INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.
IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN
CEMEX CaRACAS INVESTMENTS B.V. AND
CEMEX CaRACASs II INVESTMENTS B.V.
(CLAIMANTS)

AND

BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID CasE No. ARB/08/15)

 

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

 

Members of the Tribunal
Judge Gilbert Guillaume, President
Professor Georges Abi-Saab, Arbitrator
Mr. Robert B. von Mehren, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Janet Whittaker

Representing the Claimants

Mr. Barry H. Garfinkel,

Mr. Marco E. Schnabl,

Mr. Timothy G. Nelson and

Ms. Julie Bédard

Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP
Four Times Square

New York, NY 10036

United States of America

Date of Decision: December 30, 2010

Representing the Respondent

Mr. George Kahale, III,
Mr. Mark H. O’ Donoghue,
Mr. Hermann Ferré,
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
101 Park Avenue
New York, NY 10178
United States of America
and
Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle, S.C.
Torre Chapultepec
Ruben Dario 281, Piso 9
Col. Bosque de Chapultepec
11580 Mexico, D.F., Mexico

L PROCEDURE

1. On 16 October, 2008, Cemex Caracas Investments B.V. and Cemex Caracas II
Investments B.V., companies incorporated in the Netherlands, filed with the International Centre
for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or “the Centre”) a Request for Arbitration
against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. On 30 October, 2008, the Centre registered the
Request.

2. The Claimants are represented in this proceeding by the law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate,
Meagher & Flom LLP in New York City. Since 29 January, 2009, the Respondent has been
represented in this proceeding by the law firm of Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP in
New York City and Mexico City.

3. No agreement having been reached between the parties on the method of constituting the
Tribunal, and more than sixty days having elapsed since the registration of the Request for
Arbitration, by letter of 31 December, 2008, the Claimants invoked Article 37(2)(b) of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other

States (“ICSID Convention’).

4. By the same letter the Claimants reiterated their appointment, as arbitrator, of Mr. Robert
B. von Mehren, a U.S. national, whose appointment had initially been included in the Request

for Arbitration.

5. By letter of 20 February, 2009, the Respondent appointed Professor Georges Abi-Saab, a

national of Egypt as arbitrator.

6. The Tribunal not having been constituted within 90 days of the registration of the
Request for Arbitration, by letter of 21 May, 2009, the Claimants requested the appointment of
the third presiding arbitrator by the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council, as provided
for under Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 4 of the Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (“ICSID Arbitration Rules”). On 19 June, 2009, the Chairman of the
ICSID Administrative Council appointed Judge Gilbert Guillaume, a national of France, as the

President of the Tribunal.

7. All of the arbitrators having accepted their appointments, the Tribunal was constituted on
6 July, 2009. Ms. Katia Yannaca-Small, Senior Counsel, ICSID, was appointed as Secretary of
the Tribunal.

8. On 20 July, 2009, having consulted with the parties and the Centre, the Tribunal fixed the
first session to be held on 16 November, 2009, at the World Bank’s Paris Conference Center. On
the same day, the parties were invited to confer and to advise the Tribunal, by no later than 16
October, 2009, of any points on the session’s provisional agenda about which they were able to
reach agreement. The parties were also invited to notify the Tribunal of any other items that they

wished to see included in the agenda.

9. On 1 September, 2009, the Claimants filed a request for provisional measures. After an
exchange of communications between the parties, the Tribunal, by letter of 30 September, 2009,
from the Centre, informed the parties that their respective positions on the request for provisional
measures would be heard during the first session. On 26 October, 2009, the Respondent filed a

reply to the Claimants’ request for provisional measures.

10. On 26 October, 2009, the Respondent proposed the disqualification of Mr. von Mehren.
On 2 November, 2009, the Claimants filed observations on the Respondent’s proposal for

disqualification.

11. On 6 November, 2009, President Guillaume and Professor Abi-Saab, acting under Article
58 of the ICSID Convention, dismissed the proposal for the disqualification of Mr. von Mehren

made by the Respondent.

The first session of the Tribunal and the hearing on provisional measures was held on 16

November, 2009 at the World Bank’s Paris Conference Center. Present at the session were:
Members of the Tribunal
Judge Gilbert Guillaume, President

Mr. Robert B. von Mehren, Arbitrator
Professor Georges Abi-Saab, Arbitrator

12.
their request for provisional measures. On 5 January, 2010, the Respondent filed observations

on that letter. On 15 January, 2010, the Claimants sent another letter to the Tribunal.

13.
Claimants’ request for provisional measures and reserving the decision on the costs of the

procedure relating to the request for provisional measures to a later stage of the arbitration.

14.
followed by the Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction on 15 March, 2010, the

Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction on 17 May, 2010 and the Claimants’ Rejoinder on

ICSID Secretariat
Mrs. Katia Yannaca-Small, Secretary of the Tribunal

Representing the Claimants

Mr. Barry H. Garfinkel, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP
Mr. Marco E. Schnabl, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP
Mr. Timothy G. Nelson, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP
Ms. Julie Bédard, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP

Representing the Respondent

Mr. Mark H. O’Donoghue, Curtis Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Ms. Gabriela Alvarez Avila, Curtis Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Hermann Ferré, Curtis Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Mr. Tulio Cusman, Goji & Co. Abogados

Dra. Hildegard Rondon de Sans6, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Dr. Armando Giraud, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Dra. Mariel Perez, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Dra. Beatrice Sans6é de Ramirez, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

On 22 December, 2009, the Claimants sent to the Tribunal a communication in relation to

On 3 March, 2010, the Tribunal issued a decision on provisional measures, rejecting the

The Respondent’s Memorial on Objections to Jurisdiction was filed on 15 January, 2010,

Jurisdiction on 25 June, 2010.

An oral hearing on jurisdiction was held at the offices of the World Bank’s Paris Conference

Center on 27 July, 2010. Present at the hearing were:

1S.

Members of the Tribunal

Judge Gilbert Guillaume, President
Mr. Robert B. von Mehren, Arbitrator
Professor Georges Abi-Saab, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat
Mrs. Katia Yannaca-Small, Secretary of the Tribunal

Representing the Claimants

Mr. Barry H. Garfinkel, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP
Mr. Marco E. Schnabl, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP
Mr. Timothy G. Nelson, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP
Ms. Julie Bédard, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP

Mr. Edward Van Geuns, DeBrauw Blackstone WestBroek

Representing the Respondent

Mr. Mark H. O’Donoghue, Curtis Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Ms. Gabriela Alvarez Avila, Curtis Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
Mr. Hermann Ferré, Curtis Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Mr. Kabir Duggal, Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP

Dra. Hildegard Rondon de Sansé6, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
Dr. Gustavo Alvarez, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Dr. Armando Giraud, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

Following the hearing, the Tribunal deliberated in Paris on 28 July, 2010. The Tribunal

has taken into account all of the pleadings, documents and testimony submitted in this case.

16.

On 9 September, 2010, Ms. Janet Whittaker was appointed as Secretary of the Tribunal,

following the conclusion of Ms. Katia Yannaca-Small’s secondment to ICSID from the

Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development.

IL. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

A. The Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction

17. On 15 January, 2010, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (the “Respondent” or

“Venezuela’”’) submitted a Memorial containing its objections to jurisdiction (the “Memorial”).

18. The Memorial first explains that the Request for Arbitration was presented by two
companies, Cemex Caracas and Cemex Caracas II, which complain of the nationalization of a
Venezuelan company, Cemex Venezuela (““CemVen”) in which they held an indirect ownership

interest.

19. Venezuela proceeds to provide the Tribunal with some information on the structure of the
companies involved in the case. It submits that a Mexican company, Cemex, S.A.B. de C.V.
(“Cemex”) owns 100% of Cemex Espafia S.A., which owns 100% of one of the Claimants, a
Dutch company called Cemex Caracas. In turn, Cemex Caracas owns 100% of the other
Claimant, another Dutch Company called Cemex Caracas II. Cemex Caracas II owns 100% of
Vencement Investments (“Wencement”) a company incorporated in the Cayman Islands. Finally,
as of 2002, Vencement owns 75.7% of Cemex Venezuela (CemVen), the cement company that

was operating in the territory of the Respondent.

20. The Respondent then notes that the Claimants invoke the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
under the Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments Between the
Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of Venezuela concluded on 22 October, 1991 (the
“BIT”, the “Dutch Treaty” or the “Treaty”). In addition, Claimant Cemex Caracas has “reserved
its right” to rely on Venezuela’s Law on the Promotion and Protection of Investments (the
“Investment Law”) as an additional basis for jurisdiction.'| The Respondent contests those two

alleged bases of jurisdiction.
1. Jurisdiction Under the Dutch Treaty

21. The Respondent recalls that Articles 9(1) and 9(4) of the BIT cover “disputes between
one Contracting Party and a national of the other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of

' Memorial { 3.

the former under this Agreement in relation to an investment of the latter.” It adds that “while
Article 1(a) of the Dutch Treaty defines ‘investments’ to include ‘every kind of asset,’ it then
goes on to enumerate five categories of assets within its scope, and makes no reference
whatsoever to the subject of ownership or control, whether ‘direct or indirect,’ or to the location

of the investments or the manner in which investments may be made.”?

According to the
Respondent, the omission of this additional language from the definition of investment is
significant, when comparing the text of the Dutch Treaty with other BITs concluded by
Venezuela or the Netherlands or with multilateral treaties for the protection of investments.

Accordingly, the Dutch Treaty does not cover indirect investors.

22. According to the Respondent, this interpretation is reinforced by the facts that the BIT
uses a broad definition of “national” (or “investor”) and that it only concerns investments located
in the territory of the Contracting Parties. Moreover, such an interpretation has been found in a
comparable case in an arbitral award rendered under the auspices of the Arbitration Institute of
the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce in Berschader and Bershader v. Russian Federation, Case

No. 080/2004, and is compatible with ICSID case law.

23. In the present case, the Claimants qualify as Dutch Nationals under the BIT because of
their incorporation in the Netherlands. However, they do not themselves have investments in the
territory of Venezuela. Their indirect investments through Vencement do not entitle them to
assert claims for alleged violation of the BIT. They are not the “proper parties to this

proceeding.”*
2. Jurisdiction Under the Investment Law

24. The Respondent then submits that under ICSID case law, the consent to ICSID
jurisdiction required by Article 25 of the ICSID Convention can be contained in a contract or in a
document, such as a request for arbitration, accepting an offer previously made. In all cases,
however, consent must exist. In the present case, neither the Claimants nor Venezuela have

given such consent.

2 Memorial { 27.
; Memorial 4 43.

25. First of all, neither the letter of the Claimants of 9 April, 2008, “accepting the Republic’s

* nor the

offer of consent to ICSID arbitration contained in Article 9(1) of the Dutch Treaty,
Request for Arbitration “made any reference to, or purported to accept, any consent of the
Republic for ICSID arbitration supposedly contained in Article 22 of the Investment Law.”* It is
only in a footnote in the request for provisional measures that one of the Claimants, Cemex
Caracas, reserved its rights to rely on that law. It did so after having initiated the arbitration
without invoking expressly the Investment Law. This cannot be considered as a written consent

given in due time.

26. Venezuela then contends that Article 22 of the Investment Law does not provide the
requisite express and unequivocal consent to ICSID arbitration required by Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention. In this respect, it refers to the text of Article 22 itself and compares it to the
provisions of ICSID’s model clauses and with those of bilateral investment treaties concluded by
Venezuela. It also refers to publications and commentaries on the Investment Law made before
2005, to Venezuelan legal principles and to a decision rendered on 17 October, 2008 by the
Supreme Court of Venezuela. It adds that a comparison of Article 22 with other national

investment laws and ICSID case law leads to the same conclusion.

27. Finally, on an alternative basis, the Respondent submits that “[nJeither Claimant was the
‘owner’ of CemVen, which is alleged to constitute the ‘investment’ in this case.”° The
Claimants were not directly controlling the investment made in CemVen by Vencement. As a
consequence, according to Venezuela, they do not qualify as “international investors” under the

Investment Law and its applicable regulation.

28. Venezuela, therefore, concludes that “the claims set forth in the Request should be
dismissed in their entirety inasmuch as: (i) the indirect investments of Claimants in any event do
not qualify for protection under the Dutch Treaty; (ii) Claimants have not consented to ICSID
arbitration under the Investment Law; (iii) Article 22 of the Investment Law does not provide a

basis for finding ‘consent’ on the part of the Republic to arbitration of this dispute; and (iv)

Memorial 4 46.
Memorial 4 47.
Memorial { 103.

Claimants do not qualify as ‘international investors’ as defined in the Investment Law and the

Investment Law Regulation.”

B. The Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction

29. The Claimants first submit that their claim arises out of Respondent’s seizure of Cemex
Venezuela carried out by decrees of 27 May, 2008, 15 August, 2008 and 19 August, 2008 and by
the occupation of Cemex plants by Venezuelan armed forces at the same time. They add that

“no compensation whatsoever has been paid for this forcible taking.”*

They reassert the claims
set forth in their Request for Arbitration for purposes of remedying Venezuela’s violation of its

obligations.
1. Jurisdiction Under the BIT

30. The Claimants then contend that the Centre possesses jurisdiction to hear each of the

claims under the Netherlands-Venezuela BIT.’

31. They stress in this respect that the Respondent has given its clear and unambiguous
consent to ICSID jurisdiction in Article 9 of the BIT. They submit that the definition of
“investment” in Article 1(a) of that treaty is broad and non-exhaustive and extends to indirect
investments. They add that “Respondent’s Narrow Interpretation of ‘Investment’ Finds No
Support in Either the Vienna Convention or the ICSID Convention.””” They contend that “Past
Arbitral Decisions Confirm that Claimants have an ‘Investment’ As defined Under the BIT.”!!
They add that Cemex Venezuela is an investment “‘In the Territory’ of Venezuela.” They
submit that “Other Provisions of the Netherlands-Venezuela BIT, Including the Definition of

‘Investor’ Reinforce the Conclusion that the Netherlands-Venezuela BIT Covers Indirect

Memorial { 110.
Counter-Memorial {{ 21 (emphasis in the original).
Counter-Memorial at p. 12.
Counter-Memorial at p. 16.
Counter-Memorial at p. 21.

Counter-Memorial at p. 38.

Investments.”"> They add that “Respondent’s Concerns About ‘Layering’ of Claims Are Not

Well Founded.”'*

32. Passing to supplementary means of interpretation, the Claimants stress that
“Respondent’s Adoption of the Netherlands Model BIT Indicates an Intention to Follow the Pro-

wl5

Investment Policies Expressed Therein. Moreover, “Venezuela’s Treaty Practice Has

Consistently Favored a Broad Interpretation of ‘Investment’.”'°

2. Jurisdiction under Article 22 of the Investment Law

33. According to the Claimants, “Separately and Independently From the BIT, Article 22 of

Venezuela’s Investment Law Confers Jurisdiction On the Centre.”!”

34. In this respect, they first submit that “the Question of Whether Article 22 of the
Investment Law is a ‘Consent’ is a Question of International Law.”'* Then they contend that the
investment made by the Claimants in Cemex Venezuela is an “international investment” and that
the Claimants are “international investors” for purposes of the Investment Law. They add that

Respondent’s narrow interpretation of ownership or effective control is not well founded.

35. They further submit that Article 22 of the Investment Law expresses Respondent’s
consent to the Centre’s jurisdiction for purposes of the ICSID Convention. In this respect they
refer to the terms of Article 22, as well as the intention of its drafters. They add that the principle
of good faith requires that that article be construed as a binding offer. They contend that
Respondent’s comparisons with other investment laws are unavailing and they invoke ICSID
case law in support of their position. They stress that the consent to arbitration in Article 22 is
not inconsistent with Venezuelan Law and that the weight of scholarship confirms their
interpretation. Finally, they submit that the Respondent’s reliance on the Venezuelan Supreme
Court decision is unavailing.

Counter-Memorial at p. 39.

Counter-Memorial at p. 46.

Counter-Memorial at p. 47.

Counter-Memorial at p. 50.

Counter-Memorial at p. 56.

Counter-Memorial at p. 57.

36. Moreover, according to the Claimants, they have consented to arbitrate for purposes of

Article 22.

37. They finally submit that “Even if Jurisdiction Under Article 22 Is Lacking, Respondent’s

Various Breaches of the Investment Law Are Also Violations of the BIT.”"”

38. Accordingly, they request “that the Tribunal render a decision on jurisdiction:

(a) dismissing the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction in their entirety;

(b) finding that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over all of the claims presented in

the Claimants’ Request for Arbitration;

(c) ordering the continuation of this proceeding pursuant to Arbitration Rule

41(4); and

(d) awarding the Claimants their legal fees and costs incurred in connection
with opposing the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections, including legal
fees, experts’ fees and the Claimant’s share of the fees and expenses of the

Tribunal and the Centre.””°

Cc. The Reply Memorial of the Respondent on Objections to Jurisdiction

39. The Respondent first stresses that “Claimants fail to explain the absence of Vencement as
yo21

a party to this proceeding.
40. It submits that Claimants “Lack Standing to Assert Claims Under the Dutch Treaty in
Relation to the CemVen shares.” It stresses that the text of the Dutch treaty does not support
Claimants’ interpretation. The reasoning of other arbitral decisions does not warrant a departure

from that text. Venezuela concluded that “Claimants are unable to demonstrate that

Counter-Memorial at p. 101.
Counter-Memorial {| 190.

o Reply { 3.

Reply at p. 6.

Vencement’s shareholding in CemVen is their own investment and that they have ius standi to

assert claims under the Dutch Treaty.””

Al. Venezuela further submits that its Investment Law provides no basis for ICSID
jurisdiction over this dispute. According to Venezuela, “Article 22 of the Investment Law Does
Not Constitute Consent by the Republic to ICSID Arbitration.” In this respect it refers to the
terms of that article, as well as its history, its purpose, the commentaries on that text and

Venezuelan legal principles.

42. The Respondent also contends that the Claimants have not given their consent to
jurisdiction under the Investment Law. “The form of Claimants’ consent in their April 9, 2008
letters, as well as the Request for Arbitration itself, demonstrate that these references fall far
short of constituting a written ‘instrument of consent,’ as contemplated by the Centre’s Rules and

Article 25 of the Convention.”

43. It finally submits that “[jJurisdiction is also lacking under the Investment Law because
Claimants do not qualify as ‘international investors’ under the statute and therefore are not

within the scope of Article 22,76

44. On those bases, Venezuela concludes that “the claims brought by Claimants should be
dismissed in their entirety for lack of jurisdiction inasmuch as: (i) Claimants lack standing under
the Dutch Treaty to assert claims for alleged violations of its provisions in relation to the shares
of CemVen; (ii) Article 22 of the Investment Law does not provide a basis for finding ‘consent’
on the part of the Republic to arbitration of this dispute; (iii) Claimants have not consented to
ICSID arbitration under the Investment Law; and (iv) Claimants do not qualify as ‘international

investors’ as defined in the Investment Law and the Investment Law Regulation.”””

2 Reply 149.
ad Reply at p. 26.
35 Reply 1 88.
26 Reply 1 89.

7 Reply 100.

D. The Claimants’ Rejoinder on Jurisdiction

45. The Claimants observe that a number of points relating to jurisdiction are uncontested by
the Respondent. “[T]he so/e question facing the Tribunal under the Netherlands BIT is whether
Claimants’ indirect equity stake in Cemex Venezuela S.A.C.A. is an ‘investment’ for purposes of

Article 1(a). The answer to that question is a resounding *yes’.8

“Furthermore, once
jurisdiction is established under the Netherlands BIT, a// claims in the Request for Arbitration
may be heard by this Tribunal, as a violation of investment protections offered by Venezuelan
Law also constitutes a BIT violation.”””

46. The Claimants then submit that Respondent’s sole objection to jurisdiction under the BIT
is untenable. According to Claimants, Venezuela “Cannot Overcome Decades of Unanimous

9930

Case Law. Moreover, they contend that “Respondent’s Attempts to Erect Barriers to

Claimants’ Standing Find No Support in the Treaty Text,”*!

and, in particular, are not supported
by Articles 1(a), 1(b) and 9(1). Furthermore, “All the Supplementary Means of Interpretation
Demonstrate that Indirect Investments Are Intended to be Covered by the BIT.” “Respondent’s
Attempt to Impose a Policy-Based Limitation on Indirect Investors’ Standing Is Impermissible
and, In Any Event, Unfounded.”*? The Claimants have made an investment in the “territory” of

Venezuela.

47. Claimants further submit that, in the present case, ICSID jurisdiction independently exists
under Article 22 of the Investment Law. According to the Claimants, that article constitutes an
expression of Venezuela’s consent to ICSID arbitration, whether considering the text itself, the

SPP vy. Egypt case or any supplemental means of interpretation.

8 Rejoinder 14.

*” Rejoinder { 15.
Rejoinder at p. 7.
Rejoinder at p. 17.
Rejoinder at p. 29.
Rejoinder at p. 27.

48. The Claimants then refer to a decision rendered recently in Mobil Corp. v. Venezuela.
They note that the ICSID tribunal in that case “concluded that Article 22 does not constitute
Venezuela’s consent to arbitral jurisdiction.” They observe that, in that decision, the tribunal
distanced itself from the doctrine of effet utile on the basis of the judgment rendered by the
International Court of Justice (the “ICJ”) in the Fisheries Jurisdiction case. However, they stress
that under ICJ case law, including that judgment, “critically, the interpretative principle ‘must
seek the interpretation which is in harmony with a natural and reasonable way of reading the
text’.*° Such a reading should favor the interpretation that gives effect to the mandatory
language of Article 22. Moreover, such an interpretation would conform to the legislative
history of that article, commentaries made on that text and with Venezuela’s intention discerned

from the preamble and the stated purposes and structure of the law.

49. Finally the Claimants reaffirm that they must be considered as “international investors”
under the Investment Law. They also reaffirm that they have explicitly consented to ICSID

jurisdiction, including under Article 22.

50. They request the Tribunal to render the Decision that they requested previously in their

Counter-Memorial.

E. The Hearing on Jurisdiction

51. At the hearing held on 27 July, 2010, Venezuela maintained and developed its objections

to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

52. It first submits that “the sole issue facing the Tribunal under the Netherlands BIT is

whether the Cemex Venezuela S.A.C.A. shares are an investment ... ‘of’ the Claimants for the

 

purposes of Article 9.1 of the treaty as well as Articles 2 through 8 of the treaty.”*” It recognizes

938

that the BIT gives “broad protection to indirect investments,””” and that “shares held indirectly

Mobil Corp. and Others v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (Decision on Jurisdiction), ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/27 (June 10, 2010).

35 Rejoinder { 92.
36 Rejoinder { 96.
7 Transcript of the Hearing of 27 July, 2010 (“Hearing Transcript”) at p. 11.

 

Hearing Transcript at p. 27.

are an investment.”*? However, it stresses that “that does not answer the issue that is before us
today which is; who has the right to sue to vindicate the rights with respect to those
investments?” In this regard, Venezuela states that “the ordinary and natural meaning of the

possessive, ‘of,’ is once [sic] own,”*!

It adds that this is confirmed by the Spanish version of
Articles 2 and 3. Thus only direct investors have jus standi under the BIT. This solution is
compatible with the decision taken by the ICSID Tribunal in Mobil v. Venezuela. In the present
case, Vencement, as a direct investor, would have had standing to sue Venezuela. This is not the

case for Cemex Caracas and Cemex Caracas II.

53. With respect to Article 22 of the Investment Law, the Respondent refers to the Decision
on Jurisdiction rendered in the Mobil v. Venezuela case. It adds that Article 22 must be
construed in its political and legal context. It contends that, in adopting Article 22, Venezuela
“was reaffirming its commitment to existing treaties, which had a meaning, particularly in the
political context of 1999, and in addition was offering this option of utilizing domestic remedies
when appropriate." It finally stresses that “it is important that this issue be addressed” by the

Tribunal.

54. At the hearing, the Claimants also maintained and developed their previous submissions.

They reaffirmed that “the Tribunal could reach a conclusion on the BIT without touching Article
22, and the Claimants would have a complete case to present on the merits.”**

55. The Claimants then submit that, to be covered by the BIT, “an investment must belong to

a national.” It does not limit the meaning of “National.” It does not limit the meaning of

45

“Investment. Indirect investments, as well as direct investments, are investments for the

purpose of Article 1(a) of the Treaty, as shown by an unbroken chain of ICSID cases. They

explain the reasons for the absence of Vencement from this proceeding and agree with the

Hearing Transcript at p. 29.
Hearing Transcript at pp. 26-27.
Hearing Transcript at p. 18.
Hearing Transcript at pp. 58-59.
Hearing Transcript at p. 61.
Hearing Transcript at pp. 69-70.

Hearing Transcript at p. 71.

Respondent that this absence will not raise any procedural problem with respect to access to
documents and possible counter-claims.*° Moreover, “there is no overlapping claim by

Vencement and there is an agreement that there cannot be a double recovery here."

56. The Claimants finally contend that Article 22 of the Investment Law unambiguously
provides for consent to ICSID arbitration. In any event, that article must be interpreted as a
unilateral declaration under international law. It must thus be “read in a natural and reasonable
way, as it stands, and having regard to the words used, and due regard to the intentions of the
State.”* In the light of the law, its historical context and its legislative history, the interpretation

given by the Claimants to that text must prevail.
Ill. DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL

57. Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention provides that “[t]he jurisdiction of the Centre shall
extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State and
a national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to

submit to the Centre.”

58. According to Article 25, consent by both parties to a dispute is thus an indispensable
condition for jurisdiction to exist. Such consent can be given through direct agreement between
the host State and the investor. Under ICSID case law, it may also result from a unilateral offer
by the host State, expressed in its legislation or in a treaty, which is subsequently accepted by the

investor.

59. In the present case, the Claimants submit that Venezuela consented to the jurisdiction of

the Centre through:

(a) Article 22 of Venezuelan Decree No. 356 on the Promotion and Protection

of Investments of 3 October, 1999 (the “Investment Law’); and

Hearing Transcript at p. 160.
Hearing Transcript at p. 95.

Hearing Transcript at pp. 111-12.

(b) The Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of
Investments between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of
Venezuela signed at Caracas on 22 October, 1991 (the “BIT”, the “Treaty”
or the “Dutch Treaty”).

60. The Respondent objects to both of these alleged bases of jurisdiction.

6l. In this respect, the Claimants add that, “Respondent’s Various Breaches of the
Investment Law Are Also Violations of the BIT,” and, in particular, of its Articles 6(b), 3(1)
and 3(4). Accordingly they submit that all of their claims “will fall within the consent embodied
in Article 9 of the BIT, even if jurisdiction is lacking under Article 22 of the Investment Law.”°
The Tribunal could thus “reach a conclusion on the BIT without touching Article 22,5! By
contrast, the Respondent contends that “it is important for the Republic” and “for the integrity of

9952

this process””~ that, in any event, both issues be addressed by the Tribunal.

62. The Tribunal observes that it cannot conclude that all of the alleged breaches of the
Investment Law would also be violations of the BIT without an in-depth analysis of the
Investment Law and the Treaty, which would be inappropriate at the present stage of the

proceeding. It thus considers that it is its duty to address both issues.
A. — Article 22 of the Investment Law
63. Article 22 of the Investment Law reads as follows:

“Las controversias que surjan entre un inversionista internacional,
cuyo pais de origen tenga vigente con Venezuela un tratado o
acuerdo sobre promocién y proteccién de inversiones, 0 las
controversias respecto de la cuales sean aplicables las
disposiciones del Convenio Constituvo del Organismo Multilateral
de Garantfa de Inversiones (OMGI-MIGA) o del Convenio sobre
Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a Inversiones entre Estados y
Nacionales de Otros Estados (CIADI), seraén sometidas al arbitraje

Counter-Memorial at p. 101.
Counter-Memorial {| 189.
Hearing Transcript at p. 69.

Hearing Transcript at p. 61.

internacional en los términos del respectivo tratado o acuerdo, si
asi éste lo establece, sin perjuicio de la posibilidad de hacer uso,
cuando proceda, de las vias contenciosas contempladas en la
legislaci6n venezolana vigente”.

64. Translated into English, Article 22 could read as follows:

“Disputes arising between an international investor whose country
of origin has in effect with Venezuela a treaty or agreement on the
promotion and protection of investments, or disputes to which the
provisions of the Convention establishing the Multilateral
Investment Guarantee Agency (OMGI-MIGA) or the Convention
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
nationals of other States (ICSID) are applicable, shall be submitted
to international arbitration according to the terms of the respective
treaty or agreement, if it so provides, without prejudice to the
possibility of making use, when appropriate, of the dispute
resolution means provided for under the Venezuelan legislation in
effect.””

65. The Parties disagree on the interpretation to be given to Article 22. The Claimants

submit that Venezuela consented to ICSID jurisdiction under that article. The Respondent

contends that the text does not provide such consent.

66. In order to clarify the meaning of Article 22, the Tribunal will first determine the

standard of interpretation to be used and will then apply that standard to Article 22.
1. Standard of Interpretation
(a) Determination of the Standard

67. In its Memorial, the Respondent contends that “[a]part from the language of the statute

itself, the Investment Law, as part of the law of Venezuela, must be interpreted in the light of

954

Venezuelan legal principles”” and, in particular, of Article 4 of its Civil Code. “While

Venezuelan Law may not be dispositive ... it plays an important role in the analysis of that

Translation provided by the Tribunal. Other translations have been proposed both by the Claimants (see,
e.g., Request for Arbitration {| 34; Counter-Memorial J 130; Rejoinder [ 74) and by the Respondent (see,
e.g., Memorial at p. 9, fn 32 and J 63; Reply {| 53). The words “si asi lo establece” have been translated as
“should it so provides,” “if it so provides” or “if it so establishes”. Those variations seem immaterial to the
Parties and to the Tribunal.

 

Memorial 4 55.

statute.” It adds that, under Venezuelan law, consent to arbitration must be clear, express and
unequivocal. It further refers to a judgment rendered on those bases by the Supreme Court of
Venezuela on 17 October, 2008. It submits that “[t]he decision of the Supreme Court is a
definitive statement of Venezuelan law at the national level and its reasoning, while not binding

on an international tribunal, is entitled to due consideration by this Tribunal.”°°

68. The Claimants, for their part, submit that “The Question of Whether Article 22 of the

Investment Law is a ‘Consent’ is a Question of International Law.”*”

According to the
Claimants, an ICSID Tribunal is the judge of its own competence and the decision of the
Venezuelan Supreme Court is not binding on the Tribunal. They further add that the decision in

question is unpersuasive.

69. The Tribunal first notes that, under Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention, it is “judge of
its own competence.” This is the case whatever may be the basis of that competence, including a
unilateral offer made in the Host State’s legislation and subsequently accepted by the investor, as

has been recognized by ICSID Tribunals in a number of cases.**

70. The Tribunal adds that the same solution has been adopted by the Permanent Court of
International Justice and the International Court of Justice which have made clear that a
sovereign State’s interpretation of its own unilateral consent to the jurisdiction of an international
tribunal is not binding on the tribunal or determinative of jurisdictional issues.” Thus the
interpretation given to Article 22 by Venezuelan authorities or by Venezuelan courts cannot

control the Tribunal’s decision on its competence.

Memorial 57.
Memorial {.78.
Counter-Memorial at p. 57.

E.g., Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (Decision on Jurisdiction),
ICSID Case No. ARB/84/3 (14 Apr. 1988), {{ 60; Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador
(Award), ICSID Case No. ARB/03/26 (2 Aug. 2006), {{{ 212-13; Zhinvali Development Ltd. v. Republic of
Georgia (Award), ICSID Case No. ARB/00/I (24 Jan. 2003), | 339.

Electricity Company of Sofia and Bulgaria (Preliminary Objections), PCI, Ser. A/B No. 77 (1939);
Aegean Sea Continental Shelf (Greece v. Turkey) - 19 December, 1978 - ICJ Reports 1978, p. 3; Fisheries
Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada) — 4 December 1998 — ICJ Reports 1988, p. 432.

19

71. Another issue is whether Article 22 must be interpreted according to Venezuelan rules of
interpretation or according to international rules of interpretation. ICSID case law on that point

is rare and lacks consistency.

72. In a number of cases, ICSID tribunals have had to apply national laws that were so clear
that neither the parties nor the tribunal felt it necessary to expressly take a position on the rules of
interpretation to be applied. This was the case for the Albanian Investment Law in Tradex
Hellas v. Albania,® for various Salvadorian Laws in Inceysa v. El Salvador,®' for the Kazakh
Foreign Investment Law in Rumeli Telekom v. Kazakhstan,” and for the Tanzanian Investment
Law in Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania.” However, in three other cases, ICSID tribunals dealt
explicitly with the question of the rules of interpretation to be applied to unilateral offers made

by Host States.

73. In SPP v. Egypt, the tribunal noted that “[t]he jurisdictional issue in this case involves
more than interpretation of municipal legislation. The issue is whether certain unilaterally
enacted legislation has created an international obligation under a multilateral treaty. Resolution
of this issue involves both statutory interpretation and treaty interpretation.” “Thus in deciding
whether in the circumstances of the present case, law n°43 constitutes consent to the Centre’s
jurisdiction, the Tribunal will apply general principles of statutory interpretation, taking into
consideration, where appropriate, relevant rules of treaty interpretation and principles of
international law applicable to unilateral declarations.”™ However, one must note that in the rest

of the decision, the part played by those different norms is not easy to identify.

oo Tradex Hellas S.A.v. Republic of Albania (Decision on Jurisdiction), ICSID Case No. ARB/94/2 (24 Dec.
1996), 4179.
“ Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador (Award), 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/26 (2 Aug. 2006),

{4 212-13, 310, 316, 327 and 332.

Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil Telelomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S, v. Republic of Kazakhstan
(Award), ICSID Case No. ARB/05/16 (29 July, 2008), i 333-35.

6 Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd v. United Republic of Tanzania (Award), ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22 (24
July, 2008), 4 329.
ot Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (Decision on Jurisdiction), ICSID

Case No. ARB/84/3 (14 Apr. 1988), [ 61.

 

Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (Decision on Jurisdiction), ICSID
Case No. ARB/84/3 (14 Apr. 1988). Paragraph 74 of the award again refers to the three standards
mentioned in paragraph 61. However, paragraph 94 only mentions “general principles of statutory

20

74. In CSOB vy. Slovak Republic, the ICSID tribunal had to decide whether it had jurisdiction
both under a BIT and under a notice published by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Slovak
Republic. It stated on both grounds that “the question of whether the parties have effectively
expressed their consent to ICSID jurisdiction is not to be answered by reference to national law.
It is governed by international law as set out by Article 25(1) of the ICSID convention.”© Then
it observed that “[e]ven if the Notice were to be characterized as a unilateral declaration by the
Slovak State, it still needs to be asked whether it was ‘the intention of the State making the
declaration that it should become bound according to its terms’ as required by the international

law principles applicable to unilateral declarations.” It answered that question in the negative.

75. Finally, in Zhinvali v. Georgia, the tribunal took a third approach. Considering the
Georgian Investment Law, it said that it was “dealing with an internal statute rather than a
bilateral agreement.” It observed that “if the national law of Georgia addresses this question of
consent, which the Tribunal finds that it does, then the Tribunal must follow that national law
guidance, but always subject to ultimate governance by international law.” It added that
Georgian law was “in keeping with any international law principles that may be applicable” and
on the basis of the law thus interpreted, it concluded that the claimant and the respondent did

consent to submit the dispute to the jurisdiction of Icsip.*

76. From this review of ICSID case law, it results that in four cases, the question was not
dealt with. In SPP vy. Egypt, the tribunal decided to apply “general principles of statutory

interpretation,” “taking into consideration relevant rules of treaty interpretation and principles of
international law applicable to unilateral declarations.” In CSOB v. Slovak Republic, the
Tribunal took its decision only on the basis of the latter principles. In Zhinvali v. Georgia, it

opted for domestic law “subject to ultimate governance by international law.”

 

interpretation” and paragraph 107 only refers to the interpretation to be given to “unilateral declarations” in
international law.

Ceskoslovenska obchodni banka, a.s. v. Slovak Republic (Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction), ICSID
Case No. ARB/97/4 (24 May, 1999), if 35-6 and 46.

” Ibid. | 46.
Zhinvali Development Ltd. v. Republic of Georgia (Award), ICSID Case No. ARB/00/1 (24 Jan. 2003), {1
9,

21

77. The hesitations of ICSID tribunals on that question result from the fact that, in those
ICSID cases, the State’s consent to arbitration was not contained in a treaty to be interpreted
according to the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of 23 May, 1969, but in a unilateral

offer made by that State in one form or another.

78. The International Court of justice had to face that very problem when interpreting

unilateral declarations made by States under Article 36(2) of its Statute. It observed that:

“A declaration of acceptance of the compulsory jurisdiction of the
Court, whether there are specified limits set to that acceptance or
not, is a unilateral act of State sovereignty. At the same time, it
establishes a consensual bond and the potential for a jurisdictional
link with the other States which have made declarations pursuant
to Article 36(2) of the Statute and makes a standing offer to the
other States party to the Statute which have not yet deposited a
declaration of acceptance.”
Accordingly, such an “international instrument must be interpreted by reference to international

law?”

79. The Tribunal shares this analysis. Unilateral acts by which a State consents to ICSID
jurisdiction are standing offers made by a sovereign State to foreign investors under the ICSID
Convention. Such offers could be incorporated into domestic legislation or not. But, whatever
may be their form, they must be interpreted according to the ICSID Convention and to the

principles of international law governing unilateral declarations of States.
(b) Content of the Standard

80. Article 25 of the ICSID Convention requires that the parties to the dispute “consent in
writing” to submit that dispute to the Centre. Under Article 25, consent in writing is thus
necessary, but the text does not give any further indication about either the manner or timing of

such consent or the way in which it must be interpreted.

° Land and Maritime Boundaries between Cameroon and Nigeria, Preliminary objections — ICJ Reports

1998 p. 291 4 25; Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada) — ICJ Reports 1998, p. 453 46.

70

Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada) — ICJ Reports 1998, {{{[ 43, 64 and 68.

22

81. Customary rules governing States’ unilateral declarations in international law have never
been codified. However, as recognized by the International Law Commission of the United

Nations, ”! a basic distinction must be drawn in that field between:

(a) declarations formulated in the framework and on the basis of a treaty, and

(b) other declarations made by States in the exercise of their freedom to act on

the international plane.

82. Both declarations may have the effect of creating international obligations. However,
when considering declarations not made within the framework and on the basis of a treaty, the
utmost caution is required when deciding whether or not those declarations create such
obligations. The International Court of Justice faced situations of that kind in the Nuclear Tests
cases in 1974.” In those cases, it decided that “when States make statements by which their
freedom of action is to be limited, a restrictive interpretation is called for.” In 2006, in the Case
Concerning Armed Activities on the Territory of The Congo, it confirmed that “a statement of
this kind can create legal obligations only if it is made in clear and specific terms.””> The
International Law Commission adopted the same position in its Guiding Principles of 2006

Applicable to Unilateral Declarations of States.”

83. Rules of interpretation are, however, somewhat different when, as in the present case,
unilateral declarations are formulated in the framework of a treaty and on the basis of such a

treaty.

84. Those rules have been fixed by the International Court of Justice in a long series of cases,
when interpreting unilateral declarations of compulsory jurisdiction made under Article 36(2) of

its Statute.

7 Report to the General Assembly of 2006, Document A/CN.4/L.703 dated 20 July, 2006, “Guiding
Principles Applicable to Unilateral Declarations of States Capable of Creating Legal Obligations,” {{ 3.

Nuclear Tests - New Zealand v. France — Judgment of 20 December 1974, ICJ Reports 1974, pp. 472-73, 1
47.

Armed Activities on the Territory of The Congo (New Application, 2002) (Democratic Republic of The
Congo v. Rwanda), ICJ Reports, 2006, p. 28 {{[ 49-50.

Document A/CN.4/L.703 dated 20 July, 2006, “Guiding Principles Applicable to Unilateral Declarations of
States Capable of Creating Legal Obligations,” {{ 7.

23

85. The Court first stated that “[t]he regime relating to the interpretation” of those
declarations “is not identical with that established for the interpretation of treaties by the Vienna
Convention on the law of treaties.””> It then stressed that every declaration “must be interpreted

as it stands, having regard to the words actually used.””°

86. At the same time, since declarations are unilaterally drafted instruments, “the Court has
not hesitated to place a certain emphasis on the intention of the depositing State.””” Similarly, in
SPP vy. Egypt, the ICSID tribunal decided that: “[i]n interpreting a unilateral declaration that is
alleged to constitute consent by a sovereign State to the jurisdiction of an international tribunal,
consideration must be given to the intention of the government at the time it was made.””*

87. Accordingly, the International Court of Justice interprets “the relevant words of a
declaration including a reservation contained therein in a natural and reasonable way, having due

regard to the intention of the State concerned.”

The Court does so by starting with the text
and, if the text is not clear, by giving due consideration to the context and examining the
“evidence regarding the circumstances of its preparation and the purposes intended to be
served.”*° Thus the intention of the declaring State must prevail. It could be “defeated or
nullified” only by a defect “so fundamental that it vitiated the instrument by failing to conform to
some mandatory legal requirement.”*!

88. It is on the basis of those rules of international law that the Tribunal will now proceed to

interpret Article 22 of the Investment Law.

89. The Tribunal must add that although domestic law and the international law of treaties

are not controlling or dispositive, it does not mean that they should be completely ignored:

Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada) - ICJ Reports 1998, p. 453 { 46.
Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. — Preliminary objections — Judgment — ICJ Reports 1952, p. 105.
Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada) - ICJ Reports 1998, p. 454 48.

Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (Decision on Jurisdiction), ICSID
Case No. ARB/84/3 (14 Apr., 1988), { 107.

Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada) — ICJ Reports 1998, p. 454 49.
* Ibid.
st Temple of Preah Vihear — 1CJ Reports 1961, p. 21.

24

(a) As stated in the preceding paragraphs, when tribunals interpret unilateral
declarations, they must have due regard to the intention of the State having
made the relevant declarations. In this respect, domestic law may play a
useful réle, in particular when consent to jurisdiction has been given

through national legislation.

(b) Although the law of treaties as codified by the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties is not relevant in the interpretation of unilateral
declarations, the provisions of the Vienna Convention may “apply
analogously to the extent compatible with the sui generis character” of

. 2
such declarations.

2. Interpretation of Article 22
(a) The Text of Article 22

90. The starting point in the interpretation of unilateral declarations (as well as in statutory
interpretation or in the interpretation of treaties) is the textual analysis of the document to be

construed. Thus the Tribunal will thus first consider the words used in Article 22.

91. According to Article 22, disputes arising under Venezuela’s BITs or to which either the
Convention Establishing the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (“MIGA Convention’)
or the ICSID Convention is applicable “shall be submitted to international arbitration according

to the terms of the respective treaty or agreement, if it so provides” (“si asf éste lo establece’’).

92. The Parties agree that this provision creates an obligation to go to arbitration subject to
certain conditions and, in particular, subject to the last condition thus incorporated in Article 22.

But they disagree on the interpretation to be given to the words “‘if it so provides.”

93. For the Claimants, “[t]he reference to ‘it’ is, in this context, incontestably a reference to

the ICSID Convention.”** Thus “Article 22 is a binding direction that the State must submit to

% Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v.Canada) — ICJ Reports 1998, p. 453 {| 46.

8 Counter-Memorial {{ 130.

25

international arbitration all controversies to which the ICSID Convention applies.’”** Article 22
“expresses an immediate, fully operative consent, conditional only upon the jurisdictional criteria
of the ICSID Convention being ‘established,’ as they no doubt are here. Accordingly the Centre

has jurisdiction pursuant to Article 22 of the Investment Law.”*5

94. By contrast, Venezuela contends that “Article 22 does not itself constitute a general
consent to ICSID arbitration of all investment-related disputes between the Republic and foreign
investors from Contracting States, but instead requires such disputes to be submitted to
arbitration according to the terms of the ICSID Convention only ‘if it so provides’ — meaning,
inter alia, that consent to ICSID arbitration of a particular dispute or class of disputes has been

1986

given in writing both by the Republic and the investor. In the absence of such written

consent, the Centre has no jurisdiction in the present case.

95. The Tribunal observes that Article 22 consists of one single long sentence of some
complexity. As stated by Professor Christoph H. Schreuer in his well known commentary on the
ICSID Convention, this Article “is drafted in ambiguous terms and is likely to give rise to
difficulties of interpretation, notably as to whether it contains an expression of Venezuela’s

consent to ICSID arbitration or not.”*”

96. In this respect, the Tribunal first notes that Article 22 concerns:

(a) disputes arising between Venezuela and an international investor whose

country of origin has a BIT in force with Venezuela;
(b) disputes to which the provisions of the MIGA Convention are applicable;

(c) disputes to which the ICSID Convention is applicable.

97. Article 22 covers those disputes subject to two conditions.

Counter-Memorial { 127.
Counter-Memorial { 133.
Memorial 4 65.

C. Schreuer, “The ICSID Convention: A Commentary,” Second Ed., Cambridge University Press, 2009, p.
363.

26

98. First, the text specifies that the disputes shall be submitted to arbitration “according to the
terms of the respective treaty or agreement.” On this point, the Tribunal notes that, at the outset,
Article 22 mentions “treaty or agreement” on the promotion and protection of investments, and
then, the MIGA and ICSID Conventions. One could have expected that, at the end of the article,
the text would similarly have referred to the “respective treaty, agreement or convention.” It
does not do so. However the Tribunal observes that the term “treaty” is a comprehensive one
and normally includes “conventions.”** It further notes that this is not contested by the Parties.
It accordingly considers that, in Article 22 in fine, the words “treaty and agreement” also cover

the two Conventions.

99. One then reaches the second condition resulting from the words “si asi éste lo establece”

(if it so provides), on which the Parties disagree.

100. Grammatically, it is undisputed that the word “it” refers to the preceding words “treaty or

agreement”, which, as stated above, include the ICSID Convention.

101. The difficulty is with the word “lo” (so). This word certainly refers to the preceding

words “shall be submitted to international arbitration.” However, it could be interpreted in two

ways. It could mean:

(a) If the treaty, agreement or convention provides for international

arbitration; or
(b) Tf the treaty, agreement or convention creates an obligation for the State to
submit disputes to international arbitration.

102. Both interpretations are grammatically possible. In the first case, the word “lo” (so)
refers to international arbitration. In the second case, it refers to the obligation to submit disputes

to international arbitration.

 

Article 2 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties defines a treaty as “an international
between two states in written form and governed by international law, whether embodied in a single
instrument or in two or more related instruments and whatever its particular designation.” See also Jean
Salmon, Dictionnaire de Droit International Public, p. 1088.

 

27

103. In a number of cases concerning unilateral declarations, the International Court of Justice
decided that it “cannot base itself on a purely grammatical interpretation of the text.” Facing
an ambiguous and obscure text, which has no natural meaning, the Tribunal is in a similar

situation and has to look further.

(b) The Principle of Effet Utile

104. In this regard, the Claimants invoke the principle of effet utile (ut res magis valeat quam

pereat).

105. They submit that “[w]hen the Investment Law was enacted in October of 1999,
Venezuela was already a party to the ICSID Convention. Therefore, it would serve no purpose

to enact a statute providing that disputes ‘shall’ be submitted to ICSID arbitration, unless the

9990 «6,

intention was for those words to indicate a binding offer of arbitration; ‘under the doctrine of

Veffet utile, Article 22 should ... be interpreted as Venezuela’s binding consent to ICSID
arbitration.””!

106. The Respondent opposes this view. It contends that “[t]he function of article 22 is not to
establish new rights for international investors, but rather to acknowledge and confirm the
commitments of the Republic to submit disputes to international arbitration in accordance with

its treaty obligations.” Such acknowledgment and confirmation has an effet utile.

107. The Tribunal recalls that, as recognized by the International Court of Justice, “the

993

principle of effectiveness has an important role in the law of treaties.””"” As stated by the tribunal

in the Eureko v. Poland case, “[iJt is a cardinal rule of interpretation of treaties that each and

every clause of a treaty is to be interpreted as meaningful rather than meaningless.”** The

Anglo-Iranian Oil Co — Preliminary Objections — ICJ Reports 1952, p. 104; Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v.
Canada) — ICJ Reports 1998, p. 454 47.

Counter-Memorial { 143.

Counter-Memorial { 145.

Reply 59.

Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v. Canada), ICJ Reports 1998, p. 455 52.

Eureko B. V. v. Poland, Partial Award and Dissenting Opinion (19 Aug. 2005) {| 248.

28

International Court of Justice” and ICSID Tribunals”® have applied that principle in a number of

treaty cases.

108. It remains to be seen whether it is also applicable in the interpretation of States’ unilateral

declarations, such as offers resulting from legislation of the kind invoked in the present case.

109. As far as the Tribunal knows, this question as such has not been dealt with by ICSID

tribunals.”

110. By contrast, the International Court of Justice has taken a position on the issue, at least
twice, when interpreting the text of declarations of compulsory jurisdiction made under Article
36(2) of its Statute. In 1952, in Anglo-Jranian Oil Co., the Court recognized that the principle of
effet utile “should in general be applied when interpreting the text of a treaty.” But it added that
“the text of the Iranian Declaration is not a treaty resulting from negotiations between two or
more States. It is the result of unilateral drafting by the government of Iran.”> As a
consequence, the Court interpreted the declaration on the basis of the intention of Iran and did

not adopt the British argument based on the principle of effet utile.”

111. More recently, in 1988, the Court was required to construe a reservation made by Canada
to its jurisdiction in a similar declaration. The Court noted that it “was addressed by both Parties

on the principle of effectiveness.” It stated that: “[cJertainly, this principle has an important role

 

a Advisory opinion of 21 June, 1971 on The legal consequences for States of the continued presence of South
Africa in Namibia — 1CJ Reports 1971, p. 35 4 66; Border and transborder armed actions (Nicaragua v.
Honduras) — Judgment of 20 December 1988, ICJ Reports 1988, p. 89 46.

Pan American Energy LLC and BP Argentina Exploration Co. v. Argentina (Decision on Preliminary
Objections), ICSID Case No. ARB/03/13, (27 July, 2006) { 132; and BP America Production Co. and
Others v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/8, 4 110; Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v.
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (Decision on Jurisdiction), ICSID Case No. ARB/02/13 (9 Nov. 2004) 495.

 

In SPP v. Egypt, the Tribunal applied the principle of effet utile as a general principle of statutory
interpretation. See Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (Decision on
Jurisdiction), ICSID Case No. ARB/84/3 (14 Apr. 1988), 94. It does not mention effet utile in its
interpretation of the text as a unilateral declaration. See, id., { 107.

 

“8 Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. (United Kingdom v. Iran), ICJ Reports 1952, p. 16.

Academic comments on that solution are rather rare. However, one may note that in his course in the
Hague Academy of International Law in 1965, Professor Berlia, after having analysed the Anglo-Iranian
Oil Co. judgment, added that: “La logique du raisonnement est d’une force suffisante pour que I’on

idére sans it d que le régime iculier des actes unilaté sur ce point est établi.” See also,
Study of M. Fartache, Revue générale de droit international public, 1952, p. 593.

 

29

to play in the law of treaties and the jurisprudence of this Court; however, what is required in the
first place for a reservation to a declaration made under Article 36(2) of the Statute is that it
should be interpreted in a manner compatible with the effect sought by the reserving State.”'”
The Court did not examine any further the arguments of the Parties based on the principle of effet

utile.

112. The Tribunal agrees with those rulings of the International Court of Justice. Thus in
order to interpret Article 22, it will consider its context, its purpose and the circumstances of its
preparation in order seek to determine what was the intention of Venezuela when adopting

Article 22.

113. However, it will add that, even if the principle of effet utile were applicable to unilateral

declarations, this would not help in the interpretation of Article 22.

114. In this respect one must recall that this principle does not require that a maximum effect
be given to a text. It only excludes interpretations which would render the text meaningless,
when a meaningful interpretation is possible. Thus, in a number of cases, the International Court
of Justice, when interpreting agreements or treaties, has given a very limited effect to the text it
had to construe. In the Aegean Sea Continental Shelf case, the Court decided that the agreed
communiqué invoked by Greece did not give jurisdiction to the Court. It added that “it is for the
two Governments to consider ... what effect, if any, is to be given to [this text] in their further

wl01

efforts to arrive to an amicable settlement of the dispute. In three other cases, the Court had

to interpret bilateral treaties providing for “firm and enduring peace and sincere friendship”
between the Contracting States or using comparable formulae. It construed those provisions as

fixing only an “objective in the light of which the other treaty provisions are to be interpreted

and applied."

115. In the present case, one must recall that Article 22 covers three types of treaties.

0 Fisheries Jurisdiction (Spain v.Canada), ICJ Reports 1998, p. 455, | 52.

101

Aegean Sea Continental Shelf (Greece v. Turkey), ICJ Reports 1978, p. 44, { 108.

102 Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America),

Merits, Judgment, ICJ Reports 1986, p. 136 { 273; Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States
of America), ICJ Reports 1996 (II), p. 814 28; Case concerning certain questions of mutual assistance in
criminal matters, (Djibouti v. France), Judgment of 4 June 2008, {| 110-11.

30

(a)

(b)

(d)

First it mentions the MIGA Convention which contains a clause providing
for compulsory arbitration. The Tribunal observes that the only possible
effect of this mention is to recall and confirm the existing obligations of

Venezuela in this regard.

Then it covers disputes between Venezuela and international investors
whose country of origin has a BIT in effect with Venezuela. In this
respect the Tribunal notes that all BITs concluded by Venezuela before the
entry into force of the Investment Law contained a provision for
compulsory arbitration. Article 22 recalls and confirms those existing

commitments.

This is not denied by the Claimants, but they contend that Article 22 could
also have the effect of providing for compulsory arbitration of disputes
arising under future Venezuelan BITs, which would not contain a
provision to that end. However, such an interpretation implies that
Venezuela could in the future prefer consenting to ICSID jurisdiction
through Article 22, without any limitation and reciprocity, rather than
concluding BITs with appropriate clauses providing for compulsory
arbitration. The Tribunal is not convinced that such a possibility is

realistic and was contemplated by Venezuela in 1999.

It thus appears that, for the MIGA Convention and for BITs, the only
possible effect of Article 22 is to recall and confirm the existing

obligations of Venezuela.

With respect to disputes to which only the ICSID Convention is
applicable, Venezuela submits that has the same effect, whereas the
Claimants contend that it imposes new obligations on the Respondent.
Under the first interpretation, Article 22 has a limited effect. By contrast,
under the second interpretation, it has far reaching consequences. But,

even under the first interpretation, it has some effect, as recognized by an

31

3 Tt is not

ICSID Tribunal in respect of another domestic law of that type.
meaningless. Accordingly, even if the principle of effet utile were
applicable to unilateral declarations (which is not the case), it would be of
no use to this Tribunal in the choice to be made between those two

interpretations.
(c) Context and Purpose

116. With respect to the context, the Parties first diverge on the meaning of Article 1 of the
Investment Law. The Claimants submit that the stated object and purpose of the Law as set forth

in Article 1 is “‘to provide investments and investors ... with a stable and foreseeable legal

framework ... .’ In furtherance of this goal, the Law contains a comprehensive and far reaching
set of investment protections and guarantees typically found in modern BITs ... But these rights
potentially depend on the mechanism of Article 22 providing the means by which rights might be
vindicated in a neutral forum.”'™* The availability of such a forum is thus a critical means
whereby the purpose of the Investment Law is achieved. This is the object of Article 22 as

interpreted in the light of Article 1.

117. The Respondent, for its part, contends that the purpose of the Investment Law, as stated
in Article 1, was not “economic opening and liberalisation,” but “national development.”! It
observes that the premise of Claimants’ argument is that “the Investment Law’s purposes cannot
be achieved without ICSID Arbitration as a ‘neutral forum’ ... That policy judgment is not
reflected in the Law itself.”!°°

118. The Tribunal notes that, according to Article 1, the Investment Law was “intended to
provide investments and investors, both domestic and foreign, with a stable and predictable legal
framework in which the former and the latter may operate in a secure environment, through the

regulation of actions by the State, towards these investments and investors, in order to achieve

103 Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd v. United Republic of Tanzania (Award), ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22 (24
July, 2008).

is Counter-Memorial {{ 140.

105 Hearing Transcript at p. 49.

106 Reply 57.

32

the increase, diversification and harmonious integration of investments to advance the objectives

of national development.”

119. Such aims are in general terms comparable to those of treaties on promotion and
reciprocal protection of investments and are reflected in the Investment Law itself. Thus, the
Investment Law contains provisions relating to fair and equitable treatment (Article 7(1)), non
discrimination (Article 8), confiscations and expropriations (Article 11), which are comparable
to those incorporated in BITs. However, the rights thereby accorded to international investors
are often qualified in order not to affect the application of Venezuelan Law or the rights of
Venezuelan investors. Moreover, Article 24 of the Investment Law specifies that its provisions
do not prevent the adoption by Venezuela of a number of measures that it enumerates, inter alia,
for national security, the conservation of natural resources and the integrity and stability of the

Venezuelan financial system.

120. The Investment Law is thus in some respect different from BITs. Moreover, BITs do not
always contain a compulsory arbitration clause. It is true that a clause of that kind was
incorporated in the seventeen BITs concluded before 1999 by Venezuela. But this does not
imply that Venezuela was ready to accept such an obligation vis-a-vis States with which it had
no BIT. One cannot draw from Article 1 and from the Law as a whole the conclusion that
Article 22 must be interpreted as establishing consent by Venezuela to submit to arbitration all

potential disputes falling within the ambit of the ICSID Convention.

121. The Parties then discuss the consequences to be drawn from the fact that Article 22 is
inserted into Chapter IV of the Law, which is entitled “Dispute Resolution” and contains three
Articles, namely, Articles 21 to 23. The Claimants contend that, if Article 22 were only meant as
an abstract affirmation of the principles of arbitration, it would not be inserted in that chapter
“between two provisions full of operative and mandatory content.”!”” The Respondent arrives at
a contrary conclusion: it stresses that, if Venezuela had intended to give unilateral standing
consent to ICSID Arbitration in Article 22, it would have retained clearer formulae, like those

used in Articles 21 and 23.

tor Rejoinder { 79.

33

122. The Tribunal is of the opinion that it can draw no conclusion, one way or another, from
the fact that Article 22 is inserted into a chapter relating exclusively to the settlement of disputes.
It further notes that Article 21 concerns interstate disputes. Under that Article, those disputes are
first to be resolved through diplomatic means. Article 21 adds that, if no agreement is thus
reached, Venezuela shall “foster” the submission of the controversy to an arbitration tribunal
under conditions to be agreed upon with the other State. Article 23 concerns investors not
covered by Article 22. It provides that: “[a]fter the administrative avenues have been exhausted
by the investor, any dispute arising in relation with the application of this Decree-Law, may be
submitted to the Domestic Courts or to the Venezuelan Arbitration Tribunals, at the investor’s
election.” Those Articles thus concerns disputes different from those covered by Article 22.
They provide some flexibility for other types of dispute settlement mechanisms. They can be of

no help in the interpretation of Article 22.

123. The Parties further seek to interpret the Investment Law in the wider context of

Venezuela’s attitude vis-a-vis arbitration. The Respondent submits that “international arbitration

+9108 +9109

was long disfavored in Venezuela’ and recalls the “historical antipathy’ of that country to

arbitration. The Claimants do not deny this, but stress that a “tectonic shift” in favour of

international arbitration took place in the nineties.'!°

124. The Tribunal first observes that Venezuela had some experience of arbitration at the end

of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century that generated hostility in this country towards

1

this form of settlement of disputes.'! This reluctant attitude explains why, during the

preparation of the ICSID Convention, Latin-American countries, including Venezuela, expressed

reservations regarding the proposed text which, they said, contravened their constitutional

1s Memorial {[ 65, fn. 87.

109 Hearing Transcript at p. 61.

10 Rejoinder {{ 104-05; Hearing Transcript at p. 123. See also Counter-Memorial { 157.
The boundaries of Venezuela with Colombia and the now Republic of Guyana were fixed at that time by
two arbitral awards favorable to its neighbors, the validity of which was contested. Moreover, as a
consequence of a military intervention by Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom, Venezuela had to
accept the establishment of Mixed Commissions in charge of fixing indemnities to be paid to foreign
creditors. Those events led to the formulation of the Drago doctrine prohibiting the use of force for the
recovery of contractual debts and the Calvo clause under which investors commit themselves not to ask for
diplomatic protection by their State of origin.

 

   

34

principles.!!? It also explains why Venezuela signed the Convention only in 1993, almost thirty

years after its adoption.

125. At that time, the environment in Venezuela had become more favorable to international
arbitration. In 1993, the Respondent ratified both the ICSID Convention and the Convention on
the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards of 10 June 1958 (the “New York
Convention”), as well as the MIGA Convention. From 1991 to 1999, it signed and ratified
seventeen BITs. Finally it adopted the Investment Law of 1999. However, even at that time,
Venezuela remained reluctant to engage in contractual arbitration in the public sphere, as shown

by the 1998 Law on commercial arbitration and Article 151 of the 1999 Constitution.

126. The Tribunal notes that, during that period, Venezuela signed and ratified a number of
treaties relating to international arbitration in the field of investments and, in particular,
concluded many BITs. Moreover, since 1999, Venezuela has ratified eight more BITs, thus
confirming its will to be bound by such treaties. However, the Tribunal cannot draw from this
general evolution the conclusion that Venezuela, when adopting Article 22, intended to give in
advance a general consent to ICSID arbitration in the absence of any Treaty. For a State to
commit itself through treaties creating reciprocal obligations is one thing; to commit itself

unilaterally without counterpart is another.

(d) Legislative History

127. The legislative history of Article 22 could in this respect provide more useful information
about the intention of the drafters of the Investment Law.!? However, the Investment Law of
1999 was a decree-law and, as such, was not discussed in Parliament. Moreover it contains no

“exposicion de motivos.” Thus we have no direct information about its preparation.

128. The Claimants submit that Article 22 was intended by its drafters as a “Binding Offer of

ICSID Arbitration.”!" In this respect, they first refer to a public statement made by President

2 History of the ICSID Convention — Volume II(1) {{ 39.

ms See, e.g., Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. (United Kingdom vy. Iran), Judgment of 22 July, 1952 — ICJ Reports 1952,
pp. 104-07; Aegean Sea Continental Shelf case — Judgment of 17 December, 1978 — ICJ Reports, pp. 26—
43.

Counter-Memorial at p. 73.

35

Chavez one day before his election. However in this statement, President Chavez only states that
Venezuela needs private international investments and that he had no intention to nationalize

anything. Such a general statement is not of great assistance in the interpretation of Article 22.

129. The Claimants then refer to various papers published by M. Werner Corrales Leal, “one
of the drafters of the Investment Law.”'!® By contrast, the Respondent stresses that Mr. Corrales

a l16

“was not the legislator’ and that, in any case, his statements are misconstrued by the

Claimants.

130. The Tribunal notes that in 1999, Mr. Corrales was the Representative of Venezuela to the
World Trade Organisation. In a communication made at a conference on investment arbitration
in comparative law organized in April 2009 by the Caracas Centro Empresarial de Conciliacién y
Arbitraje (Caracas Business Center of Conciliation and Arbitration), Mr. Corrales stated that he
had advised in 1999 that the President of Venezuela should prepare a law “that would serve as
the compulsory framework for all international treaties and negotiations on investments.” He
said that he was then entrusted with preparing “reference terms to write the draft law and direct
the preparation thereof.” He added that the “legal drafting” was assigned to a legal consultant of

the Institute of Foreign Trade, Mr. Gonzalo Capriles.!!7

131. Soon after the publication of the Investment Law, Mr. Corrales in two articles gave
“algunas ideas” (some ideas) on the legal regime for promotion and protection of investments in
Venezuela. In those articles, he stated that in his “opinion, a regime applicable to foreign
investments must leave open the possibility to resort to international arbitration [unilaterally],
which today is accepted almost everywhere in the world, whether through the mechanism
provided for by the ICSID Convention or through the submission of the dispute to an
international tribunal or to an ad hoc arbitral tribunal as the one proposed by UNCITRAL. In
any case, it must be clearly established that there may not be simultaneous resorting to national

courts and to the arbitration mechanism or to any other type of procedure of settlement of

us Counter-Memorial {J 135-37.

116 See Reply 472.

Speech by Ing. Werner Corrales at CEDCA’s event — Investment Arbitration in Comparative Law — 28
April 2009 — Business — June 2009, pp. 78-80.

36

disputes. In our case this subject is dealt with in chapter IV (Articles 21-23)” of the Investment

Law, “where a great part of the principles commented is accepted.”!'*

132. The Tribunal observes that, in those articles, Mr. Corrales expressed his opinion on the
principles which, according to his judgment, must be incorporated in any _ international
arbitration regime. He added that a “great part” of those principles “is accepted in Articles 21 to
23 of the Investment Law.” He did not say that this was the case for all of the principles that he
favored and he did not say that the drafters of Article 22 intended to provide for consent to

ICSID arbitration in the absence of any BIT.

133. Moreover, at the same time, Mr. Juan de Jestis Montilla, then Minister of Production and
Trade, stated to the contrary that, under the Investment Law, “the solution in the case of
controversies or disputes where it is set forth that these shall be resolved in national courts or
within a framework of acknowledgment of the commitments that have been undertaken in

international agreements.”! 9

134. Ten years later, at the above-mentioned conference organized by the Caracas Centro
Empresarial de Conciliacién y Arbitraje, Mr. Corrales was invited by the organisers of the
conference to inform the audience of the “drafter’s intention” for the Law. He then stated that
his purpose, as “co-drafter” of the Law, “was to offer in the broadest and most transparent
manner the possibility of the investors resorting to international arbitration as a unilateral offer

made by the Venezuelan State.”

135. This last statement was made at a time that the present proceedings were already pending.
It is not supported by contemporaneous written documents and the Claimants did not ask Mr.
Corrales to appear in the proceeding as a witness. The Tribunal cannot draw from such a
statement the conclusion that in adopting the Investment Law, Venezuela intended to consent in

general and in advance to ICSID arbitration.

La OMC como espacio normativo, pp. 185-86. The word “unilaterally” did not appear in the first article of
30 April, 1999. It was added to the second article in 2000.

Juan de Jestis Montilla, La politica de atraccién de IED en Venezuela, Finanzas, inversién y crecimiento,
Revista Capitulos, n°59, Sistema Econémico Latinoamericano y del Caribe (Mayo-Agosto 2000).

37

136. Both Parties then refer to academic publications relating to the Investment Law. The
Tribunal has carefully examined those publications. It observes that all of them were written
after 2005, at a time when controversies had already emerged between Venezuela and foreign
investors, and also that most of them refer to the proceedings pending either in the Supreme
Court of Venezuela or within ICSID. They add nothing to the arguments exchanged by the

Parties in the present case.

137. The Tribunal finally notes that, at the time of the adoption of the Investment Law,
Venezuela had already signed and ratified seventeen BITs stating either that Venezuela gave “‘its
unconditional consent to the submission of disputes” to ICSID arbitration or that its disputes with
foreign investors “shall at the request of the national concerned be submitted to ICSID,” or using
both phrases. Comparable words were used in some national laws and in the ICSID model
clauses. If it had been the intention of Venezuela to give its advance consent to ICSID
arbitration in general, it would have been easy for the drafters of Article 22 to express that

intention clearly by using any of those well known formulae.

138. The Tribunal thus arrives at the conclusion that such an intention has not been
established. As a consequence, it cannot conclude from the obscure and ambiguous text of
Article 22 that Venezuela, in adopting the 1999 Investment Law, consented unilaterally to ICSID
arbitration for all disputes covered by the ICSID Convention in a general manner. That article

does not provide a basis for jurisdiction of the Tribunal in the present case.

139. Finally the Tribunal observes that, according to the Respondent, the “Claimants Have Not

+9120

Given Their Consent To Jurisdiction Under the Investment Law and that they “Are Not

‘International Investors Under [that] Law.”

Tt submits that, for those reasons also, the
Tribunal has no jurisdiction in the present case. However, as the Tribunal has arrived to the
conclusion that Article 22 does not constitute consent to jurisdiction by Venezuela, it does not

have to take a decision on those alternative objections to jurisdiction.

120 Memorial at p. 25.

a Memorial at p. 53.

38

B. Article 9 of the BIT between the Netherlands and Venezuela

140. On 22 October, 1991, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of Venezuela
signed an Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, which
entered into force on Ist November 1993, after ratification by both Parties. That agreement was
“done in the Spanish, Netherlands and English languages, the three of them being equally
authentic.” However, under paragraph 3 of a Protocol signed on the same day, “[i]n case of
difference of interpretation between the three equally authentic texts of the present Agreement,

reference shall be made to the English text.”

141. Paragraph | of Article 9 of the BIT provides that “[d]isputes between one Contracting
Party and a national of the other Contracting Party concerning an obligation of the former under
this agreement in relation to an investment of the latter, shall at the request of the national
concerned be submitted to the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes for
settlement by arbitration or conciliation under” the ICSID Convention. Article 9 adds that
“Tejach Contracting Party hereby gives its unconditional consent to the submission of disputes as
referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article to international arbitration in accordance with the

provisions of this Article.”

142. The Claimants contend that the Tribunal has jurisdiction under the BIT to consider the
case. The Respondent denies this. It recalls that “[t]he claims made by the Claimants arise from
the Republic’s nationalization of their indirect subsidiary, Cemex Venezuela, S.A.C.A.
(“CemVen’”) in connection with the 2008 restructuring of major cement producing companies in
Venezuela.” It describes the complex corporate form used for this investment and submits that
“the Claimants, as indirect investors in CemVen, did not have any investment in the territory of

Venezuela which gave rise to the treaty obligations allegedly breached by the Republic.”!

143. The first Claimant, Cemex Caracas (sometimes referred to as Cemex Caracas I) was
incorporated in 1999 as a Dutch Besloten Vennootschap. It is a wholly-owned subsidiary of
Cemex Espafia S.A., which, in turn, is an indirect subsidiary of Cemex S.A.B. de C.V., a

Mexican company with worldwide operations.

ye Memorial 4 4.

39

144. The second Claimant, Cemex Caracas II, was also incorporated in the Netherlands in
2001 as a Dutch Bes/oten Vennootschap. It is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Cemex Caracas.
Cemex Caracas II is the owner of 100% of a Cayman Islands company, called Vencement

Investments (Vencement), which in turn owns 75.7% of Cemex Venezuela (CemVen).

145. The Respondent observes that Article 1(b)(iii) of the BIT “defines a ‘national’ to
encompass entities owned or controlled by citizens or companies organized under the laws of

The Netherlands or Venezuela,”!”*

and notes that this is an expansive definition. It adds that
Article 1(a) also gives a broad definition to the term “investment” which includes “every kind of
asset.” Accordingly it recognizes that the Claimants, as well as Vencement, must be deemed to
be Dutch nationals under the BIT.'* It also recognizes that the shares owned by Vencement in

CemVen are an investment within the meaning of the Treaty.

146. It stresses however that the BIT “makes no reference whatsoever to the subject of
ownership or control, whether ‘direct or indirect,’ or to the location of the investments or the

manner in which investments may be made.”!?5

Thus the treaty “does not grant standing to
nationals of a Contracting Party who do not themselves have investments in the territory of the
other Contracting Party. Those nationals indirectly receive the benefits of the treaty because
their controlled entities are entitled to assert claims for alleged violations of the obligations of the
Contracting Party in which they have investments. Accordingly, Claimants are not proper
parties to this proceeding.”'”°

147. Venezuela, in other terms, submits that the BIT covers investments in the territory of one
contracting Party of nationals “of” the other Contracting Party. In the present case, the shares of

CemVem are an “investment of Vencement [which] has jus standi and the right to sue.”!?7 They

are not directly owned by the Claimants and cannot be considered as an investment “of” the

ps Memorial { 31.
See Memorial { 26.
Memorial { 27.
Memorial {| 43 (emphas'

 

in the original).

Hearing Transcript at p. 39.

40

Claimants under the BIT. As indirect investors, the Claimants have no “ius standi to assert

claims under the Dutch Treaty.”!

148. The Claimants, for their part, recall that the definition of investment in the BIT is broad
and non exhaustive. They submit that “the treaty text, its context, the travaux préparatoires and
all arbitral jurisprudence unanimously support the conclusion that the BIT covers indirect

investments.”'” Thus the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the claim under the Treaty.

149. The Tribunal observes that a number of ICSID decisions and awards have considered the
question of “indirect investments.” In most cases, the question was raised by the respondent
State when a local company was owned or controlled by a Claimant through another company.
Two questions then may arise. First, the tribunal may have to decide whether the Claimant has
jus standi. Second it may have to decide whether and to what extent the Claimant may claim
compensation for damages suffered by the local company. At the present stage, this Tribunal is

only faced with the first issue.
150. The BIT defines investments in Article 1(a). This text provides that:
“For the purpose of this Agreement:

a. the term “investment” shall comprise every kind of assets and more particularly

though not exclusively:

(i) movable and immovable property, as well as any other rights in rem in

respect to every kind of assets;

(ii) rights derived from shares, bonds, and other kinds of interests in

companies and joint ventures;

(iii) titles to money, to other assets as well as to any performance having an

economic value;

128 Reply 49.

129 Rejoinder { 5.

4l

(iv) rights in the field of intellectual property, technical processes, goodwill

and know-how;

(v) rights granted under public law, including rights to prospect, explore,

extract and win natural resources.”

151. The Tribunal notes that there is no explicit reference to direct or indirect investments in
the BIT, and in particular in Article 1(a). It also notes that the definition of investment given in
that article is very broad. It includes “every kind of assets” and enumerates specific categories of
investments as examples. One of those categories consists of “shares, bonds or other kind of

interests in companies and joint ventures.”

152. Ina comparable case, Siemens v. Argentina, the ICSID Tribunal observed that “there is
no explicit reference to direct or indirect investment as such in the [German/Argentine BIT].
The definition of ‘investment’ is very broad. An investment is any kind of asset considered to be
under the law of the Contracting Party where the investment has been made. The specific
categories of investment included in the definition are included as examples rather than with the
purpose of excluding those not listed. The drafters were careful to use the words ‘not
exclusively’ before listing the categories of ‘particularly’ included investments. One of the
categories consists of ‘shares, rights of participation in companies and other type of participation
in companies’. The plain meaning of this provision is that shares held by a German shareholder
are protected under the Treaty. The Treaty does not require that there be no interposed
companies between the investment and the ultimate owner of the company. Therefore a literal
reading of the Treaty does not support the allegation that the definition of investment excludes

indirect investments.”'*°

153. The same solution was adopted on the same ground by several ICSID tribunals. This was
the case in Joannis Kardassopoulos v. Georgia,'* ' which interpreted the BIT between Greece and

Georgia. This was also the case in Tza Yap Shum v. Peru, which interpreted the BIT between

130 Siemens A.G. v. Argentina (Decision on Jurisdiction), ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8 (3 Aug. 2004), | 137.
1st Ioannis Kardassopoulos v. Georgia (Decision on Jurisdiction), ICSID Case No. ARB/05/18 (6 July, 2007),
qm 123-24.

42

Peru and China.'* This was finally the case in Mobil v. Venezuela, interpreting the BIT between

the Netherlands and Venezuela.’

154. The Respondent submits that this jurisprudence is not so well established. In support of
this contention, it references the award rendered on 21 April, 2006 in Berschader v. Russian
Federation.'** However in that award, the Tribunal, faced with a text comparable to Article 1(a)
stated that “the wording of the Treaty does not exclude and therefore leaves open the possibility
that an investment made indirectly by the investor in the territory of the other Contracting Party
is encompassed by the terms of Article 2.1."'5 Thereafter, the Tribunal construed a specific
provision of the Treaty concerning the nationality of the intermediary and concluded that the
provision prohibited indirect investments through companies incorporated in the investors’ home

State (a question which is not relevant to the present case).

155. The Respondent further submits that, even if a BIT covers indirect investments, this does
not give jus standi to indirect investors. It stresses that this solution is even more justified when,
as in the present case, the BIT uses broad definitions of “nationals” and “investments,” and thus

allows direct investors easily to initiate arbitral proceedings.

156. The Tribunal considers that, as acknowledged by the Respondent, investments as defined
in Article 1 of the BIT could be direct or indirect. By definition, an indirect investment is an
investment made by an indirect investor. As the BIT covers indirect investments, it necessarily
entitles indirect investors to assert claims for alleged violations of the Treaty concerning the

investments that they indirectly own.

157. The Tribunal further notes that, when the BIT mentions investments “of” nationals of the
other Contracting Party, it means that those investments must belong to such nationals in order to

be covered by the Treaty. But this does not imply that they must be “directly” owned by those

2 Tza Yap Shun v. Republic of Peru (Decision on Jurisdiction), ICSID Case No. ARB/07/6 (19 June, 2009),
{1 106-11 (where the Tribunal based its decision on the text of Article 1 of the BIT, the intention of the
Parties to promote and protect investments and the absence of an express limitation in the Treaty).

Mobil Corporation and Others v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (Decision on Jurisdiction), ICSID Case
No. ARB/07/27 (10 June, 2010), i 162-66.

Berschader v. Russian Federation (Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, Case No. 080/2004).
BS Id., (137.

43

nationals. Similarly, when the BIT mentions investments made “in” the territory of a
Contracting Party, all it requires is that the investment itself be situated in that territory. It does

not imply that those investments must be “directly” made in such territory.

158. Thus, as recognized by several arbitral tribunals in comparable cases, the Claimants have
jus standi in the present case. The Respondent’s objection to the Tribunal jurisdiction under the

BIT cannot be upheld.

Cc. Costs of the Proceedings

159. Lastly, the Tribunal makes no order at this stage regarding the costs of the proceeding

and reserves this question to a later stage of the arbitration.

44

IV. DECISION ON JURISDICTION

160. For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal unanimously decides:

a. That it has jurisdiction over the claims presented by Cemex Caracas and Cemex
Caracas II as far as they are based on alleged breaches of the Agreement on
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments concluded on 22
October, 1991 between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Republic of

Venezuela;

b. That it has no jurisdiction under Article 22 of Venezuelan Decree No. 356 on the

Promotion and Protection of Investments of 3 October, 1999;

c. To make the necessary order for the continuation of the procedure pursuant to

Arbitration Rule 41(4); and

d. To reserve all questions concerning the costs and expenses of the Tribunal and the

costs of the Parties for subsequent determination.

[signed]
Judge Gilbert Guillaume
President of the Tribunal

[signed] [signed]
Professor Georges Abi-Saab Mr. Robert B. von Mehren
Arbitrator Arbitrator

45

