INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

CEAC HO bINGs LIMITED

(Claimant)

MONTENEGRO

(Respondent)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Bernard Hanotiau, President
Professor William W. Park, Arbitrator

Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Lindsay Gastrell

Assistant to the Tribunal
Ms. Juliana Iancu

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 26 July 2016

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Claimant Representing Respondent
Mr. Egishe Dzhazoyan Mr. Christoph Lindinger
Mr. Thomas Sprange, QC Mr. Slaven Moravéevié
Ms. Sarah Vasani Ms. Anne-Karin Grill
Mr. Grigori Lazarev Ms. Jelena Bezarevié Paji¢
Mr. Benjamin Burnham Ms. Tanja Sumar
King & Spalding International LLP Mr. Michael Stimakovits
125 Old Broad Street Schonherr Rechtsanwalte GmbH
London EC2N 1AR Schottenring 19,
United Kingdom 1010 Vienna

Austria

Page 2 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES 5
II. PROCEDURE 5
Ii. FACTUAL BACKGROUND 10
A. The dispute 10
B. The claims and relief sought by Claimant in the Request for Arbitration ......... 13
IV. THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS RELATING TO THE ISSUE OF “SEAT”............. 14
V. RELEVANT LEGAL TEXTS 15
A. The ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules ............0:c00c0c000c00 15
B. The Cyprus-M¢ ‘o BIT 16
VI. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES?’ POSITIONS... ccc cece 17
A. Claimant’s positi 17
The meaning of “seat” under Article 1(e)(b) of the BIT should be determined by
arenvoi to municipal law
. An “autonomous” interpretation of “seat” is incorrect as a matter of
international law 21
Under Cypriot law, a company’s seat is determined by the location of its
registered office 24
Under Cypriot law, “seat” cannot be understood to mean “real seat”...
The Recast Brussels Regulation supports a finding that CEAC has a seat in
Cyprus 27
The treaty practice of Cyprus and Montenegro confirms that “seat” means
“registered office” with regard to Cypriot investors .
CEAC has its “seat” in Cyprus as a matter of Cypriot laW w.cecsecseeeeeeeiees 29
B. Rest dent’s positi 32
The term “seat” should be interpreted autonomously under the BIT .........00+ 32
The term “seat” cannot be construed to mean incorporation and address ....... 36
Under Cypriot law, the term “seat” requires more than incorporation and
address 37
The meaning of the term “seat”...
Claimant does not have a “seat” in CYPrus .c.cccsccsscssesesseseseeees
Tax residency is not equivalent to “seat” and CEAC is not a tax resident
VII. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS 0000000 eee eeeeneneeeeeesceteneseseseneneneeeeeeed 45

Page 3 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

 

 

Preliminary +, :, 45
B. Whether Claimant had a registered office in Cyprus on 11 March 2014..........- 46
1. The probative value of the certificate of registered OffiCe .....c.ccccceee eee 48
2. CEAC did not have a registered office in Cyprus in March 2014 v...cccccceees 54

C. Whether Claimant was managed and controlled from Cyprus in March 2014 .64

D. Whether “tax residency” in Cyprus is equivalent to “seat” under the BIT........ 66

 

 

 

 

VIII.COSTS 67
A. Claimant's costs 67
B. Respondent’s costs 68
C. The Tribunal’s analysis 69
IX. DECISION 70

 

Page 4 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)
INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

The present dispute has been submitted to arbitration under the auspices of the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) on the basis of the Agreement
between the Republic of Cyprus and Serbia and Montenegro on the Reciprocal Promotion
and Protection of Investments, which entered into force on 23 December 2005 (the “BIT”,
the “Treaty”)!, and the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States
and Nationals of Other States, which entered into force on 14 October 1966 (the “ICSID

Convention”).

Claimant is CEAC Holdings Limited (“CEAC”, “Claimant”), a company incorporated under
the laws of the Republic of Cyprus (“Cyprus”). CEAC is represented in these proceedings
by Mr. Egishe Dzhazoyan, Mr. Tom K. Sprange, QC, Ms. Sarah Z. Vasani, Mr. Grigori
Lazarev and Mr. Benjamin Burnham of King & Spalding International LLP.

Respondent is Montenegro (“Montenegro”, “Respondent”), an ICSID Contracting State
since 10 May 2013. Montenegro is represented in these proceedings by Mr. Christoph
Lindinger, Mr. Slaven Moravéevi¢, Ms. Anne-Karin Grill, Ms. Jelena Bezarevié Paji¢, Ms.

Tanja Sumar and Mr. Michael Stimakovits of Schénherr Rechtsanwilte GmbH.

PROCEDURE

On 11 March 2014, Claimant filed a request for arbitration dated 7 March 2014 (the “Request
for Arbitration”) with ICSID.

In accordance with Article 36 of the ICSID Convention, on 20 March 2014, the Secretary-
General of ICSID (the “Secretary-General”) registered the Request for Arbitration, as
supplemented by Claimant’s letter of 18 March 2014, and so notified the Parties.

In accordance with the Parties’ agreed method of constituting the Tribunal, the Tribunal is

composed of: Professor Bernard Hanotiau, a national of Belgium, as the presiding arbitrator;

' Exhibit CLA-1.

Page 5 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

Professor William P. Park, a national of Switzerland and the United States, appointed by

Claimant; and Professor Brigitte Stern, a national of France, appointed by Respondent.

On 14 July 2014, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(1), the Secretary-General
notified the Parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the
Tribunal was therefore deemed to have been constituted on that date. Ms. Lindsay Gastrell,

ICSID Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as the Secretary of the Tribunal.

On 12 August 2014, Respondent submitted Preliminary Objections Pursuant to Rule 41(5)
of the ICSID Arbitration Rules (the “Preliminary Objections”), together with accompanying

factual and legal exhibits.

On 10 September 2014, the Tribunal held the first session by telephone conference and
subsequently issued Procedural Order No. 1 on 17 September 2014, setting out the procedure
of the arbitration. The Tribunal also confirmed the Parties’ agreement that Ms. Iuliana Iancu
act as Assistant to the Tribunal. The Parties subsequently filed written submissions with
regard to the Preliminary Objections and a hearing on the Preliminary Objections was held

at the International Dispute Resolution Center in London on 11 December 2014.

On 27 January 2015, the Tribunal issued its Decision on Respondent’s Objections under
Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. The Tribunal dismissed Respondent’s
Preliminary Objections and decided to have a phase of the proceedings dedicated to
determining whether Claimant has a “seat” under Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT. The Parties

were invited to agree on a procedural calendar to this effect.

On 16 February 2015, each Party submitted its comments and proposals regarding a

procedural calendar dedicated to the determination of the issue of the “seat”.

On 2 March 2015, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, wherein it set the procedural
calendar and instructed the Parties to submit “with their written pleadings all evidence and
arguments that pertain to the issue of the ‘seat’, in particular the definition, scope and content

of the term ‘seat’ as used in the [BIT]”.

Page 6 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

20.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

On 9 March 2015, ICSID communicated to the Parties the Tribunal’s proposal to hold the
hearing on the issue of “seat” on 22-23 March 2016 in Paris. The Parties confirmed their

agreement with the Tribunal’s proposal on the same day.

On 3 April 2015, the Parties proposed a revised procedural calendar, which the Tribunal
adopted.

On 7 April 2015, Arbitrator Stern made a supplemental disclosure concerning her
appointment in MNSS B.V. and Recupero Credito Acciaio N.V. v. Montenegro (ICSID Case
No. ARB(AF)/12/8).

On 22 April 2015, Claimant filed a Challenge to Professor Brigitte Stern as Arbitrator,
pursuant to Article 57 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 9. By letter of the same
day, ICSID notified the Parties and the Tribunal that, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule
9(6), the proceedings were suspended until a decision on the disqualification proposal would

be taken.

On 23 April 2015, ICSID communicated to the Parties the calendar for written submissions

on Claimant’s request for disqualification.

On 24 April 2015, Arbitrators Hanotiau and Park acting as Deciding Co-Arbitrators
approved Respondent’s request for an extension of the deadline to file a reply to Claimant’s

request for disqualification and amended the procedural calendar accordingly.

On 26 May 2015, the Deciding Co-Arbitrators notified the Secretary-General that, after
having carefully examined the request for disqualification, Arbitrator Stern’s explanations,
as well as the other submissions and exhibits filed in this respect, they were equally divided
on the matter and had failed to reach a decision. The Deciding Co-Arbitrators requested that
the Secretary-General notify the Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID

accordingly, pursuant to Article 58 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 9.

On 12 June 2015, the Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID rejected Claimant’s

Challenge to Professor Brigitte Stern as Arbitrator.

Page 7 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

On 15 June 2015, the Tribunal took note of the fact that the proceedings could resume and

invited the Parties to confer and agree on the procedural calendar.

On 16 June 2015, the Parties confirmed that the procedural calendar previously established
would remain intact. On the same day, Claimant filed its Memorial on the Interpretation of
Seat under Article 1(3)(b) of the Treaty (the “Memorial”), together with the expert
testimonies of Dr. Monique Sasson (“Sasson First Legal Opinion”) and Mr. Alecos Markides

(“Markides First Legal Opinion”), factual exhibits and legal authorities.

On 30 September 2015, Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial on the Issue of “Seat” (the
“Counter-Memorial”), accompanied by the expert witness reports of Prof. Vuk Radovic
(“Radovic Legal Opinion”) and Mr. Kypros Ioannides (“Ioannides First Legal Opinion”),
the witness statement of Mr. Marcos Georgios Dracos (“Dracos Witness Statement”), and

legal authorities.

On 15 November 2015, Claimant filed its Reply Memorial on the Issue of “Seat” (the
“Reply”), accompanied by the second witness testimony of Dr. Monique Sasson (“Sasson
Second Legal Opinion”), the second expert testimony of Mr. Alecos Markides (“Markides
Second Legal Opinion”), the witness statement of Mr. Georgios Iacovou (“Iacovou Witness

Statement”), factual exhibits and legal authorities.

On 31 December 2015, Respondent filed its Rejoinder on the Issue of “Seat” (the
“Rejoinder”), together with the second expert witness report of Mr. Kypros Ioannides
(“Ioannides Second Legal Opinion”), the witness statement of Mr. Michalis Georgiou

(“Georgiou Witness Statement”), factual exhibits and legal authorities.

The hearing on the issue of “seat” was held at the World Bank Conference Centre in Paris
on 22-23 March 2016. In addition to the Members of the Tribunal, the Secretary of the

Tribunal and the Assistant to the Tribunal, the following persons participated at the hearing:

On behalf of CEAC

Mr. Egishe Dzhazoyan, King & Spalding International LLP
Mr. Thomas Sprange, King & Spalding International LLP

Page 8 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

 

Ms. Sarah Vasani, King & Spalding International LLP
Mr. Grigori Lazarev, King & Spalding International LLP
Mr. Ben Burnham, King & Spalding International LLP
Ms. Lisa Wong, King & Spalding International LLP

Mr. Andrey Kovalenko, Deputy General Counsel, CEAC
Mr. Nicos Chrysanthou, Chrysanthou & Chrysanthou LLC

On behalf of Montenegro

Mr. Christoph Lindinger, Schénherr Rechtsanwalte GmbH

Ms. Anne-Karin Grill, Schénherr Rechtsanwalte GmbH

Mr. Michael Stimakovits, Schénherr Rechtsanwilte GmbH

Mr. Slaven Moravéevié, Schénherr Rechtsanwiilte GmbH

Ms. Jelena Bezarevié Paji¢, Schénherr Rechtsanwilte GmbH

Mr. Dragan Kujovié, Director-General, Directorate for Industry and Entrepreneurship of the
Ministry of Economy of Montenegro

Mr. Goran Nikolié, Officer, Directorate for Industry and Entrepreneurship of the Ministry
of Economy of Montenegro

  

Witnesses
Mr. Georgios Iacovou

Mr. Marcos Georgios Dracos
Mr. Michalis Georgiou

Experts
Dr. Monique Sasson
Mr. Alecos Markides
Mr. Nicos Makrides (assistant to Mr. Alecos Markides)

Mr. Kypros Ioannides
Prof. Vuk Radovié

Court reporter
Ms. Claire Hill, The Court Reporter Ltd.

27. On 13 April 2016, Claimant and Respondent submitted their respective Costs Submissions
(“C-CS” and “R-CS”, respectively).

Page 9 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

Ill.

28.

29.

30.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)
FACTUAL BACKGROUND

To the extent required for the Tribunal’s analysis, the Tribunal briefly summarizes the
factual background to the dispute as plead in the Request for Arbitration. This summary does

not constitute any finding by the Tribunal on any facts disputed by the Parties.

. The dispute

The present dispute arises out of CEAC’s ownership and management of Kombinat
Aluminijuma Podgorica, A.D. (“KAP”), an aluminium plant located outside of Podgorica,
Montenegro. In 2003, the Montenegrin Government initiated a public tender process to
privatize KAP, which had been owned by the State from the time of its construction. Rusal
Holdings Limited (“Rusal”) ultimately submitted the winning bid for KAP in 2005, and
CEAC, as Rusal’s affiliate company, entered into the Agreement for the Sale and Purchase
of the Shares in Kombinat Aluminijuma Podgorica, A.D. by Public Tender (the “KAP
SPA”)?

The KAP SPA was executed by several parties: (i) the Fund for Development of the Republic
of Montenegro, the Republic Fund for Pension and Disparity Insurance, and the Bureau for
Employment of the Republic of Montenegro (together, the “Sellers’”); (ii) Salamon
Enterprises Limited* (the “Buyer”); (iii) Eagle Capital Group Limited* (the “Corporate
Guarantor”); and (iv) the Government. Under the KAP SPA, CEAC paid €48,500,000 to the
Sellers to acquire approximately 65% of KAP’s shares and also undertook to invest an
additional €75,000,000 over a five-year period both to improve KAP’s facilities and to

implement social and environmental programs.”

? Request for Arbitration, at 15, 16; Exhibit C-7.

3 Salamon Enterprises Limited changed its name to CEAC Holdings Limited on 1 August 2007. Request for
Arbitration, fn. 9; Exhibit C-8.

4 Eagle Capital Group Limited subsequently changed its name to Ent Group Limited. Request for Arbitration, fn. 10.
> Request for Arbitration, at 16-18; Exhibit C-7. Regarding the Government's obligations under the KAP SPA, the
Request for Arbitration states that “the Government undertook, inter alia, (1) to guarantee a long-term (5 year)
electricity supply contract ... with the State-owned electricity producer...; (2) to warrant that all pre-2004 accounts

provided during the due diligence process were accurate and correct; and (3) to ass

 

me responsibility and liability for

 

environmental issues associated with operating KAP and RBN.” Request for Arbitration, at 21.

Page 10 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

31.

32.

33.

34.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

In October 2005, CEAC also purchased from the Government a minority share in Rudnici

Boksita Niksi¢, A.D. (“RBN”), the main supplier of raw materials to KAP, for €6,000,000.

As part of its strategy to make KAP profitable, CEAC sought to provide KAP with a
dedicated source of electricity. To further this goal, its parent company, En+, bid for and
won a tender to purchase all of the shares in the State-owned coal-fired power plant TE

Pljevlja and a 31% stake in the State-owned coal mine Rudnik Usglja.°

According to the Request for Arbitration, CEAC began experiencing problems in 2006 when
it allegedly learned that the Government had provided inaccurate financial statements for
KAP and RBN during the tender process, which understated KAP’s debts and obligations
by “tens of millions of euros”.’? Then, the Montenegrin parliament terminated the
privatization of TE Pljevlja and Rudnik Uglja “based on dubious reasoning”, which

compromised KAP’s supply of competitively-priced electricity.*

In an attempt to resolve these issues, CEAC initiated arbitration against the Sellers and
Montenegro pursuant to the KAP SPA on 27 November 2007.° That arbitration was
discontinued pursuant to the Settlement Agreement dated 16 November 2009 between the
Sellers and Montenegro, on the one hand, and CEAC, En+, KAP and RBN on the other (the
“Settlement Agreement”).!° As a result of the settlement, CEAC transferred 50% of its shares
in KAP to the Government, giving the Government an equal stake in KAP (29.3%) and a
seat on KAP’s board of directors.'' In exchange, Montenegro undertook, inter alia, to

subsidize KAP’s electricity supply and to issue €135,000,000 in State guarantees to KAP.'?

© Request for Arbitration, at 22.

7 Request for Arbitration, at 23.
8 Request for Arbitration, at 25.
° Request for Arbitration, at 26.
10 Request for Arbitration, at 28 and Exhibit C-9.
'! Request for Arbitration, at 28.
'? Request for Arbitration, at 30.

Page 11 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

35.

36.

37.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

CEAC alleges that its attempts to restructure and modernize KAP were thwarted by
Respondent, which undertook a number of actions aimed at causing KAP to default on its

debts, including:

a. Montenegro refused to provide KAP with the electricity subsidies to which it was

entitled under the Settlement Agreement;
b. the State-owned electricity company reduced KAP’s supply of electricity;

c. Montenegro’s representative on the KAP board of directors refused to approve KAP’s
2012 financial statements and its business plan, which approvals were conditions of a

loan agreement between KAP and Deutsche Bank; and

d. Montenegro refused to provide its written consent as guarantor under that loan

agreement.!*

According to the Request for Arbitration, these actions caused KAP to default on its debt,

“which in turn enabled the Government to seize control over CEAC’s investment”.!4

In June 2013, the Ministry of Finance commenced insolvency proceedings against KAP in
the Commercial Court of Podgorica and appointed Mr. Veselin Perisic as an interim
insolvency manager of KAP. Mr. Perisic, whose prior consent was required for all actions
of KAP’s management, allegedly ran the bankruptcy in an irregular manner.'> In particular,
he had KAP enter into an agreement with Montenegro Bonus, a State-owned oil trading
company. This agreement made Montenegro Bonus KAP’s manager, despite its alleged
inexperience in the aluminium business, “thereby enable[ing] the State to reap the benefit of
the revenues associated with KAP’s aluminium production”.'®

Mr. Perisic subsequently announced a public tender for the sale of all of KAP’s assets,

without seeking the approval of KAP’s Board of Creditors, which was responsible for major

'3 Request for Arbitration, at 35.

'4 Request for Arbitration, at 35, 36.
'S Request for Arbitration, at 37-41.

'6 Request for Arbitration, at 4, 38-40.

Page 12 of 72

38.

39.

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)
decisions in the bankruptcy proceedings.'’ In doing so, he provided an estimate valuing the

property at €52,000,000, which according to Claimant is far below the actual market value.'®

Finally, CEAC alleges that “in a hostile attempt to intimidate CEAC”, Montenegro initiated
“bogus criminal proceedings” against Dmitry Potrubach, a Russian national who had served
as the chief financial officer of both CEAC and KAP, for stealing electricity. The Request
for Arbitration describes the charges as “absurd and unfounded” and states that when Mr.
Potrubach lodged a complaint with the European Court of Human Rights, Montenegro

dismissed the local proceedings.”

The claims and relief sought by Claimant in the Request for Arbitration

Based on the alleged facts summarized above, Claimant submits that Montenegro has

breached the following obligations under the BIT:?°
a. to provide fair and equitable treatment;7!
b. to provide full protection and security;

c. to provide national and most-favoured-nation treatment, including with respect to the

“management, maintenance, use, enjoyment, expansion or disposal” of investments;”*

d. not to expropriate, except in cases in which such measures are taken in the public
interest, observe due process of law, are not discriminatory, and are accompanied by

adequate compensation effected without delay;”*

"7 Request for Arbitration, at 42. CEAC also alleges that Mr. Perisic formed the Board of Creditors of KAP in an

unlawful manner, resulting in a Board of Creditors consisting of only three members, none of whom represented
CEAC. Id., at 41.

'8 Request for Arbitration, at 42.

'° Request for Arbitration, at 45-48.

2° Request for Arbitration, at 50.

2! BIT, Article 2.2, Exhibit CLA-1.

» BIT, Article 2.2, Exhibit CLA-1.

3 BIT, Article 3, Exhibit CLA-1.

4 BIT, Article 5, Exhibit CLA-1.

Page 13 of 72

40.

Al.

42.

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

to guarantee the free transfer of payments;”> and

to “encourage and create stable, equitable, favourable and transparent conditions for

[foreign investors] to make investments in its territory”.°°

On the merits, Claimant seeks an award granting it a declaration that Montenegro has
violated the BIT, monetary compensation, costs, interest and such other relief as the Tribunal

deems appropriate.””
THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS RELATING TO THE ISSUE OF “SEAT”

Within the framework of this phase of the proceedings, Claimant has formulated the

following request for relief:

“[...] CEAC respectfully requests the following relief:

98.1 an award declaring that CEAC is seated in Cyprus, and thus qualifies as an investor
pursuant to Article 1(3)(b) of the Treaty;

98.2 an order joining any other jurisdictional objections Montenegro may have to the merits
phase of this dispute;

98.3 an award requiring Montenegro to pay all costs and fees associated with this phase of
the proceedings, plus compound interest.

2 28

98.4 any other relief that the Tribunal may deem appropriate”.

For its part, Respondent has requested the following from the Tribunal:

“(A) An award

(i) declaring that Claimant does not have a seat in Cyprus and thus does not qualify
as an investor pursuant to Article 1(3)(b) of the Treaty,

(ii) dismissing Claimant’s claim, and

(iii) ordering Claimant to bear all fees and expenses of the members of the Arbitral
Tribunal and of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes, as

25 BIT, Article 6, Exhibit CLA-1.

26 BIT, Article 2.1, Exhibit CLA-1.

27 Request for Arbitration, at 73.

28 Memorial, at 98. See also Reply, at 186.

Page 14 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

43.

44.

4S.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

well as all fees and expenses incurred by Respondent in relation to this proceeding,
including but not limited to the fees of its legal representatives and any experts
retained, as well as Respondent’s internal resources devoted to this arbitration and
interest.

2 29

(B) Any other relief that the Tribunal may deem appropriate”

RELEVANT LEGAL TEXTS

The Tribunal considers it useful, before any presentation of the Parties’ respective positions
on the issue of “seat”, to quote below the legal provisions invoked by the Parties and which

are relevant to the Tribunal’s analysis.

. The ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules

Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, which is found within Chapter II entitled “Jurisdiction

of the Centre”, provides in relevant part:

“(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of
an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a
Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the
Centre. When the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent
unilaterally.

(2) “National of another Contracting State” means:
(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State other than the State

party to the dispute on the date on which the parties consented to submit such dispute to
conciliation or arbitration [...]”.

Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, which is found within Chapter IV, Section 3 entitled

“Powers and Functions of the Tribunal”, provides:

“The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of law as may be agreed
by the parties. In the absence of such agreement, the Tribunal shall apply the law of the
Contracting State party to the dispute (including its rules on the conflict of laws) and such
rules of international law as may be applicable”.

2° Rejoinder, at 171.

Page 15 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)
B. The Cyprus-Montenegro BIT

46. The Preamble of the BIT reads:

“The Republic of Cyprus and Serbia and Montenegro ...

Desiring to create favourable conditions for greater economic cooperation between the
Contracting Parties,

Desiring to create and maintain favourable conditions for reciprocal investments,
Convinced that the promotion and protection of investments will contribute to the
enhancement of entrepreneurial initiative and thereby significantly contribute to the
development of economic relations between the Contracting Parties

Have agreed as follows”.

47. Article 1 of the BIT provides in relevant part:

“3. The term ‘investor’ shall mean:

L-]

(b) a legal entity incorporated, constituted or otherwise duly organized in accordance with
the laws and regulations of one Contracting Party, having its seat in the territory of that
Contracting Party and making investments in the territory of the other Contracting Party”.

48. Article 9 of the BIT provides in relevant part:

“4. The arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with the provisions of this
Agreement and the applicable rules and principles of international law”.

49. Article 10 of the BIT reads:

“Tf the laws of either Contracting Party or international agreements, existing at present or
established hereafter, between the Contracting Parties or other international agreements
whereof the Contracting Parties are signatories, contain provisions entitling investments by
investors of the other Contracting Party to a treatment more favourable than is provided by
the present Agreement, such laws and agreements shall to the extent that they are more
favourable prevail over the present Agreement”.

Page 16 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

VI.

50.

51.

52.

53.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

. Claimant’s position

Claimant submits that CEAC has established a seat in Cyprus within the meaning of Article
1(3)(b) and is therefore an “investor” under the BIT (7.). According to Claimant, the meaning
of the term “seat” cannot be interpreted autonomously under the Treaty (2.), but must be
determined by renvoi to Cypriot municipal law (/.). CEAC further considers that, under
Cypriot law, the term “seat” means “registered office” (3.), not “real seat” (4.), and that this
interpretation is supported by Regulation (EU) 1215/2012 of 12 December 2012 of the
European Parliament and of the Council on jurisdiction and recognition and enforcement of
judgments in civil and commercial matters (“the Recast Brussels Regulation’) (5.) and the

treaty practice of Cyprus and Montenegro (6.).

I. The meaning of “seat” under Article I(e)(b) of the BIT should be determined by a
renvoi to municipal law

Claimant’s position is that, since the BIT does not define the term “seat” and no uniformly

accepted definition of the term exists under international law, the meaning of “seat” under

Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT must be determined by a renvoi to Cypriot municipal law.

In this respect, Claimant refers to Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law
of Treaties (the “VCLT”), which indicates the rules of interpretation of international treaties
to be followed by the Tribunal in its interpretive process. Claimant considers that there is no
hierarchy in the application of the principles set out in Article 31 of the VCLT and adds that
the Tribunal should favor an interpretation of the BIT which gives its terms an
“appropriate”? effect. Further, CEAC submits that Articles 31 and 32 of the VCLT should

be applied in conjunction, rather than independently.*!

According to Claimant, the ordinary meaning of the term “seat”, as provided in Article 31

of the VCLT, should be determined by means of a renvoi to Cypriot municipal law.

3° Memorial, at 15.
3! Memorial, at 11-21.

Page 17 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

54.

55.

56.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

Referring to the expert testimony of Dr. Sasson,” Claimant contends that, where no accepted
definition of a term exists under international law or is given in an investment treaty,
international law requires that tribunals refer to municipal law to obtain the precise meaning

of a legal concept.**

Claimant submits that the BIT offers no definition of the term “seat”, as used in Article
1(3)(b). Further, because States have adopted varying approaches when it comes to linking
companies with a specific system of law, no uniform definition of the term exists under
private or public international law. Indeed, under the real seat theory, which is used for
instance in France and Germany, the law of the place where the company has its management
and control center is the law applicable to that company, regardless of the place of
incorporation. Under the incorporation theory, a company is governed by the law where it
has been constituted, and the situs of the “real seat” is irrelevant. Claimant submits that
Cyprus, along with the United Kingdom and other common law jurisdictions, follows the
incorporation theory, which means that the concept of “real seat” is not recognized in the

sense in which it is understood in jurisdictions such as France or Germany.**

Claimant disputes Respondent’s theory that there might exist an international business law
definition of the term “seat”. According to Claimant, the only authority Respondent has
provided in support of its theory is the AFT v. Slovakia award.** Claimant considers however
that this Tribunal is not obliged to follow the conclusions in that award because the AFT v.
Slovakia tribunal: (i) was considering a case involving a different treaty, using different
language and involving different parties; (ii) failed to explain how it determined the meaning
of “seat” in “international business law” and how its approach complied with Articles 31
and 32 of the VCLT; (iii) cited a single source in support of its “seat” theory , which did not
contain a definition of “seat” in accordance with international law or set out any standards

to determine the concept; (iv) conflated the requirement of “seat” with the requirement of

* Sasson First Legal Opinion, at 58.1-58.2.

33 Memorial, at 22-29.

4 Memorial, at 30-35.

38 Alps Finance and Trade AG v. The Slovak Republic (UNCITRAL), Award, 5 March 2011 (‘AFT v. Slovakia”)
(Exhibit RL-14).

Page 18 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

57.

58.

59.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

“real economic activities” from the applicable treaty; and (v) offered reasoning that is
contrary to the principle that a holding company can be a viable claimant in an investment

treaty case.*°

Claimant further argues that the BIT’s context, object and purpose support a renvoi to
Cypriot municipal law. In its view, Article 10 of the BIT strongly indicates that the Treaty
is not a self-contained international instrument that prohibits reference to municipal law. To
the contrary, Article 10 of the BIT demonstrates that municipal law has great importance,
and the Tribunal should be guided by this context when interpreting Article 1(3)(b) of the
BIT. Further, the Preamble reflects the BIT’s purpose to promote greater economic
cooperation between the Contracting Parties and to create and maintain favorable conditions
for investments. In Claimant’s view, these goals make it clear that the term “seat” should be
interpreted in an inclusive manner, and not as setting hurdles to the protection of Cypriot

investors which are unknown to Cypriot law.*”

Claimant disagrees with Respondent’s argument pursuant to which the BIT excludes renvoi
to Cypriot municipal law due to the fact that the term “seat” is not followed by the phrase
“in accordance with the laws and regulations of one Contracting Party”. According to CEAC,
this phrase is unnecessary, as the BIT clearly links “seat” with the “territory” of the host
State. A legal entity’s seat cannot “exist in a vacuum” but is linked to the jurisdiction of a
particular State and defined on the basis of that State’s laws and regulations. Claimant adds
that, even if “seat” had been followed by the phrase “in accordance with the laws and
regulations of one Contracting Party”, its meaning would still not have been readily
ascertainable from the BIT’s text, which again demonstrates that a renvoi to municipal law

is necessary.*®

Claimant further submits that its interpretation of the term “seat” does not contravene the
principle of reciprocity set out in the BIT’s Preamble. According to CEAC, reciprocity does

not presuppose that threshold questions such as whether a company qualifies as an investor

8 Memorial, at 36-40.
’ Memorial, at 43-47, 75-81; Reply, at 88-91.
38 Reply, at 50-55.

Page 19 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

60.

61.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

should be decided identically in the case of both Contracting Parties, as argued by
Respondent. Rather, reciprocity requires that each Contracting Party accord the same
substantive protections to investors of the other Contracting Party. Claimant argues that this
is confirmed by Article 3 of the BIT (“National Treatment and Most Favoured Nation
Treatment”), wherein it is explicitly stated that reciprocity applies to the treatment of
investors. Equally, the Cyprus-Bulgaria BIT — which defines “investor” differently for each
contracting State but which has as its goal the mutual encouragement and protection of
investments — demonstrates that the circle of protected investors in an investment treaty need

not be identical for the treaty to be consistent with the reciprocity principle.*”

Claimant considers that this interpretation is not contradicted by the Permanent Court of
International Justice’s (the “PCIJ”) conclusions in the Exchange of Greek and Turkish
Populations case.*° In that case, the PCI) had to establish the meaning of the term
“established” in Article 2 of the Convention of Lausanne. The PCIJ found that the term
described a situation of fact — not a legal term of art. Consequently, that term could be
construed according to its natural meaning and not according to national legislation.
Claimant argues that in this case, “seat” is a legal term of art with distinct and specific legal

meanings within different municipal law systems. While in the PCIJ case, a renvoi to

 

municipal law would have resulted in uncertainties, difficulties and delays, in this case it is
the only means of establishing the meaning of “seat”. CEAC adds that the Exchange of
Greek and Turkish Populations case supports its position that, where a treaty refers to a legal
concept with no express direction on how to interpret it, renvoi to municipal law is required.
Renvoi can only be excluded if the interpretation of the concept under municipal law

conflicts with the intention of the State parties to the treaty, and that treaty is self-contained.*!

Claimant therefore concludes that the meaning of the term “seat” under Article 1(3)(b) of

the BIT should be determined by a renvoi to Cypriot municipal law.

» Reply, at 60-67, 77-80.

* Exchange of Greek and Turkish Populations, Advisory Opinion no. 10, 21 February 1925, PCI, Series B, No. 10,
Exhibit 27 to Sasson First Legal Opinion (“Exchange of Greek and Turkish Populations”).

+! Reply, at 68-74.

Page 20 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

 

2. An “autonomous” interpretation of “seat” is incorrect as a matter of
international law
62. Claimant further argues that Respondent’s autonomous interpretation of the term “seat”,
with the term requiring a “real connection” or “genuine link” between the investor and the
host State, is incorrect as a matter of international law. It is premised on the assumption that
“seat” is a practical concept, rather than a legal term of art, a theory with which CEAC

disagrees.”

63. Claimant is of the view that Respondent’s interpretation is also unreasonable, as in practice
it would effectively nullify the BIT in relation to most Cypriot investors, the vast majority
of which are holding companies with the sole purpose of holding investments. Relying on
the witness testimony of Mr. Iacovou, Claimant submits that, when entering into the BIT, it
was the intention of the Cypriot Government that all companies incorporated and having
their registered offices in Cyprus benefit from the Treaty’s protections. Moreover, had the
Contracting Parties to the BIT wished to exclude holding companies or pass-through entities
from protection, they would have included specific language to this effect, such as a denial
of benefits clause. Since such a clause does not exist, it would be wrong to imply one into

the Treaty.

64. Claimant further disagrees with Respondent’s argument that the BIT only protects
“entrepreneurs” from either Contracting Party. In this respect, CEAC argues that the Treaty
envisages the protection of legal entities in addition to natural persons. Further, because the
BIT does not contain a denial of benefits clause, the ultimate origin of capital is not a relevant

consideration for the purposes of determining investor status.**

* Reply, at 18, 25.
8 Reply, at 4-13, 18, 82-84, 100-103.
+ Reply, at 81, 85-87.

Page 21 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

65.

66.

67.

4 Article

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

Claimant adds that the legal authorities referred to by Respondent in support of its “real seat

theory are irrelevant and inapplicable to the facts of this case.

In this respect, Claimant argues that Article 9 of the ILC Articles on Diplomatic Protection
(the “Diplomatic Protection Articles”)* is inapposite, as it is inconsistent with Article
1(3)(b) of the BIT. The Commentaries to the Diplomatic Protection Articles specify that they
“do not apply to the alternative special regime for the protection of foreign investors
provided for in bilateral and multilateral investment treaties ... ‘to the extent that’ they are
inconsistent with the provisions of a BIT”.** Referring to the expert testimony of Dr. Sasson,
Claimant submits that the Treaty provides an exhaustive list of requirements for qualification
as an investor. This renders the Diplomatic Protection Articles essentially incompatible with

the BIT.”

Claimant argues that, even if the Tribunal were to find the Diplomatic Protection Articles
relevant, they are not an authoritative statement of customary international law. In any event,
CEAC satisfies the requirements of both customary international law, which determines
nationality by reference to the place of incorporation, and of the Diplomatic Protection
Articles, which provide that incorporation and the existence of a registered office are
sufficient to establish a company’s nationality. Claimant further notes that in Diallo*®, the
ICJ rejected the theory that the Diplomatic Protection Articles require a “close connection”
or “genuine link” between a legal entity and its State of nationality. Further, Claimant argues

that, contrary to Respondent’s position, the requirements of “seat of management” and

9 of the Diplomatic Protection Articles reads as follows:

“For purposes of the diplomatic protection of a corporation, the State of nationality means the State under
whose law the corporation was incorporated. However, when the corporation is controlled by nationals of
another State or States and has not substantial business activities in the State of incorporation, and the seat of
management and the financial control of the corporation are both located in another State, that State shall be
regarded as the State of nationality.”

46 Reply, at 29, quoting from ILC Draft Articles on Diplomatic Protection with Commentaries, p. 90 (Exhibit CL-

138).

+7 Reply, at 26-29.
+8 Ahmadou Safio Diallo (Republic of Guinea v. Democratic Republic of the Congo), Preliminary Objections,
Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 2007, p. 582, at 88 (Exhibit CL-127) (“Diallo”).

Page 22 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

68.

69.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

“financial control” under Article 9 of the Diplomatic Protection Articles are not cumulative,

but alternative.”

Claimant also contends that Respondent’s reliance on Nottebohm” is misplaced. Investment
arbitration tribunals such as Rompetrol v. Romania! have emphasized that Article 27 of the
ICSID Convention expressly excludes the application of customary international law rules
on diplomatic protection. Further, referring to Brownlie’s Principles of Public International
Law, Claimant submits that Nottebohm concerns the diplomatic protection of natural
persons, not legal entities, and that “no absolute test of ‘the genuine connection’ has found
general acceptance”.** Consequently, CEAC submits that the “main seat of interests” and
the “center of ... interests and ... business activities” criteria laid out in the Nottebohm case
only apply to natural persons and then only to a limited extent.** As stated in the
Commentaries to the Diplomatic Protection Articles:

“Draft article 4 [State of Nationality of a Natural Person] does not require a State to prove

an effective or genuine link between itself and its national, along the lines suggested in the

Nottebohm case ... the Commission took the view that there were certain factors that served

to limit Nottebohm to the facts of the case in question ... This suggests that the Court did
not intend to expound a general rule applicable to all States.”**

Claimant adds that Respondent’s theory that one must look at the place of residence of the
“effective” or “real” representative to determine a company’s seat has no basis under
international law. Moreover, it would lead to the absurd result that each legal entity must
have one single representative to act on its behalf, and the nationality of that representative

would determine the nationality of the company.*

49 Reply, at 30-33.

5° Nottebohm case (Liechtenstein v. Guatemala), Second phase, Judgment, 6 April 1955, pp. 13-16, at 25 (Exhibit RL-
70) (“‘Nottebohm”’).

5! The Rompetrol Group N.V. v. Romania (ICSID Case No ARB/03/3), Decision on Respondent’s Preliminary
Objections on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, 18 April 2008, at 101 (Exhibit CL-133) (“Rompetrol v. Romania”).

» Reply, at 34-36, quoting from IAN BROWNLIE, PRINCIPLES OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW (1990), at 706 (Exhibit
CL-137).

53 Reply, at 37.

» Reply, at 37, quoting from ILC Draft Articles on Diplomatic Protection with Commentaries, p. 33 (Exhibit CL-

138).

55 Reply, at 35, 39.

Page 23 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

Claimant considers that the reference to a “permanent establishment” (as opposed to “seat”)
within the Double Taxation Treaty (“DTT”) between Cyprus and Montenegro cannot be
used to imply an “effectiveness of representative” requirement into the completely unrelated
BIT. The DTT between Cyprus and Montenegro is inapposite in this case because it has an

entirely distinct object, purpose and subject matter from that of the BIT.*°

3. Under Cypriot law, a company’s seat is determined by the location of its

registered office
Referring to the expert testimony of Mr. Markides,>’ Claimant submits that, when including
the term “seat” in Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT, Cyprus could only have been referring to the

Cypriot law concept of “registered office”.

In this respect, Claimant notes that Cyprus is a jurisdiction following the incorporation
theory with respect to determining the /ex societatis of a company. Cypriot law does not
recognize the concept of “real seat”, as this term is used in France or Germany, and the
Cypriot legal concept which most closely resembles “seat” is a company’s registered
office.** According to Claimant, the meaning of “seat” as applied to Montenegrin investors
under the BIT may very well be different, but that other meaning of “seat” is irrelevant to
this case. In Claimant’s view, the fact that the term “investors” will have a different meaning

with respect to each State does not contravene the effet utile principle.*°

Under Section 102(1) of the Cypriot Companies Law (the “Companies Law”), Chapter 113,
every Cypriot company must maintain a registered office in Cyprus. A registered office is
the location where a company’s registers must be kept. It is also the location where a

company can be validly served process and receive communications and notices.

According to Claimant, this interpretation of the term “seat” does not run counter to the

principle of effectiveness. In its view, the obligation to maintain a registered office is distinct

56 Reply, at 41-44.

57 Markides First Legal Opinion, at 8-12.
58 Memorial, at 48-52.

5 Reply, at 96-99.

© Memorial, at 49-53.

Page 24 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

75.

76.

77.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

from the concept of incorporation under Cypriot law. Incorporation is the process of a
company’s formation and registration with the Registrar of Companies, which gives a
company separate legal personality. By contrast, the obligation to maintain a registered
office arises either from the date on which a company begins to carry on business or from
the fourteenth day after the day of incorporation. The distinction between the two concepts
is further evidenced by the fact that, under certain conditions, a Cypriot company may
transfer its registered office to or outside of Cyprus, which effects a change in the proper law
of the company. A company may also be in breach of its obligation to designate a registered

office.*!

Further, the Cyprus-Benelux BIT includes in its definition of investor both the incorporation
and the registered office requirements, which means that the two concepts are not

coterminous.

Claimant does not consider that the Greek version of the BIT, which includes the adjective
“permanent” before the word “seat” (“edra”), contradicts its position. First, Claimant notes
that the English version of the Treaty is controlling and that this version does not contain the
word “permanent”. Therefore, the use of this term cannot carry a lot of weight in the
Tribunal’s interpretive process. Moreover, contrary to what Respondent is arguing, the use
of the word “permanent” before “seat” does not contravene the effet utile principle if “seat”
is interpreted as “registered office”. According to CEAC, because the term “seat” by itself
is ambiguous and a registered office is by its nature permanent, the addition of “permanent”
in the Greek version of the BIT can only further suggest that “seat” means registered office.
Otherwise, in Respondent’s interpretation, the BIT would require that an investor have a

“permanent real seat”, a concept that Montenegro does not make any effort to explain.

Claimant further refers to Respondent’s table comparing the various translations of the word
“edra” between English and Greek in a number of legal texts. According to CEAC, there are

five possible translations of the word “seat” (with or without qualifying adjectives): seat;

©! Memorial, at 54-56; Reply, at 94, 95, 108, 111-115.
© Reply, at 116-118.
© Reply, at 119-122.

Page 25 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

78.

79.

80.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

statutory seat; real seat; registered office; and head office. Claimant submits that Respondent
cannot conclude that the term “seat” cannot mean “registered office” when this is one of the
possible translations of the term and, incidentally, the translation which has been adopted by

the Office of the Law Commissioner of Cyprus (the “OLC”) for the Companies Law.

Finally, Claimant submits that its interpretation of the term “seat” is conclusive in this case,
because the concept of “registered office” is not “wholly unreasonable” or “abhorrent to

international law”.

4. Under Cypriot law, “seat” cannot be understood to mean “real seat”

Claimant considers that Montenegro’s argument pursuant to which “seat” under Article
1(3)(b) of the BIT should be interpreted to mean “real seat” is flawed. It is based on an
interpretation of the Treaty as if it were a Cypriot domestic instrument and relies upon

irrelevant sources.

In this respect, Claimant takes issue with Respondent’s reliance on Council Regulation (EC)
No. 2157/2001 of 8 October 2001 on the Statute for a European company (“SE”) (the “SE
Regulation”) as support for the argument that this piece of legislation introduced the concept
of “real seat” in Cyprus. According to Claimant, the SE Regulation is of no assistance to the
Tribunal, because CEAC is not an SE. The Regulation’s scope of application is limited to
SEs and does not modify Member States’ company laws. Claimant submits that the
Companies Law was unaffected by the entry into force of the SE Regulation. Moreover, the
SE Regulation can have no impact on earlier BITs — such as the one at issue in the present
case — which included the term “seat” before the SE Regulation entered into force. Claimant
adds that, in any event, the SE Regulation does not define or explain the meaning of the

terms “real seat” or “head office”.

4 Reply, at 123-127.

° Memorial, at 64, referring to NEWCOMBE AND PARADELL, LAW AND PRACTICE OF INVESTMENT TREATIES:
STANDARDS OF TREATMENT (Kluwer, 2009), at 96 (CL-118).

66 Reply, at 129-131.

°T Reply, 132-141.

Page 26 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

81.

82.

83.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

Claimant also disagrees with Respondent’s interpretive methodology. In its view,
Respondent’s expert Mr. Ioannides interprets the BIT as if it were a domestic Cypriot statute,
using English law principles of construction instead of applying the VCLT, which is
inappropriate. Further, Claimant rejects Respondent’s analogy with Cypriot laws on tax
residency, and specifically the distinction Montenegro tries to make between the concepts
of “domicile” (which Mr. Ioannides assimilates to incorporation) and “residence” (which
Mr. Ioannides views as an economic concept). In the view of CEAC, taxation laws are a
special category of legislation that is designed to regulate a particular type of social
relationship. Taxation laws cannot be applied by analogy to contexts they were not designed
to regulate. In particular, Claimant takes issue with Mr. Ioannides’ reliance on the Supreme
Court of Cyprus’ decision in the OMAS case.® According to CEAC, the OMAS decision
provided guidance on the meaning of the word “seat” solely for purposes of the Value Added
Tax Law of 2000 and does not provide any guidance on the meaning of the word “seat” as a

matter of general law.”

5. The Recast Brussels Regulation supports a finding that CEAC has a seat in

Cyprus
Claimant further submits that its interpretation of the term “seat” under Article 1(3)(b) of the
BIT is also confirmed by the Cypriot rules on the conflict of laws and by the Recast Brussels
Regulation. Claimant considers that the Recast Brussels Regulation, as a legal instrument of
European Union law, is an applicable rule and principle of international law, as envisaged

by Article 9(4) of the BIT and by Article 31(3)(c) of the VCLT.”

CEAC argues that, according to the Cypriot rules on conflict of laws, the seat of a Cypriot

company is determined by the location of its registered office. In this respect, Cypriot law

8 OMAS (Cyprus) Lid v. Republic of Cyprus (2008) 3 A.A.D. 253 (“OMAS”), referred to in Ioannides First Legal
Opinion, at 14.16, 15.1-15.7.

© Reply, at 142-151.

% Memorial, at 57-61, 69, 73.

Page 27 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

84.

85.

86.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

follows the position of English law, according to which the domicile of a corporation is the

place of its incorporation.”!

Claimant adds that, under the Recast Brussels Regulation, which has direct effect in Cyprus,
Member States’ courts are directed to apply their private international law rules in order to
determine where a company is seated. In the case of Cyprus, this means that courts will
determine the location of a company’s seat by reference to the incorporation theory.
Moreover, in relation to Cyprus, the Recast Brussels Regulation expressly recognizes that a
company’s registered office is the connecting factor that establishes domicile and determines

the jurisdiction of courts within the EU.”

6. The treaty practice of Cyprus and Montenegro confirms that “seat” means
“registered office” with regard to Cypriot investors
According to Claimant, its interpretation of the term “seat” is also confirmed by the treaty

practice of both Cyprus and Montenegro.

In this respect, Claimant submits that, of the 27 Cypriot BITs it is aware of, 13 contain
language that is substantially identical to the provision at issue in these proceedings,
requiring both incorporation of a legal entity and the existence of a seat in the host State. An
additional six treaties refer only to “constitution”, “incorporation” or “registration” in the
host State, without more. Five other treaties include additional requirements, such as
“control” (the Cyprus-Israel BIT and the Cyprus-Italy BIT) or “real business activities” (the
Cyprus-Iran BIT, the Cyprus-Jordan BIT and the Cyprus-Malta BIT). In a similar vein, the
Montenegro-Austria, Montenegro-Netherlands and Montenegro-Moldova BITs contain
express references to the ultimate “control” of the notional investors. The Montenegro-
Switzerland, Montenegro-Macedonia and Montenegro-Moldova BITs also expressly require
that the potential investor carry out “real” or “substantial” business activities in the host

State.

7! Memorial, at 57, 59, 60.
” Memorial, at 58, 61.
™ Memorial, at 84-90.

Page 28 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

Claimant interprets this treaty practice to mean that, when Cyprus and Montenegro have
intended to stipulate more stringent requirements on investors than proving the existence of
a “seat”, they have employed express language to this effect. The fact that the BIT does not
include such requirements can only mean that both Contracting Parties intentionally chose

not to do so.”4

Claimant also submits that the treaty practice of Cyprus and Montenegro shows that these
two States have used the terms “registered office” and “seat” interchangeably. Indeed, while
the Cyprus-Benelux BIT and the Montenegro-Benelux BIT use the term “registered office”
in addition to “incorporation” in their definition of investor, Cyprus’ BITs with Israel, Iran

and Jordan employ the term “seat”, without any reference to a “registered office”.”°

7. CEAC has its “seat” in Cyprus as a matter of Cypriot law

Claimant submits that at all relevant times, CEAC maintained its registered office at
Dimosthenous 4, 1101, Nicosia, Cyprus. Claimant argues that CEAC’s certificates of
registered office, dated 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2010, 2011, 2012 and 201376 represent

conclusive evidence to this effect.””

In the alternative, should the Tribunal consider that the term “seat” within the meaning of
Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT requires that CEAC have a “real connection” or “genuine link”
with Cyprus, or that CEAC have its central management and administration in Cyprus,

Claimant submits that this requirement is met as well.”®

Referring to Clause 3 of the Memorandum of Association,”? Claimant submits that CEAC is
by its nature a holding company, which carries out the activities and functions that are typical
of such an entity. The Tribunal’s analysis should start from this premise and not be

influenced by the external appearance of the physical buildings where CEAC is located.

74 Memorial, at 86, 90; Reply, at 92, 93.

75 Memorial, at 94-97.

% Exhibits C-20, C-70, C-80, C-90, C-95, C-56, C-100 and C-103.
7” Memorial, at 62, 63; Reply, at 154.

8 Reply, at 155.

79 Exhibit C-19.

Page 29 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

92.

93.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

Claimant submits that, in any event, CEAC carries out its central administration and

management from Cyprus and conducts its business in all material respects from Cyprus.*°

In particular, CEAC submits that its predecessor, Salamon Enterprises Ltd (“Salamon”) was
incorporated on 30 June 2004 and its sole director and secretary positions were held by Mr.
Chrysanthou and C&P Corporate Services, a Cypriot national and a Cypriot legal entity.*!
Salamon’s Certificate of Incumbency of 1 December 2005 stipulated that the Board of
Directors comprised C&P Corporate Services and Mr. Chrysanthou, and that the Board was
authorized to execute all powers of the company.** Claimant states that the Board passed
resolutions in the exercise of this power on several occasions, including resolutions related
to potential investments in Montenegro.** The structure of the Board subsequently changed
so that in September 2012 and April 2013 it included only C&P Corporate Services as the
sole director, while Mr. Chrysanthou was Secretary.** Claimant also refers to a letter dated
25 January 2011 sent by CEAC to VTB Bank (Austria),*° confirming that the address of the

registered office was the place of CEAC’s management and administration.*®

Claimant adds that, in furtherance of its object, CEAC carries out the sale and purchase of
shares in Cyprus, including, in April 2006, 100% of the share capital in a BVI-incorporated
company for consideration of USD 12 million.*? Claimant also draws the Tribunal’s
attention to CEAC’s balance sheets and financial statements for the years 2005, 2006, 2007,
2008 and 2009 as support for its submission that CEAC held assets, had liabilities and
reported losses which are evidence of real economic activity in Cyprus. Further, CEAC
instructed auditors, accountants and other consultants to perform professional services in

Cyprus, and in all situations correspondence was sent to CEAC’s registered office.** Indeed,

* Reply, at 156-161.

8! Exhibits C-6, C-94.

® Exhibit C-66.

3 Exhibits C-46, C-47, C-48, C-63, C-64 and C-79. See Claimant’s Closing Presentation, at slides 68-71.
* Exhibits C-101, C-102.

8S Exhibit C-97.

* Reply, at 162-164.

87 Exhibit C-69.

88 Reply, at 166-169.

Page 30 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

94.

95.

96.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

CEAC received at least 16 letters at its registered office from Respondent and its counsel at

Schonherr.?

As an alternative argument, Claimant reiterates its position that CEAC is and has been a tax
resident of Cyprus, as proven by its tax residency certificates of 2005, 2014 and 2015 and
by its income tax return of 2007. Claimant submits that, for a legal entity to be a tax resident
under Cypriot law, it must be managed and controlled from Cyprus. Claimant states that,
while the concept of “management and control” has not been defined in Cypriot law or
addressed by the courts of Cyprus, it is appropriate to look for its meaning in English
common law, which has been incorporated into the Cypriot legal system. According to
Claimant, the English Court of Appeal decision Wood v. Holden sets out the relevant
standard: what is needed for the exercise of “management and control” is “some level of
discretion that is exercised by the company within the jurisdiction”, which can be

demonstrated by the fact that directors of the company executed documents there.?

Further, Claimant points out that it holds bank accounts at Bankas Snoras (a Lithuanian
bank), Deutsche Bank, Russian Commercial Bank and Soyuz Commercial bank, with Mr.
Chrysanthou and/or Ms. Antoniou being the authorized signatories. Claimant has also
concluded various agreements for the provision of legal and consultancy services, some of
which concerned legal services in relation to aluminum, mining, power generation and other
industries in Montenegro. CEAC has granted powers of attorney to overseas counsel
(authorized by the signature of Mr. Chrysanthou or Ms. Antoniou) for activities such as, for
instance, the negotiation of a loan facility, the execution of documents, and the

representation of its interest in these arbitration proceedings.”!

Based on all these considerations, Claimant submits that CEAC satisfies the requirement of

“seat” under Article 1(3)(b) of the Treaty.

* Exhibits C-23 to C-29 and C-31 to C-39. See Claimant’s Closing Presentation, at slides 57-60.
° Wood and another v. Holden, [2006] 1 W.L.R. 1393, at 2-3 (Exhibit CL-37); Reply, at 173-175.
°! Reply, at 176-185.

Page 31 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

97.

98.

99.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

B. Respondent’s position

Respondent’s position is that Claimant bears the burden of proving the meaning of the term
“seat” under the BIT and that it satisfies this requirement,” but that Claimant has failed to
discharge this burden (5.). Respondent considers that the term “seat” should be interpreted
autonomously under the Treaty (/.) and that it requires something more than incorporation
and an address under both international law (2.) and Cypriot law (3.). In Montenegro’s view,
“seat” under Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT is the place where a legal entity is effectively
managed and financially controlled and where it carries out its business activities (4.). It is

not equivalent to tax residency, which, in any event, CEAC does not have (6.).
I. The term “seat” should be interpreted autonomously under the BIT

Respondent’s position is that any question of interpretation of the Treaty, including
determining the meaning of the term “seat” under Article 1(3)(b), has to be resolved in
accordance with the rules contained in Articles 31-33 of the VCLT. Because these rules do
not contain any reference to national law, the term “seat” needs to be interpreted

autonomously under the Treaty, without a renvoi to municipal law.

Referring to the principle of “good faith”, enshrined in Article 31(1) of the VCLT,
Respondent argues that Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT sets a high threshold for legal entities to
qualify as protected investors. Three conditions must be fulfilled in this respect: (i) legal
existence; (ii) seat; and (iii) the making of investments. While legal existence (through
incorporation, constitution or other due organization) is defined in reference to “the laws and
regulations of one Contracting Party”, this latter requirement is separated by a comma from
the other two elements, seat and the making of investments. Respondent interprets this to
mean that “seat” cannot be understood by reference to the Contracting Parties’ municipal
laws. Respondent considers that this conclusion is reinforced if one looks at the -Cyprus-

Bulgaria BIT, where the term “seat” is expressly defined by reference to Cypriot law.”

* Counter-Memorial, at 7-12.
°3 Counter-Memorial, at 46-57; Rejoinder, at 14-16, 28-30.

Page 32 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

100. Respondent further contends that the object and purpose of the BIT do not support a renvoi
to municipal law for the interpretation of the term “seat”. According to Montenegro, the Title
of the BIT and its Preamble establish two fundamental principles: reciprocity and the

development of economic relations between the Contracting Parties.**

101. Respondent considers that the overarching purpose of reciprocity would be defeated if the
Contracting Parties applied their domestic laws in order to define the term “seat”. Cyprus is
a jurisdiction following the incorporation theory, which means that the law applicable to a
legal entity is the law of the State of incorporation, regardless of where that entity carries out
its activities or is managed. By contrast, Montenegro has adopted the “real seat” theory,
pursuant to which the law applicable to a legal entity is the law of the jurisdiction where the
entity has its real seat (provided that the law of the jurisdiction where an entity has its real
seat accepts this basis for the determination of applicable law). Respondent argues that the
“seat” test needs to fulfill its function in an even manner with respect to both Contracting
Parties, which means that it must be conducted on the basis of reciprocal and identical
criteria. Otherwise, if the Tribunal were minded to accept Claimant’s interpretation of the
term “seat”, this would mean that the circle of protected Montenegrin investors would be
different from the circle of protected Cypriot investors. Indeed, in such a scenario,
Montenegrin shell companies would not benefit from Treaty protection, whereas Cypriot

shell companies would.°

102. Respondent considers that this conclusion is not affected by the fact that the Cyprus-Bulgaria
BIT, while mentioning reciprocity in the preamble, defines investors based on asymmetrical
criteria for the two contracting parties. Respondent considers that, even though reciprocity
is stated as a purpose for numerous international treaties, State parties are free to limit its

sphere of application if they so wish. However, no such limitation exists in the BIT.*°

103. Respondent refers in this respect to the Advisory Opinion of the PCIJ in Exchange of Greek

and Turkish Populations. In that case, the PCIJ interpreted the term “established”

°* Counter-Memorial, at 58-64.
°5 Counter-Memorial, at 65-79; Rejoinder, at 37-44.
% Rejoinder, at 45, 46.

Page 33 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

104.

105.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

autonomously under the applicable treaty, stating that it could not have been the intention of
the contracting parties to define this criterion by reference to differing provisions in their
national legislation. Respondent considers that it is also in the spirit of the BIT that protection
should be accorded to legal entities of both States that satisfy identical and reciprocal

criteria.”

Respondent adds that the purpose of developing economic relations between Cyprus and
Montenegro would not be served if Cypriot special purpose vehicles (““SPVs”), used as pass-
through entities, and with no substantial involvement in making the investment, were
protected as investors under the BIT. Referring to Standard Chartered v. Tanzania,*
Respondent argues that the BIT’s purpose of promoting investments by nationals of the
Contracting Parties would be defeated if the national of the Contracting State had no role in
deciding to make the investment, to fund it or in controlling or managing it. In particular,
Respondent quotes the following reasoning of the Standard Chartered v. Tanzania

tribunal:

“Tt is difficult to see how the treaty’s protections could promote investment by nationals of
a Contracting State if the national of the Contracting State had no role in deciding to make
the investment, funding the investment, or controlling or managing the investment after it
was made.”!

Respondent argues that, in the case before the Tribunal, the management services firm which
provides SPV support services to Claimant in Cyprus did not have any role in making any
investment decisions, or in adopting any managerial or entrepreneurial initiative with respect
to Claimant’s investment in Montenegro. All of these decisions were made outside of

Cyprus.!°!

°7 Counter-Memorial, at 80-86.
°8 Standard Chartered Bank v. The United Republic of Tanzania (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/12), Award, 2 November
2012 (“Standard Chartered v. Tanzania”) (Exhibit CL-110).

°° Counter-Memorial, at 87-9:

 

ejoinder, at 47-52.

100 Standard Chartered v. Tanzania, at 228.
1! Rejoinder, at 53-55.

Page 34 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

106.

107.

108.

109.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

Respondent further contends that Claimant’s reliance on Article 10 of the BIT is misplaced.
Article 10 provides for the application of more favorable provisions included in domestic

law only once an entity qualifies as an investor pursuant to Article 1(3) of the Treaty.!°

Respondent disputes CEAC’s contention that the BIT reflects the Cypriot Government’s
policy of creating a business friendly environment for holding companies. It contends that
CEAC has offered no concrete evidence of this policy or of the fact that it was accepted by
Montenegro. Further, if the purpose of the Cypriot Government had been to protect all
Cypriot companies, they would not have agreed to employ the term “seat” in the definition

of investor or at least they would have used the term “registered office”.!

Referring to Article 32 of the VCLT, Respondent argues that the Tribunal should disregard
the witness testimony of Mr. Georgios Iacovou because it does not include content that was
created by both Contracting Parties during the negotiation of the BIT. Respondent considers
that Mr. Iacovou’s testimony does not reflect the common understanding of Cyprus and
Montenegro as to the meaning of Article 1(3)(b) of the Treaty and cannot make up for the
fact that it was impossible to obtain the travaux préparatoires for the BIT. Respondent adds
that any documents from a “unilateral source” may only be taken into account if they were
introduced into the negotiation process or at least brought to the attention of the other party

to the negotiations. Mr. Iacovou’s testimony does not satisfy this requirement.!°*

Respondent also finds Claimant’s reliance on the Contracting Parties’ treaty practice to be
unconvincing. In particular, Respondent takes issue with the fact that Cyprus, a jurisdiction
which has adopted the incorporation theory and which does not employ the term “seat”, has
chosen to use that term 18 times instead of using what Claimant deems to be its equivalent,
ie. “registered office”. Further, Cyprus has defined investors by reference only to
incorporation in six bilateral investment treaties, which means that its choice not to do so in
the BIT must have been deliberate. The fact that in three treaties the requirement of “(real)

business activity” is used in addition to both “incorporation” and “seat”, does not mean that

2 Counter-Memorial, at 96-100.
63 Counter-Memorial, at 102-106.
14 Rejoinder, at 31.

Page 35 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

110.

111.

112.

113.

105

Counter-Memorial,
166 Counter-Memorial, at 123.
l,

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

in the 14 treaties where “seat” was used as a self-standing requirement, it did not refer to a

genuine connection between the investor and the host State. !
2. The term “seat” cannot be construed to mean incorporation and address

Respondent contends that the term “seat”, when interpreted autonomously under the Treaty

requires something “more than a registered office, i.e. an address”.!°°

In this respect, Respondent first refers to the Greek version of the BIT. While the standard
Greek translation of the term “seat” is “edra”, the BIT provides in Article 1(3)(b) “ehi
monima ten edra tis”, which means “permanently has its seat”. Respondent accepts that the
English version of the BIT is controlling. However, it also argues that the nuance present in

the Greek version of the Treaty should be taken into account by the Tribunal.!°”

Relying on the effet utile interpretive principle, Respondent argues that the term “seat”
requires something more than mere incorporation or a legal and factual consequence of it.
Respondent notes that every legal entity incorporated in Cyprus must have a registered
office. Therefore, interpreting the term “seat” to mean “registered office” would render part
of Article 1(3)(b) redundant and would be contrary to the effet utile principle. Respondent
adds that, in light of the permanent nature of a registered office under Cypriot law, the use
of the adverb “permanently” in the Greek version of the BIT would not make any sense if

“seat” were to be interpreted as “registered office”. !°*

Respondent further submits that, while it is true that a legal entity incorporated under the
Companies Law can transfer its registered office outside of Cyprus, it is also true that Article
3540 of the same law provides that, as a result of the transfer, the entity in question will be
stricken off the Register of Companies and will cease to be a registered company in
Cyprus.!°? To Montenegro, this further underscores that there is no such thing as a legal

entity constituted under Cypriot law which does not have a registered office in Cyprus. In a

at 107-117.

107 Counter-Memorial, at 125-128; Rejoinder, at 65-67.
108 Counter-Memorial, at 129, 130, 132-136; Rejoinder, at 19-22, 68, 69.
109 Appendix D to the Markides First Expert Legal Opinion, Companies Law, Article 3540.

Page 36 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

114.

115.

116.

117.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

similar manner, while a company may fail to comply with its obligation to designate a
registered office, the necessary consequence of this is that such a company may be stricken

off the Register of Companies.!!°

Respondent concludes that, because a registered address is simply a necessary consequence
of incorporation, an interpretation of Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT in accordance with the effet

utile principle requires that “seat” have a more substantial meaning.

3. Under Cypriot law, the term “seat” requires more than incorporation and
address
Respondent argues that, even under Cypriot law, the term “seat” cannot be equated to

“registered office”.

In its view, there is nothing in the record to support a conclusion to the contrary, with the
exception of the expert testimony of Mr. Markides. According to Montenegro, this testimony
does not withstand scrutiny because it is premised upon the false argument that the “real seat
theory” would be unknown to Cypriot law. Respondent invokes in this respect the SE
Regulation, which is part of Cypriot law and entered into force before the conclusion and
ratification of the BIT. Respondent submits that the SE Regulation employs the “real seat”

theory for SE companies, which means that this theory is a binding part of Cypriot law.!!!

Respondent further argues that the term “seat” is used in a multitude of legal texts and
contexts in Cypriot law, including directly applicable EU law, but the Greek translations of
this term are by no means consistent. For instance, when preparing the official translation of
the Companies Law in September 2012, the OLC used the English term “registered office”
once and the term “head office” twice to translate the same term (“edra’’). In Article 2(1) of
the SE Regulation the term “registered office” in the English version is reflected in the term
“katastatike edra” in the Greek translation. The term “katastatike edra” also appears in the
Greek version of Article 63(2) of the Recast Brussels Regulation to mirror the English term

“statutory seat”. Respondent concludes that the term “registered office” is better reflected in

410 Rejoinder, at 20.
"1 Counter-Memorial, at 149-160; Rejoinder, at 61-64.

Page 37 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

118.

119.

120.

112

113

115

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

the term “statutory seat” and not the term “seat”, which has a much wider connotation. This
conclusion is further supported by the fact that the Cypriot law implementing the SE
Regulation replaced the term “statutory seat” used in the Greek translation of the SE with

the term “registered office”.!!*

Respondent adds that the Recast Brussels Regulation does not support Claimant’s contention
that the term “seat” means “registered office” under Cypriot law. In this respect, Respondent
underlines that the Recast Brussels Regulation does not employ in Article 63(2) the term
“seat”, but “statutory seat”. Further, the Recast Brussels Regulation serves an entirely
different object and purpose from the BIT, which means that it is not particularly helpful in
interpreting the latter. The Recast Brussels Regulation also expressly excludes from its
sphere of application “the liability of the State for acts and omissions in the exercise of State

authority” and “arbitration” (Article 1(1) and (12)).!!?
4. The meaning of the term “seat”

Respondent’s main position in this arbitration is that the term “seat” needs to be interpreted
autonomously under the BIT and that it means the place where a legal entity is effectively
managed and financially controlled and where it carries out its business activities.
Respondent submits that, should the Tribunal find that the interpretation of the term “seat”

requires a renvoi to Cypriot law, the term “seat” would have the same meaning.!!*

Autonomous _ interpretation. In Respondent’s view, the term “seat” cannot represent
something which is an inseparable consequence of incorporation. Respondent contends that
“seat” is a practical concept, which requires a subject and an activity. Because a legal entity
cannot think, form views or adopt decisions, it requires a representative. Where that

representative resides, that is where the seat of the legal entity is situated.!'>

Counter-Memorial
Counter-Memorial
"4 Counter-Memoria
Counter-Memorial

, at 161-171; Rejoinder, at 73, 74.

|, at 172-181; Rejoinder, at 75, 78-80.
, at 182-184.

|, at 185-192.

Page 38 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

121.

122.
123.

124.

16 Counter-Memorial,
"7 Counter-Memorial,
‘8 Counter-Memorial, at 207.
119 Counter-Memorial,
120 Counter-Memorial,

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

Respondent refers in this respect to the second sentence of Article 9 of the Diplomatic
Protection Articles, which provides that, under certain circumstances, a legal entity shall be
deemed the national of the State where the seat of the legal entity’s management and
financial control is located. From this, Respondent draws the conclusion that the two subjects
(“the management” and “the financial control”) and the two activities (“managing” and
“financially controlling”) are the decisive factors for linking a legal entity to a specific
jurisdiction. Respondent concludes that these criteria ensure a real connection or a genuine
link between a legal entity and a jurisdiction and describe where that entity’s seat is

situated,!!6

Respondent also refers to the Nottebohm case in support of its position that the “main seat
of ... interests” and “the center of ... interests and ... business activities” are relevant to
determining where a legal entity’s seat is located. It considers that a “real connection” or
“genuine link” between the legal entity and a jurisdiction exists “where the representative,
who pursues the legal entity’s interests, resides and where the legal entity performs business

activities”.!!7

Respondent further draws a distinction between a “statutory representative” — “installed for
the sole purpose of complying with the laws relating to the process and the requirements for

establishing a legal entity”!'*

—and an “effective” or “real” representative — who “effectively
thinks, forms views or adopts decisions for the legal entity”.!'? Respondent contends that,
because the concept of “seat” is a practical concept, concerned with reality and not fiction,

it necessarily requires the presence of a “real” representative. !2°

Respondent further argues that the DTT between Cyprus and Montenegro, as a category of
international law rules referred to in Article 31(3)(c) of the VCLT, can provide useful
guidance for the interpretation of the Treaty. In this respect, the word “permanently” in the
Greek version of the BIT can be linked to the concept of “permanent establishment” used in
at 194-197,
at 198-205.

at 207, 208.
at 207-209.

Page 39 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

125.

126.

127.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

the DTT. The latter concept requires a real presence of the enterprise of one contracting State
in the territory of the other contracting State (a place of management, a branch, an office).
Where the enterprise acts solely through an independent agent, a real presence does not exist.

Respondent considers that the term “seat” in the BIT establishes similar requirements. '7!

Respondent submits that its interpretation of the term “seat” is also confirmed by the AFT v.

Slovakia tribunal, which stated:

“Proof of a ‘business seat’, in the meaning of an effective center of administration of the
business operations, requires additional elements, such as the proof that: the place where the
company board of directors regularly meets or the shareholders’ meetings are held is in Swiss
territory; there is a management at the top of the company sitting in Switzerland; the
company has a certain number of employees working at the seat; an address with phone and
fax numbers are offered to third parties entering in contact with the company; certain general
expenses or overhead costs are incurred for the maintenance of the physical location of the
seat and related services, which would be a clear indication that a business entity is
effectively organized at a given Swiss place.”!”?

Respondent considers that the principles set out by the AFT v. Slovakia tribunal can be
replicated in this case as the language employed by the Slovak-Swiss BIT at issue in that
case is comparable to the language of the BIT with regard to the term “seat”. Moreover, the
AFT vy. Slovakia tribunal interpreted “seat” independently from the additional requirement

of “real business activities” in the Slovak-Swiss BIT.!

In support of its argument that the term “seat” requires that a legal entity have a genuine link

or real connection with a State, Respondent also refers to several legal authorities, such as:

“Tt has become more and more pertinent to look at the aspect of the control of a corporation
when one wants to determine its nationality especially for purposes of international
investment arbitration. [...] The test of the seat of the corporation requires something more,
whether some activities are taking place and whether the corporation is managed from that
particular state.”!**

“The seat of a company may not be as easy to determine as the country of organization, but
it does reflect a more significant economic relationship between the company and the country

"21 Counter-Memorial, at 210-218; Rejoinder, at 70, 97-101.
122 AFT y, Slovakia, at 217.

"3 Count
124

iter-Memorial, at 219-227; Rejoinder, at 102-105.

 

| hi Investor, y, and ‘s, in MUCHLINSKY/ORTINO/SCHREUER (EDS),

INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT LAW (2008), at 79 (Exhibit RL-100).

Page 40 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

128.

129.

130.

125 UNCTAD Series on Iss

RL-96).

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

of nationality. Generally speaking, ‘seat of a company’ connotes the place where effective
management takes place. The seat is also likely to be relatively permanent as well.”!?°

Interpretation pursuant to Cypriot law. Respondent submits that the term “seat” is very
frequently used in Cypriot law, with more than 130 laws and 150 regulations attributing the
term various meanings. In order for the interpretation of the term “seat” in the BIT to be
accurate, the Tribunal should identify those Cypriot laws and regulations that serve an object
and purpose comparable to that of the Treaty. Such body of law is represented, in
Montenegro’s view, by the SE Regulation which aims at further developing economic
relations between Member States. Because the SE Regulation adopts the “real seat” theory,
by requiring that a Societas Europeana have its registered office and its head office in the

same Member State, the term “seat” as used in the BIT must have a comparable meaning. !7°

Respondent also refers to the alternative method of interpretation suggested by Mr.
Toannides, which is based on the distinction between “domicile” and “residence”. While
“domicile” refers to the place of incorporation of a legal entity, “residence” is a substantive
concept and designates the place with which an entity has a real connection or genuine link.
By applying this distinction to the Treaty, Respondent concludes that an investor’s
nationality or domicile is dealt with by the requirement of incorporation, while “seat” is the
residence of a legal entity, meaning the place of its effective central management and

control.'27
5. Claimant does not have a “seat” in Cyprus

Respondent’s position is that, regardless of the interpretation of the term “seat”, CEAC does
not have a seat at Dimosthenous 4, Nicosia, Cyprus. The alleged office located at that address
does not have the substance required to qualify even as a registered office within the meaning

of Cypriot law.

s in International Investment Agreements II, 2011 (Scope and Definition), at 83 (Exhibit

 

26 Counter-Memorial, at 233-240; Rejoinder, at 81-84.
27 Counter-Memorial, at 241-253.

Page 41 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

131.

132.

133.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

Respondent disputes that the certificates of registered office issued by the Registrar of
Companies of Cyprus are conclusive evidence to the contrary. Montenegro argues that such
certificates are issued by the Registrar of Companies on the basis of a filing by the relevant
legal entity. However, the Registrar does not carry out any independent investigation, which
means that if the filing made by the legal entity is incorrect, so will be the certificate. Equally,
if the Registrar makes a mistake, the issued certificate will reflect this mistake. In both
situations, an incorrect certificate cannot be conclusive evidence of a registered office.
According to Montenegro, “[t]he registered office of a company must be a reality which
subsequently may be confirmed through a document such as a certificate of registered
office”, but “it cannot be ... that a certificate would create the reality of a registered office

where there is none”.!78

Referring to Soufraki v. UAE,'”° Respondent argues that international tribunals have the
power to make their own nationality determination, even if their ultimate conclusions
contradict official documents issued on the basis of municipal law. In the case before the
Tribunal, the certificates of registered office do not represent conclusive evidence that CEAC

has a registered office in Cyprus and are contradicted by the facts described below.'*°

According to Respondent, the building at Dimosthenous 4, Nicosia, Cyprus has no street
number and no brass plate for CEAC. In addition, when Respondent attempted to courier a
package to that address, three delivery attempts (two by DHL and one by FedEx) failed, and
Respondent’s counsel was told that CEAC was “not known at that address”.'*! Further, not
a single contract introduced by Claimant in this arbitration was signed by CEAC’s director

in Cyprus.!*?

28 Rejoinder, at 113-120.

29 Houssein Nuaman Soufraki v. The United Arab Emirates (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/7), Decision of the ad hoc
Committee on the Application for Annulment of Mr. Soufraki, 5 June 2007 (“Soufraki v. UAE”) (Exhibit RL-103).
130 Rejoinder, at 135-140.

5! Counter-Memorial, at 255.

'82 Counter-Memorial, at 257, 258; Rejoinder, at 126, 127.

Page 42 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

134.

135.

136.

137.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

Respondent adds that the property at that address is not an office and does not evidence that
Claimant would have any presence at the premises. Respondent refers in this respect to the
witness testimony of Mr. Dracos, who testified:
“Upon request from the legal counsel of the Respondent, on 23 September 2015 at
approximately 9.15am I visited the building at the above address [...]. The property appeared
not to be occupied. There was no sign or plate bearing CEAC’s name on the Property. The

Property simply looked like an unoccupied house, and there was nothing to indicate or
suggest that it was used as offices by CEAC”.!8

In addition, despite the fact that under Cypriot law, a registered office is the place where a
company’s registries are kept open for inspection to the public, at Dimosthenous 4, Nicosia,
Cyprus, no registries are available for inspection by interested third parties. In this respect,
Respondent refers to the testimonies of Messrs. Dracos and Georgiou, who visited the
property on different occasions in order to inspect the registries, but found no sign of any
activity and could not obtain access to Claimant’s offices. Respondent concludes that an

address which does not fulfill these basic functions does not qualify as a registered office. !*4
6. Tax residency is not equivalent to “seat” and CEAC is not a tax resident

Respondent also disagrees with Claimant’s argument pursuant to which “seat” under Article
1(3)(b) of the BIT could mean tax residency pursuant to Cypriot law and adds that, even if

the Tribunal were to hold otherwise, CEAC is not a tax resident of Cyprus.

On a preliminary note, Respondent objects to Claimant relying upon this argument.
According to Montenegro, Claimant did not assert that its alleged tax residency would
qualify as “seat” in its Memorial, but only added that “for the sake of completeness”!?>
CEAC was a tax resident of Cyprus. Respondent therefore considers that this is a new
argument raised by Claimant for the first time in its Reply and that the Tribunal should

disregard it. For the same reason, exhibits C-104 and C-105 (a tax certificate dated 16 March

'33 Dracos Witness Statement, at 11.
134 Rejoinder, at 128-134.
135 Memorial, at 63.

Page 43 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

2015 relating to the DTT between the Russian Federation and Cyprus, and a tax certificate

dated 4 November 2015 relating to the year 2014) should also be disregarded.'*°

138. Should the Tribunal consider that this new theory is admissible, Respondent argues that it is
not supported by any evidence. In this respect, Respondent points out that Mr. Markides was
specifically tasked by Claimant with explaining the meaning of the term “seat” in Article
1(3)(b) of the BIT from the perspective of a Cypriot lawyer, and stated:!*7

“Resorting to the provisions of tax legislation of Cyprus for the purposes of this opinion is
inappropriate and may dangerously mislead the Tribunal”.!*

139. Respondent adds that, in any event, CEAC is not a tax resident of Cyprus. According to
Montenegro, under Cypriot law, tax certificates are issued solely on the basis of a filing by
the tax payer and the actual content of the filing is not investigated independently in any
way. Therefore, just like a certificate of registered office does not create a registered office
where none exists, likewise a tax residency certificate does not conclusively demonstrate
that CEAC is a tax resident of Cyprus. The Tribunal can and should make its own

determination on the matter.'*?

140. Referring to the expert testimony of Mr. Ioannides and the Laerstate BV v. The
Commissioner for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs decision,'*° Respondent contends
that, under Cypriot law, tax residency requires that the legal entity’s central management

and control be located in Cyprus.'*!

141. According to Respondent, the evidence in the record demonstrates that CEAC was not
effectively managed or financially controlled in Cyprus, and that it did not run its business
in Cyprus at the time the Request for Arbitration was filed, i.e. March 2014. Respondent

considers that the only evidence purportedly to the contrary are the tax residency certificates

'36 Rejoinder, at 141-148.

'57 Rejoinder, at 149-152.

38 Markides Second Legal Opinion, at 4.2.

59 Rejoinder, at 153-155.

440 Laerstate BV v. The Commissioner for Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs, (Corporation Tax] [2009] UKFTT
209 (TC), at 27, Appendix 2 to Ioannides Second Legal Opinion.

41 Rejoinder, at 156, 157.

Page 44 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

142.

VIL.

143.

144.

145.

146.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

and the certificates of registered office, which cannot be considered conclusive evidence of

the matters stated therein.!

On the basis of all these considerations, Respondent concludes that CEAC does not have a

“seat” in Cyprus, as required under Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT.

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

The Tribunal has carefully considered the Parties’ submissions and the evidence in the record
with regard to the interpretation of the term “seat” under Article 1(3)(b) of the Treaty.'**
After deliberations, the Tribunal has come to the conclusion that CEAC did not have a “seat”
in Cyprus at the relevant time. As a result, the Tribunal finds that CEAC is not an “investor”

under the BIT, and the Tribunal therefore lacks jurisdiction to hear this case.

The Tribunal will explain this conclusion in the following sections.

. Preliminary considerations

The starting point for the Tribunal’s analysis is Article 41(1) of the ICSID Convention,
which provides that the Tribunal shall be the judge of its own competence. This provision
has several implications. The first is that the Tribunal has an obligation to determine its own
jurisdiction. The second is that it is only the Tribunal that can make such a determination.
Finally, the Tribunal being constituted under the ICSID Convention and the BIT, its

jurisdictional analysis will be made under international law.

Further, the Tribunal notes that the condition of jurisdiction must be fulfilled at the moment
when the Parties’ consent to arbitration is perfected, i.e., at the moment the Request for
Arbitration is filed (11 March 2014). This conclusion is reinforced by Article 25(2)(b) of the
ICSID Convention, which requires that a juridical person claiming the protection of the

Convention must have “the nationality of a Contracting State other than the State party to

142 Rejoinder, at 158-164.

'43 Tn this regard, the Tribunal notes for the avoidance of doubt that the fact that a particular submission, argument,
document or fact is not expressly addressed in this Award does not mean that it has not been carefully considered by
the Tribunal.

Page 45 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

147.

148.

149.

150.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

the dispute on the date on which the parties consented to submit such dispute to conciliation
or arbitration”, i.e., the date when the Request for Arbitration was transmitted to the Centre.
Therefore, the Tribunal has to determine whether Claimant had a “seat” in Cyprus on 11

March 2014.

The Tribunal is grateful to the Parties for their arguments concerning the correct
interpretation of the term “seat” under Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT. While Claimant contends
that the Tribunal should make a renvoi to Cypriot municipal law and find that the term “seat”
means — with regard to Cypriot investors under the Treaty — “registered office”, Respondent,
on the other hand, is of the view that the Tribunal should seek to interpret the term “seat”
autonomously under the Treaty and find that it means the place where a legal entity is

effectively managed and financially controlled and where it carries out its business activities.

For the purposes of the present analysis, the Tribunal does not consider it necessary to
determine the precise meaning of the term “seat” as employed in Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT.
That is because the evidence in the record does not support a finding that CEAC had a
registered office in Cyprus at the relevant time (B.), nor a conclusion that it was managed
and controlled from Cyprus (C.). Equally, the Tribunal finds that the term “seat” cannot be
equated to tax residency (D.). As these are the only competing interpretations of the term
“seat” put forward by the Parties, the Tribunal has come to the conclusion that CEAC did
not have a “seat” in Cyprus at the time the Request for Arbitration was filed. Consequently,
CEAC is not an “investor” within the meaning of the Treaty, and the Tribunal lacks

jurisdiction to hear this case.

The Tribunal will explain its finding in the paragraphs below.

. Whether Claimant had a registered office in Cyprus on 11 March 2014

Claimant has argued throughout this arbitration that the existence of its registered office in
Cyprus is “conclusively” proven by the certificates of registered office in the record. For

example, it has stated:

Page 46 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

“CEAC’s registered office is situated at Dimosthenous 4, 1101, Nicosia, Cyprus. This is
confirmed by the official Certificate of Registered Office issued by the Registrar of
Companies. The Certificate of Registered Office serves as conclusive evidence of the matters
stated in it, including the presence of the regi d office within Cyprus. On that basis, there
can be no doubt that CEAC’s seat is located in Cyprus”.'* [internal citations omitted]
[emphasis added]

“[...] CEAC (or its corporate predecessor) has maintained a registered office in Cyprus at
all material times since at least 2005. This is conclusively evidenced by CEAC’s certificates
of registered office. As noted by Mr Markides in his First Expert Legal Opinion, there is no
factor, other than the absence of a valid certificate of registered office, which can negate or
invalidate the existence of a regi d office of a compan i din Cyprus”. [internal
citations omitted] [emphasis added]

151. Claimant’s argument is consistent with the testimony of Mr. Markides, who stated as

follows:

“47, From the documents I have reviewed (including Exhibit C-6, Certificate of
Incorporation of Salamon Enterprises Limited; and C-8, Certificate of Change of Name from
Salamon Enterprises Limited to CEAC Holdings Ltd), I have no doubt that CEAC met the
incorporation requirements under the Companies Law.

48. Furthermore, the documents I have reviewed (including Exhibit C-20, Certificate of
Registered Office of Salamon Enterprises Limited and the recently obtained electronic
confirmation concerning CEAC, attached hereto as Appendix F) and the fact that CEAC is
still a registered company in the companies register of the Registrar of Companies in Cyprus,
it is my opinion that CEAC has met and to date meets the registered office requirements
under the Companies Law.

49. I would further note that other documents provided to me for the purposes of this opinion
which contain the details of CEAC’s registered office (such as official filings and
correspondence) confirm that it is located at “... (in English: “Dimosthenous 4, 1101,
Nicosia, Cyprus”).

 

50. The decisive d that confirms the existence and address of a regi d office.
however, is indeed the Certificate of Regi d Office issued by the Regi of Cc i

of Cyprus; the information therein corresponds to the information contained in the public
file held by the Registrar. I am not aware of any factor, other than the absence of a valid
Certificate of Registered Office, which can negate or invalidate the existence of a registered

office of a company registered in Cyprus”.'“*[emphasis added]

152. The Tribunal has no difficulty accepting that, as a general matter, a certificate of registered

office will indicate that a company indeed has a registered office at the address specified

44 Memorial, at 62.
45 Reply, at 154.
446 Markides First Legal Opinion, at 47-50.

Page 47 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

153.

154.

155.

156.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

therein. However, the presentation of the factual evidence in this particular case has brought
to light certain elements that have made the Tribunal doubt whether, as of the date of the

Request for Arbitration, Claimant in effect had a registered office in Cyprus.

The Tribunal will set out these factual elements in more detail below, but before proceeding
to this analysis (2.), the Tribunal finds itself compelled to first consider the issue of the
probative value of a certificate of registered office or, more precisely, the precise extent of

the facts which it certifies (/.).
I. The probative value of the certificate of registered office

In this context, the Tribunal wishes to reemphasize that the question of its jurisdiction is a
matter for international, and not domestic, law. The Tribunal therefore has to determine the
probative value in the international legal order of certificates of registered office issued by

Cypriot (i.e., domestic) authorities.

In line with earlier decisions of international tribunals, this Tribunal considers that
certificates of nationality and, by corollary, other certificates issued by domestic authorities
insofar as they are relied upon by a claimant in order to justify the jurisdiction of
international arbitration tribunals, constitute only prima facie evidence of the facts they
attest to. An international tribunal is therefore not bound by the nationality determinations
and the certificates issued by domestic authorities, but must make its own determination
under international law. This finding does not in any way diminish the probative value of

such certificates under domestic law.
This Tribunal refers in this respect to the Flutie case:

“[T]he Commission, as the sole judge of its jurisdiction, must in each case determine for
itself the question of the citizenship upon the evidence submitted in that behalf. [...]
Whatever may be the conclusive force of judgments of naturalization under the municipal
laws of the country in which they are granted, international tribunals, such as_ this
Commission, have claimed and exercised the right to determine for themselves the
citizenship of claimants from all the facts presented”.'*”

47 Flutie case, 1904 IX R.LA.A., pp. 151, 152 (“Flutie”) (Exhibit RL-102).

Page 48 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

 

157. The Soufraki v. UAE annulment committee found, in a similar vein:

“A certificate of nationality can, in principle, only be as correct as the information disclosed.

The truth has to prevail over the formal appearance”.'“*

“[T]he principle is in fact well established that international tribunals are empowered to
determine whether a party has the alleged nationality in order to ascertain their own
jurisdiction, and are not bound by national certificates of nationality or passports or other

documentation in making that determination and ascertainment”.'*? [emphasis added]

“[T]he Tribunal had the power to determine whether it had jurisdiction to hear the dispute.
In determining whether the jurisdictional requirements of the ICSID Convention and the BIT
have been satisfied, the Tribunal is empowered to make its own investigation into the
nationality of parties regardless of the presence of official government nationality
documents. Certificates of nationality constitute prima facie — not conclusive — evidence.
and are subject to rebuttal”.'*° [emphasis added]

    

158. The Soufraki v. UAE annulment committee was careful to emphasize that its findings were

limited to a very narrow set of circumstances:

“[P]rudential considerations require that the ad hoc Committee make crystal clear that it is
addressing a very specific and limited situation: that is, the situation of an international
tribunal vested with = which must verify the reality of the claimed
nationality of a natural person who is a party to a proceeding before it, if the Tribunal is to
determine its own jurisdiction to go forward with that proceeding, when its jurisdiction is
contingent upon that nationality. Further defining features of this situation are that the
Claimant has presented certificates of nationality issued by local governmental or consular
officials of the State whose nationality is claimed, under circumstances indicating that
material error under the law of that State may have attended such issuances”.'*! [emphasis
added]

159. | The circumstances to which the Soufraki v. UAE committee made reference are very similar

to those present in the case before the Tribunal.

160. In any event, the Tribunal considers that, even under Cypriot law, certificates of registered

office are not conclusive evidence that a registered office exists.

48 Soufraki v. UAE, at 62.
489 Soufraki

UAE, at 64,
180 Soufraki v. UAE, at 76.

'5! Soufraki v. UAE, at 78.

 

Page 49 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

161.

162.

163.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

In this respect, the Tribunal notes that it has been provided with the conflicting testimonies
of Messrs. Markides and Ioannides. While Mr. Markides has opined that a certificate of
registered office represents “conclusive” evidence that a registered office actually exists, Mr.
Toannides has contested this interpretation of the Companies Law, stating that a certificate
of registered office simply confirms that a company has made the required notification to

the Registrar of Companies, and nothing more.

These two opinions could not be more irreconcilable. In deciding which of the two is
preferable, the Tribunal has considered the bases invoked by the two experts for their

positions.

Mr. Markides appears to ground his opinion on a presumption of good faith on the part of a
company making the required filing with the Registrar of Companies and on the mandatory

nature of the obligation to maintain a registered office. He specified in this respect:

“1.5 L attach hereto as Appendix 1 the English translation of section 102 of the Companies
Law, as it has been amended on June 19, 2015 by Law No. 89(D/2015. As shown therein,
the obligation of a company to maintain a registered office in Cyprus and to make relevant
reporting of it in its annual returns (Form HE 32(I) — copy (in Greek) of which is attached as
Appendix 2), is a statutory compulsory requirement, which, if not complied with, may,
according to the provisions of section 327(6) of the Companies Law, result in striking off
from the Register of Companies. [...]

3.1 The KI [Kypros Ioannides] Opinion also argues that a certificate of registered office,
issued by the Registrar of Companies, does not constitute conclusive evidence that a
company actually maintains a registered office in Cyprus.

3.2 I disagree with this argument and, as far as regards the comment made in the KI Opinion
that the “... Registrar does not carry out any independent investigation...”, | repeat the
content of paragraph 1.5 above and furthermore note that the KI Opinion conclusion on this
matter is based on an arbitrarily [sic] presumption that each company in Cyprus is actin,
against its legal obligations. I cannot accept as correct in law the conclusion of the KI
Opinion that “... a certificate of registered office merely confirms that a company has made
a filing to the Registrar, not that it maintains a registered office ...” simply because the “...
Registrar does not carry out any independent investigation...”. Each company in Cyprus and
its officers are considered to act in good faith when reporting to the Registrar of Companies
the place of the “registered office”.

3.3 In addition, the conclusion of the KI Opinion invalidates also other legal obligations of

companies, such as those specifically described in paragraph 44 of the First Expert Opinion.
Tam not aware of any other certificate of proof, which can be issued by any other competent

Page 50 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

164.

165.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

authority of Cyprus, other than the Certificate of Registered Address, which verifies and
confirms the existence of a “registered office” in Cyprus”.'*? [emphasis added]

Mr. Ioannides, on the other hand, bases his opinion on several facts, including: (i) that the
Registrar of Companies does not undertake an independent investigation to verify if the
filing made by a company corresponds with reality; and (ii) that a number of causes, apart
from a lack of good faith of the company making the filing, could lead to a situation where
the Registrar’s records do not correspond with reality. In this respect, Mr. Ioannides testified

in his First Legal Opinion:

“12.2. I firstly note Mr Markide’s [sic] position in his Opinion that a company’s certificate
of incorporation constitutes ‘conclusive evidence’ that it maintains a registered office or that
a certificate of registered office is ‘a decisive document that confirms the existence and
address of a registered office’.

12.3. I respectfully disagree with Mr Markides that a company’s certificate of incorporation
constitutes evidence of any form (let alone conclusive evidence) that a company maintains
a registered office.

 

12.4. Additionally, a_certificate_of regi d office is not_a ‘decisive d which
confirms the existence and address of a registered office’. Such a certificate merely confirms
that a notification of a registered office has been made by a company to the Registrar of
Cc ies. The Registrar does not carry out any ind dent investigation and the said
certificate contains the words ‘in accordance with the records kept by this Department’.
Cc ly, a certificate of regi d office merely confirms that a company has made a
filing to the Registrar, not that it maintains a registered office, which is an ind d
requirement”.'*? [emphasis added]

Mr. Ioannides then provided supplementary clarifications during the hearing.

“THE PRESIDENT: Is there any also [sic] verification by the office where it is registered?
So you file the documents, is there any verification that is made?

A. By the Registrar of Companies? No, there is no such verification.

MR SPRANGE: The consequences could be serious in terms of anybody who has misled the
register of companies.

A. Potentially. Depending on the state of mind of the particular person.

Q. The other consequence, of course, is if you don’t have a proper registered office, you may
be struck off as a company?

A. Yes.

MR SPRANGE: [...] You said, in your second opinion, that the certificate of registered
office is no evidence, let alone conclusive evidence.

152 Markides Second Legal Opinion, at 1.5, 3.1-3.3.
'53 Toannides First Legal Opinion, at 12.2-12.4.

Page 51 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro
(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

 

A. [...] The certificate of registered office only confirms that the filing has been made. No
independent review is made, so that anybody can confirm that the company maintains a
registered office.

MR SPRANGE: So you say the filing of one of these certificates, which is part of a bundle
that is filed by a lawyer, and has consequences if it’s wrong, is no weight as to the existence
of a registered office?

A. Correct.

Q. No evidence at all?

A. If you look at the wording of the certificate itself, it says something along the lines that
in accordance with the records kept by this department, the registered office of the particular
company lies at the following, so even the certificate does not verify that the company
maintains a registered office. It says in accordance with the records, the filings made with
us, this is what we have.

L.-]

There could be a negligent or a non-negligent intention to mislead by filing a wrong filing.
but it could be a negligent filing, with a wrong address. It could be a negligent replication of
the form by the Registrar of C ies. There could be a destruction of building, for
whatever reason [...]. The company could move, but still not notify the registrar of such a
move. So any of many things could happen regarding the actual maintenance of a registered
office.

linsist in my statement that a certificate of registered office merely confirms that the filing
by the company has been made, that it maintains a registered office somewhere. That is all
the evidence it provides”.'™ [emphasis added]

166. While the Tribunal has no reason to doubt that, as testified by Mr. Markides, in the vast
majority of cases, a company’s registered office will be at the address indicated in the
certificate of registered office, the Tribunal cannot fail to note that Mr. Markides has never
rebutted Mr. Ioannides’ testimony that the Registrar of Companies, upon receiving a filing
by acompany, does not carry out any official and independent verification as to whether the
declaration made by the company concerning the registered office corresponds with reality.
Furthermore, Mr. Markides has offered no clarifications for the situations — which could
arise in practice — where for reasons unrelated to bad faith (such, as for instance, a change in
a company’s registered office coupled with a failure to notify; or the destruction of the

building), the Registrar’s records do not correspond with reality.

167. In addition, the Tribunal notes that, as testified by Mr. Ioannides, the certificates of registered

office produced by Claimant by their own words do not attest to the actual existence of a

14 Ty. Day 1, 173:10-22, 174:12-14, 175:2-19, 176:13-25, 17:1.

Page 52 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

registered office at the address indicated therein. The certificates indicate what the records

kept by the Registrar attest to. In this respect:

Exhibit C-20, dated 29 August 2005:

“Tt is hereby certified that, in accordance with the records kept by this Department
[Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Tourism, Department of Registrar of

Companies and Official Receiver Nicosia], the Registered Office of the above
Company is situated at:

Dimosthenous, 4
P.C. 1101, Nicosia, Cyprus”

Exhibit C-95, dated 29 October 2010:

“Tt is hereby certified that, in accordance with the records kept by this Department,
the Registered Office of the above Company is situated at:

Dimosthenous, 4
P.C. 1101, Nicosia, Cyprus”

Exhibit C-56, dated 16 December 2011:

“Tt is hereby certified that, in accordance with the records kept by this Department,
the Registered Office of the above Company is situated at:

Dimosthenous, 4
P.C. 1101, Nicosia, Cyprus”! [emphasis added]

168. Consequently, the Tribunal considers that Mr. Ioannides’ more nuanced testimony better
reflects the effects of Cypriot law. The Tribunal therefore finds that, under Cypriot law, a
certificate of registered office is not conclusive evidence of the existence of a registered

office, but merely confirms that a filing to this effect has been made.

169. Having concluded that, under both international law and Cypriot law, a certificate of
registered office does not represent conclusive evidence that a registered office exists at the

address identified therein, the Tribunal will therefore have to determine whether the evidence

'55 Claimant has also put forward: Exhibit C-57, which is not an actual certificate, but a print-out from the Department
of Registrar of Companies and Official Receiver; certificates of incumbency; and certificates of registration. The
Tribunal finds that these documents, as reflected in their very titles, are not certificates of registered office and could
not attest to the probative value of such a certificate.

Page 53 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

170.

171.

172.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

in the record supports a finding that CEAC maintained a registered office in Cyprus in March

2014. As indicated above, the Tribunal has come to the conclusion that it did not.

2.

CEAC did not have a registered office in Cyprus in March 2014

To begin with, the Tribunal refers below to the expert testimonies of Mr. Ioannides and Mr.

Markides in order to ascertain the conditions that need to be fulfilled so that an office could

qualify as a registered office under Cypriot law.

In this respect, the Tribunal finds that Mr. Ioannides’ testimony below to be particularly

useful:

 

“3.9. There are in my view certain minimum requirements that an office should fulfil i Ss
to be considered to be a company’s registered office within the meaning of the Companies
Law, including:

(a) It must consist of a physical premises — a vacant plot will not do;

(b) The company must have some right (by way of ownership, lease or license) to use the
property or part thereof — it cannot be a trespasser (although the premises may be shared with
any number of other persons — whether legal or natural);

(c) The premises must be accessible to the public (for at least two hours on each business
day) for inspection of the various books and registers (which are discussed at length in both
of Mr Markides’ Opinions) and for service of documents and notices upon the company;

(d) The books and registers that a company must by law maintain in its registered office
should actually be held there; and

(e) The relevant company’s name should be painted or affixed on the outside of the office,
in a conspicuous position, in letters easily legible.

If an ‘address’ does not comply with the above minimum requirements, I do not see how
such address can qualify as the regi d office of any company”.'* [internal citations
omitted] [emphasis added]

Therefore, the Tribunal will consider below if these conditions are fulfilled.

'86 Toannides Second Legal Opinion, at 3.9.

Page 54 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

173. Physical premise. Both Parties agree and the evidence has revealed that the address where
Claimant states that it has its registered office is a building located at 4 Dimosthenous,

Nicosia, Cyprus.

174. Right to use the property. Based on the evidence in the record, the Tribunal cannot determine
whether CEAC has the right to use the property situated at 4 Dimosthenous, Nicosia, Cyprus

as a registered office.!°’

175. Accessibility to the public. The Tribunal refers in this respect to Mr. Ioannides’ testimony,
according to which the Companies Law provides for specific rights of access and inspection

of a company’s documents:

“(i) The register of debentures: Should be open to inspection daily from holders of
debentures and company members without fee and any other person at a prescribed fee for
at least two hours daily (it may be closed only during such period or periods, not exceeding
in the whole thirty days in any year);

(ii) Register of charges and book of mortgages: Should be open for not less than two hours
during business hours daily to the inspection of any creditor or member of the company
without fee, and the register of charges and book of mortgages shall also be open to the
inspection of any other person on payment a [sic] prescribed fee;

(iii) Register of Members: Should be open to inspection daily from company members
without fee and any other person at a prescribed fee for at least two hours daily (it may be
closed only during such period or periods, not exceeding in the whole thirty days in any
year);

(iv) Minutes of proceedings of general meeting [sic]: Should be open to inspection daily
from company members without fee; and

(v) Register of directors and secretaries: Should be open to inspection daily from company

members without fee and any other person at a prescribed fee for at least two hours daily”.!°*

[internal citations omitted]
176. The Tribunal finds that Mr. Ioannides’ testimony is consistent with the provisions of

Sections 84(1), 100(1), 108(1), 140(1) and 192(6) of the Companies Law. Mr. Ioannides’

'57 The Tribunal does not rely on this specific point for its conclusion that CEAC does not have a registered office in
Cyprus, as neither Party has focused on CEAC’s right (or lack thereof) to use the property.
158 Toannides First Legal Opinion, at 12.5.(b).

Page 55 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

177.

178.

179.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

testimony explaining what books and registers are required by law to be kept at a company’s

registered office is also in line with that of Mr. Markides:

“44. The registered office of a company serves various mandatory purposes. In particular, it
is the place where the company shall keep:

44.1 the register of holder [sic] of debentures (section 83);

44.2 every instrument creating any charge requiring registration or any mortgage requiring
recording (section 99);

44.3 the register of its members (section 105);

44.4 the book containing the minutes of proceedings of any general meeting (section 140);
44.5 the books of account (section 141);

44.6 the register of its directors and secretaries (section 192).

45. Furthermore, the registered office is the place to which all communications and notices
may be addressed and served. The Companies Law also confers special jurisdiction on the

District Court where the registered office of a company is situated, for (among other things)
winding-up procedures and cross-border mergers (section 209)”.!°

The Tribunal further notes that Respondent has introduced into the record exhibits and
witness testimonies showing that, on several distinct instances, the building situated at 4
Dimosthenous, Nicosia, was not accessible to the public and appeared to show no sign of

CEAC’s presence or of any activity.

The first evidence in this respect was filed during the stage of the proceedings dedicated to

Respondent’s Preliminary Objections (Exhibits R-1, R-2 and R-3).

Exhibits R-1 and R-2 are two emails from DHL and FedEx reporting on two separate

instances of delivery failures to the address CEAC has indicated as its registered office:

Exhibit R-1:

“The shipment in question was collected by a DHL courier on 30 January 2014 for
delivery to the recipient CEAC Holding limited, Dimosthenous,4, P.C. 1101,
Nicosia, Cyprus. According to information which we obtained from our colleagues
at DHL Cyprus, the shipment in question was sorted on arrival, but was not delivered

59 Markides First Legal Opinion, at 44, 45.

Page 56 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

180.

181.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

as the recipient was not found at the given address and no telephone number was
listed on the waybill”. [emphasis added]

Exhibit R-2:

“We write to you with regard to the shipment under AWB# 803675203787 which
you sent on 6 February 2014 via the FedEx courier service to recipient:

CEAC HOLDINGS LTD

DIMOSTHENOUS 4

NICOSIA

Cyprus

The shipment arrived in Cyprus on 9 February and was dispatched for delivery the
following day.

The same day we were informed that the recipient is not known at that address”.

 

Exhibit R-3 is an email from Petros Antoniades to Tanja Sumar dated 11 August 2014.
Within this email, Mr. Antoniades, who had been tasked by Respondent to see the property,

made the following observations:

“Based on your request to check the registered address of the named company, provided as
4 Dimosthenous Street, Nicosia 1101, we have visited this address today 11/8/2014 at 9:30
in the morning and at 14:30.

L-]

Although there was no number on the suspected houses number 4, we have been able to trace
this. The house entrance was closed and there was no obvious sign or brass plate mentioning
any company and there was no obvious activity of people entering or exiting. Furthermore,
there were a number of letters/marketing leaflets on the entrance that looked to have been
there for some time.

L--]

There is definitely no sign of the company you are interested to have an active presence there
[sic]. [...] We seriously doubt any physical activities of any company within the premises”.
[emphasis added]

In light of the filing of these three documents into the record and the subsequent proceedings
dedicated to Respondent’s Preliminary Objections under Arbitration Rule 41(5), the
Tribunal considers that Claimant was put on notice that it needed to provide evidence to
demonstrate the existence of its “seat” in Cyprus. Claimant was also aware that Exhibit R-3
highlighted a number of issues concerning the building situated at 4 Dimosthenous, Nicosia,
which appeared to suggest that the building was not being used by CEAC, that it was not

used for any commercial activity and was unoccupied. During the hearing dedicated to

Page 57 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

182.

183.

184.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

Respondent’s Preliminary Objections, Claimant made specific representations that it would

file a substantial amount of evidence to prove its case:

“PROFESSOR STERN: [...] If the Tribunal takes your facts, what can we do with those
facts? We take your facts as, you know, we agree, it’s all right, that is your facts [sic], we
accept them, but what can we do with facts dating back to 2006?

MS VASANI: I will take you to all the documents in a minute. All of our evidence is not
limited to 2006. In fact, you will see that —

se]
We gave a sampling of documents, and actually the documents that we gave span from the
beginning of the corporation all the way to the end of the corporation and I will take the
Tribunal through those because there are more recent documents, there were more recent
resolutions issued before the RFA was filed, there are hundreds of documents, and again, we
didn’t think that at the 41(5) stage it was appropriate to have a full-blown ICSID
jurisdictional hearing and proceeding”.'® [emphasis added]

 

Based on these representations, the Tribunal expressly indicated in its Decision on
Respondent’s Objections under Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules that:
“During this subsequent stage of the proceedings, the Parties are to present all the evidence
and arguments that pertain to the issue of the “seat”, in particular the definition, scope and

content of the term “seat” as used in the Treaty, and the Tribunal will issue a ruling
accordingly”.'*! [emphasis added]

The Tribunal re-emphasized the importance it attached to the provision of sufficient and
persuasive evidence in Procedural Order No. 2 and set the procedural calendar on the

assumption that Claimant had substantial amounts of evidence to produce:

In light of Claimant’s assertion that it has substantial amounts of evidence to produce in
support of its contention that it has a “seat” in Cyprus, it is likely to be more efficient for
Claimant to produce this evidence first, together with its memorial on the issue of “seat”, so
that the Tribunal and the Respondent can properly be guided by it”.'®? [emphasis added]

Demonstrating that the building situated at 4 Dimosthenous, Nicosia, served as CEAC’s
registered office in fact and not just on paper would have been relatively easy for Claimant,
if it was indeed its registered office. With little to no difficulty, Claimant could have

produced factual evidence dispelling any doubts that CEAC effectively had an office at that

‘60 Preliminary Objections Hearing Transcript, 107:2-8, 11-20.
'6! Decision on Respondent’s Objections under Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, at 110.
162 Procedural Order No. 2, at 6.iii.

Page 58 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

185.

186.

187.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

address, where the company could be contacted'® and its registers could be consulted by

the public. It did not.

Instead, during the proceedings dedicated to the issue of “seat”, the Tribunal heard testimony

consistent with what is recorded in Exhibit R-3.

Indeed, together with its Counter-Memorial, Respondent introduced the witness testimony

of Mr. Marcos Gregorios Dracos, who made the following statements:

“11. Upon request from the legal counsel of the Respondent, on 23 September 2015 at
approximately 9.15am I visited the building at the above address (the “Property”). The
Property appeared not to be occupied. There was no sign or plate bearing CEAC’s name on
the Property. The Property simply looked like an unoccupied house, and there was nothing
to indicate or suggest that it was used as offices by CEAC. My visit had a duration of 15
minutes.

12. Upon further request from the legal representatives of the Respondent, on 30 September
2015, at approximately 3.15pm I visited again the Property. Its condition was still as
described in paragraph 11, above, except that there were also some flyers on the front outer
gate.

13. I entered through the outer gate, into the yard of the Property, approached the front door
and rang the doorbell. I also knocked on the front door. No one answered. Since the front
door is partly made of translucent glass, I could see inside the Property, which looked
unoccupied. I could see an old couch (with some pillows and a walking stick lying on it), a
folded rug, a box and some objects I could not identify what they were.

14. The Property has in total four entrance doors: a front door on the ground floor, a front
door on the first floor, and two front doors next to each other, on the side. I rang the bell or
knocked on all of them, but no one answered. It was therefore, impossible to obtain access
to the inside of the Property. Since it was impossible to obtain access, I could not inspect or
check any company registers. My visit lasted 20 minutes.

 

15. Lalso confirm that CEAC has not notified the Registrar that its registers of members and
debentures can be inspected at any other address”.' [emphasis added]

Again, it would have been relatively easy for Claimant to introduce into the record, together

with its Reply, evidence that contradicted the testimony of Mr. Dracos, if it existed. It did

not.

'63 For further observations with regard to CEAC’s amenability to service, please see below, at paragraphs 195 et seq.
‘+ Dracos Witness Statement, at 11-15.

Page 59 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

188.

189.

190.

165

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

Respondent then introduced the testimony of Mr. Michalis Georgiou, who stated as follows:

“2. Lvisited the Property on three consecutive days (15, 16 and 17 December 2015) at three
different times in each day (10:00, 11:30 and 15:00).

3. Following my visits to the Property, I note the following:

a. The Property contains a two storey building (which appears to be a house) and is located
in a residential area.

b. There are three gated entrances to the Property, two of which are driveways. One of the
driveways was securely locked with a chain. Leafs and debris made the said driveway
inaccessible. The second driveway, while not locked, had a chain hanging from one of its
gates. The third entrance was not locked or somehow else secured.

c. Although I spent circa 10 minutes during each of my visits, no one seemed to enter or exit
the Property or the house. From what I could observe without entering the Property there
was no movement inside the Property or the house.

 

d. Although during my last visit it was really clouded with very little natural light, no
artificial light seemed to be in use in the Property or the house.

 

e. There was no sign or other marking visible from outside the Property.

f. While I did not attempt to get access to the property it appeared clear to me that no one
was there and that, therefore, it would not be possible to ask anyone whether any registers
of any company could be inspected”.'® [emphasis added]

During the hearing, Claimant sought to demonstrate that these testimonies had very little
evidentiary value, because Messrs. Dracos and Georgiou could not obtain access to the
company’s registers due to the specific nature of the instructions they received. Claimant
submitted on several occasions during the hearing that, if the witnesses desired to consult

CEAC’s registers, the appropriate thing to do was to fix an appointment.

While the Tribunal accepts that, under ordinary circumstances, this may well be the best
course of conduct, the special circumstances of this case suggest otherwise. Indeed, the
evidence produced up until the hearing had revealed that, on several different occasions, the
building situated at 4 Dimosthenous, Nicosia, appeared unoccupied, was inaccessible to the
public and showed no sign of any activity. Moreover, as mentioned earlier, the Companies

Law effectively requires any company registered in Cyprus to have its registers available for

Georgiou Witness Statement, at 2, 3.

Page 60 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

191.

192.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

inspection by any person daily. The Tribunal notes in this respect the clarifications made by

Mr. Dracos during the hearing:

“Q. As IT understand your statement, your instructions were to go there and to see if anybody
was there?

A. [...] [O]n the 23" I was asked to go and check the factual position in relation to the
property, and then on the 30" I was actually asked to try and gain access to the property for
the purpose of checking the register of members and debentures.

LJ

Q If it is not a civil fraud investigation, and you are really just trying to sincerely see the
company’s register and you haven’t made an appointment and you turn up and somebody is
not there, might you leave a card [...] or make an appointment next time you go? [...
A. [...] No, I mean, I wouldn’t leave a business card because I would have serious doubts
whether anyone would actually pick it, from the state of the house [...]. Though again, as I
said, I am reluctant to engage in legal speculation, but the reason one usually goes to the
registered office without giving prior notification is that the books should be there, unless a
notification has been sent, and they should be available for certain hours of the day”.!°
[emphasis added]

 

 

 

 

Claimant has not offered any plausible explanation for the state of the building, which
appeared unoccupied, for the lack of any outside indication that it is being used for business
purposes by CEAC and, more importantly, Claimant has not provided a reason why, on nine
different occasions during the last two years, the building was inaccessible for courier
delivery or for purposes of inspecting CEAC’s registers. Under normal circumstances, any
company should have had no difficulty finding and introducing into the record evidence that

the building is in use, is the place where its registers are kept and that it is open to the public.

The only evidence that Claimant did provide was introduced during the Preliminary
Objections phase and appears to suggest that, indeed, CEAC’s registers are not accessible to
the public as required by law. Instead, it appears that an employee of the law firm
Chrysanthou & Chrysanthou LLC regularly picks up the correspondence from 4
Dimosthenous, Nicosia, to deliver it to the offices of the law firm. No activity is mentioned

as actually taking place at 4 Dimosthenous, Nicosia. Moreover, CEAC’s operating address

166 Tr., Day 2, 74:7, 8, 75:6-10, 81:2-12, 21-25, 82:1.

Page 61 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

193.

194.

195.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

is the same as the address of Chrysanthou & Chrysanthou LLC and of C & P Corporate

Services Limited:

“[A]n employee of our firm forwards on a daily basis all of the correspondence received at
the Registered Address to the firm’s address [...]. [...] I mote that CEAC’s operating address
is not the same as its Registered Address. CEAC carries out its operational business at Palais
d'Ivoire House, 2™ Floor, 12 Them. Dervis Ave., PO Box 21762, CY-1513 Nicosia, Cyprus
[...]. This is the address of our firm, where CEAC’s corporate director CPCS and CPCS’
director Ms Antoniou are located”.'®”

Taking all of these findings into consideration, the Tribunal can only conclude that CEAC’s

office at 4 Dimosthenous, Nicosia does not meet the requirement specified in the Companies

Law that it should be accessible to the public for purposes of inspecting the company’s

registers.

Amenability to service. Another condition mentioned by Mr. Ioannides so that an office can
qualify as a registered office under Cypriot law is amenability to service. This is consistent
with Section 102(1) of the Companies Law (in force at the relevant time), which provides:
“A company shall, as from the day on which it begins to carry on business or as from the
fourteenth day after the date of its incorporation, whichever is the earlier, have a registered
office_in the Republic _to which all icati and_notices_may be addressed”.
[emphasis added]
It is unclear whether the property located at 4 Dimosthenous, Nicosia, is still being used for
service of documents and notices upon CEAC. The Tribunal accepts that Claimant has
received correspondence at that address for a number of years, including correspondence
from Respondent.!® However, the Tribunal notes that Exhibits R-1 and R-2 demonstrate
that, on two distinct occasions in 2014, two different courier services failed to effect delivery

because “the recipient was not found at the given address”!

or because “the recipient is not
known at that address”.'”” During the Preliminary Objections phase of these proceedings,
Claimant produced the witness testimony of Mr. Chrysanthou, who stated that CEAC took

regular deliveries from both DHL and FedEx at the registered office and could not find an

167 Witness Statement of Nicos Chrysanthou, at 22, 24.

168 Exhibit

 

'-23-C-29 and C-31-C-39.

 

169 Exhibit R-1.
10 Exhibit R-2.

Page 62 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

196.

197.

198.

199.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

e!” have

explanation for the two failed deliveries.'”! Mr. Chrysanthou further stated that “w
established long-term engagement agreements with DHL (and FedEx in the past) who
therefore are both quite familiar with all our different addresses and have faced no problems
in delivering packages to us in the past”.!73

In light of this longstanding agreement with DHL (and FedEx), with both courier services
being familiar with the address, the Tribunal can only assume that both DHL and FedEx did
not make inaccurate representations when they stated that “the recipient was not found at the

77174 and that “the recipient is not known at that address”.'”> Further, the

given address
Tribunal notes that the most recent correspondence sent to 4 Dimosthenous, Nicosia, that is
on the record dates from 16 April 2013. Again, it would have been easy for Claimant to
introduce into the record evidence demonstrating that correspondence can still successfully

be delivered to CEAC in March 2014, if this was the case. It did not.

The actual presence of a company’s registers at the registered office. Based on the evidence

 

currently in the record, the Tribunal cannot determine whether CEAC’s registers are actually

kept at the registered office or not. Claimant has not produced evidence to this effect.

CEAC’s plate. It is undisputed that the building at 4 Dimosthenous, Nicosia, does not bear

CEAC’s plate in a conspicuous and visible location.'”®

The Tribunal has therefore found that Claimant has not proven, with evidence, that the
building at Dimosthenous 4, Nicosia, Cyprus is accessible to the public for purposes of
inspecting the company’s registers, that CEAC is amenable to service at that address, that

the company’s records are kept there or that the address bears a plate with CEAC’s name.

'71 Witness Statement of Nicos Chrysanthou, at 19, 20.

'? Tt is unclear from the witness statement of Mr. Chrysanthou whether “we” refers to CEAC or to the law firm where
Mr. Chrysanthou is partner, Chrysanthou & Chrysanthou LLC.

'73 Witness Statement of Nicos Chrysanthou, at 21.

1 Exhibit R-1.

"5 Exhibit R-2.

176 Ty, Day 2, 64:18-25, 65:1-4.

Page 63 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

200.

201.

202.

203.

204.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

Based on these considerations, the Tribunal can only conclude that, for purposes of its
jurisdictional analysis, CEAC does not have a registered office at Dimosthenous 4, Nicosia,
Cyprus. Considering that Claimant has not presented arguments or evidence indicating that
a different address in Cyprus could ostensibly serve this purpose, the Tribunal concludes that
CEAC did not have a registered office in Cyprus at the time the Request for Arbitration was

filed.

In light of the fact that it seems undisputed that Claimant’s interpretation of the term “seat”,
meaning “registered office”, requires the fulfilment of fewer conditions than Respondent’s
proposed interpretation does, the Tribunal’s finding that CEAC did not have a registered
office in Cyprus at the relevant time is sufficient for a conclusion that CEAC is not an

“investor” under the Treaty and the Tribunal has no jurisdiction.

Out of an abundance of caution, however, the Tribunal will consider below whether the
evidence in the record supports the conclusion that CEAC was managed and controlled from
Cyprus, which corresponds to Respondent’s definition of “seat”. Again, as mentioned

earlier, the Tribunal finds that this is not the case.

. Whether Claimant was managed and controlled from Cyprus in March 2014

Before proceeding with its analysis on this point, the Tribunal would like to reiterate that
since the stage of the proceedings dedicated to Respondent’s Preliminary Objections,
Claimant has been asked to submit recent evidence attesting to the existence of CEAC’s seat
in Cyprus. In turn, Claimant has represented that it had in its possession numerous recent

documents that would prove the existence of a “seat” in Cyprus. '7”

During the hearing dedicated to the issue of “seat”, it became apparent that CEAC’s status
as a holding company is disputed by the Parties. However, even if the Tribunal were to
assume that CEAC is a holding company, the record is very poor when it comes to evidence

attesting to CEAC’s management.

"77 Preliminary Objections Hearing Transcript, 107:2-8, 11-20.

Page 64 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

205.

206.

207.

208.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

In this respect, during the stage of the proceedings dedicated to Respondent’s Preliminary
Objections, Claimant filed Exhibits C-1 to C-58. Out of these exhibits, the following attest
to CEAC’s management:

Exhibit C-46, Minutes of the Extraordinary General Meeting of Salamon Enterprises Ltd, 5
September 2005

Exhibit C-47, Minutes of the Board of Directors of Salamon Enterprises Ltd, 4 May 2006

Exhibit C-48, Minutes of the Board of Directors of Salamon Enterprises Ltd, 25 September
2006.

During the stage of the proceedings dedicated to the issue of “seat”, Claimant has produced
the following additional documents pertaining to the management of CEAC:

Exhibit C-63, Written Resolutions of the Sole Director of Salamon Enterprises Ltd, 25
November 2005

Exhibit C-64, Written Resolutions of the Sole Director of Salamon Enterprises Ltd, 25
November 2005

Exhibit C-65, Written Resolutions of the Sole Director of Salamon Enterprises Ltd, 25
November 2005

Exhibit C-79, Written Resolution of the Sole Director of Salamon Enterprises Ltd, 5 March
2007

Despite Claimant’s representation that it had in its possession “hundreds of documents”,
including more recent resolutions, no other more recent documents attesting to the
management of CEAC in Cyprus were submitted to this Tribunal. Providing such documents
would have been easy for Claimant to do, if they existed. The Tribunal can only take note
that there are no documents in the record attesting to CEAC’s management and control at

the relevant time: 11 March 2014.

The Tribunal therefore finds that CEAC does not meet the definition of “seat” put forward

by Respondent.

Page 65 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

D. Whether “tax residency” in Cyprus is equivalent to “seat” under the BIT

209.

210.

Claimant has put forward an alternative argument in support of its position that it has a “seat”
in Cyprus: its alleged tax residency in the country. While the Parties dispute whether
Claimant is in fact a tax resident in Cyprus, the Tribunal need not address this issue. Indeed,
after a careful analysis of the Parties’ arguments and evidence, the Tribunal has come to the

conclusion that, under Cypriot law, “seat” cannot be equated with “tax residence”.

In this respect, the Tribunal notes that Claimant has adduced no convincing evidence that
tax residency could be equated with “seat” under Cypriot law. To the contrary, its own
Cypriot law expert strongly disagrees with this position. Mr. Markides testified that Cypriot
tax legislation is to be strictly interpreted, in light of its own context, and cannot be used to

determine the meaning of the term “seat” under the BIT:

“4.2 Resorting to the provisions of tax legislation of Cyprus for the purposes of this
opinion'’’ is inappropriate and may dangerously mislead the Tribunal. It is a rather well
established Cypriot case law principle that the primary objective of tax laws is to ensure
revenues for the Republic, by defining in various manners the behaviour of persons, aiming
to secure effective achievement of the aforesaid primary objectives. As it has been repeatedly
stated by the Supreme Court of Cyprus ..., tax legislation shall be interpreted strictly within
the context of its own wording.

L-]

4.4 The content of paragraph 15.5 of the KI Opinion, which refers to a specific passage of
the OMAS judgment of the Supreme Court, although not accurately and completely
translated, nevertheless strengthens my opinion that the provisions of tax legislation cannot
be of assistance.

4.5 For the purposes of clarity and in support of my immediately above judgment, I
hereinbelow set the original Greek text of paragraph 4 of the OMAS judgment delivered by
Judge Constantinides. [...
English Translation: “... Section 10 of the Law, concerns exactly when a person, for the
purposes of Section 9, is considered to be in Cyprus. And it is obvious from the wording
and its general meaning that the reference to [“é5pa’”] does not merely refer to registered
[“éd5pa’”]. It constitutes ascription of a respective English term with wider meaning,
referring to the place of carrying on business. Hence, the article itself, in its own meaning,
regulates circumstances, where a “person” may have [“é5pa”] in Cyprus and elsewhere...”
(Emphasis added)

 

178 According to Mr. Markides, the purpose of his opinion was to “explain, from the perspective of a Cypriot lawyer,
the meaning of the term “seat” as it appears in Article 1(3)(b) of the [BIT]” (Markides First Legal Opinion, at 6).

Page 66 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

211.

212.

213.

VII.

214.

215.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

4.6 It is obvious from the wording of the above passage of the Supreme Court Judgment that
Section 10 (of the tax law referred to therein) was enacted specifically, in order to
supplement and support the purpose of the special tax provisions of section 9 of the same
Law.”'” [emphasis in the original]

The Tribunal therefore concludes that, regardless of whether Claimant is a tax resident of
Cyprus or not, its tax residency cannot serve to prove that CEAC has a “seat” in Cyprus for

purposes of Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT.

For all these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that CEAC is not an “investor” in accordance
with the terms of Article 1(3)(b) of the Treaty. Consequently, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction

to hear this case.

The Tribunal will now address the issue of the costs of this arbitration.

COSTS

. Claimant’s costs

Claimants requests that the Tribunal order Montenegro to pay all costs and fees associated

with this phase of the proceedings, plus compound interest.

CEAC requests that it be awarded USD 2,530,931.63 as counsel fees and disbursement
broken down as follows:

- USD 327,825.81 King & Spalding fees for the period 18 December 2013 until 31 August
2014;

- USD 464,239.39 King & Spalding fees for the period 1 September 2014 until 31
December 2014;

- USD 1,738,866.43 King & Spalding fees for the period 1 January 2014 to 31 March
2016.18?

179 Markides Second Legal Opinion, at 4.2, 4.4-4.6.
89 CCS, p. 10.

Page 67 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

216.

217.

218.

219.

81R

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)
B. Respondent’s costs

Respondent requests that the Tribunal order Claimant to bear the costs of the arbitration,
including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal members and of ICSID, as well as all legal
representation and other costs incurred by Respondent, plus interest in an amount to be

determined by the Tribunal.!*!

Respondent argues that the Tribunal has discretion in determining the apportionment of the
costs and that the circumstances of this case militate in favor of applying the principle costs
follow the event. First, Respondent submits that the cost intensive stage of the proceedings
dedicated to the issue of “seat” was only triggered as a result of Claimant’s representation
that it had hundreds of documents which could not be properly aired at the Preliminary
Objections phase. However, the hearing has revealed that Claimant only introduced a
handful of additional documents into the record, which could not demonstrate that it had a
“seat” in Cyprus. In addition, Claimant unsuccessfully sought to disqualify Prof. Stern
purely to drive up the costs of the arbitration. Finally, Respondent submits that the costs
follow the event principle has been gaining considerable acceptance in investment

arbitration. !*?

In the alternative, Respondent submits that, regardless of whether it prevails on the question
of jurisdiction, the Tribunal should apply Arbitration Rule 28(1)(b) and decide that Claimant
should bear the costs of these parts of the arbitration as a result of its conduct throughout

these proceedings. !*

Montenegro requests that it be awarded EUR 865,678.51 as legal fees and expenses (EUR
158,572.8 incurred in connection with the Preliminary Objections phase; EUR 26,480.83
incurred in connection with the challenge of Prof. Stern; and EUR 680,624.88 incurred in
connection with the determination of the issue of “seat”), and USD 299,950 as arbitration

expenses, plus interest.!**

-CS, at 38.

182. R
183. R
184 R

-CS, at 13-23.
-CS, at 24-27.
-CS, at 28, 29, 36.

Page 68 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

220.

221.

222.

185

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

C. The Tribunal’s analysis

Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention confers the Tribunal discretion in the allocation of
costs. In deciding how to allocate the costs of these arbitration proceedings, the Tribunal has
been guided by the principle that costs should follow the event, if there are no indications

that a different solution is better suited to the case at hand.

The Tribunal has found no such indications to be present in this case. In this respect, the
Tribunal finds that the stage of the proceedings dedicated to the issue of “seat” has been
triggered by Claimant’s representation that it had substantial amounts of evidence to produce
in support of its argument that it had a “seat” in Cyprus. As the Tribunal has already found
several times within the body of this Award, Claimant has produced little evidence during
this stage of the proceedings. This evidence was in any event not sufficient to prove its case
regardless of how the Tribunal might interpret the term “seat” under Article 1(3)(b) of the
BIT. The Tribunal has also taken into account that it previously dismissed Respondent’s
Preliminary Objections in light of the fact that it had not been briefed to its satisfaction by

both Parties on the meaning of the term “seat” and on several factual issues.

The Tribunal has therefore decided that Claimant shall bear the costs of these arbitration
proceedings, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the Tribunal’s Assistant,

ICSID’s administrative fees and direct expenses, amounting to (in USD):'*°

Arbitrators’ fees and expenses

Professor Hanotiau 90,867.90
Professor Park 100,258.75
Professor Stern 100,850.80
Ms. Iancu’ fees and expenses 23,665.27
ICSID’s administrative fees 96,000.00

The ICSID Secretariat will provide the parties with a detailed Financial Statement of the case account once all

invoices are received and the account is final.

Page 69 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

223.

224.

225.

226.

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

Direct expenses (estimated)!*° 34,482.60
Total 446,125.32

The above expenses have been paid out of the advances made by the Parties in equal parts.'*”

As a result, each Party’s share of the costs of arbitration amounts to USD 223,062.66, and

Claimant is to reimburse Respondent’s share of the costs.

The Tribunal has further decided that Claimant shall also reimburse Respondent the amount
of EUR 707,105.71 (representing Respondent’s legal costs and expenses of EUR
865,678.51, minus the costs and expenses incurred in connection with the Preliminary

Objections phase, of EUR 158,572.8).

The Tribunal notes that Respondent has requested that it be granted interest on any costs
awarded to it. However, Respondent has not provided any arguments or evidence in support

of its claim. The Tribunal therefore denies Respondent’s claim for interest.

DECISION
For the reasons set out above, the majority of the Tribunal:

(dd) Finds that CEAC does not have a “seat” in Cyprus and does not qualify as an
“investor” for purposes of Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT;

(2) Finds that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear this case;

(3) Decides that CEAC shall bear the full costs and expenses incurred by ICSID in
connection with these arbitration proceedings, including the fees and expenses of the
members of the Tribunal and of the Tribunal’s Assistant, by reimbursing Montenegro

USD 223,062.66;

186 This amount includes estimated charges (courier, printing and copying) in connection with the dispatch of this

Award.

'87 The remaining balance will be reimbursed to the parties in proportion to the payments that they advanced to

ICSID.

Page 70 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. Montenegro

 

(4)

(5)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

Decides that CEAC shall reimburse Montenegro the amount of EUR 707,105.71,
representing Montenegro’s legal costs and expenses minus the legal costs and

expenses incurred in connection with Montenegro’s Preliminary Objections;

Dismisses all other claims.

Page 71 of 72

CEAC Holdings Limited v. A

 

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/8)

Ware b. bk “ti Me Gem

 

Professor William W. Park Professor Brigitte Stern
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Subject to the attached Separate Opinion
Date: 20 TL, 2016 Date: \@ yey Lol 6

BT

Ssor Bernard Hanotiau
President of the Tribunal

Date: G Juhy 206

   

Page 72 of 72

CEAC v. Montenegro
Separate Opinion of William W. Park

I. Notions of Registered Office

1. The Award declines to determine the meaning of “seat” in the 2005 investment treaty concluded by
Cyprus with Serbia and Montenegro, yet nevertheless finds that CEAC has no seat in Cyprus,
dismissing all claims and ordering CEAC to bear full costs. The Award reasons that the record fails to
support a finding of seat according to any interpretation put forward.

2. In reaching that conclusion, the Award purports to consider Claimant’s position on registered office,
but in fact adopts Respondent’s formulation, which not surprisingly fails to carry the day.

3. Claimant argued that “seat” corresponds to “registered office” in Cypriot law, defined as an office that
has been registered. CEAC counsel stated, “Under our scenario, all you need to be satisfied of is that
we have ... incorporation [Sections 3 and 15 of the Companies Law] and a certificate of registered
office [Section 102 of the Companies Law].” Again he said, “[A]ll you need is compliance with
[Sections 3, 15 and 102], which is beyond doubt.”!

4. Section 3 of the Cypriot Companies Law says persons associated for any lawful purpose may form a
limited liability company by subscribing to a memorandum of association and “complying with the
requirements of this Law in respect of registration.” Section 15 provides for company creation to be
certified by the Registrar on registration of the memorandum and articles of association. Section 102
requires a registered office in Cyprus “to which all communications and notices may be addressed.”

5. CEAC was incorporated and its memorandum and articles of association were filed with the Registrar,
who was informed of the office at 4 Dimosthenous Street in Nicosia,° to which notices were delivered
on multiple occasions, including sixteen communications from Respondent.*

6. Respondent’s expert, Mr. Kypros Ioannides, proposed a more elaborate test of registered office,
hemmed by a half dozen conditions, including physical premises, right to use property, public
accessibility, amenability to service, presence of company registers, and a name plate.

' Mr. Sprange, Transcript Day 2, pages 93 and 97.

? At commencement of this arbitration, a registered office could be filed within fourteen days from
incorporation. During the proceedings, the law changed to require simultaneous filing, a practice also
followed before amendment. Expert Opinion of Alecos Markides, 12 June 2015, paragraph 39.3.

> Certificates of Registered Office were dated 29 August 2005 (C 20), 29 October 2010 (C 95) and 16
November 2011 (C 56).

+ Witness statement of Mr. Nicos Chrysanthou, 19 December 2014, paragraphs 17-20, testifying that
CEAC regularly receives correspondence at its registered office, including at least sixteen letters from
Montenegro and its counsel between January 2009 and April 2013, three of which were delivered through
DHL. Although these deliveries do not themselves prove a registered office in March 2014 when the
Arbitration Request was filed, no evidence suggests that the office was abandoned following the
deliveries, a question of fact to be determined by the record in this case.

7. By contrast, Claimant’s expert, Mr. Alecos Markides, endorsed none of these criteria as prerequisites
to the existence of a registered office, but carefully distinguished conditions to the existence of a
registered office (incorporation and registration) from the various purposes an office serves.

8. Mr. Markides served for eight years as Attorney General of Cyprus. In that capacity he led the
Cypriot Law Office in harmonizing national law with European Union regulations, an experience
providing a unique qualification to understand the relationship of Cypriot corporate law with
Continental analogues. No reason exists to discredit the expert testimony of Mr. Markides.

9. Based on the test proposed by Respondent (not Mr. Markides) the Award denies the existence of a
registered office for CEAC, stressing that the office was not always open. Although doubtless the
case, no evidence supports the position that constant accessibility constitutes a precondition to a
registered office, or that inability to remain open triggers disregard of the office by the Register.°

10, Defective compliance with corporate obligations (such as name plate, ledgers and accessibility) may
result in fines, but does not make the office disappear. Failure to comply with Respondent’s six-part
test does not rob CEAC of a registered office on Dimosthenous Street.

11. The Award notes that domestic authorities cannot determine jurisdiction for purposes of international
treaties, While true, the observation does not lead to any determination of whether the registered
office on Dimosthenous Street meets Treaty requirements, a matter to which we now turn.

Il. Notions of Seat

12. To qualify as an investor under Article I(3) of the Treaty, a company incorporated in one contracting
state must have its “seat” in the territory of that state. Seeking content to this requirement, arbitrators
begin with Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, calling for an “ordinary
meaning” to be given to terms in context and in the light of treaty object and purpose. The relevant
sources of international law, listed in Article 38 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice,
include conventions, international custom and general principles of law, as well as judicial decisions
and teachings of highly qualified publicists. None of these sources provides an “ordinary meaning”
for seat in the context of this investment treaty and its objects.’

5 Expert Opinion of Alecos Markides, 12 June 2015, paragraph 44. This testimony separates the
conditions for existence of a registered office (Section V.B) from its purposes (Section V.C). The
keeping of ledgers, receipt of communications, and creation of judicial jurisdiction, were all included in
Part V.C (purposes), not in Part V.B (conditions). *

6 Apparently FedEx could not make a delivery on 30 January 2014 and DHL could not make its delivery
on 6 February 2014. Exhibits R-1 and R-2 respectively.

7 Significantly, the ILC Draft Articles on Diplomatic Protection state that “international law has no tules
of its own for the creation, management and dissolution of a corporation or for the rights of shareholders
and their relationship with the corporation, and must consequently turn to municipal law for guidance on
this subject.” ILC, 58th Sess. (A/61/10), 2006 Yearbook International Law Commission (Vol. II, Part 2).
Although useful in some situations, UNCTAD pronouncements carry no authority as a source of
international law. In this context, both sides have referenced the UNCTAD Series on Issues in
International Investment Agreements, UNCTAD/ITE/IIT/11 (Volume 2, 2001), RL-96, which does not
purport to confirm any rule of international law, but simply mentions (page 83) that “generally speaking”
a seat connotes place of effective management, adding that some investment agreements require “real
economic activities” or “business activities”.

WWP, 4,VIL.2016

13. The notion of corporate seat derives from the civil legal tradition, as a connecting point with a national
legal order. Continental jurisdictions invokes terminology such as siége (France), Sitz (Germany),
sede (Italy), domicilio (Spain) and sede (Portugal).

14, Although notions of “seat” are alien to the English tradition from which Cyprus derives its Companies
Law, analogues can be found in the Bruxelles Regulation, providing that for Cyprus a statutory seat
means, alternatively, registered office, place of incorporation or the place under the law of which the
company formation took place. * CEAC appears to have a seat in Cyprus under any of these tests.

15. The Bruxelles Regulation also provides that “rules of private international law” determine seat for
purposes of judicial jurisdiction over company creation.’ In the English tradition of Cyprus, those
rules look to either (i) place of incorporation and registered office or some other official address, or
(ii) central management and control.!° CEAC meets the first test, and thus has its seat in Cyprus.

16. Sometimes “seat” marries with a qualifier to become siége réel or “real seat”. This Treaty did not
adopt such language. An arbitral tribunal would be bold indeed to add adjectives on its own initiative.
The Treaty drafters introduced no such additional requirements.

17. A different exercise for linking companies and legal orders might commend itself for claimants from
Continental jurisdictions where notions of seat form an integral part of national corporate law.!!

Ill. A Test That Fits the Context

18. The jurisdictional question in this case does not yield to facile analysis, International law as it
currently stands provides no uniformly accepted “ordinary meaning” of corporate seat. The term
“seat” remains essentially a municipal law concept derived from Continental systems, whereas
Claimant’s incorporation occurred in a common law country lacking such notions as such.

19. Apart from tax residency, the Parties advanced three tests of “seat” for consideration. One looks to a
relatively deep level of economic penetration implicating management and control in Cyprus. The
second imposes multiple criteria in determining registered office, and presupposes that an office
ceases to be registered in the event of defective compliance with corporate formalities. The final test
rests on a registered office in the plain meaning of that terms: an office that is registered.

8 Article 63(2), Regulation on Jurisdiction and the Recognition and Enforcement of Judgments in Civil
and Commercial Matters (Bruxelles Regulation), 12 Dec. 2012, EU Regulation No. 1215/2012.

° Article 24, Bruxelles Regulation, granting exclusive jurisdiction to courts where a company has its seat.
10 Dicey, Morris & COLLINS, CONFLICTS OF LAW (15th ed. 2012), paragraph 11-079. Noting that “seat”
has no precise equivalent in Britain, the treatise continues (citing § 42 of the1982 Civil Jurisdiction and
Judgments Act) that for the Bruxelles Convention (predecessor to the Bruxelles Regulation) a company
has a seat in the UK if either (i) incorporated under UK law with registered office or some other official
UK address or (ii) possessing central management and control exercised in the UK.

11 A different exercise for linking companies to legal orders might commend itself for claimants from
civil law jurisdictions where notions of seat form an integral part of national law. See Tenaris et al v.
Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/26 (29 January 2016), with investors from Luxembourg and
Portugal, where (as noted in para. 148 of that decision) company formation requires a “siége” or a “sede”
respectively. Tests might also differ when touching goals other than investment, such a tax, judicial
jurisdiction, trading with enemies, litigation venue, and standing before the International Court of Justice.

WWP, 4. VIL.2016

20. The first test, mandating management and control in Cyprus, imports into the Treaty an obligation of

2

2

nv

substantial economic activity similar to “denial of benefits” provisions of free trade agreements and
treaty shopping rules in tax treaties. However desirable such standards might be from a policy
perspective, an arbitral tribunal bears a duty of fidelity to the treaty text as drafted, and cannot rewrite
the contracting states’ bargain. If the negotiators of this Treaty had wished to require investors to
prove “management and control” they could have done so by adding those three words.

. The second test finds no support in either domestic or international law. The test defines registered

office according to six criteria, and posits that non-observance of these factors leads to disregard of
the office. Adoption of that standard would require arbitrators to assume a policy-making mission in
excess of their authority.

. The third test, looking to the plain meaning of registered office, best matches the meaning of “seat” in

Cyprus as used in this particular Treaty. Although international law does not currently permit a
uniform definition of seat for treaty purposes, the last test commends itself in the configuration of this
dispute. Under that standard, Claimant appears to possess a seat, precluding dismissal of the
arbitration on this ground alone.

Lyzesse, bd. Poe.
4 SarSey Lore

WWP, 4.VII.2016

