INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the annulment proceeding between
CEAC HOLpINGs LIMITED

Applicant

and

MONTENEGRO

Respondent

ICSID CASE No. ARB/14/08

ANNULMENT PROCEEDING

 

DECISION ON ANNULMENT

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Sir Christopher Greenwood, President of the ad hoc Committee
Professor Joongi Kim, Member of the ad hoc Committee

Ms Tinuade Oyekunle, Member of the ad hoc Committee

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee

Mr Alex Kaplan

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 1 May 2018

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing CEAC Holdings Limited

Mr Egishe Dzhazoyan

Mr Thomas Sprange, QC

King & Spalding International LLP
125 Old Broad Street

London EC2N 1AR

United Kingdom

Representing Montenegro:

Mr Slaven Moravéevié

Ms Jelena Bezarevié Paji¢

Ms Tanja Sumar

Ms Vanja Tica

Moravéevié Vojnovic & Partners in cooperation
with Schonherr

Dobraéina 15

11000, Belgrade

Republic of Serbia

and

Mr David A. Pawlak
David A. Pawlak LLC
ul. Jasna 26

00-054 Warsaw
Republic of Poland

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES 1
Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 2
III]. THE AWARD AND SEPARATE OPINION .........ccscsessesssessesseeeeseesesseesessnssnsesenseneeneeseeeee 8
A. The Claim 8

B. The Procedure before the Tribunal 10

C. CEAC’s Position before the Tribunal ..........0.c.ccccscscssesseseeeseeseseeseseesestessanessateneanenees ll

D. Montenegro’s Position before the Tribunal.........0..ccceeeeee eee eeeseeeeeetseeeeeenees 12

E. The Award 13

IV. GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT 18
A. CEAC’s Position 18

(1) The Tribunal failed to determine the meaning of the term “seat” in Article 1(3)(b)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6

LS

(7
(8

Voz

(9)

(10) The Tribunal entirely failed to consider Montenegro’s “real seat” theory

of the BIT 18

The Tribunal considered the facts before the legal tests, thereby prejudging the
outcome of its legal analysis.............

 

 

The Tribunal failed to consider the definition of “registered office” advanced by
CEAC 19

The “minimum requirements” for a registered office proposed by Mr Ioannides
were not pleaded by Montenegro as a test for “seat” and did not form part of the
legal framework in the Case .........ccccecece eee ee eeeeeeeeeseeesceteceseteseseeeeeeeeenenenenees 19
The Tribunal failed to give any, or any proper, weight to the evidence of Mr
Markides 20
By adopting the “minimum requirements” identified by Mr Ioannides as a legal
test which found no basis in international or domestic law, the Tribunal assumed a
policy-making mission beyond its jurisdiction

 

The Tribunal ignored CEAC’s evidence regarding management and control...... 20

The Tribunal failed properly to consider and give content to Montenegro’s
“autonomous definition” of “seat” under international law

 

The Tribunal’s treatment of “tax residency” was incompatible with its approach to
the “autonomous definition” 21

  

 

(11) The evaluation of CEAC’s evidence was unnecessarily arbitrary and frivolous.. 22

B. Montenegro’s Position 22
V. THE COMMITTEE’S DECISION 23

A. The Legal Standard to be Applied on an Application for Annulment

 

(1) Nature of Annulment and the Powers of an Ad Hoc Committee
(2) ICSID Convention, Article 52(1)(b): Manifest Excess of Power
(3) ICSID Convention, Article 52(1)(d): Serious Departure from a Fundamental Rule

 

 

 

 

of Procedure 28
(4) ICSID Convention, Article 52(1)(e): Failure to State Reasons 00.0... 29
B. Grounds for Annulment in the Present Case Taken as a Whole ............ccccceeeseeenees 32
C. Manifest Excess of Power: 39
(1) The failure to determine the meaning of the term “seat” in Article 1(3)(b) of the
BIT 40
(2) Considering the facts before the legal tests, thereby prejudging the outcome of the
legal analysis 40
(3) The failure to consider CEAC’s definition of “registered office” .. 40

 

(4) Mr Ioannides’ “minimum requirements” were not pleaded by Montenegro as a
test for “seat” and did not form part of the legal framework of the case..

 

(5) The failure to give any, or any proper, weight to the evidence of Mr Markides .. 41

 

 

 

 

 

(6) By adopting the “minimum requirements” identified by Mr Ioannides as a legal
test which found no basis in international law or domestic law, the Tribunal

assumed a policy-making mission beyond its jurisdiction «0.0.0.0... cece 42
(7) The Tribunal ignored CEAC’s evidence regarding management and control...... 42
D. Serious Breach of a Fundamental Rule of Procedure...........csccceseesseseeteseetesteestenees 43
E. Failure to State Reasons 44
F. The Committee’s Conclusions 45
VI. COSTS 45
A. Applicant’s Cost Submissions 45
B. Respondent’s Cost Submission: 46
C. The Committee’s Decision On Costs .......c.ccccccccecseseesseeteseessscessseessseessseessseessstensanenees 47

VII. DECISION 49

iii

TABLE OF SELECTED ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINED TERMS

 

Application

CEAC Holdings Limited Application for
Annulment

 

Arbitration Rules

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings 2006

 

Award

Award of the Tribunal dated 26 July 2016 in
CEAC Holdings Ltd v. Montenegro (ICSID
case No. ARB/14/8)

 

BIT or Treaty

Agreement between the Republic of Cyprus
and Serbia and Montenegro on the Reciprocal
Promotion and Protection of Investments,
which entered into force on 23 December 2005

 

C-#]

Applicant’s Exhibit

 

CEAC Memorial

Applicant’s Memorial on Annulment dated 12
May 2017

 

CEAC Reply

Applicant’s Reply on Annulment dated 25
August 2017

 

CEAC Slides

Applicant’s Slides accompanying Oral
Presentation at Hearing on Annulment held on
29-30 November 2017

 

 

 

 

CL-[#] Applicant’s Legal Authority
Ad hoc Committee composed of Sir
Committee Christopher Greenwood (president), Professor
Joongi Kim and Ms Tinuade Oyekunle
: Dissenting Opinion of Professor William W.
Dissent

 

Park, appended to the Award

 

 

 

EUR

Euro

 

Hearing

Hearing on Annulment held on 29-30
November 2017

 

ICSID Convention

Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States dated 18 March 1965

 

ICSID or the Centre

International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes

 

Montenegro Counter-Memorial

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on
Annulment dated 7 July 2017

 

Montenegro Rejoinder

Respondent’s Rejoinder on Annulment dated
13 October 2017

 

R-[#]

Respondent’s Exhibit

 

RL-[#]

Respondent’s Legal Authority

 

Tr. Day [#], [page:line]

Transcript of the Hearing before the
Committee

 

Tribunal

Arbitral tribunal composed of Professor
Bernard Hanotiau (President), Professor
William W. Park, and Professor Brigitte Stern

 

 

USD

 

United States Dollars

 

 

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

This case concerns an application for annulment (the “Application”) of the award rendered
on 26 July 2016 in ICSID Case No. ARB/14/08 (the “Award”) in the arbitration proceeding
between CEAC Holdings Limited (“CEAC” or the “Applicant’) and Montenegro
(“Montenegro” or the “Respondent”) rendered by a Tribunal composed of Professor

Bernard Hanotiau (President), Professor Brigitte Stern and Professor William W. Park.

The Applicant and the Respondent are collectively referred to as the “Parties.” The Parties’

representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).

The Award decided on a dispute submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre’’) on the basis of the Agreement between the
Republic of Cyprus and Serbia and Montenegro on the Reciprocal Promotion and
Protection of investments, which entered into force on 23 December 2005 (the “BIT” or
the “Treaty”’), and the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States

and Nationals of Other States (the “ICSID Convention’).

The dispute in the original proceeding related to CEAC’s alleged ownership and
management of an aluminium plant located near Podgorica, Montenegro. CEAC alleged
that Montenegro failed to provide fair and equitable treatment, full protection and security,
and most-favoured nation treatment to CEAC’s investment as required by the Treaty and

that Montenegro expropriated CEAC’s investment.

In the Award, the Tribunal, by a majority (Professor Park dissenting), reached the
conclusion that it lacked jurisdiction over the dispute because CEAC did not have a “seat”
in Cyprus and thus did not qualify as an investor under the BIT. The Tribunal ordered
CEAC to pay the full costs and expenses incurred by ICSID and the Tribunal by
reimbursing Montenegro USD 223,062.66. It also ordered CEAC to reimburse Montenegro
EUR 707,105.71 for legal costs and expenses.!

' Award, paras. 220-225.

CEAC applied for the annulment of the Award on the basis of Article 52(1) of the ICSID
Convention, identifying three grounds for annulment: (i) manifest excess of powers
(Article 52(1)(b)); (ii) serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure (Article
52(1)(d)); and (iii) failure to state the reasons on which the Award was based (Article

52(1)(e)).

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 22 November 2016, CEAC filed the Application with the Secretary-General of ICSID.
CEAC’s Application also contained a request under Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention
and Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules for a stay of enforcement of the Award
(pertaining to the order for costs) until CEAC’s Application was decided (“CEAC’s

Request” or the “Request”).

On 30 November 2016, pursuant to Rule 50(2) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (the “ICSID Arbitration Rules”), ICSID registered the
Application. On the same date, in accordance with Arbitration Rule 54(2), ICSID informed

the Parties that the enforcement of the Award had been provisionally stayed.

By letter dated 29 December 2016, in accordance with Rules 6 and 53 of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, the Parties were notified that an ad hoc Committee composed of Sir
Christopher Greenwood, a national of the United Kingdom and designated as President of
the Committee, Professor Joongi Kim, a national of the Republic of Korea, and Ms Tinuade
Oyekunle, a national of Nigeria, (the “Committee’’) had been constituted. On the same date,
the Parties were notified that Mr Alex Kaplan, Legal Counsel, ICSID, would serve as

Secretary of the Committee.

By letter of 3 January 2017, the Committee invited the Parties to submit their positions on
CEAC’s Request by 9 January 2017. On 9 January 2017, and in accordance with the

Committee’s instructions, CEAC requested that the Committee continue the stay of

2 Application, para. 2.

enforcement of the Award pending the Committee’s decision on the Request. By letter of

the same date, Montenegro informed the Committee that it opposed CEAC’s Request.

On 10 January 2017, the Committee invited the Parties to submit by 17 January 2017 a
joint proposal advising the Committee of any agreements reached and those points on
which the Parties were unable to reach agreement concerning the schedule for written and
oral submissions on CEAC’s Request and the procedural matters to be discussed at the

First Session.

On 12 January 2017, the Parties were provided with copies of the declarations pursuant to
Rules 53 and 6(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules signed by each member of the

Committee.

By letters of 17 January and 18 January 2017, the Applicant and the Respondent
respectively informed the Committee on the status of their efforts to reach agreement on a
joint proposal for the timing of written and oral submissions on CEAC’s Request and
procedural matters to be discussed at the First Session. Both Parties agreed that there should
be one round of simultaneous written submissions on 17 February 2017, and that the Parties
should have the liberty to make oral submissions on CEAC’s Request at the First Session.
However, the Parties did not agree on a date for the First Session or on whether there should

be oral submissions on CEAC’s Request.

By letter of 3 February 2017, the Committee instructed the Parties to file their submissions
on CEAC’s Request by the Parties’ agreed date of 17 February 2017. In the same letter,
the Committee requested that the Parties confirm their availability to hold the First Session
together with oral submissions on CEAC’s Request in Paris or in The Hague on 20 April
or 2 May 2017, should they be unable to reach agreement on the Request. The Committee
also asked the Parties to confirm their availability on those same dates for a First Session
to be held by teleconference, should CEAC’s Request be resolved among the Parties before
the First Session. By separate communications of 6 February 2017, the Parties confirmed
their availability for a First Session to be held on 20 April 2017 by teleconference should

the Parties reach agreement on the Request, or in Paris should they fail to agree.

20.

By separate communications on 14 February 2017, the Parties informed the Tribunal that
they were still engaged in negotiations regarding the Applicant’s Request, and requested
that the Committee grant a four-week extension until 17 March 2017 to file simultaneous
submissions thereon. By letter of 15 February 2017, the Committee granted the Parties’
request for an extension and further notified the Parties that the First Session and hearing
on the Applicant’s Request would take place on 20 April 2017 at the World Bank Paris

Office, should the Parties fail to reach agreement on the Request.

On 6 March 2017, the Committee transmitted a draft Procedural Order No. | to the Parties,
and on 13 March 2017, the Parties provided the Committee with their comments on the

draft.

By separate communications of the same date, the Parties confirmed that they had reached
agreement on CEAC’s Request and that, accordingly, the Applicant would not pursue its
Request before the Committee. The Parties further confirmed their agreement that the First

Session take place by telephone conference on 20 April 2017.

By letter of 20 March 2017, the Respondent informed the Committee of changes to its legal
representatives and requested the opportunity to propose further revisions to the Draft
Procedural Order No. 1, either in writing before the First Session or orally during the First
Session. On 24 March 2017, the Committee requested that the Parties confer and submit a

revised joint proposed draft of Procedural Order No. 1 by 5 April 2017.

By letter of 5 April 2017, the Respondent informed the Committee that the Parties had been
unable to resolve disagreements regarding proposed modifications to the Draft Procedural
Order No. 1. The Applicant confirmed this disagreement by letter of the same date and
requested that the Committee “decide the issues of disagreement between the Parties either

prior to or at the First Session.”

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rules 53 and 13(1), the Committee held a first
session with the Parties on 20 April 2017 by teleconference. In addition to the Committee

and its Secretary, participating in the conference were:

21.

22.

23.

24.

For the Applicant:

Mr Egishe Dzhazoyan Partner, King & Spalding International LLP

Mr Thomas Sprange QC Partner, King & Spalding International LLP

Mr Grigori Lazarev Senior Associate, King & Spalding International LLP
Ms Lisa Wong Qualified Paralegal, King & Spalding International LLP

For the Respondent:

Mr David Pawlak David A. Pawlak LLC

Mr Slaven Moravéevié Partner, Moravéevié Vojnovié and Partners in
cooperation with Schénherr

Ms Jelena Bezarevié Paji¢ Partner, Moravéevié Vojnovié and Partners in
cooperation with Schénherr

Ms Tanja Sumar Attorney at law, Moravéevié Vojnovié and
Partners in cooperation with Schénherr

Ms Vanja Tica Associate, Moravéevié Vojnovic¢ and Partners in

cooperation with Schénherr

Pursuant to the Committee’s instructions during the First Session, by separate
communication on 21 April 2017 the Parties each confirmed their availability to a hold a

hearing on annulment on 29 and 30 November 2017.

On 24 April 2017, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 1 recording the agreement
of the Parties on procedural matters and the Committee’s decisions on those procedural
matters where the Parties did not agree. Procedural Order No. | provided, inter alia, that
the applicable Arbitration Rules would be those in effect from 10 April 2006, that the
procedural language would be English, and that the place of proceeding would be Paris,

French Republic.

In accordance with Procedural Order No. 1, on 12 May 2017, the Applicant submitted its
Memorial on Annulment, together with Exhibits C-1 to C-4, and Legal Authorities CL-1
to CL-12 (the “Memorial’”). Subsequently, on 16 May 2017, the Applicant submitted a

revised version of Exhibit C-3.

On 7 July 2017, the Respondent submitted its Counter-Memorial on Annulment (the
“Counter-Memorial”), together with Exhibits R-1 to R-20, and Legal Authorities RL-1 to
RL-20.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

On 26 July 2017, Professor Joongi Kim informed the Parties that he had been asked to
serve as chair of a tribunal in an unrelated commercial dispute by two co-arbitrators, one
of which was Mr Jan Schaeffer, the head of the German dispute resolution practice of the
law firm representing the Applicant. Mr Schaeffer was not involved in the present
proceedings. Professor Kim notified the Parties that the appointment would not impact his
independence or impartiality in the proceedings, and invited the Parties to submit any
questions they might have regarding this development. Neither Party raised any question
or objection regarding Professor Kim’s continued participation as a Member of the

Committee if he accepted the appointment in the other case.

On 25 August 2017, the Applicant submitted its Reply on Annulment (the “Reply”),
together with Exhibits C-5 to C-90, and Legal Authorities CL-13 to CL-30.

On 13 October 2017, the Respondent submitted its Rejoinder on Annulment (the
“Rejoinder’”), together with Exhibits R-21 and R-22, and Legal Authorities RL-21 to RL-
49.

On 27 October 2017, the Committee sent the Parties a draft of Procedural Order No. 2
containing a proposed hearing protocol and invited them to submit joint comments thereon,
by 30 October 2017. On the same date, the Respondent requested an extension to submit
its comments on draft Procedural Order No. 2 until 1 November 2017, a request granted

by the Committee later that day.

Previously, by separate communication on 29 October 2017, both Parties confirmed their
availability for a pre-hearing organization meeting by telephone conference on 2 November

2017.

On 1 November 2017, the Parties provided their comments on Procedural Order No. 2, and
on 2 November 2017, the President and the Parties held a pre-hearing organizational
meeting by telephone conference. During the telephone conference, the Parties agreed on
all outstanding matters regarding the hearing, and subsequently on the same date, the

Committee issued Procedural Order No. 2 concerning the organization of the hearing.

31.

32.

In addition to President Greenwood, acting on behalf of the Committee, and Ms Lindsay

Gastrell, acting on behalf of the Secretary, participating in the prehearing organization

meeting were:

For the Applicant:

Mr Egishe Dzhazoyan
Mr Thomas Sprange QC
Ms Lisa Wong

For the Respondent:

Mr David Pawlak
Mr Slaven Moravéevié

Ms Jelena Bezarevié Paji¢
Ms Tanja Sumar

Ms Vanja Tica

Partner, King & Spalding International LLP
Partner, King & Spalding International LLP
Qualified Paralegal, King & Spalding

David A. Pawlak LLC

Partner, Moravéevié Vojnovié and Partners in
cooperation with Schénherr

Partner, Moravéevié Vojnovié and Partners in
cooperation with Schénherr

Attorney at law, Moravéevié Vojnovié and
Partners in cooperation with Schénherr
Associate, Moravéevié Vojnovic¢ and Partners in
cooperation with Schénherr

A hearing on Annulment was held at the World Bank Paris Office from 29 to 30 November

2017 (the “Hearing’”). The following persons were present at the Hearing:

Committee:

Sir Christopher Greenwood QC
Professor Joongi Kim
Ms Tinuade Oyekunle

ICSID Secretariat:

Mr Alex Kaplan

For the Applicant:

Mr Thomas Sprange QC
Mr Egishe Dzhazoyan
Mr Grigori Lazarev

Ms Lisa Wong

Ms Elysia Stellakis

President
Committee Member
Committee Member

Secretary

Partner, King & Spalding International LLP
Partner, King & Spalding International LLP
King & Spalding International LLP
King & Spalding International LLP
King & Spalding International LLP

7

For the Respondent:

Mr David Pawlak David A. Pawlak LLC

Mr Slaven Moravéevié Partner, Moravéevié Vojnovié and Partners in
cooperation with Schénherr

Ms Jelena Bezarevié Paji¢ Partner, Moravéevié Vojnovié and Partners in
cooperation with Schénherr

Ms Tanja Sumar Attorney at law, Moravéevié Vojnovié and
Partners in cooperation with Schonherr

Ms Vanja Tica Associate, Moravéevi¢é Vojnovic¢ and Partners in

cooperation with Schénherr

Court Reporter(s):

Ms Yvonne Vanvi Independent Court Reporter

33. The Parties filed their submissions on costs on 12 January 2018.

34. The proceeding was closed on 26 March 2018.

Ill. ©THE AWARD AND SEPARATE OPINION

A. THE CLAIM

35. The factual background was briefly summarized in paras. 29-38 of the Award. The
Tribunal made clear, however, that it was not making any findings with regard to factual
disputes.> The dispute originated in CEAC’s ownership and management of Kombinat
Aluminijuma Podgorica, AD, an aluminium plant located in Montenegro. According to the
Request for Arbitration, CEAC had begun experiencing problems regarding the plant in
2006. On 11 March 2014 CEAC filed a Request for Arbitration with ICSID. It relied upon
the Agreement between the Republic of Cyprus and Serbia and Montenegro on the
Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments, which had entered into force on 23

December 2005 (the “BIT”).

3 Award, para. 28.

36. CEAC

maintained that it was entitled to rely upon the BIT on the ground that it was a

company incorporated under the laws of Cyprus. Article 1 of the BIT provides, in relevant

part, that:

37. CEAC

+ Award, para. 39.

3. The term “investor” shall mean: [...]

(b) a legal entity incorporated, constituted or otherwise duly
organized in accordance with the laws and regulations of one
Contracting Party, having its seat in the territory of that
Contracting Party and making investments in the territory of the
other Contracting Party.

maintained that Montenegro had breached its obligations under the BIT:
(a) to provide fair and equitable treatment;
(b) to provide full protection and security;

(c) to provide national and most-favoured-nation treatment, including with respect
to the “management, maintenance, use, enjoyment, expansion or disposal” of

investments;

(d) not to expropriate, except in cases in which such measures are taken in the
public interest, observe due process of law, are not discriminatory, and are

accompanied by adequate compensation effected without delay;
(e) to guarantee the free transfer of payments; and

(f) to “encourage and create stable, equitable, favourable and transparent

conditions for [foreign investors] to make investments in its territory”.*

38.

39.

THE PROCEDURE BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL

The Tribunal was duly constituted on 14 July 2014. Montenegro submitted Preliminary
Objections pursuant to Arbitration Rule 41(5) within the thirty-day time limit. In its
Objections, Montenegro contended, inter alia, that CEAC did not qualify as an “investor”
under Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT on the ground that it did not have a “seat” in Cyprus.
CEAC filed a response to the Objections, together with a witness statement from Mr Nicos
Chrysanthou.> Hearings were held on those objections on 11 December 2014 and the
Tribunal issued its Decision on the Preliminary Objections on 27 January 2015. In that
Decision, the Tribunal rejected the Objections on the ground that Montenegro had failed
to meet the high standard, laid down in Rule 41(5), of demonstrating that CEAC’s claim

was “manifestly without legal merit”.° In particular, the Tribunal observed that:

(i) the issue of the “seat”, as the term is used in Article 1(3) of the
BIT, is a complex legal issue which has been left undefined by the
Contracting Parties to the BIT; (ii) both Parties made arguments on
this issue, which, whilst incomplete, were nonetheless plausible; and

(iti) the Tribunal does not have before it all the relevant materials

that would allow it to ascertain the meaning of the term “seat”."

In light of this decision, the Tribunal decided to have a phase of proceedings dedicated to
determining whether CEAC had a “seat” in Cyprus for the purposes of Article 1(3)(b) of
the BIT.

In accordance with the Tribunal’s decision, the Parties set out their submissions regarding
the question of “seat” in two rounds of written argument and at the hearing in March 2016.
CEAC’s Memorial® and Reply’ were accompanied by two expert opinions from Mr Alecos
Markides (hereinafter the “First Markides Opinion” '!° and the “Second Markides

Opinion” !'), a former Attorney-General of Cyprus, and two expert opinions from Dr

5 Exhibit R-6.

© Exhibit C-1, para. 100.
7 Exhibit C-1, para. 105.
8 Exhibit R-9.

° Exhibit R-13.

© Exhibit R-15.

41 Exhibit C-88.

40.

Al.

Monique Sasson.'? In addition, it submitted with its Reply a witness statement from Mr
Georgios Iacovou.'? Montenegro submitted a Counter-Memorial '* and a Rejoinder, '*
together with an expert opinion from Professor Vuk Radovic and two expert opinions from
Mr Kypros Ioannides,'® as well as witness statements from Mr Marcos Georgios Dracos

and Mr Michalis Georgiou.

CEAC’S POSITION BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL

CEAC’s position before the Tribunal is set out in some detail at paras. 50-96 of the Award
and the Committee does not consider it necessary to repeat that position in the same detail
here. In brief, CEAC maintained that neither the BIT nor international law more generally
offered any guidance as to the meaning of the term “seat” in Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT.
The BIT itself contained no definition of the term or anything which might indicate its
meaning. As for international law as a whole, there was no consistent State practice
regarding the concept of corporate “seat”: whereas some States (such as France and
Germany) regarded a corporation as having its “real seat” in the State from which it was
managed and controlled, irrespective of where it was incorporated, others (including
England, from whose law the companies law of Cyprus was derived) had no notion of the
“seat” of a corporation and considered nationality to flow from the fact of incorporation

under the law of a particular State.

Accordingly, CEAC argued that the meaning of “seat” in the BIT had to be determined by
a renvoi to the law of the relevant Contracting Party, in the case of CEAC, to the law of
Cyprus. Under Cypriot law, CEAC maintained, a corporation was Cypriot if it had its
registered office in Cyprus. That CEAC had its registered office in Cyprus was
conclusively demonstrated, according to CEAC, by the certificates of registration granted

by the Registrar of Companies and produced in evidence.!'’ Those certificates stated that

! Exhibits R-12 and C-89.

'3 Exhibit C-87.

'4 Exhibit C-84.

'S Exhibit R-17.

16 Exhibits C-85 and R-14.

'” CEAC produced certificates for 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013; Award, para. 89.

ll

42.

43.

44.

4S.

the registered office of CEAC was located at Dimosthenous 4, 1101, Nicosia. CEAC
adduced evidence to the effect that it received documents — including a number of
documents from the Respondent — at Dimosthenous 4. Its argument that under Cypriot law
a company had its “seat” where it had its registered office was supported by the expert

evidence of Mr Markides.

CEAC also advanced two alternative arguments. First, it maintained that, if the term “seat”
was to be interpreted as requiring a “genuine link” or “real connection” with Cyprus, or
that CEAC had to be managed and controlled from Cyprus, those requirements were
satisfied. CEAC was a holding company and its activities and functions were typical of
such a company. According to its governing instruments, its sole director was a Cypriot
service company. In addition, CEAC carried out transactions in Cyprus including the

purchase of shares and instructing auditors and other consultants.

Secondly, CEAC argued that it was a tax resident of Cyprus, as established by its tax
residency certificates for 2005, 2014 and 2015, and its income tax return for 2007. In the
event that the Tribunal did not accept that the fact that CEAC had its registered office in
Cyprus meant that it had its “seat” there, CEAC maintained that its tax residency in Cyprus

was sufficient to establish that it had its “seat” there.

MONTENEGRO’S POSITION BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL

Montenegro’s position before the Tribunal is described in similar detail in paras. 97-142 of
the Award; again, the Committee will not repeat that detail but briefly summarize

Montenegro’s arguments.

Montenegro maintained that CEAC bore the burden of establishing the meaning of the term
“seat” under the BIT and proving that it had a “seat”, within that meaning, in Cyprus.
According to Montenegro, CEAC had failed to discharge that burden. Montenegro’s
principal argument was that the term “seat” in the BIT had to be given an autonomous
meaning derived from international law. For Montenegro, that meaning had to be equated
to the concept of “real seat’. Otherwise the requirement in Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT that

a legal entity must have its “‘seat” in the territory of the contracting party, as well as being

12

46.

47.

48.

incorporated under the laws of that party, would be rendered superfluous. Montenegro
further argued that the principle of reciprocity required that the “seat” test needed to fulfil
its function in an even manner with respect to both Contracting Parties, which meant that
the test had to be based upon identical criteria; the essential reciprocity of the BIT would
be frustrated if a Cypriot holding company was treated as an investor but a Montenegrin

one was not.!®

In the alternative, Montenegro argued that, even under Cypriot law, the term “seat” could
not be equated to “registered office”. It also argued that CEAC did not, in fact, have a
registered office in Cyprus. Montenegro rejected the argument that the certificates issued
by the Registrar of Companies were conclusive evidence that CEAC had a registered office
at Dimosthenous 4. It maintained that the reference to Dimosthenous 4 as the registered
office of CEAC in the certificates of registration was by no means conclusive, because the
Registrar of Companies issued such certificates on the basis of the filings by companies

and made no attempt at independent verification of the existence of a registered office.

Montenegro maintained that, under Cypriot law, a registered office had to perform certain
functions. In particular, Montenegro argued that Cypriot law required that the registered
office consist of physical premises and not a mere vacant plot of land, that the company
have some right in respect of those premises, that the premises be accessible to the public
for at least two hours a day for inspection of various official documents pertaining to the
company, that service of documents on the company could be effected at the premises and
that the company’s name be clearly displayed outside the premises. Montenegro adduced
evidence which it maintained demonstrated that the building at Dimosthenous 4 met none
of those requirements, that it appeared to be an empty building with no indication of any

connection with CEAC and that attempts to deliver documents there had been unsuccessful.

THE AWARD

The Tribunal began by noting that it was for the Tribunal to determine whether the

requirements for jurisdiction were satisfied, that this analysis had to be conducted under

8 Award, paras. 98-114.

international law!” and that the conditions necessary for the establishment of jurisdiction

“must be fulfilled at the moment when the Parties’ consent to arbitration is perfected, i.e.,

at the moment when the Request for Arbitration is filed (11 March 2014)”.7°

49. The Tribunal went on to summarize its findings in a passage which has been the subject of
so much debate between the Parties in the annulment proceedings that it is worth quoting

in full. The Tribunal stated:

For the purposes of the present analysis, the Tribunal does not
consider it necessary to determine the precise meaning of the term
“seat” as employed in Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT. That is because the
evidence in the record does not support a finding that CEAC had a
registered office in Cyprus at the relevant time, nor a conclusion
that it was managed and controlled from Cyprus. Equally, the
Tribunal finds that the term “seat” cannot be equated to tax
residency. As these are the only competing interpretations of the
term “seat” put forward by the Parties, the Tribunal has come to
the conclusion that CEAC did not have a “seat” in Cyprus at the
time the Request for Arbitration was filed. Consequently, CEAC is
not an “investor” within the meaning of the Treaty, and the Tribunal
lacks jurisdiction to hear this case.”!

The Tribunal elaborated on this summary finding in the following three sections of the

Award.

50. First, in paras. 150-201, it considered whether CEAC had a registered office in Cyprus on
11 March 2014. It noted CEAC’s argument, supported by the First Markides Opinion, that
a certificate of registered office was conclusive proof, as a matter of Cypriot law, that a
company had a registered office in Cyprus. The Tribunal had “no difficulty in accepting
that, as a general matter, a certificate of registered office will indicate that a company
indeed has a registered office at the address specified therein”.2?_ However, it rejected

CEAC’s argument that the certificate was conclusive proof. Referring to the award of the

9 Award, para. 145.
2 Award, para. 146.
2! Award, para. 148 (cross-references omitted).
2 Award, para. 152.

51.

52.

tribunal in Flutie?’ and the decision of the ad hoc Committee in Soufraki,”* the Tribunal
held that, as a matter of international law it was not bound by a certificate issued by a
domestic authority but was entitled, in certain circumstances, to go behind that certificate

and investigate the facts for itself.

The Tribunal also held that, “even under Cypriot law, certificates of registered offices are
not conclusive evidence that a registered office exists”.?° It noted that the Registrar who
issued the certificate “does not carry out any official and independent verification as to
whether the declaration made by the company concerning the registered office corresponds
with reality”.”° On that point, it preferred the expert evidence of Mr Ioannides to that of

Mr Markides.’

The Tribunal noted that Mr Ioannides had explained that the law of Cyprus imposed certain

requirements that a registered office should fulfil, specifically:
qd) it had to consist of physical premises; a vacant plot would not do;
(2) the company had to have some right to use the property;

(3) the premises had to be accessible to the public (for at least two hours on each
business day) for inspection of the various books and registers and for service of

documents and notices upon the company;

(4) the books and registers that a company was required by law to maintain in its

registered office had actually to be held there; and

(5) the company’s name had to be painted or affixed on the outside of the office in a

conspicuous position in letters easily legible.”*

2 Award, para. 156, citing Flutie case,1904 IX R.LA.A. 151-152.

2 Award, paras. 157-158, citing Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/07),
Decision on Annulment, 5 June 2007 (“Soufraki”), paras. 76 and 78.

25 Award, para. 160.

26 Award, para. 166.

27 Award, para. 168.

28 Award, para. 171.

53. The Tribunal accepted that these requirements were applicable under the law of Cyprus
and that, as Mr Ioannides put it, if an address did not comply with them, it did not qualify
as a registered office.*? The Tribunal examined the evidence regarding the premises at

Dimosthenous 4 and concluded that:

... Claimant has not proven, with evidence, that the building at
Dimosthenous 4, Nicosia, Cyprus is accessible to the public for
purposes of inspecting the company’s registers, that CEAC is
amenable to service at that address, that the company’s records are
kept there or that the address bears a plate with CEAC’s name.*°

It continued:

Based on these considerations, the Tribunal can only conclude that,
for purposes of its jurisdictional analysis, CEAC does not have a
registered office at Dimosthenous 4, Nicosia, Cyprus. Considering
that Claimant has not presented arguments or evidence indicating
that a different address in Cyprus could ostensibly serve this
purpose, the Tribunal concludes that CEAC did not have a
registered office in Cyprus at the time the Request for Arbitration
was filed.*!

54. Secondly, in paras. 202-208, the Tribunal considered, “out of an abundance of caution’,
whether the evidence in the record supported a conclusion that CEAC was managed and
controlled from Cyprus at the relevant time.*? Noting that CEAC’s status as a holding
company was contested, the Tribunal found that, even if it were accepted to be such, the
evidence attesting to its management and control was “very poor”.*> In particular, the
Tribunal observed that “there are no documents in the record attesting to CEAC’s

management and control at the relevant time: 11 March 2014”.*#

55. Finally, in paras. 209-211, the Tribunal considered CEAC’s alternative argument that

CEAC had a seat in Cyprus on account of its tax residency in Cyprus. The Tribunal rejected

2 Award, paras. 171 and 176.
3 Award, para. 199.
3! Award, para. 200.
* Award, para. 202.
33 Award, para. 204.
Award, para. 207.

56.

57.

58.

59.

this argument on the ground that CEAC had put forward no convincing evidence that tax
residency could be equated to “seat” as a matter of Cypriot law and that, on the contrary,
the evidence of its own expert, Mr Markides, was that it could not be used to determine the

meaning of “seat” under BIT.*>

The Tribunal therefore concluded that CEAC was not an investor under the BIT and that

the Tribunal accordingly lacked jurisdiction.**

That decision was taken by a majority. Professor Park wrote a vigorous dissent, criticising

the approach taken by the majority. According to Professor Park:

Apart from tax residency, the Parties advanced three test of “seat”

for consideration. One looks to a relatively deep level of economic

penetration implicating management and control in Cyprus. The

second imposes multiple criteria in determining registered office,

and presupposes that an office ceases to be registered in the event

of defective compliance with corporate formalities. The final test

rests on the registered office in the plain meaning of that terms [sic]:

an office that is registered.*”
Professor Park considered that there was no international law definition of “seat” and thus
rejected the first of the three tests which he identified.*® The second he considered to be
unsupported in either domestic or international law and commented that “adoption of that
standard would require arbitrators to assume a policy-making mission in excess of their

authority.*? Only the third test had any merit in his eyes.*°

Professor Park was also critical of the majority for having purported to apply CEAC’s test
of “seat” and finding it was not satisfied when he considered that, in reality, the majority

had applied a test advanced by the Respondent.*!

38 Award, para. 210, quoting the Second Markides Opinion.
8 Award, para. 212.
57 Dissent, para. 19.

38 Dissent, para. 20.

% Dissent, para. 21.

40 Dissent, para, 22.

4! Dissent, paras. 1-2 and 10-11.

60.

61.

62.

63.

GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT

As noted in para. 6, above, CEAC argues that the award should be annulled on the grounds
that the decision that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction was a manifest excess of power
(ICSID Convention, Article 52(1)(b)), that the Tribunal was guilty of a serious departure
from a fundamental rule of procedure (ICSID Convention, Article 52(1)(d)) and that the
Award failed to state the reasons on which it was based (ICSID Convention, Article
52(1)(e)). However, CEAC made a total of eleven separate criticisms of the Tribunal and
the Award, in respect of several of which it maintained that more than one of the three

grounds for annulment was implicated.

CEAC’s PosITION

In the hearings before the Committee, CEAC set out its challenge to the Award under the

following headings.*

(1) The Tribunal failed to determine the meaning of the term “seat” in Article
1(3)(b) of the BIT

By failing to determine the precise — or, according to CEAC, any — meaning of the term

“seat in Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT, the Tribunal failed to answer the central question it had

posed and to which the relevant stage of the proceedings had been dedicated. Consequently,

the Award was not based on international law, and the Tribunal had failed to identify and

apply the proper law. The result was a manifest excess of power.*? There was also a failure

to state the reasons on which the Award was based, since the Tribunal failed to deal with

all the questions put to it.

(2) The Tribunal considered the facts before the legal tests, thereby prejudging the
outcome of its legal analysis

CEAC maintains that, instead of following the proper course of determining the legal tests
to be applied and then considering whether the facts did or did not show those tests to have

been met, the Tribunal started by considering the facts and thereby prejudged the outcome,

*2 CEAC Slides, 14-19.
+3 Application, paras. 44-46; CEAC Memorial, para. 17.1; CEAC Reply, paras. 87-99.

18

64.

65.

thus committing a manifest excess of power and producing an Award which failed

adequately to state the reasons on which it was based.

(3) The Tribunal failed to consider the definition of “registered office” advanced by
CEAC

According to CEAC, the Tribunal, having decided to proceed not by setting out what it
considered the legal test of “seat” under the proper law but by enquiring whether CEAC
satisfied any of the tests put forward by the Parties, misapplied the test on which CEAC
principally relied. CEAC maintains that its test was that the BIT required a renvoi to
Cypriot law and that, according to that law, a company had its seat in Cyprus if it had been
incorporated there, had given the Registrar of Companies the necessary notification of a
registered office address and received from the Registrar a certificate of registration. In
CEAC’s view, the Tribunal fell into error by substituting its own test of what constituted a
registered office based upon the expert evidence of Mr Ioannides. In doing so, the Tribunal
confused the question “what is a registered office?” with the question “what is a registered
office required to do?”. As a result, it committed a manifest excess of power, was guilty of
a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure and failed to state the reasons on

which the Award was based.*°

(4) The “minimum requirements” for a registered office proposed by Mr Ioannides
were not pleaded by Montenegro as a test for “seat” and did not form part of the
legal framework in the case

CEAC contends that it was taken by surprise by the way in which the Tribunal employed

the expert evidence of Mr Ioannides to arrive at a definition of what constituted a registered

office under Cypriot law. According to CEAC, Montenegro had not pleaded the
requirements identified by Mr Ioannides as part of its own test for “seat” under the BIT
and CEAC had not cross-examined Mr Ioannides on this part of his report because it had

no reason to believe that it might be taken as a definitive part of the test for “seat”. As a

result, the Tribunal committed a manifest excess of power, was guilty of a serious departure

+ Application, paras. 46 and 75-76; CEAC Reply, paras. 145 and 159.
+ Application, paras. 49, 54 and 76; CEAC Memorial, paras. 30-32 and 39; CEAC Reply, paras. 146, 161, 164-168
and 178-179.

19

66.

67.

68.

from a fundamental rule of procedure and failed to state the reasons on which the Award

was based.*®

(5) The Tribunal failed to give any, or any proper, weight to the evidence of Mr
Markides

According to CEAC, the Tribunal, in contrast to its reliance on the evidence of Mr

Toannides, failed to give any, or any proper, weight to the evidence of CEAC’s expert on

the law of Cyprus, Mr Markides, notwithstanding that he was a former Attorney-General

of Cyprus. As a result, the Tribunal committed a manifest excess of power, was guilty of a

serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure and failed to state the reasons on

which the Award was based.‘7

(6) By adopting the “minimum requirements” identified by Mr Ioannides as a legal
test which found no basis in international or domestic law, the Tribunal assumed
a policy-making mission beyond its jurisdiction
CEAC maintains that the test adopted by the Tribunal — namely that only an office which
complied with the “minimum requirements” identified by Mr Ioannides was a “registered
office” within the meaning of Cypriot law — had no legal basis and was a serious
misapplication of the law. The Tribunal adopted a policy-making mission, seeking to lay
down what it thought the requirements for a “seat” ought to be, rather than considering
what those requirements were under the proper law. It therefore manifestly exceeded its

powers.*®

(7) The Tribunal ignored CEAC’s evidence regarding management and control

In considering the evidence of whether CEAC satisfied the test of being subject to
management and control from Cyprus, the Tribunal, according to CEAC, ignored the
evidence which CEAC had submitted on this point. In particular, CEAC complains that the
Tribunal disregarded the evidence of Mr Chrysanthou, whose witness statement had been

submitted in the Article 41(5) stage and who testified that the office of his law firm in

“6 Application, paras, 50-51, 62-63 and 81; CEAC Memorial, para. 23; CEAC Reply, paras. 102-121, 127-132, 147
and 180-183.

+7 Application, para. 69; CEAC Reply, paras. 31-36, 97, 137, 165-166 and 178.
+8 Application, paras, 40.2 and 52-54; CEAC Memorial, para. 17.2; CEAC Reply, para. 36.

20

Cyprus was the operating centre of the company and that documents were regularly served
on CEAC through the premises at Dimosthenous 4, from which correspondence was
collected daily. As a result, the Tribunal committed a manifest excess of power, was guilty
of a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure and failed to state the reasons

on which the Award was based.*?

(8) The Tribunal failed properly to consider and give content to Montenegro’s
“autonomous definition” of “seat” under international law
69. CEAC also complains that the Tribunal failed to give content to Montenegro’s definition
of “seat” under the BIT. Montenegro had argued that “seat” had to be given an autonomous
definition under international law. The result is that the Award failed to state the reasons

on which it was based.*°

(9) The Tribunal’s treatment of “tax residency” was incompatible with its approach

to the “autonomous definition”
70. CEAC maintains that the Tribunal’s treatment of its alternative test based upon CEAC’s
“tax residency” in Cyprus was incompatible with its approach to Montenegro’s
“autonomous definition”, with the result that the Award failed to state the reasons on which

it was based.*!

10) The Tribunal entirely failed to consider Montenegro’s “real seat” theor
y zo y

71. This ground of challenge, which clearly overlaps with ground (8) above, is said to involve
a manifest excess of power and a failure to state the reasons on which the Award was

based.

*® Application, paras. 65-68, 74 and 83-84; CEAC Memorial, paras. 26 and 38; CEAC Reply, paras. 51, 133-136, 138,
148, 157-160, 169-175 and 184-185.

5° CEAC Reply, paras. 23.2, 39-46, 90.3, 148 and 162.

5! CEAC Reply, paras. 23.3., 47-49 and 149-150.

5 CEAC Reply, paras. 23.5, 54-60, 90.2, 96, 141, 153 and 163.

    

21

72.

73.

74.

75.

(11) The evaluation of CEAC’s evidence was unnecessarily arbitrary and
frivolous

CEAC criticises the Tribunal’s approach to CEAC’s evidence in light of the failure to

consider and give effect to the “autonomous definition” and “real seat” theory advanced

by Montenegro, with the result that the Award failed to state the reasons on which it was

based.

MONTENEGRO’S POSITION

Montenegro raised a procedural objection that CEAC had not properly deployed its case
either in its Application (which was 21 pages long) or its Memorial (which occupied only
nine pages) but had waited to develop its case until it filed its Reply (67 pages) and had
then further refined that case at the hearings.*+ According to Montenegro, this approach
placed Montenegro at a disadvantage and meant that the pleading schedule was not

properly respected.

On substance, Montenegro denied that the Tribunal had committed any of the errors
suggested by CEAC and maintained that, even if the Tribunal had erred, it had not

committed an annullable error.*°

Montenegro maintained that there had been no manifest excess of power.*° The Tribunal
had been entitled to avoid the question of the precise meaning of “seat” in Article 1(3)(b)
of the BIT and adopt an approach based on “judicial economy”.*” CEAC had argued that
the question whether CEAC had its seat in Cyprus had to be decided under Cypriot law
and that was what the Tribunal had done, since the Tribunal had applied Cypriot law,
having carefully compared the expert evidence of Mr Markides and Mr Ioannides and

preferred the latter. According to Montenegro, the Tribunal had been correct in its

53 CEAC Reply, paras. 23.4, 46, 50-53, 90.4, 174 and 188.
5 See Montenegro Rejoinder, paras. 2-16.

55 Montenegro Counter-Memorial, paras. 1-13.

56 Montenegro Counter-Memorial, paras. 39-81.
5? Montenegro Rejoinder, paras. 36-38; Tr. Day 1, 207:18-208:6.

22

76.

78.

79.

80.

58

conclusion but, even if it had not been, it would have misapplied the proper law, rather than

failed to apply it at all and had not therefore committed an annullable error.**

According to Montenegro, the Parties had both been aware that the Tribunal intended to
examine the evidence concerning whether CEAC had its seat in Cyprus at the hearings.*?
The burden of proof had been on CEAC and if it had failed to bring forward evidence
regarding its links with Cyprus as of the date of filing its Request for Arbitration, then it
had only itself to blame. There had been no serious departure from a fundamental rule
of procedure and the Award set out in full its reasoning; the fact that CEAC found that

reasoning unconvincing was not a ground for annulment.®!

THE COMMITTEE’S DECISION

The Committee is grateful to both Parties and their representatives for their very full

argument on all of the points in contention.

THE LEGAL STANDARD TO BE APPLIED ON AN APPLICATION FOR ANNULMENT

Before analysing the grounds on which annulment is sought in the present case, the
Committee will briefly consider the legal standards which it is required to apply.

(1) Nature of Annulment and the Powers of an Ad Hoc Committee

The text of Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention and the decisions of past ad hoc
Committees establish that there are four general principles regarding the nature of
annulment proceedings and the power of an ad hoc Committee which are pertinent to the

present case.
First, as the ad hoc Committee in MTD Equity and MTD Chile v. Republic of Chile put it:

Under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention, an annulment
proceeding is not an appeal, still less a retrial; it is a form of review

Counter-! ial, section IV; joi paras. 113-116.

5° Montenegro Rejoinder, paras. 73-75; see also Tr. Day 1, 152:1-4 (quoting Professor Brigitte Stern).

© Montenegro Counter-Memorial, para. 123; Montenegro Rejoinder, para. 41.

©! Montenegro Counter-Memorial, section V; Montenegro Rejoinder, paras. 195-200.

23

on specified and limited grounds which take as their premise the
record before the Tribunal.

81. The ad hoc Committee in Soufraki was similarly insistent on this point, commenting that:

. annulment review, although obviously important, is a limited
exercise, and does not provide for an appeal of the initial award. In
other words, ... “an ad hoc committee does not have the jurisdiction
to review the merits of the original award in any way. The annulment
system is designed to safeguard the integrity, not the outcome, of
ICSID arbitration proceedings.” °

The Soufraki Committee went on to analyse this role of an ad hoc Committee as the

safeguard of the integrity of the proceedings in greater detail:

In the view of the ad hoc Committee, the object and purpose of an
ICSID annulment proceeding may be described as the control of the
fundamental integrity of the ICSID arbitral process in all its facets.
An ad hoc committee is empowered to verify (i) the integrity of the
tribunal — its proper constitution (Article 52(1)(a)) and the absence
of corruption on the part of any member thereof (Article 52(1)(c));
(ii) the integrity of the procedure — which means firstly that the
tribunal must respect the boundaries fixed by the ICSID Convention
and the Parties’ consent, and not manifestly exceed the powers
granted to it as far as its jurisdiction, the applicable law and the
questions raised are concerned (Article 52(1)(b)), and secondly,
that it should not commit a serious departure from a fundamental
rule of procedure (Article 52(1)(d)); and (iii) the integrity of the
award — meaning that the reasoning presented in the award should
be coherent and not contradictory, so as to be understandable by
the Parties and must reasonably support the solution adopted by the
tribunal (Article 52(1)(e)). Integrity of the dispute settlement
mechanism, integrity of the process of dispute settlement and
integrity of solution of the dispute are the basic interrelated goals
projected in the ICSID annulment mechanism.

82. Secondly, as the Soufraki Committee also explained:

Article 52 of the ICSID Convention must be read in accordance with
the principles of treaty interpretation forming part of general
international law, which principles insist on neither restrictive nor

© MTD Equity and MTD Chile v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/1/07), Decision on Annulment, 21 March
2007 (“MTD”), para. 31.

© Soufraki, para. 20.
& Soufraki, para. 23.

24

extensive interpretation, but rather on interpretation in accordance

with the object and purpose of the treaty.
The reference to principles of treaty interpretation is to the principles laid down in
Articles 31 to 33 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1969. Although the
Vienna Convention is not, as such applicable to the ICSID Convention, which predates
it, the provisions of the Vienna Convention on treaty interpretation are generally

regarded as declaratory of customary international law.

83. Thirdly, it is clear from the text of Article 52 that an award may be annulled only on one
or more of the five grounds set out in Article 52. An ad hoc Committee is not entitled to
range beyond those five grounds. Its function is not to consider whether it agrees with the
reasoning or the conclusions of the tribunal but only to determine whether one or more of

the five grounds has been made out.

84. Lastly, the language of Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention, which states that an ad hoc
Committee “shall have the authority to annul the award or any part thereof on any of the
grounds set forth in paragraph (1)” indicates that, even where an ad hoc Committee
determines that one of the grounds for annulment is made out, the Committee has a
discretion whether to annul the award.© That discretion is by no means unlimited and must
take account of all relevant circumstances, including the gravity of the circumstances which
constitute the ground for annulment and whether they had — or could have had — a
material effect upon the outcome of the case, as well as the importance of the finality of

the award and the overall question of fairness to both Parties.

© Soufraki, para. 21.

© See Amco v. Indonesia (ICSID Case No. ARB/8 1/1), Decision on Annulment, 3 December 1992 (“AMCO IT”), para.
1.20; Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of Guinea (ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4), Decision
on Annulment, 22 December 1989 (“MINE”), paras. 4.09-4.10; Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi
Universal v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment, 3 July 2002 (“Vivendi I”),
para. 66. See also Schreuer and Others, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, (Cambridge, 2" ed., 2009)
(“Schreuer”), Article 52, paras. 466-485.

25

85.

86.

87.

These principles have been repeated by numerous other ad hoc Committees © and can be

regarded as well established.

(2) ICSID Convention, Article 52(1)(b): Manifest Excess of Power

Article 52(1)(b) provides that an ad hoc Committee may annul an award on the ground that
“the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers”. The paragraph lays down two
requirements, both of which must be met if an Award is to be annulled on this ground.
First, the tribunal must have exceeded its powers and, secondly, that excess of power must
be “manifest”. The most obvious instance of an excess of power by a tribunal is the decision
of an issue which falls outside the jurisdiction of the tribunal under the ICSID Convention
or the relevant BIT (or other instrument conferring jurisdiction). However, decisions of ad
hoc Committees in other cases have made clear that it is also an excess of power for a

tribunal to fail to apply the law applicable to the case or to the particular issue in the case.

The requirement that the excess of powers be “manifest” refers to how readily apparent the
excess is, rather than to its gravity. In the words of one leading commentary on the ICSID

Convention:

In accordance with its dictionary meaning, “manifest” may mean
“plain”, “clear”, “obvious”, “evident” and easily understood or
recognized by the mind. Therefore, the manifest nature of an excess
of powers is not necessarily an indication of its gravity. Rather, it
relates to the ease with which it is perceived. ... An excess of powers
is manifest if it can be discerned with little effort and without deeper
analysis.

 

This view has been endorsed in several decisions of ad hoc Committees. Thus, in
Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Egypt, the Committee stated that:
The excess of power must be self-evident rather than the product of

elaborate interpretation one way or the other. When the latter
happens, the excess of power is no longer manifest.”

© See, e.g., EDF International SA v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/23), Decision on Annulment, 5
February 2016 (“EDF”), paras. 61-73; Teco Guatemala Holdings v. Republic of Guatemala (ICSID Case No.
ARB/10/23), Decision on Annulment, 5 April 2016 (“Teco”), para. 73.

8 Schreuer, Article 52, para. 135.
Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision on Annulment, 5 February 2002 (“Wena”), para.

25.

26

Similarly, the Committee in CDC Group v. Seychelles stated:

As interpreted by various ad hoc committees, the term “manifest”
means clear or “self-evident”. Thus, even if a tribunal exceeds its
powers, the excess must be plain on its face for annulment to be an
available remedy. Any excess apparent in a tribunal’s conduct, if
susceptible of argument “one way or the other” is not manifest. As
one commentator has put it, “if the issue is debatable or requires
examination of the materials on which the tribunal’s decision is
based, the tribunal’s determination is conclusive.”

88. The Committee notes, however, the observation of the EDF Committee that:

While ... an excess of powers will be manifest only if it can readily
be discerned, ... this does not mean that the excess must, as it were,
leap out of the page on a first reading of the Award. The reasoning
in a case may be so complex that a degree of inquiry and analysis is
required before it is clear precisely what the tribunal has decided.
In such a case, the need for such inquiry and analysis will not
prevent an excess of powers from being “manifest”.”!

 

 

89. Nevertheless, it is important to understand the limits of the Committee’s role in relation to
an application for annulment for manifest excess of powers. As the Teco Committee

explained:

. in determining whether a tribunal has committed a manifest
excess of powers, an annulment committee is not empowered to
verify whether a tribunal’s jurisdictional analysis or a tribunal’s
application of the law was correct, but only whether it was tenable
as a matter of law. Even if a committee might have a different view
on a debatable issue, it is simply not within its powers to correct a
tribunal’s interpretation of the law or assessment of the facts.” 7

CDC Group v. Republic of the Seychelles (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14), Decision on Annulment, 29 June 2005
(“CDC’), para. 41.

7! EDF, para. 193.

® Teco, para. 78; see also Lucchetti v. Peru (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25), Decision on Annulment, 23 December
2010, para. 112, and Rumeli v. Kazakhstan (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/16), Decision on Annulment, 25 March 2010,
para. 96.

27

90.

91.

92.

93.

73 EDF, para. 199, discus

(3) ICSID Convention, Article 52(1)(d): Serious Departure from a Fundamental
Rule of Procedure

Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention provides that an ad hoc Committee may annul

an award on the ground that “there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule

of procedure”. It is clear from this language that not every procedural default can provide

grounds for annulment. A party seeking to annul an award under this provision must show

(a) that the rule of procedure from which the tribunal departed was of fundamental

importance;”* and (b) that the departure was serious.

With regard to the first requirement, the Committee does not consider it necessary or
appropriate to set out a list of those procedural rules which fall into the category of
“fundamental” rules of procedure but it has no doubt that the rules of natural justice,
including the rule that a tribunal must afford both Parties an equal opportunity to be heard,

fall into that category.

On the second requirement, the Committee agrees with the observation of the MINE

Committee that:

In order to constitute a ground for annulment the departure from a
“fundamental rule of procedure” must be serious. The Committee
considers that this establishes both quantitative and qualitative
criteria: the departure must be substantial and must be such as to
deprive a party of the benefit or protection which the rule was
intended to provide.”

It also shares the view of the Committee in Pey Casado that:

The applicant is not required to show that the result would have
been different, that it would have won the case, if the rule had been
respected. The Committee notes in fact that in Wena, the committee
stated that the applicant must demonstrate “the impact that the issue

 

ng, inter alia, a difference between the Spanish text of the Convention and the English and

French texts and concluding that, in accordance with the principle stated in Article 33 of the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties, 1969, the meaning which best reconciles the three authentic texts of the ICSID Convention is that
only a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure affords grounds for annulment. See also MINE, paras.
5.05 to 5.06.

74 MINE, para. 5.05.

28

may have had on the award”. The Committee agrees that this is
precisely how the seriousness of the departure must be analysed.”
The Committee is, therefore, not persuaded by the suggestion, in Wena that “the violation
. must have caused the Tribunal to reach a result substantially different from what it
would have awarded had [the relevant procedural] rule been observed”.”° It shares the view

of the Teco Committee that:

Requiring an applicant to show that it would have won the case or
that the result of the case would have been different if the rule of
procedure had been respected is a highly speculative exercise. An
annulment committee cannot determine with any degree of certainty
whether any of these results would have occurred without placing
itself in the shoes of a tribunal, something which it is not within its
powers to do. What a committee can determine however is whether
the tribunal’s compliance with a rule of procedure could potentially
have affected the award.”

(4) ICSID Convention, Article 52(1)(e): Failure to State Reasons

94, The provision of Article 52(1)(e) that an award may be annulled if it “fails to state the
reasons on which it is based” is closely tied to the provision of Article 48(3), which requires
that “the award shall deal with every question submitted to the Tribunal, and shall state the

reasons upon which it is based”.

95. The requirement to state reasons is an important one but it is equally important that an ad
hoc Committee is not drawn into using Article 52(1)(e) as a means for conducting an
appeal. The point was very clearly made by the Vivendi 1 Committee in the following

passage:

A greater source of concern is perhaps the ground of “failure to
state reasons”, which is not qualified by any such phrase as
“manifestly” or “serious”.

However, it is well accepted both in the cases and the literature that
Article 52(1)(e) concerns a failure to state any reasons with respect

8 Victor Pey Casado v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2), Decision on Annulment, 18 December 2012,
para. 78, citing Wena, para. 61.

% Wena, para. 58.
” Teco, para. 85.

29

to all or part of an award, not the failure to state correct or
convincing reasons. It bears repeating that an ad hoc committee is
not a court of appeal. Provided that the reasons given by a tribunal
can be followed and relate to the issues that were before the
tribunal, their correctness is beside the point in terms of Article
52(1)(e). Moreover, reasons may be stated succinctly or at length,
and different legal traditions differ in their modes of expressing
reasons. Tribunals must be allowed a degree of discretion as to the
way in which they express their reasoning.

In the Committee’s view, annulment under Article 52(1)(e) should
only occur in a clear case. This entails two conditions: first, the
failure to state reasons must leave the decision on a particular point
essentially lacking in any expressed rationale; and second, that
point must itself be necessary to the tribunal’s decision. It is
frequently said that contradictory reasons cancel each other out,
and indeed, if reasons are genuinely contradictory so they might.
However, tribunals must often struggle to balance conflicting
considerations, and an ad hoc committee should be careful not to
discern contradiction when what is actually expressed in a
tribunal’s reasons could more truly be said to be but a reflection of
such conflicting considerations.”®

 

96. The Wena Committee took a similar view:

The ground for annulment of Article 52(1)(e) does not allow any
review of the challenged award which would lead the ad hoc
committee to reconsider whether the reasons underlying the
tribunal’s decisions were appropriate or not, convincing or not. As
stated by the ad hoc committee in MINE, this ground for annulment
refers to a “minimum requirement” only. This requirement is based
on the tribunal’s duty to identify, and to let the parties know, the
factual and legal premises leading the tribunal to its decision. If
such a sequence of reasons has been given by the tribunal, there is
no room left for a request for annulment under Article 52(1)(e). [...]

Neither Article 48(3) nor Article 52(1)(e) specify the manner in
which the Tribunal’s reasons are to be stated. The object of both
provisions is to ensure that the parties will be able to understand the
tribunal’s reasoning. This goal does not require that each reason be
stated expressly. The tribunal’s reasons may be implicit in the
consideration and conclusions contained in the award, provided

8 Vivendi I, paras. 64-65.

30

97.

98.

because it finds the reasoning unconvincing”.

they can be reasonably inferred from the terms used in the
decision.”

The Committee therefore agrees with the observation of the EDF Committee that “Article
52(1)(e) empowers a Committee to annul an award if there has been a failure to state the

reasons on which the award is based; it does not entitle a Committee to annul an award

>» 80

One final consideration, of particular relevance in the present case, is that, in order to give
a fully reasoned award, a tribunal is required to answer every “question” put to it. It is not,
however, required to deal explicitly with every detail of every argument advanced by the
Parties or to refer to every authority which they invoke. The Committee agrees with the

analysis of the Enron Committee:

. @ tribunal has a duty to deal with each of the questions
(“pretensions”) submitted to it, but it is not required to comment on
all arguments of the parties in relation to each of those questions.
Similarly, the Committee considers that the tribunal is required only
to give reasons for its decision in respect of each of the questions.
This requires the tribunal to state its pertinent findings of fact, its
pertinent findings as to the applicable legal principles, and its
conclusions in respect of the application of the law to the facts. If
the tribunal has done this, the award will not be annulled on the
basis that the tribunal could have given more detailed reasons and
analysis for its findings of fact or law, or that the tribunal did not
expressly state its evaluation in respect of each individual item of
evidence or each individual legal authority or legal provision relied
on by the parties, or did not expressly state a view on every single
legal and factual issue raised by the parties in the course of the
proceedings. The tribunal is required to state reasons for its
decision, but not necessarily reasons for its reasons.*!

9 Wena, paras. 79 and 81.
* EDF, para. 195; see also Teco, para. 90.

8! Enron Creditors Recovery Corp. and Ponderosa Assets LP v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3),

Decision on Annulment, 30 July 2010 (“Enron”), para. 222.

31

99.

100.

GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT IN THE PRESENT CASE TAKEN AS A WHOLE

The Committee will now turn to the application of the standards set out in the preceding
section to the case presented by CEAC. Each of the grounds for annulment advanced by
CEAC is, of course, in principle freestanding in the sense that CEAC does not have to
succeed in respect of one ground in order to succeed on another. Nevertheless, it is apparent
that there is a very close relationship between the different grounds summarized in paras.
60-72, above and that, indeed, there is a considerable overlap. The Committee considers,
therefore, that it is appropriate to begin by looking at CEAC’s criticisms of the Award as a

whole.

Those criticisms centre around the Tribunal’s decision not to determine the “precise”
meaning of “seat” in the BIT but to decide the case on the basis that, on any of the tests put
forward by the Parties, CEAC did not have a “seat” in Cyprus and thus did not qualify as
an investor within the meaning of Article 1(3)(b) of the BIT. CEAC sees a sequence of

errors — substantive and procedural — in this approach:

(a) the Tribunal failed to answer the principal question that was before it and, in
doing so, failed to apply international law, which it had already stated was the

applicable law for determining its jurisdiction;

(b) instead, the Tribunal purported to decide the issue by reference to the law of
Cyprus but got that law wrong because it confused questions of evidence with
questions of law and failed to appreciate that whether CEAC had a registered
office was entirely different from whether its office performed the functions

which Cypriot law required of a registered office;

(c) the Tribunal based its decision on a part of the expert report of Mr Ioannides
which did not correctly represent the law of Cyprus and had not been put
forward by Montenegro (whose witness Mr Ioannides was) for the purpose for

which the Tribunal used it;

(d) the Tribunal failed to give equal treatment to the evidence of Mr Markides

(CEAC’s expert); and

32

101.

102.

103.

104.

(e) the Tribunal ignored, or grossly underestimated, evidence which contradicted

its findings.
The Committee is not persuaded by this line of argument.

First, the issue before the Tribunal was not — as CEAC tried to represent it before the
Committee — what was the meaning of “seat” in the BIT, but whether, at the relevant date,
CEAC had a “seat” in Cyprus. That was the only question which the Tribunal had to answer
in the proceedings on what it had identified as a preliminary issue. In answering it, the
Tribunal was perfectly entitled to adopt the “judicial economy” approach of concluding
that, if CEAC failed to show that it possessed a seat in Cyprus under any of the tests
advanced by the Parties, then the answer to that question was in the negative and no further
inquiry was necessary; the Tribunal did not have to begin by determining the meaning of

“seat” in the BIT and then deciding whether CEAC had such a seat.

There is no force in CEAC’s argument that, by adopting this approach, the Tribunal failed
to apply international law as the applicable law. The Tribunal was faced with three possible

tests of “seat” put forward by the Parties:

(a) CEAC’s principal argument, that neither the BIT nor international law
contained any definition of “seat” and therefore a renvoi to Cypriot law was

required;

(b) Montenegro’s argument that, as a matter of international law, “seat” meant “real
seat”, in the sense of the place from which the company was managed and

controlled; and
(c) CEAC’s alternative argument that “seat” should be equated to tax residency.

None of these arguments was advanced as an end in itself but as a means by which the
Tribunal should conclude that CEAC did or did not have a seat in Cyprus. All three tests
were based on international law, either (as in the case of the second argument) on the
ground that this was the test directly imposed by international law, or (as is explicit in the

case of the first test and implicit in the third) on the ground that international law referred

33

the matter to national law. The Tribunal’s approach of deciding that CEAC had failed to
establish it had a seat in Cyprus under any of these three tests cannot therefore correctly be
characterized as a failure to apply international law. Nor does it involve a failure to state
the reasons for the Award; the chain of reasoning is expressly stated and easily discernible

on the face of the Award.

105. At the hearings before the Committee, CEAC’s counsel argued that, if the Tribunal were
to employ the approach of judicial economy to avoid deciding what the term “seat” in the
BIT meant, then it had to apply the tests put forward by each Party exactly as that Party
had done. He maintained that the Tribunal had failed to do this, because it had not applied
CEAC’s test of “seat” under Cypriot law. CEAC’s argument had been that, under Cypriot
law, a company had its “seat” in Cyprus if it had its registered office there and it had a
registered office there if it held a certificate to that effect from the Registrar of
Companies.*? Instead of applying that test, the Tribunal had taken the requirements
identified by Mr Ioannides and wrongly treated them as conditions which had to be
satisfied if the office shown on the certificate of registration were to qualify as a registered

office.

106. That criticism misunderstands the nature both of the issue before the Tribunal and the
approach of the Tribunal to that issue. CEAC had argued that the Tribunal should apply
the law of Cyprus to determine whether CEAC had its seat there and that, as a matter of
Cypriot law, a company had its seat in Cyprus if it had its registered office in Cyprus. That
was the test that the Tribunal applied. It was not obliged to adopt CEAC’s evidence as to
what constituted a registered office under the law of Cyprus. Its finding that CEAC’s
premises at Dimosthenous 4 did not meet the requirements of Cypriot law and therefore
did not constitute a registered office was neither a failure to apply the proper law nor any

other form of manifest excess of power.

107. Secondly, the Committee sees no confusion, let alone contradiction or annullable error, in

the Tribunal’s treatment of what constituted a registered office under the law of Cyprus.

82 Counsel did accept that the Tribunal would have been entitled to inquire whether there were actual premises at the
address shown on the certificate but maintained that, in other respects, the certificate was conclusive.

34

108.

109.

The Tribunal held that “even under Cypriot law, certificates of registered office are not
conclusive evidence that a registered office exists”.** Counsel for CEAC told the
Committee that CEAC was “not asking you, as a Committee, to disturb the finding they
make in paragraph 160”.** His complaint was that the Tribunal erred in the way it then
treated the evidence of Mr Ioannides as the basis for finding that an office which did not

meet certain requirements was not a registered office.

Counsel for CEAC nevertheless maintained that these minimum requirements had been put
forward only as evidence, not as criteria for determining what constituted a registered
office.** He accepted that this was “a subtle distinction”*®* but contended that it was an

2987

“egregious mistake””’ on the part of the Tribunal to elevate the minimum requirements into

a legal test.

The Committee disagrees. After setting out the different requirements which he considered
a registered office had to fulfil (see para. 52, above), Mr Ioannides testified that “if an
‘address’ does not comply with the above minimum requirements, I do not see how such
address can qualify as the registered office of any company”.** There can be no doubt that
his evidence was that, as a matter of Cypriot law, an office which did not meet the minimum
requirements was not a registered office. That was the Tribunal’s conclusion.*? CEAC
may contend that the Tribunal was wrong to reach that conclusion but the Committee does
not see anything which could constitute an annullable error. The conclusion was supported
by evidence of Cypriot law from an expert whose qualifications have not been challenged
and whom CEAC was able to cross-examine. The way in which the Tribunal arrived at its
conclusion is clear from the Award. The fact that Montenegro may not have attributed to
the evidence of Mr Ioannides the significance which the Tribunal gave it is not important;

Montenegro was relying upon one approach to the concept of “seat” but the Tribunal was

8 Award, para. 160.
“Tr. Day 1, 72:14-16.
8 Tr. Day 1, 74:18-25.

* Tr. Day 1, 93:

 

1-12.

*' Tr. Day 1, 87:4-5.
88 Exhibit R-14, para. 3.9.
* Award, para. 171 et seq.

35

entitled to take that evidence into account when considering a different test of “seat”. The
evidence of Mr Ioannides was clear and CEAC had the chance to challenge it and to

examine its own expert, Mr Markides, on the issues which Mr Ioannides raised.

110. Thirdly, the Committee does not accept that the Tribunal can be faulted — let alone that
there was a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure — in its handling of the
evidence of Mr Markides. It is, of course, a rule of the utmost importance that each party
must be given an equal opportunity to put evidence before a tribunal and that the tribunal
must treat all witnesses equally in the sense of affording them the same opportunity to be
heard. That does not mean that it is required to accord each witness’s evidence the same
weight. Indeed, where two expert witnesses markedly disagree, it is difficult to see how a
tribunal can avoid deciding between them and, in doing so, preferring the evidence of one

to that of the other.

111. In the present case, the Tribunal commented on the evidence given by Mr Markides and
Mr Ioannides that “these two opinions could not be more irreconcilable” and continued
that “in deciding which of the two is preferable, the Tribunal has considered the bases
invoked by the two experts for their positions”.°° It then set out the evidence of both
experts and concluded that “Mr Ioannides’ more nuanced testimony better reflects the
effects of Cypriot law”.°! Whether the Tribunal was right to prefer Mr Ioannides’ evidence
to that of Mr Markides and to reach the conclusion that it did, the Committee considers that
nothing in the Award, or in the record before the Tribunal, could support a conclusion that

its approach to the competing expert evidence amounted to an annullable error.

112. Lastly, the Committee is not persuaded by CEAC’s argument that the Tribunal committed
an annullable error in its treatment of the evidence regarding CEAC’s factual links with
Cyprus. There are two limbs to this argument, both of which concern the Tribunal’s

treatment of the evidence of Mr Chrysanthou.””

° Award, para. 162.
9! Award, para. 168.
° Exhibit R-6.

36

113.

114.

Under the first limb, CEAC contends that the Tribunal ignored Mr Chrysanthou’s evidence
regarding the premises at Dimosthenous 4. According to CEAC, that evidence showed that
correspondence was collected daily from Dimosthenous 4 and taken to the law office of
Mr Chrysanthou at Palais d’Ivoire House, 2" Floor, 12 Them. Dervis Avenue, PO Box
21762, Nicosia, which Mr Chrysanthou describes as the “operating address” of CEAC,”?
that, contrary to Montenegro’s evidence, courier companies knew how to deliver to CEAC
at Dimosthenous 4,4 and that correspondence from Montenegro and its lawyers was
received there.?> In CEAC’s view, that evidence should have led the Tribunal to reach a
different conclusion regarding the status of the premises at Dimosthenous 4 as the

registered office of the company.

Under the second limb, CEAC maintains that the Tribunal’s comment that CEAC had not
presented arguments or evidence indicating that a different address in Cyprus could
possibly serve the purpose of a registered office for CEAC”® flew in the face of Mr
Chrysanthou’s evidence that the premises of his law firm were the operating address of the

company. In particular, CEAC points to the fact that Mr Chrysanthou had testified that:

All board meetings are held in Cyprus at the Operating Address ...
of the Company and all minute books, registers and accounting
records are maintained on behalf of the company in Cyprus by the
Cypriot Secretary of the Company. Procedurally, the directors of
the Company function independently in their fiduciary duties such
as passing resolutions on different issues, executing documents and
so forth. CEAC also maintains a bank account in Cyprus which is
locally administered. The above further demonstrates that CEAC is
effectively managed and controlled from within Cyprus.”

Moreover, CEAC maintains that this evidence pointed to the conclusion that CEAC was
managed and controlled from Cyprus and should not have been ignored by the Tribunal

when the Tribunal considered that question.°*

°3 Exhibit R-6, para. 24.
° Exhibit R-6, para. 19.
°5 Exhibit R-6, para. 17.
°6 Award, para. 200.

°” Exhibit R-6, para. 14.
°8 Award, paras, 203-208.

37

115.

116.

117.

With regard to the first limb of the argument, the Award makes extensive reference to the
evidence of Mr Chrysanthou regarding the premises at Dimosthenous 4. The Tribunal,
however, attached more weight to other evidence before it, in particular to the evidence of
Mr Dracos and the evidence that neither FedEx nor DHL had been able to deliver to that
address and the fact that the “Claimant has not provided a reason why, on nine different
occasions during the last two years, the building was inaccessible for courier deliveries or
for the purpose of inspecting CEAC’s registers”.!°” CEAC’s complaint is, in reality, that
the Tribunal should have accorded greater weight to Mr Chrysanthou’s evidence. Even if
that were so, it is not an annullable error. How much weight is accorded to each item of
evidence is very much a matter for the tribunal to determine; it is not within the powers of

an ad hoc Committee to substitute its assessment of the evidence.

So far as the second limb of the argument is concerned, the Committee accepts that the
Tribunal made almost nothing of Mr Chrysanthou’s witness statement, although it did
quote the passage in which he referred to the operating address of CEAC,'®! and did not
consider that evidence either with regard to a possible alternative address for the registered
office or, when the Tribunal came to consider whether CEAC met the test of “seat”
formulated by Montenegro, in relation to the question whether CEAC was managed and
controlled from Cyprus.'°? That may reflect the fact that Mr Chrysanthou’s witness
statement was filed at the Article 41(5) phase and CEAC made nothing of it in relation to

either of these points in its written or oral pleadings before the Tribunal.

In any event, CEAC’s argument confuses two different issues: whether the operating
address could constitute the relevant office and whether the evidence regarding the
operating address established that CEAC was managed and controlled from Cyprus. With
regard to the first issue, CEAC never contended that its registered office was anywhere
other than Dimosthenous 4, nor did Mr Chrysanthou suggest that. The Tribunal cannot,

therefore, be faulted for its comment that CEAC had adduced neither argument nor

%® Award, paras, 192-195.
100 Award, para. 191.
01 Award, para. 192.
102 Award, paras. 203-208.

38

118.

119.

120.

evidence to suggest that an address other than Dimosthenous 4 could serve the purpose of
its registered office. On the second issue, notwithstanding Mr Chrysanthou’s comment that
all Board meetings were held in Cyprus, the only documentary evidence produced by
CEAC was from 2006-2007; there was nothing at all from the critical date of 11 March
2014 when the arbitration was commenced and counsel for CEAC admitted to the
Committee that there were no Board minutes from that period. !°? Given that Mr
Chrysanthou attended the hearings before the Tribunal as a representative of CEAC and
that CEAC’s counsel had told the Tribunal at the Article 41(5) hearings that CEAC would
be able to produce “hundreds of documents” at the next stage of the proceedings, the
absence of any documents which might have evidenced management and control from

Cyprus at the time the Request for Arbitration was filed was telling.

In these circumstances, the Committee cannot see in the Tribunal’s treatment of Mr
Chrysanthou’s evidence anything which could amount to a manifest excess of power or a
serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure. Nor does the failure to cite that
evidence on the second issue mean that the Award has failed to state the reasons on which
it was based; a tribunal is not required to refer to each and every item of evidence before

it.

In short, CEAC’s main line of argument fails to disclose any ground on which the Award
could be annulled. CEAC undoubtedly considers that the Tribunal made a number of
mistakes of law and fact but, even if one accepts that the Tribunal had done so, those

mistakes are not enough to warrant annulment.

MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS

Notwithstanding its analysis in the preceding section of the main line of CEAC’s challenge
to the Award, the number of different criticisms which CEAC has made of the Award
makes it necessary also to examine in turn the allegations relating to each of the three

paragraphs of Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention on which CEAC relies.

"3 Tr, Day 2, 285:9-12.

39

121.

122.

123.

124.

Nine of the eleven criticisms of the Award advanced by CEAC involve the allegation that

there was a manifest excess of power:

(1) The failure to determine the meaning of the term “seat” in Article 1(3)(b) of the
BIT

CEAC’s argument is that, by failing to address the question what “seat” meant in the BIT,
the Tribunal failed to apply the proper law. For the reasons already given in paras. 101 to
106, above, the Committee rejects this ground of challenge. The Tribunal did not fail to
apply the proper law; it was entitled to determine the real question before it - whether
CEAC had a seat in Cyprus — by considering whether CEAC satisfied any of the possible
tests, namely whether it had a registered office in Cyprus, whether it was managed and
controlled from Cyprus and whether its tax residency in Cyprus amounted to having its
seat there. The Committee sees no manifest excess of power in the adoption of this

approach or in the way in which it was applied.

(2) Considering the facts before the legal tests, thereby prejudging the outcome of
the legal analysis

This challenge is essentially a slight recasting of the first challenge and is equally without
merit. The Tribunal did not consider the facts before it considered the legal tests. Rather, it
approached each of the three legal tests advanced by the Parties and inquired whether they
were satisfied. In the case of the first test advanced by CEAC — i.e., whether the company
had its seat in Cyprus as a matter of Cypriot law, which treats registered office as
synonymous with seat — the Tribunal first examined the law of Cyprus to determine what
constituted a registered office, holding that such an office had to fulfil certain functions in
order to be considered a registered office (Award, paras. 150-169), and then held that the
evidence did not support a conclusion that CEAC met that test (Award, paras. 170-200).

The Committee can discern no prejudgment and no manifest excess of power.

(3) The failure to consider CEAC’s definition of “registered office”

CEAC argues that the Tribunal failed to consider its definition of “registered office” as an
office certified as the registered office by the Registrar of Companies. That is not the case.

The Tribunal carefully inquired into what were the requirements of Cypriot law regarding

40

125.

126.

127.

a “registered office” and rejected CEAC’s definition and the evidence of Mr Markides in
favour of the definition advanced by Mr Ioannides (Award, paras. 154-169). Even if, as
CEAC maintains, the Tribunal should have preferred the evidence of Mr Markides (and
the Committee expresses no opinion on whether that is so), the error would not have been
one for which the Award could be annulled. As the Teco Committee put it, “even if a
committee might have a different view on a debatable issue, it is simply not within its

powers to correct a tribunal’s interpretation of the law or assessment of the facts”. !°

Contrary to CEAC’s submission to the Committee, the Tribunal, in applying the test of
registered office under Cypriot law, was entitled — indeed required — to determine what
Cypriot law required for a company to have a registered office. It was not obliged to accept

CEAC’s view of the requirements of Cypriot law.

(4) Mr Ioannides’ “minimum requirements” were not pleaded by Montenegro as a
test for “seat” and did not form part of the legal framework of the case

The fact that Montenegro did not rely upon the evidence of Mr Ioannides regarding the
minimum requirements of Cypriot law for a registered office does not make the Tribunal’s
adoption of those requirements a manifest excess of power. It was not in the context of
Montenegro’s test that the Tribunal considered those requirements but in the context of
CEAC’s test. As the Committee has already explained, CEAC had argued that, as a matter
of the law of Cyprus, a company had its seat in Cyprus if it had its registered office there.
The Tribunal was entitled to consider all the evidence before it to determine what Cypriot

law required if a company was to be held to have its registered office in Cyprus.

(5) The failure to give any, or any proper, weight to the evidence of Mr Markides

The Committee has already dealt with this ground of challenge in paragraphs 110 to 111

above.

4 Teco, para. 78.

4l

128.

129.

130.

131.

105

(6) By adopting the “minimum requirements” identified by Mr Ioannides as a legal
test which found no basis in international law or domestic law, the Tribunal
assumed a policy-making mission beyond its jurisdiction

This ground of challenge, which is clearly based upon a comment in the dissenting

opinion, '®> simply restates the earlier ones. The Tribunal did not find that the minimum

requirements constituted part of an autonomous international law definition of “seat”. It
considered them in the context of applying CEAC’s own argument that international law
required a renvoi to the law of Cyprus. It then held, on the basis of its examination of the
expert evidence on Cypriot law, that an office which did not meet these requirements was
not a registered office under the law of Cyprus. Even if that conclusion were wrong, it was

based upon expert evidence and could not amount to a manifest excess of power.

(7) The Tribunal ignored CEAC’s evidence regarding management and control

The Tribunal has already dealt with this argument at paragraphs 116 to 118 above. The
Committee has no power to annul the Award under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention merely because the Tribunal did not refer to the evidence of Mr Chrysanthou
on this point and was persuaded by the absence of documentary evidence of management

activities in Cyprus at the relevant date.
(8) Montenegro’s autonomous definition of seat and (9) Treatment of tax residency

Grounds (8) and (9) of CEAC’s challenge to the Award do not involve an allegation of

manifest excess of power.
(10) The Tribunal entirely failed to consider Montenegro’s “real seat” theory

This argument again recasts what has gone before, particularly under Ground (8). The
Committee has already held that the Tribunal was not obliged to determine the precise
meaning of “seat” in the BIT and thus to decide whether the Montenegrin theory was right
as a matter of international law. The essence of that theory was that a company had its seat
in the State from which it was managed and controlled and the Tribunal considered that

the evidence put forward by CEAC was insufficient to show that it could satisfy that test.

Dissent, para. 21.

42

132.

133.

134.

135.

136.

It was not a manifest excess of power that the Tribunal did not inquire further into the

Montenegrin theory.
(11) — The evaluation of CEAC’s evidence was unnecessarily arbitrary and frivolous

This argument overlaps almost completely with the arguments raised under headings (5)
and (7). As the Committee has already explained, nothing in the treatment of the evidence
by the Tribunal comes close to sustaining a finding that there was a manifest excess of

power.

The Committee thus dismisses CEAC’s application for annulment under Article 52(1)(b)
of the ICSID Convention.

SERIOUS BREACH OF A FUNDAMENTAL RULE OF PROCEDURE

Grounds (1), (2), (3), (4), (5) and (7) are also claimed by CEAC to entail a serious departure

from a fundamental rule of procedure.

The Committee does not consider it necessary to review each of these grounds separately.
Insofar as CEAC maintains that Ground (1) involves such a procedural default, the
Committee repeats what it has already said in respect of manifest excess of powers. The
decision of the Tribunal to adopt the approach that it did and not to decide on the meaning
of “seat” involved no serious departure from anything which might be regarded as a

fundamental rule of procedure.

The other grounds listed above essentially concern the Tribunal’s treatment of the
evidence. The Committee has already discussed that in paragraphs 110 to 119 above. The
Committee considers that the Tribunal’s handling of the evidence before it entailed no
procedural default of any kind. Contrary to what is said by CEAC, the Committee considers
that the treatment of the evidence was in no way “frivolous” or “arbitrary”. Nor does the
record support the allegation that the treatment of the evidence disclosed a lack of
impartiality on the part of the Tribunal, or that the Tribunal had prejudged any of the issues

which it had to decide.

43

137.

138.

139.

140.

One further comment is required as regards Ground (4). One aspect of the challenge under
these two grounds is that CEAC was not given a proper opportunity to put forward its case,
because the Tribunal chose to treat the evidence of Mr Ioannides as relevant to the question
of the substantive requirements of Cypriot law for a registered office when it had not been
put forward by Montenegro for that purpose. The Committee does not accept that criticism
of the Tribunal. As it has already explained, the Committee considers that the evidence of
Mr Ioannides was clear on its face and, given that the hearing was to determine whether
CEAC had its seat in Cyprus, CEAC had the opportunity to challenge that evidence and
should have done so. That it did not take that opportunity does not constitute a procedural

default by the Tribunal.

The challenge under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention also fails.

FAILURE TO STATE REASONS

The Committee can also deal quite briefly with the allegation that the Award failed to state
the reasons on which it was based (a complaint which forms part of Grounds (1), (2), (3),
(4), (5), (7), (8), (9) and (11)). For the reasons already set out in paragraphs 95 to 98, above,
the Committee is of the view that the bar which an applicant for annulment must clear
under Article 52(1)(e) is a high one. The Committee has no doubt that CEAC has failed in
this respect. Just as these grounds of challenge have failed to establish the existence of a
manifest excess of power or a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, they
also fail to establish a default within Article 52(1)(e). Under this paragraph of Article 52,
the Committee is not empowered to reconsider whether the Tribunal’s reasons were
appropriate or convincing. The test is simply whether the Tribunal was guilty of a failure
to state its reasons in such a way that there is a lack of expressed rationale or that the
reasoning cannot be followed. That is not the case here. However unconvincing CEAC
may consider the reasoning, there is no difficulty in following the line of reasoning in the

Award and understanding how the Tribunal came to each of its conclusions.

A brief additional comment is, however, needed in respect of Grounds (8) and (9), because
they relate only to Article 52(1)(e). Little need be said about Ground (8) — that the Tribunal

failed properly to consider and give content to Montenegro’s autonomous definition of

44

141.

142.

VI.

143.

“seat” under international law. That Ground largely overlaps with Ground (10), which has
already been considered. The Tribunal made clear its reasons for not going into
Montenegro’s test. They explained that it was unnecessary to determine the precise
meaning of “seat” in the BIT and that CEAC had failed to establish that it was managed
and controlled from Cyprus at the relevant time. With regard to Ground (9), that the
Tribunal’s treatment of “tax residency” was incompatible with its approach to the
“autonomous definition”, the Committee considers that this allegation is simply not borne
out by a consideration of the Award. The “tax residency” test was CEAC’s alternative
argument and it was rejected for reasons which are clearly set out at paragraphs 209 to 211

of the Award.

The Committee thus dismisses the application to annul the Award under Article 52(1)(e)

of the ICSID Convention.

THE COMMITTEE’S CONCLUSIONS

For the reasons stated above, the Committee dismisses in its entirety the Application for

Annulment in the present case.

COSTS

APPLICANT’S COST SUBMISSIONS

In its submission on costs dated 12 January 2018, the Applicant argues that the Respondent
should bear the total arbitration costs incurred by the Applicant, including legal fees and

expenses, broken down as follows:
a) Legal Fees: USD 581,018.30
b) Disbursements for translation and duplicating costs: USD 5,332.93
c) Payments to ICSID: USD 425,000.00

Total: USD 1,011,351.23

45

144.

145.

146.

147.

148.

RESPONDENT’S COST SUBMISSIONS

In its submission on costs dated 12 January 2018, the Respondent submits that the
Applicant should bear all the costs and expenses of these proceedings, including the

Respondent’s legal fees and expenses, broken down as follows:

a) Legal Fees: EUR 323,999.56

b) Disbursements (unspecified): EUR 11,193.55

Total: EUR 335,193.11

Montenegro acknowledges that the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules
permit the Committee to allocate the costs of the proceeding but provide no further
guidance to the Committee on how to allocate those costs. In the absence of such guidance,
Montenegro urges the Committee to apply the “costs follow the event” principle in which

the unsuccessful party bears the costs of the prevailing party.

Montenegro asserts that such an allocation is particularly warranted here where the
Applicant initiated this annulment proceeding as an improper attempt to secure a “second
bite at the apple” by seeking de novo review of the Award. Further, according to
Montenegro, the present annulment proceeding is “only one component of a coordinated
litigation assault” consisting of four interconnected proceedings against the Respondent

and its limited resources.

In addition, Montenegro argues that the Committee should allocate all of its costs to the
Applicant due to the Applicant’s own procedural misconduct, namely, waiting until the
final round of its written submissions to elaborate its position and its time-consuming

attempts on the eve of the hearing to withhold certain exhibits from the hearing bundle.

In view of the above, Montenegro requests that the Committee order that CEAC (i) bear
the costs of this annulment proceeding (ii) pay interest on any costs awarded to the
Respondent at a rate to be determined by the Committee; and (iii) reimburse Montenegro
for its costs and any interest due thereon within 30 days of the date of the Committee’s

decision.

46

Cc.

149.

150.

151.

THE COMMITTEE’S DECISION ON COSTS

Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as

the parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the

parties in connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how

and by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members

of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the

Centre shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the award.
This provision, together with Arbitration Rule 47(1)(j) (applied to these proceedings by
virtue of Arbitration Rule 53) gives the Committee discretion to allocate all costs of the
arbitration, including attorney’s fees and other costs, between the Parties as it deems

appropriate.

In accordance with Administrative and Financial Regulation 14(3)(e), CEAC, as the Party
seeking annulment of the Award, has been responsible to date for all the advance payments
required to cover the costs of the proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the
members of the Committee. The Committee considers that the normal course should be for
an applicant for annulment who has been wholly unsuccessful, as CEAC has been, to bear
the entire costs of the proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the members of the
Committee, unless there are exceptional circumstances which warrant a different allocation
of costs. The Committee can see no such exceptional circumstances in the present case.

CEAC must, therefore, bear the entire costs of the proceeding.

47

152.

153.

154.

155.

The costs of the proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the Committee, ICSID’s

administrative fees and direct expenses, amount to:

Committee’s fees and expenses:

Sir Christopher Greenwood USD 47,920.12

Professor Joongi Kim USD 56,461.21

Ms Tinuade Oyekunle USD 72,628.85
ICSID’s administrative fees USD 74,000
Direct expenses !06 USD 20,031.37
Total USD 271,041.55

The above costs have been paid out of the advances made by the Applicant pursuant to

Administrative and Financial Regulation 14(3)(e).!””

With regard to the costs of legal representation of the Parties, each Party has, in accordance
with Procedural Order No. 2, provided details of the costs which it incurred in relation to
the annulment proceedings. CEAC informed the Committee that its costs of legal
representation amounted to USD 581,018.30, together with disbursements of USD
5,332.93, a total of USD 586,351.23. 1% Montenegro’s costs, including disbursements,
came to EUR 335,193.11.!

The Committee has taken into account the fact that CEAC has not succeeded in any of the
grounds for annulment which it advanced, that the Tribunal ordered CEAC to reimburse
Montenegro’s costs and that CEAC has pursued this application for annulment
notwithstanding the fact that its ultimate owner has initiated other proceedings against
Montenegro with regard to the same underlying facts, thus obliging Montenegro

0

simultaneously to defend two sets of proceedings. '!? In these circumstances, the

106 This amount includes actual charges relating to the dispatch of this Award (printing, copying and courier).

107

The remaining balance will be reimbursed to the Applicant, which paid the all of the advance payments to ICSID.

108 CEAC Costs Schedule, 12 January 2018.
109 Respondent’s Costs Submission, 12 January 2018.

110 Montenegro Counter-Memorial, para. 18, and fn. 34; Montenegro Rejoinder, para. 12; Tr. Day 2, 158:19-25.

48

Committee considers that it is an appropriate exercise of its discretion under Article 61(2)
of the Convention to decide that, in this case, costs should follow the event. It therefore
decides that CEAC shall, within 30 days of the date of this Decision, reimburse
Montenegro EUR 335,193.11.

VII. DECISION

156. For the reasons set forth above, the Committee unanimously decides that:

qd) the Application for Annulment of the Award of 26 July 2016 submitted by CEAC

is dismissed in its entirety;

(2) CEAC shall bear the entire costs of the proceeding, including the fees and expenses

of the Members of the Committee, in the amount of USD 271,041.55; and

(3) CEAC shall, within thirty days of the date of dispatch of this Decision, pay to
Montenegro the sum of EUR 335,193.11 in respect of the latter’s costs of legal

representation.

49

[SIGNED] [SIGNED]

 

Professor Joongi Kim Ms Tinuade Oyekunle
Committee Member Committee Member
Date: 23 April 2018 Date: 13 April 2018
[SIGNED]

Sir Christopher Greenwood

President of the Committee

Date: 5 April 2018

50

