INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
Washington, D.C.

CASE No. ARB/97/4

CESKOSLOVENSKA OBCHODNI BANKA, A.S.
(Claimant)

versus

THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC
(Respondent)

Decision of the Tribunal on Respondent's Further
and Partial Objection to Jurisdiction

Members of the Tribunal

Judge Thomas Buergenthal, President
Professor Piero Bernardini
Professor Andreas Bucher

Secretary of the Tribunal

Ms. Margrete Stevens

Representing the Claimant Representing Respondent
Mr. Charles Brower Mr. Henry Weisburg
Ms. Abby Cohen Smutny Shearman & Sterling
White & Case New York, New York

Washington, D.C.
Professor Emmanuel Gaillard
Shearman & Sterling
Paris, France

and, as co-counsel

Cernejova & Hrbek
Bratislava, Slovak Republic

544

CASES 545

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

On May 24, 1999 this Tribunal rendered a first decision on jurisdic-
tion (hereinafter, the “First Decision”), holding that the parties had
consented in the Consolidation Agreement to ICSID jurisdiction and
that, accordingly, the dispute was within the jurisdiction of the Centre
and the competence of the Tribunal.

The First Decision describes the contractual arrangements between
the parties, the object of the dispute and the procedural steps taken
prior thereto. The terms, as defined therein, shall have the same
meaning when used in this Decision.

After the First Decision was rendered, the parties filed the following
memorials within the time limits fixed by the Tribunal:

Claimant: | Memorial on the Merits, dated November 15, 1999;

Respondent: Further and Partial Objection to Jurisdiction under
ICSID Rule 41, dated December 23, 1999;

Claimant: Observations on the Slovak Republic’s Further and
Partial Objection to Jurisdiction, dated February 7, 2000;

Respondent: Reply to Claimant’s Observations on the Further and
Partial Objection to Jurisdiction, dated March 7, 2000;

Claimant: — Rejoinder to the Slovak Republic’s Further and Partial
Objection to Jurisdiction, dated March 21, 2000.

On July 17, 2000, the Tribunal held a meeting at which the parties

presented oral arguments regarding the Further and Partial Objection
to Jurisdiction raised by Respondent.

THE PARTIES’ POSITION

The respective positions of the parties, based on their written and oral
submissions, are summarized below.

Respondent's position

Respondent asserts that Claimant's submission on the merits improp-
erly attempts to have this Tribunal resolve a broad range of highly
factual issues arising exclusively under agreements that lack an arbitra-

546

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

tion clause and involve only private parties. Specifically, Respondent
contends that many of the issues raised by Claimant do not arise
under the Consolidation Agreement, but under the Loan Agreement
and other contracts to which the Slovak Republic is not a party.
Respondent further submits that such other agreements, which it
describes collectively as the “CSOB/SI Agreements”, did not serve as
the basis for Claimant's claims as set out in its Request for Arbitration
since their scope was restricted to claims arising under the Consolida-
tion Agreement. Respondent adds that these agreements were not the
basis for the Tribunal’s jurisdictional determination, and are currently
the subject of proceedings in the Slovak courts.

Since Claimant has submitted 12 volumes of supporting materials
with its Memorial on the Merits, accompanied by 22 boxes of
accounting documents, Respondent considers it essential that the
proceeding on the merits be suspended and a decision be rendered as
to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction relating to the issues raised by the
CSOB/SI Agreements.

It is Respondent's position that Claimant should not be allowed to
surreptitiously extend the scope of this arbitration beyond the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction. It obtained jurisdiction only with regard to the
Consolidation Agreement because an ICSID arbitration clause was
held to have been incorporated by reference into that agreement.
According to Respondent, therefore, the Tribunal cannot be deemed
to have jurisdiction to decide disputes arising under the CSOB/SI
Agreements, since they differ significantly in a variety of respects from
the Consolidation Agreement.

In further amplification of its objection to jurisdiction, Respondent
emphasizes that:

i) The Slovak Republic is party to the Consolidation Agreement, but
not to any of the CSOB/SI Agreements to which only SI is a party;

ii) Czech law and the BIT govern the Consolidation Agreement,
while Slovak law governs the CSOB/SI Agreements;

iii) None of the CSOB/SI Agreements contains an arbitration clause,
which suggests that, according to the applicable rules of private

CASES 547

international law, Slovak courts have jurisdiction to resolve
disputes arising under these agreements. One of them in fact
contains an express reference to “the court of competent jurisdic-
tion” and not to arbitration;

iv) The First Decision emphasized the relationship between the
Loan Agreement and the Consolidation Agreement for the
purposes of determining whether the dispute arose directly out of
an investment. It did not do so for the purpose of determining
the existence of consent by either party to arbitration or the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione personae;

v) In determining that “this dispute is within the jurisdiction of the
Centre” (First Decision, paragraph 92), the “dispute” is necessarily
defined by reference to the claims before the Tribunal, which
were all brought under the Consolidation Agreement.

The Respondent further contends that, notwithstanding the
Tribunal’s holding in its First Decision, Claimant seeks an award of
sums due it from SI under the Loan Agreement, SI’s indebtedness
thereunder being supported by Respondent's undertaking under the
Consolidation Agreement to cover SI’s losses. That undertaking is
characterized by Claimant's legal expert, Professor Jan Didié, as a
“comfort letter” according to which Respondent would have secured
the debtor's (SI’s) obligations. It constitutes, therefore, a second-tier
obligation in respect of SI’s first-tier obligation to repay its debt to
Claimant under the CSOB/SI Agreements. Respondent submits that
only when the courts competent to resolve the disputes arising out of
the first-tier obligations have done so, will there be a liquidated
amount of losses capable of constituting the subject matter of the
second-tier obligation, which is the subject of this arbitration.

Respondent submits that it is a generally accepted principle that an
arbitration clause contained in a guarantee does not extend to the
primary contract. The same is deemed to be true the other way round,
that is, when the clause in question is found in the primary contract
and not in the guarantee. According to the Respondent, this Tribunal
has jurisdiction only with regard to disputes under the Consolidation
Agreement, namely, the Agreement which stipulates the second-tier
obligation, and does not extend to disputes under the agreements that

548

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

govern the first-tier obligation. In the instant case, these are the Loan
Agreement and the other CSOB/SI Agreements. Respondent there-
fore rejects the proposition that this Tribunal has jurisdiction to deter-
mine the indebtedness of SI to CSOB because those issues arise solely
under the CSOB/SI Agreements.

Respondent contends further that in the present case there was no
consent for the submission to ICSID arbitration of issues arising
under the CSOB/SI Agreements. It founds this argument on the prop-
osition that the determination of the Tribunal that the arbitration
clause contained in Article 8 of the BIT was incorporated by reference
into the Consolidation Agreement and cannot be construed as
extending to the CSOB/SI Agreements or to any other contract.
According to this view, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction extends to issues
involving the Slovak Republic that arise under the Consolidation
Agreement and includes jurisdiction to award damages. It does not,
however, apply to the determination of amounts owed by SI to CSOB
under the CSOB/SI Agreements. This conclusion, according to
Respondent, gains further support from the fact that, since SI is a
national of the Slovak State, the Tribunal would not have jurisdiction
ratione personae over such an entity.

In conclusion, while reserving its right to seek the annulment of any
subsequent award on the merits on the ground that the Tribunal
exceeded its jurisdiction in the First Decision, Respondent submits
that, while the Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide issues arising under
the Consolidation Agreement, including the existence and nature of
the parties’ obligations thereunder, only the Slovak courts are compe-
tent to determine the existence and amount of SI’s debt to CSOB
under the CSOB/SI Agreements.

Claimant's position

Claimant submits that it claimed, both in the Request for Arbitration
and in its Memorial on the merits, that the Slovak Republic violated
the Consolidation Agreement and that Claimant was entitled there-
fore to the remedies afforded by Czech law in such circumstances,
including damages. Accordingly, Claimant contends that the jurisdic-
tion of this Tribunal is not limited to the determination of Respon-
dent’s breach of the Consolidation Agreement and the resulting

CASES 549

liability for damages, but that it also extends to the determination of
the amount of damages. This result has its basis in the principles of
effectiveness and finality applicable to the matter of jurisdiction as
indicated by the practice of the International Court of Justice.

15. According to Claimant, the scope of the consent to ICSID jurisdiction
given under Article 25 (I) of the Convention must be determined by
reference to the good faith intentions of the parties and the economic
realities of the contemplated transaction. It follows that when such a
transaction is to be consummated through a series of separate agree-
ments, or is to be executed through a special purpose entity, ICSID
tribunals have held that they have jurisdiction to address issues arising
under those related agreements. This has been the case even where
such related agreements did not contain separate consents to ICSID
jurisdiction and when they were concluded between parties other
than, but related to, the parties to the arbitration.

16. In support of its position, Claimant refers to the many cases decided
by ICSID tribunals which exercise jurisdiction over issues arising not
only under the agreement containing the parties’ consent to ICSID
jurisdiction, but also under other contracts concluded to carry out the
contemplated investment. In rendering these decisions, the ICSID
tribunals relied on the overall unity or inseparability of the relevant
operation.! Claimant asserts further that its position finds support
also in the caselaw of other non-ICSID tribunals. They based their
jurisdiction to rule on issues arising under contracts related to the
primary contract, which contained the parties’ consent to arbitration,
whenever the related contracts defined the scope of obligations arising
under the primary contract.

17. Claimant further contends that this Tribunal has already recognized
that its claims necessarily concern the entire transaction contemplated
by Article 3 of the Consolidation Agreement, and that the CSOB/SI

! Holidays Inns v. Morocco, as commented by P. Lalive, The First “World Bank” Arbitration
(Holidays Inns v. Morocco). Some Legal Problems, 51 Brit. Y. B. Int'l L. 123 (1980); Amco Asia et
al. v. Indonesia, CSID ARB/81/1 (jurisdictional decision of Sept. 25, 1983), reprinted in 23
ILM 351, 357, 367 (1984); SOABI v. Senegal, ICSID ARB/8211 (Award of Feb, 25 1988),
reprinted in 6 ICSID Rey. EILL.J. 119 (1991); Tesoro Petroleum Corp. v. Trinidad and Tobago, |
ICSID Rey. ELLJ. 340 (1986); Klickner et al. v. Cameroon, ICSID ARB/81/2 (Award of Oct.
21, 1983), reprinted in 111 J. Droit Int'l 409 (1984) and in 10 Y. B. Com. Arb. 71 (1985).

550 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

Agreements, which were designed to implement the Consolidation
Agreement, are central to a determination of the scope of the rights
and obligations of the Parties under that Agreement. Claimant
submits that the principle that international proceedings take prece-
dence over national court proceedings requires the exercise of ICSID
jurisdiction to the exclusion of proceedings in Slovak national courts,
and that the decisions of such courts concerning matters subject to
ICSID jurisdiction are not binding on this Tribunal, which must
render its own independent decision.

18. Claimant submits next that the evidence in this case demonstrates that
the only interpretation of the Consolidation Agreement that “takes
into account the consequences of the commitments the parties may be
consi d as having bly and legiti b i 2 is one that
would extend this Tribunal’s jurisdiction to the determination not
only of the existence of Respondent's obligation but also of the precise
amount of that obligation, instead of leaving the latter determination
to the Slovak courts. This evidence is said to be reflected in the history
of the negotiations leading to the Consolidation Agreement. Here the
Slovak Republic itself referred to this Agreement as a “master agree-
ment”. The evidence is also to be found in the subsidiary agreement
where the Slovak Minister of Finance confirms the obligations
assumed by Respondent with regard to the Consolidation Agreement.
The numerous cross references in the text of the subsidiary agreements
to the Consolidation Agreement as well as the conduct of the parties
subsequent to the conclusion of these agreements are said to further
support Claimant's conclusion.

 

19. In reliance on the caselaw of the International Court of Justice,
Claimant contends that when a tribunal has been seized of a dispute
arising under an instrument over which it has jurisdiction, it is
deemed to be competent to address secondary or incidental questions
relating to other instruments, provided this is necessary in order to
adjudicate the dispute over which it has jurisdiction. According to
Claimant, the instant case is in fact such a case because the Consoli-
dation Agreement defines Respondent’s obligation in terms of SI’s
liability under the subsidiary agreements. It is Claimant's position that

 

? First Decision, paragraph 34 (quoting AMCO Asia et al. v. Indonesia, Decision on Juris-
diction of Sept. 25, 1983, 23 I.L.M. 359 (1984)).

CASES 551

20.

21.

Ill.

22.

23.

its claims are against Respondent and not SI, and that they arise under
the Consolidation Agreement, rather than the implementing or
subsidiary agreements.

Claimant further submits that the absence of dispute resolution
clauses in the implementing agreements demonstrates that the parties
to these agreements considered such provisions unnecessary because
the Consolidation Agreement contained the requisite arbitration
clause. In this connection, Claimant suggests that questions
concerning the intention of the parties regarding whether or nor they
agreed to arbitration are routinely evaluated by reference to agree-
ments at issue in other cases with similar elements. Previous ICSID
decisions are thus relevant in deciding comparable issues in this case.

Finally, Claimant asserts that it is consistent with the obligation of
Article 48 (3) of the ICSID Convention that the Tribunal’s award deal
with every issue submitted to it. In the present case the dispute under
the Consolidation Agreement raises two principal issues, namely, (i)

 

whether Respondent breached its obligation to cover SI’s losses as
contemplated by the Consolidation Agreement, and (ii) what are the
damages to which Claimant is entitled under that Agreement as a
consequence of such a breach. Since the dispute submitted to this
Tribunal covers the transactions described in the Consolidation Agree-
ment, Claimant submits that it is necessary for the Tribunal to
examine the agreements contemplated therein. Hence, according to
Claimant, this Tribunal has the requisite jurisdiction over the dispute
and should reject Respondent’s latest jurisdictional challenge.

ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSIONS

This further challenge to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and the argu-
ments advanced by the parties make it necessary for the Tribunal to
spell out the precise scope of the jurisdictional determination it made
in the First Decision. In this connection, the Tribunal recalls that in
paragraph 92 of the First Decision it ruled that “...this dispute is
within the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the
Tribunal...”

Claimant is correct in asserting that the reference in the First Decision
to “this dispute” applies to the manner in which the Claimant has

552

24.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

presented its claims. In its Request for Arbitration, Claimant
requested that a final award be issued

“(a) Declaring that the Slovak Republic without legal justification has
breached its obligations to CSOB under the Consolidation Agree-
ment by failing and refusing to cover losses made by the Slovak
Collection Company;

Requiring the Slovak Republic to fulfil its obligations to CSOB
under the Consolidation Agreement to cover losses made by the
Slovak Collection Company in an amount sufficient to discharge
its debt to CSOB;

(c) Granting to CSOB any and all of the damages suffered by it as a
result of the Slovak Republic’s failure and refusal to fulfil its obli-
gations to CSOB under the Consolidation Agreement to cover
losses made by the Slovak Collection Company; and

Granting to CSOB all of the costs of the arbitration, including the
arbitrator’ fees and the administrative costs fixed by ICSID, the
expenses of the arbitrators, the fees and expenses of any experts, and
the legal costs incurred by the parties (including fees of counsel)”.

(b

(a

S

The Tribunal confirms its jurisdiction regarding the dispute as so
framed by Claimant to the extent that the same arises under the
Consolidation Agreement and is to be settled according to its provi-
sions, including its governing law clause.

The relief requested by Claimant in its Memorial on the merits reads
as follows:

“For the reasons stated above, CSOB respectfully requests the
Tribunal to award it as compensation for the damages it has incurred
due to the Slovak Republic's breach of the Consolidation Agreement
the following:

1. The sum of SKK 24,659,907,271, being equal to the principal
and interest due to June 30, 2000 under the SI Loan Agreement;

2. The sum of SKK 9,064,537,958, being the additional losses of
CSOB it may claim pursuant to Section 379 et seg. of the
Commercial Code of the Czech Republic, measured by the
Slovak Government bond yield to June 30, 2000;

CASES 553

3. The additional sums due when the damages under 1 and 2 above
are carried forward from June 30, 2000 to the date of the award
to be issued in this case;

4. Such additional sums as may be calculated and submitted to the
Tribunal prior to the closure of this proceeding representing
CSOB’s further damages, including lost productive management
time and professional fees and expenses incurred relating to

a. all proceedings relating to SI’s bankruptcy;

b. obtaining, documenting, implementing and maintaining Czech
shareholder financial support of the Bank;

c. this proceeding; and

d. otherwise asserting its rights under the Consolidation Agree-
ment;

5. interest at a rate (or rates) to be determined on all sums awarded
from the date of the award until the date it is paid.”

25. The determination of the precise scope of its jurisdiction as estab-
lished by the Tribunal in its First Decision must be made by reference
to the consent of the parties to ICSID jurisdiction under Article 25
(1) of the ICSID Convention. The Tribunal’s decision on this subject
will be guided by the principles set out in paragraph 34 of the First
Decision, which reads as follows:

“In determining how to interpret agreements to arbitrate under
the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal is guided by an ICSID deci-
sion which held that
a convention to arbitrate is not to be construed restric-
tively, nor, as a matter of fact, broadly or liberally. It is
to be construed in a way which leads to find out and to
respect the common will of the parties.... Moreover,
..-any convention, including conventions to arbitrate,
should be construed in good faith, that is to say by
taking into account the consequences of the commit-

554

26.

27.

28.

29.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

ments the parties may be considered as having reason-
ably and legitimately envisaged.” (Emphasis supplied)]

After full consideration of the arguments and authorities submitted by
the parties, the Tribunal concludes that an analysis of what may be
deemed to be “the common will of the parties’, as that phrase is used in
paragraph 34, indicates that the Tribunal was not granted jurisdiction
also with respect to the CSOB/SI Agreements.

In reaching the foregoing conclusion, the Tribunal notes, in the first
place, that each case must be assessed by reference to its specific facts.
Unlike the prior cases to which Claimant has referred, the parties in
the instant case have not provided for a separate and express dispute
resolution clause. The Tribunal did find, however, that the reference
to the BIT in the Consolidation Agreement constituted an incorpora-
tion by reference into the Consolidation Agreement of Article 8 of the
BIT which provides for international arbitration. This conclusion,
while fully justified as an interpretation of the common will of the
parties, imposes a measure of restraint on the Tribunal when it is
called upon to identify, once again by a process of interpretation, what
types of disputes the parties actually intended to have covered by their
arbitration agreement.

In the First Decision, the Tribunal has held that the CSOB’s claim and
the related loan facility made available to SI qualify as investments
within the meaning of the ICSID Convention and the BIT (paragraph
91). This does not mean, however, that the Tribunal thereby automat-
ically acquires jurisdiction with regard to each agreement concluded
to implement the wider investment operation. Other requirements
have to be met for such jurisdiction to be established. That is, the fact
that the agreement to arbitrate referred to in the First Decision must
be construed in good faith does not necessarily mean that the inter-
pretation of the consent of the parties under Article 25 (1) of the
ICSID Convention must in each case be deemed to extend to any and
all agreements comprising the entire transaction.

In the instant case, there are good reasons that militate against
extending the scope of the parties’ agreement to arbitrate beyond the
Consolidation Agreement. The CSOB/SI Agreements have not been
signed by the same entities which are parties to the Consolidation

CASES 555

30.

33.

Agreement. Moreover, national courts have shown considerable
restraint in extending the reach of an arbitration agreement beyond
the signatories’ sphere. In taking this position, these courts have relied
on the principle of the relative effects of a contract (tertio neque nocet
neque prodest) as well as on the contractual basis of arbitration as a
dispute resolution method.?

The Tribunal does not accept the contention that the absence of an
arbitration clause in the CSOB/SI Agreements supports the conclu-
sion that the parties thereto considered the arbitration agreement of
the Consolidation Agreement to be applicable also to disputes
between them. The absence of such a clause may in fact be deemed to
reflect the intent to leave the resolution of disputes to the competent
national courts. In this respect, it is significant that one of these agree-
ments, viz., the Agreement to Conclude Future Agreements on the
Assignment of Certain Receivables Under Off-Balance Sheet Instru-
ments between CSOB and SI (Article III), makes a specific reference
to “a court of competent jurisdiction”.

The principle of effectiveness and finality of jurisdiction, invoked by
Claimant with reference to the practice of the International Court of
Justice, cannot override the basic rule that arbitral jurisdiction is based
on the consent of the parties. Moreover, this Tribunal lacks compe-
tence ratione personae to decide with res judicata effect issues arising
out of the CSOB/SI Agreements. This is so because, on the one hand,
SI is not bound by an agreement to submit disputes arising under
these Agreements to ICSID jurisdiction and is not a party to the
dispute pending before this Tribunal. On the other hand, Respondent
is not a party to the CSOB/SI Agreement

For the reasons stated above, the Tribunal confirms its First Decision
and holds that its competence covers, and is confined to, issues arising
out of the Consolidation Agreement.

For the guidance of the parties in the merits phase of these proceed-
ings, the Tribunal reiterates that it has jurisdiction to determine the
validity, nature and scope of Respondent's obligation to cover SI’s

3 Cohen D., Arbitrage et Groupes de Contrats, Rev. Arb. 1997, p. 502.

556

34,

35.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

losses as provided by Article 3(II) of the Consolidation Agreement, to
establish whether Respondent has breached that obligation, and to
assess damages, if any, payable by Respondent to CSOB for any such
breach.

According to paragraph 61 of the First Decision, CSOB’s claim based
on Article 3 of the Consolidation Agreement requests the Tribunal to
analyze the rights and obligations set forth therein, as well as the ques-
tion whether CSOB is entitled to damages due to the breach of the
obligations alleged to have been committed by the Slovak Republic. In
Article 3(II) of the Consolidation Agreement, the Slovak Republic
undertook to cover SI’s losses resulting from the operating costs and
the schedule of payments for the receivables assigned by CSOB to SI,
including payment of interest. The more concise wording of Section
7 of the Loan Agreement provides that “the repayment of the loan
including interest thereof is secured by an obligation of the Ministry
of Finance of the Slovak Republic”. At the bottom of that Agreement,
the Ministry of Finance confirmed its obligation under Section 7,
which refers expressly to the Consolidation Agreement as the legal
basis for the Ministry’s undertaking.

It follows that if the determination of SI’s losses and the amount of SI’s
indebtedness to CSOB were to be left to the national courts, as
contended by Respondent, the determination of the amount of the
Republic’s alleged obligation to secure the repayment of the loan would
be excluded from the scope of the arbitration agreement contained in
the Consolidation Agreement and, hence, also from the competence of
this Tribunal. The ICSID Convention does not require an ICSID
tribunal to accept the binding effect of national court decisions. By
contrast, Article 26 of the Convention states that “[c]onsent of the
parties to arbitration under this Convention shall, unless otherwise
stated, be deemed consent to such arbitration to the exclusion of any
other remedy”. The Tribunal’s competence must include, therefore, the
determination of the Slovak Republic’s obligation, if any, to secure the
repayment of CSOB’s loan, as well as, the amount of CSOB’s damages,
if any, due to the breach of that obligation. This competence, as recog-
nized by Article 26 of the Convention, is exclusive of any other remedy.
Accordingly, Slovak national courts may not retain jurisdiction over
issues arising under the Consolidation Agreement.

CASES 557

IV. DECISION

36. For all the above reasons, the Tribunal unanimously rejects the Slovak
Republic’s Further and Partial Objection to Jurisdiction under ICSID
Rule 41, and decides to continue the proceedings on the merits
pursuant to a pleading schedule to be fixed in due course.

Thomas Buergenthal

Piero Bernardini Andreas Bucher

(Date: December 1, 2000]

