Date of decision:
May 24, 1999

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
‘Washington, D.C.

CASE No. ARB/97/4
CESKOSLOVENSKA OBCHODNI BANKA, A.S.
(Claimant)
versus

THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC
(Respondent)

Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction

Members of the Tribunal

Professor Thomas Buergenthal, President
Professor Piero Bernardini
Professor Andreas Bucher

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Margrete Stevens

Representing the Claimant
Mr. Charles Brower

Ms. Abby Cohen Smutny
White & Case
Washington, D.C.

Representing Respondent
Mr. Henry Weisburg
Shearman & Sterling
New York, New York

Professor Emmanuel Gaillard
Shearman & Sterling
Paris, France

and, as co-counsel

Mr. Igor Palka
Cernejova & Hrbek
Bratislava, Slovak Republic

252 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

I. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND AND CLAIMS OF THE PARTIES

1. The Claimant in this case is the Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka,
A.S. (CSOB), a commercial bank organized under Czech law; the Respon-
dent is the Slovak Republic. Claimant filed its “Request for Arbitration”
with the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID or Center) on April 18, 1997, charging Respondent with a breach
of the “Agreement on the Basic Principles of a Financial Consolidation of
Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, A.S.” (Consolidation Agreement),
which was concluded on December 19, 1993 by the Ministry of Finance
of the Slovak Republic, the Ministry of Finance of the Czech Republic,
and CSOB. Claimant alleged that the breach consisted in the failure of the
Slovak Republic to cover the losses incurred by the Slovenska inkasni spol.
s.r.0 (Slovak Collection Company), as agreed to in the Consolidation
Agreement. It seeks fulfillment by Respondent of its obligations under the
Consolidation Agreement and damages for the losses sustained, plus costs.
The request was registered by the Centre on April 25, 1997.

2. The Consolidation Agreement, which was designed to facilitate the
privatization of CSOB and its operation in the Czech and Slovak Repub-
lics after their separation, provided, inter alia, for the assignment by
CSOB of certain non-performing loan portfolio receivables to two so-
called “Collection Companies,” one to be established by the Czech Repub-
lic, the other by the Slovak Republic, in their respective national territo-
ties. The Consolidation Agreement also stipulated that each Collection
Company was to pay CSOB for the assigned receivables. To enable them
to do so, each Collection Company was to receive the necessary funds
from CSOB under the terms of separate loan agreements, such loans to be
paid down in accordance with a stipulated repayment schedule.

3. The Collection Companies were established by the respective
Republics as contemplated by the Consolidation Agreement. Thereafter
CSOB and the newly created Slovak Collection Company concluded the
“Loan Agreement on the Refinancing of Assigned Receivables” (Loan
Agreement), with the effective date of December 31, 1993. Section 7 of
the Loan Agreement, entitled “Security”, refers to the Consolidation
Agreement and declares that pursuant to the latter agreement, “the repay-
ment of the loan including interest thereon is secured by an obligation of
the Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic.” This obligation is con-
firmed at the bottom of the Loan Agreement where, following the signa-

CASES 253

tures of the representatives of CSOB and the Slovak Collection Company,
the Minister of Finance of the Slovak Republic, on behalf of his Ministry,
“consents to and acknowledges the contents of this Agreement and, in par-
ticular, confirms its obligation under Section 7 of this Agreement.”

4. Claimant’s Request for Arbitration notes that the Czech and Slovak
Republics are parties to the “Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States” (ICSID Conven-
tion), the Czech Republic as of April 22, 1993 and the Slovak Republic as
of June 26, 1994. Claimant bases the Centre’s jurisdiction over this dis-
pute on three grounds. It contends, first, that the “Agreement between the
Government of the Slovak Republic and the Government of the Czech
Republic Regarding the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Invest-
ments” (Bilateral Investment Treaty or BIT), signed on November 23,
1992, did enter into force on January 1, 1993 and that Article 8(2) thereof
confers jurisdiction on the Centre to hear this dispute. ! Second, Claimant
submits that even if the BIT had not entered into force as between the two
Contracting States, it was binding on the Slovak Republic by virtue of the
fact that the Slovak Foreign Ministry, in a Notice published on October
22, 1993 in the Official Gazette of the Slovak Republic, declared that the

'" Article 8 of the BIT reads as follows:

1. Any dispute which may arise between the investor of one Party and the
other Party in relation to any investments made in the territory of such
other Party, shall be subject to negotiations between the parties to the
dispute.

If the dispute between the investor of one Party and the other Party
continues after a period of three months, the investor and the Party shall
have the right to submit the dispute to either:

1) the International Center for the Resolution of Investment-Related
Disputes with special regard to the applicable provisions of the Treaty on
the Resolution of Investment-Related Disputes arising between States
and nationals of other States, open for signature in Washington D.C. on
18 March 1965, provided, however, that both Parties are parties to such
‘Treaty; or

an arbitrator or an ad hoc international arbitration tribunal established
in accordance with the arbitration rules of the United Nations Organi-
zation Committee for International Trade Law. Parties to the dispute
may agree in writing upon modifications of such rules. The arbitration
award shall be final and binding on both parties to the dispute.

Nn

Nv

»

The dispute shall be resolved by such agency referred to in Section 2 above
as was the first one to which a proposal for the resolution of the dispute was
submitted.

254 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

BIT had entered into force on January 1, 1993.2 Finally, Claimant con-
tends that Article 7 of the Consolidation Agreement incorporates the BIT
by reference because it provides that “this Agreement shall be governed by
the laws of the Czech Republic and the Treaty on the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments between the Czech Republic and the
Slovak Republic dated November 23, 1992.” This incorporation is said to
bind the Slovak Republic regardless of whether the BIT itself entered into
force.

5. In accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (Arbitration Rules), this Tribunal was deemed
constituted and the proceedings to have begun on August 20, 1997, the
date on which the parties were notified by the Acting Secretary-General of
ICSID that Professor Andreas Bucher, appointed by the Claimant, Profes-
sor Piero Bernardini, appointed by the Respondent, and Professor Thomas
Buergenthal, designated as President of the Tribunal by the Centre, had
accepted their appointments. On that date, the Acting Secretary-General
also informed the parties that Ms. Margrete Stevens, Counsel, ICSID,
would serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

6. On October 6, 1997, the Tribunal held its first session with the par-
ties at the seat of ICSID in Washington, D.C. At that session, the parties
acknowledged that the Tribunal had been duly constituted in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention and the Arbitration
Rules.

7. At the same session, counsel for Respondent declared that the Slo-
vak Republic considered that the instant dispute was not within the juris-
diction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal and would
interpose objections to jurisdiction. The President, acting in accordance
with Article 41(2) of the Convention and Arbitration Rule 41(3), there-
upon suspended the proceedings on the merits and, after ascertaining the
views of the parties, fixed the following time limits for the written phase of

2 This Notice reads as follows:
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Slovak Republic announces that
the Treaty on the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments
between the Government of the Slovak Republic and the Government
of the Czech Republic was signed in Bratislava on November 23, 1992.
Pursuant to Article 12, the Treaty became effective on January 1, 1993.

CASES 255

the proceedings relating to jurisdiction: (i) January 30, 1998—Respon-
dent to file memorial on jurisdiction; (ii) April 30, 1998—Claimant to file
counter-memorial on jurisdiction; (iii) July 31, 1998—Respondent to file
reply; (iv) October 30, 1998—Claimant to file rejoinder. The oral hearing
on jurisdiction was fixed to commence on January 4, 1999. (The opening
date of the hearing was subsequently moved to January 5, 1999.)

 

8. By letter dated May 18, 1998 Respondent requested the Tribunal, in
accordance with Article 43(a) of the Convention and Arbitration Rule 34(2),
to order Claimant to produce copies of various documents Respondent
alleged would provide evidence bearing on its contention that the Tribunal
lacked jurisdiction to hear this dispute. By Procedural Order No.1, dated
June 8, 1998, the Tribunal granted only that part of Respondent's request
which sought the production by Claimant of “all documents in the custody
or control of CSOB in any way relating to a guarantee and/or proposed issu-
ance of a guarantee, whether or not a guarantee is currently in effect.”

9. Between the October 6, 1997 session and the commencement of the
oral phase of the proceedings on January 5, 1999 Claimant, invoking
Arbitration Rule 39, requested the Tribunal on different occasions to issue
provisional measures and emergency interim restraining measures in
accordance with Articles 47 and 26 of the ICSID Convention, seeking the
suspension of the bankruptcy proceedings pending against the Slovak Col-
lection Company in Slovak courts. The Tribunal dealt with these requests
in Procedural Orders Nos. 2, 3 and 4 of September 9, 1998, November 5,
1998 and January 11, 1999, respectively. While denying the requests for
emergency interim restraining measures and deferring action on the
requests for provisional measures in Procedural Orders Nos. 2 and 3, the
Tribunal granted the latter relief in Procedural Order No. 4. In it the Tri-
bunal recommended the suspension of the aforementioned bankruptcy
proceedings “to the extent that such proceedings might include determina-
tions as to whether the Slovenska inkasni spol. s.r.0. [Slovak Collection
Company] has a valid claim in the form of a right to receive funds from
the Slovak Republic to cover its losses as contemplated in the Consolida-
tion Agreement at issue in this arbitration.”

10. In its Memorials and in the oral phase of the proceedings, Respon-
dent challenges the Tribunal’s jurisdiction on the ground that the require-
ments of Article 25 (1) of the Convention for the Centre's jurisdiction and
the Tribunal’s competence have not been complied with in this case. To

256 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

support its contention, Respondent submits, first, that the requirement of
Article 25(1) that the dispute must be “between a Contracting State and a
national of another Contracting State,” has not been satisfied in this case.
With regard to this issue, Respondent contends: a) that CSOB is merely
an agent of the Czech Republic, and b) that the subsequent assignments to
the Czech Republic of CSOB’s interest in the receivables, which constitute
the subject matter of the dispute, transformed the Czech Republic into the
real party in interest to this case.

11. Respondent's second contention is that the “consent in writing,”
required under Article 25(1) of the Convention for the submission of dis-
putes to the Centre, is lacking in the instant case because: a) the BIT on
which Claimant relies never entered into force; b) the notice published in
the Slovak Republic’s Official Gazette did not bring the BIT into force or
make it part of Slovak law and, therefore, cannot constitute effective con-
sent to arbitration; c) the clause in the BIT referring to the Consolidation
Agreement, characterized by Respondent as a governing law provision,
cannot be deemed to constitute effective consent unless and until the BIT
enters into force; and d) even assuming the BIT was in force, the parties
had not “jointly” invoked Article 8—its arbitration provision—and,
moreover, the dispute did not relate to “investments” as that concept is
defined in the Convention and the BIT. As for the argument that the con-
sent to arbitration envisaged under the BIT required a joint submission,
Respondent asserts that a proper reading of the Czech and Slovak texts of
Article 8 of the BIT compels that conclusion.

12. Respondent's final submission under Article 25(1) focuses on the
contention that the dispute was not one “arising directly out of an invest-
ment.” Here Respondent contends, in the first place, that the loan to the
Slovak Collection Company was not an “investment.” Rather, it was an
element of the inter-governmental restructuring and division of CSOB,
necessitated by the dissolution of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic
(CSFR), and not an operation from which either party to the dispute was
intended to receive a benefit. According to Respondent, moreover,
CSOB’s claims did not arise “directly” out of the loan and, therefore, can-
not be deemed to arise “directly” out of an investment within the meaning
of Article 25(1) of the Convention.

13. The oral phase of these proceedings commenced on January 5, 1999
and concluded on January 7, 1999.

CASES 257

14. Although the January 5-7, 1999 hearing was originally intended to
address only the issue of jurisdiction, the Tribunal granted Claimant's
motion to permit the Parties also briefly to address Claimant's request for
provisional measures.” By agreement of the parties, no witnesses were
heard during this entire hearing. Instead, both parties submitted and
relied on witness affidavits and expert opinions.

II. IS CLAIMANT A NATIONAL OF A CONTRACTING STATE?

15. The first ground on which Respondent challenges the jurisdiction
of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal is that Claimant does
not meet that requirement of Article 25(1), which provides that the dis-
pute must be between a Contracting State and a national of another Con-
tracting State. According to Respondent, the instant dispute is between
two Contracting States because: a) Claimant is a state agency of the Czech
Republic rather than an independent commercial entity; and b) the real
party in interest to this dispute is the Czech Republic.

A. National of Another Contracting State

16. The language of Article 25(1) of the Convention makes clear that
the Centre does not have jurisdiction over disputes between two or more
Contracting States. Instead, the dispute settlement mechanism set up by
the Convention is designed to deal with disputes between Contracting
States and nationals of other Contracting States. Although the concept of
“national”, as that term is used in Article 25(1), is in Article 25(2)
declared to include both natural and juridical persons, neither term is
defined as such in the Convention. The legislative history of the Conven-
tion does provide some answers, however, that bear on the issues presented
in this case. It indicates that the term “juridical persons” as employed in
Article 25 and, hence, the concept of “national,” was not intended to be
limited to privately-owned companies, but to embrace also wholly or par-
tially government-owned companies. This interpretation has found gen-
eral acceptance.

17. It follows that the question whether a company qualifies as a
“national of another Contracting State” within the meaning of Article

3 For the outcome of the Tribunal’s deliberations relating to this request for provisional
measures, see para. 9, supra.

258 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

25(1) does not depend upon whether or not the company is partially or
wholly owned by the government. Instead, the accepted test for making
this determination has been formulated as follows: “... for purposes of the
Convention a mixed economy company or government-owned corpora-
tion should not be disqualified as a ‘national of another Contracting State’
unless it is acting as an agent for the government or is discharging an
essentially governmental function.”* Both parties to this dispute accept
this test as determinative.

18. The soundness of Respondent's contention that Claimant is not “a
national of another Contracting State” must therefore be judged by refer-
ence to this test. Standing alone, Respondent's submission that more than
65% of CSOB’s shares are owned in one form or another by the Czech
Republic and that some 24% are owned by the Slovak Republic demon-
strate that CSOB is a public sector rather than a private sector entity, does
not address the here crucial issue. Neither does the submission that the
Czech Republic’s 65% stock ownership gives it absolute control over
CSOB. For, as has been shown above, such ownership or control alone will
not disqualify a company under the here relevant test from filing a claim
with the Centre as “a national of a another Contracting State.”

19. Respondent does not, however, rest this aspect of its case solely on
the above arguments. It contends further that CSOB is a government
agency which has been discharging essentially governmental functions
throughout its existence and, more specifically, with regard to all events
pertinent to this dispute. In this regard, Respondent seeks to show that
since its inception CSOB has served as agent or representative of the State
to the international banking and trading community, that its subsequent
reorganization has not changed its status, and that, moreover, the instant
dispute arises out of the functions CSOB performed in that capacity.

20. It cannot be denied that for much of its existence, CSOB acted on
behalf of the State in facilitating or executing the international banking
transactions and foreign commercial operations the State wished to sup-
port and that the State’s control of CSOB required it to do the State's bid-
ding in that regard. But in determining whether CSOB, in discharging
these functions, exercised governmental functions, the focus must be on

4 4. Broches, The Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States, 135 Hague Ree. d. Cours 331, at 3545 (1972).

CASES 259

the nature of these activities and not their purpose. While it cannot be
doubted that in performing the above-mentioned activities, CSOB was
promoting the governmental policies or purposes of the State, the activi-
ties themselves were essentially commercial rather than governmental in
nature.

21. It also appears that beginning in the early 1990's and following the
1989 “Velvet Revolution,” as the State began to transform its command
economy into a market economy, CSOB took various steps to gradually
throw off its exclusive economic dependence on the State and to adopt
measures to enable it to function in this new economic environment as an
independent commercial bank. By 1993, CSOB seemed to have basically
achieved that purpose, although its competitive position continued to be
adversely affected by the existence on its books of non-performing receiv-
ables. These receivables, which became the subject of the Consolidation
Agreement and play a role in the instant dispute, grew out of CSOB’s ear-
lier lending activities during the State’s non-market economy period.
Although these activities were driven by State policies, as was true gener-
ally of economic activities during the country’s command economy, the
banking transactions themselves that implemented these policies did not
thereby lose their commercial nature. They cannot therefore be character-
ized as governmental in nature. Moreover, even if one were to conclude
that the non-performing assets derived from activities conducted by
CSOB as an agent of the State, the measures taken by CSOB to remove
them from its books in order to improve its balance and consolidate its
financial position in accordance with the provisions of the Consolidation
Agreement, must be deemed to be commercial in character.

22. In support of its contention that the dispute is between two Con-
tracting States, Respondent also submits that the ultimate goal of the
Consolidation Agreement was the privatization of CSOB. Characterizing
privatization as a State function, Respondent argues that in concluding the
Consolidation Agreement, CSOB was performing State functions and
could therefore not claim to be a private investor. In this connection,
Respondent submits that

The principal ingredient in the Consolidation Agreement
preparing CSOB for privatization was the proposed removal
of the poor-quality assets resulting from CSOB’s role in
financing the Czechoslovak State’s foreign trade .... The

260 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

whole structure of Consolidated Agreement, Loan Agreement
and Collection Companies, which is central to this arbitra-
tion, was thus conceived and implemented with the express
purpose of facilitating CSOB’s privatization. (Respondent's
Reply Memorial, at 34.)

23. — It cannot be denied that a State’s decision to transform itself from a
command economy to a free market economy involves the exercise of gov-
ernmental functions. The same is no doubt true of legislative and adminis-
trative measures adopted by the State that are designed to enable or
facilitate the privatization of State-owned enterprises. It does not follow,
however, that a State-owned enterprise is performing State functions when
it takes advantage of these State policies and proceeds to restructure itself,
with or without governmental cooperation, in order to be in a position to
compete in a free market economy. Nor does it follow that the measures
taken by such an enterprise to achieve this objective involve the perfor-
mance of State or governmental functions. In both instances, the test as to
whether or not the acts are governmental or private turn on their nature.

24. There appears to be some disagreement between the parties to this
case as to whether the conclusion of the Consolidation Agreement and the
Loan Agreement was driven by or was part of the privatization process
instituted by the Government or whether it was the result largely of
CSOB’s unrelated business decision to strengthen its financial position.
The Tribunal does not believe that it matters which of these views is
accepted, for whether CSOB’s actions were or were not driven by the
privatization process set in motion or facilitated by the State is not deter-
minative of the issue to be decided. What is determinative is the nature of
these acts.

25. In the instant case, the steps taken by CSOB to solidify its financial
position in order to attract private capital for its restructured banking
enterprise do not differ in their nature from measures a private bank might
take to strengthen its financial position. It is no doubt true that CSOB’s
ability to negotiate the Consolidation Agreement and Loan Agreements on
favorable conditions can be attributed to the interest both the Czech and
Slovak Governments had in seeing CSOB survive in a free market environ-
ment and continue to provide needed banking services. But that fact does
not transform the otherwise commercial or private transactions here at
issue into governmental acts.

CASES 261

26. Finally, in support of its submission that the instant dispute is
between two States Parties, Respondent contends that all the parties to the
Consolidation Agreement are State entities and that they include, in addi-
tion to CSOB and the Czech and Slovak Republics, the Czech National
Bank, the Czech National Property Fund and the National Bank of Slova-
kia. Even assuming, without deciding, that these other entities had also
become parties to the Consolidation Agreement, this fact would not
weaken or overcome the Tribunal’s conclusions, set out in the preceding
paragraphs, about the commercial character of the Consolidation Agree-
ment or the functions CSOB performed.

27. The Tribunal concludes, accordingly, that Respondent has failed to
sustain its contention that the Centre lacks jurisdiction and the Tribunal
competence to hear this case on the ground that Claimant was acting as an
agent of the State or discharging essentially governmental activities as far
as this dispute is concerned. This is so whether or not this determination
is made by reference to the date of the conclusion of the Consolidation
Agreement (December 19, 1993) or the date when the Request for Arbi-
tration was registered by the Centre (April 25, 1997).

B. Real Party in Interest

28. Respondent next points to two assignments, dated April 24, 1998
and June 25, 1998, respectively, which CSOB concluded with the Czech
Ministry of Finance. These assignments, according to Respondent, have
transformed the Czech Republic—the assignee—into the real party in
interest to the instant arbitration by relieving CSOB of the economic risk
arising from the claims relating to the Slovak Collection Company receiv-
ables. Respondent argues that the assignments require the Tribunal to dis-
miss the case for lack of jurisdiction because Claimant no longer has the
requisite standing under Article 25(1) and because the Czech Republic is
disqualified under the same provision from stepping into CSOB’s shoes.

29. In view of the fact that the first assignment has been fully super-
seded by the second, the Tribunal needs to focus here only on the latter. In
that instrument CSOB agrees to assign to the Czech Republic on a so-
called “effective date” all claims CSOB has against the Slovak Collection
Company relating to the receivables transferred to the latter under the
Loan Agreement as well as the claims CSOB has against the Slovak Repub-
lic under the Consolidation Agreement. The “effective date” is three days

262 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

after the date on which the assignee receives in writing assignor’s request
for the delivery of the receivables and the rights attaching thereto. How-
ever, the assignee does not have the right to request the assignment prior
to the completion of the instant arbitration proceedings.

30. The specified “consideration” which assignee is required to pay
assignor consists of an amount equal to 90% of the nominal value of the
receivables as of December 31, 2002. This payment is to be made within
three days following the termination of the arbitration proceedings, but no
earlier than the above mentioned date. If the arbitration should not be com-
pleted by December 31, 2002, assignee is required to increase that amount
to a “deposit” of 100% of the agreed upon nominal value of the receivables.
On the other hand, if the assignor should receive any payment in settlement
of the receivables, the consideration is to be reduced by 75% of the amount
so received. The assignor is entitled to 25% of any amounts received by
assignee following the assignment in repayment of the assigned receivables
paid after December 31, 2002, and 10% before January 1, 2003.

31. In assessing the effect of the June 25, 1998 assignment (and of the
April 24,1998 assignment it superseded) on the Centre's jurisdiction to
hear this dispute, the Tribunal notes, in the first place, that the Request
for Arbitration in the instant case was filed on April 17, 1997 and that the
case was registered on April 25, 1997. Hence, at the time when these pro-
ceedings were instituted, neither of these assignments had been concluded.
Second, it is generally recognized that the determination whether a party
has standing in an international judicial forum for purposes of jurisdiction
to institute proceedings is made by reference to the date on which such
proceedings are deemed to have been instituted. Since the Claimant insti-
tuted these proceedings prior to the time when the two assignments were
concluded, it follows that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear this case
regardless of the legal effect, if any, the assignments might have had on
Claimant's standing had they preceded the filing of the case.

32. In the light of what has just been said, it is not really necessary for
the Tribunal to address Respondent’s contention that the assignments here
in question transformed the Czech Republic into the real party in interest
because it became, for all practical purposes, the beneficial owner of the
disputed claims and because Claimant, as a result, no longer has a real eco-
nomic interest in the outcome of these proceedings. But even if the Tribu-
nal, for purposes of the argument, were to accept this contention, it would

CASES 263

not follow that this case would have to be dismissed for lack of jurisdic-
tion. This conclusion is compelled by the consideration that absence of
beneficial ownership by a claimant in a claim or the transfer of the eco-
nomic risk in the outcome of a dispute should not and has not been
deemed to affect the standing of a claimant in an ICSID proceeding,
regardless whether or not the beneficial owner is a State Party or a private
party. It must be emphasized, moreover, that the second assignment does
not deprive claimant of an interest in the outcome of the case because the
assignment becomes effective only after these proceedings terminate and
because the assignor remains entitled to a share (either 25 or 10%) of the
amount received by the assignee.

III. IS THERE CONSENT TO ICSID JURISDICTION?

33. Under the system created by the ICSID Convention, consent by
both parties is an indispensable condition for the exercise of the Centre’s
jurisdiction under Article 25(1). The Convention only requires that con-
sent be in writing, leaving the parties otherwise free to choose the manner
in which to express their consent. Although the most common form of
consent is an agreement recorded in a single instrument, other expressions
of consent are equally valid, provided they are in writing.

34. In determining how to interpret agreements to arbitrate under the
ICSID Convention, the Tribunal is guided by an ICSID decision which
held that

a convention to arbitrate is not to be construed restrictively,
nor, as a matter of fact, broadly or liberally. It is to be con-
strued in a way which leads to find out and to respect the
common will of the parties.... Moreover, ...any convention,
including conventions to arbitrate, should be construed in
good faith, that is to say by taking into account the conse-
quences of the commitments the parties may be considered as
having reasonably and legitimately envisaged.>

 

35. The question of whether the parties have effectively expressed their
consent to ICSID jurisdiction is not to be answered by reference to

5 Amco Asia et al. v. Indonesia, Decision on Jurisdiction of September 25, 1983, 23
LL.M. 359 (1984).

264 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

national law. It is governed by international law as set out in Article 25(1)
of the ICSID Convention.

36. In the instant case, Claimant invokes ICSID jurisdiction by point-
ing to three independent bases of consent, namely: a) the Bilateral Invest-
ment Treaty (BIT) as an international treaty in force between the two
States; b) the notice published by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
Slovak Republic in the Official Gazette on October 22, 1993 (the
“Notice”), announcing the entry into force of the BIT on January 1, 1993;
and c) the reference to the BIT in the Consolidation Agreement.

A. The BIT

37. The question whether the BIT is in force is relevant in the instant
case since Article 8 of the BIT contains an ICSID arbitration clause. If the
BIT entered into force on January 1, 1993 or on some other date, the Slo-
vak Republic would be bound by the consent so given, because Article 8
provides for the settlement of investment disputes at the option of the
party initiating the arbitration proceedings, either under the ICSID Con-
vention or the arbitration rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (“UNCITRAL”).

38. Since Claimant by its Request for Arbitration, dated April 18,
1997, submitted the instant dispute to ICSID, Claimant would be
deemed to have accepted ICSID jurisdiction on that date, Respondent
having already unequivocally consented to it. The exchange of consents in
this form would satisfy the requirement of a “written consent” under Arti-
cle 25(1) of the ICSID Convention. This type of consent has been
accepted as a valid submission to the Centre’s jurisdiction in the first case
brought by an investor under a bilateral investment treaty,® and has found
acceptance in subsequent practice.

39. The elements of proof presented by Claimant and Respondent on
the question whether the BIT has entered into force are by no means con-
clusive enough to permit a definite answer. Article 12 of the BIT provides

© Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. (AAPL) v. Republic of Sri Lanka, 4 ICSID Rep. 245,
30 LL.M. 577 (1991).

7 C. Schreuer, “Commentary on the ICSID Convention: Article 25,” 11 ICSID Rev.—
Foreign Investment L. J. 441 (1996).

CASES 265

that “each Party shall give notice to the other Party of the completion of
the constitutional formalities required for this Agreement to enter into
force”. In the Tribunal’s view, this language shows that the parties were
aware and mutually recognized that the signature of the BIT by the two
heads of government was not sufficient to bring the treaty into force and
that further formalities were required under the respective constitutions.
Whether or not such constitutional formalities needed to be complied
with as a matter of domestic law—an issue on which the parties disagree—
is relatively immaterial, considering the above-quoted stipulation included
in the “Entry into force” provision of the BIT. This provision must be
deemed to have some meaning as required under the principle of effective-
ness (effet utile). It may, consequently, not be disregarded as contemplating
a mere procedural formality not affecting the coming into force of the
BIT. This is so particularly when the language is read in the light of Article
24(1) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (the “Vienna Con-
vention”), which provides that “a treaty enters into force in such manner
and upon such date as it may provide or as the negotiating States may
agree.” The Tribunal notes, in this connection, that the Parties agree that
no such exchange of notices has taken place. The documents on file in
this case indicate, moreover, that this is also the position of the Czech
Republic.

40. In its pleadings, Claimant has made reference to Article 46 of the
Vienna Convention. Under that provision a State’s right to invoke the fact
that its consent to be bound by a treaty violates a provision of its internal
law regarding competence to conclude treaties is limited to cases in which
such violation was manifest, that is, “if it would be objectively evident to
any State conducting itself in the matter in accordance with normal prac-
tice and in good faith”. However, this provision deals with the “Invalidity
of Treaties”, whereas the Slovak Republic claims that the BIT never came
into force due to the non-compliance with its Article 12. The Slovak
Republic does not claim that the treaty is invalid, although that assertion
was made in the corrective notice published by the Slovak Ministry of For-
eign Affairs in the Official Gazette on November 20, 1997.

41. The second sentence of Article 12 of the BIT provides that the
treaty shall come into force as of the date of the division of the two
Republics. Claimant contends that this provision should prevail over the
above-quoted procedural formalities calling for the exchange of notices
signalling the completion of the constitutional requirement found in the

266 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

first sentence of Article 12, especially because both States knew that the
division would occur on January 1, 1993. Respondent submits, on the
other hand, that this provision should be interpreted to mean that once
the exchange of notices contemplated by the first sentence had taken
place, the treaty would be effective as of the date of division, the division
being another condition for the coming into force of the BIT. In the Tri-
bunal’s view, Respondent's interpretation is more consistent with the
requirements of the principle of effectiveness than is Claimant's submis-
sion on that subject.

42. The numerous declarations issued by different authorities of the
two States in various circumstances and the expert opinions which have
been produced by both parties, expressing conflicting views regarding the
coming into force of the BIT, are not particularly helpful due to the fact
that they are inconclusive and contradictory. Little would therefore be
gained by reviewing them. Equally unhelpful would be an analysis of the
question whether the BIT can be characterized as a “Governmental
Treaty” (not requiring approval by Parliament nor Presidential ratification)
or a “Presidential Treaty” (subject to such approval). This is so because the
wording of Article 12 of the BIT does not fit into one or the other of these
categories of treaties.

43. The Tribunal accordingly holds that the uncertainties relating to the
entry into force of the BIT prevent that instrument from providing a sound
basis upon which to found the parties’ consent to ICSID jurisdiction.

B. The Notice

44. ICSID practice also indicates that the exchange of written consents
required for ICSID jurisdiction can be satisfied not only by the mutual
acceptances of bilateral investment treaties, but also by other forms of
acceptances. Many investment laws of developing countries provide for
the State’s acceptance of ICSID jurisdiction (or for alternative dispute res-
olution methods) for disputes with the investor arising out of a particular
investment. Under some laws the offer is deemed to be accepted as soon as
the foreign investor files an investment application pursuant to such a law,
regardless of whether the application includes a reference to the arbitration
provision contained in the law. The aforementioned laws differ from the
present case in that the offer of consent by the Slovak State is not con-
tained in a domestic legislative act (or an international treaty in force for

CASES 267

that State) but, rather, in a notice of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
Slovak Republic, published in the Official Gazette, announcing that the
BIT had entered into force on January 1, 1993.8

45. Respondent contends that the publication of the BIT in the Official
Gazette did not result in its entry into force, nor give that treaty any other
legal effect under Slovak law. Claimant, on the other hand, considers the
publication to constitute a sufficient basis upon which to found the Slovak
Republic’s consent to ICSID jurisdiction, even if the underlying legal
instrument (the BIT) did not enter into force. In this connection, it
should be noted that if the Notice were to be held to constitute a valid
offer by the Slovak State to submit to international arbitration, the correc-
tive notice published by the Slovak Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the Offi-
cial Gazette on November 20, 1997, asserting the invalidity of the BIT,
would be of no avail to Respondent, since Claimant accepted the offer in
the Request for Arbitration filed prior to the publication of the corrective
notice.

46. It must now be determined whether the original Notice published
in the Official Gazette provides a sufficient basis for holding the Slovak
State to be bound under Article 8 of the BIT. Even if the Notice were to be
characterized as a unilateral declaration by the Slovak State, it still needs to
be asked whether it was “the intention of the State making the declaration
that it should become bound according to its terms”, as required by the
international law principles applicable to unilateral declarations.? Pursu-
ant to these principles, unilateral assumption of the contractual obliga-
tions is “not lightly to be presumed...” and requires “a very consistent
course of conduct.”!° As noted by one authoritative source, “while the
principle applied by the [International] Court [of Justice]—that a unilat-
eral declaration may have certain legal effects—is not new, when the decla-
ration is not directed to a specific state or states but is expressed erga
omnes, as here, the detection of an intention to be legally bound, and of
the structure of such intention, involves very careful appreciation of the

8 See note 2, supra.

° Nuclear Tests Case (Australia v. France), IC.J. Reports 1974, p. 253, at 274. See also
Case Concerning Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v.
United States of America), I.C.J. Reports 1986, p. 14, at 13 Nuclear 2.

'0 North Sea Continental Shelf Cases, I.C.J. Reports 1969, p. 4, at 25.

268 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

facts.”!! Given this standard, the Tribunal considers that the Slovak
Republic’s intention to be bound by the treaty through the Notice has not
been established. This is so particularly when it is recalled that the entry
into force of the treaty appears to have been conditioned on an exchange
of notices which, as we have seen did not take place. (See para. 39, supra.)

47. The Tribunal must now turn to the question whether the Slovak
State is estopped because of the Notice from denying that it is bound by
the arbitration offer under the BIT. An essential element of estoppel is that
“there must be reliance in good faith upon the statement either to the det-
riment of the party so relying on the statement or to the advantage of the
party making the statement”.!? Claimant nowhere alleges that it was mis-
led by Respondent or that it relied on any allegedly misleading statements
by Respondent and that it was prejudiced as a consequence of such reli-
ance. Instead, it is clear from a draft of the Consolidation Agreement, pre-
pared by CSOB after the date of the Notice, that it relied neither on the
BIT being in force nor on the fact that Article 8 thereof had become bind-
ing on the Slovak State. In that draft, CSOB initially proposed arbitration
in Prague and referred to the BIT “after it is ratified.” (See para. 50, infra.)

48. Since the second basis for consent to ICSID jurisdiction has not
been established, the Tribunal must now examine Claimant's third basis
for establishing such consent.

C. The Consolidation Agreement

49. The Consolidation Agreement, entered into between the parties to
these proceedings (the question of identifying all parties to the Agreement
being immaterial for the purposes of the present analysis), provides in the
relevant part of Article 7 that “this Agreement shall be governed by the
laws of the Czech Republic and the Treaty on the Promotion and Mutual
Protection of Investments between the Czech Republic and the Slovak
Republic dated November 23, 1992.” It must, therefore, be determined
whether this reference to the BIT must be deemed to constitute accep-
tance by the Slovak Republic of ICSID jurisdiction. Specifically, the ques-

'l 1. Brownlie, Public International Law 638-39 (4th ed. 1990).

'2 Brownlie, supra, at 641. See also B. Cheng, General Principles of Law as Applied by
International Courts and Tribunals 141 et. seq. (1987)

CASES 269

tion to be resolved is whether the consent required under the ICSID
Convention can be satisfied by a reference to a treaty that is not in force
on the international plane.

50. The parties have expressed conflicting views regarding the signifi-
cance of the reference to the BIT in the Consolidation Agreement. Claim-
ant contends that it is immaterial whether the reference is characterized as
a choice-of-law clause or an incorporation by reference. To Claimant, the
decisive question is whether the provision can be interpreted as an agree-
ment to submit to ICSID jurisdiction. Relying on the text of the clause
and its reference to the BIT, Claimant contends that it constitutes an
incorporation by reference of ICSID jurisdiction. Respondent submits
that the reference to the BIT is made in the context of a choice-of-law pro-
vision, with both Czech law and the BIT equally governing the interpreta-
tion of the contract. Since the BIT never came into force, the reference to
it should be disregarded. Respondent further contends that even if Article
7 of the Consolidation Agreement were to be interpreted as an incorpora-
tion by reference, the reference itself cannot be deemed to amount to con-
sent to arbitration. In support of this contention, Respondent points, inter
alia, to the UNCITRALs Model Law on International Commercial Arbi-
tration of June 21, 1985, whose Article 7(2) states in part: “The reference
in a contract to a document containing an arbitration clause constitutes an
arbitration agreement provided that the contract is in writing and the ref-
erence is such as to make that clause part of the contract.”

51. The negotiating history of the provision under examination offers
elements permitting the Tribunal to determine the parties’ common intent
regarding the issue here under consideration. The documents submitted
by the parties show that the Consolidation Agreement was the subject of
various drafts due to changes requested by Respondent. This latter cir-
cumstance provides a sufficient basis for rejecting Respondent's argument
that the contra proferentem rule should be applied against Claimant by
holding that the reference to the BIT in Article 7 of the Consolidation
Agreement does not embody consent to ICSID jurisdiction.

52. It is uncontested and fully borne out by the record that in reply to a
draft of the Consolidation Agreement submitted by the Slovak Republic
on or about November 15, 1993, containing neither a governing law
clause nor a dispute-settlement provision, CSOB proposed various drafts
in the period between November 15—December 17, 1993, including a

270 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

governing law provision referring to Czech law only and an arbitration
clause referring disputes to the Arbitration Tribunal of the Chamber of
Commerce and Industry in Prague. The latter reference was not accepted
by Respondent. After further revisions the parties agreed to a final draft,
which included the following provision: “This agreement shall be gov-
erned by the laws of the Czech Republic and the Treaty on the promotion
and mutual protection of investments between the Czech Republic and
the Slovak Republic after it is ratified.” The final draft of the Consolida-
tion Agreement makes no express reference to arbitration or to any other
method of dispute settlement, but before it was signed on December 17/
19, 1993, the above provision was amended by deleting the words “after it
is ratified” and by replacing it with the date of the signature of the BIT.

53. The parties have given different explanations for this amendment.
For the purposes of the present analysis, it is relevant to note, first, that
the issue of the settlement of disputes through arbitration was raised in the
negotiations leading up to the conclusion of the Consolidation Agree-
ment; that a clause proposed by CSOB on that subject was rejected by the
Slovak Republic; and that the final text as agreed by the parties contains
no separate arbitration clause, although it does make reference to the BIT
which provides for a dispute settlement method that permits resort either
to the ICSID Convention or the UNCITRAL arbitration rules. Second,
the reference in the final draft to the BIT “after it is ratified” would have
justified the conclusion that the acceptance of the arbitration provision
was conditioned upon the BIT’s coming into force at international level;
however, the phrase relating to ratification was eliminated from the signed
text.

54. The negotiating history of the clause under consideration thus
indicates that the issue of the dispute settlement method had been dis-
cussed by the parties and that the proposal to resort to domestic arbitra-
tion in the Czech Republic had been rejected by the Slovak party. These
considerations support Claimant’s contention that the parties eventually
agreed on international arbitration. In the absence of a separate dispute
resolution provision, the reference to the BIT satisfies the requirement
that international arbitration, as specified in its Article 8, is the agreed
dispute resolution mechanism. This reference cannot be understood to
mean that the contested provision was intended to deal exclusively with
the governing law question, as Respondent contends, if only because by
eliminating the phrase relating to the BIT’s ratification, the parties made

CASES 271

the reference to the BIT and to the consent to arbitration expressed by it
effective and unconditional. As a matter of fact, the elimination of the
phrase may be deemed to indicate either that the parties were convinced
that the BIT was already in force (the Notice announcing the BIT’s status
had appeared less than two months before) or, what is more likely, that
they intended the reference to the BIT to be a valid expression of consent
for purposes of their contract, including the provision for the settlement
of disputes, independently of the BIT’s entry into force on the interna-
tional plane.

55. The Tribunal concludes, therefore, that by referring to the BIT, the
parties intended to incorporate Article 8 of the BIT by reference into the
Consolidation Agreement, in order to provide for international arbitration
as their chosen dispute-settlement method. The soundness of this conclu-
sion is confirmed by the fact that the provisions of the BIT were well
known to the negotiators for both parties.

56. Respondent also contends that even if the BIT is held to be applica-
ble, its dispute-settlement mechanism under Article 8 can be invoked only
by means of a joint submission of the dispute by the parties either to an
ICSID arbitration tribunal or to a tribunal established under the UNCI-
TRAL arbitration rules. Since Claimant has not sought ICSID arbitration
jointly with Respondent, the latter submits that the requirements of Arti-
cle 8 of the BIT have not been satisfied.

57. Respondent's contention, which is based on its translation of the
Czech and Slovak texts of Article 8, has been convincingly refuted by
expert evidence presented by Claimant. The Tribunal also notes that in its
last submission, Respondent itself admits that the wording of Article 8 is
“ambiguous.” Moreover, a holding that the parties must submit their dis-
pute to arbitration jointly would amount to a finding that the terms of
Article 8 of the BIT, even if otherwise effective for purposes of ICSID
jurisdiction, do not provide for binding arbitration unless the parties agree
to arbitration if and when a dispute arises. As correctly pointed out by
Claimant, such an interpretation would leave investors without the pro-
tection afforded by international arbitration, contrary to the main objec-
tive of bilateral investment treaties. The fact that some such treaties may
contain provisions for joint submission of disputes to arbitration does not
compel the conclusion that provisions whose wording is at best ambiguous
must be interpreted in like manner. Such a construction of the terms of a

272 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

treaty would be incompatible with the applicable international rules for
the interpretation of these types of agreements. (Vienna Convention, art.

31(1).)

58. The Tribunal notes, furthermore, that Article 8(3) of the BIT pro-
vides that whichever of the two dispute-settlement facilities envisaged
under Article 8(2)—ICSID or the UNCITRAL rules—first receives a dis-
pute shall resolve it. The language of this provision makes sense only if it
is predicated on the assumption that each party to a dispute has the right
separately to initiate the arbitration proceedings.

59. For all the above reasons, the Tribunal holds that the parties have
consented in the Consolidation Agreement to ICSID jurisdiction and that
the date of such Agreement is, for all relevant purposes, the date of their
consent. Since each party may separately institute the arbitration proceed-
ings, Claimant was entitled to elect ICSID jurisdiction.

IV. IS THERE A LEGAL DISPUTE ARISING OUT OF AN INVESTMENT?

60. The Tribunal must now consider the objection raised by the Slovak
Republic in which it challenges the jurisdiction of the Centre and the Tri-
bunal’s competence in this case on the ground that the dispute between
the Parties is not a “legal dispute arising directly out of an investment” as
required by Article 25(1) of the Convention.

61. The Slovak Republic stresses the political nature of the instant dis-
pute and its close link with the dissolution of the former Czech and Slovak
Federal Republic, but it does not question the legal nature of the dispute.
CBOS’s claim is based on Article 3 of the Consolidation Agreement. The
Tribunal must therefore analyze the rights and obligations set forth
therein, as well as the question whether CSOB is entitled to damages due
to the breach of the obligations alleged to have been committed by the
Slovak Republic. CSOB does not seek a determination relating to the divi-
sion of assets and liabilities between the two Republics, a subject expressly
excluded from the scope of the BIT by its Article 11. While it is true that
investment disputes to which a State is a party frequently have political
elements or involve governmental actions, such disputes do not lose their
legal character as long as they concern legal rights or obligations or the
consequences of their breach. Given these considerations, the Tribunal is
satisfied that CSOB’s claim is legal in character.

CASES 273

62. The Slovak Republic bases its objection to the jurisdiction of the
Centre and the competence of this Tribunal on the ground that the dis-
pute in the instant case is not related to an “investment” and, moreover,
that it does not arise “directly” out of an investment within the meaning of
Article 25(1) of the Convention.

63. It is common ground that the Convention does not define the term
“investment” and that various proposals to define it during the drafting
negotiations failed. This fact is reflected in the Report of the Executive
Directors of the World Bank, which noted that:

27. No attempt was made to define the term “investment”
given the essential requirements of consent by the parties,
and the mechanisms through which Contracting States can
make known in advance, if they so desire, the classes of dis-
putes which they would or would not consider submitting to
the Centre (Article 25(4)).!3

64. This statement also indicates that investment as a concept should be
interpreted broadly because the drafters of the Convention did not impose
any restrictions on its meaning. Support for a liberal interpretation of the
question whether a particular transaction constitutes an investment is also
found in the first paragraph of the Preamble to the Convention, which
declares that “the Contracting States [are] considering the need for inter-
national cooperation for economic development, and the role of private
international investment therein.” This language permits an inference
that an international transaction which contributes to cooperation
designed to promote the economic development of a Contracting State
may be deemed to be an investment as that term is understood in the
Convention.

65. It is worth noting, in this connection, that a Contracting State that
wishes to limit the scope of the Centre's jurisdiction can do so by making
the declaration provided for in Article 25(4) of the Convention. The Slo-
vak Republic has not made such a declaration and has, therefore, submit-
ted itself broadly to the full scope of the subject matter jurisdiction
governed by the Convention.

'3 1 ICSID Rep. 28 (1993)

274 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

66. It follows that an important element in determining whether a dis-
pute qualifies as an investment under the Convention in any given case is
the specific consent given by the Parties. The Parties’ acceptance of the
Centre’s jurisdiction with respect to the rights and obligations arising out
of their agreement therefore creates a strong presumption that they con-
sidered their transaction to be an investment within the meaning of the
ICSID Convention.

67. The Tribunal must accordingly attach considerable significance to
the reference made in Article 7 of the Consolidation Agreement to the
BIT and thus to the ICSID arbitration clause contained therein (Article
8). The Parties’ acceptance of the relevance and applicability of the BIT to
the Consolidation Agreement expresses their view that the latter transac-
tion relates to an investment within the meaning of the BIT. The contrary
conclusion would deprive the reference to the BIT in Article 7 of the Con-
solidation Agreement of its meaning or effet utile.

68. The Slovak Republic is correct in pointing out, however, that an
agreement of the parties describing their transaction as an investment is
not, as such, conclusive in resolving the question whether the dispute
involves an investment under Article 25(1) of the Convention. The con-
cept of an investment as spelled out in that provision is objective in nature
in that the parties may agree on a more precise or restrictive definition of
their acceptance of the Centre's jurisdiction, but they may not choose to
submit disputes to the Centre that are not related to an investment. A
two-fold test must therefore be applied in determining whether this Tribu-
nal has the competence to consider the merits of the claim: whether the
dispute arises out of an investment within the meaning of the Convention
and, if so, whether the dispute relates to an investment as defined in the
Parties’ consent to ICSID arbitration, in their reference to the BIT and the
pertinent definitions contained in Article 1 of the BIT.

69. CSOB’s claim is based on the allegation that the Slovak Republic
breached its obligation under the Consolidation Agreement by failing and
refusing to cover the losses incurred by the Slovak Collection Company.
Viewed in isolation, this undertaking does not involve any spending, out-
lays or expenditure of resources by CSOB in the Slovak Republic. Stand-
ing alone, therefore, it does not constitute an investment.

70. Claimant argues, however, that the loan made to the Slovak Collec-

CASES 275

tion Company qualifies as an investment and that the actual dispute is
therefore within the Centre’s jurisdiction and the competence of this Tri-
bunal. The Slovak Republic rejects the view that CSOB’s loan is an invest-
ment and contends that the dispute does not arise directly out of the Loan
Agreement. It submits that the dispute is concerned exclusively with the
purported obligation of the Slovak Republic to cover the losses of the Slo-
vak Collection Company.

71. The Slovak Republic’s argument calls for an analysis of the meaning
of the word “directly” as used in that part of Article 25(1) of the Conven-
tion which reads as follows: “The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to
any legal dispute arising directly out of an investment, ...”. Here it is rele-
vant to note that in the Fedax case the Tribunal stated:

It is apparent that the term “directly” relates in this Article to
the “dispute” and not to the “investment”. It follows that
jurisdiction can exist even in respect of investments that are
not direct, so long as the dispute arises directly from such
transaction. This interpretation is also consistent with the
broad reach that the term “investment” must be given in the
light of the negotiating history of the Convention. !4

72. The Tribunal agrees with the interpretation adopted in the Fedax
case. An investment is frequently a rather complex operation, composed of
various interrelated transactions, each element of which, standing alone,
might not in all cases qualify as an investment. Hence, a dispute that is
brought before the Centre must be deemed to arise directly out of an
investment even when it is based on a transaction which, standing alone,
would not qualify as an investment under the Convention, provided that
the particular transaction forms an integral part of an overall operation
that qualifies as an investment. !>

73. The Preamble of the Convention confirms the foregoing interpreta-
tion. Here, after “considering the need for international cooperation for
economic development, and the role of private international investment

'4 Fedax N.V. v. Republic of Venezuela, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, July 11,
1997, 37 LL.M. 1378, at para. 24 (1998).

'5 See ibid., paras. 25 and 26, and cases cited therein.

276 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

therein,” the Contracting Parties bear “in mind the possibility that from
time to time disputes may arise in connection with such investment
between Contracting States and nationals of other Contracting States.”

74. The foregoing analysis indicates that the term “directly”, as used in
Article 25(1) of the Convention, should not be interpreted restrictively to
compel the conclusion that CSOB’s claim is outside the Centre's jurisdic-
tion and the Tribunal’s competence merely because it is based on an obli-
gation of the Slovak Republic which, standing alone, does not qualify as
an investment.

75. Hence, in deciding whether the obligation referred to in CSOB’s
requested relief forms part of an investment, the Tribunal has to determine
whether the purported obligation of the Slovak Republic forms an integral
part of a transaction which qualifies as an investment. The Slovak Repub-
lic’s undertaking to cover the losses incurred by the Slovak Collection
Company is closely linked to the loan provided by CSOB pursuant to
Article 3 of the Consolidation Agreement and the provisions of the Loan
Agreement. This loan was basically designed to secure the refinancing of
the Collection Company up to an amount corresponding to the payment
by the Company of the value of the receivables assigned by CSOB on the
basis of the schedule of payments covering the years 1995 to 2003. As
stated in Article 3 of the Consolidation Agreement, it follows from the
nature of the assigned receivables, which are qualified therein as “non-per-
forming”, that the Collection Company will incur a loss resulting from the
operating costs of the Company and the schedule of payments, including
interests, due to CSOB and the amounts eventually recovered from those
described as “non-performing” debtors. The purpose of the Slovak Repub-
lic’s obligation to cover the loss of the Collection Company is therefore to
allow this Company to meet its obligation towards CSOB under the
schedule of payments based on the Loan Agreement. Given this close link,
the dispute arising out of the alleged breach of the Slovak Republic’s obli-
gation is closely related to the loan made by CSOB to the Slovak Collec-
tion Company.

76. The Slovak Republic submits that loans as such do not qualify as
investments under Article 25(1) of the Convention, nor under Article | of
the BIT. It contends further that the loan in the instant case is not an
investment because it did not involve a transfer of resources in the terri-
tory of the Slovak Republic. As to the first point, the Tribunal considers

CASES 277

that the broad meaning which must be given to the notion of an invest-
ment under Article 25(1) of the Convention is opposed to the conclusion
that a transaction is not an investment merely because, as a matter of law,
it is a loan. This is so, if only because under certain circumstances a loan
may contribute substantially to a State’s economic development. In this
connection, Claimant correctly points out that other ICSID Tribunals
have affirmed their competence to deal with the merits of claims based on
loan agreements. !®

77. In support of its conclusion that the CSOB loan qualifies as an
investment under the BIT, Claimant points to Article 1(1), which reads in
part as follows:

. Investment’ shall mean any asset invested or obtained by
an investor of one Party in the territory of the other Party
in accordance with the laws of the other Party, including,
without limitation: ...

c) monetary receivables or claims to any performance
related to an investment; ...

e) any rights under an act or under any contract, license or
permit issued under an act, including any concession to
search for, cultivate or exploit natural resources.

Although loans are not expressly mentioned in this list, terms as broad as
“assets” and “monetary receivables or claims” clearly encompass loans
extended to a Slovak entity by a national of the other Contracting Party.
Loans as such are therefore not excluded from the notion of an investment
under Article 1(1) of the BIT. It does not follow therefrom, however, that
any loan and, in particular, the loan granted by CSOB to the Slovak Col-
lection Company meets the requirements of an investment under Article
25(1) of the Convention or, for that matter, under Article 1(1) of the BIT,
which speaks of an “asset invested or obtained by an investor of one Party
in the territory of the other Party”.

78. The Slovak Republic contends that the CSOB loan does not consti-
tute an investment. It defines an investment essentially as the acqu

 

16 See, e.g., the Fedax case, paras. 22 and 29, supra.

278 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

of property or assets through the expenditure of resources by one party
(the “investor”) in the territory of a foreign country (the “host State”),
which is expected to produce a benefit on both sides and to offer a return
in the future, subject to the uncertainties of the risk involved. While the
Slovak Republic argues that the CSOB loan does not meet any elements of
the above definition, CSOB submits that its loan qualifies as an invest-
ment thereunder. The Tribunal notes, in this connection, that while it is
undisputed that CSOB’s loan did not cause any funds to be moved or
transferred from CSOB to the Slovak Collection Company in the territory
of the Slovak Republic, a transaction can qualify as an investment even in
the absence of a physical transfer of funds.!7

79. Claimant argues that the loan provided the Slovak Collection Com-
pany with the funds necessary to settle the purchase price of the assigned
receivables, and that these funds therefore represented an asset acquired by
CSOB in the territory of the Slovak Republic. An analysis of the particular
circumstances of this transaction indicates, however, that while CSOB’s
receivables against the Slovak Collection Company had a defined value, as
determined in the loan agreement and the schedule of payments agreed
upon by the Parties, these receivables had no corresponding value for the
Slovak Collection Company. Indeed, the price to be paid by the Company
to CSOB, that is, the return-payment of the advances received from
CSOB under the loan facility, had a value far above the expected recovery
from the collection of the assigned non-performing receivables. To that
extent, CSOB’s loan did not involve any spending or outlay of resources in
the territory of the Slovak Republic.

80. The contractual scheme embodied in the Consolidation Agreement
shows, however, that the CSOB loan to the Slovak Collection Company is
closely related to and cannot be disassociated from all other transactions
involving the restructuring of CSOB. As stated in the first part of Article
1, the Consolidation Agreement was designed to provide for “the imple-
mentation of the project of the second phase of CSOB’s transformation,”
and further:

This process shall consist primarily of a financial consolida-
tion of CSOB in preparation for the future privatization of

'7 Thid., at para. 41, supra.

CASES 279

CSOB. The consolidation of CSOB shall involve the
improvement of CSOB’s balance by the disposal of non-per-
forming assets of CSOB to such level as agreed herein.

Those provisions of Article 1 that deal with the objects to be achieved
show that the Agreement constituted the legal framework for a “consolida-
tion process” consisting of several interrelated actions, as defined in the
second part of Article 1:

The following actions shall be taken as part of the consolida-
tion process:

I. An increase in the registered capital of CSOB;
II. Improvement of the balance of CSOB, comprising:

(a) the coverage of a part of the Non-Performing Assets
of CSOB (as defined below) out of the profit and
reserves;

(b) the establishment of Collection Companies and the
transfer of the Non-Performing Assets to such Col-
lection Companies.

III. The privatization of CSOB.

The assignments of a part of CSOB’s non-performing receivables to the
respective Collection Company to be established in each Republic was
thus an integral part of the whole process. This transfer improved CSOB’s
balance by crediting CSOB with payments equivalent to “the nominal
value of the assigned receivables, including any interest accrued until the
time of the assignment”, whereas the Collection Company had to suffer
the loss resulting “from the nature of the assigned receivables.” (Article 3.)

81. The sole or exclusive purpose of the CSOB loan was to ensure the
refinancing by the Collection Company of CSOB. The loan facility was
therefore a mere instrument in ensuring the payment by the Collection
Company of the nominal value of the assigned receivables, which was part
of the improvement of CSOB’s balance. This close link is further evi-
denced by the fact that CSOB’s loan to the Collection Companies is part
of the Consolidation Agreement concluded between CSOB and the
Republics. (Article 3.) Similarily, the Slovak Republic’s undertaking to

280 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

compensate its Collection Company for the losses made as a consequence
of unsuccessful recoveries of the non-performing assets was instrumental
to ensuring the refinancing of CSOB and thus to covering the payment of
the assigned receivables up to their nominal value. This obligation of the
Slovak Republic is also included in the terms of the Consolidation Agree-
ment (Article 3) and referred to in Article 7 of the Loan Agreement.

82. The Slovak Republic’s undertaking and the CSOB loan form an
integrated whole in the process defined in the Consolidation Agreement.
Hence, individual transactions comprising it may still meet the require-
ments of an investment under the Convention, provided the overall opera-
tion for the consolidation of CSOB, to which it is closely connected,
qualifies as an investment.

83. The basic feature of the Consolidation Agreement was not the
financial consolidation of CSOB as such, but the development of the role
and activities of CSOB in both Republics. When considering the imple-
mentation of the second phase of CSOB’s transformation, the parties to
the Agreement referred to:

The special position and role of CSOB in managing the cen-
tral foreign exchange source for both Republics and in per-
forming foreign banking transactions, and the extraordinary
role that CSOB plays in the economy of both Republics. ...
(Article 1.)

The second phase was to render CSOB more attractive to potential new
shareholders from the private sector and thus prepare for the future priva-
tization of CSOB. The ultimate goal of this process was to enable CSOB
to exercise fully its role and to develop its activities in both Republics
within the framework of a market economy.

84. The Slovak Republic is correct in submitting that both Republics
undertook to initiate this process and to ensure the capital increase of
CSOB as well as the funding necessary to cover the losses of the Collection
Companies and, consequently, the refinancing of CSOB. These important
financial contributions to the benefit of CSOB are not investments within
the meaning of the Convention, for they do not involve investments made
in a Contracting State by a national of another Contracting State. This
conclusion does not, however, resolve the issue whether or not CSOB

CASES 281

qualifies as an “investor” under the Consolidation Agreement. To answer
that question, the Tribunal must focus on CSOB’s role in achieving the
ultimate goal of the Agreement, irrespective of whether or not the funds
required to allow CSOB to exercise this role were provided by the
Republics.

85. The function attributed to CSOB in the Consolidation Agreement
was, as stated in the heading of Article 5, the “Development of CSOB in
the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic”. According to the first sen-
tence of this provision, “[t]he development of CSOB in the Czech Repub-
lic and in the Slovak Republic shall reflect the needs of the Company and
the interest of the shareholders in maximizing the value of CSOB.” This
development was designed to improve what Article 1 qualifies as “the
extraordinary role that CSOB plays in the economy of both Republics.”

86. The drafting history of the Consolidation Agreement shows that the
Slovak Republic wished to ensure that CSOB would maintain and extend
its activities on its territory. This conclusion finds support in the Slovak
insistence on this point during the negotiations of the Agreement:

The Slovak party demands guarantees of sound development
of CSOB in the Slovak Republic, and makes the compensa-
tion of the collection company’s losses conditional upon the
honoring of such guarantees. !®

87. The Consolidation Agreement provides basically for the develop-
ment of CSOB’s activities in both Republics. A particular consideration
was given to CSOB’s role in the Slovak Republic in two respects. First,
pursuant to the last sentence of Article 5, the Czech National Bank
(CNB), in consultation with the Ministry of Finance of the Czech Repub-
lic, “shall enable CSOB to develop business in the Slovak Republic in line
with the above principle by issuing a general foreign-exchange licence”.
Second, the parties provide in Article 6 for the establishment of a CSOB
subsidiary domiciled in the Slovak Republic that would take over the
entire range of banking services provided by the CSOB branch network in
the Slovak Republic and enable CSOB to reduce its equity interest below
50%. Although this subsidiary has not as yet been created, there can be no

'8 Minutes of Interdepartmental Discussion of the Project of CSOB’s Restructuring as
Part of the Preparation for CSOB’s Privatization on October 21, 1993.

282 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

doubt that the parties intended to strenghten CSOB as a leading entity in
the Slovak banking sector. Since the Loan Agreement was concluded by
CSOB’s branch in Bratislava, CSOB’s accounts receivable were recorded in
the accounting books of that branch. They were to be paid in Slovak cur-
rency and constituted a working asset designed to enable CSOB to engage
in business activities through its Slovak branches.

88. In the Tribunal’s view, the basic and ultimate goal of the Consolida-
tion Agreement was to ensure a continuing and expanding activity of
CSOB in both Republics. This undertaking involved a significant contri-
bution by CSOB to the economic development of the Slovak Republic; it
qualified CSOB as an investor and the entire process as an investment in
the Slovak Republic within the meaning of the Convention. This is evi-
dent from the fact that CSOB’s undertakings include the spending or out-
lays of resources in the Slovak Republic in response to the need for the
development of the Republic’s banking infrastructure.

89. The Tribunal concludes, moreover, that the requirements spelled
out in Article 1(1) of the BIT for a qualifying investment are also met in
the instant case. This must have been the view of the parties when they
accepted a reference to the BIT in Article 7 of the Consolidation Agree-
ment. The contrary conclusion would deprive this reference to the BIT of
any meaning (cf. para. 67). Furthermore, CSOB’s activity in the Slovak
Republic and its undertaking to ensure a sound banking infrastructure in
that country compel the conclusion that CSOB qualifies as the holder of
an “asset invested or obtained” in the territory of the Slovak Republic
within the meaning of Article 1(1) of the BIT, including “movable and
immovable property and any other encumbrances, including any mort-
gages, liens, guarantees, and similar rights” (Art. 1(1)(a)) and “monetary
receivables or claims to any performance related to an investment” (Art.

1()@)).

90. Finally, applying the definition of an investment proffered by the
Slovak Republic (para. 78, supra), it would seem that the resources pro-
vided through CSOB’s banking activities in the Slovak Republic were
designed to produce a benefit and to offer CSOB a return in the future,
subject to an element of risk that is implicit in most economic activities.
The Tribunal notes, however, that these elements of the suggested defini-
tion, while they tend as a rule to be present in most investments, are not a

CASES 283

formal prerequisite for the finding that a transaction constitutes an invest-
ment as that concept is understood under the Convention.

91. The Tribunal concludes, accordingly, that CSOB’s claim and the
related loan facility made available to the Slovak Collection Company are
closely connected to the development of CSOB’s banking activity in the
Slovak Republic and that they qualify as investments within the meaning
of the Convention and the BIT.

V. DECISION
92. For all the above reasons, the Tribunal unanimously decides that
this dispute is within the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of

the Tribunal. Accordingly, the Tribunal will issue the necessary Order for
the continuation of the proceedings on the merits.

Thomas Buergenthal Piero Bernardini Andreas Bucher

