International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
1818 H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A.
Telephone: (202) 458-1534 FAX: (202) 522-2615/2027
Website: http://(www.worldbank.org/icsid

By Courier
Ceskoslovenska obchodni banka, a.s.
c/o Mr. Charles N. Brower,

Ms, Abby Cohen Smutny,

Mr. Francis A. Vasquez, Jr. and
Ms. Anne D. Smith

White & Case LLP
701 Thirteenth Street, NW
Washington, DC 20005

December 29, 2004

The Slovak Republic
c/o Professor Emmanuel Gaillard
Shearman & Sterling
114 avenue des Champs-Elysées
75008 Paris
France
and
Mr. Henry Weisburg
Shearman & Sterling
599 Lexington Avenue
New York, NY 10022

Re: Ceskoslovenska obchodni banka, a.s. v. Slovak Republic

Dear Sirs and Mesdames,

(ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4)

The Tribunal has now drawn up and signed its Award.

In accordance with Rule 48(1)(a) of the Arbitration Rules of the Centre, I have

authenticated the original text of the Award and deposited it in the archives of the Centre.

In accordance with Rule 48(1)(b) of the Arbitration Rules, I am dispatching to you
herewith a certified copy of the Award. I have indicated the date of this dispatch on the original

text and on all copies.

In accordance with Article 49(1) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States and Rule 48(2) of the Arbitration Rules,

the Award is deemed to have been rendered on this date, December 29, 2004.

Enclosure

cc: Professor Hans van Houtte
Professor Piero Bernardini
Professor Andreas Bucher

Sincerely yours,

Roberto Dafiino
Secretary-General

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

1818H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C.
Telephone: (202) 458-1534 FAX: (202) 522. 2515/2007

CERTIFICATE

Ceskoslovenska obchodni banka, a.s.
v.

Slovak Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4)

I hereby certify that the attached document is a true copy of the original of the
Award of the Arbitral Tribunal in the above case.

Roberto Daffino
Secretary-General

Washington, D.C.
December 29, 2004

]

 

Date of dispatch to the parties: December 29, 2004

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
CESKOSLOVENSKA OBCHODNi BANKA A.S.
(Claimant)
versus
THE SLOVAK REPUBLIC

(Respondent)

Case No. ARB/97/4

AWARD
RENDERED BY THE TRIBUNAL
composed of
Professor Hans van Houtte, President

Professor Piero Bernardini
Professor Andreas Bucher

Secretary of the Tribunal

Ms. Margrete Stevens

Representing the Claimant:

Mr. Charles N. Brower
Ms. Abby Cohen Smutny’
Mr. Francis A. Vasquez Jr
Ms. Anne D. Smith

White & Case LLP, Washington, D.C.

Representing the Respondent:

Mr. Henry Weisburg
Shearman & Sterling, NewYork, NY

Professor Emmanuel Gaillard

Mr. John Savage

Mr. Peter Griffin

Shearman & Sterling, Paris, France

and, as co-counsel

Ms. Alena Cernejova

Mr. Peter Bartosik
Cernejova & Hrbek,
Bratislava, Slovak Republic

Ill.

VI.

Table of Contents

Introduction
Background of the Dispute
CSOB's Privatisation
The Three Phases of the Restructuring and Privatisation Process
The Agreements Relating to the Second Phase
The Cover Losses Provision of Article 3 of the CA at the Core of this Dispute
CSOB's Claims and the Slovak Republic's Request
The Scope of the Tribunal's Jurisdiction
The Petition for the Declaration of SI's Bankruptcy
¢ Law Applicable to the CA
The CA is a Legal Agreement
The Role of International Law in Respect of the CA
Is the CA Governed by Czech Public Law ?
Czech Private Law Is Applicable to Article 3 CA
ie he Meaning and Scope of Article 3 CA
Introduction
The Rules of Czech Law Applicable to the Interpretation of Article 3 CA
1. In general
2. The relevance of the wording
The Legal Nature of the Cover Losses Provision of Article 3 CA
The Notion of “Losses” that Triggers a “Cover Losses” Obligation
1 The losses related to the assigned non-performing receivables
a. The relevant schedule of payments
b. The occurrence of losses
c. The selection and collection of the receivables assigned
i. The Slovak Republic's involvement, knowledge
and acceptance
ii. The 6.25% capital adequacy ratio
2. The losses related to the operating costs
E. The Obligation to Cover Losses Under Article 3 CA
1. The Slovak Republic's involvement in the negotiation of the cover
losses provision
2. The meaning of “cover losses”
3. The Slovak Republic's obligation to cover SI's losses
4. CSOB's right to claim
The Receivables that Could Trigger Losses Under Article 3 CA
A. On-Balance Sheet Receivables

>

5 PoOommoow>

Bp avAw>

on

1. The devaluation loans
2. The receivables concerning Polnopo / Mykroprogres
3. Later transfer of receivables
B. Off-Balance Sheet Receivables
1. CSOB's internal instructions
2. Absence of signature on OBS Technopol loans
3. Later transfer of receivables

CSOB's Claim For Compensation
A. Obligation to Pay Full Compensation

Vil.
VIII.

B. The Claim Based on the Principal Amount of the Loan
Cc. The Claim Based on Interest Related to the Loan
Article 4 of the Loan Agreement
Methods (a) and (b)
Method (c)
The actually fixed interest rates
Interest calculation related to the currency split of the loan
Capitalization of interest
a. The agreement of the parties to the LA
b. Capitalization as “common business practice”
c. Other arguments
7. The amount of interest included in the Slovak Republic's cover losses
obligation
8. Article 8 of the Loan Agreement
Dz. Lost Profits and Interest on CSOB's Damage Claim
1, Procedural standing of CSOB's claim for lost profits
2. Concrete and abstract lost profits
3. The issue of evidence of CSOB's lost profits
4. Interest of CSOB's damage claim
E. Operating Costs and Other Fees
F, Taxes
The Division of Costs
Decision

AMWPYwne

INTRODUCTION

The Claimant in this case is the Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka A.S. (hereinafter
“CSOB”), a commercial bank organized under Czech law; the Respondent is the Slovak
Republic. CSOB filed its “Request for Arbitration” with the International Centre for Set-
tlement of Investment Disputes (hereinafter “ICSID” or “Centre”) on April 18, 1997,
charging the Slovak Republic with a breach of the Agreement on the Basic Principles of
a Financial Consolidation of Ceskoslovenské Obchodni Banka dated December 17,
1993 (hereinafter the “Consolidation Agreement”), that was concluded between the
Ministry of Finance of the Czech Republic, the Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Re-
public and CSOB. CSOB alleged that the breach consisted in the failure of the Slovak
Republic to cover the losses incurred by the Slovenska inkasna spol. s.r.o. (the Slovak

Collection Company), as agreed to in the Consolidation Agreement and claimed dam-

ages for the losses sustained, plus costs. The Request was registered ‘by the Centre on

April 25, 1997.

In accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceed-
ings (Arbitration Rules), the Tribunal was deemed constituted and the proceedings to
have begun on August 20, 1997, the date on which the Parties were notified by the Act-
ing Secretary-General of ICSID that Professor Andreas Bucher, appointed by CSOB,
Professor Piero Bernardini, appointed by the Slovak Republic, and Professor Thomas
Buergenthal, designated as President of the Tribunal by the Centre, had accepted their
appointments. On that date, the Acting Secretary-General also informed the Parties that

Ms. Margrete Stevens, Senior Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

On May 24, 1999, the Tribunal rendered a first decision on jurisdiction (hereinafter the
“First Decision on Jurisdiction”),! holding that the Parties had consented in the Consoli-
dation Agreement to ICSID jurisdiction and that, accordingly, the dispute was within the

jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal.

On December 23, 1999, the Slovak Republic filed a Further and Partial Objection to
Jurisdiction under ICSID Arbitration Rule 41.

After having heard the Parties’ written and oral submissions on this Request, the Tribu-
nal, on December 1, 2000, rendered its Decision on Respondent's Further and Partial
Objection to Jurisdiction (hereinafter the “Second Decision on Jurisdiction”).? In this
Decision, the Tribunal confirmed its jurisdiction regarding the dispute as framed by
CSOB to the extent that the same arises under the Consolidation Agreement and is to be
settled according to its provisions, including its governing law clause. On February 20,
2001, the Tribunal informed the Parties that further directions, as they had been re-
quested by the Slovak Republic on February 12, 2001, were not necessary to enable the
Slovak Republic to proceed with its defense; the Tribunal therefore concluded that it had

nothing to add to its Second Decision on Jurisdiction.

14 ICSID Review, Foreign Investment Law Journal, at 251 (1999).
15 ICSID Review, Foreign Investment Law Journal, at 530 (2000).

6. By letter dated October 4, 2001, Judge Thomas Buergenthal confirmed his decision to
resign as President of the Tribunal. In accordance with Arbitration Rule 10(2), the pro-

ceeding was suspended until the vacancy had been filled.

7. Ina joint letter dated December 3, 2001, both Parties requested that the Centre appoint
Professor Hans van Houtte to replace Judge Buergenthal on the Tribunal. By letter dated
December 11, 2001, the Centre informed the Parties that Professor van Houtte had ac-
cepted his appointment and that, accordingly, the Tribunal was deemed to have been re-

constituted and the proceedings to have resumed as of that date.

8. After the First Decision on Jurisdiction had been rendered and the merits phase of these
proceedings opened for the presentation of written submissions, the Parties filed the fol-
lowing memorials, together with supporting documentation, within the time limits fixed

by the Tribunal:

CSOB: Claimant's Memorial on the Merits, dated November 15, 1999;?
Slovak Republic: The Slovak Republic's Counter Memorial, dated April 19, 2001;
CSOB: Claimant's Reply, dated August 31, 2001;

Slovak Republic: The Slovak Republic's Rejoinder, dated February 28, 2002.

9. In Procedural Order No. 6 dated February 16, 2001, the Tribunal granted, with modifi-
cations, the Slovak Republic's request for the production of documents by CSOB. A set
of documents was filed by the CSOB on March 12, 2001. In its Procedural Order No. 7
dated October 14, 2002, the Tribunal confirmed that Procedural Order No. 6 continued
to govern the production of documents, including the denial of the Slovak Republic's re-
quest for production of documents relating to the finances and performance of Ceska
inkasni s.r.o.; the Tribunal ruled therefore that in respect of the latter category of materi-
als, it considered irrelevant documents and paragraphs whose removal from the file had
been requested by the Slovak Republic and would not take them into account, without,
however, ordering that such documents and paragraphs were to be actually removed

from the files already submitted.

3 This Memorial was re-submitted on February 15, 2000, including corrections to the Expert Report of Timo-
thy H. Hart (Arthur Andersen) submitted January 20, 2000.

On October 1, 2002, the Tribunal held a meeting at the Centre in Washington, D.C. that
dealt with procedural issues regarding the conduct of the first oral hearing on the merits

to be held on November 8-12, 2002.

The first oral hearing on the merits was held on November 8-12, 2002 in Prague, at a
venue agreed by the Parties. The hearing of witnesses and experts, followed by the Par-
ties’ respective pleadings, was recorded and documented by a transcript (hereinafter

“TR, November 2002”).

Following the first oral hearing held in Prague, the Parties filed on January 31, 2003 the
following submissions, within the time limit fixed by the Tribunal:

CSOB's Post Hearing Submission on Issues Addressed at the Hearing of November 8-

12, 2002;
The Slovak Republic's First Post Hearing Memorial.

The second oral hearing on the merits was equally held in Prague, as agreed by the Par-
ties. It took place on April 14-18, 2003. The hearing of witnesses and experts, followed
by the Parties’ respective pleadings, was again recorded and documented by a transcript
(hereinafter “TR, April 2003”).

Following the second oral hearing on the merits, the Parties filed the following submis-

sions, within the time limits fixed by the Tribunal:

On June 20, 2003: CSOB's Post Hearing Submission on Issues Addressed at the Hear-
ing of April 14-18, 2003; The Slovak Republic's Second Post Hearing Memorial;

On July 18, 2003: CSOB's Reply to the Slovak Republic's Second Post Hearing Memo-
rial; The Slovak Republic's Third Post Hearing Memorial.

On June 20, 2003, the Slovak Republic further filed a brief under the title “The Slovak
Republic's Proposed Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law”, to which CSOB sub-
mitted a Reply on July 18, 2003.

Upon the invitation by the Tribunal, the Parties submitted on October 18, 2004 an up-
date of the quotations of the inter-bank rates on three-months loans (BRIBOR).

16.

Il.

20.

21.

On October 29, 2004, each Party submitted a statement of costs incurred or borne by it
in this proceeding and on November 15, 2004, each Party made comments on the other

Party's statement.

By letter dated November 19, 2004, the Parties were informed that the proceeding had

been closed.

BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE
CSOB’s Privatisation

In the early 1990s, banks in Central and Eastern Europe had great difficulty remaining
solvent and competitive as their markets evolved from state-run economies to private
market economies. In order to remain viable, they needed restructuring. Most state-

owned banks thus became subject to privatisation processes in their respective countries.

The present dispute relates to the privatisation of one such bank, CSOB, the Foreign
Trade Bank of the former Czeskoslovak Republic, that changed its name to the “Czech
and Slovak Federal Republic” in 1990. After this Republic was dissolved in December
31, 1992, CSOB remained active in the succeeding Czech and Slovak Republics.

In 1992, with a view to future privatisation, the Czech and Slovak Republics had begun
the restructuring of CSOB. In fact, the restructuring of CSOB was the first of several re-
structuring operations of former Czechoslovak state-owned banks so as to prepare them

for privatisation.

At the end of 1992, after the dissolution of Czechoslovakia, the succeeding Czech and
Slovak Republics had become involved in the restructuring of CSOB. Both Republics

22.

23.

24,

4

became shareholders of CSOB which was pursuing its activity in the territory of both

States. *

The Three Phases of the Restructuring and Privatisation Process
The restructuring and privatisation process was organized in three phases:

During the first phase, which was initiated under the Federal Czechoslovak Govern-
ment, non-performing state-related assets and liabilities from CSOB were transferred to
the Czech and Slovak Republics at the ratio of 2:1, reflecting the respective population
of both successor states. As of January 1, 1993, the central foreign exchange resources
and the assets and liabilities of non-convertible currencies were transferred to the Czech
and Slovak Republics at the same ratio of 2:1. Problems connected with foreign ex-
change assets and liabilities of state character within CSOB’s balance were thus re-
solved and CSOB was relinquished from its former role as the Government’s financier

of foreign trade.

During the second phase, CSOB’s forthcoming privatisation came under preparation. It
was contemplated that such privatisation would take place within two to four years. This
phase included, inter alia, the increase of the registered capital of CSOB; the establish-
ment of a Czech and Slovak Collection Company to whom non-performing receivables
of CSOB would be transferred; and the establishment of a CSOB subsidiary in the Slo-
vak Republic. To implement the second stage of the restructuring, the Consolidation
Agreement (abbreviated “CA”) was concluded between the Ministry of Finance of the
Czech Republic (hereinafter the “MF CR”); the Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Re-
public (hereinafter the “MF SR”); and CSOB. The Czech National Bank, the National
Property Fund of the Czech Republic and the National Bank of Slovakia declared their
consent to this Agreement. Contrary to the later restructuring of other Czech and Slovak
banks, where restructuring assets were written down to the real value, CSOB’s assets
The main shareholders of CSOB were the Czech National Bank (26.51%) and the National Bank of Slova-

kia (24.13%), the Czech Ministry of Finance and the Czech National Property Fund (each 19.59%), as well
as private shareholders (10.18%).

25.

26.

27.

were maintained at nominal value and non-performing assets were replaced by perform-

ing receivables.

The third and final phase of CSOB’s transformation was its privatisation. This privatisa-
tion would require that at least 51% of the remaining state participation in CSOB were
sold to one strategic investor. In 1997, the actual privatisation of CSOB was undertaken.
CSOB was subsequently privatised in 1999 when the Czech State shareholders (i.e. the
Czech National Property Fund, the Czech Ministry of Finance, and the Czech National
Bank) as well as the National Bank of Slovakia sold their shares to KBC, a Belgian
bank.

The restructuring and privatisation of CSOB has been profitable to both the Czech Re-
public and the Slovak Republic. Before the restructuring, the privatisation of CSOB
would have been difficult and not very lucrative. The Tribunal notes that the Slovak
Republic contributed an amount of Czech Crowns 1,055 million to the increase of
CSOB’s capital. CSOB claims that the Slovak Republic undertook a commitment to
cover the losses incurred by the Slovak Collection Company and that its obligation to
cover these losses amounted to SKK 13,523,712,976. In this Award the Tribunal will
analyze whether indeed the Slovak Republic was required to cover such losses for such
amount. It may be born in mind that regardless whether the Slovak Republic would
have to cover the full amount as claimed by CSOB, the privatisation of CSOB, that has
yielded more than 17 billion SKK to the Slovak Republic, has been a profitable opera-

tion for the Slovak Republic.

The Agreements Relating to the Second Phase

The Consolidation Agreement that was the basic agreement to implement the second
stage of CSOB's restructuring provided, inter alia, for the assignment by CSOB of non-
performing loan portfolio receivables to two so-called “Collection Companies”, one to
be established by the Czech Republic (Ceska inkasni s.r.0., hereinafter “CI”), and the
other by the Slovak Republic (the Slovenské inkasnd spol s.r.o., hereinafter “SI”’), in

their respective national territories. This operation led to the conclusion of a number of

ered eed eee

Hee

agreements which, in respect of SI, have been described collectively as the “CSOB/SI

Agreements”.

28. The “Agreement on the Assignment of Certain Receivables of a Loan Portfolio” (here-

inafter the “Assignment Agreement”), and the “Agreement to Conclude Future Agree-
ments on the Assignments of Certain Receivables under Off-Balance Sheet Instruments”
(hereinafter the “Future Assignment Agreement” or “FAA”), that became effective on
December 31, 1993, organized the assignments. On the one hand, the Assignment
Agreement assigned actual balances of loans and payments made under guarantees. Two

d to this Agi were concluded subsequently, with the effect of chang-
ing the amount of receivables assigned. On the other hand, the FAA covered receivables
that were to be created by a future payment by CSOB, e.g. when a letter of credit was
drawn. These receivables were therefore assigned at a later stage, through several spe-
cific agreements (hereinafter the “OBS Assignment Agreements”). The FAA identified
the amounts of receivables as specified and determined that they were related to: Tech-
nopol a.s., Slovart a.s., Chirana Export-Import, Drevounia a.s., Istroconti a.s., Martimex

a.s., Elteco Zdruzenie.

29. Other agreements had to organize the financing of the assignments. The Czech and Slo-

vak Collection Companies were to receive the necessary funds from CSOB by way of a
loan in order to allow them to finance the assigned receivables and to pay their nominal

value to CSOB.

30. SI and CSOB thus concluded a “Loan Agreement on the Refinancing of Assigned Re-

ceivables” (hereinafter the “LA”), also effective as of December 31, 1993. The LA was
amended ten times in relation to the financing of the assignment of receivables arising
from the on-balance sheet instruments, some of these amendments being more relevant

to this dispute than others, as will be seen below.

31. The actual assignment of the off-balance sheet instruments was carried out by the OBS

Assignment Agreements, each of which relates to one particular Foreign Trade Organi-
zation (hereinafter “FTO”). In parallel, OBS Loan Agreements were concluded between

CSOB and SI, again in respect of each FTO, providing for loan disbursements in accor-

aa!

ae ik

32.

33.

34,

5

dance with the payments to be made for the receivables. The LA provided in Article
1(b) for the conclusion of these agreements; on the other hand, the OBS Loan Agree-
ments stated that they were related to the LA and that both documents should only be in-
terpreted in their mutual interconnection (Art. V). When the underlying guarantees had
to be paid and CSOB’s exposure materialised, SI had to pay for the transferred receiv-
able. A corresponding A d to the respective OBS Loan Ag) was then
concluded pursuant to which CSOB loaned SI an amount equal to the consideration part

 

for the transferred asset.

Uncertain receivables were thus removed from CSOB’s balance sheet and were replaced
by payments made by the Czech and Slovak Collection Companies, financed with funds
provided as a loan by CSOB.

Finally, CSOB and SI also concluded an “Agreement on securing activities of Slovenska
inkasna” (hereinafter the “Operation Agreement”). Under this agreement CSOB had to
take care of the administration of SI and secure the collection of the receivables CSOB
had transferred to SI. For this purpose, CSOB had to put at the disposal of SI the neces-
sary number of employees, one of which would act as executive of SI (Art. I{2]).
CSOB employees performing activities for SI were subject only to orders and instruc-
tions of the executives of SI in accordance with the resolution of the General Meeting
and the Supervisory Board of SI; however, they were not to act against the business in-
terest of CSOB (Art. IH[1][2]). The activities of SI's executives were to be subject, inter
alia, to the contro] and other authority of the Supervisory Board of S] (Art. III[2]). Since
the MF SR was the sole shareholder of SI, it had full authority in the General Meeting

and the power of appointment of the members of the Supervisory Board.

On the part of the Slovak Republic, the preparation and implementation of stage II of
CSOB's restructuring was the responsibility of a Working Group appointed by Resolu-
tion No. 937 of the Government of the Slovak Republic of December 15, 1993. This
Group was composed of selected Ministers of the Slovak Republic and the Governor of
the National Bank of Slovakia.> The Group authorized the Slovak Republic's Minister of

CSOB's Memorial, Exh. 6.

at 1H

—— 28 ws we le le = a a

35,

36.

Finance to found SI; to enter into a “master agreement” with the MF CR and CSOB
(which later became the CA); and to prepare and enter into the required partial agree-
ments for the purpose of securing the implementation of stage II of CSOB's transforma-
tion.® The Working Group also charged the Minister of Finance with making provisions
for the expenditures needed for the coverage of the losses of the Collection Company in
the State budget for the years 1995 to 2003. SI had to be “administered by the Ministry
of Finance of the Slovak Republic”, according to the draft resolution relating to the pro-
posal for the project for stage II’ that was “recognized” by the Government of the
Slovak Republic and “approved” by the Working Group, as well as according to the
report attached to this draft. The CA states in its Preamble that it was “based on”
Resolution No. 937 of the Government of the Slovak Republic of December 15, 1993,
as well as on the corresponding Resolution No. 689 of the Government of the Czech

Republic of December 1, 1993.

The Cover Losses Provision of Article 3 of the CA at the Core of this Dispute

One of the essential features of the assignments and their financing was that the Czech
Republic and the Slovak Republic had agreed in the CA that they would “cover any
losses” of the Collection Companies. Article 3, II, 5" paragraph of the CA stated -

The losses of the Collection Company shall be compensated for over the period
1995-2003. The MF CR [Ministry of Finance of the Czech Republic] and the MF
SR [Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic], each undertakes to cover any
losses made by the Collection Company in its respective territory.

The Collection Companies that had to take over the non-performing receivables at their
nominal value risked never to realize these receivables. This risk was covered by the
commitment from the Czech and Slovak Republics that they would “cover” the losses of

the Collection Companies.

Conclusion with respect to the Proposal for the project for Stage II of the restructuring of CSOB, December
16, 1993, CSOB's Memorial, Exh. 7.
Statement of P. Kavanek, Exh. 1.

 

37. The present dispute thus turns on the meaning, scope and effect of the “cover losses”

E.

38.

commitment from the Slovak Republic. CSOB claims that the Slovak Republic did not
“cover losses” of SI as this had been agreed. Moreover, prospects of SI repaying are nil,
as the SI has been subject to bankruptcy proceedings and has stopped all activities. The
Slovak Republic is of the view that the “cover losses” provision is unenforceable as it
does not satisfy the certainty requirement of Czech law. It contends that it has no liabil-

ity to CSOB under this provision.

CSOB’s Claims and the Slovak Republic's Request

In its Memorial of November 15, 1999, CSOB claimed compensation of -

1. The sum of SKK 24,659,907,271, being equal to the principal and interest due
to June 30, 2000 under the SI Loan Agreement;

2. The sum of SKK 9,064,537,958, being the additional losses of CSOB it may
claim pursuant to Section 379 et seq. of the Commercial Code of the Czech
Republic, measured by the Slovak Government bond yield to June 30, 2000;

3. The additional sums due when the damages under 1 and 2 above are carried
forward from June 30, 2000 to the date of the award to be issued in this case;

4. Such additional sums as may be calculated and submitted to the Tribunal prior

to the closure of this proceeding representing CSOB’s further damages, in-

 

cluding lost prod time and professional fees and exp

incurred relating to

a. all proceedings relating to SI's bankruptcy,

 

b b ing, de ipl and intainii Czech
shareholder financial support of the Bank;
c this proceeding; and
d otherwise asserting its rights under the Consolidation Agreement;
J. Interest at a rate (or rates) to be determined on all sums awarded from the

date of the award until the date it is paid.

a .
Cia Ci.

—
os

te La La Lua

co
ed

~—T

Lo

39.

40.

41.

In its final submission of June 20, 2003, CSOB has specified its claim to be awarded as

compensation the following -

1. The sum as of March 31, 2003 of SKK 40,300,940,576, consisting of:
(a) SKK 32,443,747,036 in ‘actual damage’, being equal to the diminish-
ment in value of CSOB’s rights under the SI Loan Agreement caused by the
Slovak Republic’s breach of the Consolidation Agreement; and
(b) SKK 7,857,193,540, reflecting the additional gains that CSOB would
have realised had the Slovak Republic satisfied its obligation to CSOB in April
1997 and if CSOB had invested the amounts then due and owing in Slovak

Government bonds;

2. CSOB’s costs including all the costs and expenses of this arbitration proceed-
ing; and
3. Interest at a rate (or rates) determined with reference to Section 735 of the

Commercial Code of the Czech Republic, as amended, on all sums awarded

Srom the date of the award until the date of payment.

The Slovak Republic argues on various grounds that CSOB’s claims are unfounded. In

its submission, the Slovak Republic requested the Tribunal to issue an award -

+ dismissing all of CSOB’s claims;

* ordering CSOB to pay all the Slovak Republic’s costs associated with this pro-
ceeding, including attorney’s fees and expenses, and .

* grant the Slovak Republic any further relief that the Tribunal deems appropriate.

The Scope of the Tribunal's Jurisdiction

In front of the complex legal structure of the second stage of CSOB's restructuring and
privatisation, it may be useful to recall that the jurisdiction of this Tribunal is limited to
claims arising under the CA. In its Second Decision on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal con-

firmed its First Decision and stated that it holds —

es

42.

43.

44.

45.

that its competence covers, and is confined to, issues arising out of the Consolida-
tion Agreement (No. 32)

The Second Decision further explained —

33. - For the guidance of the parties in the merits phase of these proceedings, the
Tribunal reiterates that it has jurisdiction to determine the validity, nature and
scope of Respondent's obligation to cover SI's losses as provided by Article 3(ID)
of the Consolidation Agreement, to establish whether Respondent has breached
that obligation, and to assess damages, if any, payable by Respondent to CSOB for
any such breach.

The Petition for the Declaration of SI's Bankruptcy

On May 6, 1998, SI was declared bankrupt by the Regional Court in Bratislava. CSOB
submitted an Application for registration of receivables in bankruptcy proceedings on
June 23, 1998.5 CSOB also requested that the bankruptcy proceeding be dismissed on
the ground that SI had only one creditor. The Supreme Court of the Slovak Republic af-
firmed the decision of the Bratislava Regional Court by its ruling dated September 13,
1999.

By its Procedural Order No. 5 of March 1, 2000, the Tribunal, upon CSOB's request,
recommended that the bankruptcy proceedings be suspended to the extent that such pro-
ceedings might include determinations as to whether SI has made a loss resulting from
the operating costs and the schedule of payments for the receivables assigned to it by
CSOB, including payment of interest, as contemplated in the Consolidation Agreement
at issue in this arbitration. It also invited the Parties to keep the Tribunal informed of the

implementation of this Order.

Ultimately, the Regional Court in Bratislava cancelled the bankruptcy by its decision of
June 7, 2001. The Supreme Court of the Slovak Republic upheld this decision on Sep-

Statement I. Cestr, Tab C, filed with CSOB's Request for Provisional Measures of September 4, 1998; the

Slovak Republic's Observations on CSOB's Request for Provisional Measures of January 19, 2000, Exh. B;
the Slovak Republic's Hearing Exhibits, November 2002, Tab 9.

et

a

46.

iil.

47.

48.

49.

tember 19, 2001 and the cancellation of bankruptcy became effective on November 16,

2001.

On October 23, 2002, SI filed a second bankruptcy petition and sought to have its assets
declared bankrupt. However, by decision of January 20, 2003, the Regional Court in
Bratislava discontinued the proceedings as SI had not submitted the necessary evidence
to sustain its request for bankruptcy. This decision of the Regional Court was upheld on
appeal by the Supreme Court of the Slovak Republic on March 12, 2003.

THE LAW APPLICABLE TO THE CA

The present dispute concerns the rights and obligations in respect of CSOB and the Slo-
vak Republic arising under the CA that was concluded to implement phase II of CSOB's
restructuring and privatisation. This phase was a product of phase I and a condition
precedent to phase III. Both phases I and III are essential to understand the economic
purpose of phase II and the CA under which it was implemented. However, as a legal

instrument, the CA stands on its own.

The CA is a Legal Agreement

The Slovak Republic has argued that the CA was not a legal agreement but a mere po-
litical resolution, expressing the political intention of the Czech and the Slovak Repub-
lics to proceed with phase II of CSOB’s restructuring. It has also argued that the CA
was a mere “framework agreement” that does not contain legally binding and enforce-

able obligations.

The nature of the CA as a legal agreement is no longer in dispute. In its First Decision
on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal has indeed recognized that the CA contains legally binding

obligations at least in its parts relevant for this dispute -

50.

Sl.

52.

9

While it is true that investment disputes to which a State is a party frequently have
political el or involve go’ | actions, such disp do not lose their
legal character as long as they concern legal rights or obligations or the conse-
quences of their breach. Given these considerations, the Tribunal is satisfied that
CSOB’s claim is legal in character.?

By deciding that CSOB’s claim - based upon the Consolidation Agreement - is legal in
character, the Tribunal thus has confirmed that the CA, at least in its relevant parts
which include its Article 3, contains legally binding provisions. In view of the Parties’
further arguments developed in this respect, the Tribunal adds the following observa-

tions.

The CA undoubtedly was entered into for a public purpose, i.e. to privatise CSOB pur-
suant to Government resolutions and to the benefit of the public finances of both the
Slovak Republic and the Czech Republic. As the Tribunal has stated in its First Deci-
sion, the fact that the Czech and the Slovak Republics acted for a public purpose does

not exclude that the CA contains rights and obligations of a legal nature.

By naming the document they signed a “Consolidation Agreement” and by submitting it
to Czech law (Art. 7), the Parties themselves indicated that they considered it to be an
“agreement” governed by law, and not a mere political resolution. Moreover, the refer-
ence contained in Article 7 CA to the Treaty on the Promotion and Mutual Protection of
Investments between the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic dated November 23,
1992 (hereinafter the “BIT”), which, as the Tribunal has stated in its First Decision (No.
55, 59, 67, 89), had the effect of submitting disputes arising under the CA to settlement
by ICSID arbitration, likewise confirms that the Parties understood the CA as containing
legal rules and making it legally binding. Indeed, as indicated in Article 42 of the ICSID
Convention, ICSID arbitrators have to apply rules of law to the dispute, unless the par-
ties agreed: that the Tribunal decide their dispute ex aeguo et bono. No such an agree-

ment was concluded in the instant case.

First Decision on Jurisdiction, No 61.

Ce

it

53.

54,

3

The Slovak Republic has accepted on various occasions that the CA was intended to be
a legal instrument and not a mere political promise. On the bottom of the LA, the Slovak
Republic's Minister of Finance declared that he “in particular, confirms the obligation
under Section 7 of this Agreement”, i.e. a provision which in turn states that under the
CA, “the repayment of the loan including interest thereon is secured by an obligation of
the Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic”. Although this provision cannot, in it-
self, determine the legal nature of the relevant rule of the CA, it demonstrates that the
Slovak Republic knew and accepted the fact that it was bound by an obligation arising
under the CA, relating to the repayment of the loan. This declaration was addressed to
SI and CSOB as signatories of the LA. Together with SI and CSOB, the Ministry of Fi-
nance received one of the originals of the Agreement (Art. 13 LA). Further, the Slovak
Republic's Minister Kozlik has stated in his letter of May 17, 1996 that the obligations
of the CA were not “legally ambiguous”.'° Moreover, several statements made on behalf
of the Slovak Republic have admitted that the Slovak Republic had an obligation to pay
‘CSOB.

The Slovak Republic argued that — as a matter of principle - the CA could not be a bind-
ing agreement of a legal nature because it was a “framework” agreement that established
nothing more than the basic principles and essential features of CSOB's consolidation
during phase II. The CA had indeed been envisaged by the Czech Republic’! and the
Slovak Republic! as an agreement limited to the basic commitments in respect of
CSOB's consolidation and privatisation. As Article 7(1) of the CA confirms, many
specifications relevant for the actual relationships and procedures to be followed had to
be agreed upon in later agreements. The CA did not and was not designed to spell out all
the necessary details of the transaction. Indeed, it often instructed the Parties to make
further arrangements, in particular as to the establishment of Collection Companies,'?

the further assignment of off-balance receivables, '* the grant of loans,'> the mechanism

Statement of P. Kavanek Exh. 18.

Resolution No. 689 of the Government of the Czech Republic of December 1, 1993.

Conclusions of December 16, 1993 of the Working Group created by the Government of the Slovak Repub-
lic.

Art. 3 (II) (1)

Art. 3 (II) (2 and 3)

Art. 3 (11) (4)

9 a ‘ eed «Sid a

55.

56.

57.

to cover losses,'® the further relations between the shareholders!” and any other more de-
tailed regulation of the various parties’ relationships or on appropriate technical proce-

dures.!8

However, the assertion that an agreement is not a legally binding agreement when it
leaves open some matters to be specified later cannot be sustained. The fact that an
agreement imposes obligations to do something at a future time does not mean, in itself,
that such an obligation is not legally binding, even when such obligation only specifies
the target to reach and leaves the contracting Parties or one of them free to determine the

means and mechanism to do so.

The obligations of the Consolidation A that required-further specification (e.g.
Article 3 - Improvement in CSOB’s balance; Article 4 - Privatisation of CSOB; Article
5 - Development of CSOB in the Slovak Republic; Article 6 - Institutional Form of
CSOB's Activity in the Slovak Republic) imposed sufficiently specific obligations upon
the parties in the nature of legally binding agreements, and they also specified how they
had to be implemented.

The comparison made by the Slovak Republic, following one of its legal experts,'? with
the “Agreement on Economic Cooperation” between Czechoslovakia and Yemen of
March 24, 1978”° and the “Arrangement” concluded between CSOB and the Bank of
Yemen “on behalf of their respective governments” on May 7, 1979,?! does not allow
another conclusion in respect of the legal nature of the CA. The fact that this Coopera-
tion Agreement is called a “framework agreement” by the Slovak Republic does not
mean that it is similar in nature to the CA, even if the term “framework agreement” is
also used in respect of the CA. This Arrangement is a mere instrument for the imple-

mentation and completion of the Economic Agreement between Czechoslovakia and

Art. 3 (II) (5)

Art. 7 (1)

Art. 7 (1)

Rejoinder Opinion of Professor Sturma, No. 28/29.
Rejoinder Opinion of Professor Sturma, Exh. 10.
Rejoinder Opinion of Professor Sturma, Exh. 11.

a 2

— ee a as at ay a i

58.

59.

Yemen,” whereby two banks, on behalf of their respective Governments, established
accounting and financial procedures as provided for in the bilateral Cooperation Agree-
ment. The CA, on the contrary, although created to carry out the resolutions of each of
the two Statés, is the basic agreement concluded between the Czech Republic and the
Slovak Republic, as well as CSOB. It was concluded by CSOB in its own capacity and
contains primary obligations that do not just complement another agreement. Therefore,
CSOB’s position as a party to the CA is different from its position as a party to the Ar-
rangement mentioned above. The Slovak Republic’s legal expert accepts that the CA
was signed as a tripartite agreement, with CSOB as a direct party thereto, and that the
CA, therefore, differs from the bilateral agreement signed between Czechoslovakia and
Yemen that he characterizes as a “framework agreement”. This demonstrates that the
“model” consisting of the agreements relating to the cooperation with Yemen does not
apply to the CA which has a different nature and content. Therefore, if the term “frame-
work agreement” is used in respect of the CA and one or both of the above mentioned

agreements, it does not have the same meaning.

The Role of International Law in Respect of the CA

The question has been raised whether and if so, to which extent, the CA was governed

by public international law.

The CA, as a whole, is not a Treaty between States, governed by international law. The
fact that two States, i.e. the Slovak Republic and the Czech Republic, concluded an
agreement is not sufficient to make such agreement subject to international law, espe-

cially as a commercial entity - i.e. CSOB - was also party thereto.

The provisions of the Arrangement referred to the corresponding provisions of-the Economic Agreement
(except Article 3 of the Arrangement that specified Article 1 of the same Arrangement).

Cf. Rejoinder Opinion of Professor Sturma, No. 29. The expert’s conclusion is anyhow rather vague when
he states that the alleged fact that the CA was a “framework agreement” is “obviously a more probable in-
terpretation” than the construction that the cover losses obligation is a “comfort letter”. Even if such a con-
clusion would be correct, it does not demonstrate that the CA was a framework agreement of the type de-
scribed by the expert.

20

60.

61.

62.

The Slovak Republic's experts on Czech law envisaged the possibility that the CA was
“an agreement of a mixed nature, containing both public international law duties be-
tween the two States, and private law obligations of the individual Parties”.24 In their
view, the state-to-state obligations and rights contained in the CA - i.e. those between
both Republics - would be governed by international law. Thus the engagement of the
Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic to cause their respective shareholders to in-
crease CSOB’s capital (Art. 2 CA) would be subject to international law. However,
even in the hypothesis that international law were to apply to the relationship between
the two Republics, the Slovak Republic's experts concede that the rights and obligations
of individual Parties, i.e. CSOB, were governed by national law.

The concept of “State Contracts” has also been used by one of the Slovak Republic's
experts to characterise the CA In this respect, the reference to the BIT as included in
Article 7(4) CA has been seen as a “manifestation of increased protection of a private
legal entity signing a contract with two sovereign states”. However, this expert has
also admitted that the space left for the application of international law was significantly
narrow, in light of the reference to Czech law contained in the choice of law clause of

Article 7(4),?” which reads as follows -

This agreement shall be governed by the laws of the Czech Republic and the
Treaty on the Promotion and Mutual Protection of Investments between the Czech
Republic and the Slovak Republic dated November 23, 1992.

The Tribunal need not engage in a broad discussion about the relevance of international
law in respect of the CA and of the possible characterization of the latter as a “State
Contract” concluded between two States and a private law entity. The law applicable to
the provision relevant to this dispute, i.e. Article 3 CA, is determined by Article 7(4) as
being Czech Law and the BIT. Any further focus has to be on these two sets of rules.

CSOB has stated that international law could also be applicable as a matter of Czech

Rejoinder Opinion of Professors Pohunek, Stuna and Svestka, No. 11-12, 33.

Rejoinder Opinion of Professor Sturma, No. 38; TR, November 9, 2002, 67:2-68:23 (Sturma).
Rejoinder Opinion of Professor Sturma, No. 39; TR, November 9, 2002, 68:16-71:8 (Sturma).
TR, November 9, 2002, 69:5-18 (Sturma); Rejoinder Opinion of Professor Sturma, No. 50.

21

hee heme emma emma mde} lem et ee

63.

64.

65.

law. Such an application of international law through Czech law is, however, not rele-

vant for the resolution of this dispute.

Pursuant to Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention, “The Tribunal shall decide the dis-
pute in accordance with such rules of law as may be agreed by the parties”. An implied
submission to international law can be seen in Article 7(4) CA where it is stated that the
CA shall be governed by the BIT, in addition to the laws of the Czech Republic. In its
First Decision on Jurisdiction (No. 55), the Tribunal concluded that by referring to the
BIT in Article 7(4) CA, the Parties intended to incorporate the arbitration clause of Arti-
cle 8 of the BIT into the CA. As the reference to the BIT in Article 7(4) is not limited to
this particular provision, such incorporation into the CA is equally pertinent in respect
of any other provision of the BIT that may be relevant for the interpretation and applica-
tion of the CA. Even to the extent the CA is not governed by international law as such,
the BIT, as it is incorporated into the CA, has to be interpreted in the context of the legal
system under which it has been drafted. Consequently, the incorporation of the BIT in-
cludes the rules of international law that are relevant for its interpretation. Article 2(2)

BIT states -

Investments of investors of each Party shall at all times be accorded fair and equi-
table treatment and shall enjoy full protection and security in the territory of the
other Party. .

Is the CA Governed by Czech Public Law ?

The CA expressly states in Article 7(4) that it “shall be governed by the laws of the
Czech Republic”. The Slovak Republic has argued that this reference, in light of the two

States being parties, had to be understood as a choice of Czech public law.

The fact that the conclusion of the CA involved two States and that it was a conse-
quence of several public law instruments, such as constitutional provisions, government
resolutions, regulatory decisions and government authorizations, does not make the CA

itself an agreement governed by Czech public law. Such acts of public law by the Czech

22

ht em bet ieee te

— =

66.

67.

68.

Republic and the Slovak Republic do not make the CA, which is a different legal in-
strument that stands on its own, an agreement governed by the public Jaw of the Czech
Republic or the Slovak Republic. It is equally irrelevant whether other banks in the
Czech and the Slovak Republics were later restructured and privatised on the basis of
instruments governed by public law (i.e. by governmental resolutions) and not by pri-
vate law agreements. In those later instances, one State only was acting as shareholder
and ordered the privatisation. In the case of CSOB, to the contrary, the consolidation
could not be ordered on the basis of a resolution of one State; it had to be managed by
the two State-shareholders on the basis of an agreement involving both States and

CSOB.

The Slovak Republic also argued that the CA was a public law instrument as it raises
rights and obligations between the two Republics only, whereas CSOB did not have any
tights arising from the imposed obligations, in particular under the provisions of Article
3 CA. This argument appears to be linked to the proposition that the CA constitutes a
framework agreement of a type that is allegedly often used in state-to-state relations,

and which does not confer direct actionable rights on private parties, e.g. CSOB.

The Tribunal notes that the term “framework agreement” has been used in these pro-
ceedings with different meanings (as this has been illustrated hereinbefore in respect of
the comparison between the CA and the Economic Cooperation Agreement concluded
between Czechoslovakia and Yemen). One of these meanings at least corresponds to a
type of agreement that contains particular rights and obligations notwithstanding the fact
that they need further implementation through negotiation and more specific agree-
ments. The Tribunal has stated that the CA is a legal agreement and that it contains
tights and obligations of a legally binding nature. When the Slovak Republic contends
that the CA, by its nature as a framework agreement, is a public law instrument not con-
ferring any right on CSOB, the Slovak Republic draws a general and conceptual conclu-
sion that is not supported by a detailed analysis of the particular provisions of the CA

that are relevant for this dispute.

In the Tribunal's view, the pertinent approach must be different. CSOB's claim is of a

legal nature and based on the cover losses provision of Article 3 CA. The fundamental

23

—

[
I
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|

 

69.

70.

issue in these proceedings is whether CSOB can derive any right to claim under this
provision against the Slovak Republic. This matter has to be examined on the basis of
the rules of Czech law that are capable of creating rights in favor of private parties such
as CSOB, i.e. Czech private law, provided all legal requirements are met. In fact, the
Slovak Republic adopted this approach when advocating the opinion that the cover
losses provision of Article 3 CA was not valid to the extent it was based on the relevant
provisions of the Czech Civil and Commercial Codes. Indeed, as Czech public law, as
alleged by the Slovak Republic, does not create substantive rights for private parties like
CSOB,”* Czech private law is the only source of law that could support the existence of

such rights.

A State's public law regulates the State's organization and its relation with the popula-
tion living in the same territory. It is not intended to govern the relations to other States.
One of the Slovak Republic's legal experts pointed out that the fact that Czech public
law assumes unequal positions between the parties renders its application in relation to
the Slovak Republic impossible. This was because the Czech Republic could not have a
higher legal position than the Slovak Republic which had to be legally in an equal posi-
tion. He concluded that Czech public law was therefore not applicable to the CA.”

The Tribunal shares the view that Czech public law is not applicable to the provisions of
Article 3 CA that are relevant to the resolution of this dispute. It does not and does not
have to make a statement on the question of whether the CA may contain some other
provisions that may call for the application of Czech public law and that would thus al-

low the CA to be characterized as a “mixed agreement”.

It may be noted that the argument that legal instruments governed by Czech public law do not create any
right on private parties has been put forward by the Slovak Republic's legal experts without being further
supported. The underlying documentation confirms that under public law, the State and the individual party
do not enjoy equal status or position. This, however, seems not to allow the conclusion that the private party
would have “no right” in such.a public law relation.

Rejoinder Opinion of Professor Sturma, No. 44; TR, November 9, 2002, 31:1-8 (Sturma).

24

tS ae

Me LY

Rae eee ak

71.

72.

Czech Private Law Is Applicable to Article 3 CA

As it is stated above, the reference in Article 7(4) CA to Czech law cannot be found to
have the meaning that Czech public law would govern CSOB's claim under Article 3
CA, with the effect that CSOB would be deprived of any right arising under this provi-
sion. This dispute is therefore governed by Czech private law. The Tribunal adds that
this conclusion is the only way to give effect to the Parties’ choice to have the BIT ap-
plicable by incorporation into the CA. Indeed, Article 2(2) BIT which ensures CSOB
“full protection and security” for its investment in the territory of the Slovak Republic
would be without any useful effect if CSOB were to have no right in respect of the CA
under Czech public law, as this has been argued by the Slovak Republic.

It may further be added that the Slovak Republic's legal experts on Czech law, despite
the fact that they contend that CSOB has no rights as a private party under Article 3
CA,* nevertheless accept that the CA has a private law part and that the provisions of
Article 3 CA, to the extent they may create rights of CSOB, are to be interpreted on the

basis of Czech private law.*! They add in this respect the following -

After all, all the parties considered the Consolidation Agreement as a commercial
law agreement and confirmed this fact also in the course of these arbitration pro-
ceedings, doing that they in fact made a subsequent choice of law under Section
262 of the Commercial Code.”

The Tribunal does not need to examine whether the Parties have concluded effectively a
subsequent choice of Czech private law in the course of these proceedings. Indeed, such
a choice was already made when they accepted the choice of law clause in Article 7(4)
CA. This was also the conclusion of another expert, presented by the Slovak Republic

during the jurisdictional phase of these proceedings, who stated that -

... the nature of the Consolidation Agreement is a private law agreement, i.e. a
civil law or commercial law agreement?

Opinion by Professors Pohunek, Stuna and Svestka, No. 41-50.

Opinion by Professors Pohunek, Stuna and Svestka, No. 51-56; Rejoinder Opinion, No. 11, 34.
Opinion by Professors Pohunek, Stuna and Svestka, No. 56.

Affidavit of A. Banyaiova, January 27, 1998, No. 17.

25

teed ld dled

... the Consolidation Agreement is a special agreement that, in terms of its strict
legal nature, falls into the category of private law agreements.*4

IV. THE MEANING AND SCOPE OF ARTICLE 3 CA

A.

73.

74.

34

Introduction

This dispute turns on the meaning of Article 3 of the CA that aimed at the “Improve-
ment of CSOB’s Balance”. It relates in particular to part II of the second section of the
same Article, under the heading “Establishment of Collection Companies and Transfer
of CSOB's Non-Performing Assets to the Collection Companies”. There is no contro-
versy about the fact that these Collection Companies have been established as agreed
and that SI was the Company operating for the purposes determined in Article 3(II) in
the Slovak Republic. In the second (not numbered) paragraph of the same provision, it
was agreed that CSOB’s non-performing receivables were to be transferred to the Czech
and the Slovak Collection Companies in a ratio of about 3 : 1, each Company being as-
signed receivables from entities domiciled in the respective Republic. The amount of
such receivables had to be specified as of December 31, 1993, “‘so that the actual capital
adequacy of CSOB as of the same date amounts to 6.25%”. On the basis of this. provi-
sion, CSOB and each Collection Company had to specify in a subsequent agreement

which receivables had actually to be transferred.

In order to improve CSOB’s balance, the third paragraph of Article 3(II) CA stipulated
that the Collection Companies had to pay to CSOB as a “consideration” the nominal
value of the assigned receivables, together with the interest accrued thereupon until the

time of the assignment. In respect of this payment, it was further provided as follows -

The payment for the assigned receivables shall be made by the Collection Com-
panies on the basis of a schedule of payments for the assigned receivables over the
years 1995 to 2003. CSOB shall provide a loan to cover the 1994 operating costs
of the Collection Companies and secure the refinancing of the Collection Compa-
nies by making advances under a loan facility up to the sum of considerations for

Reply Affidavit of A. Banyaiova, July 17, 1998, No. 27.

26

 

75.

76.

77.

35

the receivables assigned to the Collection Companies. The terms and conditions
for the refinancing shall be determined under special agreements to be entered
into by and among CSOB and the Czech and Slovak Collection Companies.

As the receivables to be assigned were defined as non-performing and in fact were re-
coverable for small amounts only, the Collection Companies could never be placed in a
position to recover the full nominal value of the assigned receivables which would have
allowed the repayment of the loan to CSOB. The Parties to the CA undertook in para-
graph 4 of Article 3an> to identify this consequence in the following terms -

It follows from the nature of the assigned receivables that the Collection Compa-
nies will make a loss. Such loss will result from the operating costs and the sched-
ule of payments for the receivables assigned by CSOB to the Collection Compa-
nies, including payments of interests.

Furthermore, Article 3(II) stated in its paragraph 5 the so-called “cover losses provi-

sion” -

The losses of the Collection Companies shall be compensated for over the period
1995-2003. The MF CR and the MF SR each undertakes to cover any losses made
by the Collection Company in its respective territory. For this purpose, the MF
CR, in co-operation of the NPF CR [National Property Fund of the Czech Repub-
lic], shall prepare a mechanism for covering any losses of the Czech Collection
Company and the MF SR shall prepare a mechanism for covering any losses of the
Slovak Collection Company.

CSOB has submitted its claim based on an alleged undertaking by the Slovak Republic
in the provision just quoted to cover any losses made by the Slovak Collection Com-
pany. The Slovak Republic, from its side, contends that this cover losses provision does
not have such meaning and legal effect. For the Slovak Republic, this provision lacks
any required precision, is too vague, not sufficiently specific, not intelligible and it does
not identify adequately and in a legally binding way what CSOB holds to be the object
of the Slovak Republic's obligation.

This provision will be referred to as Article 3(11)(4) CA. The same applies, mutatis mutandis, to the other
paragraphs of Article 3(II) CA.

27

I 2B.

82.

79.

80.

! 81.

The Parties thus have different views as to the meaning and effects of the cover losses
provision. This controversy can be centered on two issues. One issue relates to how the
cover losses provision has to be understood and interpreted. The other issue, which is
linked to the first issue, relates to the question of whether the content of the cover losses

provision was certain enough to be legally binding.

For the Slovak Republic, the CA - or at least the cover losses provision - is thus null and
void because its meaning is uncertain. The Slovak Republic relies in this respect on

Section 37(1) of the Czech Civil Code that states -

An act in law must be made ... in a definite and intelligible [also expressed as “un-
derstandable”] manner; otherwise the act is invalid.

The Slovak Republic also refers to Section 269(2) of the Czech Commercial Code that

states specifically for innominate contracts that -

If the Parties fail to identify adequately the object of their obligations, such a con-
tract is not considered as concluded.

On the basis of these provisions of Czech law, the Slovak Republic objects that the
cover losses provision - or the whole CA - does not satisfy Section 37(1) of the Civil
Code and Section 269(2) of the Commercial Code, and is therefore null and void. The
Slovak Republic argues forcefully that no interpretation can revive an imprecise and

therefore invalid contractual provision as the cover losses provision of the CA.

The Rules of Czech Law Applicable to the Interpretation of Article 3 CA
1. In general

The requirement that a contract provision is “definite and intelligible” (Section 37 Civil
Code) and that it should adequately identify the obligations undertaken (Section 269

28

io

de

83.

84.

Commercial Code), does not require that the text of the provision is so detailed and pre-
cise that it would be entirely sufficient to simply read the provision in order to under-
stand its content. If that were the case, the rules of Czech law on the interpretation of
contracts, laid down in Sections 35 Civil Code and 266 Commercial Code and discussed

hereafter, would be meaningless.

Section 37 Civil Code and Section 269 Commercial Code have to be read in the light of,
respectively, Section 35 Civil Code and Section 266 Commercial Code. These provi-
sions give room, in particular, to the Parties’ own intentions and understanding. Section
37 Civil Code and Section 269 Commercial Code only require that the Parties’ agree-
ment is sufficiently definite and clear to define the Parties’ mutual obligations. The in-
terpretation tools indicated in Section 35 Civil Code and Section 266 Commercial Code
may serve to understand that the agreement meets the requirements in respect of the pre-

cision of its content under Section 37 Civil Code and Section 269 Commercial Code.

Both Parties accept that to the extent that the CA may create rights for which CSOB has
title to sue, the Czech Commercial Code applies to the CA. To construe the meaning of
the relevant provisions of the CA, Section 266(3) of the Czech Commercial Code in-

structs the Tribunal as follows -

When interpreting a manifestation of will under subsections (1) and (2), due ac-
count shall be taken of all the circumstances related to the manifestation of will,
including the negotiations about conclusion of the contract in question and the
practice which the parties have introduced between themselves, as well as the
subsequent conduct of the parties, if the nature of the case so permits.

Thus, all the relevant circumstances, including the context and purpose of the agree-
ment, the history of the negotiation and the Parties’ subsequent conduct, are relevant to

reconstruct the Parties’ intentions and to identify the meaning of their agreement.

29

=

85.

86.

87.

88.

36
37

2. The relevance of the wording

The Slovak Republic, through the first Opinion of its legal experts on Czech law, sub-
mitted that the CA was a commercial agreement, governed by the Commercial Code.*®
Only at a later stage’” did it argue that equally relevant for the construction of the CA
was Civil Code Section 35. The Slovak Republic then argued that indeed both Section

35 Civil Code and Section 266 Commercial Code applied to commercial contracts.

Section 35(2) Civil Code states in respect of the interpretation of an expression of a will

in words the following -

Acts in law expressed in words shall be construed not only according to the verbal
expressions but shall also in particular take into account the intention [also trans-
lated as “will”] of the person who performed the act, provided that such intention
is not conflicting [also translated as “inconsistent”] with the wording.

The Slovak Republic argues that Section 35 Civil Code differs from Section 266 Com-
mercial Code in respect of the last part of the provision where it is emphasized that the
intention of the parties shall not be upheld if it would be contrary to the wording of the
agreement. It contends that under Section 35 Civil Code, the Tribunal cannot take into
account the alleged intention of the Parties to give a meaning to the cover losses provi-
sion when this alleged intention is contradicted by the wording of their agreement. In
this respect, Section 35 Civil Code does, in the Slovak Republic's view, prevail over

Section 266 Commercial Code.

The Tribunal is aware that the relationship between Section 35 Civil Code and Section
266 Commercial Code is a delicate and debated matter under Czech law. The starting
point is that commercial agreements are governed by the Commercial Code as the Czech
Commercial Code Section 1(2) clearly indicates. This first Section of the Czech Com-

mercial Code reads, under the title “Scope of the Code”, as follows -

Opinion Pohunek, Stuna & Svetska, No. 56 and 187.

Rejoinder, Pohunek, Stuna & Svetska, No. 60.

30

6H

Sas

89.

(1) This Code regulates the status of entrepreneurs, business obligations and some
other relationships connected with business activities.

(2) The legal relationships specified in subsection (1) above are subject to the
provisions of this Code. Should it prove impossible to resolve certain issues
according to the provisions of this Code, they shall be resolved in accordance with
the civil law provisions. In the event that such issues cannot be resolved in accor-
dance with the civil law provisions, they shall be considered according to trade
usage (commercial practice) and, in the absence of this, according to the princi-
ples upon which this Code is based.

Pursuant to this provision, the CA, that the Parties agree to be subject of the Czech
Commercial Code, is governed by this Code. This includes Section 266 of the same
Code on the matter of interpretation of the Parties’ will, and in particular paragraph 3 of
this Section. The Slovak Republic has not argued that Section 266 would not allow the
resolution of issues of interpretation in respect of the CA. This would be the only case
where the Civil Code could come into play according to Section 1(2) Commercial
Code.*® The Slovak Republic argues that Section 35 Civil Code shall apply as it is more
restrictive in matters of interpretation than Section 266 Commercial Code. This, how-
ever, is not a situation for which Section 1(2) Commercial Code provides for the appli-

cation of the Civil Code to commercial agreements.

Three recent decisions of the Czech Supreme Court do not support the view that Section
35 Civil Code may prevail over Section 266 Commercial Code. They rather indicate that
the latter provision prevails, or that both Sections may be combined and lead:to the same
result of the interpretation. In its decision of November 15, 2000," the Czech Supreme
Court decided that in a case where it was not clear between the parties whether a con-
tractual penalty or default interest was agreed upon by the word “penalty” used in their

agreement, “it was appropriate to consider the arrangement in question under the provi-
8) pprop! 8 q P

Professors Pohunek, Stuna and Svetska, who support in their Rejoinder Opinion the application of Section
35 Civil Code (No. 60), confirm that the general rules of the Civil Code are applicable only if there are no
special rules in the Commercial Code and, in other words, that the Civil Code can be applied only if the
rules of the Commercial Code are incomplete (No. 56); see TR, November 11, 2002, 77:5-21 (Pohunek).
See further the Reply Affidavit of A. Banyaiova, of July 17, 1998, No. 31, that recalls the same interpreta-
tion, accepting, however, that both provisions (Sec. 35 Civil Code and Sec. 266 Commercial Code) apply
jointly (No. 35) and that a manifestation of will is interpreted according to the intention of the parties, but
not inconsistently with the wording used by the acting party. The intention of the acting party is taken into
account to the extent it was known to the other party (No. 36). The same view has been expressed by Profes-
sor K. Elia, A Course of Commercial Law, 2™ edition 1999, page 42, Annex 22 of the Rejoinder Opinion of
Professors Pohunek, Stuna and Svetska.

No. 29 Cdo 2735/99.

31

90.

91.

40
4

sion of Section 35(2) of the Civil Code and Section 266(1) and (3) of the Commercial
Code”. The decision did quote, but did not further examine, these provisions, the judg-
ment of the appellate court being reversed and the case remanded for further trial. The
decision also indicates that the appellate court, in regard to the sanctions agreed by the
parties upon the occurrence of a default in payment, referred to both the Civil Code
(Sections 544-588) and the Commercial Code (Sections 297-323), and concluded that
the agreement was not contrary to any mandatory legal rule. In a decision of February 7,
2001, the Supreme Court criticized the appellate court that came to the conclusion that
in the particular case, the legal act was uncertain pursuant to Section 37 Civil Code
“without interpreting this act pursuant to Section 266 of the Commercial Code”."* In a
more recent decision, dated November 5, 2002,‘! the Czech Supreme Court had to deal
with an applicant who claimed commission payments based on a brokerage contract and
who reproached the appellate court “for failing to proceed in accordance with Section
35(2) of the Civil Code by interpreting the wording of the said brokerage contract”. The
Supreme Court referred the matter back to the appellate court, stating that the appellate
court's “fundamental error” was “that it completely failed to apply Section 266 of the
Commercial Code to the case at hand, which Section 266 sets out rules governing the in-
terpretation of manifestations of will in business relations”. No mention of Section 35

Civil Code was made in this finding of the Czech Supreme Court.

The Tribunal is of the view that on the basis of Section 1(2) Commercial Code and in
light of these decisions, the argument cannot be retained that Section 35 Civil Code pre-
vails over Section 266 Commercial Code in matters governed by the latter Code. It can-
not be retained that Section 35 Civil Code, to the extent it is considered more restrictive
than Section 266 Commercial Code with regard to elements of interpretation that might
differ from the agreement's wording, would render inapplicable the pertinent provision
of Section 266 Commercial Code to the interpretation of an agreement governed by this

Code.

That Section 266 Commercial Code prevails over Section 35 Civil Code, however, is

not alone decisive to reach a conclusion on this issue. Indeed, Section 35 of the Civil

No. 29 Cdo 1402/99.
No. 29 Odo 512/2002.

32

Code, that states that the Parties’ intention shall not be contrary to the wording of the
agreement, does not require that the Parties’ intention is somehow reflected or recogniz-
able in the terms used in the agreement. It only excludes intentions that are contrary to
these terms. Section 35 thus allows retaining the intention of the Parties, even if it has
not been reflected in the wording of the agreements. The only restriction to this is that
the Parties’ intent must not be contradicted by the wording of the agreement as such

wording may be interpreted.

92. For the Slovak Republic, in a case where a contract provision is too vague, it cannot
become valid by later specification from the Parties. Interpretation only allows specify-
ing the content of an existing contractual provision; it cannot turn a vague and therefore
legally unbinding commitment into a valid contract by making an imprecise and there-
fore ineffective manifestation of will more precise. In brief, it cannot rescue a provision
that was vague and therefore non-existent. However, interpretation can help to under-
stand the meaning of a contract provision. This has been confirmed by a decision of the
Czech Supreme Court of October 7, 1998, quoted by the Slovak Republic, where it is
stated that “by interpretation it is not possible to supplement a legal act”, while “by in-
terpretation it is only possible to determine the content of a legal act”. In another case
the Czech Supreme Court decided on November 26, 1998 that interpretation can be used
to see whether the agreement was sufficiently certain and definite to be valid.* It ruled

that —

... it is precisely the process of interpretation that is to dispel doubts as to the con-
tent of the legal act, even in case that the written manifestation of will contains an
expression permitting multiple interpretations.

In the decision referred to above, of February 7, 2001, the appellate court was criticized
because it considered a legal act uncertain without interpreting the act pursuant to Sec-
tion 266 Commercial Code. In another example, a clause that “the price may be altered”
was in itself not per se unclear, insufficient and thus uncertain; it all depended on what

the parties understood under this provision. Because in that case it was clear for the par-

* No. 1 Odon 110/97.
* Czech Supreme Court, November 26, 1998, No. 25 CDO 1650/98.
“ Fora similar ruling see Czech Supreme Court, May 30, 2000, No. 32 Cdo 2061/99.

33

93.

4s
46

ties that such clause meant that the price would be adapted to changes in the currency
rate, it was sufficiently clear to be binding.“ Ina mote recent decision, rendered on No-
vember 5, 2002 and referred to above, the Czech Supreme Court explained that a clause

that used a clear term can still be a matter for interpretation, as follows —

The fact that the parties used a statutory term (contractual fine) in the contract,
with reference to the applicable provisions of the law, does not in itself rule out
the application of Section 266 of the Commercial Code and cannot justify the
court interpreting the legal act in question solely according to the meaning of the
verbal expression ensuing from the referencéd legal norm, without regard to the
acting parties’ intent, or the circumstances relevant for the interpretation of the
parties’ manifestation of will within the meaning of Section 266 of the Commer-
cial Code, as the case may be.

Another decision of the Czech Supreme Court, dated October 27, 1999, stated —

If the principle that the content of a legal action may only be determined by inter-
pretation, and that the demonstration of will cannot be amended thereby, is re-
spected (cf. ....), the will of the person/entity who undertook the action, can be de-
termined, inter alia, with regard to subsequent conduct of the contractual parties
(cf. ...).

The Tribunal concludes therefore that the interpretation of Article 3 of the CA is to be
done in light of all relevant circumstances as mentioned in Section 266(3) Commercial
Code. Elements of interpretation other than the wording of the agreement may prevail
over verbal expressions used in the text unless the wording in itself represents the Par-
ties’ understanding and intention in respect of the agreement. Even if Section 35(2)
Civil Code would be of some relevance in this dispute, it does not impose a strictly lit-
eral understanding of the CA, nor does it support that expressions contained in Article 3
CA would be interpreted without considering the Parties’ intention in concluding this

provision.

Czech Supreme Court, August 31, 1999, No. 29 Cdo 2400/98-41.
No. 2 Cdon 824/97.

34

bea

ed need Ieee

94.

95.

The Legal Nature of the Cover Losses Provision of Article 3 CA

In the Parties’ submissions and in the oral debate, various legal terms have been used to
characterize the cover losses provision of Article 3 CA. CSOB mentioned that this pro-
vision is or comes close to a guarantee, a security or a comfort letter. The Slovak Re-
public voiced objections to such terms, either because the CA did not comply with the
legal requirements related to a particular type of contract, or because Czech law does not
know a particular undertaking, like “comfort letters”. In his declaration set fourth at the
end of the Loan Agreement, entered into between SI and CSOB, the Ministry of Finance
of the Slovak Republic accepted Article 7 LA that uses the term “secure” in this respect.
Mr. Magula, representing the MF SR, initialed the Operation Agreement that uses the
term “guarantee” (Art. IV/3). The Slovak Republic also argued that none of the avail-
able types of contracts could be relevant, as the CA was a mere “framework agreement”
that provided for nothing more than general principles requiring further implementation
in order to be legally binding.

The Tribunal does not uphold the submission that Article 3 CA were to represent a
“framework agreement” that does not contain obligations of a legally binding nature. In
the course of the proceedings, both Parties came to accept the view that Article 3 CA,
respectively the CA as a whole, did not represent a particular type of contract known in,
Czech law as a nominate agreement. Such an agreement is regulated by law as an indi-
vidual type of contract containing “the essential elements of a contract as specified in
the fundamental provisions for each of these contracts” (Section 269(1) Commercial
Code). The legal undertaking in dispute has therefore to be qualified as an innominate
agreement. The expressions used by the parties are as a consequence not to be linked to
a particular nominate agreement and to its specific legal requirements. The conclusion
of an innominate agreement is a matter for the parties’ autonomy, as stated in Section

269(2) Commercial Code that reads as follows -

Parties may also conclude a contract which is not specified as a particular type of
contract. However, if the parties fail to identify adequately [also translated as:
“sufficiently define”] the object of their obligations, such a contract is not consid-
ered as concluded.

35

bd eee

a |

]
]

 

 

96.

97.

As has been noted above, the Slovak Republic did also refer in this respect to Section
37(1) Civil Code that states that an “act in law” is valid only if it is made in a “definite
and intelligible” manner. The Tribunal finds, however, that the agreement contained in
Article 3 CA is based upon and has to be examined in respect of the relevant provisions
of the Commercial Code. The Parties have accepted that the CA is a commercial agree-
ment. In light of Section 1(2) Commercial Code, there is no particular reason that would
allow to have Section 269(2) Commercial Code supplemented by Section 37(1) Civil

Code.

Section 269 Commercial Code also deals in paragraph 3 with cases where the content of

an obligation is identified in subsequent agreements. This provision reads as follows -

An agreement regarding a certain part of a contract may be replaced by an agree-
ment of the parties on the method allowing the content of the obligation to be de-
fined subsequently, provided that such method does not depend on the will of one
party only. If a missing part of a contract is to be established by a court or a par-
ticular person, the agreement must be in writing and the provisions of Section 291
shall apply mutatis mutandis.

It may be recalled that this provision follows paragraph 2 that declares an innominate
agreement not concluded if it fails to identify adequately the object of the parties’ re-
spective obligations. Nothing in the text of these provisions prevents the conclusion that
a further agreement on the identification of the content of an innominate agreement may
also allow the adequate identification of the object of the parties’ obligations in an
agreement that otherwise would not meet the requirement on precision as stated in para-
graph 2. Section 269(3) Commercial Code constitutes therefore a further confirmation
that an agreement can contain legally binding rights and obligations even if their identi-
fication may be in part contained in subsequent agreements like those referred to in Ar-
ticle 7(1) CA. Therefore, the issue of whether the CA may be called a “framework

agreement” or not is not relevant.

36

98.

99.

100.

101.

The Notion of “Losses” that Triggers a “Cover Losses” Obligation

The Slovak Republic has argued that it is uncertain as to which “losses” Article 3 CA
refers and what that term means. As this expression did not sufficiently define the Slo-
vak Republic's alleged obligation to “cover” the “losses” of SI, no agreement was val-
idly concluded that would create any liability of the Slovak Republic towards CSOB in
respect of the repayment of the loan extended to SI.

The inquiry into the meaning of “losses” has to start from what the CA says about this
notion. Article 3(II)(4) specifically indicates that the loss will be attributable to each
Collection Company and that it results from the operating costs and from the schedule
of payments for the receivables assigned by CSOB to the Collection Companies, includ-

ing payments of interest.

The dominant part of such a loss is related to the payment for the receivables assigned to
SI. This will be dealt with first. The payment of SI's operating costs will be dealt with

thereafter.

1, The losses related to the assigned non-performing receivables

What the Parties meant by the notion “loss” in connection to “schedule of payments for
the assigned receivables” follows from the economics of the assignments and the place
of the references to the term “loss” within the text of Article 3(II) CA. Indeed, Article
3(1)(3) first states that the non-performing receivables had to be paid at their nominal
value (including any interest accrued). The payment was to be made on the basis of a
schedule of payments over 1995 to 2003. In order to allow the Collection Companies to
make such payment effectively, CSOB undertook to make advances under a loan facil-
ity up to the sum of “consideration” for the receivables assigned to the Collection Com-

panies. Immediately thereafter, Article 3(II)(4) CA continues and specifies -

It follows from the nature of the assigned receivables that the Collection Compa-
nies will make a Joss. [emphasis added]

37

102.

10:

104.

105.

a

106.

a

107.

»

The term “follows” clearly indicates that the Parties considered the loss to be triggered
by the fact that the nominal value (including interest) of the receivables, payable by the
Collection Companies to CSOB, would be higher than the amount for these receivables

actually received by the Collection Companies from third parties.

a. The relevant schedule of payments

Article 3(I)(4) CA further specifies that the losses will result from “the schedule of
payments for the receivables assigned by CSOB to the Collection Companies, including
payments of interest”. In the preceding sub-paragraph, it is stated that the Collection
Companies’ payment for the assigned receivables had to be made “on the basis of a

schedule of payments for the assigned receivables over the years 1995 to 2003”.

It is undisputed that no “schedule of payments for the assigned receivables” was estab-
lished in conformity with the literal reading of the agreement. In fact, the payment for
the receivables has immediately been made in full as a “consideration” upon their re-
spective assignment. Such assignment occurred, as foreseen in Article 3(II)(2), on De-
cember 31, 1993 for the on-balance sheet receivables (under the Assignment Agree-
ment). For the off-balance sheet receivables, the payment for the full nominal value was
to be made at their respective maturity dates for these receivables (under the OBS As-

signment Agreement, Art. IV).

For the Slovak Republic, however, the provisions of the CA, and Article 3 in particular,
should be understood literally. When Article 3 refers to “losses” resulting from pay-
ments under a “schedule of payments for the receivables assigned”, losses out of pay-

ment of a loan are excluded because contra verba.

For CSOB, the Parties intended and understood this reference to a “schedule of pay-

ments for the receivables assigned” as a reference to the loan payment schedule.

It is obvious — in spite of the prima facie meaning of the reference to a “schedule of

payments for the receivables assigned”, that the Parties did not intend that the receiv-

38

tte

108.

109.

110.

ables would be paid by the Collection Companies in installments from 1995 to 2003. In-
deed, the purpose of the whole transfer of receivables was to improve CSOB’s balance
by replacing the bad assets by good ones as per the end of December 1993 in order to
make CSOB’s privatisation more attractive and profitable for its shareholders, i.e.
mainly the Slovak Republic and.the Czech Republic. An outstanding claim for payment
of non-performing receivables would not fit that purpose. A “schedule of payment for
the receivables assigned” is indeed incompatible with the ultimate goal of the consolida-
tion, ie. to replace CSOB’s bad receivables by performing assets equivalent to the full
nominal value of the assigned receivables. The transaction thus required that the non-
profitable receivables had to be paid in full as of December 31, 1993 - and not in in-

stallments covering many years.

When the receivables were actually assigned by CSOB to SI, the loans under which SI
obtained the funds to pay for the receivables were accepted by CSOB and SI to be
closely interconnected with the assignments. Indeed, the loan for the assignment of the
on-balance receivables was recognized by CSOB and SI to be a “follow-up” agreement
to the Assignment Agreement, both agreements having to be read “in their mutual con-
junction” (Art. 13 LA); the declaration of the Minister of Finance of the Slovak Repub-
lic includes this statement in his consent. The OBS Loan Agreements as well mention
that they are related to the respective OBS Assignment Agreement and that both agree-

ments "shall only be interpreted in their mutual interconnection" (Art. V).

Moreover, the CA itself confirms that the Parties in fact did not intend the receivables to
be paid in install Indeed, the “consideration” for the assi of the receiv-
ables, i.e. the nominal value of the receivables (and the interest accrued until the time of
the assignment) had to be advanced under a loan facility “up to the sum of considera-
tions for the receivables assigned”. In other words, the CA itself provided for an ad-

vance of the total sum of receivables under a loan agreement.

Article 3 CA expressly instructed CSOB and the Collection Companies to determine the
terms and conditions of the refinancing under special agreements. As for the on-balance
receivables, the repayment schedule attached to the Loan Agreement clearly functions as

such “schedule of payments for assigned receivables”. In fact, the Slovak Ministry of

39

Low

oe aaa

111.

112.

113.

Finance expressly recognised in its confirmation of Article 7 of the Loan Agreement
that the CA involved the repayment of the loan (and not of receivables) and that the
Slovak Republic had an obligation to this effect. This consent and acknowledgement in
the LA helps to construe the Parties’ intentions and understanding pursuant to Section
266(3) of the Czech Commercial Code. Although the seven OBS Loan Agreements do
not contain a similar (signed) acknowledgment, this does not remove the fact that in
consenting to Article 7 LA, the MF SR accepted that the obligation referred to, based on
the CA, consisted in the repayment of a loan and not in the payment for the assigned re-
ceivables. The Assignment Agreement, initialled on behalf of the Slovak Republic, con-
firms the same understanding when it states in Article III that the consideration to be
paid at the day of the assignment was the amount of 100% nominal value of the receiv-
ables; such payment leaves no room for any schedule of payments in respect of these re-

ceivables.

Furthermore, in the OBS Assignment Agreements (Art. IV), that became effective on
December 31, 1993, i.e. the same day as the CA, SI recognised that SI’s payment for
the receivables would be covered by a loan from CSOB. Consequently, SI has con-
firmed that installment payments were to reimburse the loans and not the receivables.
The Agreement on a Repayment Schedule Mechanisms for Off-Balance Instruments
of March 1, 1996, clearly confirms that the Parties intended SI to repay the loans and
not the off-balance receivables. Although the Slovak Republic was not a party to the
agreement, it was aware of the mechanism through its executive and controlling func-

tion exercised within the Supervisory Board of SI.

In fact, the repayment of the loan was a full substitute for the payment for the assigned
receivables including interest accrued until the date of assignment. The schedule for
both repayments would have been identical. However, the fact that the loss also in-
cluded payments of interest on the amount paid for the receivables according to the
agreed schedule confirms that the parties had in mind the schedule of repayment of a

loan rather than a schedule of payment for the receivables.

The Tribunal has stated that the interpretation of Article 3 CA is governed by the provi-
sions of Section 266 Commercial Code. Under paragraph 3 of this Section 266, the

40

114.

115.

agreement has to be interpreted according to the intention of the Parties, taking into ac-
count all the circumstances related to the manifestation of will, including the negotia-
tions about the conclusion of the contract in question and. the Parties’ subsequent con-
duct. It clearly was not the Parties’ actual intention that the receivables would be paid in
installments. When account is taken of all circumstances related to the manifestation of
the Parties’ will, it becomes apparent that when they used the term “schedule of pay-
ment for the receivables” they in fact intended “schedule of payment of the loans ob-

tained to pay the receivables”.

Even if Section 35(2) Civil Code would be of some relevance for the interpretation of
Article 3 CA, as contended by the Slovak Republic, this would not mean that the literal
wording would become decisive. Indeed, as the Tribunal has stated, Section 35(2) Civil
Code does not have the effect that verbal expressions used by the parties would prevail
over their intention and understanding of the text. Moreover, contrary to the Slovak Re-
public's view, there is no such clear wording in Article 3 CA in respect of the schedule
of payments referred to. Indeed, Article 3(1I)(3) CA stipulates that a “consideration” is
to be paid for the nominal value of the assigned receivables. Such consideration must
cover the full value of the receivables. The “schedule of payments” must, therefore, re-
fer to a payment to be made through installments. The only payment pertinent in this re-
spect is the repayment of the loan. Further, when the same provision states that CSOB
and the Collection Companies shall agree on a schedule for payments, reference is made
to the “refinancing”, i.e. the loan and not the receivables. Finally, the “cover losses”
provision of Article 3(II)(5) CA refers to “any losses” made by the Collection Compa-
nies, not referring to any specific schedule of payments. The wording of these provi-
sions is therefore not as clear as contended by the Slovak Republic and anyhow not clear
enough to leave room for a strictly literal interpretation if Section 35(2) Civil Code

would be considered as applicable and understood as calling for such an interpretation.

b The occurrence of losses

CSOB argued that the term “losses” had in the context of the CA a specific meaning. It

should not be understood in the sense of “negative economic result, lack of funds or

41

ee ee

11

11

6.

Nn

damage”. For the Slovak Republic, the term loss is capable of more than one meaning,
producing different results. As the amount to be paid under the cover losses provision is

not clearly stated or at least capable of determination, this provision is null and void.

For the Tribunal, the proper understanding of the term “losses” follows from the inter-
mediate conclusion, also shared by the Parties, that the CA is to be analyzed as an in- :
nominate agreement. By its text, Article 3(II) CA attributes the losses to the respective
Collection Companies. These Companies are desi; d in sub- iphs 4 and 5 as
the entities that will “make losses”. As those losses derive from the “nature of the as-
signed receivables” and result from the schedule of payments and the operating costs
(Art. 3(11)(4) CA), they are clearly identified as the Collection Companies negative bal-
ance (or shortage of funds), due to the fact that the amounts collected from third party
debtors (the FTOs) for the assigned receivables (representing the only income to be
made) did not cover the repayment of the loan to CSOB and the operating costs. Such
occurrence of losses made by the Collection Companies was a fact that explains the very

essence and purpose of Article 3(II) CA.

The losses of SI would occur each time SI had to pay to CSOB under the schedule of
payments but could not pay because of a negative balance that emerged in SI’s accounts
between the amount of receivables collected from third parties and the amount of pay-
ments to be made to CSOB. The occurrence of losses was thus related to the schedule of
installments to be paid to CSOB, minus the (small) income produced by some of the re-
ceivables, and SI's operating costs. Such losses were therefore not equal to a single
amount nor were they equal to installments for fixed amounts. The amount of SI's losses
did further depend upon variables as SI's income and operating costs. Such a situation
was envisaged by the drafters of Article 3(II) CA. The cover losses provision relates, in=
deed, to “any losses” and it ordered the Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic to
prepare a “mechanism for covering any losses” of SI (Art. 3(II)(5) CA). Such a “mecha-
nism” makes sense only in a hypothesis where the amount representing the coverage

changed in the course of the evolution of the loan facility extended to SI.

42

24 py ft

c The selection and collection of the receivables assigned

118. The Slovak Republic further argues that the term “losses” and, consequently, the “cover

11

°

losses” provision was inherently uncertain and the latter provision therefore null and
void because the amount of losses is dependent on another set of uncertain factors, that
relate to the volume of receivables to be assigned (which in turn depended upon the
amount of reserves created by CSOB and CSOB's profitability in 1993), the allocation
of receivables between SI and CI, the capital adequacy ratio to be achieved and the ex-
tent to which SI was able to make recoveries on its claims against FTOs. When the CA
was concluded, the Slovak Republic contends, it was impossible to predict and to calcu-
late the amount the Slovak Republic would have to cover. This amount could not objec-
tively be calculated. Moreover, CSOB had a free hand in manipulating many factors so
as to arrive at the result it wanted. In particular, CSOB had full discretion to select the
most doubtful receivables to be transferred to CI or SI. The “cover losses” provision was
thus non-binding because the losses to be paid were unknown at the moment the CA
was entered into; nor could the respective amounts be calculated in an objective way
later.

\

i) The Slovak Republic's involvement, knowledge and acceptance

There is no doubt that the process for the selection of non-performing receivables to be
assigned by CSOB to SI and the volume of assets to be transferred, as well as their
value, had an impact on the potential losses of SI and the amount of losses to be covered
under the provision of Article 3(II)(5) CA. The Parties to the CA had accepted that the
selection of the receivables to be assigned was to be made on the basis of an agreement ©
entered into by CSOB and SI (respectively CSOB and CI), such agreement containing
also the “specification of the various Non-Performing Assets” (Art. 3(II)(2) CA). In
fact, as this has been explained, the receivables were identified, depending the date of
their respective maturities, in two distinct agreements, i.e. the Assignment Agreement
(later completed by two amendments) and the Future Assignment Agreement (subse-
quently followed by the OBS Assignment Agreements). These agreements can be con-

sidered as part of the “particular bilateral or multilateral agreements” to be executed “in

43

the event that the performance of this Agreement [the CA] necessitates a more detailed
regulation of the relationships among the various parties”, as stated in Article 7(1) CA.
It was further stated specifically in Article 3(II)(2) in fine that the transfer of the as-
signed receivables was made “pursuant to the above-referenced Government Resolu-

tions”, which are those referred to in the Preamble.

120. Thus, it was accepted by all Parties to the CA, including the Slovak Republic, that the
receivables to be transferred to SI were to be identified in agreements entered into by
CSOB and SI, including the specification of their nominal value (plus interest accrued
until the time of the assignment). It was therefore perfectly clear what the potential loss
of SI would amount to, at least as a maximum figure (in case no receivable could be re-
covered). This disposes of the Slovak Republic's argument that the process of selection
of receivables was such that SI's losses were uncertain.

121. As the Slovak Republic argues that there existed a fatal uncertainty at the time of the

=

conclusion of the CA, it may still be argued that the certainty provided by the agree-
ments subsequently concluded did not yet exist at that precise moment. However, Sec-
tion 266(2) Commercial Code does not specify that the requirement for adequate identi-
fication of the object of the parties’ obligations has to be met on the day of the conclu-
sion of the agreement. Further, paragraph 3 of the same provision accepts that proper
identification of part of a contract may be made in subsequent agreements. Moreover, as
will be explained below, the maximum exposure to cover losses was also determined by

the capital adequacy ratio of 6.25% specified as of December 31, 1993.

122. Indeed, the Slovak Republic had precise knowledge of the potential losses of SI as it
was involved in the selection of receivables to be assigned. The Slovak Republic was
urged to appoint experts and bank examiners from the National Bank of Slovakia to in-
spect CSOB’s loan portfolio and any other records pertinent to a proper implementation
of the Consolidation Agreement, including the capital adequacy issue.“’ A representa-

tive of the MF SR had been invited to participate in a working group to examine

* Cf. Statement of P. Kavanek, No. 14-17, Exh. 3-5.

44

123.

124.

125.

a

CSOB’s portfolio of non-performing receivables in September 1993." As Mr. Magula
has indicated,’? as a member of the Supervisory Board of CSOB, he was, like the other
members of this Board, entitled to inspect all documents and to insure that the share-
holders’ instructions were comptied with. The MF SR, in exercising the function of Su-
pervisory Board of SI, was invited to negotiate the assignment of CSOB's OBS receiv-
ables.” The Slovak Republic was aware of the commitments SI had undertaken through
SI’s Supervisory Board, composed of high ranking officials of the MF SR. All the major
SI agreements were presented to it. The Supervisory Board never has protested that the
instructions of SI’s sole shareholder, i.e. the Slovak Republic, had not been followed.
Neither has the Slovak Republic objected. Besides, on February 13, 1997, an expert
commission, established by CSOB and the MF SR, which included Dr. Papunova, a
staff member of the MF SR, confirmed that the receivables had been correctly assigned
to and accepted by SI.°!

To make the Slovak Republic's involvement and acceptance of the transfer of receiv-
ables even more clear, the Assignment.Agreement and the Future Assignment Agree-
ment were initialed by Mr. Magula, then Chief Executive Director of the Section of
Economic Policy of the MF SR. The Slovak Republic, through the person of Mr. Ma-
gula, was thus aware of the specifics of the receivables to be assigned and it accepted

such transfer to SI and, consequently, the potential losses suffered by SI.

Equally explicit is the declaration signed by Mr. Filbus, then the Slovak Republic's Min-
ister of Finance, on the bottom of the Loan Agreement, where he acknowledges the con-
tent of the LA that states specifically the details of SI's repayment obligation for the
Joan. Here again, the Slovak Republic declared to be perfectly aware of the amount of

repayments owed by SI to CSOB.

The Slovak Republic furthermore argues that CSOB had not only a free hand in the se-

lection of the receivables, but also in their collection. However, the collection was made

Letter of CSOB to the National Bank of the Slovak Republic and to the MF SR, of September 10, 1992,

Statement of P. Kavanek, Exh. 4.

Affidavit of J. Magula, supporting the Slovak Republic's Memorial on Jurisdiction, January 27, 1998,
No. 5. .

Letter of CSOB, March 31, 1994, Statement of E. Kalinova, Exh. 5.

Statement of E. Kalinova, Exh. 34.

45

126,

127.

128.

oO

by CSOB's employees performing activities for and on behalf of SI and under instruc-
tion of SI. The recovery of the transferred receivables was SI's activity and duty. SI was
governed by its Supervisory Board, which was under the control of representatives of
the Slovak Republic, SI's sole shareholder. SI's activity had an impact on its need for re-
financing and the size of the loan extended by CSOB, but it did not interfere with the
understanding and actual application of the CA.

One could still say that the amount of SI's losses was uncertain to the extent the result of
SI's activity to collect the non-performing receivables was uncertain. However, this
situation was an inherent part of the process set up in Article 3(II) CA and it was agreed
upon by all Parties. The potential reduction of SI's exposure and loss was of no harm to
the Slovak Republic, as it had the effect of reducing the amount of the repayment of the
loan it had accepted to “secure” and did not, in fact, leave the Slovak Republic with any
uncertainty. Indeed, when funds were collected from non-performing receivables and
used to repay the loan, they had the immediate effect of reducing SI's potential loss.
There did not exist any uncertainty at any given point in time about the amount of SI's
payment obligation and loss in this respect. Consequently, there did not exist any uncer-

tainty for the Slovak Republic either.
ii) The 6.25 % capital adequacy ratio

The privatisation plan required CSOB to reach an overall capital adequacy ratio of
6.25% by the end of 1993 to improve the financial standing of CSOB and to make it
more attractive for privatisation. That explains also why the capital adequacy ratio had
to improve to 7% at the end of 1994 (Art. 3(I) CA). In Article 3 CA, the ratio of 6.25%
is relevant in two respects. First, CSOB had to create reserves to cover part of the non-
performing assets at an amount such that its capital adequacy at the close of 1993 was to
be 6.25% (Art. 3(I) CA). Second, the amount of non-performing assets to be transferred
to the Collection Companies was to be specified as at December 31, 1993, “so that the
actual capital adquacy of CSOB as of the same date amounts to 6.25%”.

In fact, more receivables were transferred to SI than necessary to reach the capital ade-

quacy ratio of 6.25 %. As both Parties have told the Tribunal, a capital adequacy ratio of

46

6.49 % had actually been reached.” The Slovak Republic argues that the assignments
thus had gone beyond what was contractually foreseen and that the role of this capital
adequacy ratio shows again how uncertain the content of the Parties’ respective obliga-
tions under the CA were. This uncertainty is also demonstrated, in the Slovak Republic's
view, by the fact that CSOB had full discretion to compose the bank's own capital, a8
the starting point for the calculation of the capital adequacy ratio.

129. Despite the difficulties of monitoring the-process of its determination, the 6.25% capital
adequacy ratio was in itself precise and imposed a clear target. Indeed, the drafters did
use the direct notion “amount” and did not qualify it with “about” as they did in the
same provision when they provided that for an “about 3:1 ratio” the receivables would

be allocated between CI and SI.

130. However, it is one thing to have a clear target; another whether the performance should
never go beyond that clear target. It is admitted that the capital adequacy ratio is a regu-
latory minimum that CSOB was required to achieve. As the CA was concluded in order
to prepare CSOB for privatisation and to make its acquisition financially more attrac-
tive, the capital adequacy ratio had a specific meaning in the consolidation operation. It
would have been against the purpose of the CA had the capital adequacy ratio of 6.25%
not been reached at the end of 1993. It would, however, not have been against this pur-
pose had the ratio at the end of 1993 been higher, e.g. 6.49%, so that it would have been
easier to reach the 7%, or an even higher ratio, at the end of 1994. The actual rate of
6.49% complies with the minimum requirement fixed by the CA. In fact, it is very diffi-
cult to reach exactly a target capital adequacy. Indeed, many components influence a
capital adequacy calculation. Changes in any one component can significantly alter the
final ratio. As a practical matter, the banks never achieve a ratio at the exact regulatory

minimum, because, as one of CSOB’s expert stated —

.. in order to hit that exactly, you would have to spend incredible amounts of
money to monitor profit and monitor risk weighted assets. .... It will not be cost
effective.

2 Cf. Statement of K. Cloughsey, No. 6.
53 TR, April 15, 2003, 131:7-11 (Cloughesy).

47

 

TS Soke oe’ tw ts

131. The 6.25% rate had to be implemented on an overall basis, i.e. for the totality of.as-

13)

133.

2.

wo

signments to CI and SI. It does not necessarily follow that the 6.25% rate also had to ap-
ply separately to each group of receivables assigned to Cl and SI, respectively. The CA
itself does not instruct to do so. Moreover, the receivables to be assigned to make CSOB
reach the 6.25 % rate had to be allocated in a ratio of about 3:1 between CI and SI. SI
had to agree on the exact division of receivables to be assigned to implement this
“about” 3:1 ratio. In other words, SI had to explicitly accept the assignment of the spe-
cific receivables. Once the receivables were accepted, SI could no longer raise an objec-
tion that more receivables had been assigned to CI and SI than strictly required under
the 6.25 % standard, nor that the assignments were not in conformity with the “about

3:1” split.

It is a fact that CSOB initially had all the necessary information about the receivables,
their specification and the impact their transfer had on CSOB's capital adequacy ratio.
CSOB’s assessment of its capital adequacy at the close of 1993 was subject to the scru-
tiny and approval of the Bank’s own Supervisory Board, which included a representa-

tive of the MF SR.

Moreover, the receivables to be assigned had been audited, and information had been
formally shared with the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic. CSOB had to pro-
pose the receivables to be selected for their assignment. SI and CI were given the oppor-
tunity to examine such proposals before giving their approval. CI and SI undoubtedly
were in a position to oppose any over-transfer of receivables whenever not in confor-
mity with the 6.25 % capital adequacy rate and the “about 3:1” ratio. They did not do so
and they accepted the transfer of receivables as identified in the Assignment Agreement
and the Future Assi; Agr and their coll lag Thus, CSOB and
SI had selected and decided to transfer the non-performing assets as provided in Article
3(11)(2) CA. No criticism can be addressed to either SI or CSOB for having “over trans-
ferred” assets in light of the actual capital adequacy ratio compared to the ratio as fixed
in that provision. Indeed, such a target was very difficult to reach at the precise date of

December 31, 1993, and the ratio fixed at 6.25% was to be understood as a minimum

48

134.

135.

136.

137.

and not as a maximum requirement, at least in the relations between CSOB and the Col-

lection Companies.

The question has to be addressed, however, whether the Slovak Republic, given the fact
that CSOB and SI accepted assignments over the 6.25% ratio, is bound by such an
agreed “over-assignment”. In other words, what are the effects of such “over transfer”

on the meaning and operation of the cover losses provision of the CA ?

CSOB has stated correctly that the Slovak Republic knew about the volume of the as-
signments through the information provided by CSOB and the executive functions it ex-
ercised in the Supervisory Board of SI. However, the obligation to cover SI's losses that
is at issue in the instant-case is exclusively based on the provisions of Article 3 CA. The
involvement of the Slovak Republic in the asset selection process and its approval of the
assignments to SI were not intended to and did not change the nature and scope of the
cover losses obligation contained in Article 3(11I)(5) CA, which is interrelated with the
notion of losses as it is to be understood in light of paragraphs 2 to 4 of Article 3(II) CA,

as explained above.

In respect of the assigned non-performing receivables, SI's losses relevant in the context
of Article 3(II) CA could not go beyond the nominal value (plus interest accrued) on
December 31, 1993 (without considering SI's operating costs). The overall scope of the
assignments was determined, inter alia, by the precise figure of an actual capital ade-
quacy of the amount of 6.25%. This figure was to be understood as a maximum figure,
determining the extent to which the assigned receivables were able to trigger SI's losses
relevant in respect of the cover losses obligation. If such a limitation had not been
agreed upon by the parties to the CA, the CSOB/SI Agreements could have extended the
volume of assets to be transferred without limit, thus extending equally without limit the

cover losses undertaking stated in Article 3(11)(5) CA.

As has been stated, the 6.25% target was not necessarily directed as such to the sole as-
sets to be transferred to SI. It was an overall figure relating to both CI and SI, the split
between these Companies not being fully precise, because it had to be “about” 3:1 only.
However, the Parties have not contended that this element plays a role in this respect

49

and would not allow to retain the actual figure of 6.49% in respect of SI. The Tribunal
notes that in this respect the amount of CSOB's FTO credit exposure was a main vari-
able of its capital adequacy position as of December 31, 1993. As the Parties have not
indicated either on what precise amount of transferred receivables they rely when refer-
ring to this 6.49% ratio, the Tribunal includes those receivables that CSOB identified as
receivables transferred to SI.

138. In order to determine how to deal with the “over-draw” of 0.24%, the Tribunal is of the

oo

view that the capital adequacy ratio served to fix a limit on the total exposure under the
“cover losses” undertaking of Article 3(II)(5) CA. Therefore, the total loss to be covered
was not to go beyond an amount that would raise this ratio over 6.25%. There is no need
to identify any receivable that might represent the “over-draw”. This matter will have to
be dealt with further when the amount of receivables relevant in this respect is identi-
fied.

2. The losses related to the operating costs

139: Article 3(II)(4) CA states that the Collection Companies’ loss will result from the “op-
erating costs”, in addition to the losses resulting from the schedule of payments to be
made to CSOB. The preceding sub-paragraph that deals with the payment for the re-
ceivables as “consideration” and CSOB's loan facility towards the Collection Compa-
nies, mentions that “CSOB shall provide a loan to cover the 1994 operating costs”. The
Operation Agreement concluded between CSOB and SI included a quarterly fee of SKK
1.5 million and a percentage of the amount collected to be agreed upon for each collec-
tion on an individual basis (Art. IV/1). It also stipulated that CSOB would provide a
loan for the purpose of the payment of fees, if the collection of assets of SI during 1994
was not sufficient to cover such payment (Art. [V/3.1). It was added that the repayment
of such a loan was “guaranteed” by the MF SR under the CA (Art. IV/3.2). The Opera-
tion Agreement was one of the various collateral agreements implementing the CA. Its

content was fully known to the Slovak Republic, as it was initialed by Mr. Magula, rep-

+ Statement of K. Cloughesy, No. 18.

50

resenting the MF SR, and had as contracting party SI, directed by the Slovak Republic

as its sole shareholder.

140. The CA, as explained, included SI's operating costs in the notion of losses. This did not

141.

55 Expert Opinion of D. Frishberg (Deloitte & Touche), Nos 38, 39; Rejoinder, Nos 75-78.

create any uncertainty or lack of identification of the obligation based on the “cover
losses” provision. Indeed, the contracting parties to the CA agreed to have the amount
of operating costs to be settled between CSOB and the respective Collection Compa-
nies. As the Operation Agreement shows, this has been done in respect of SI, to the full
knowledge of the Slovak Republic. There existed therefore complete legal clarity about
the costs accruing and their determination and, consequently, about their impact on the
amount of losses to be covered under the cover losses provision. In fact, CSOB charged
SI the quarterly fee through SI's accounts, reducing accordingly the amount of collected
assets on these accounts. Thus, the balance of SI's obligation towards CSOB was recog-
nizable, in this respect as well, and the Slovak Republic was in a position to know at
any time the exposure triggered by the concept of “losses” under the CA. The Slovak
Republic had every opportunity to object to the handling of SI's management fees; it did

never do so at the relevant time.

It has been argued, on behalf of the Slovak Republic, that parts of SI's management fees
were charged unduly and should be credited to SI, thus reducing SI's loss.>> However,
such a matter relates to the legal relations between CSOB and SI, governed by the Op-
eration Agreement, and that is outside this Tribunal's jurisdiction. What matters in re-
spect of CSOB's claim against the Slovak Republic is exclusively the actual state of SI's
loss as it appears on the face of SI's assets and liabilities. Merely potential claims of SI,
that are anyhow, as will be explained later, unsupported, do not constitute assets to be

taken into account for the determination of SI's losses.

51

eee ee

14

143.

w

144.

BR

145.

N

The Obligation to Cover Losses under Article 3 CA

The Slovak Republic argues that in addition to the unclear meaning of the term “losses”
it is equally not clear what the CA means by the “coverage” of the losses. Does “cover
losses” mean that the Slovak Republic had to pay to SI or did it have to pay directly to
CSOB ? Would the Slovak Republic have “covered” the losses when it were to pay SI,
had SI not passed the funds on to CSOB ? Does the “cover losses” provision contain any
payment obligation, or did it oblige the MF SR only to prepare a mechanism that would

allow implementation of a payment obligation agreed upon at a later stage ?

The Slovak Republic further argues that even if the “cover losses” provision contained
an obligation of the Slovak Republic to make payments in support of SI, such obligation
did not have CSOB as beneficiary, as no mention of CSOB was made in this provision.

Therefore, CSOB had no title (or “standing”) to sue as it does in this dispute.

For CSOB, when the Slovak Republic had to “cover” the losses, it meant that it had to
provide CSOB with some kind of security for the repayment of the loan, but the specific
form that security and payment had to take was not determined by the CA itself, with
the proviso, however, that the MF SR was obliged to prepare the necessary “mecha-
nism”. For CSOB, there is no doubt that it was the beneficiary of the “cover losses” ob-

ligation and thus entitled to direct its claim against the Slovak Republic.

The Tribunal has dealt above with the Slovak Republic's further suggestion that the
“cover losses” obligation of the CA was intended to be a security but failed to be in the
proper form of a “security”, i.e. the nominate contract under Czech law. As it was nota
proper security for CSOB, it was not valid and the loans granted by CSOB therefore un-
secured. However, the “cover losses” obligation is not a “guarantee” or a “security” of
this kind. Despite various controversies on terminology, the Parties both based their ar-
gumentation on the understanding that the CA is an innominate contract that parties

could agree upon pursuant to their contractual liberty.

52

1. The Slovak Republic's involvement in the negotiation
of the cover losses provision

146. The CA was negotiated extensively over five months. Mr. Magula, at that time Chief

Executive Director of the Section of Economic Policy of the MF SR,* as well as a
member of CSOB's Supervisory Board, was present at six of the meetings. As the CA
itself indicates, all Parties, including the Slovak Republic, were aware that “It follows
from the nature of the assigned receivables that the Collection Companies would make a
loss.” The certainty of the Collection Companies’ losses was the very basis for and the
genesis of the CA.*” The Slovak Republic had full opportunity to participate and inter-
vene in this process, as negotiator and party of the CA and through its presence on the
Board of CSOB.

147. During the negotiations - a period very relevant to the interpretation of an agreement

according to Section 266 Commercial Code — the Slovak Republic knew what was un-
derstood by the losses it had to cover. Indeed, on the basis of the draft agreement of De-
cember 1993, it has estimated its expenditure till 2003 under the CA, in other words it
was aware of the amount of losses it expected to have to cover. Consequently, the Slo-
vak Republic's own behavior shows that the Slovak Republic understood what was cov-
ered by the notion of “losses”. Moreover, the initial draft agreement, that was prepared
by the MF SR, provided already that the contracting parties (then the Czech and the
Slovak Republics) had to agree that the Finance Ministries of both Republics “shall bear
the losses of the collection unit equally” and that the “planned distribution of losses
coverage spans from the year 1995 until the year 2003”. The subsequent drafts pre-
pared by CSOB contained the cover losses provision as it was adopted in Article 3(II)
CSOB.*® Therefore, there could not exist any surprise, doubt or lack of clarity in respect

of the Slovak Republic's undertaking.

Affidavit of J. Magula, supporting the SR's Memorial on Jurisdiction, January 27,1998, No. 4.

For the negotiation history of the CSOB see, in particular, Statement of P. Kavanek in support of Claimant's
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, April 30, 1998, together with the Annexes containing the Minutes of
meetings and the draft proposals.

Statement of P. Kavanek in support of Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, April 30, 1998, Exh. J.

Statement of P. Kavanek in support of Claimant's Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, April 30, 1998, Exh.
Mand N.

53

ao Le — a_i — — ww cu ue

eo wo

me

148. The Working Group that was appointed by the Slovak Republic's Government to deal

with stage II of the restructuring of CSOB charged the Minister of Finance —

to make provisions for the expenditures intended for the coverage of losses of the
collection company in the State budget, commencing in the year 1995 and ending
2003.

The Resolution No. 937 of the Government of the Slovak Republic of December 15,
1993 that appointed the Slovak Republic's Working Group, also recognized the proposal
for the project for stage II that had been prepared by the Minister of Finance and the

Governor of the National Bank of Slovakia. This proposal stated in its rationale —

With account taken of the fact that CSOB is active in both Republics, the partici-

pation of both states in the coverage of losses from bad loans and guarantees will
be necessary. (page 6, emphasis in the original)

It was further stated that bad assets in a total amount of approximately SKK 9.3 billion
would be transferred to the Collection Company in the Slovak Republic and that the to-
tal estimated net expenditures of the state budget of the Slovak Republic would amount
to at most approximately SKK 13.3 billion until 2003 (page 7). As a result, no doubt can
remain that the Slovak Republic had therefore full knowledge, not only of its obligation
to cover SI's losses, but also of the scope of its exposure and the need to provide for the

necessary budget.

2. The meaning of “cover losses”

149. As the Tribunal has stated on various occasions, the CA stands on its own and Article 3

CA constitutes an innominate agreement to be considered under the pertinent provisions
of the Czech Commercial Code. When Section 269 of this Code requires that such

agreement identifies “adequately” the object of the parties obligations, this does not

6° As Mr. Knapp put it: “... this required final calculation and final approval, but the magnitude was known

already. ... The exact figure of course was not known but in general both parties had very good knowledge
of what it is about and what will be the total costs and what also is expected then from [the] privatisation
process.” TR, April 15, 2003, 98: 17/18, 22-25.

54

mean that all details have to be spelled out. It is sufficient that the parties, in light of the
pertinent elements for the interpretation of the manifestation of their will (Section 266
Ce ial Code) und d the ials of their obligations or know the pertinent
elements of their further determination or implementation. Furthermore, under Czech
contract law — in conformity with general principles of contract law -, it is not required
that the amount to be-paid should be known when the agreement is entered into; it is suf-
ficient that at the moment when the performance is due, it is objectively quantifiable
(e.g. Art. 409(2) Czech Commercial Code in respect of contract of sale). As the Slovak
Republic was in a position to measure precisely SI's loss and its evolution at any point in
time (at least at each quarter), the Slovak Republic surely was able to objectively quan-

tify its obligation to cover SI's losses.

150. As the language of the cover losses provision shows, the Slovak Republic had been of-

15

a

2

fered more than one way to implement its obligation to cover losses. Indeed, this obliga-
tion directed the Slovak Republic to achieve the goal of “covering”, i.e. removing or re-
placing SI's losses, but it did not impose on the Slovak Republic a particular method to
achieve this goal. It requested the Slovak Republic, however, to prepare a mechanism
that would permit reaching the required result. It is not disputed that the Slovak Repub-
lic did not implement such a mechanism nor provide for the necessary funds on the
State's budget. It is clear that the non-existence of such a prepared mechanism cannot
serve as an argument to raise an objection based on an alleged lack of clarity of the basic

obligation to cover losses when required.

. The decisions of the Czech Supreme Court, which the Slovak Republic invokes to sus-
tain its argument that Article 3 does not indicate what is meant by “cover losses” and
therefore is illegal, are not relevant. All these decisions concerned flagrant cases where
it was not clear whether parties intended a gift or a sale;®” or where there was.no objec-

tive way to determine the ultimate sales price;® or where all relevant elements in respect

Section 37 Civil Code, that requires that the parties’ declaration be “definite and intelligible”, is, contrary to
the Slovak Republic's view, not applicable to Article 3 CA, and it would anyhow not lead to another conclu-
sion than Section 269 Commercial Code.

Decision of October 7, 1998, No. 1 Odon 110/97.

Decision of August 31, 1999. In this case, no ruling on the validity of the agreement was made. The case
was remanded to the appellate court to complete the facts in relation to the price arrangement.

55

— — eee ee Reena pe,

152.

153.

of the rights and duties associated with the membership of a cooperative building soci-
ety were missing. In the case at stake, on the contrary, it was clear that the Slovak Re-
public would cover SI’s losses, in order to protect CSOB against the most probable risk
that loaned sums to SI most likely would not be reimbursed. As the Slovak Republic

would ultimately make a profit from the transaction, it had to make this investment.

As an equivalent to the MF SR's undertaking to “cover” SI's losses, Article 3(II)(5) CA
uses the expression that such losses shall be “compensated”. The same undertaking cov-
ers “any” losses. This means that all of SI's losses, as identified under the provisions of
Article 3(1I) CA, are to be covered, respectively compensated, and this at any time they
occur. The undertaking to cover SI's losses implied payments to be made at regular in-
tervals, corresponding to the intervals fixed in the agreed schedule of payments, when SI
had to pay the installments of CSOB's loan, over the period 1995-2003, but lacked the
funds necessary to meet its obligation. That is the reason why the MF SR was required
to prepare a “mechanism” to ensure a periodic flow of coverage for SI's losses. The Slo-
vak Republic thus had to provide SI with funds or assets to compensate for the loss it
had to suffer because the recovery from the assigned receivables was insufficient to
fully repay the loan and the operating costs. In this way, SI would keep the proper fi-

nancing to meet its obligations towards CSOB.

The losses to be covered were SI's losses. In the ordinary course of dealings, the pay-
ments to be made by the Slovak Republic to cover those losses would have to be di-
rected to SI. The Slovak Republic has argued, however, that this demonstrates that the
cover losses provision hereby shows another face of its inherent uncertainty, as such
payments made to SI would not have ensured that CSOB ultimately would be paid. The
Tribunal does not accept this argument. First, as the Slovak Republic has not made any
payment to cover SI's losses, such assertion is purely hypothetical. Second, and more
importantly, such a refusal of SI to transfer the Slovak Republic's payment to CSOB
would imply that the Slovak Republic, after it had paid the amount necessary to cover
SI's losses, would refuse, when acting within SI's Supervisory Board, to forward the

same money to its final destination, CSOB. Such a behavior would represent a gross

* Decision of February 7, 2001, No. 29 Cdo 1402/99.

56

154.

15.

156.

157.

w

violation of the principle of good faith and of Article 2(2) of the BIT, resulting in a

breach of the Consolidation Agreement.

As a matter of fact, another way to effectively cover SI's losses could have been a direct
payment from the Slovak Republic to CSOB, to the benefit of SI, thus reducing SI's re-
payment obligation and its potential loss. As the Slovak Republic had not prepared any
mechanism for the coverage of SI's losses nor the necessary funds on its budget, this
variant to allow compliance with the cover losses obligation need not to be further dis-

cussed.

The Tribunal concludes, therefore, that the cover losses provision of Article 3(ID(5) CA
identifies adequately and in a definite and understandable manner the Slovak Republic's
obligation to cover SI's losses as soon as and to the extent as the recovery of the as-
signed receivables did not allow to repay CSOB's loan according to the agreed schedule

of payments and taking into account SI's operating costs.

3. The Slovak Republic's obligation to cover SI's losses

Considering again the basic rules on the interpretation of the manifestation of will of
Section 266 Commercial Code, the Tribunal finds that all relevant circumstances for the
understanding of the content of the cover losses provision of Article 3(I1)(5) CA lead to
the conclusion that the Slovak Republic had accepted a legally binding undertaking to

make the necessary payments in order to allow the coverage of SI's losses.

During the negotiations leading to the conclusion of the CA, as explained, the represen-
tatives of the Slovak Republic were aware of the precise operation of Article 3(II) CA,
the need for each Republic to cover the losses of its respective Collection Company and
the budgetary funds needed to give effect to such undertaking, as much as the Slovak
Republic. was aware of the profit it was going to make through the consolidation and
subsequent privatisation of CSOB. The documentation supporting Resolution No.
937/93 of the Government of the Slovak Republic, referred to and quoted above, repre-

sents the most pertinent evidence in this respect.

57

158. The wording of Article 3(1I)(5) CA leaves no doubt about the basic obligation of each
Republic, acting through its Ministry of Finance, to provide for the “compensation” of
the Collection Companies’ losses over the period 1995-2003 and to “cover any losses”

made by these Companies in its respective territory.

159. Equally cleat is the declaration signed by Mr. Filbus, then the Slovak Republic's Minis-
ter of Finance, at the end of the Loan Agreement, where he “consents to and acknowl-
edges the contents” of the LA that states specifically the details of SI's repayment obli-
gation for the loan. This declaration confirms the MF SR's obligation to “secure” such
repayment under the CA. This means that the Slovak Republic had full knowledge of
SI's exposure to CSOB and declared to confirm that the repayment would finally be “se-
cured” by the Slovak Republic. As no other provision than Article 3(II)(5) of the CA is
related to such an obligation, this confirmation, declared by the Slovak Republic, is
clearly based on and refers to the CA's cover losses provision. The fact that a similar
declaration attached to the Future Assignment Agreement has not been signed on behalf
of the Slovak Republic does not remove the Slovak Republic's obligation under the CA,
which did not require any further confirmation. The declaration attached to the LA
shows that the Slovak Republic accepted that an obligation to secure the repayment of
the loan existed under the CA. Such an obligation covers necessarily all receivables as-
signed pursuant to the provisions of Article 3(II)(2) CA, including both on-balance and
off-balance sheet receivables. This is further confirmed by Articles 1(b) and 2 LA, that
refer expressly to loans related to OBS items and that are included in the MF SR's con-

sent declaration.

160. The Slovak Republic did argue that under Slovak law, the Slovak Minister of Finance
had no power to make such a declaration on behalf of the Slovak Republic. The evi-
dence shows, to the contrary, that the Minister of Finance of the Slovak Republic was
authorized by the Working Group appointed by virtue of Resolution No. 937 of the

Government of the Slovak Republic of December 15, 1993 to enter into a master agree-

6 Opinion of J. Drgonec, No. 25, 128, 211, 214; Rejoinder Opinion J. Drgonec, No. 27, 33. This expert advise
does not contain any mention of the cited Government Resolution No. 937.

58

161.

162.

Nv

ment and to prepare and to enter into the required partial agreements for the purpose of

implementing stage II of CSOB's restructuring.

The main line of the Slovak Republic's argumentation in these proceedings, ie, that
the cover losses obligation is in various respects not definite, not understandable and
uncertain, and thus null and void, is contradicted by the position taken by the Slovak
Republic's representatives over an extended period of time. Thus, during the negotia-
tions preparing for the conclusion of the CA, as well as in the years of the CA's subse-
quent practical application, they never raised doubts or objections in respect of the Slo-
vak Republic's cover losses obligation. In this way they demonstrated effectively that
the provisions of the CA were fully understandable, certain and definite to the Slovak
Republic. Any contrary position, as taken by the Slovak Republic in these proceedings,
is unsupported by all relevant circumstances of interpretation under the applicable
Czech law and, moreover, it does not comply with Article 2(2) of the BIT, which was
incorporated into the CA and requires the Slovak Republic to treat CSOB fairly and in
an equitable way and to give its investment full protection and security in the Slovak

Republic.

The Slovak Republic's subsequent conduct - another source on which to assess and con-
strue the meaning of a contract provision under Section 266 Commercial Code - con-
firms that the Slovak Republic clearly knew and accepted what was meant by its obliga-
tion to “cover losses”. Through various set-off agreements concluded between the MF
SR, SI and FTOs (Technopol, Chirana, Martimex) in 1994 and 1995,” the Slovak Re-
: public confirmed that SI did dispose of a receivable validly assigned by CSOB to SI.
The MF SR accepted to enter into discussions with CSOB on the provision of resources
on the state budget that would allow the repayment of CSOB's loan. CSOB was ensured
by the Slovak Republic's Minister of Finance that in 1996, the proposed budget would
include an amount for SI covering both 1995 and 1996. By the end of 1995, the MF
SR agreed to propose to the Government that SKK 3 billions from the budget of the

At least in the merits phase. In its Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction (p. 68), the Slovak Republic submitted
“that the meaning of the Consolidation Agreement is clear on its face and, if any further evidence were
needed, it is supplied by the negotiating history. Because the contract is not ambiguous, no further rules of
contractual interpretation are necessary.”

Statement of E. Kalinova, Exh. 18-20.

Minutes of meeting of September 4, 1995, Statement of P. Kavanek, Exh. 7.

59

163.

Slovak National Property Fund could be used for SI. The MF SR had been provided
by SI with “detailed quantification required from the state budget for 1995-1996”.”° At
no time during these discussions did any representative of the Slovak Republic question
the nature or the extent of the Slovak Republic's cover losses obligation under the CA.”
However, the Slovak Republic failed to include in the budget amounts for funding SI.

The Slovak Republic’s Minister Kozlik recognized in his May 17, 1996 letter that, fol-
lowing expert review, “there were no legally ambiguous obligations in the CA.”” In a
bond prospectus dated December 16, 1996,” the Slovak Republic accepted that under
the CA, the MF SR was obliged to cover the losses incurred by SI in such a way that SI
has sufficient funds to make the payments on the loans to CSOB. In a “Guarantor's Let-
ter of Information”, issued on December 22, 1997 by the State Secretary of the MF
SR,” it was stated that the MF SR was obliged to ensure that SI had sufficient funds to
make payments on SI's of some SKK 10.7 billions, and that the MF SR recognized that
“to date such payments have not been made in a timely manner’. In statements made to
the press, on May 25, 1998, June 1, 1998 and August 11, 2001, as well as in the "Black
Book" released in January 1999, the Slovak Republic repeatedly recognized that it had

to pay CSOB because of SI’s failure to reimburse the loans.”*

164. In the bond prospectus referred to above, it was also stated that CSOB had not yet ful-

filled its obligations under the CA to provide documentation to prove the amount owed
to CSOB with respect to the receivables assigned to SI. Other complaints of this kind
had been raised in late 1996 and early 1997,” but no statement made by the Slovak Re-

Minutes from meeting of December 1, 1995, Statement of P. Kavanek, Exh. 12; Reply Statement of P. Kav-
anek, Exh. 2.

Statement E. Kalinova, Exh. 17

Statement of P. Kavanek, No. 22-26.

Statement of P. Kavanek, Exh. 18. Contrary to what the Slovak Republic contends (TR, November 12,
2002, 172:16-173:16), this statement was not a general statement, inspired by practical considerations and
not considered as a legal acknowledgement. This is unconvincing as the purpose of the statement was to as-
sure third parties. Indeed, the statement was legally significant as it had the purpose to assure CSOB about
the MF SR's willingness to complete stage II of CSOB's restructuring and to recognize the Slovak Repub-
lic's obligation under the CA. It further served CSOB to satisfy its auditors (Statement P. Kavanek, Exh. 19,
TR, November 11, 2002, 156:9-25) and to classify the SI loan as a “standard” loan (Reply Statement P.
Kavanek, No. 23).

CSOB's Memorial, Exh. 8.

CSOB's Memorial, Exh. 9.

Cf. CSOB's Memorial, Exh. 10-14; TR, November 12, 2002, 85:3 — 90:9.

Cf. Statement of P. Kavanek, No. 35, 36, 38, 39, 41, 42, Exh. 26, 27, 29, 31, 32, 34.

60

16:

161

a

public in this respect disputed the MF SR's cover losses obligation under the CA.” The
expert commission jointly set up by CSOB and the MF SR concluded on February 13,
1997 that no imperfections in respect of the assigned receivables had been discovered.”
In response to CSOB's letter of April 10, 1997, calling SI to pay all drawn loans, SI
asked in its letter of April 24, 1997 for postponement of the due payments until Decem-
ber 31, 1997 because it was “unable to pay its obligation to your bank”.”? No objection

to the existence and scope of this obligation was raised.

. The Slovak Republic has argued that these repeated confirmations of the Slovak Repub-
lic’s duty to pay are set aside by the fact that CSOB did not request firm compliance
with Article 3 CA. On the contrary, e.g. on September 4, 1995, when SI was in default
of payments, CSOB explored the possibility of whether the Slovak Republic would
grant a specific state guarantee." In October, CSOB again invited the Slovak Republic
to ensure repayment of CSOB’s loan to SI. A letter was addressed by SI to the MF SR
on December 22, 1995, requesting the MF SR to regard its liability towards SI as being
secured by a State guarantee. For CSOB, such an endorsement by the MF SR of its obli-
gation would have allowed the SI loan to be given a classification that would have satis-
fied CSOB's auditors and the bank regulating authorities of the Slovak Republic. Ulti-
mately, the MF SR's letter stating that there “were no legally ambiguous obligations” in
the CA resolved the auditing and reporting requirements and the proposed agreement

was not signed.*!

6. For the Slovak Republic, these requests for an explicit guarantee, which remained un-

successful, indicate that the Slovak Republic was not obliged under the CA to pay
CSOB. Article 3 did not specify the mechanisms to cover losses; any number of meth-

ods could have been employed.

167. The Tribunal finds that the request for a specific guarantee is a - belated - request to the

Slovak Republic to secure properly its existing obligation for covering SI’s losses. The

Statement of P. Knapp, No. 22 and Exh. 4.

Statement of E. Kalinova, Exh. 34

Statement of P. Kavanek, Exh. 37.

Minutes of meeting, Statement of P. Kavanek, Exh. 7.
Cf. Reply Statement of E. Kalinova, No. 3-14.

61

16

16!

170.

od

2

fact that the Slovak Republic did not issue a guarantee is no indication that Article 3 is
not binding. It means only that the Slovak Republic was not prepared to undertake such
a further step to strengthen the enforcement of its liability under the CA. The December
22, 1995 proposal stated clearly that it “will merely endorse the obligations of the MF
SR” pertaining to the CA. The purpose was manifestly to provide SI, and ultimately
CSOB, with a security that, while assuring the Slovak Republic's compliance with an al-
ready existing and at that time not disputed obligation of the Slovak Republic to cover

SI's losses, would have satisfied CSOB's regulatory requirements.

4. CSOB's right to claim

The Slovak Republic further contends that CSOB is not designated as the beneficiary of
the cover losses provision and that even if CSOB had had any title to claim, it has no ac-

tual interest on the basis of which it can bring a claim against the Slovak Republic.

In respect of the first item, the Slovak Republic notes that the cover losses provision
does even not mention CSOB. It is argued that this is in line with the nature of the CA

that can create mutual obligations and rights between states only.

The Tribunal observes that it cannot be disputed that CSOB is a party to the CA with its
own rights and obligations. It contracted various obligations towards the Slovak Repub-
lic (as well as the Czech Republic). In particular, CSOB undertook to call a General
Meeting that would resolve to increase the registered capital (Art. 2 CA), it accepted to
improve its balance (Art. 3 CA), to develop its business in the Slovak Republic (Art. 5
CA), and to establish a subsidiary in the Slovak Republic (Art. 6). In respect of the
cover losses provision, while it is true that it does not mention CSOB expressly, it is
said in the provisions above that CSOB undertakes to transfer non-performing assets to
SI (Art. 3(11)(2) CA), that CSOB will be paid for these assets and will provide SI with a
loan (Art. 3(II)(3) CA), which will ultimately create SI's loss that the Slovak Republic
undertakes to cover. The heading of part II of Article 3 CA mentions the “Transfer of
CSOB's Non-Performing Assets to the Collection Companies”, a transaction that could
not be envisaged without having CSOB as a party to it. Moreover, the above stated

62

171.

172.

heading of Section 2 of Article 3 CA states that “the parties hereto have agreed to cover
the Non-Performing Assets”, thereby referring necessarily to the parties of the CA, in-
cluding CSOB. The Slovak Republic did not explain how the cover losses provision of
the Consolidation Agreement could operate as a state-to-state undertaking from the Slo-
vak Republic towards the Czech Republic. The Slovak Republic's cover losses obliga-
tion can only make sense if it entitles CSOB to claim from the Slovak Republic that it
effectively provides SI with the funds necessary to meet SI's obligation to repay CSOB's
loan. The fact that CSOB had to be involved and that it had to grant a loan to the Collec-
tion Companies, implies that CSOB had to be secured in the likely occurrence that the
Collection Companies were to make losses. The Slovak Republic's denial of CSOB's ti-
tle to request from the Slovak Republic that SI's losses are covered would deprive
CSOB from any meaningful protection for its loan and thus breach the Slovak Repub-
lic's commitment to let CSOB “enjoy full protection and security” as stated in Article
2(2) BIT that the parties agreed to incorporate into the CA. Therefore, the Tribunal re-
jects the Slovak Republic's contention that CSOB has no title to claim under the cover

losses provision of the CA.

The Slovak Republic also denies CSOB any actual interest on the basis of which it can
bring a claim against the Slovak Republic. under the cover losses provision of the CA.
Indeed, after the present arbitration proceedings had commenced in 1997, CSOB con-
cluded an assignment agreement with the Czech Republic on April 24, 1998," which
was superseded on June 25, 19988 by a second agreement. The purpose of these agree-

ments was to improve CSOB’s financial situation in view of its privatisation.

Under the second assignment agreement, CSOB undertook to assign to the Czech Re-
public on a so-called “effective date” all claims CSOB had against SI under the LA re-
lating to the receivables transferred to the latter as well as the claims CSOB had against
the Slovak Republic under the CA. The “effective date” is three days after the date on

- which the Czech Republic receives in writing CSOB's request for delivery of the receiv-

ables and the rights attached thereto. However, the Czech Republic does not have the

right to request the assignment prior to the completion of the instant arbitration proceed-

® Reply Statement of P. Kavanek, Exh. 9.
Reply Statement of P. Kavanek, Exh. 10.

63

I

J
a
d
J
1
d
q
J
1
|
|
1
|
|
]
]
]
|

173.

w

ings. In case of these proceedings not being completed by December 31, 2002, the
Czech Republic was required to pay a deposit for the payment of the “consideration”
amounting to 90% of the agreed upon nominal value of the receivables at that date.
Were CSOB to receive any payment in settlement of the receivables, 75% of the consid-
eration related to such payment has to be reimbursed to the Czech Republic. Whenever
the Czech Republic obtains such payment after the assignment of any receivable, CSOB

remains entitled to 25% of any amount received.

The second assignment agreement was amended on October 31, 2001." The due date
for payment to CSOB of the deposit for the consideration for the assignment of receiv-
ables to the Czech Republic was postponed until after completion of the arbitration pro-
ceedings, but no earlier than December 31, 2004. The Amendment denominated the
consideration in Czech crowns. It established a variable component of the consideration
based on interest on the outstanding fixed component of the consideration. Further, the
percentage of the consideration to be reduced in case of payments collected by CSOB
was increased from 75% to 85% for payments received as from January 1, 2003; the
same percentage were to apply to the amount of the Czech Republic's deposit that would

have to be returned to the latter after January 1, 2005.

174. The Slovak Republic has argued that, because of these assignment agreements, CSOB

has no longer standing to claim in this arbitration as in fact the Czech Republic became
the party interested to obtain a payment from the Slovak Republic. The circumstance
that the assignments would not take place before three days after the termination of the
arbitration proceedings was - in Slovak Republic’s view - a mere artifice to maintain
CSOB as a party in the present proceedings. In fact, the Czech Ministry of Finance has
stated on its web site that the Czech Republic - ie. not CSOB - would win the dispute.
Moreover, in its Annual Report 2001, CSOB has dropped the receivable related to SI
from its balance sheet and has replaced it by a Czech Republic receivable. The receiv-

able against SI was transferred to the off-balance sheet.

® Additional documents produced by CSOB pursuant to Procedural Order No. 1, on June 13, 2002, Tab 1.

175. However, the Arbitral Tribunal already has decided in its First Decision on Jurisdiction

176.

17

178.

a

_

oo

that CSOB is the real party in interest.** Consequently, CSOB has standing and title to

claim.

THE RECEIVABLES THAT COULD TRIGGER LOSSES UNDER ARTICLE 3 CA

The losses that the Slovak Republic had to cover could result from SI's operating costs
and from the payments to be made to CSOB to repay CSOB's loan, the amount of which
was equivalent to the amount of the consideration paid by SI at the time of the assign-
ment of the selected non-performing receivables. Such selection was based on two dis-
tinct agreements, i.e. the Assignment Agreement (later completed by two amendments)
and the Future Assignment Agreement (subsequently followed by the OBS Assignment
Agreements). The Slovak Republic as a party to the CA was bound by these CSOB/SI
Agreements in respect of the identification of the assigned receivables as provided for in

Article 3(11)(2) CA.

The Slovak Republic and CSOB disagree on which receivables have actually been prop-
erly assigned as provided for by Article 3(II)(2) CA. The assignments of some “On-
Balance Sheet” receivables as well as of some “Off-Balance Sheet” receivables are in

dispute.

On-Balance Sheet Receivables

The total amount of CSOB's receivables transferred to SI through the Assignment
Agreement was 6,521,108,081.91 Slovak Crowns (hereinafter “SKK“), representing the
“balances of contractual and forced loans denominated in Crowns and foreign currencies
as of December 31, 1993” (Art. I). The Amendment No. 1 dated August 16, 1994 re-.
duced this amount by SKK 51,668,195. The Amendment No. 2 dated May 31,.1995 in-

* First Decision on Jurisdiction, No 28-32.

65

dest

=

— eet arent memes eat pare a

17!

18

181.

se

0.

creased the amount by SKK 86,948,277.04, corresponding to a newly transferred re-

ceivable from Omnia.

The Slovak Republic argued that CSOB had engaged in aggressive lending to the FTOs
in late 1993, years after the end of the command economy, and then shunted those late
loans to SI. The Slovak Republic contended that this was inconsistent with the agreed
purpose of the CSOB/SI Agreements and that therefore a reduction of CSOB's claim of
SKK 7,022,989,051 (including interest) should be made. It is not certain whether this
request that does not appear in later submissions, has been formally withdrawn by the
Slovak Republic. However, the Tribunal notes that the provisions of Article 3(II) CA do
not give room to investigate into the origin and nature of the respective non-performing
receivables. In the Tribunal's view, the Slovak Republic is bound by the assignments
that have been validly agreed upon by CSOB and SI in compliance with Article 3(II)(2)
CA.

1. The devaluation loans

The Slovak Republic argues that among the “On-Balance Sheet” receivables, there were
receivables for a value of SKK 1,011,426,185 that were not “non-performing” as of De-
cember 31, 1993 and thus did not fall under the qualification of the “Non-Performing
Assets” to be transferred under Article 3(II)(2) CA.

These receivables were related to devaluation loans, granted by CSOB to three FTOs
(Technopol, Chirana and Martimex) in order to allow them to honour their obligations
in foreign currencies after the devaluation of the Czechoslovakian Crown in 1990. On
December 30, 1992, CSOB and the MF SR had entered into a “Devaluation Agree-
ment”®> whereby the Slovak Republic accepted to reimburse CSOB certain of the FTO’s
devaluation related losses, for a total amount of 1,900,980,000 Czechoslovakian Crowns
(hereinafter “KCS”); the reimbursements were meant to reduce the indebtedness of the
FTOs to CSOB (Art. II). Consequently, in the Slovak Republic's view, because CSOB

had obtained a direct guarantee from the Slovak Republic to reimburse these loans, the

8 Reply Statement of P. Kavanek, Exh. 18; Expert Opinion of D. Frishberg, Exh. 21.

66

receivables could not be considered as non-performing. Thus, in the Slovak Republic’s
view, the damage claimed by CSOB should have been reduced by SKK 3,068,497,860,
consisting of SKK 1,011,426,185 of principal and SKK 2,057,071,675 of interest as of

December 31, 2002.°”

182. The Tribunal notes that the Devaluation Agreement, concluded in 1992, foresaw that the
Slovak Republic would pay KCS 833,100,000 to CSOB for these receivables in 1993
and KCS 1,067,880,000 in 1994. On October 25, 1993, CSOB and Konsolidacna Banka
(KBB) concluded an ag hereby the latter purchased for SKK 724,020,000 part
of these receivables and obtained from CSOB a loan for the same amount at an interest
rate of 16.5% until October 31, 1996.** This arrangement had the effect of reducing the

outstanding obligations that were later transferred to SI. At the time of the CA's conclu-

lated to the devaluation losses in the CA that was then under preparation.® It is not con-
tested that the Slovak Republic agreed to such inclusion while it had full knowledge of
the Devaluation Ag and the agi concluded with Konsolidacna Banka.
The handling of the respective assets by the Supervisory Board of SI shows that their
transfer was made properly and was accepted.” The Slovak Republic's argument pre-

sented in these proceedings appears therefore as the opposite to its prior position.

|
]
]
]
]
]
]
] sion, the Slovak Republic had agreed to the inclusion of the remaining receivables re-
]
J
]
] 183. The argument now raised by the Slovak Republic is that the Devaluation Agreement”
operated as a “guarantee” to give CSOB full protection with regard to the payments of
] the devaluation loans. The Tribunal observes that the Devaluation Agreement states an
obligation to “reimburse” and does not contain the notion of a “guarantee”. Further, the
] particulars of the agreement with Konsolidacna Banka show that the Slovak Republic
: did not satisfy its direct payment obligations toward CSOB under the Devaluation
] Agreement as they were agreed. In fact, the Slovak Republic never did so even later. As
Section 266 Commercial Code indicates, the practices introduced, between the Parties

and the subsequent conduct are important parts of the circumstances of the interpretation

} *”  Rejoinder of D. Frishberg, para. 87.
| Reply Statement of E, Kalinova, Exh. 2. See further TR, April 15, 2003, 72:12-76:2, 122:14-128:3 (Knapp).
®° These loans were put on the list of receivables assigned and they were mentioned in the KPMG report on
1 CSOB's credit exposures as well as in the Proposal of the Slovak Republic of December 1993. Cf. Reply
Statement of P. Kavanek, No. 43 and 44, Statement of P. Knapp, Exh. 2.
Cf. Reply Statement of E. Kalinova, No. 18-24,

. 67

of an agreement. In the instant case, the Slovak Republic's own conduct demonstrates
that it was perfectly aware and had fully agreed upon the inclusion of the devaluation
loans as non-performing receivables into the assets assigned to SI. Indeed, in 1994, three
tri-partite set-off agreements were concluded whereby the MF SR paid an obligation it
had towards each respective FTO through the set-off of FTO receivables held by SI (af-
ter their assignment from CSOB). This operation had the effect of reducing SI's receiv-
ables and entitlement to collect from these FTOs. While this had the advantage for the
MF SR and the FTOs of reducing their respective liabilities, it had the collateral effect
of reducing SI's ability to repay CSOB's loan from collections from those FTOs. Such
an operation and its implied increase of CSOB's exposure to get SI's loan repaid could
make sense only because of the Slovak Republic's undertaking to provide SI with the
funds necessary to meet its loan obligation to CSOB. The Slovak Republic knew, when

it accepted the transfer of those receivables to SI, that the Devaluation Agreement was

* not an appropriate instrument to ensure performance of these receivables and it acted

184.

subsequently on the same basis. The Slovak Republic alleges that there had been some
indications that through 1994 the Slovak Republic would have repaid some SKK 1.4 bil-
lion for these receivables. No specific evidence has been submitted in this respect, and
the reduction claimed by the Slovak Republic in respect of the principal is below this

amount.

Finally, the Tribunal does not share the Slovak Republic's view that proof should be
given that the receivables assigned effective on December 31, 1993 were in fact actually
non-performing. The content of Article 3(II)(2) CA does not go so far. It requires CSOB
and SI to identify the non-performing receivables. If a receivable so selected were later
to appear as performing, in full or in part, it would have the effect of increasing SI's col-
lection and allow the repayment of CSOB's loan. No adverse effect would occur that
would put the actual operation of Article 3(II)(2) CA into question. Moreover, the Slo-
vak Republic has no interest in challenging the transfer of receivables because they were
performing. As the Slovak Republic had to cover the losses caused by non-performing
receivables, the more performing receivables that were transferred, the less substantial

its obligation to cover SI's losses would be.

68

2. The receivables concerning Polnopo / Mykoprogres

185. Another on-balance sheet receivable assigned for an amount of SKK 121,085,371.50
concerned Polnopo. This receivable had been guaranteed by Mykoprogres in an amount
of SKK 118,476,874. Mykoprogres became subject of bankruptcy proceedings, initiated
by SI. In the course of these proceedings Mykoprogres requested the District Court in
Bratislava to declare that SI had no valid claim against Mykoprogres. The Slovak Re-
public invokes this request to argue that it should not be held to cover losses from the
Polnopo receivables as these receivables had not properly been assigned to SI. However,
the objection raised by Mykoprogres is not more than an argument of a third party op-
posing a guarantee payment, that may be based on grounds unrelated to the relationship
between the creditor and the debtor of the disputed asset. It does not specifically support
a view that no claim of SI exists against its debtor Polnopo. Mykroprogres’ objection
has no legal effect on the validity of the transfer of the Polnopo receivable as it was

agreed between CSOB and SI and is consequently binding on the Slovak Republic.

186. The Supreme Court of the Slovak Republic decided on June 26, 1998 to overturn a deci-
sion of the Regional Court in Bratislava that failed to examine Mykoprogres’ objection
to SI's claim; the matter was therefore returned to the lower court for further proceed-
ings.”! This Court subsequently reopened the bankruptcy on November 20, 1998, in the
course of which the trustee of Mykoprogress challenged SI's receivable. No evidence
has been produced about the outcome of these proceedings. One of the Slovak Repub-
lic's legal experts confirms that there is no final decision on the merits and he abstains
from offering a conclusion in this respect; he states, however, that the trustee's challenge
enables him to assert that the validity of Mykoprogres’ receivable is “seriously ques-
tioned”. This expert does not consider, however, nor did the Slovak Republic, that
Mykoprogres’ refusal to settle SI's claim has been examined in detail by an Expert
Commission directed by Ms. Papciinova, an executive of SI appointed by the MF SR, at
a meeting held on February 13, 1997, that concluded unanimously that no imperfections

to the particulars with respect to the assignment of balance sheet receivables from

°' Reply Opinion of O. Ovetkova, Exh. 9.
2 Rejoinder Opinion of J. Drgonec, No. 70-72.

69

187.

188.

oo

189.

93
94

CSOB to SI were discovered.” As it has been reported to the Tribunal, at no time during
its negotiations with SI did Mykoprogres question the validity of its obligations to SI.

Therefore, the Tribunal does not retain the objection raised by the Slovak Republic in

this respect.

3. Later transfer of receivables

Under Article 3(II)(2) CA, the receivables to be assigned had to be specified as of De-
cember 31, 1993. However, on May 31, 1995, CSOB and SI agreed to transfer receiv-
ables to SI that had not been identified on December 31, 1993. Pursuant to Amendment
No. 2 to the Assignment Agreement, effective as of June 1, 1995, CSOB assigned to SI
a receivable from Omnia for SKK 86,948,277.04. On this basis, Amendment No. 4 to
the LA increased the SKK part of the loan by the same amount and it modified the

amount of the installments correspondingly.

On August 16, 1994, CSOB and SI agreed in Amendment No. 1 to the Assignment
Agreement to retract part of the assignment of receivables related to AVEX and listed in
the receivables transferred to SI as of December 31, 1993 under the Assignment Agree-
ment. The amount of the assigned receivables was thus reduced by SKK 51,668,195 and
became a total of SKK 6,469,439,886.91. With effect on August 1, 1994, the same re-
duction in SKK was agreed in Amendment No. 2 to the LA, thus reducing the SKK part
of the total loan to SKK 5,233,127,586.91 (the other part in Czech Crowns remaining
unchanged at 1,055,000,000). The revised payment schedule in Amendment No. 3 of the
LA did take account of this reduction. The Slovak Republic's claim for a reduction of
approximately SKK 14 million paid as interest on the loan is based on the erroneous as-
sumption that the reduction was effective on December 31, 1993. As stated above, this
reduction occurred on August 1, 1994. This claim cannot, therefore, be upheld by the

Tribunal.

Statement of E. Kalinova, Exh. 34.
Reply Statement of E. Kalinova, paras. 26-32 and documents referred to.

70

190.

191.

192.

193.

The withdrawal of the AVEX receivable, however, did not create new opportunities to
change the Slovak Republic’s coverage for losses of assigned receivables. Indeed, the
Slovak Republic had only undertaken to cover losses out of the assignment of receiv-
ables, as selected on December 31, 1993. Receivables thus selected but no longer as-
signed to SI, surely reduce the Slovak Republic’s commitment to cover the losses result-
ing from these receivables. On the other hand, such withdrawal of receivables cannot
make room under Article 3 CA to cover receivables not selected as of December 31,

1993, but transferred by an agreement between CSOB and SI after this date.

The fact that SI’s Supervisory Board has approved the transfer of new receivables to SI
does not imply that the Slovak Republic has agreed to extend its obligation to cover

these receivables, i.e. beyond what was provided in Article 3(II) CA.

Therefore, the Tribunal finds that it cannot agree that the receivable from Omnia forms
part of the on-balance sheet receivables that can trigger SI's losses that the Slovak Re-

public had to cover.

Off-Balance Sheet Receivables

The Future Assignment Agreement (also referred to as the “FAA”) that became effec-
tive on December 31, 1993, identified the off-balance sheet instruments under which
CSOB might be obliged to make payments to the payees of such an instrument, where-
upon the respective amount would become due and payable by the domestic instructing
party (the FTOs) to CSOB. The FAA specified the OBS liabilities that could oblige
CSOB to make payments after 1993 because of guarantees and letters of credit granted
to third parties. When CSOB had to make such a payment, it assigned the OBS receiv-
able to SI against payment of a consideration in the amount of 100% of the nominal
value of such receivable, on the basis of an OBS Assignment Agreement. To finance
such assignment, CSOB advanced.SI the funds through an OBS Loan Agreement. The
receivables exposed to a later assignment have been selected during the negotiations that

took place before December 31, 1993 and that involved, inter alia, CSOB, SI and repre-

71

 

194.

195.

a

196.

197,

&

8

sentatives of the Slovak Republic, in the same way as this was done in respect of the se-

lection of the on-balance sheet receivables.

The Future Assignment Agreement set the total amount of SI's payment exposure at
SKK 4,229,367,000. It identified the FTOs holding such instruments to be assigned to
SI as: Technopol, Slovart, Chirana Export-Import, Drevounia, Istraconti, Martimex,
Elteco Zdruzenie.

1. CSOB’s internal instructions

The Slovak Republic argues that OBS instruments had been created and/or paid by

CSOB in breach of its own internal control regulations.

The issuance of the OBS instruments was governed by CSOB Order No. 7/78.°° This
Order required CSOB to follow a specific procedure to issue a guarantee (e.g. the use of
specific written forms, signatures, specific processing). The Slovak Republic notes that
a KPMG audit for 1992” had stated that there were significant differences between the
bank’s records and counter party confirmations and that therefore CSOB's procedures
had not been applied. The Slovak Republic asserts that of the 420 OBS items assigned
by CSOB to SI, 18 OBS files did not have a request by the FTO for the issuance of a
guarantee, in 9 files this request had not been signed by the FTO and in 11 files, there

was no guarantee agreement signed by CSOB.””

The Slovak Republic also contends that CSOB Internal Regulation 6/93,” that applied
to the guarantee payment, was not followed either. For instance, the rule that payments
could only be made when there was a guarantee agreement, signed by CSOB, was not
followed for 17 OBS payments. Contrary to the instructions, 42 OBS files did not con-
tain a request for payment from the FTO, 52 files had no payment order, 297 files had
incomplete payment orders, 119 files did not mention the third party beneficiary, 32

CSOB's Hearing Exh. 7 for I. Cermakova (English translation).

Statement of P. Knapp, Exh. 1.
Cf. Rejoinder Opinion of D. Frishberg, Exh. 3-28.
Statement of I. Cermakova in Reply, Exh. 1.

72

files had no proof of a non-payment guarantee and 13 files lacked an original copy of

the non-payment guarantee.

198. The Slovak Republic further notes that these deficiencies could overlap, as some OBS
files breached several rules. In 352 of the 420 OBS transactions, the CSOB’s procedures
on issuing and paying thus appear not been followed on one or more points. For that
reason, in the Slovak Republic’s view, SI should not have been bound to these irregular
receivables, and CSOB’s claim against the Slovak Republic for covering the losses re-
sulting from assigned OBS receivables should be reduced by SKK 10,371,262,716 (in-

cluding interest).

199, CSOB objects to the Slovak Republic's allegations that they are not correct and anyhow
not relevant in respect of the validity of the assignments to SI and the Slovak Republic's
cover losses obligation. CSOB affirms that the Slovak Republic did not produce any
evidence in support of its objection that payments were made that had not to be made or
that other payments were made to the wrong entity. Despite the accumulation of alleged
documentary failures, wholly rejected by CSOB, the Slovak Republic and its accounting

expert failed, in CSOB's view, to identify even a single disbursement error.

200. The Tribunal finds that the deficiencies alleged by the Slovak Republic are of a purely
technical nature and relate to CSOB's internal method of processing this line of busi-
ness. Under testimony, the Slovak Republic's accounting expert had to accept that a
number of what he identified as deficiencies did in fact not reveal any irregularity. He
also admitted that much less is required by way of documentary proof when CSOB had
to honor abstract guarantees, as most of the guarantees were in fact.°? It was also estab-
lished that issues raised by KPMG were not raised again after the 1992 report, and in
particular in 1993 and the years when the OBS items reached maturity.’ The Slovak
Republic's argumentation was directed to raise doubts about the quality of CSOB's
method of handling the guarantees underlying the OBS items. The Tribunal finds that

this matter is anyhow not relevant and that the objections raised-by the Slovak Republic

°° TR, April 17, 2003, 53:23 — 60:8 (Frishberg).
' Statement of P. Knapp, Exh. 2; TR, April 14, 2003, 155:11-157:18 (Hart); TR, April 15, 2003, 103:19-
104:15 (Knapp).

73

201.

20:

20:

s

2.

did not demonstrate that payments were made to creditors to which the CSOB should
not have paid. It also observes that the Slovak Republic did not raise similar objections
to the processing of guarantees before December 1993 and related to the on-balance

sheet instruments.

The Slovak Republic did not challenge CSOB's assertion that none of the beneficiaries
of the underlying guarantees that it alleged to be inherently irregular objected to CSOB's
conduct. The Slovak Republic did not consider either the fact that none of the FTOs has
ever filed a claim or otherwise complained that CSOB had not properly handled pay-
ments under the guarantees and that CSOB thus had not received title to claim the re-

spective amounts from the FTOs.

Under the OBS Assignment Agreements, SI was entitled to claim the delivery of the
complete documentation concerning the FTO and the assigned receivables (Art. VIII).
On March 1, 1996, SI and CSOB concluded the Agreement on a Repayment Schedule
Mechanism for OBS Instruments and the Method of Source Document Delivery. Under
this agreement CSOB committed itself to deliver to SI all documents evidencing and
documenting the amounts of the assigned OBS, as from January 1, 1994. On March 31,
1994, CSOB transmitted a complete documentation on the transfer of the OBS items to
the MF SR.'! The Slovak Republic has not reported that SI had indicated that it had
not received these documents or had objected to the assignment of OBS receivables on

the ground that they had not been sufficiently documented.

In late 1996, the Slovak Republic made a declaration that CSOB was not providing

102 4 request of SI for documentation

documentation to prove the amounts owed to it.
was addressed to CSOB on December 10, 1996.'°3 The expert commission, mentioned
above, headed by a representative of the MF SR, unanimously confirmed on February
13, 1997 that “no imperfections to the particulars with respect to the assignment of off-

balance sheet and on-balance sheet receivables from CSOB to SI were discovered”,!"

Statement of E. Kalinova, Exh. 5.

Letter of the MF SR of November 8, 1996, Statement of P. Kavanek, Exh. 26; Bond prospectus issued on
December 16, 1996, CSOB's Memorial, Exh. 8.

Statement of E. Kalinova, Exh. 32.

Statement of E. Kalinova, Exh. 34.

74

204.

205.

When the MF SR was invited, in a letter of May 30, 1997, to send documentation on its
objection in respect of the transfer of certain receivables, that it had promised to submit

in a meeting held on May 16, 1999, no further reaction occurred.'°

The Tribunal recalls that SI had every opportunity to inquire into the status of each of
the receivables before accepting its assignment. In this respect, it was irrelevant whether
all the internal procedural rules had: been followed when these receivables had been cre-
ated. As they existed, they were on CSOB’s books. As for CSOB’s payment of the OBS
receivables after 1993, SI could at any time have challenged these payments if they were
not due, but it did not do so. On the contrary, without any objection it accepted their as-
signment after CSOB’s payment. The relevant OBS instruments have been listed in the
Future Assi: Ag in the subseq OBS Assi Ag and
again in the numerous Amendments to the OBS Loan Agreement. The Slovak Republic
acknowledged the OBS receivables when Mr. Magula initialed the FAA. By entering
into these transactions, SI accepted and confirmed that CSOB had acquired valid title to
the respective receivables and that they were thus validly transferred to SI. This is all
that matters under Article 3(II)(2) CA. The Slovak Republic is indeed bound by the
transfer of assets as they were negotiated, specified and agreed upon between CSOB and
SI. The legal effect of these agreements upon the Slovak Republic, which is an essential
element of the operation of Article 3(II) CA, is explained by the fact that the Slovak Re-
public, as having complete control over SI, had full opportunity to object to the transfer
of any particular OBS item to SI or to request any further information it might have
thought to be relevant. The Slovak Republic has not done so and cannot do so years later
in the course of these proceedings. Therefore, the Tribunal rejects the Slovak Republic's

objections in this respect.

2. Absence of signature on OBS Technopol loans

\
The Slovak Republic has argued that the SI is not bound by the Amendments No. 37
through 42 and Amendment No. 46 to the Technopol OBS Loan Agreement No.

'® Statement of P. Knapp, No. 22 and Exh. 3 and 4.

75

i

ead

 

206.

207.

208.

209.

21

o

01/02/95 because these Amendments have not been signed by SI. Nor is it bound by
Amendments No 43, 44, 45, 47, and 48 of said Agreement, as these Amendments were

not signed by any of the parties.

The Slovak Republic notes correctly that the Technopol OBS Loan Agreement No
01/02/95 is governed by Slovak law. It is governed by the same law as the Loan Agree-
ment of May 25, 1994 (LA), that contains a choice of law clause in favour of Slovak
law and of which it is an integral part. Under Section 40(3) of the Slovak Civil Code a
written agreement or written amendment to an agreement is only binding when it has

been executed by the parties thereto.

As the requirement of both parties’ signature has not been met in respect of Technopol
OBS Loan Amendments No 37 through 48, the Slovak Republic contends that SI is not
bound by these Amendments. Therefore, CSOB's damage claim against the Slovak Re-
public, as calculated as of December 31, 2002, must be reduced by SKK 683,553,309

(including interest).

CSOB has argued that the Amendments No 37 through 48, created from October 1996
till December 1997, had not been signed because SI’s Board of Supervisors no longer

convened and refused to supervise SI’s activities.

The Tribunal notes in this respect that such refusal of SI's Board to operate may be a
breach of the duty to co-operate and to implement the Agreements concluded between

CSOB and SI. It does not compensate for the missing signatures.

. Under Section III of the Technopol OBS Assignment Agreement No. 01/1/1995, CSOB

assigned all Technopol OBS receivables to SI, including those due in the future. Section
IV stipulated that for each assigned receivable, upon provision of payment in favor of
the beneficiary under an OBS instrument, SI shall pay consideration to CSOB in the
amount of 100% of the nominal value of the receivable. Concurrently with each such

payment, in accordance with Section 1(b) LA —

76

21

212.

21

wo

... the Assignor [CSOB] shall provide the Assignee [SI] with a loan for such re-
accounted payment in the corresponding amount pursuant to a separate loan
agreement (“partial disbursement of the loan by the Assignee”).

In the second part of the same Section IV, it was stated that the same procedure “shall
be applied for each partial monetary payment in favor of a beneficiary under a specific
off-balance sheet instrument”. Similarly, Article 2 LA provided that the OBS loans

“shall be drawn as the need arises”.

. Under the Technopol OBS Loan Agreement No. 01/02/95, concluded the same day as

the respective assignment agreement, it was stated that the loan shall be disbursed
gradually in accordance with the payments of OBS receivables from Technopol (Section

II/1) and it was specified that -

Each individual (partial) disbursement of the loan shall be regulated by the
amendments thereto.

It follows from these undertakings that upon payment of the beneficiary of a guarantee,
SI had to pay the full nominal value of the respective Technopol receivable and was
provided by CSOB, for this purpose, with a loan in the same amount. CSOB's obligation
to provide for such a loan and SI's acceptance were agreed upon in the Technopol OBS
Loan Agreement. However, the individual provision of a loan for each particular receiv-
able reaching maturity required a procedure to be applied for each partial payment (Sec-
tion IV of the Technopol OBS Assignment Agreement). In addition, the loan had to be
disbursed on the basis of a specific di to the Technopol OBS Loan Ag

the latter thus operating as a kind of umbrella instrument.

 

. The legal framework agreed upon by CSOB and SI required therefore the execution of a

specific agreement, i.e. an amendment. This is confirmed by the actual practice followed
in the relations between CSOB and SI as demonstrated by the Technopol Amendments
No. 1-36 that are all signed by both parties. The Amendments No. 37-48 that have not

been signed by SI all contain the following sentence —

77

214.

21

na

By signing this Amendment, the Client accepts such loan.

It is thus demonstrated that for CSOB as well, SI's signature was considered as a legal

requirement for the existence and disbursement of each partial loan.

CSOB's position in these proceedings is not consistent with the Application for registra-
tion in SI's bankruptcy proceedings it filed on June 23, 1998 with the Regional Court in
Bratislava.'° In respect of the list of outstanding loans related to Technopol OBS in-
struments, this Application does not refer to any Technopol OBS Loan Amendment
above No. 36. The Application states in a separate section V that under the Technopol
OBS Assignment Agreement, SI was to pay CSOB consideration in the amount of 100%
of the nominal value of the receivables assigned, and that SI violated this Agreement in
October 1996 when it refused to conclude amendments to the loan agreement, thus not
paying the consideration for the receivables assigned. Consequently, CSOB registered a
receivable “ensuing from the failure to pay the consideration for assignment”, and it of-
fered as documentary evidence, inter alia, “draft Amendments No. 37 through to 48 to
the Loan Agreement No. 01/02/95, including the related correspondence”. In the Section
VI below, this receivable was identified as “Receivable by virtue of the unpaid purchase
price” (No. 9). It was thus stated and confirmed by CSOB that the loans based on these
amendments, that were not signed on behalf SI, never came into existence. Similarly,
CSOB's acceleration letter of April 10, 1997 that listed all relevant contractual docu-

ments, does not refer to the Technopo! OBS loan amendments above No. 36.

. Article 3(11I)(3) CA provided for full payment (as “consideration”) of 100% of the nomi-
nal value of the assigned receivable. As has been explained above, such payment was
financed by the provision of a loan, that was designed to have SI making a loss that the
Slovak Republic undertook to cover. The Slovak Republic's obligation to cover SI's
losses required the conclusion of a loan agreement between CSOB and SI, creating an
obligation for SI to repay the loan that triggered its losses and consequently the Slovak

Republic's obligation for compensation. The existence of a loan agreement was there-

106 Statement I. Cestr, Tab C, filed with CSOB's Request for Provisional Measures of September 4, 1998; the

Slovak Republic's Observations on CSOB's Request for Provisional Measures of January 19, 2000, Exh. B;
the Slovak Republic's Hearing Exhibits, November 2002, Tab 9.

72

21

217.

S

fore a requirement, a conditio sine qua non of the Slovak Republic's cover losses obliga-
tion. This requirement has not been met in respect of Amendments No. 37-48 to the
Technopol OBS Loan Agreement. Therefore, the Tribunal rejects CSOB's claim in this

respect.

3. Later transfer of receivables

In relation to the late transfer of the Omnia receivables, referred to above, CSOB ex-
plained that this transfer was also to be adjusted, in addition to the credit given for the
AVEX receivable, in taking into consideration the partial assignment of the receivable
for Intercoop that was agreed between CSOB and SI on April 21, 1995, in an amount of
SKK 31,661,730.53. This transfer was also balanced by the assignment back to CSOB
of the OBS receivable Drevotina for SKK 43,661,000. This last assignment has not
been documented before this Tribunal otherwise than through the Minutes of the SI Su-
pervisory Board held on August 31, 1994,'°” where it was agreed to accept CSOB's pro-
posal to exchange the Drevotia receivable for the Intercoop OBS receivable which did

result in the transfer of the entire Intercoop debt exposure to SI.

The Tribunal understands that these transfers were made in a way to keep an overall
balance of the amount of receivables transferred to SI and resulted in a decrease of this
amount of about SKK 14 million to the benefit of SI. These operations are not, as con-
tended by the Slovak Republic, evidence of CSOB's failure to manage SI, all the more
so as SI was governed by its Supervisory Board, composed by representatives of the
Slovak Republic. However, the receivables newly added to SI after December 31, 1993
did not comply with Article 3(II)(2) CA that fixed the receivables to be identified at that
time-limit, not providing for any later exchange. The losses to be covered by the Slovak
Republic had to be caused by receivables assigned to SI in compliance with all provi-
sions of Article 3 CA, including the requirement that they had to be identified on De-
cember 31, 1993 at the latest. Therefore, the Tribunal finds that it cannot consider the
above mentioned receivable from Intercoop as part of the OBS-assets that can trigger

SI's losses that the Slovak Republic had to cover.

107 Statement of E. Kalinova, Exh. 8.

79

218.

VI.

219.

220.

The Slovak Republic contended, moreover, in its Third Post-Hearing Memorial submit-
ted on July 18, 2003, that it had identified five payments made under three separate
guarantees (two relating to Martimex and one to Technopol) which were not included in
Schedule A of the OBS Future Assignment Agreement, but were nevertheless assigned
to SI. The Tribunal observes, however, that this Memorial was submitted on the condi-
tion, expressed by the Chairman, that it shall “only address issues raised in the post-
hearing brief of the other side”; thus, “no new elements” were admitted.!"* The argu-
ment made by the Slovak Republic in its last brief in respect of these guarantees was

new. Therefore, it cannot be decided by the Tribunal.

CSOB’s CLAIM FOR COMPENSATION

CSOB claims full compensation for the damages it suffered because of the Slovak Re-
public’s breach of its cover losses obligation under Article 3(II)(5) of the CA. CSOB's
alleged damage is composed of various elements related to the structure of SI's payment
obligation and loss, and to the consequences of the Slovak Republic's failure to pay on

CSOB.

Obligation to Pay Full Compensation

Under Section 373 of the Czech Commercial Code, the obligation to compensate for

damages is determined as follows —

Who ever breaches a duty arising from a contractual relationship is obliged to
provide compensation for the damage caused to the other party, unless he proves
that such a breach was caused by circumstances excluding his liability.

108 TR, April 18, 2003, 231:5-10 (Chairman).

80

221.

222.

223.

224.

109

In the instant case, no other compensation than through payment of money is to be con-

sidered (Section 378 Commercial Code).

Section 379 Commercial Code states that unless provided otherwise, compensation con-
sists of “actual damage” and “lost profit”. Damage also includes any expenses which the
injured party has incurred by having to expend funds due to the breach of obligation of

the other party (Section 380 Commercial Code).

It is not disputed that the Slovak Republic did not provide SI with funds necessary to
allow SI to repay CSOB's loan nor did the Slovak Republic in any other way, i.e. by di-
tect payments to CSOB, reduce SI's payment obligation towards CSOB and thus SI's
loss. As CSOB was not paid according to the CSOB/SI Agreements, it suffered damage
caused by the Slovak Republic's failure to cover losses in a way that allowed the repay-
ment of the loan. SI's default on its loan from CSOB and CSOB's damage arising from
this default was thus caused by the Slovak Republic's breach of its cover losses obliga-
tion. The Tribunal has now to determine the amount of CSOB's prejudice arising from
SI's default that can be attributed to the Slovak Republic's default on its cover losses ob-

ligation under Article 3(II)(5) CA.

The Tribunal recalls that the Slovak Republic's cover losses obligation and its duty to
provide compensation for CSOB's damage is based on and limited by the relevant provi-
sions of Article 3(II) CA.'° The Slovak Republic had to “cover”, respectively to “com-
pensate” SI's losses (Art. 3(II)(5) CA), such losses being identified as resulting —

... from the operating costs and the schedule of payments for the receivables as-
signed by CSOB to the Collection Companies, including payments of interest.

CSOB has repeatedly argued that its claim was exclusively based on the CA, cf., inter alia, CSOB's Reply,

p. 30. This has to be held against CSOB's pleadings at the April 2003 hearing where it was contended that
CSOB's actual damage resulting from the Slovak Republic's breach of its obligation to cover losses as re-
quired under the CA was necessarily [sic] what S] was bound to pay pursuant to the LA (TR, April 18,
2003, 61:13-20, 63:1-8), while it was also argued that CSOB was in no way seeking to enforce the LA itself
(TR, April 18, 2003, 62:23-25). CSOB then stated that its claim for actual damage is “for the value of the
Loan Agreement” (CSOB Post Hearing Submission on issues addressed at the hearing of April 2003, No.
34) and that “it seeks compensation based upon a factual finding as to the value of its rights under the SI
Loan Agreement” (CSOB's Reply to the Slovak Republic's Second Post Hearing Memorial, No. 10).

81

225.

22

227.

6.

_

As this has been explained above, the payments hereby referred to relate to the loan that
CSOB was required to provide “up to the sum of considerations for the receivables as-
signed to the Collection Companies” (Art. 3(II)(3) CA). To the extent that SI was not in
a position to repay this loan and therefore made a loss, the Slovak Republic was re-
quired to compensate for such loss in the same amount as determined by paragraphs 3

and 4 of Article 3(II) CA.

The Tribunal shares the Parties’ view that as a matter of principle, the burden of proof
for CSOB's damage is on CSOB. The Slovak Republic further argues that the applicable
standard of proof is determined by Czech law, as the law chosen in Article 7(4) CA.
CSOB, on the other hand, is of the view that under Czech law, the burden of proof re-
lates to procedure as opposed to substance, and that the CA's choice of law clause does
not extend to matters of procedure; therefore, the only rule to be applied by this Tribunal

would be ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(1) which states —

The Tribunal shall be the judge of the admissibility of any evidence adduced and
of its probative value.

The Tribunal is of the view that while Arbitration Rule 34(1) must prevail, it has not to
open a discussion on an issue whether this Rule leaves room for the application of
Czech law in respect of the assessment of evidence, respectively the required standard of
proof. Section 132 of the Czech Procedural Code states that the court assesses the evi-
dence at its own discretion. There does therefore not exist any discrepancy in compari-
son with Arbitration Rule 34(1). However, it has been argued by the Slovak Republic
that in some respects, i.e. on the matter of Jost profits, Czech law requires specifically
high probability in assessing evidence. This may be related to the law applicable to the

merits and will be dealt with at the appropriate place.

After SI's failure to meet its payment obligations that had been deferred to that date, the

situation deteriorated and lead CSOB to formally request from SI, in a letter dated Au-

82

22)

m
2
u3

i)

gust 22, 1996, payment of the then outstanding amounts.'’° This letter was followed by
another letter, dated September 5, 1996 and addressed to the MF SR, requiring payment

" As no further progress was made, in the re-

of the amount of which SI was in default.
lation with SI as well as in the course of the exchange of views that took place between
CSOB and the MF SR, CSOB, by a letter of April 10, 1997 to SI declared the entirety of
the outstanding principal and interest due and payable as of that date, with reference to
Article 11(a) LA." In another letter of the same day, CSOB requested the MF SR, with
reference to Article 3 CA, to fulfill immediately its duty:to cover the losses of SI and to
secure the payment of the due receivables of CSOB from SI in the amount of SKK
13,710,273,571.88. CSOB further declared that in the event no payment was received by
April 17, 1997, it would undertake the necessary steps for collection of the MF SR's ob-

ligation and compensation for damages.!!?

. In the light of these developments, SI became liable for payment, as from April 10,
1997, for the full amount of the loan. Indeed, pursuant to Article 11(a) LA, and given
SI's default, CSOB was entitled to declare the full amount of the loan immediately due
and payable. The CA does not require CSOB to exhaust any method of recoverability
from SI, including the conclusion of the bankruptcy proceedings against SI. As SI had
no funds available to repay even part of its loan, it made a loss corresponding to the
amounts outstanding on April 10, 1997. As SI did not pay within a week as required by
CSOB, the latter confirmed by its letter of April 18, 1997 that all its receivables from SI
were mature and payable, pursuant to Article 11(a) LA, as from April 10, 1997. The
same letter stated that the total amount of the due receivables was SKK
13,710,273,571.88 and that this figure did take account of a set-off CSOB operated with
funds maintained by SI on its sub-accounts and its current account in the total amount of
SKK 2,792,822.85. It was further indicated that the global amount included SKK
1,500,000 for unpaid fees under the Operation Agreement, with the effect that the re-
ceivable relevant under the loan was of SKK 13,708,773,551.88 (principal and interest).

NO Statement of P. Kavanek, Exh. 20.

Statement of P. Kavanek, Exh. 21.
Statement of P. Kavanek, Exh. 35.
Statement of P. Kavanek, Exh. 36; Opinion of O. Ovetkova, Exh. 11.

83

229. The Slovak Republic's obligation was to cover SI's losses in the amount specified, in

compliance with Article 3(II) CA, in the LA and its collateral agreements. Therefore,
when the full amount of the loan was called on April 10, 1997, the Slovak Republic had
to perform its cover losses obligation in respect of the total amount of the loan on the
same day. As from that day, the Slovak Republic, failing to perform its obligation, was
in delay according to Sections 365 and 367 Commercial Code, thus creating CSOB's ti-
tle to claim damages under Section 373 of this Code.

230. The Tribunal will successively analyze the different claims for actual damages that

N
wo

CSOB has based upon the Slovak Republic’s failure to cover the losses SI has sustained
in respect of the loan extended by CSOB. After this examination of CSOB's claim for

actual damage, it will focus on CSOB’s claim for lost profits.

The Claim Based on the Principal Amount of the Loan ‘

. For CSOB, the advances under the Loan Agreement for on-balance sheet receivables
were SKK 6,556,388,163.95.!" This amount does not include the portion of the AVEX
receivable that had been retransferred in 1994 to CSOB in the amount of SKK
51,668,195.00. It does include the Omnia receivable of SKK 86,948,277.04.

232. The total exposure in respect of the seven OBS Assignment Agreements was SKK

233.

na
ns
16

4,217,744,329.42."5 The actual total amount of the exposure, i.e. the loan disburse-
ments made effectively is SKK 4,090,848,277.35.1'6 The retracted Drevoitinia receivable
of SKK 43,661.00 is not included in this amount.

On this basis, for CSOB, the total principal amount of the loan is SKK
10,647,236,441.30.

Cf, inter alia, CSOB's Memorial, Tab B, No. 7.

Cf., Expert Report of T.H. Hart, No. 16, table 3.
CSOB's Memorial, Tab B, No. 11, 51; Statement of J. Stérbova, No. 11, p. 6; Expert Opinion of T.H. Hart,
No. 16, table 3.

84

l
I
|
I
|
|
|
]
|
]
|
]
|
|
|
|
|
|

234. In light of the Tribunal's decision relating to the receivables that cannot be taken into

235.

236.

account as triggering SI's losses to be covered by the Slovak Republic under Article
3(ID) CA, the above mentioned amounts have to be adjusted. First, extracting the Omnia
receivable, the on-balance sheet portion of the loan amounts to SKK 6,469,439,886.91.
Second, the Technopo! Loan Amendments No. 37 through 48, in the cumulated amount
of SKK 258,272,280, and the Intercoop exposure of SKK 31,661,730.53 have to be de-
ducted (both amounts together: SKK 289,934,010.53) from the OBS portion of the loan,
that becomes then a total of SKK 3,800,914,266.82. In the light of these figures, the to-
tal principal amount of the loan becomes SKK 10,270,354, 154.

The reductions made above from the total amount claimed by CSOB are in an amount
of SKK 376,882,288. As indicated earlier, the question has now to be raised whether
this amount can compensate for the overturn by 0.24% of the capital adequacy ratio. As
CSOB accepts that a capital adequacy ratio of 6.49% was actually hit at December 31,
1993, when the principal amount of the loan for on-balance and off-balance receivables
was, in CSOB's view, reaching an exposure of SKK 10,750,475,082,"!” it follows that a
reduction for 0.24% is in an amount of SKK 397,552,237. This leads to a result of SKK
10,352,922,845 as the amount corresponding to a capital adequacy ratio of 6.25% at
December 31, 1993. Therefore, as the capital adequacy reduction leads to a commitment
of an amount higher than the amount of SKK 10,270,354,154, reached as the actual
amount of receivables to be covered under the provisions of Article 3(II)(2) CA, it is

this lower amount that is to be considered by the Tribunal.

SI's obligation to repay the loan was admittedly decreasing to the extent SI was able to
collect money from the debtors of the poorly performing or non-performing receivables.
The payments made on SI's sub-accounts for the FTOs were later used to repay the
Joan.''® CSOB's accounting expert presented in his first report a figure of SKK

"7 This figure refers to the on-balance sheet portion (SKK 6,521,108,081.91) and the off-balance sheet portion

(SKK 4,229,367,000) as they were agreed upon on December 31, 1993. It does not include the Omnia and
Intercoop receivables that are included in CSOB's claim but were admittedly transferred after December 31,
1993. On the other hand, for the purpose of this calculation, the Avex receivable of SKK 51,668,195, and
the Drevounia receivable of SKK 43,661,000, that were transferred at the relevant date, are to be included.

After FTOs made deposits on their sub-accounts, SI directed CSOB to transfer the balance from the sub-
accounts to SI's main current account that served the repayment of the loan. The payments on the sub-
accounts with CSOB was secured by Agreement No. 001/1996 on the Creation of Pledge over Receivables.

85

ns

1,768,360,036,!"? whereas another source mentioned an amount of “over SKK 1.7 bil-
lion”.!”° In the letter dated April 18, 1997, whereby CSOB confirms to SI the precise
amount of the full amount of the due receivables under the loan, it is stated that a total
of SKK 2,792,822.85 “were used to set off a part of CSOB's due receivable from SI”.
This confirms CSOB's practice, agreed upon by SI, to use the balance of the sub-
accounts where payments from the FTOs were collected for the repayment of the
loan.'! Taking into account collections made on April 10, 1997, CSOB's accounting
expert indicated in his reply a total amount of SKK 1,770,462,989.'” He also reported
in respect of these FTO payments that an amount of SKK 1,592,059,556 was collected
until April 10, 1997, and another amount of SKK 187,889,159 after that date,'”? result-
ing in repayments on the loan of SKK 1,584,073,830 before and on April 10, 1997, and
of SKK 186,389,159 after that date.!2* CSOB's claim for the total principal amount does
not include such repayments, while other statements made on behalf of CSOB do.
Where no reduction was made to take account of SI's repayments funded by the collec-
tions from the FTOs, this has to be done by the Tribunal, where relevant.'?> However,
the Tribunal cannot take account of later collections that may have been made by SI's
bankruptcy trustee, leading to a positive balance in SI's account with CSOB, as the alle-
gation made by the Slovak Republic in this respect was contained in its Third Post
Hearing Memorial and therefore submitted too late to be considered by this Tribunal.
Further, The Slovak's Republic's allegation that repayments funded by collections made
by the bankruptcy trustee have been effectively been made to CSOB is not supported by

evidence.

Cf. Statement J. Stérbova, No. 13/14. A small part of the money collected from the FTOs was used to pay

CSOB's bank and management fees.

Expert Report of T.H. Hart, No. 46, Table 7.

Statement of J. Stérbova , No. 21. CSOB' 's Reply to the Slovak Republic's Second Post Hearing Memorial,
No. 161: "approximately i 7 billion".

In reply to a question from the Tribunal, CSOB indicated that the letter sent on September 5, 1996 from
CSOB to the Slovak Republic, requesting payment of the outstanding loan, referred to an amount estab-
lished after CSOB had reconciled the balances of all of the SI accounts into the main SI current account
(CSOB Post-heari ission on issues at the hearing of , 2002, Tab A, p. 16).
Expert Reply of T. H. Hart, Exh. 39.

This amount includes a remaining balance as of May 6, 1998 on SI's account in the amount of SKK
28,901.19 (Expert Report of T.H. Hart, Exh. 4) that was later corrected into SKK 68,169.95 (Expert Reply
of T.H. Hart, Exh. 39).

Expert Reply of T.H. Hart, Exh. 39. See also part of the correspondence in Statement of J. Stérbova, Exh. 2-
5, 8,9.

Part of the collection from the FTO may relate to the Omnia and/or Intercoop assets that are to be excluded
from the principal amount of the loan. However, the Tribunal's file does not allow to trace such a relation.

 

86

237.

238.

239.

The Tribunal determines therefore that the amount of SKK 8,686,280,324 is the princi-
pal amount of the loan as of April 10, 1997. Repayments made after this date in the
amount of SKK 186,389,159 will also have to be further considered.

The Claim Based on Interest Related to the Loan

Pursuant to Article 3 (I1)(4) CA, the Slovak Republic’s cover losses obligation included
“payments of interests”. The interest related to the repayment of the loan constituted,
together with the schedule of payments and the operation costs, the “losses” that the
Collection Companies would make and that would have to be covered by the Slovak

Republic, whenever necessary.

1. Article 4 of the Loan Agreement

The Loan Agreement sets out in Article 4(II) the following provisions for the fixing of

interest rates and the method for their calculation -

The loan shall bear interest at an annual interest rate. The interest shall be payable,
along with the installment of the principal of the loan, always at the end of each
calendar quarter commencing on March 31, 1995. The interest rate shall be de-
termined as a floating rate to be fixed at regular three-month intervals for the sub-
sequent period. The first interest rate shall be fixed at the time of loan drawdown,
the second fixation shall be made as of March 31, 1994 and, thereafter, the inter-
est shall be fixed at regular three-month intervals, as mentioned above.

The interest rate shall be determined by using one of the following methods or a
combination thereof. Such interest rate shall be increased by a uniform surcharge
to cover the Bank’s overhead costs at a rate of 3/4 (three-quarters) % per annum.

a. .The loan made hereunder shall be refinanced for each subsequent three-month
period (until the next interest rate fixation) on the interbank market. The inter-
est rate shall be determined at the rate ‘sale’ indicated in the table Interest-
Rate Fixing in the Market of Interbank Deposits for a Three-Month Period as
published in HOSPODARSKE NOVINY two business days prior to the fixa-
tion date. In the event that such rate is not quoted in the future or the quotation
is not adequate, a similar interest rate shall be used.

87

240.

24

S

b. If there is not sufficient liquidity in the inter-bank market to allow the refi-
nancing of the Bank to the required extent, the interest rate shall be calculated
as the average price of the Bank’s resources with a residual maturity of more
than two years.

c. If the interest rate as calculated by the methods referred in Section 4a or 4b is
not sufficient to cover the cost of the Bank’s refinancing, the interest shall be
determined so as to reflect the price of the specific resources used by the Bank
to refinance the loan. :

Paragraph 1 of this provision was modified on April 18, 1996 in Amendment No. 7 in
order to take account of situations when the relevant calendar day was a non-banking

day.

In the first of many objections raised in relation to Article 4 LA, the Slovak Republic
contends that this provision is too imprecise and unclear to be binding under Slovak law,
the law that governs the Loan Agreement. The Slovak Republic’s legal expert on Slovak
law was not so outspoken; he concluded that the terms of Article 4 were “not unambi-
guous”.?° He admitted that the interpretation given by the Slovak Republic's accounting
expert “is consistent with the wording of Section 4 of the Loan Agreement”,!2” This
demonstrates that in this legal expert's view, Article 4 LA can be given a meaning and is

thus precise enough to be valid.

. CSOB’s accounting expert admitted that the implementation of Article 4 LA could be

different according to the person who had to fix the actual interest.'** CSOB stated,
however, that between CSOB, SI and the MF SR, the meaning of this provision was
very well understood and that the methods to determine the interest rates had been
agreed upon when the CA was concluded. That is confirmed by the parties’ behavior at
the time the provision had to be implemented and the interest rates had to be fixed.
Moreover, so CSOB argues, SI and thus also the Slovak Republic would not have been
in a better position if ever Article 4 would have been of no use to determine the interest

rate. Indeed, under the Slovak Commercial Code, Section 502, SI would then have been

126 Rejoinder Opinion J. Drgonec, No. 39.
127 Rejoinder Opinion J. Drgonec, No. 40-42,
8 TR, April 14, 2003, 201:12-203:1 (Hart).

88

24!

24

244.

2.

3.

a

obliged to pay interest at the market rates, that would have been higher than the interest

provided for under Article 4.

For the Tribunal, Article 4 LA gave a choice of methods to determine interest rates that

 

were to be applied depending on the ci and by the comp p

of both parties. It follows from the purpose and the object of the LA, and also from the
CA with which the LA was closely connected, that CSOB should not make losses on the
loans granted to SI. The interest on the loan had to be set accordingly. Article 4, and es-
pecially method (c), contained the mechanism to ensure that the loan granted by CSOB
was not at a loss but yielded sufficient interest to make it cost-neutral. This goal was
clearly stated and the method to achieve it a matter for specialists to decide. The parties’
conduct in the practical application demonstrates that, albeit with or after some debate
on particular items, the provision of Article 4 LA was clear enough to be handled by

those involved in matters of financing on the side of CSOB as well as for SI.

2 Methods (a) and (b)

The Slovak Republic also argued that even if Article 4 LA were valid, CSOB did not
apply this provision correctly as it made use of method (c) only. For the Slovak Repub-

lic, methods (a) and (b) were available and had to be applied.

Method (a) envisaged that the Joan would be refinanced on the inter-bank market so that
the interest rate had to be determined “on the basis of the three-month inter-bank rate”.
Method (a) that established the most advantageous interest rate for SI, had to be fol-
lowed whenever the inter-bank market was sufficiently liquid “to allow the loan’s refi-
nancing”. The three-month BRIBOR rates, to which method (a) referred, were publicly
available as of June 23, 1994. Even if they were not quoted, a similar interest rate could
be used under method (a). For the Slovak Republic, the Slovakian inter-bank market had
generally known an excess of liquidity from 1994 to 2000.'”? For the first and second
quarters of 1994, during which only a one-month BRIBOR was quoted, the interest rate

"2° Cf. Reply Statement of S. Majlingova, Exh. 14,

89

24

246.

5.

a

could be determined on the basis of the “similar rate” provision of Article 4(ID(a) LA.
According to the Slovak Republic, nowhere does Article 4(II)(a) LA require that the
Slovak inter-bank market is stable; stability of the interest rate is not a criterion for using
method (a), the application of which only depends on sufficient liquidity. For the Slovak
Republic, the evidence presented at the April hearing demonstrated that the Slovak in-
ter-bank market was sufficiently liquid through most of the relevant period. Therefore,
method (a) should have been applied in all but four quarters (i.e. Q 3/97, Q 4/97, Q1/98,
Q 2/98) during the life of the loan. During those four quarters, CSOB should have used

method (b) to calculate the interest rate on the SI loan.

For CSOB, method (a) was unavailable due to the “repeated illiquidity and instability of
the money market in the Slovak Republic over the relevant period”.'°° The three-month
BRIBOR interest rates were hypothetical as they were extrapolated. They were never
actually available. There was insufficient liquidity in the inter-bank market to enable
CSOB to finance the SI loan balance. When the Slovak Republic asserted that there was
sufficient liquidity in the market, it referred to volumes of trade with the same loan be-
ing bought and sold repeatedly over short periods of time and with none of the funds
trading for 3 months terms, but most often relating to overnight or one day deposits. Ac-
cording to CSOB, the. evidence offered by the record that CSOB was never in a position
to purchase enough 3 months deposits on the inter-bank market to fund the SI loan
stands unrebutted, particularly in view of the fact that the SI loan balance continued to

increase rather than decrease over time.'?!

During the four quarters that method (a) could not be used, for the Slovak Republic,
method (b) should have been followed, i.e. the interest rate should be calculated as “the
average price of the bank’s resources with the residual maturity of more than two
years.” CSOB has argued that it never had resources with a residual maturity of more
than two years in an amount sufficient to fund the SI loan and thus the conditions were
never met to apply method (b). For the Slovak Republic, however, method (b) did not
require that these resources amount to a certain percentage of the loan; method (b) could

be used for a small portion of the financing.

3° Statement of S. Majlingova, No. 10.
‘3! Statement of S. Majlingova, No. 6-15; Reply Statement of S. Majlingova, No. 6-20.

90

247.

248.

249.

132
133

- The Slovak Republic’s accounting expert has demonstrated what interest would have
been due under method (a), starting in June 1994, for all but four quarters during which
method (b) should have been used.! For the Slovak Republic, his analysis shows that it
would have been appropriate to follow methods (a) and (b). Because methods (a) and (b)
would have yielded substantially smaller amounts of interest, CSOB’s damage claim
must be reduced by SKK 1,989,641,433. However, this calculation purports to demon-
strate what CSOB should have done and not what CSOB and SI actually did in respect
of interest rates fixed in the years 1994 to 1997.

3. Method (c)

CSOB has followed method (c), i.e. based upon the costs of refinancing, to calculate the
interest due. For each quarter the interest was calculated on the basis of the costs of the
funds used by CSOB to cover the amounts outstanding.'"? Whenever there was no suffi-
‘cient liquidity in the inter-bank market (method a) and CSOB did not have sufficient re-
sources with a residual maturity of more than two years (method b), the actual costs of
refinancing was higher than the interest provided for by methods (a) and (b). In that
event, method (c) became relevant, i.e. the interest rate were to reflect “the price of the
specific resources” CSOB actually used to refinance the loan. Method (c) encompassed
methods (a) and (b). Interest due on loans taken in the BRIBOR inter-bank market
(method a) and the costs of financing with CSOB resources with a residual maturity of
over two years (method b) were part of the price of “specific” resources actually used. In
this way, the interest rate was determined by a “combination” of the three different

methods, as Article 4(2) LA itself provides for.

The Slovak Republic argues in this respect that - even when CSOB was entitled to fol-
low method (c) — that it did not apply this method correctly. Indeed, although CSOB ar-
gues that it calculated the interest on the basis of the actual costs of financing the loan,
there was a substantial gap between the specific resources identified by CSOB to that

Rejoinder D. Frishberg, No. 105-118.
Cf. Statement of S. Majlingova, No. 6-14; Reply Statement of S. Majlingova, No. 3-20.

91

end, and the loan balance. In order to carry out the method (c) calculation, CSOB had
to first quantify the balance of the SI loan for each quarter, and then to identify the spe-
cific resources to be used to match the loan volume. CSOB has not proven that the inter-
est were related to the costs of using the “specific resources used by the bank to refi-
nance the loan”, as required by method (c). According to the Slovak Republic, the evi-
dence in the record shows that the method used by CSOB consistently failed to match

specific resources to the balance of the SI loan. It was in fact a pointless and artificial

~ exercise. There was a continuing mismatch between the loan balance and the supposed

“specific resources” “used” by CSOB. The Director of the Risk and Funds Management
Subdivision of CSOB in Bratislava attempted to explain this shortfall by claiming that
no one within CSOB knew the actual balance of the SI loan for the whole of 1994 and
the first quarter of 1995.'5° CSOB’s Finance Director, who was at the time working for
KPMG, has admitted that the interest claimed did not match the funds used.’ For the
Slovak Republic, this clearly demonstrates that CSOB breached the terms imposed on

the use of method (c) and instead engaged in an artificial exercise.

250. CSOB has offered in these proceedings a review calculation of interest based on the

251.

134
1
13

13
13

analysis of its accounting and damages expert, who “reconstructed” the interest rates
and made assumptions on the “specific resources” that had been available and that he
used on some occasions to “plug the difference” between the loan balance and the spe-
cific resources CSOB had earmarked at the time.'3” This expert observed that the bal-
ance of the SI loan used for CSOB's interest rate calculations did not exactly match the
total sources of financing used to develop the interest rates.'** The interest calculated by
CSOB’s expert and based upon an electronic model, additional records and on recalcu-

lated data," were intended to reflect better the real cost of refinancing the loan.

For the Slovak Republic, it is impossible “to restructure post factum a claim for histori-

cal costs, that was manifestly erroneous”. No adequate and true picture of the actual and

Cf. Rejoinder D. Frishberg, No. 125-130, including charts 1 and 2.

TR, April 16, 2003, 75:1-15, 87:17-21 (Majlingova).

TR, April 15, 2003, 173:11-175:10 (Cloughesy), referring to a memorandum of Mr. Cloughesy of May 14,
1997 (the Slovak Republic's April 2003 Hearing Documents for Mr. Cloughesy, Tab 2).

Cf. TR, April 14, 2003, 49:5-14, 50:1-15, April 15, 2003, 18:1-24:13 (Hart).

Expert Report of T.H. Hart, No. 54.

Cf. TR April 14, 2003, p. 43-51, 84 (Hart).

92

252.

253.

wo

precise historic costs of the refinancing can be based upon gaps in the historical cost
analysis that were complemented with simulated added resources. The Slovak Republic
objects that CSOB, based on the calculations of its expert, claims in these proceedings
for each single quarter of the 38 quarters that the ST loan was in effect, interest rates dif-
ferent from the historical interest, For the Slovak Republic, CSOB’s “recalculation” of
the interest rates is a clear admission that the historical interest rate, as claimed in its
time, had been erroneous. The Slovak Republic therefore challenges CSOB's new calcu-
lations as they fabricated the “specific resources” that were to be used for the refinanc-
ing. These calculations were spurious, a posteriori and not in conformity with method
(c) of Article 4 LA or any other method provided for by this provision. For the Slovak
Republic, these new interest rates have never been approved by CSOB, SI or the Slovak
Republic. .

4. The actually fixed interest rates

The Tribunal notes that the interest rates determined by CSOB's staff under Article 4 LA
were communicated to SI on a regular quarterly basis.'“° In some instances, CSOB also
sent estimations about rates that had to be expected in a near future. The specific interest
rates for each of the quarters of 1994 and for the first quarter of 1995 had been partly
approved, partly acknowledged at meetings of the SI Supervisory Board.'*!

As the Slovak Republic has noted, the Supervisory Board did not approve interest rates
for any other subsequent quarters. However, in its very first meeting, i.e. on July 1,
1994, the SI Supervisory Board, before specifying the specific interest rates for the first
and second quarter of 1994, had agreed more generally that method (c) would be fol-
lowed.'”? This agreement is confirmed by the fact that the specific interest rates for the
third quarter could not be determined at that time in advance for the only reason that the
actual costs were not known yet. As Article 4 LA specifies, method (c) required “fixing

the interest rate so as to reflect the price of the sources used by the Bank to refinance the

'49 See Statement of S. Majlingova, Exh. 2.
‘41 Cf. Statement of E. Kalinova, Exh. 7, 11 and 13.
¥2 Statement of E. Kalinova, Exh. 7.

93

254.

255.

143

loan.” The Board decided that for the 3rd quarter of 1994 “the interest rates will be fixed

after CSOB determines the price of the sources.”

As CSOB pointed out, Article 4 LA does not require any agreement of the parties on the
interest rate to be applied for each quarter.’ Indeed, this provision states that the rate
shall be “floating” and “to be fixed” quarterly, following one of the methods indicated
under (a), (b) and (c). In the modified version of paragraph 1, as agreed upon in
Amendment No. 7 of April 18, 1996, the term “adjustment” was used instead of “fixed”.
Further, there is a reference to the Bank's need for refinancing. This indicates not only
that the Bank had to reach a level that permitted it to keep the loan cost-neutral, but also,
as a matter of policy and practical application, that the Bank was the pertinent entity to
determine its own need for refinancing the loan. The methods provided under (a), (b)
and (c) were sufficiently precise in this respect not to allow the Bank to fix interest rates
not in compliance with the ultimate goal of the LA. In one of its answers given to ques-
tions raised by the Tribunal at the April 2003 hearing; the Slovak Republic stated that
the LA “does not afford SI any opportunity to approve, reject, or even comment on the

interest rates set by CSOB”.

The method used by CSOB and SI for the practical implementation fully confirms this
reading of Article 4 LA. All communications sent by CSOB to SI on the fixing of the in-
terest rate for each relevant quarter were sent for the purpose of “information”. No
agreement of SI was requested nor required. The fact that the first five quarterly rates
were “approved” by SI's Supervisory Board is of no influence on the understanding that
no such acceptance was required. Therefore, all rates communicated later, when the Su-
pervisory Board no longer approved interest rates, were valid acts for the implementa-
tion of Article 4 LA in the relations between CSOB and SI. This was all the more so as
neither SI nor the Slovak Republic's representatives who exercised control over SI never
raised an objection as to the actual fixing of the interest rates on the loan by CSOB. The
Tribunal adds that such mutual understanding and conduct of the parties involved in
these dealings further demonstrates that there can be no room for any hypothetical a
On its meeting held on December !, 1994, the SI Supervisory Board ordered the executive to prepare an
amendment to the LA where the interest rate would be fixed by an agreement between CSOB and SI (State-

ment E. Kalinova, Exh. 10). Such amendment has not been concluded. This confirms that at the time, no ac-
ceptance of the rates by SI was formally required.

94

256.

257.

25

“

-

posteriori fixing of interest rates that would not comply with the actual (or also called

historical) rates as they were fixed pursuant to the provisions of Article 4 LA.

For the Tribunal, the interest rates under the loan that are relevant to determine the loss
SI actually suffered and that triggered the Slovak Republic's obligation for coverage are
the interest rates that were actually charged by CSOB to SI on the basis of Article 4 LA.
Relevant in this respect is the understanding that both CSOB and SI had of the proper
operation of this provision at the time of its conclusion as well as in light of their subse-
quent conduct during its practical implementation. SI's conduct is particularly relevant
in this regard, as SI acted under the full control of the Slovak Republic that had ulti-
mately to cover the losses composed of CSOB's interest charges. As this is a matter of
interpretation of the LA under Slovak law, the Tribunal notes that the pertinent factors
under Section 266 of the Slovak Commercial Code are in this respect the same than
those referred to in the corresponding provision of the Czech Commercial Code, that

have been explained above.

For the sake of completeness, it has to be mentioned that CSOB has moreover argued
that the costs it sustained on the loan were much more substantial than the interest pay-
ments granted under Article 4 LA, especially when such interest was not paid. As the SI
loan grew to constitute as much as 70% of CSOB’s total SKK asset portfolio, CSOB ul-
timately had to raise funds to satisfy existing liabilities through the issuance of bonds,
conversion of foreign currency and borrowing overnight deposits on the inter-bank
market. For the Tribunal, these considerations are not material. In order to know what
interest SI had to pay on the loan, only the provisions of the LA and their implementa-

tion by the Parties are relevant.
3. Interest calculation related to the currency split of the loan

On May 25, 1994, CSOB and SI concluded Amendment No. | to the LA to modify sec-

tion 1(a) of the LA as follows -

95

259.

260.

261.

262.

263.

On July 1, 1994, the Bank has provided the Client with the following loans:

~ SKK 5,284,795,781.91

~ CZK 1,055,000,000

for the covering of receivables assigned to its Client as of December 31, 1993...

The SI loan was thus split into two currencies, with the Czech crown (hereinafter
“CZK”) bearing an interest rate of 5 basis points lower than the Slovak crown portion.
This was done to address partially the high costs to CSOB for refinancing a loan exclu-

sively in SKK, while the interest for CZK was lower.

For the Slovak Republic, Amendment No. | clearly stated that the Bank has provided SI]
on July 1, 1994 with the loan amounts specified. Consequently, interest would only ac-
crue as from that date. Therefore, in the Slovak Republic’s view, CSOB has improperly
computed interest before July 1, 1994. Consequently, CSOB has overstated its claim for
interest to the extent of SKK 2,180,627,907.

CSOB admits that the terms of Amendment No. 1 may be “somewhat ambiguous”. For
CSOB, this ambiguity is, however, corrected by the fact that the Minutes of SI’s Super-
visory Board of July 1, 1994 did not indicate that the loans would be newly made on
July 1, 1994. These Minutes only approved the denomination in CZK of part of the ex-

isting loan granted in SKK.

The Slovak Republic has pointed out that the fact that these Minutes did not indicate
that the loans were new, is not a reason to conclude that SI would have accepted a mere
adjustment of the existing loans, contrary to the text of the Amendment itself. Indeed,
Amendment No. 1 considered the CZK loan as new, where it determined the interest

rate that had to be paid and the repayment that had to be made.

However, it follows from the text of Amendment No. | itself that it only split the exist-
ing loan. Firstly, the “Amendment” indicated that it “modified” on May 25, 1994, “the
amount of the loan” granted under the Loan Agreement, concluded on December 31,
1993. Consequently, the loan of SKK 6,521,108,081.91 was merely divided into a loan

denominated in SKK and one denominated in CZK.

96

264.

265.

266.

267.

144

. Secondly, the Amendment only contained provisions for the CZK loan: its interest rate
was fixed on the basis of the existing interest rate for the SKK loan (Section 4). Its con-
ditions of repayment were a modification of the existing conditions for the SKK loan.
Consequently, the SKK loan remained governed by the loan agreement. Amendment
No. 1 only reduced the amount of the principal in SKK and introduced a separate CZK
loan. Therefore, Amendment No. 1 offers no ground to argue that interest on the SKK.

Loan was only due as of July 1, 1994.

The Tribunal also fails to see how it could deduce from Amendments No. 2-9 that no
interest was due before July 1, 1994. On the contrary, Amendment No. 3, approved by
SI, indicates that interest were calculated on the SKK loan as from January 1, 1994. Be-
sides, the Slovak Republic’s argument that is based upon the use, in Amendment No. 1,
of the terms “On July 1, 1994, the bank has provided ... with the following loans”, is not
convincing. Amendment N° 4 of May 31, 1995 similarly states that “On July 1, 1995,
the bank has provided the following loans.” But none of the Parties has argued that in
fact the loans started on July 1, 1995. Consequently, for the Parties, “provide” did not

mean “create”, but “keep at disposition”.

6. Capitalization of interest

CSOB has included in its claim the capitalization on a quarterly basis of the interest al-
legedly overdue (Art. 4 LA).!4

The capitalization was retroactively carried out on April 10, 1997, the date of the loan
call. As of December 31, 2002, this capitalization was evaluated by the Slovak Republic

to amount to SKK 11,574,157,624.'* CSOB alleged that this amount was incorrect and

that the compound interest amounted to SKK 9,225,784,406. "6

For the SKK-loans, the quarterly capitalization of interest started on June 28, 1996, the date of default, al-
though SI had not paid interest for the first and second quarter of 1995 (cf. Expert Opinion of T.H. Hart,
Exh. 14 and 15; Expert Reply, No. 100). For the CSK-portion of the loan, capitalization occurred on Sep-
tember 29, 1995, March 29, 1996, and April 30, 1995 (cf. Rejoinder of D. Frishberg, No. 101).

Cf. Rejoinder D. Frishberg, Exh. 34.

CSOB Post Hearing Submission on issues addressed at the hearing of April 2003, No. 190.

97

268. Before entering into this analysis, a preliminary issue needs to be clarified, that is the

269.

270.

271.

difference between “compound interest”, i.e. the term often used by CSOB in the pre-

sent proceedings, and “capitalization of interest”, i.e. the term used by the Slovak Re-

public.

Under Slovak and Czech law, there is apparently a difference between “capitalization of
interest” and compounding “interest on interest”. Under the former, the outstanding in-
terest is converted into the loan principal; under the latter, interest is charged on overdue
and unpaid interest amounts. However, although both techniques are different, they have
a similar effect. Consequently, for the present analysis, the term “capitalization of inter-
est” will be used.'“’ This semantic choice, however, does not prejudge the later discus-
sion of CSOB’s argument with regard to its title to charge interest on overdue interest

amounts on SI's current account with CSOB.

Under Slovak law, which, it may be recalled, governs the LA, interest may only be capi-
talized with the agreement of the parties (Commercial Code, Section 502) or when it is a
“common commercial practice in the particular line of business and is not contradicted

by the agreement of the parties” (Commercial Code, Section 264).

The Tribunal will first explore the possibility that the parties have agreed upon capitali-
zation (a), thereafter whether capitalization is a “common commercial practice” perti-
nent for the instant case (b) and, finally, whether other arguments would justify capitali-

zation (c).

a. The agreement of the parties to the LA

272. The analysis starts from Article 5 of the Loan Agreement which reads as follows -

147 ‘Also CSOB has used the term capitalization, e.g. its Reply of August 31, 2001, p. 74; Expert Reply of T.H.

Hart, No. 112; Reply Opinion of Professor Oveckova, No. 19.

98

273.

Capitalization of Interest

Until December 31, 1994, interest shall be capitalized by. adding it to the prin-
cipal of the loan on each of the following dates:

March 31, 1994

June 30, 1994

September 30, 1994

December 31, 1994.

The agreement contained in Article 5 LA to capitalize interest up to December 31, 1994
relates to the fact that under Articles 3 and 6, as well as under the Repayment Schedule,

"the first installment to repay the loan was deferred until March 31, 1995. For the Slovak

“274.

27.

an

276.

Republic, any capitalization after March 31, 1995 is therefore a contrario excluded by

Article 5.

In the Tribunal’s view, however, no decisive conclusion on capitalization in the event of
default can be drawn from Article 5 LA. Indeed, this provision addressed a completely
different hypothesis, i.e. capitalization for the period in respect of which the parties, in
common agreement and as provided for in the LA itself, had deferred any payment of

capital and interest.

. On the other hand, it is correct to say that the Parties did not explicitly agree on a capi-

talization of interest after December 1994.

CSOB, for its part, has alleged that such agreement could be inferred from the stipula-
tions in Articles 4 and 6 of the LA that interest had to be paid on a quarterly basis as of
March 31, 1995. The fact that interest had to be paid on a quarterly basis as of March
31, 1995 offers, however, no basis for capitalization in case of default. The Tribunal
notes that in Appendix No. 1 to the Second Assignment Agreement concluded between
CSOB and the Czech Republic on June 25, 1998," it is stated expressly that the loan
principal was increased by capitalized interest for the year 1994. If capitalized interest
was agreed and effectively made as from 1995 or later as from the date of SI's default,

one would expect that this would have been mentioned in this Agreement.

8 Reply Statement of P. Kovanek, Exh. 10.

99

277. CSOB furthermore relied on its own General Terms and Conditions in effect in the Slo-

278.

279.

280.

149

15
1st

8

vak Republic!” to claim capitalization of interest. The LA, however, did not refer to
these General Conditions. Therefore, they cannot be considered incorporated by refer-
ence into the agreement .of the Parties. Moreover, even if these Conditions had been part
of the agreement, they would not allow CSOB to capitalize overdue interest. Article 7 of
Part I of the Conditions only provides for “positive” capitalization, not “negative” capi-
talization, as does Section 714 Slovak Commercial Code. It only provides for posting
earned interest (so that accrued interest are compounded); it does not provide for capi-
talization of interest to be paid. In a separate provision of the Conditions, ie. Article
4(5) of Part III, that covers interest to be charged on an overdue negative balance, only a
penalty interest rate — and no negative capitalization — is provided for. A similar provi-
sion on penalty was agreed upon in the current account agreement concluded between

CSOB and sI.!°

Therefore, the Tribunal finds that CSOB has failed to show that the Loan Agreement

allows for capitalization of overdue interest.'*!

b. Capitalization as ‘common business practice”

The question has been raised whether there is a “common business practice” in banking

loans to capitalize interest in the event of default.

For CSOB, the capitalization of interest after March 31, 1995 resulted moreover from
Section 264 of the Slovak Commercial Code. Under this provision,.“common business
practices, generally observed in the particular line of business, have to be taken into ac-
count to determine contractual obligations, if they are not contradicted by the content of

the contract”. CSOB contends that capitalization was such common practice. CSOB and

Further Statement of J. Stérbova, Exh. 1 (effective as of March 1, 1996), Exh. 2 (effective as of January 1,
1994),

Statement of J. Stérbova, Exh. 1.

See also Reply Opinion of Professor Ovetkova, No. 19, where it is said that the parties to the LA “expected”
that interest would automatically be capitalized. However, this expert later admitted that the LA does not
contain an agreement on compound interest after December 31, 1994 (TR, November 10, 2002, 43:12-
44:13, 62:6-9, 65:15-18, 67:2-25, 68:1-18). She also did not find any specific business practice (TR, No-
vember 10, 2002, 45:22-25).

100

281.

282.

283.

284.

SI had agreed not only on what the text of the LA explicitly states, but-also on what the

parties intended and what was customary trade practice.

For the Slovak Republic, no evidence was given that such practice existed in the Slovak
banking world. At most, CSOB stated in general terms that capitalization was a general

practice of the banking world at large.

For the Tribunal, CSOB did not submit convincing evidence as to the existence of a
common business practice that was therefore by implied agreement alsa applicable to
CSOB in its relationship to SI. Indeed, CSOB’s own behavior towards SI has indicated
that it did not consider capitalization the general rule that was also applicable to SI. As
CSOB stated in these proceedings, interest capitalization was adopted by its accounting
expert starting with the date of SI's default on June 28, 1996. This capitalization was
thus introduced a posteriori, while it was not claimed at the actual time when interest
were adjusted quarterly by CSOB and communicated to SI. This confirms that there was

no “common business practice” to support interest capitalization in the instant case.

c. Other arguments

CSOB has argued that there is a substantial difference between “capitalization”, i.e. the
conversion of outstanding interest into loan principal, and compounding interest-on-
interest, i.e. charging interest on overdue interest amounts. In this perspective, Article 5
LA has only indicated that interest would be capitalized for 1994; it does not affect the
compounding of interest-on-interest. Even if Slovak law were to exclude CSOB’s capi-
talization in the absence of an agreement to that effect, compounding interest-on-interest
would still be possible. This distinction between “capitalization” and “interest-on-
interest” would be crucial in view of SI’s current account, which was debited to cover
SI’s payments. According to CSOB, negative interest-on-interest could be charged on

this current account.

For the present dispute, however, it is irrelevant whether interest is charged on negative

interest in current accounts. Before April 10, 1997, when the loan was called, no capi-

101

285.

286.

talization was claimed; on the contrary, all documents emanating from CSOB and ad-
dressed to SI and to the MF SR referred to non-capitalized interest. As of April 10,
1997, the Slovak Republic’s obligation to cover losses was triggered for the losses that
existed at that date. Therefore, it is irrelevant to determine whether SI’s current account
was actually closed on April 18, 1997, as the Slovak Republic alleges, or after May 18,
1998, as CSOB argues.

CSOB has also invoked the fact that third parties, such as KPMG, SI’s Bankruptcy
Trustee, an Expert Commission and the National Bank of Slovakia, all allegedly have

accepted that the interest due under the LA could be capitalized.

However, acceptance by third parties is no proof that the lender was entitled to capital-
ize interest to be paid by the borrower. Moreover, the KPMG audit did not address the
issue whether the interest CSOB claimed was legally due. Moreover, when, in the bank-
ruptcy proceedings, SI had included interest-on-interest in its declaration of debts to-
wards CSOB, SI’s Trustee in Bankruptcy objected globally to CSOB’s calculation of in-
terest, thus including the capitalization.’ Furthermore, the Expert Commission did not
ratify capitalization either. It had only to decide whether the receivables had been as-
signed in conformity with the agreement between the Parties and not whether interest
could be capitalized.'*? Finally, the National Bank only examined the changed account-
ing treatment of the SI loan when it was transferred from the Bratislava branch to the

Prague branch of CSOB; it did not render a statement on the capitalization.

287. CSOB contended that it regularly accounted for compound interest and informed SI as

152

153,

well as the MF SR of the status of SI’s account, but that neither of them raised any ob-
jection. However, CSOB did not submit contemporary documents to prove that it

claimed capitalization from SI, nor that the MF SR was informed of this capitalization at

that time.’**

Exh. A to the Slovak Republic's Observations on CSOB’s Request for Provisional Measures, January 19,
2000.

Cf. Report of February 13, 1997, Statement of E. Kalinova, Exh. 34.

E_g. the letter sent by SI to the MF SR on September 11, 1995, containing a quantification of funds required
from the state budget, does not mention capitalization (cf. Statement of E. Kalinova, Exh. 17).

102

288.

28:

290.

291.

©

Finally, CSOB relied on another argument of its accounting and damages expert,
namely that SI would have had no incentive to bring the loan out of default without
capitalization. The additional 2% interest was ineffective to secure a timely payment be-
cause it would over time be neutralized by the absence of capitalization so that the inter-

est-sanction would be well below the actual benefit of not paying. '*

However, under the CA, CSOB could request the Slovak Republic at any time to cover
SI’s losses and to provide SI with sufficient. funds to cover. the payments that were due.
In the event that SI were to continue to be in default, CSOB could rescind the LA and
declare the loan and other amounts immediately payable (Art. 11 LA). This was the

most effective deterrent to secure timely payments.

7. The amount of interest included in the Slovak Republic's
cover losses obligation

The Parties’ respective experts have offered their own analysis of the proper application
of Article 4 LA that are based on calculations made a posteriori for the purpose of these
proceedings. As they are admittedly different from the interest rates that were applied
effectively in the relation between CSOB and SI and to the full knowledge of the MF
SR's representatives, the Tribunal finds that they cannot constitute a basis for a decision

on this matter.
The Tribunal, at the April 2003 hearing, asked the Parties —

if possible, the Tribunal would appreciate to receive the interest rates asked by the
Bank, quarter by quarter, since 1994 until now. If possible, also, with details, for
instance, we are thinking of the document which has been submitted and how this
amount could be financed by the different sources of funds available. If this
documentation is available.!**°

One important item for calculation is the actual amount of the outstanding loan for each

quarter that takes account of the progress in reaching maturity of the OBS receivables

‘55 Expert Reply of T.H. Hart, No. 102-106.
136 TR, April 17, 2003, 170:7-14, see also April 18, 2003, 87:16-23.

103

and of the repayments made by the FTOs and credited to SI's account with CSOB. In
reply, CSOB referred to the calculations of its accounting expert, to CSOB's letters fix-
ing quarterly interest rates and to the SI Supervisory Board meetings.'” However, this
documentation does not allow a new calculation of the interest evolution with the rates
actually used, as CSOB's expert used his own and different rates and as the other mate-
tials contain very little and anyhow insufficient information about the evolution of the
principal loan amount. In response to the Tribunal's question, the Slovak Republic ob-
served that CSOB had not produced any contemporaneous documents showing the total

‘58 CSOB's accounting expert did not recall an overall

159

running balance of the SI loan.
summary and he referred to the KPMG report,

not serve as support for CSOB's quarterly calculations. For some quarters, the loan: bal-

that is, however, not periodic and did

ance was not available at the time when the refunding had to be determined and the

quarterly interest rate to be fixed.'®

292. Until the day, on April 10, 1997, when CSOB called the full amount of the loan from SI

and claimed damages in the corresponding amount from the Slovak Republic, the actual

quarterly rates determined under Article 4 LA were as follows, for each quarter -

1994: 18.84%, 18.59%, 21.27%, 18.91%;
1995: 17.73%, 17.75%, 8.86%, 8.61%;
1996: 12.70%, 14.19%, 12.05%, 13.70%;
1997; 12.91%, 14.53%.

293. The Tribunal has to apply these rates to the amount of the Joan principal. As the amount

8

8s

relied upon differs from the amounts on the basis of which the Parties’ calculations
were made, no documentation is on the Tribunal’s file that would show the result of
such a detailed calculation. The principal amount to be retained is the amount accrued
on April 10, 1997. However, this amount does not reflect the variations that occurred

during the relevant period from 1994 through April 10, 1997, and that were caused, as

CSOB's Post Hearing Submission on issues addressed at the hearing of April 2003, Tab A, No. 20.

The Slovak Republic's Second Post Hearing Memorial, Tab A, Question 18, p. 10; TR, April 18, 2003,
162:15-163:17.

TR, April 15, 2003, 9:12-10:9 (Hart).

TR, April 16, 2003, 75:1-15, 87: 17-21 (Majlingova).

104

tL) to co wy

L

294.

295.

a

161

162

163

mentioned above, by the increase, at irregular intervals, of the amount of the OBS loans
and by the decrease of the loan, at equally irregular intervals, caused by repayments
from the FTOs that amounted to a total of SKK 1,770,462,989 (respectively SKK
1,584,073,830 as of April 10, 1997). To run a calculation using actual interest rates, the
Tribunal has to consider firstly the period covering the year 1994 when pursuant to Ar-

ticle 5 LA interest had to be capitalized by adding it to the principal at each quarter.

The only comprehensive statement from CSOB filed with the Tribunal and stating the
full amount of all interest accrued and capitalized in 1994, including the OBS items, is
contained in CSOB's application addressed to the Regional Court in Bratislava on June
23, 1998.'"! According to this document, when adding all interest capitalized deter-
mined for each portion of the loan, the total amount is SKK. 1,588,098,324.45.' The
Tribunal relies on this amount. Other documents contain different figures, relating to
parts of the loans only and are therefore less reliable, in respect of the on-balance’® as
well as the off-balance’ receivables. From the amount indicated above, an amount of
SKK 1,749,967.77 has to be deducted that corresponds to capitalized interest for 1994
charged in relation to the Intércoop receivable that is not included by the Tribunal. The
Omnia receivable is not to be considered in this respect, as it was transferred with effect
in 1995 only. The total amount of capitalized interest for 1994 is therefore SKK
1,586,348,356.68.

For the interest calculation relating to the subsequent period, from January 1, 1995 to
April 10, 1997, the Tribunal has to take account of three different “floating” factors, i.e.
the interest rates fixed quarterly, the repayments in the total amount of SKK

1,584,073,830 and the irregular accrual of the loan relating to the OBS assets.

Statement I. Cestr, Tab C, filed with CSOB's Request for Provisional Measures of September 4, 1998; the
Slovak Republic's Observations on CSOB's Request for Provisional Measures of January 19, 2000, Exh. B;
the Slovak Republic's Hearing Exhibits, November 2002, Tab 9.

As CSOB's application also refers to Amendment No. 9 to the LA, the Tribunal understands that this figure
already includes the correction of the interest for 1994 on the Czech portion of the loan as it was agreed.

Cf. Amendment No. 3 to the LA; CSOB's Memorial, Tab B, No, 24; Statement of E. Kalinova, Exh. 14,
Development of the loan in 1994, document to be reviewed at the meeting of the Supervisory Board of SI on
May 22, 1995. The amounts mentioned in this documentation are at variance to CSOB's bankruptcy applica-
tion mostly in respect of the exchange rate applied to the CZK portion.

Some amounts, close to those mentioned in CSOB's bankruptcy application, can be found in some Amend-
ments to OBS Loan Agreements, i.e. No. 3 (Slovart), 3 (Intercoop), 3 (Istroconti), 5 (Chirana), 4 (Elteco).

105

296.

297.

298.

299.

165

16

167

168

16

On December 31, 1994, the outstanding loan principal was composed of the on-balance
loan portion (as adjusted) of SKK 6,469,439,886.91,. an amount of SKK
2,341,923,443.23, 6 corresponding to the at that time extended loans for OBS items,
and the 1994 interest of SKK 1,586,348,356.68, resulting in a total of SKK

10,397,711,687.

In order to run an interest calculation as from January 1, 1995, account has to be taken
of the CZK portion of the loan which produces, pursuant to Amendment No. 3 of the
LA, an interest of 5% lower than the interest applicable to the SKK portion.

According to Amendment No. 3 to the LA, the amount of the CZK portion of the loan
was at December 31, 1994 CZK _1,144,555,351.16, including capitalized interest for
1994 in the amount of CZK 89,555,351.16.' Expressed in SKK, the corresponding full
amount is SKK 1,276,179,217.!" The SKK portion of the loan to be retained as of Janu-
ary 1, 1995 is therefore SKK 9,121,532,470.

In respect of the CZK portion of the loan, i.e. CZK 1,144,555,351.16, when taking ac-
count, as explained above, of repayments! and a reduction effective on March 29,

1996,' the total accrual, as of April 10, 1997, is for the principal CZK 976,880,012,

Cf. Expert Report of T.H. Hart, Exh. 15 (Summary of SI loan activity, off balance sheet portion). For a

slightly different amount (SKK 2,312,328,356.83), provided with few details only, cf. Statement of E. Kali-
nova, Exh. 14, Development of the loan in 1994, document to be reviewed at the meeting of the Supervisory
Board of SI on May 22, 1995.

Cf. CSOB's Memorial, Tab B, No. 24. The figure referred to does not include the correction agreed upon in
Amendment No. 9 LA.

To the Tribunal's knowledge, the exchange rate at that time was 1.115 (cf. Expert Opinion of T.H. Hart,
Exh. 5). Another rate (1.1798) results from the document on the development of the loan attached to the
Minutes of meeting No. 6 of the SI Supervisory Board of May 22, 1995 (Statement of E. Kalinova, Exh.
14), but it is qualified as an estimated rate-for 1995.

It has been reported to the Tribunal that repayments on the CZK portion (principal and interest) had been
made between April 3, 1995 and August 30, 1996, at irregular intervals, in a total amount of CZK
228,473,804.52 (principal CZK 161,192,027.45, interest CZK 67,281,777.07), cf. Expert Report of T.H.
Hart, Exh. 14, and Expert Reply, Exh. 39, where the portions per quarter can be found. (For a slightly differ-
ent principal amount — CZK 158,966,021 -, cf. CSOB's Memorial, Tab B, No. 17, 19, 23, 24). The amount
retained corresponds to SKK 256,142,705.03 (principal SKK 179,924,101.21, interest SKK 76,218,603.82),
cf. Expert Report of T.H. Hart, Exh. 4 and Expert Reply, Exh. 39.

As mentioned above, a reduction of the loan amount by CZK 6,483,311.27 had been agreed. upon in Amend-
ment No. 9 to the LA, effective on March 29, 1996, in order to rectify an incorrect application of capitalized

interest for 1994.

106

corresponding to SKK 1,094,105,613, and for actual quarterly interest CZK
126,749,082, corresponding to SKK 141,958,972.!”

300. In respect of the SKK portion of the loan, i.e. SKK 9,121,532,470, when taking into

account, as indicated above, the OBS loan accrual”! and the repayments!” related to

the relevant period, the total accrual, as of April 10, 1997, is for the principal SKK
9,252,592,171 and for the actual quarterly interest SKK 2,875,959,936.

301. As of April 10, 1997, the principal amount became, when taking account of the OBS
loan accrual, the repayments and a loan reduction, SKK 10,346,697,784. At the same
date, the accrued interest amounts to a total of SKK 3,017,918,908.

302. Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that CSOB's title to principal and interest as of April
10, 1997 is in an amount of SKK 13,364,616,692.

8. Article 8 of the Loan Agreement

303. CSOB has claimed an additional SKK 1.2 billion based on Article 8 of the Loan

Agreement.
304. Article 8 LA reads as follows -

Contractual Penalty
The Customer and the Bank have agreed that if there is an event of default un-
der this Agreement, the Bank shall be entitled to exercise vis-a-vis the Cus-

‘70 The exchange rate retained as for April 10, 1997 is 1.12. It is lower than the rate provided by CSOB's ac-
counting expert for March 27, 1997 (1.128; cf. Expert Report of T.H. Hart, Exh. 5). At the relevant time, the
exchange rate decreased significantly; this allows a reduction occurring after two weeks only.

"cE Expert Report of T.H. Hart, Exh. 15. However, the Tribunal does not include the loan accrual related to

receivables it does not retain in respect of the Slovak Republic's cover losses obligation. Thus, the amounts

related to Technopol loan amendments above No. 36, all dated later than October 14, 1996, are not com-
puted. The same applies to the Intercoop receivable in the amount of SKK 31,661,730.53; as the Tribunal
cannot identify the date as from which the respective loan disbursement had been computed, and consider-
ing that it was agreed that this loan produced capitalized interest in 1994, the Tribunal operates the corre-

sponding reduction for its interest computation together with the first accrual of interest in 1995.

The repayments on the SKK portion are, as of April 10, 1997, in a total amount of SKK 1,584,073,830, less

the repayments computed with the CZK portion of the loan, SKK 256,142,705, i.e. SKK 1,327,931,125.

17

107

tomer a sanction remedy consisting of an increase in the interest rate pursuant
to Section 4 hereof by two percent per annum.

305. On the basis of this provision and the information given by its accounting expert, CSOB
has claimed 2% of the interest on the balance of the loan outstanding as of December
31, 1996. In fact, the loan was in default already on June 28, 1996. CSOB's payment re-
quest addressed to SI on August 18, 1996 informed SI that due to the breach of the
Credit Agreement and in accordance with its Article 8, it would be charging interest in-
creased by 2%.'” On the basis of CSOB's notification of quarterly interest rates to SI, it
appears that the 2% interest increase was claimed for the first time on July 1, 1997 for
the third quarter of 1997.!

306. The Slovak Republic denies CSOB the right to claim this amount under the CA. It ar-

gues that Article 8 LA is a “penalty clause” and not a default interest provision.

307. Under Slovak law, a default interest provision, governed by Section 735 of the Com-
mercial Code, is an appurtenance to the receivable. Under Section 121(3) of the Slovak
Civil Code: “The appurtenances of a receivable are interest due, default interest ...”. The
interest is due and no separate security needs to be established to claim the amount from
the debtor. A penalty clause, on the contrary, governed by Sections 544 and 545 of the
Civil Code and Sections 300-302 of the Commercial Code, is distinct from the underly-
ing loan. It is not an appurtenance to a receivable.

308. The fact that the heading of Article 8 is “contractual penalty”, by itself, may not be

oO

compelling evidence. Nevertheless, this heading is important, at least, as the expression
of the parties’ understanding at the time of the conclusion of the LA. The wording of
Article 8 LA clarifies the meaning of the title. Indeed, the terms “a sanction remedy
consisting of an increase in the interest rate”, indicate that the parties had a sanction of a
penalty type in mind. CSOB’s Slovak law experts equally envisaged that Article 8 LA

was a penalty clause.!>

3 Statement of P. Kavanek, Exh. 20.
"4 Statement of S. Majlingova, Exh. 2.
5 Opinion of Professor J. Bejéek, No. 107; TR, November 10, 2002, 75:5-9 (Ovetkova).

108

309. It was mentioned that the qualification of Article 8 LA asa “penalty clause” had an ad-

310.

311.

vantage for SI, because a penalty clause could be reduced whenever it was judged to be
excessive in the actual circumstances. It has, furthermore, been suggested that the inter-
est rate of Article 4 LA was rather low so that CSOB sustained losses when SI did not
repay capital and interest on time and that, therefore, the 2% should not be reduced.
CSOB has also argued that it was entitled under the CA to claim from the Slovak Re-
public the 2%, even when it was not able to claim payment of the penalty clause directly
from the Slovak Republic. In CSOB’s view, CSOB remained entitled to claim the 2%
from the Slovak Republic under the CA, because the Slovak Republic’s breach of the
CA made it impossible for CSOB to obtain from SI these 2%.

In the Tribunal's view, what is decisive in these proceedings are not the legal implica-
tions of Article 8 LA in the relation between CSOB and SI, but the Slovak Republic's
obligation to cover SI's losses as determined by Article 3(II) CA. The Slovak Republic's
obligation to “secure” the loan was explicitly recorded in Article 7 LA and was covered
specifically by the Slovak Republic's Finance Minister's approval declaration at the end
of the LA. The Tribunal finds that weight has to be given to the place attributed to this
provision by the parties to the LA, with the consent of the MF SR. Indeed, Article 7 LA
follows all relevant provisions of this Agreement on interest and repayment (Articles 3
through 6). It is placed before Article 8 on “Contractual Penalty”. This indicates that the
“security” clause of Article 7 and the statement made by the MF SR in this respect was

not intended to cover also SI's contractual penalty undertaking under Article 8.

Further, the parties’ conduct does not reveal an understanding that the penalty under
Article 8 LA was an inherent part of the Slovak Republic's cover losses obligation. Al-
ready when SI was in default on June 28, 1996, CSOB claimed that it would add a 2%
default charge, but it did not mention the additional 2% when it informed SI of the inter-
est rates for the third and fourth quarter of 1996 and for the first and second quarter of
1997. The 2 % were claimed from SI for the first time in CSOB's acceleration letter of
April 18, 1997 and charged for the first time on July 1, 1997 for the third quarter of

109

 

“

 

 

 

312.

313.

176
in

1997.!"5 In the course of these p dings, the 2% have ively been calculated as
of December 31, 1996, but no claim has been addressed to SI in this respect. The Tribu-
nal notes also that while SI was informed of the 2% penalty in the above mentioned let-
ter of April 18, 1997, the letter sent by CSOB to the Slovak Republic on April 10, 1997,
where the Slovak Republic was called to secure the total amount of the outstanding loan

receivable, does not Contain any mention of a 2% interest increase.!7”

Moreover, as this has already been recalled, the Slovak Republic's obligation consisted
in the coverage of SI's losses resulting from its obligation to pay CSOB's loan that was
extended “up to the sum of considerations for the receivables assigned to the Collection
Companies” (Article 3(II)(3) CA). The Tribunal finds that SI's payment obligation under
Article 8 LA towards CSOB goes beyond the “sum of considerations for the receivables
assigned”. Moreover, even if payments under Article 8 LA were considered as part of
SI's loan tepayment obligation, they do not relate, as they should under Article 3(1I) CA,
to a receivable specified at the latest on December 31, 1993. CSOB's claim for compen-
sation of its damages arises under the CA and it cannot serve to extend indirectly the

Slovak Republic's contractual obligations beyond the terms and content of Article 3(II)
CA.

For the reasons given above, the Tribunal concludes that a claim based on the CA
against the Slovak Republic that would allow CSOB to recover payments provided for
between CSOB and SI as parties to the LA and consisting of a 2% interest increase must

be dismissed.

Lost Profits and Interest on CSOB's Damage Claim

. For CSOB, compensation of the actual damages suffered because the Slovak Republic
did not cover losses when requested in 1997 does not wipe out all the consequences of

the Slovak Republic’s default. CSOB claimed for SKK 13,175,225,718 billion “lost

Statement of S. Majlingova, Exh. 2.

A similar understanding seems to be correct in respect of the letter sent by CSOB to the MF SR on Septem-
ber 5, 1996 (Statement of P. Kavanek, Exh. 21).

110

315.

31

a

profits” as of December 31, 2002. It reduced this claim to SKK 7,857,193,540 for “lost
profits” as of March 31, 2003.' This claim is based upon the rate obtained if the

money received from the SI loan would have been invested in Slovak Government

Bonds.

CSOB offered flexibility in respect of the relevant rate to be retained when it referred to
alternative solutions, in particular to Section 735 Czech Commercial Code, and further

invited the Tribunal at the April 2003 hearing to “take any rate you want”.!”?

1, Procedural standing of CSOB's claim for lost profits

At the April 2003 hearing, counsel for CSOB has indicated that CSOB would limit its
claim to SKK 32,443,747,036 for actual damages, as he indicated that —

in an effort, after these six years, now to render this phase of these already
somewhat complex proceedings as simple as possible and to give the Tribunal
a considerable measure of comfort in the correctness and in the justness of
CSOB’s claim, CSOB desires to assure the Tribunal that it will feel that justice
has been done if it is awarded the full amount that it asserts as actual damages,
the sum I have mentioned, as 32.443 billion Slovak Crowns. '®

317. The Slovak Republic relies on this statement to conclude that CSOB has withdrawn the

“additional damages” or additional losses claim.'*!

318. Immediately after the statement quoted above, counsel for CSOB continued —

178

179
180
18
182

You may rightly ask then: does the concept of lost profits then any longer have a
role here ? My answer to that is: yes, most definitely.’

CSOB Post Hearing Submission on issues addressed at the hearing of April 2003, p. 103. This amount is the

difference between the “Slovak Bond Rate” calculation (CSOB Hart Examination, Exh. 66) and the actual
damage of SKK 32,443,747,036.

TR, April 18,-2003, 78:8.

TR, April 18, 2003, 68:1-23.

The Slovak Republic's Second Post Hearing Memorial, p. 124.

TR, April 18, 2003, 68: 24-25, 69:1.

V1

CSOB's counsel then elaborated extensively on these lost profits. While CSOB declared
thus that it was upholding its lost profit claim, its statement would nevertheless allow
the interpretation that CSOB would accept that its total claim would not reach a figure
above SKK 32,443 billion. Moreover, CSOB maintained its claim for lost profits in the

restatement of claim in its post-hearing submissions."

319. The Tribunal finds that CSOB's oral statements were contradictory and partly confus-

ing. However, they do not allow the conclusion that CSOB has withdrawn its “lost prof-

its” claim, as such withdrawal would require a clear statement to that effect.

2. Concrete or abstract lost profits

320. For CSOB, under Czech law, a claimant may base its profit claim either on the specific

32

=

profit lost in a particular case (the so-called “concrete” lost profit) or on the profit at-
tained in the line of business under conditions similar to those of the breached contract
(the so-called “abstract” lost profit). Whether a claim is admitted on the basis of “con-

crete” or “abstract” lost profit depends upon the nature of the available evidence.
. Section 381 Commercial Code specifies the “abstract” lost profit as the —

profit usually achieved in fair business practices on terms and conditions in the
line of business in which the injured party engages, which terms and conditions
are similar to those breached.

322. For the Slovak Republic, it is the average profit for the entire operations of a business

323.

183

without regard to the specific type of transaction.

For CSOB, this “abstract” profit is the transactional profit expected to be made on the
performance of the contract at issue. CSOB argues that the language of Section 381 con-

firms that the abstract profit relates to the type of transactions involved. In business,

CSOB's Post Hearing Submission on issues addressed at the hearing of April 2003, No. 258-263 and request

on p. 103, part V 1(b); CSOB's Reply to the Slovak Republic's Second Post Hearing Memorial, No. 6, 150-
153.

112

 

dee

324.

325.

326.

327.

profit follows from transactions not from year-end accounting performances for the
company as a whole. When money is received from a transaction, it is invested in a

similar transaction. The money received by CSOB from lending to SI would have been

used to provide loans to other clients.

The Tribunal agrees that the abstract profit has to be based upon the specific type of
transaction involved, i.e. loans. However, should the profitability of the loan be assessed

on the basis of the market in the Slovak or in the Czech Republic ?

For the Slovak Republic, only the profit on banking business in the Czech Republic

should be considered, as the Czech Republic is the proper venue to assess the profits.

For CSOB, the potential profit made on re-lending the money from the SI loan to other
customers has to be based upon the profit on loans in the Slovak Republic as this is the
most appropriate country of reference. The loan was extended by CSOB’s Slovak
branch to a Slovak entity, was denominated in Slovak Crowns and was governed by Slo-
vak law. The proceeds were intended to remain in the Slovak Republic and to be part of
the Slovak. CSOB spin-off. Under Section 737(1) Commercial Code, the abstract profit
shall take account of “the rate of profits usually attained in the country where the enti-
tled person has his registered seat, place of business or residence.” For CSOB, this pro-
vision thus allowed CSOB to opt for the profit in the Slovak market. Through its Slovak
branch, it was doing business in that country. Moreover, that Slovak branch had its

registered office in the Slovak Republic.'™

On the basis of this provision and the CA's goal to promote CSOB business activity
within the Slovak Republic, the Tribunal accepts that the profitability within the Slovak
market is relevant. The conversion by CSOB and SI of part of the loan in a Czech
Crown portion does not affect the fact that the losses the Slovak Republic had to cover

remained in Slovak currency and were considered as such by the Parties.

‘8 TR, November 11, 2002, 91:11-16 (Dédié).

113

—— or nome ta aa femme

328

329.

330.

33

332.

18:
184
18:
188
189

3. The issue of evidence of CSOB’s lost profits

. Under Czech law, as in other legal systems, lost profits can only be awarded when evi-
dence has been submitted that it is not a mere speculation that profits would have been
made if the breach had not occurred. For CSOB’s legal expert, it had to be “highly prob-
able” that profits would have been earned.'*’ For the Slovak Republic, CSOB has to
prove that the amount of profits lost would undoubtedly have been achieved if the con-
tract had been performed.’** The Czech Supreme Court has held that it should be proven
“with probability reasonably considered certainty that in the usual course of events” the

profit would have been made.'®”

CSOB alleges that, as a commercial bank, it undoubtedly would have reinvested the
proceeds in other lending activities at a higher profit level than SI's loan that was de-
signed to be not more than cost neutral. CSOB has, however, not substantiated its lost
profit claim with an analysis of the profits banks operating in the Slovak Republic

would actually have made on loans.

For the Slovak Republic, the profitability of the Slovak equity market was very low and

even negative during certain periods of time.'®*

. CSOB did find support for its lost profits on the basis of six very different approximate
market indicators, with a wide range of results. It claims on the basis of the highest indi-

cator, i.e. on the basis of the Slovak Government Bond Yield.

However, CSOB did not establish that this indicator, or any other indicator, would have
been the basis for actual profits. It did not present evidence that it would actually have
been able to make loans on the basis of such interest rate and for such amounts had pay-
ments under the LA been made on time. It only established that CSOB and other banks

purchased some Slovak state bonds at different times.” However, it has not been

Opinion of Professor J. Bejéek, No. 116; see also TR, November 10, 2002, 155:10-156:16 (Dédiz).
Opinion of Professor J. Bejéek, No. 114.

Opinion of Professors Pohunek, Stuna, Svestka, No. 130.

Opinion of D. Berrey (Deloitte & Touche), No. 148-155.

Statement of S. Majlingova, No. 5; Reply Statement of S. Majlingova, No. 31-35.

114

33.

334,

335.

an

336.

wo

proven that CSOB would have invested the whole amount from the SI loan in Slovak
Government Bonds, e.g. in 1996, when their interest rate was at 42,53 %, probably re-
flecting not only a high inflation of the SKK, but also a higher risk of default. In fact,
CSOB seemed to have a more prudent general investment policy, under which it held
only a small portion in debt securities and an even much smaller portion in Slovak

bonds.'”

CSOB has argued that the interest rate of Slovak Government Bonds was a proper crite-
tion to assess the profits lost, because Articles 9 and 10 LA provided for the possibility
that the reimbursement of the SI loan would be financed with Slovak Government
Bonds, which would probably to a large extent be purchased by CSOB whenever it had
money to invest. The interest on these bonds, that have never been issued, constitutes
the amount SI - and thus also the Slovak Republic - saved by not paying and thus by not
having to issue bonds. Therefore, in CSOB’s view, Slovak Government Bonds interest

rates are a proper criterion to assess CSOB’s lost profits.

For the Tribunal, however, the alleged evidence on CSOB’s lost profits is unrelated to
the costs SI and/or the Slovak Republic allegedly saved. Moreover, CSOB’s argument is
a mere hypothesis of which the constituent elements (i.e. issuance of bonds by SI or the

Slovak Republic and purchase of those bonds by CSOB) remain uncertain.

Under Section 379 Commercial Code, the amount of lost profits must have been fore-
seeable when the CA was concluded. The Slovak Republic has argued that it would
have been impossible to foresee the actual scope of its obligation to “cover losses” when
the CA was signed in December 1993, as the actual amount of the loan was not known

at that time.

However, as the Tribunal has already noted above, the Slovak Republic had full knowl-
edge of its obligation to cover SI's losses and of the scope of its exposure and the need
to provide for the necessary budget. In particular, it accepted to provide for a net expen-

diture of the state budget in an amount of approximately SKK 13.3 billion until 2003.

19° Rejoinder Opinion of D. Frishberg, No. 141.

115

The Slovak Republic could thus foresee the maximum amount of its cover losses obliga-
> __ tion and of its potential liability to cover CSOB's actual damages. When the Slovak Re-
public concluded the CA, it could have foreseen that CSOB would use the revenues
from the loan to generate other loans and make profit. However, it could not have fore-
seen that CSOB would claim as lost profits an average of 18.98% per year for nearly 6
years. CSOB did not submit evidence to prove that the Slovak Republic could have

foreseen such high lost profits margin.

337. For the reasons given above, the Tribunal dismisses CSOB's claim for lost profit in so
far that this claim requests the Slovak Republic's to compensate CSOB for an alleged

loss of a potential investment in Slovak Government Bonds.

4. Interest on CSOB's damage claim

338. CSOB recognized that providing interest on its damage claim is yet another solution to
compensate for “lost profits” occurred and still occurring in respect of its damages ac-
cruing as from the time it formally requested the Slovak Republic, on April 10, 1997, to
compensate CSOB for damages arising from the Slovak Republic's failure to cover SI's
losses as provided for under Article 3(11)(5) CA.'! Such interest serve the purpose to let
the damage claim accrue in such a way that full compensation is granted to the party en-
titled to it at the date of effective payment. Within this meaning, such interest can be
considered, depending on the circumstances, as compensation for actual damage or for
lost profits. However, as stated above, the Tribunal has not received evidence demon-
strating that CSOB would have been in a position, had it received the Slovak Republic's
payment promptly upon request (on April 10, 1997), to invest the respective amounts of
money in a way to recover substantially more than the Bank was able to receive for
credits extended on the relevant market. It is also to be noted that under Section 369(2)

Commercial Code, the creditor is entitled to be compensated for damage caused by de-

‘| The Tribunal understands that when CSOB presented its final submission on June 20, 2003 (supra, para-
graph 39), stating that it claimed the sum referred to “as of March 31, 2003*, it assumed that interest on “‘ac-
tual damages” is to be further carried forward from that date until the date of this Award. In other words,
this final submission was not meant to withdraw the claim made in this respect in CSOB's preceding sub-

missions.

116

Be

Re as

as

se

VY

339.

341

S

lay in the rendering of performance on monetary obligation “only if such damage is not
covered by the interest paid on the amount in arrears”. This provision indicates that in-

terest is the ordinary remedy in case of default on a monetary obligation.

The Tribunal is satisfied with the advise that the fact that under Slovak law, interest ac-
crued since SI's declaration of bankruptcy is excluded from SI's bankruptcy does not

prejudice its existence and ability to be claimed.!*

In respect of interest accruing on its damage claim, CSOB offered as an alternative to

apply Section 735 Commercial Code that provides for the following —

Delay in Fulfilling a Monetary Obligation

On delay in fulfilling a monetary obligation, interest on the amount in arrears is
payable in the same currency as the monetary obligation. The debtor is obliged
to pay interest on the sum in arrears at a rate one per cent higher than the inter-
est set under section 502, with the decisive rate of interest being the rate fixed
or offered by banks on credits granted for a period corresponding to the
debtor's default in the country where the debtor has his seat, place of business
or home address.'

The quoted provision is part of a chapter on “Special provisions on contractual relations
in international trade” that is applicable to the CA, as one of the parties has its seat,
place of business or his home address on the territory of a country different from that of
the other party and, further, as their relationship is governed by Czech law. CSOB did
not explain for what reason such “interest on the amount in arrears” would be applicable
to the instant case where interest has to be determined by the Tribunal in respect of
damage resulting from the non payment by the Slovak Republic of the amounts that
would have permitted to cover SI's losses. The Slovak Republic objected to the applica-

tion of this provision to the determination of interest on CSOB's damage claim (except

'2 Opinion of Professor O. Ovetkova, No. 59.
193 Section 502 Commercial Code, referred to in Section 735 of the same Code, reads as follows —

(1) As of the day when the debtor is provided with the monetary resources, he shall pay interest on them at
the agreed rate, or else at the maximum rate set by law or on the basis of law. If an interest rate is not fixed
in this manner, the debtor must pay the usual rate of interest demanded on credits by banks at the place of
the debtor's seat at the time of the conclusion of the contract. If the parties agree on a higher interest rate
than the rate permitted by law or on the basis of law, the debtor is bound to pay the interest at the maximum
permissible rate.

(2) In case of doubt, it is presumed that the agreed interest rate is interest per annum.

117

341.

342.

34

344.

345.

»

for post-award interest) and it argued that it had not had full opportunity to address this

issue that was raised by CSOB as an alternative only.

The Tribunal is of the view that Section 735 Commercial Code concerns a monetary
obligation that has already been fixed as to its amount and terms of payment and regu-
lates the payment of interest as from the day of default. This provision. does not
cover the issue of interest determination as from April 10, 1997 as part of the compensa-
tion to be established by this Award. The Tribunal refers in this respect to the legal ex-
pert on which CSOB relied and who accepted interest to be determined on this legal ba-
sis only for the period after the date for the payment of compensation of damages as as-

sessed by this Tribunal.'™*

The CA does not provide for an interest rate to be applied to a damage claim resulting

from a breach of an obligation contained therein.

In the Tribunal's view, the actual rate on April 1997 should not be retained for the whole
period for which the Slovak Republic's payment was outstanding, as this has been ar-
gued by CSOB.'5 Such a rate, fixed over years, would alter significantly the purpose of
the interest allocation on a market with considerable changes in interest rates over the

years, and, in particular, with notably lower rates in more recent years.

Therefore, the Tribunal decides to retain the BRIBOR rate as determined by the Na-
tional Bank of Slovakia for lending money on a three months basis. In the Tribunal's
view, the 3-months BRIBOR rate can be considered under the particular circumstances
of the Slovak Republic's obligation to cover SI's losses as a solution most closely based
on the trade usages to which the Czech Commercial Code refers (Sections 264 and 730).

This rate is thus applied to the damage amount retained at April 10, 1997.

The Parties have provided the Tribunal with a chart of the quotations for the three-
months BRIBOR rate as from the first quarter of 1994 until the last quarter of 2004. The
Tribunal notes that it had indicated that it was considering this rate at the April 2003

‘9 Additional Expert Opinion of Professor J. Dédit, No. 159, page 78.
15 PR, April 18, 2003, 74:7-15.

118

34

34

348.

a

nN

hearing when it invited the Parties to submit an update of the relevant quotations.’
None of the Parties has raised objections against this question or argued that it was ir-

relevant.

The Tribunal relies on the quotations cited by both Parties. In respect of the quotations
for the third and fourth quarter of 1997, that CSOB alleges that it was not quoted,
whereas the Slovak Republic asserts that it was quoted, the Tribunal observes that the
tables copied from the Slovak National Bank's website indicate that the quotation of the
BRIBOR rate was temporarily stopped;!” on the other hand, the Slovak Republic's ac-
counting expert indicates that the quotations he refers to were obtained by comparison
or as a “substitute”.'®* Therefore, the Tribunal deems appropriate to bridge the gap by
using the average between the two closest rates, i.e. the second quarter of 1997 and the
first quarter of 1998. For the fourth quarter of 1998, for which both Parties state that no

quotation was available, the Tribunal applies the same method.

For some quarters, the Parties’ figures differ to a minimal extent as they disagree on the
precise date to be considered for the fixation of the rate applicable to the following quar-
ter. Article 4(1) LA, on which the Parties rely, stipulates that the interest rate shal] be
“fixed” at the last day of the previous quarter or, pursuant to the wording of the modi-
fied version adopted in Amendment No. 7, “adjusted” at the first business day of the
subsequent new quarter or, if this is a non-banking day, at the next banking day. Article
4(2) LA provides for the use of method (a) that the rate published two business days
prior to the fixation date is to be used. The Parties are in dispute about the operation of

these provisions.

As the Tribunal-has explained above, the determination of the interest to be awarded on
CSOB's claim for damages as from April 10, 1997 is not based on the Loan Agreement.
The Tribunal notes that fixation date of the rates quoted by CSOB is closer to the end of
the previous quarter. In addition, the rates so determined by CSOB are, taken as an av-

erage, lower than the rates quoted by the Slovak Republic. The Tribunal retains the rates

‘STR, April 16,2003, 123:25-124:4, April 17, 2003, 170:15-25
'? Cf Expert Reply of T.H. Hart, Exh. 29.
'§ Cf. Expert Opinion of D. Frishberg, No. 72; Rejoinder of D. Frishberg, No. 120.

119

]
|
]
]
]
J
J
|
|
]
]
]
J
J
J
]
J
J
]

349.

350.

351.

352.

provided by CSOB; there is no reason to retain interest rates higher than those invoked

in support of CSOB's claim.

To the Tribunal's knowledge, Czech law does not prohibit an award for compound inter-
est on a damage claim. Full compensation for damage may include such interest if the
damage includes clai 's costs of refi ing that imply p on the basis of
compound interest, e.g. in case a bank has to refinance an outstanding loan on a short-
term basis. However, CSOB has chosen to claim “abstract” lost profit, i.e. profit made in
transactions similar to the one at issue. In this respect, the Tribunal has not received evi-
dence di ing that such ions would imply pound interest, in full or in
part. In particular, it has not been shown convincingly that “common business practice”
in the Slovak Republic supported capitalization of interest. Under these circumstances,
awarding compound interest as part of the compensation for CSOB's damage would
amount to pure speculation. Therefore, the Tribunal's interest computation does not re-

tain compound interest.

The Tribunal's computation takes account of the repayments made by the FTOs in a
total amount of SKK 186,389,159 since April 10, 1997, as evidenced during this pro-

ceeding.'”

In respect of the amount of principal and interest of SKK 13,364,616,692 owed to
CSOB as of April 10, 1997, the accumulation of interest on the basis of the three months
BRIBOR, taking into account the repayments (reducing the principal to SKK
13,178,227,533), results in an amount of SKK 11,618,154,309. Therefore, the Tribunal
concludes that on November 30, 2004, the total amount to be awarded to CSOB is SKK.
24,796,381 ,842.

Pursuant to Section 735 Commercial Code, the Tribunal retains the rate of 4%, plus 1%,
as applicable to interest running on the principal amount awarded as from the date of

payment fixed in the Award, until full payment.

' Cf Expert Opinion of T.H. Hart, Exh. 39, amending Exh. 4.

120

353.

354.

355.

a

356.

YU

357.

‘Operating Costs and Other Fees

CSOB has claimed management fees from SI under the SI Security Agreement for an
amount of SKK 20,934,665, representing the management fees for 14 quarters and
charged through either the SI current account or the SI current sub-account related to

Technopol.

Relying on its accounting expert, the Slovak Republic claims as of December 31, 2002,
a reduction of SKK 20,935,976 because CSOB allegedly mismanaged SI and did not
perform with the expert care and in accordance with the interests of SI, as required un-

der Section II.3 of the Operation Agreement.”

The Tribunal will not inquire whether CSOB has managed SI correctly and it will not
make any ruling based on the Operation Agreement that is not within the Tribunal's ju-
risdiction. As a matter of fact, the Tribunal was informed that the SI management, while
carried out by CSOB, collected more than SKK 1.7 billion on receivables and negotiated

favorable agreements on future collections.

The Tribunal also noted that the SI Supervisory Board had to supervise SI managers and
it actually did so, until the Supervisory Board chose not to hold formal meetings. This
Board did not object to the way SI was being managed. The Operation Agreement au-
thorized SI to terminate the Agreement without cause and with six months notice (Sec-

tion V). SI did not do so until the contract was cancelled in April 1997.

As the Tribunal has stated above, what matters from the perspective of Article 3(IT) CA
and the Slovak Republic's cover losses obligation is the actual state of SI's losses in re-
spect of SI's assets and liabilities. Merely potential claims based on agreements other
than the CA are not to be taken into account for the determination of SI's losses and the

Slovak Republic's cover losses obligation.

200 The Slovak Republic's Rejoinder, p. 60; the Slovak Republic's Counter Memorial, p. 83; Expert Opinion of

D. Frishberg, No. 38-40; Rejoinder of D. Frishberg, No. 75-78.

121

mI

as SS

|

 

358. The Slovak Republic also argues that CSOB has incorrectly charged SKK 14,011,934

359.

360.

361.

S

maintenance fees and SKK 12,622,267 for foreign bank charges related to its payment
of the OBS guarantees, whose creation and payment was insufficiently documented.”°!
CSOB’s ing expert has indicated that these mai; fees were charged for
the OBS guarantees independently of whether the guarantees were paid or not, and that
the other fees were properly charged as the related guarantees had effectively been

paid.2°

However, as the Tribunal has already stated, such alleged deficiencies could not offer
any reason to consider that the assignment of the receivables would not have been bind-
ing for SI. These assignments had been accepted by SI, with the full knowledge of the
Slovak Republic. There is no reason either to refuse payment of the bank costs related to
these receivables. This is all what matters ‘under Article 3(II) CA. Therefore, the
amounts referred to above are not relevant for the determination of the Slovak Repub-

lic's cover losses obligation.

Taxes

The Slovak Republic has argued that the amount CSOB claims should be reduced be-
cause of a “tax windfall”. In its view, CSOB would have owed taxes on interest income
in an amount greater if SI had made timely payments on the loan than the respective
taxes CSOB would owe today on that portion of the claim, and on the amounts that

might be awarded to CSOB.

A first alleged reason for a “tax windfall” is the interest capitalization. In the hypothesis
of interest capitalization, the capitalized amount would also have been smaller if account
is taken of the taxes to be paid on the interest due. However, as indicated above, the Tri-
bunal does not accept such interest capitalization. Consequently, the impact of earlier

tax payments on the amount of interest needs not to be examined from this perspective.

201. Cf. Rejoinder of D. Frishberg, No. 75-78.
2 Expert Reply of T-H. Hart, No. 98.

122

 

362.

363.

364.

365.

A second alleged reason for a “tax windfall” is the fact that tax rates in the Slovak Re-
public were 40% until the year 2000, when they were reduced to 29%. The Slovak Re-
public has argued that CSOB would obtain a windfall profit when its income out of the
award would now be taxed at 29% while the compensation had it been paid on time,
would have been taxed at 40%. Consequently, as of December 31, 2002, because of the
present tax rate, CSOB would save an amount of SKK 3,403,227,165 (not taking the in-

terest capitalization into account).

The Slovak Republic has relied on a study in a US accounting journal to sustain that
compensation should take into account changes in a tax regime.”°> However, it has not
submitted any evidence that under Czech law compensation is reduced proportionally
when the tax rate has decreased between the moment the compensation became due (i.e.

in April 1997) and the moment of actual payment.

The court decisions submitted by the Slovak Republic are unconvincing. The decisions
concerning whether the repair costs to be compensated include VAT or not do not rule
that the amount of compensation depends on the later actual impact of income tax rates

on the compensation to be received.?™

The decision of the Czech Supreme Court that compensation due for renting a car con-
sists of the renting expenses minus the saved costs of using one’s own car, in other
words that the “actual damage” is granted, is irrelevant for the issue whether compensa-
tion is affected by later changes in an income tax rate." The Slovak Republic incor-
rectly alleges that such reduced income tax rate is an “advantage brought about by the
harmful event”; on the contrary, there is no link between the harmful event and the rate

at which the injured party's compensation is taxed as income.

YY
366. Similarly, the decisions from the US-Iran Claims Tribunal to which the Slovak Republic

203

208

referred are also irrelevant. In one case, the 5.5% tax on contract payments was not in-

Fisher & Romaine, Janis Joplin’s Yearbook and the Theory of Damages, Journal of Accounting, 145, 148

(1990).
Judgements 3C 258/98-20, District Court-in Semily, and 25 Co 558/98-36, Regional Court in Hradec

Kralove. >
Czech Supreme Court, 1 Cz 86/90, November 30, 1990.

123

367.

x

368.

cluded in the compensation, because it did not have to be paid on amounts received as
compensation; only on amounts received as contract payments. In another case the fact
that the investor was entitled to half of the proceeds after taxes from the compensation
due to its joint venture with Guinea, was a mere consequence of the fact that it was the

shareholder and not the injured company itself that claimed compensation.

Income taxes are an act of government (“fait du prince”) that are out of the parties’ con-
trol and are unrelated to the obligation of one party to fully compensate the other party
for the harm done. Moreover, they are consequential to the compensation and do not af-
fect its d ination. Comp ion will not it or di ding to whether

the amount of income tax rates is increased or decreased. Anyhow, the evidence before,

the Tribunal does not permit it to make any assessment on CSOB's tax duties, past and

present.

For the reasons given above, the Tribunal cannot examine CSOB's objections that, to
assess the impact of a difference in tax rate, not the specific amounts due to CSOB un-
der the CA, but CSOB’s complete tax situation and its global year end taxable income -
or at least the tax situation and income of CSOB’s Slovak branch - should be consid-
ered. The Tribunal does equally not examine CSOB's argument that the interest actually
generated by the LA were set “at cost” and thus did not generate profit for CSOB and
that it allegedly has paid taxes on the amounts due but unpaid till April 1998.

VIL. THE DIVISION OF Costs

369. CSOB requests that the Slovak Republic be ordered to pay all of CSOB's costs including

all the costs and expenses of this arbitration proceeding, in the total amount of US$

16,351,846.2%

295 “This amount includes a correction in respect of the advances paid to the Centre.

124

| 370. The Slovak Republic requests that CSOB be ordered to pay all the Slovak Republic's
costs associated with this proceeding, including attorney's fees and expenses, in the total
amount of US$ 14,314,236.17.2”

In the Tribunal's view, there was not, in the instant case, a situation as argued by the
Slovak Republic, where one party only was clearly advocating arguments that com-
| ‘pelled the other Party to reply with extensive and unnecessary arguments. Both Parties
| have argued their case to the best of their knowledge; there is no reason to determine the

[ 371.

distribution of costs on the basis of the cost effectiveness of each argument put forward
by a Party, all the more so as the statements submitted by the Parties would not allow
the identification of the pertinent amounts in such respect. Further, the Tribunal under-
I stands that, as a general rule, the party's employee costs are not recoverable to the extent
. that such costs are part of a party's normal operating expenses and do not represent spe-
J cial costs incurred for the purposes of the arbitration. However, in the instant case, the

record shows that CSOB's employees had prepared specific contributions that were
| caused by this proceeding, including several statements filed with the Tribunal, which

 

justify the request for recovery of the associated costs, not to mention that the same are
| in an amount of not more than 1.54% of CSOB's total costs.

| : 372. The Tribunal takes into account that the Slovak Republic did oppose without success the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction; that the proceedings related to SI's bankruptcy caused CSOB to
| request from the Tribunal provisional measures that were granted; and that its objections

to the merits in respect of the existence of its cover losses obligation under the CA have
| been rejected by the Tribunal, whereas CSOB's claim for compensation has been
granted in its prevailing part. Therefore, the Tribunal finds appropriate that the Slovak
! Republic bear its own costs, expenses and counsel fees and that it shall contribute to
CSOB’s costs by the amount of US$ 10,000,000. CSOB shall bear its own costs, ex-
penses and counsel fees above this amount of US$ 10,000,000.

Finally, the Tribunal rejects the Slovak Republic's request that it be granted “any further
relief that the Tribunal deems appropriate”. This request lacks any substantiation. More-

over, the Tribunal has no power to provide for any relief on its own initiative.

37.

ad

27 This amount includes a correction in respect of the advances paid to the Centre.

125

 

VIII. DECISION

374.

Z ;
Andreas Bucher Hans van Houtte Piero Bernardini

On the basis of the reasons given above, the Tribunal unanimously decides as follows -

The Slovak Republic shall pay to Ceskoslovenské Obchodni Banka A.S. the amount of
Slovak Crowns 24,796,381 ,842.00 as compensation, including principal and interest un-
til November 30, 2004, for Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka's damage.

The Slovak Republic shall pay to Ceskoslovensk4 Obchodni Banka A.S. on the amount
of Slovak Crowns 24,796,381,842.00 interest at a rate of 4.19% between December 1,
2004 and the date of this Award.

The amounts awarded under No. 1 and 2 shall be paid by the Slovak Republic to
Ceskoslovenské Obchodni Banka A.S. within 30 days from the date of this Award.
Thereafter, the amounts awarded under No. 1 and 2 will accumulate interest at an annual

rate of 5%, until paid.

The Slovak Republic shall bear its own costs, expenses and counsel fees, including its

share of the costs incurred by the Arbitral Tribunal and ICSID.

The Slovak Republic shall pay to Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka A.S. the amount of
US$ 10,000,000 within 30 days from the date of this Award, together with interest run-
ning thereafter at an annual rate of 5%, as a contribution to Ceskoslovenské Obchodni
Banka’s costs, expenses and counsel fees, including its share of the costs incurred by
the Arbitral Tribunal and ICSID. Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka A.S. shall bear its
costs, expenses and counsel fees, including its share of the costs incurred by the Arbi-

tral Tribunal and ICSID, in any amount higher than US$ 10,000,000.

Yate

Arbitrator President of the Tribunal / Arbitrator

Leeember 7, 200¥ December 14, tooy Dace \3, 2A

126

