Date of Dispatch: October 27, 2006

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE MATTER
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY
AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC.

(HEREAFTER “THE CLAIMANTS”)

AGAINST

ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

(HEREAFTER “THE RESPONDENT’’)

CASE No. ARB/02/9

AWARD

MEMBERS OF THE TRIBUNAL MR. ROBERT BRINER, CHAIRMAN
MR. L. YVES ForTIER, Q.C., ARBITRATOR
PROFESSOR LAURENT AYNES, ARBITRATOR

SECRETARY OF THE TRIBUNAL Mrs. MARTINA POLASEK

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD,

CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

COUNSEL

FOR THE CLAIMANTS

FOR THE RESPONDENT

Mk. PETER KIRBY, MS. RENE CADIEUX
& MR. HILAL EL AYOUBI

FASKEN MARTINEAU DUMOULIN LLP
STOCK EXCHANGE TOWER

800 PLACE VICTORIA, SUITE 3400
MONTREAL, QUEBEC

CANADA H4Z 1E9

AND

PROF. TODD WEILER

2317 ERLTON STREET SW

CALGARY, ALBERTA

CANADA, T2S2V7

MEssrs. ROBERT SAINT-ESTEBEN,

TIM PoRTWOOD AND MATTHIEU POUCHEPADASS
BREDIN PRAT

130, RUE DU FAUBOURG ST-HONORE

75008 PARIS

FRANCE

1

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 3
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On May 29, 2002, the shareholders of National Cotton Company (“NCC”) — Champion
Trading Company, a Delaware (USA) incorporated company, Ameritrade International,
Inc., another Delaware (USA) incorporated company, together with James T. Wahba,
John B. Wahba and Timothy T. Wahba — submitted to the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or “the Centre”) a Request for Arbitration

directed against the Arab Republic of Egypt.

ICSID registered the Request on August 8, 2002.

The Claimants designated Mr. L. Yves Fortier, Q.C., as Arbitrator, and the Respondent
designated Professor Laurent Aynés as Arbitrator. With the agreement of the Parties, the
Secretary-General of the Centre appointed Mr. Robert Briner as the President of the
Arbitral Tribunal, and by letter of January 31, 2003, the Centre noted that, in accordance
with Rule 6(1) of the Arbitration Rules of the Centre, the Arbitral Tribunal was deemed
to have been constituted and the proceedings to have begun on January 30, 2003. Mrs.
Martina Polasek, Counsel, ICSID, was designated by ICSID as Secretary of the
Tribunal.

A first session of the Arbitral Tribunal was held on March 7, 2003, at the World Bank
offices in Paris in the presence of representatives of the Parties, President Robert Briner,
Arbitrator Professor Laurent Aynés, and Mrs. Martina Polasek. Arbitrator Mr. L. Yves

Fortier, Q.C., participated through video conferencing.

Among other matters, it was agreed that the place of the proceeding would be Paris, that
the procedural language would be English, which is the working language of the
Arbitral Tribunal, and that pleadings and other documents could be submitted in either
English or French. It was also agreed that any documents submitted in a language other

than English or French would be translated into either of those languages.

Before the first session of the Arbitral Tribunal, by letter of March 5, 2003, the
Respondent remitted a “Note préliminaire sur la compétence” in which the Respondent

stated that the Arbitral Tribunal lacked jurisdiction with respect to the claims by the

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 4
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

physical persons as well as those of the corporate Claimants. At the first session, the
Arbitral Tribunal informed the Parties that it had decided to first deal with the issue of

its jurisdiction, and a timetable for the further procedure was agreed upon.

7 In accordance with this timetable, the Respondent submitted on April 18, 2003, its

"Mémoire sur la compétence”.

8 The Claimants submitted on May 30, 2003, their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction.

9 The Respondent on June 19, 2003, submitted “Observations complémentaires sur la

compétence”.

10 On June 27, 2003, a hearing of the Arbitral Tribunal on jurisdiction was held at the
World Bank offices in Paris. A sound recording and a transcript were made of these

proceedings.

The following persons were present:

The Arbitral Tribunal Mr. Robert Briner (President)
Mr. L. Yves Fortier, Q.C.
Professor Laurent Aynés

The Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal Mrs. Martina Polasek

On behalf of the Claimants Mr. Emmanuel Gaillard,
Shearman & Sterling
Ms. Yas Banifatemi,
Shearman & Sterling
Mr. Merwan Lomri,
Shearman & Sterling
Mr. Dany Khayat,
Counsel for Claimants
Mr. Arif Ali,
Counsel for Claimants
Mr. James Wahba, Claimant
Mr. John Wahba, Claimant
Mr. Timothy Wahba, Claimant
Mrs. Susanne Wahba,
Guardian of Mr. T. Wahba
Dr. Mahmoud Wahba,
Officer of the Corporate Claimants

Witness and Expert on behalf of the Claimants — Mrs. Eglal El-Waqeel
Professor Hisham Sadek

On behalf of the Respondent Counsellor Iskandar Ghattas,
Undersecretary of the State for the
Ministry of Justice

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 5
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

Counsellor Hossam Abdel Azim,
President of the State Lawsuits
Authority

Counsellor Osama Mahmoud,
Vice-President of the
State Lawsuits Authority

Mr. Mostafa Abdel Ghaffar,
Member of the Directorate General
for International and Cultural
Cooperation of the Ministry of Justice

Mr. Robert Saint-Esteben,

Bredin Prat

Mr. Louis-Christophe Delanoy,
Bredin Prat

Mr. Tim Portwood, Bredin Prat

Mr. Denis Bensaude, Bredin Prat

Mr. Matthieu Pouchepadass,
Bredin Prat

Witness and Expert on behalf of the Respondent Major General Hamdy Hafez
Professor Hossam El Ehwany

At the end of the examination of the witnesses and experts, counsel for both Parties
summed up their respective positions and the Arbitral Tribunal accepted to receive, after
the hearing, the “Dossier de plaidoirie’” which had been used by counsel for the
Respondent during their pleadings. At the end of the hearing, the Parties and the
Arbitrators stated that they had no further issues to discuss, and the Parties confirmed
that they were in agreement with the procedure as conducted by the Arbitral Tribunal up
to that time. On July 15, 2003, the Parties submitted their respective statements of costs

in regard to the proceeding on jurisdiction.

On October 21, 2003, the Arbitral Tribunal issued its Decision on Jurisdiction. The
Arbitral Tribunal declared that it did have jurisdiction over the claims of the corporate
Claimants — Champion Trading Company and Ameritrade International, Inc. — but did
not have jurisdiction over the individual Claimants — James B. Wahba, John T. Wahba
and Timothy T. Wahba. This Decision is annexed to this Award and constitutes a part

thereof.

On October 27, 2003, the Centre was informed that the corporate Claimants had
appointed new counsel, the law firm Jones Day. On March 16, 2004, Jones Day
informed the Centre that Mr. Peter E. Kirby and Ms. René Cadieux of the law firm

Fasken Martineau DuMoulin LLP would act as co-counsel in the proceeding.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 6
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

Subsequently, as of September 1, 2004, Jones Day no longer acted as co-counsel for the

Claimants and Prof. Todd Weiler became co-counsel.

On April 30, 2004, the corporate Claimants submitted a limited Memorial on the Merits
to be completed with supporting documentation and statements. Certain supporting

documentation to the Memorial was filed on June 1, 2004.

On June 7, 2004, the corporate Claimants submitted a motion for permission to conduct
limited discovery and for the production of documents. On July 9, 2004, the Respondent
submitted a response to the motion, and on August 9, 2004, the Claimants filed a reply
to the response by the Respondent. By letter of August 16, 2004, the Parties were
informed of the Arbitral Tribunal’s instructions that the Respondent produce one or
several witnesses in regard to questions concerning the Egyptian cotton sector. The
Parties subsequently agreed on the hearing of two witnesses: Mr. Samir Anis, Executive
Director for Internal Cotton Trade Committee and Secretary-General of Cotton and
International Trade Holding Company, and Mr. Mahmoud Karem, Member of the

Cabinet of the Ministry of Finance of the Arab Republic of Egypt.

The hearing of the two witnesses took place in Paris on December 13, 2004.

The following persons were present:

The Arbitral Tribunal Mr. Robert Briner (President)
Mr. L. Yves Fortier, Q.C.
Professor Laurent Aynés

The Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal Mrs. Eloise Obadia

On behalf of the Claimants Mr. Peter Kirby,
Fasken Martineau DuMoulin LLP
Mr. Hilal Al Ayoubi,
Fasken Martineau DuMoulin LLP
Professor Todd Weiler,
Dr. Mahmoud Wahba,
Officer of the Corporate Claimants

On behalf of the Respondent Counsellor Iskandar Ghattas,

Undersecretary of the State for the
Ministry of Justice

Counsellor Hossam Abdel Azim,
President of the State Lawsuits
Authority

Counsellor Osama Mahmoud,
Vice-President of the
State Lawsuits Authority

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 7
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

20

21

22

23

Mr. Mostafa Abdel Ghaffar,
Member of the Directorate General
for International and Cultural
Cooperation of the Ministry of Justice

Mr. Robert Saint-Esteben,

Bredin Prat
Mr. Tim Portwood, Bredin Prat

Mr. Matthieu Pouchepadass,
Bredin Prat

Ms. Jennifer Downing

Witnesses Mr. Mahmoud Karem
Mr. Samir Anis
At the end of the witness examinations, counsel for the Claimants announced their
intention to submit by January 14, 2005, a request for production of documents. The
Arbitral Tribunal accepted and agreed with the Parties on a time frame to answer the
request, as well as a time frame to submit a completion of the memorial by the
Claimants and a counter-memorial by the Respondent. At the end of the hearing, the
Parties and the Arbitrators stated that they had no further issues to raise, and the Parties
confirmed that they were in agreement with the procedure as conducted by the Arbitral

Tribunal up to that time.

According to the agreed schedule, the Claimants submitted on January 14, 2005, a

Request for production of documents.

On March 1, 2005, the Respondent submitted its Response to the Request for

production of documents, along with certain documents.

On March 3, 2005, the Arbitral Tribunal issued an Order for the Parties to file their
complete memorials within the time frame agreed upon during the December 13, 2004,

hearing.

On March 25, 2005, the Respondent produced additional documents.

On April 6, 2005, the Claimants filed a Reply to the Respondent’s Response of March

1, 2005, together with a submission regarding the production of further documents.

The Respondent, by letter of April 13, 2005, objected to the further request for

production of documents by the Claimants.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD,
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

24

25

26

27

28

29

On April 14, 2005, the Arbitral Tribunal issued an Order maintaining the March 3,

2005, Order and extending the time limit for the Claimants to file the Memorial until

May 30, 2005.

On May 30, 2005, the Claimants submitted their Memorial on the Merits.

On September 30, 2005, the Respondent submitted its Counter-Memorial.

On October 30, 2005, the Claimants submitted their Reply.

The Respondent submitted its Rejoinder on November 30, 2005.

On June 5 and 6, 2006, a hearing on the merits was held at the World Bank Offices in

Paris. A sound recording and a transcript were made of the hearing. The following

persons were present :

The Arbitral Tribunal

The Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal

On behalf of the Claimants

Witness and Experts on behalf of the Claimants

On behalf of the Respondent

Mr. Robert Briner (President)
Mr. L. Yves Fortier, Q.C.
Professor Laurent Aynés

Mrs. Martina Polasek

Mr. Peter Kirby,

Fasken Martineau DuMoulin LLP
Mr. Hilal Al Ayoubi,

Fasken Martineau DuMoulin LLP
Professor Todd Weiler,
Mr. Andrew Price,

Fulbright Jaworski

Dr. Mahmoud Wahba
Mr. Howard Rosen
Dr. Dean Ethridge

Mr. Robert Saint-Esteben,
Bredin Prat

Mr. Tim Portwood, Bredin Prat

Mr. Matthieu Pouchepadass,
Bredin Prat

Mr. Raed Fathallah, Bredin Prat

Counsellor Iskandar Ghattas,
Undersecretary of the State for the
Ministry of Justice

Counsellor Hossam Abdel Azim,
President of the State Lawsuits
Authority

Mr. Mostafa Abdel Ghaffar,

Member of the Directorate General

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 9
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

30

31

32

33

for International and Cultural
Cooperation of the Ministry of Justice

On the second day of the hearing, counsel for both Parties summed up their respective
positions and answered questions posed by the Arbitrators. At the end, the Parties and
the Arbitrators stated that they had no further issues to raise, and the Parties confirmed
that they were in agreement with the procedure as conducted by the Arbitral Tribunal up

to that time.

Further to the Arbitral Tribunal’s directions at the hearing on the merits, the Parties
submitted statements of costs on July 10, 2006 (the Claimants submitted a revised

statement on July 17, 2006), and reply statements of costs on July 24, 2006.

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 38, the proceedings were closed on

September 26, 2006.

THE CLAIMS

In their original Request for Arbitration of May 29, 2002, the original Claimants sought

the following relief :

An award:

(a) declaring that Egypt unlawfully expropriated the Claimants’ investments in
Egypt without providing prompt, adequate and effective compensation, and
discriminated against and unlawfully failed to accord those investments the
requisite protection and security;

(b) ordering that Egypt compensate the Claimants in respect of the losses they
have suffered through Egypt's unlawful conduct, described above, in an amount to
be quantified precisely during this proceeding, but in no event in an amount less
than USD 100 million;

(c) ordering that Egypt pay the Claimants' costs occasioned by this arbitration
including, without limitation, arbitrators' fees, administrative costs fixed by
ICSID, the expenses of the arbitrators, the fees and expenses of any experts, and
the legal costs incurred by the parties (including fees of counsel);

(d) ordering that Egypt pay interest on all sums awarded at a rate of 10%
compounded quarterly, such interest to run from the date losses were incurred
until the date of effective payment of the sums awarded; and

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD,
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

34

35

36

37

(e) granting the Claimants any other relief the Tribunal deems appropriate.

In their last submissions, the final position of the Claimants was that they are

"seeking damages on their own behalf and on behalf of their respective
investment the National Cotton Company (NCC) from Egypt for violations of the
"Treaty between the United States of America and the Arab Republic of Egypt
Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investments”.
(Claimants' Reply of October 30, 2005, paragraph 3)

"In particular, the Claimants allege that Egypt violated its obligations to provide
non-discriminatory treatment under Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty and to provide
treatment in accordance with international law including full protection and
security and fair and equitable treatment under Article I(4) of the Treaty.”
(Claimants' Reply of October 30, 2005, paragraph 4).

The Claimants furthermore stated :

In its Memorial Il, the Claimants also explain how Egypt violated its obligation
under Article II(4) of the Treaty by failing to provide fair and equitable treatment
and full protection and security in accordance with the minimum standard of
treatment required under international law. In particular, Egypt's treatment of
NCC ~ both in terms of the arbitrary removal of its ability to conduct its business
and in terms of the secretive and non-transparent manner in which it intervened
to compensate a limited group of select companies — fell below the minimum
standard of treatment, constituting an abuse of right under customary
international law and violated the international law principle of transparency.”
(Claimants' Reply of October 30, 2005, paragraph 8).

 

their Reply of October 30, 2005, made the following statement:

"In its Memorial IT, the Claimants made a claim based on an abuse of rights
argument relating, in large part, to the treatment NCC received as a result of the
cooperation between the NBE and the Socialist Prosecutor, resulting in what
Egypt refers to as the "1997 Moratorium.”

As mentioned earlier, the entire circumstances surrounding the restructuring
agreements with the NBE is the subject of litigation in U.S. Courts. Therefore, on
the basis of comity and out of and respect for both this Tribunal's jurisdiction and
that of the U.S. Courts, the Claimants are hereby withdrawing all claims based on
the cooperation between the NBE and the Socialist Prosecutor and the resulting
agreements with NBE.” (paragraphs 142 and 143).

With respect to the alleged violation of "fair and equitable treatment" the Claimants, in

The conclusion of the Claimants’ position is stated in Chapter 6 of their Reply of

October 30, 2005:

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD,
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

“At the end of this round of pleadings, the Tribunal can now discern a fairly clear
picture of what transpired in the Egyptian cotton industry after liberalization and
privatization in 1994. NCC entered the market at the express request of Egyptian
officials and proceeded to engage in buying and selling cotton in accordance with
the privatization and liberalization laws. Almost immediately the privatization
and liberalization program was derailed by actions taken by Egyptian officials.
Those actions resulted [sic] massive losses to the Egyptian cotton industry
leading to a liquidity crisis in mid-1996.

Egypt acted to resolve that liquidity crisis by engaging in a massive scheme of
compensation to selected companies. While the Egyptian Cabinet approved the
payment in a general way, Egyptian officials granted compensation in an overtly
discriminatory fashion.

The first Settlement in 1997 was followed by at least four other Settlements,
totalling well over EGP 7 billion. All of the payments were made in a selective
and discriminatory fashion and NCC was systematically excluded from the
program.

The Claimants invested in NCC in April 1997 and would have benefited from any
payments made to NCC in August 1997 and in later years. It is entirely plausible
to assume that had NCC received its fair and non-discriminatory share of
compensation in 1997 that it would have continued in business as a major
Egyptian cotton company. All of the companies that received payments in the first
settlement are still continuing in business in Egypt to this day.

No legislative scheme was enacted at any time to support the payment scheme and
the payments were made completely outside of any documented program. Egypt
has attempted but has failed at every turn to demonstrate the existence of any
agricultural price support system operating through compensation payments.
Egypt has provided no legislative scheme for such payments. Documents that
have been provided are internally inconsistent and demonstrate nothing more
than the fact that payments were made in the five Settlements on a wholly
selective and discriminatory basis.

Egypt has confirmed that there were no rules and regulations surrounding the
payments. That the payments were effected in a “top-down” fashion, without the
beneficiary companies being subjected to requirements of application and proof
of claims, or entitlement. The whole scheme operated in a thoroughly non-
transparent fashion and its existence was known only to a few Egyptian officials
and favoured members of the cotton industry.

In view of the facts and arguments made above, may it please this Tribunal to
declare and adjudge the following:

Order the Arab Republic of Egypt to pay to the Claimant, Champion Trading
Company, the amount of US$73,034,224 plus the appropriate interest on that
amount from September 30, 2005 until full payment.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 12
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

38

39

3.1.

Order the Arab Republic of Egypt to pay to the Claimant, Ameritrade
International Inc., the amount of US$292,136,897 plus the appropriate interest on
that amount from September 30, 2005 until full payment.

The Arab Republic of Egypt be hereby ordered to pay to the Claimants, Champion
Trading Company and Ameritrade International Inc. the costs in this arbitration
including:

(i) _ the full cost of the Arbitration Tribunal;

(ii) the professional fees and disbursements of professionals used by the
Claimants to prepare and prosecute this claim; and

(iii) appropriate pre and post-judgement interest on such amounts at
commercial rates.” (paragraphs 153 through 159).

In its final submission, the Rejoinder of November 30, 2005, the Respondent submitted

the following request :

". Dire et juger que les sociétés AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL INC. Et CHAMPION
TRADING COMPAWY sont mal fondées en toutes leurs prétentions; en conséquence

- Débouter purement et simplement les sociétés AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL
INC. Et CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY de I'intégralité de leurs demandes; et

- Condamner solidairement les sociétés AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL INC. Et
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY, ainsi que Messieurs John, James et Timothy
WaHBA @ l'indemniser de l'intégralité des préjudices moral et matériel que lui
aura causé la présente procédure, le préjudice matériel comprenant notamment
lintégralité des frais, dont les frais d'arbitrage et de conseil, qu'elle aura exposés
pour faire face a cette action.”

The Tribunal will therefore in the following Chapters examine the various allegations

regarding the alleged actions of Egyptian authorities which the Claimants state violate

the provisions of the Bilateral Investment Treaty between the United States of America

and the Arab Republic of Egypt.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

The Treaty between The United States of America and The Arab Republic of Egypt

 

40

This dispute is about whether Egypt has violated its duties under the “Treaty between

The United States of America and The Arab Republic of Egypt Concerning the

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 13
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

3.2

41

42

4B

Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investments” signed on September 29,
1982 and in force as of June 27, 1992 (the “BIT”)! and/or under other applicable

international legal rules.
Article II (2)(a) of the BIT provides:

“Each Party shall accord investments in its territory, and associated activities in
connection with these investments of nationals or companies of the other Party,
treatment no less favorable than that accorded in like situations to investments
and associated activities of its own nationals and companies, or nationals and
companies of any third country, whichever is the most favourable.”

Article II (4) of the BIT provides:

“The treatment, protection and security of investments shall never be less than
that required by international Law and national legislation.”

The cotton industry and the market status before 1994

Cotton is one of Egypt’s principal industries. The cotton industry involves a complex
manufacturing process starting with seed cotton and ending with textile fibre or

garments”.

After harvest of the cotton crop, the farmers — or producers — sell the seed cotton to
cotton ginners who process it by separating the cotton lint from the cotton seeds and
remove all foreign matter. A cotton gin is a manufacturing facility made up of a
processing plant, where the seed cotton is processed in huge ginning machines and
warehouse space for the storage of seed cotton, cotton lint, cotton seeds and waste
cotton. The ginned cotton lint is sold to spinning mills to be spun into cotton fibre. The
cotton seeds are sold to edible oil plants to have their oil extracted and their waste used
as animal feed. Finally, cotton waste is sold to specialty manufacturers for use in

gauze*.

The Parties are in agreement that the pre-1994 situation was that of a classical State-
controlled economy where the Government controlled all the production, purchasing,
and distribution of cotton. There were no privately-owned cotton companies. The

Government was also closely monitoring the banking system.

' Request for Arbitration, Annex C-5.
? Memorial of the Claimants, p. 2.
* Memorial of the Claimants, p. 2-3.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 14
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

According to the Law No. 88/1962', the cotton crop was to be sold to the Egyptian
Cotton Committee at a price fixed each season by a Decree of the Ministry of the
Economy, which also determined the conditions, circumstances and date of delivery of
the cotton to the Committee>. For example, for the season 1985/1986, the purchase

price was fixed by Ministerial Resolution No. 297/1985°.

The Egyptian Cotton Committee sold the cotton for local consumption or export under
the conditions of and at the prices declared by the Committee, after approval by the
Ministry of the Economy’. For example, for the season 1985/1986, the sale price for

local consumption was fixed by Ministerial Resolution No. 221/1986°.

Finally, no cotton was to be exported or sold to local spinning mills except through

direct purchase from the stock of the Committee’.

This mechanism resulted in the setting of a fixed price at which the farmers could sell
their cotton, as well as a price at which the cotton would be sold to local mills or for
export. The Government thereby guaranteed the price to the producers and supported
the growing of cotton, since this industry is considered to occupy an economically

strategic position for the country!°,

Moreover, by establishing the Egyptian Cotton Committee as the sole seller of cotton,
the Government was able to monitor the cotton trade, could avoid speculations

regarding the crop, and could maintain price stability!!.

Since all cotton purchases were made on behalf of the Government, these purchases
were financed through bank loans to the cotton companies, which were reimbursed once

the cotton was resold by the cotton companies’.

When the cotton resale price was higher than the fixed purchase price, the cotton
company would make a profit. When the cotton resale price fixed by Decree was lower

than the fixed purchase price, a negative balance would result for the cotton companies.

* Exhibit D-115.

5 Law No. 88/1962, Art. 1, in Exhibit D-115.

° Exhibit D-116.

7 Law No. 88/1962, Art. 2, in Exhibit D-115.

* Exhibit D-124.

° Law No. 88/1962, Art. 2, in Exhibit D-115.

'° Explanatory note to the Law No. 88/1962, p. 3, in Exhibit D-115.
" Id. p. 4, in Exhibit D-115.

" Reply of the Respondent, p. 24.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 15
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

This balance would ultimately be paid by Governmental funds, according to the Law
No. 88/1962" and similar later Laws and Decrees, since all cotton trading was done on

behalf on the Government and according to its instructions M

 

51 From the 1985/1986 season until the 1993/1994 season, the continuous increases in the
purchase prices from the farmers in comparison to the sale prices led to a regular
increase of the debt of the cotton trading companies towards the banks'°,

52 As of August 31, 1996, the cotton companies’ negative balance — and ultimately the
Government’s — amounted to EGP 3,975.94 million, pursuant to the audit report of the
Central Audit Agency’®.

3.3 The liberalization of 1994 and the incorporation of NCC

53. In 1994, the Egyptian Parliament passed a series of laws with the objective to liberalize
the Egyptian cotton industry and open it to private sector participation as follows'7:

Law No. 141/1994 Authorizing the Establishment of the Cotton Spot Exchange’*:

54 This Law established a Spot Cotton Exchange through which the cotton would be
purchased and sold, and also recognized the possibility for cotton to be purchased and
sold outside the Spot Cotton Exchange.

55 Consequently, any cotton company had the option of purchasing and selling cotton
through the Exchange or outside. However, to participate in the dealing of cotton
through the Exchange, the company had to be recorded as a member of the Exchange,
after having fulfilled certain requirements and having filed an application 9

56 A Cotton Exchange Committee was appointed to supervise the Exchange, in particular,
to establish the internal regulations and rules of the exchange and its organization and to
prepare an annual report to the General Assembly of the Exchange”. A Technical

8 Exhibit D-115.

S Letter of May 30, 1999, from the Ministry of Public Business Sector to the Ministry of Finance, in Exhibit D-125.

'S Exhibit D-125.

'6 Exhibit D-125.

"’ Exhibits D-52, D-53 and D-54.

'S Exhibit D-52.

® Art. 1 to 5, in Exhibit D-52.
°° Art. 8, in Exhibit D-52.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 16
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

Committee was also created to determine the average prices of the different types of

cotton and to announce them”.

Law No. 210/1994 Organizing Domestic Cotton Trade:

57 This Law allowed cotton traders to freely purchase and sell cotton on the domestic
market, outside the Spot Cotton Exchange, as previously established by the Law No.
141/1994.

58 The conditions and procedures of this optional purchase and sale mechanism were

defined in the By-Laws” to be issued by the Minister of Economy and Foreign Trade”.

59 Any cotton company which wished to participate in this purchase and sale mechanism

had to file an application in order to be registered”.

Law No. 211/1994 called the “Cotton Exporters Union Act?®:

60 According to this Law, cotton companies had to be registered in order to export
cotton?”. A Management Committee was established to issue the rules and regulations

of the Export Union**.

61 The Parties are in agreement that although these Laws allowed the private sector to fully
participate in all aspects of the cotton industry, they did not afford companies the
complete freedom to trade cotton. Thus, according to the Law No. 210/1994?, the
producers could, during a transitional period, optionally sell their cotton to the
Collection Centres - i.e., the Spot Cotton Exchange as established by Law No.
141/1994 — where minimum prices were guaranteed by the Government*’. Between
1994 and 2000, a Decree was enacted at the beginning of each season to organize the

functioning of the Collection Centres*!.

*! Art. 31, in Exhibit D-52.

Exhibit D-53.

° Art. 1, in Exhibit D-53.

* Art. 3 of the Preamble, in Exhibit D-53; Ministerial Decree No. 389/1994 promulgating the executive regulations of the
Law organizing cotton trade internally, in Exhibit D-91, Art. 46 of the Law, in Exhibit D-53.
® Art. 3 to 8, in Exhibit D-53.

°° Exhibit D-54.

77 Art. 3 to 7, in Exhibit D-54.

° art. 17, in Exhibit D-54.

® Art. 4 of the Preamble, in Exhibit D-53.

* Exhibits D-92 to D-95.

*! Reply of the Respondent, p. 28; Exhibits D-98 to D-104.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 17
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

62

63

64

65

66

Tf, on the one hand, these Laws liberalized and opened the cotton industry to new
participants, and in particular to non-State-owned companies, they established, on the
other hand, the legal basis for the Government to take regulatory measures from time to

3
time”.

On August 17, 1994, the National Cotton Company (“NCC”), a privately-owned cotton

company, was incorporated.

According to the Claimants, NCC’s incorporation was made with the active
encouragement of senior Egyptian officials as a joint investment between the National
Bank of Egypt (“NBE”) and the Pension Fund of the employees of the NBE, holding
together 25% of the shares, and some members of the Wahba family, holding 75% of

the shares.

NCC was the first privately-owned cotton ginning and trading company in Egypt
combining both production and sales activities. NCC was as well the largest company in

terms of the number of employees**

Other privately- or publicly-owned companies were operating in the market at the same
time as NCC**. Pursuant to the Law No. 210/1994, NCC was registered like any other
cotton company which wished to trade on the domestic market outside the Collection

Centres.

4. The 1994/1995 season

3.4.

67

68

Pursuant to the new liberalization laws, Ministerial Resolution No. 364/1994 was
passed in August 1994 whereby the Government undertook to guarantee fixed minimum
prices for seed cotton during the season 1994/1995 to the farmers who optionally chose

to supply their cotton to the Collection Centres*’.

During that season, production of cotton was lower than average due to bad
meteorological conditions. Low production and high international market prices resulted

in higher overall market prices. This increase in prices led the farmers to sell their

* Reply of the Respondent, p.
* Memorial of the Claimants, . "3-4; Exhibit C-1, p. 2-3.

* Exhibit D-111.

*5 Ministerial resolution No. 364/1994 in connexion with fixing the minimum prices of seed cotton, Exhibit D-92.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 18
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

69

70

71

cotton directly to cotton companies in order to get a higher price, instead of selling at

the lower fixed price to Collection Centres.

According to the Respondent, only 15% of the harvest — produced either by farmers
who did not find any purchaser due to the small amount of crop offered or by farmers
who did not want to expend resources in search of a buyer — was sold through the
Collection Centres, since the prices were lower than the market prices. Consequently,
due to these specific market conditions and the small amount of cotton sold through the
Collection Centres, the Government did not undertake to reimburse any price

differentials the way it did during the pre-1994 period**.

During that season, NCC purchased directly from the free market, outside the Collection

Centres, approximately 18% of the national production of raw cotton.

A company wishing to export or import cotton was required to apply for a permit from
the Union of Cotton Exporters in order to be registered, pursuant to Law No. 211/1994.
Import and export permits were granted in advance for the 1994/1995 season.
Consequently, only state-owned companies were in possession of these permits*’, and,
therefore, NCC could not benefit from such permits for the ongoing season and could

neither import nor export cotton.

5. The 1995/1996 season

3.5.

72

73

In August 1995, Ministerial Resolution No. 549/1995 was passed whereby the
Government would guarantee the fixed minimum prices of the seed cotton for the
season 1995/1996 for the producers who optionally chose to supply their cotton to the

Collection Centres**.

During that season, NCC purchased approximately 12% of the national production of
raw cotton. The market conditions were identical to those of the previous season, and
the market prices were high. Again, the increase in the market prices led the farmers to
sell their cotton directly to cotton companies in order to get a higher price, instead of

selling at a lower fixed price to the Collection Centres.

*© Counter-memorial of the Respondent, p. 30-31; Exhibit D-98.

*’ Exhibit C-1, p. 5; Exhibit C-CMW-6.

*8 Ministerial Resolution No. 549/1995 in connexion with fixing the minimum prices of seed cotton, Exhibit D-93, Exhibit C-
cMW-16.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 19
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

74

75

76

3.6

77

78

79

80

On February 1, 1996, the Government passed Decree No. 34/1996 authorizing the
export of cotton for the ongoing season*’. Thus, NCC was granted an export permit

during 8 days, until the Government decided again to prohibit the export of cotton®’,

The Government then passed Ministerial Decree No. 457/1995"" for the 1995/1996
season, ordering the dealers of cotton not to store any ginned cotton for more than 30

days.
By the end of the 1995/1996 season, NCC had ceased to purchase cotton.
The 1996/1997 season and the transfer of shares to the Claimants

In April 1996, the Government passed Ministerial Act No. 133/1996 guaranteeing the

minimum prices of seed cotton for the season 1996/1997".

During this season, production of cotton was higher than average and market prices
therefore decreased, making it more advantageous to sell and purchase through

Government Centres instead of buying directly from farmers, since prices were fixed.

In view of the market conditions (i.e. the low prices), the Government introduced by
Decree No 908/1996"* the reimbursement of the price differential resulting from a
higher resale price, in comparison with the purchase price from the farmers, for all
companies which participated in purchasing and selling cotton through the Collection
Centres. Four privately owned companies — Modern Nile Cotton Company, Arab Cotton
Ginning and Trade Company, Arab Investment Cotton Company, and the partially
privatized Nile Ginning Company — participated in the system of purchasing and selling

through the Collection Centres.

On April 1, 1997, the Claimants acquired the shares held by the NBE and the Pension
Fund; Ameritrade replaced the NBE, acquiring its 40,000 shares, and Champion

acquired the Pension Fund’s 10,000 shares, for a total amount of EGP 3.75 million”,

* Exhibit C-CMW-8.

4° Exhibit C-1, p. 5-6.

*! Exhibit C-CCMW-14.

* Ministerial Act No. 133/1996 determining minimum prices of seed cotton, Exhibit D-94, Exhibit CMW-22.
* Exhibit D-100.

 Counter-memorial of the Respondent, p. 14.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 20
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

3.7

81

82

83

3.8

The 1997/1998 season and the subsequent seasons

The market conditions of the 1997/1998 season were identical to the conditions of the
1996/1997 season, resulting in low overall market prices. Again, the decrease in the
market prices led the farmers to sell their cotton through the collection centres, rather

than directly to companies, in order to get a better price.

The Government introduced by Decree No. 931/1997** a reimbursement mechanism of
the price differential resulting from a higher resale price, in comparison with the
purchase price from the farmers, for the companies which participated in purchasing

and selling cotton through the Collection Centres.

In 1998, the Government modified the price supporting scheme. For the 1998/1999 and
1999/2000 seasons, the minimum price was determined by a new formula. However, the
mechanism allowing the cotton companies to choose whether or not to participate in the
trade through the Collection Centres remained identical, according to Decrees No.

1048/1998"° and No. 1014/19994”.

.8 The Settlements

84

85

86

The Government of Egypt has executed five series of payments to several cotton
companies, namely a Settlement of September 15, 1997, and four other Settlements,
those of June 29, 1998, of July 1, 2000, of November 5, 2002, and of December 12,
2003.

The 1997 Settlement provided for a payment by the Government of EGP 3.975 billion

in favour of six publicly-owned companies",

According to the Respondent, these companies had submitted to the Government the
documents that proved that they had purchased cotton through the Governmental
system, and the price differences were recorded by the Government as a debt owed to
these companies, since the Ministry of Finance had declared that the Government would

bear the costs resulting from the price differential””.

* Decree No. 931/1997, in Exhibit D-101.

“© Exhibit D-102.

*’ Exhibit D-103.

*S Exhibit C-3.

Transcript of the hearing held on December 13, 2004, p. 54-55.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 21
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

87

88

89

4.1

90

This payment was the consequence of an accumulation of dues (debts) of the
Government for the benefit of the cotton companies since the mid-1980s. This debt
increase had lead to a liquidity crisis in the banks — since the banks financed these
Governmental debts — and therefore became a serious problem for the Government™.

The Settlement represented a benefit for both the companies and the banks”!

The four subsequent Settlements were paid to publicly-owned companies as well as to
private companies”. Those Settlements were paid in the respective amounts of: EGP
443 million on June 26, 1998, for the 1996/1997 season; EGP 3.3 billion on July 1,
2000, for the 1997/1998 season; EGP 400 million on November 5, 2002; EGP 107
million on December 18, 2003. The Settlements in the years 2002 and 2003 dealt with
price differences for the 2000/2001 season as well as interests and leftovers from

previous seasons.

According to the Respondent, as in the previous Settlement, the companies receiving
payments from these Settlements had submitted to the Government the documents that
proved that they had purchased cotton through the Governmental system, and the price
differences were recorded by the Government as a debt owed to these companies, since

the Ministry of Finance had declared that the Government would bear the costs*’.

DISCUSSION
Position of the Claimants

The Claimants allege that the Respondent has violated its obligations to provide non-
discriminatory treatment under Article II (2)(a) of the BIT (i.e., discrimination/national
treatment claim, cf. infra 4.1.1) and to provide treatment in accordance with
international law including full protection and security and fair and equitable treatment
under Article II (4) of the BIT (i.e., denial of fair and equitable treatment/full protection

and security claim, cf. infra 4.1.2).

Td. p. 112.

5! Id. p. 116-117.

* Exhibit CMW-29.

* Transcript of the hearing held on December 13, 2004, p. 54-55.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 22
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

4.1.1. Discrimination claim

91

92

93

94

The Claimants argue that the series of the five Settlements executed in 1997, 1998,
2000, 2002 and 2003 were in violation of the non-discrimination obligations owed by
Egypt under the BIT. According to the Claimants, when Egyptian officials decided in
August 1997 to take action to relieve the crisis facing the cotton industry — a crisis the
Claimants assert was created by the officials themselves — Egypt had an obligation
under the BIT to ensure that the action was taken on a non-discriminatory basis. Their
decision to implement a compensation program — which by design, implementation and
impact, benefited only certain enterprises to the exclusion of NCC — was a violation of
Egypt’s obligation to provide NCC with national treatment according to Article II
(2y(a)™.

In order to honour its obligations to provide national treatment under the BIT, the
Government of Egypt could not choose to pay only selected companies without also
compensating NCC. NCC could have continued in business if it had not been denied

access to the Settlements on the same terms as its competitors®.

The Claimants rely on the Pope & Talbot standard as the test to be applied, according to
which: “the critical test for national treatment in the investment Treaty context, as
demonstrated by the Pope & Talbot Tribunal, is whether differences in treatment have a
reasonable nexus to rational government policies that (i) do not distinguish, on their
face, or de facto, between foreign-owned and domestic companies, and (ii) do not
otherwise unduly undermine the investment-liberalizing objectives of the Treaty [...]
The rationale for this approach is the acknowledgement that it is almost always
impossible to provide positive evidence of discriminatory governmental intent.
However, by examining the proffered government policy rationale for the action and
determining whether the action in question discriminates de jure or de facto against
foreign-owned investments that are in like circumstances to the benefited local
investments one can quite reasonably arrive at a conclusion with respect to the

government action 756.

According to the Claimants, once a difference in treatment has been established, the

* Reply of the Claimants, p. 1.
$5
Id.

Id. p. 25.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 23
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

95

96

97

burden shifts to the other party to demonstrate that a reasonable, non-discriminatory
policy justification exists which would explain the differences in treatment received by
the foreign-owned investment. In the present case, the Claimants alleged that having
established prima facie the existence of a discriminatory Governmental action, the
Respondent had to provide evidence that the Settlements were based on reasonable and

non-discriminatory underlying grounds, which Egypt failed to do’.

The Claimants refer to a set of events that allegedly led to violation of the non-
discrimination clause by Egypt. On August 7, 1995, a Coordination Committee was
established by Decree to supervise the cotton operations of the affiliated companies and
of the private companies who chose to supply their cotton to the collection centres*®,
The Committee also drafted and adopted a Uniform Contract to govern the transactions
between buyers and sellers™. According to the Claimants, NCC sought to negotiate
concessions and special terms with the Coordinating Committee. Its requests were
unsuccessful and, according to Mahmoud Wahba, NCC was ordered, by letter of March
11, 1996, from the Coordinating Committee, to deliver a certain quantity of cotton to

certain spinning mills®.

During the 1995/1996 season, NCC made several requests to the Government to receive

an export authorization; all of the requests were unsuccessful®',

In 1996, NCC was forced to sell its stocks within a short period of time in order to
comply with the regulations of the Ministerial Decree®. In August 1996, NCC was left
with huge amounts of cotton because of the export prohibition and needed to sell its
stocks urgently®, before the beginning of the new season™. NCC was finally able to
sell its cotton in September 1996, at the time when the new crop for the 1996/1997
season was introduced. The price paid for NCC’s stocks by the Government-owned
mills being very low®, NCC sustained losses. By the end of the 1995/1996 season,
NCC had lost huge amounts of money as a result of Government actions designed to

reverse the 1994 privatisation Laws.

57 Id. p. 26-27.

°8 Ministerial Decree No. 338/1995, Exhibit C-CMW-17.

® Exhibit C-1, p. 8; Template of the Unified Contract, Exhibit C-CMW- 18.

© Exhibit C-1, p. 9; Exhibit C-CMW-19.

°! Exhibits C-CCMW-11 to C-CMW-13.

© Exhibit C-1, p. 7-8.

® Id. p. 7 No. 33.

© Meeting of the board of directors of August, 19, 1996, Exhibit C-CMW-20.

© Exhibit C-1, p. 9 No. 47-48; Meeting of the board of directors of August, 19, 1996, Exhibit C-CMW-20.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 24
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

98

99

100

101

102

On August 14, 1997, the Government issued a Decree establishing minimum seed
cotton prices for farmers. As a result of the minimum prices, cotton companies
sustained losses and Egypt launched a scheme to compensate them for these losses. At
the end of 1996/1997 season, Egypt implemented this program to compensate the cotton

industry participants for the losses resulting from its actions in the market.

During the subsequent seasons, although NCC had stopped purchasing cotton, the
company remained active in the cotton industry. NCC was selling cotton left over from
the 1995/1996 season, in particular cotton waste, which is used by the industry in
stuffed articles and to make gauze. In addition, NCC was trying during this period to

collect its accounts receivable.

The Claimants allege that, in executing the Settlements, the Government of Egypt
violated its obligations under the BIT®’. NCC ~as well as the entire private sector — was
excluded from participating in this scheme on the grounds that: “(i) the minimum price
was only available to those farmers who delivered their cotton to Government approved
distribution centres; (ii) compensation was only available to companies operating
State-approved distribution centres; and (iii) the State-owned companies controlled the
allocation and operation of distribution centres and none were allocated to the private

sector’,

As a result, the Claimants claim that these series of payments made by Egypt to some
companies operating in the cotton industry in the post-1996 period were discriminatory.
A select group of national companies operating in the cotton sector were provided with
substantial sums of money while NCC, a company owned by Americans, received
nothing. According to the Claimants, by making payments to other company and failing
to make similar payments to NCC, Egypt discriminated against NCC and failed to
provide NCC with national treatment, an action in violation of Egypt’s obligation under

the BIT.

The Claimants allege that the Respondent has failed to provide any evidence that would
support the conclusion that the scheme described by Egypt operated prior to 1994, or in
the years 1996/1997, 1997/1998, 2000/2001 and subsequent years. Egypt has produced

° Exhibit C-1, p. 15.
° Memorial of the Claimants, p. 9-10.
°8 Id. p. 10-11.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 25
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

no laws, no regulations, no ministerial decrees, no demonstration of the various
companies booking their entitlements to various payments, and no demonstration of the

Egyptian government booking its corresponding liability to make those payments”.

4.1.2. Lack of transparency claim (originally: Fair and equitable treatment/full
protection and security claim)

103 The Claimants claim that Egypt violated its obligations under Art. II (4) of the BIT by
failing to provide fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security in

accordance with the minimum standard of treatment required under international law.

104 In particular, the Claimants allege that Egypt’s treatment of NCC — both in terms of the
arbitrary removal of NCC’s ability to conduct its business and in terms of the secretive
and non-transparent manner in which Egypt intervened to compensate a limited group
of select companies — fell below the minimum standard of treatment, constituting an
abuse of rights under customary international law and violating the international law

principle of transparency”.

105 Initially”', the Claimants claimed that the Claimants’ major shareholder, Mr. Wahba,
was compelled, under threats by the Government, to agree to the sale to the Claimants
of the shares in NCC held by the NBE and the Pension Fund. As a consequence, the
Claimants claim, the agreement relating to the purchase of the shares by the Claimants
was made under duress”. In the Claimants’ Reply, the Claimants withdrew all claims
based on the relationship between the NBE and the Socialist Prosecutor and the
resulting agreements with the NBE, since these issues are currently pending in U.S.

3
courts”?

106 However, the Claimants maintained their claim regarding the lack of transparency of the

Settlements.

© Reply of the Claimants, p. 27.
” Id. p. 2.

7! Cf. Memorial of the Claimants.
® Memorial of the Claimants, p. 26.
* Reply of the Claimants, 28.

 

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 26
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

107

108

42

109

110

According to the Claimants, the applicable standard that determines the obligations of
Egypt in this context are the doctrine of abuse of rights and the principle of

transparency”.

The Claimants allege that the terms of the Settlements were not publicly known. They
were neither incorporated in a Decree or a Law nor published. Moreover, payments
were made in favour of companies without any prior application, and without any
objective criteria. As a consequence, by funding selected members of the cotton
industry in a clandestine fashion, the Respondent violated the transparency principle

under the BIT”.

Position of the Respondent

The Respondent rejects all claims of the Claimants.

The Respondent contests that it pursued any discriminatory actions. The Respondent
also maintains there has been no violation of the fair and equitable treatment/full

protection and security obligations and no violation of the transparency principle.

4.2.1 Discrimination claim

111

112

113

According to the Respondent, the five Settlements that resulted in payments by the
Government to cotton companies are the materialization of Government undertakings to
bear the costs of price differentials by compensating the cotton trade companies for the
price differences that occurred between the minimum purchase price from the producers
and the fixed sale price to customers. These five Settlements included a Settlement of
September 15, 1997, and other Settlements of June 26, 1998, of July 1, 2000, of
November 5, 2002, and of December 18, 2003.

The Settlement of September 15, 1997, concerns the reimbursement of price
differentials regarding trade operations that occurred before 1994, i.e., before the

liberalization of the Egyptian cotton market and before the creation of NCC”.

The other Settlements — those of June 26, 1998; July 1, 2000; November 5, 2002; and

December 18, 2003 — concern the reimbursement of price differentials resulting from

™ Memorial of the Claimants, p. 59.
* Reply of the Claimants, p. 28.
7 Counter-memorial of the Respondent, p. 52.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 27
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

114

115

116

117

118

the optional collective system of cotton commercialization that was established during
the liberalized years of the cotton industry, and in particular from the 1996/1997 season

onwards”.

NCC chose not to participate in the optional collective system of cotton
commercialization and chose not to buy its cotton from the Collection Centres. Since
NCC was not in the same situation as the companies that had purchased their cotton
through the Collection Centres, NCC did not benefit from the Settlements. Therefore,
the Settlements were not discriminating against NCC in comparison with the cotton

companies which had used the Collection Centres’®.

The purpose of the Settlements was to reimburse the Government’s debts resulting from
price differences on an objective basis established by the liberalization Laws and their

applications Decrees. Egypt never owed any debt to NCC regarding price differences”.

The Respondent contests that there should be a shift in the burden of proof, as alleged
by the Claimants®. However, should the Respondent have to provide the necessary
proof of a non-discriminatory policy, the Respondent claims that it has provided enough
positive evidence that the difference of treatment was justified by objective

circumstances, independent from any consideration linked to nationality®'.

The Central Agency drafted an audit report in 1997 regarding the price differences,
the purpose of which was to examine and check the amount of debt owed by the

Ministry of Finance to the trading cotton companies*’.

The four Settlements from June 29, 1998, to December 12, 2003, did not concern the
activities pertaining to the 1994/95 and 1995/96 seasons. All Settlements were based on
governmental Decrees™. It has not been disputed that both publicly-owned and private
companies were the beneficiaries of these Settlements. The Claimants could not show
that NCC would in any way have been prohibited from continuing to participate in the

Egyptian cotton market. The only reason advanced by the Claimants was their economic

™ Id. p. 52-53.
*8 Id. p. 53.

” Id. p.

54.

8° Rejoinder of the Respondent, p. 16.

sl

Id. p. 4.
© Exhibit D-152.

85 Rejoinder of the Respondent, p. 25.
Exhibits D-98 to D-104.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 28
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

119

impossibility to continue their activity in view of the heavy losses which they had
incurred during the two seasons in which they did participate. This Tribunal has not
been asked to examine the reasons for the losses incurred by NCC resulting, according
to the Claimants, from acts and omissions of the Egyptian authorities. All these alleged
acts and omissions are the object of a lawsuit commenced by NCC against the Egyptian
Government before the Egyptian Administrative Courts. In any case, the acts and
omissions occurred before the investment of the two corporate Claimants in NCC and
would therefore be outside the jurisdiction of this Tribunal based on the Bilateral

Investment Treaty between Egypt and the USA.

The Respondent states that it has provided enough evidence that the litigious payments
pertained to a support program for cotton producers and, as NCC did not participate in

this support program, the Claimants could not claim any payment®’.

4.2.2 Lack of transparency claim

120

121

122

According to recent case law, the fair and equitable standard must be assessed in light of

all the facts and circumstances of the case, including the behaviour of the Claimants*®°.

The Government’s acts and the measures taken were reasonable and objectively
justified. The Socialist Prosecutor’s acts were also legitimate and based on the Law. The
magistrates working for the Socialist Prosecutor and for the Court of Ethics are
independent from the Government and from the NBE*’. Thus, the NBE required the
Social Prosecutor to take action against Mr. Wahba only after the failure of the
negotiations relating to an agreement with Mr. Wahba concerning his debts, according

to regular judicial proceedings, and not in an arbitrary manner®®,

Regarding the full protection and security standard, the acts of the Government, the
NBE, and the Socialist Prosecutor against Mr. Wahba were lawfully taken in order to

protect public funds, according to Egyptian Law and Article X (1) of the BIT’.

85 Rejoinder of the Claimants, p. 5.

8 Reply of the Respondent, p. 57-58.

57 Id. p. 62.

88 Counter-memorial of the Claimants, p. 64.

8 Id. p.

68.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 29
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

123

43

124

Regarding the transparency claim, the Respondent states that the BIT contains no such
obligation. However, should such obligation exist, the Settlements were made public, as

they were taken in the form of published Laws and Decrees”.

Findings of the Arbitral Tribunal

The Arbitral Tribunal will first examine the discrimination claim and then the

transparency claim.

4.3.1. Claim under Art. II (2) (a) — non-discrimination principle of the BIT

125

126

127

128

129

The non-discrimination principle is found in Art. II (2)(a) of the BIT, which prohibits
discrimination based on nationality and requires the State to treat equally investments

that are in like situations.

The purpose of Art. II (2)(a) is to promote foreign investment and to guarantee the
foreign investor that his investment will not because of his foreign nationality be

accorded a treatment less favourable than that accorded to others in like situations.

The Parties are in agreement that the application of this clause requires that a foreign
company make an investment and/or any associated activity in connection with this

investment, in the territory of a Contracting State.

To comply with the non-discrimination provision, the following requirements need to be
met: there shall be no treatment less favourable — i.e., no discrimination — between
foreign and national investments when they are in like situations. This standard requires
the Arbitral Tribunal to first determine whether the parties involved — NCC and the
companies who received payments from the Government under the various Settlements
— were in like situations, and then to compare the treatment being received by foreign
investments with the treatment received by local investors to determine whether there

was a violation of the provision.

Were the parties involved — NCC and the companies who received payments from the

Government — in like situations?

°° Id. p. 65.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 30
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

130

13

132

133

134

The national treatment obligation does not generally prohibit a State from adopting
measures that constitute a difference in treatment. The obligation only prohibits a State
from taking measures resulting in different treatment in like circumstances”!. A like
situation has been defined as a similar situation that should be assessed within the same

business or economic sector”.

In the present case, the Parties agree that NCC and the other publicly — or privately —
owned cotton trading companies were prima facie in similar situations: both purchased

cotton from farmers, and both ginned their cotton and sold it.

According to the Respondent, the payments made by the Government to some cotton
trade companies were based on objective criteria: the payments aimed either to
reimburse debts for pre-1994 operations or to reimburse price differentials for
operations post-1995/96 in which NCC did not participate”’. Therefore, the payments

did not violate the national treatment obligation.

According to the Claimants, the payments made by the Government did discriminate.
An analysis of the intent of the Government of Egypt is irrelevant. Because the
Claimants did demonstrate a prima facie difference in treatment, the burden had shifted
to the Respondent to demonstrate that a reasonable non-discriminatory policy
justification existed that would explain the differences in treatment received by NCC

and the other cotton companies”.

Under Art. II (2)(a) of the BIT, the Government of Egypt should not treat differently
NCC and other cotton trading companies on the grounds of their different nationality, if
they were in like situations. The question would remain whether a difference of
treatment in like situations could be permissible based on other objective grounds. It is,
however, not necessary for the Arbitral Tribunal to answer this question since the
Arbitral Tribunal, as shown hereafter, finds that NCC and the companies which received

the payments were not in a like situation.

° A. Goetz and others v. Burundi (ICSID Case No. ARB/95/3), para. 121, in Exhibit D-134: “une discrimination suppose un
traitement différencié appliqué & des personnes se trouvant dans une situation semblable”.

® Pope & Talbot v. Canada, Award of April 10, 2001, para. 78, available at http://Awww.dfait-maeci.ge.ca/tna-nac/
documents/Award_Merits-e.pdf.

°5 Counter-memorial of the Claimants, p. 53.

°* Reply of the Claimants, p. 25-26.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 31
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

The 1997 Settlement:

135

136

137

138

139

According to the Respondent, the Settlement relates to reimbursement of price

differentials regarding trade operations that occurred before 1994.

Under the Law No. 88/1962”, all cotton produced was to be delivered to the Egyptian
Cotton Committee at a price which would be fixed prior to the beginning of each season
by decision of the Minister of Economy”. The Egyptian Cotton Committee was to sell
the cotton locally or for export at a price fixed also by the Minister of Economy”.
Before the 1994 liberalization, it was prohibited for spinning mills to purchase cotton

except through direct purchase from the established Committee.

According to the Law, the Minister of Economy fixed the purchase prices paid by the
cotton export companies for the cotton bought from the producers (on behalf of the
Government), from the 1985/1986 season until the 1993/1994 season’. The sale prices

from cotton companies to local consumers were also fixed by ministerial resolution”.

The mechanism was explained in a letter from the Minister of Public Sector to the
Minister of Finance!° and during the December 13, 2004, hearing in Paris. The cotton
company bought cotton from the producer at a fixed price on behalf of the Government

and sold it to local mills or for export.

The differences between the prices are debited or credited on the account of the public
treasury. Over the years the purchase price from the producers increased, so that the
balance of the debt of the Ministry of Finance amounted to EGP 3,975.94 million as of
August 31, 1996, pursuant to the audit of the cotton accounts control department at the
Central Audit Agency. On September 15, 1997, the Ministry of Finance paid its debt by
issuing notes on the public treasury for a one-year period with interest of 8%. Other

amounts, especially interest on the outstanding amounts, were, however, still due!!,

° Exhibit D-115.

°° Art. 1, in Exhibit D-115.

°7 Art. 2, in Exhibit D-115.

° Exhibits D-116 to D-123.

® Exhibit D-124.

' Letter of May 30, 1999, in Exhibit D-125.
'°! Exhibit D-125.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 32
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

140

141

142

143

An auditing report was made for the Cotton Trade & Export Company”, in which the
agency mentioned the price differences and the debts of the Ministry of Finance for the
price differences, the repurchase differences, the marketing expenses differences and the

financing burdens of these amounts!”

The marketing expenses represent all the costs involved in every activity between the
acquisition of raw cotton and the sale of ginned cotton. The company engaging in these

activities gets paid for these production or transformation costs!

5

Auditing reports were also made for the Misr Cotton Export Company‘ and for the

Port Said Cotton Export Company’.

To conclude, regarding the 1997 Settlement, the documents presented to the Arbitral
Tribunal evidence that the reason for the payments was to extinguish the debts recorded
for the period before 1994. Therefore, since NCC was not incorporated at the time these
debts were incurred, the Arbitral Tribunal finds that the payments of the 1997

Settlements were not discriminatory.

The Subsequent Settlements:

144

145

Regarding the other Settlements — those of June 26, 1998; July 1, 2000; November 5,
2002; and December 18, 2003 — they concern, according to the Respondent, the
reimbursement of price differentials that occurred, for the 1996/1997 season and the
seasons thereafter, in relation with the liberalized optional collective system of cotton

commercialization.

As previously exposed, after 1994 the cotton companies had the option of buying cotton
either from the Collection Centres — organized at the beginning of each year by a
ministerial Decree — or directly from the producers. The producers, like the cotton
companies, also had the option of selling their cotton either to the Centres or to the
companies. At the Collection Centres, a minimum price, fixed by the Government!”’,

was guaranteed to the producers.

'©2 Report of the Central Audit Agency of June 30, 1993, in Exhibit D-128.
103
Id. p.3.
' Transcript of the hearing held on December 13, 2004, p. 150-152.
5 Exhibit D-129.
16 Exhibit D-130.
' Exhibits D- 92 to D-95.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 33
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

146

147

148

149

150

151

152

For the 1994/1995 and 1995/1996 seasons, the Government did not have to make any
payments to cotton companies, since, due to the higher resale price of cotton, the
companies did not sustain any losses during these seasons. The support system was

therefore not used.

If NCC possibly incurred losses in the 1995/1996 season (see above §§95-97) these,
according to the Claimants, were not caused by price differentials but by administrative
acts like the impossibility to freely export cotton or the problems associated with the
stocks of cotton held by NCC. The Claimants, however, do not, or at least no longer,
base their claim on these acts of the Egyptian authorities which are (or at least were) the
object of a law suit commenced by NCC against the Egyptian Government before the

Egyptian Administrative Courts.

During the 1996/1997 and 1997/1998 seasons, however, the market prices were very
low, and therefore most of the production was sold through the Collection Centres. The
difference between the price paid by the private or public companies which had
purchased cotton from the Collection Centres and the resale price was reimbursed by

the Government to these companies.

The letter of May 30, 19991°8, also states that the Ministry of Finance would bear the
differences between the minimum prices for producers and the sale prices for the
1996/1997 season. As of June 30, 1997, the debt amounted to EGP 443 million and

payment was made by issuance of notes.

For the 1997/1998 season, the Ministry of Finance also stated that it would bear the

price if the export prices dropped below the minimum guaranteed.

Every year, the Central Audit Agency would audit the accounts of the State-owned
companies, including the account used to record the price differences due by the

Ministry of Finance 109 |

A company’s participation in purchasing cotton through the Collection Centres was a

prerequisite for that company to receive a reimbursement.

88 Exhibit D-129.
'® Exhibits D-126 and D-127.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 34
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

153

154

155

156

NCC was not part of the companies that could potentially receive a reimbursement for
the 1996/1997 and 1997/1998 seasons, since NCC did not participate in buying any
cotton during these seasons. Moreover, according to the Respondent, Egypt did not
violate the national treatment obligation which prohibits discrimination (between

foreign and domestic nationals) on the grounds of nationality.

Although both kinds of companies operate in the same industry and are subject to same
kind of rules, there is a significant difference between a company which opts to buy
cotton from the Collection Centres at fixed prices and a company which opts to trade on
the free market, whether or not the company is privately-owned or State-owned or

whether the company is national or foreign.

The first requirement to be fulfilled in order to receive compensation payments from the
Government is the participation in the trading of cotton through the Collection Centres.
The Parties are in agreement that NCC did not participate in this system. Therefore,
NCC cannot be compared with other cotton trading companies regarding the

Settlements.

Since the Arbitral Tribunal came to the conclusion that the companies were not in a like
situation, it does not need to analyze the other requirements which prohibit

discrimination on the grounds of nationality.

4.3.2. Claim under Art. II (4) — Lack of transparency claim

157

158

159

160

The non-discrimination principle can also be found more generally in Art. II (4) of the
BIT, which provides for a general non-discrimination principle, as required by

international law and national legislation.

Because the Claimants withdrew their claim based on the alleged violation of the fair
and equitable treatment and the full protection and security obligations, the Arbitral

Tribunal will not further analyze this facet of the claim.

However, the Claimants maintained their claim based on the lack of transparency of the

Settlements, pursuant to Art. II (4) of the BIT, which will be analyzed hereunder.

According to the Claimants, the Settlements were implemented and executed in

violation of the transparency principle in international law, since they were secretly

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 35
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

161

162

made to selected members of the cotton industry!"”.

The transparency principle was developed by the Claimants!!! by reference to the
principle of transparency as it has been addressed by the WTO Appellate Body, and
recalled the U.S.-Underwear case in which the Appellate Body described how the
principle of transparency finds expression in the GATT agreement: “[...] The essential
implication is that Members and other persons affected, or likely to be affected, by
Governmental measures imposing restraints, requirements and other burdens, should
have a reasonable opportunity to acquire authentic information about such measures
and, accordingly, to protect and adjust their activities, or alternatively to seek

modification of such measures” m2

The Claimants''? also mentioned how the principle of transparency was clarified in the

ICSID case Técnicas Medioambientales, which holds: “[...] The foreign investor

expects the host State to act in a consi: manner, free from iguity and totally
transparently in its relations with the foreign investor, so that it may know beforehand
any and all rules and regulati that will govern its investments, as well as the goals of
the relevant policies and administrative practices or directives, to be able to plan its
investment and comply with such regulations. Any and all State actions conforming to
such criteria should relate not only to the guidelines, directives or requirements issued,
or the resolutions approved hereunder, but also to the goals underlying such
regulations. The foreign investor also expects the host State to act consistently, i.e.
without arbitrarily revoking any preexisting decisions or permits issued by the State
that were relied upon by the investor to assume its commitments as well as to plan and
launch its commercial and business activities. The investor also expects the State to use
the legal instruments that govern the actions of the investor or the investment in
conformity with the function usually assigned to such instruments, and not to deprive
the investor of its investment without the required compensation. In fact, failure by the
host State to comply with such pattern of conduct with respect to the foreign investor or
its investments affects the investor’s ability to measure the treatment and protection

awarded by the host State and to determine whether the actions of the host State

"° Reply of the Claimants, p. 28.
Td. p. 6

"2 United States — Restrictions on Imports of Cotton and Man-made Fibre Underwear, (WT/DS24/AB/R), February 10, 1997,

p.21.
"5 Reply of the Claimants, p. 68.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 36
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

163

164

165

166

167

conform to the fair and equitable treatment principle.”!"* (Emphasis added by the

Claimants).

According to the Respondent, the payments were known, public and transparent. The
payments were published and the reimbursements were decided on the grounds of a
report drafted by the independent Central Audit Agency. Evidence was produced by the

Respondent to this effect.

The parties are in agreement that each Party has the burden to prove the facts on which
it relies to support its claims and defenses. It was therefore the obligation of the
Claimants to prove that the Settlements were not made in a transparent manner. The
Tribunal notes that the Laws and Decrees regarding the organization of the cotton
trading structures, the prices and the Government Centres’ purchase and sale
mechanism were public, available, or have been published or produced by the
Respondent upon the request of the Claimants. The Claimants were in a position to
know beforehand all rules and regulations that would govern their investments for the
respective season to come. The Claimants have not produced any evidence or even
pertinent arguments that Egypt violated the principle of transparency under international

Jaw and this claim therefore also has to be denied.

COSTS

The Parties submitted statements of their costs on July 15, 2003, with respect to the
jurisdictional phase and on July 10, 2006, regarding the merit phase and the overall
costs of the proceeding. The original Statement of the Claimants of July 10, 2006, was

resubmitted in its final revised form on July 17, 2006.

Each party has paid an amount of USD 225,000 to ICSID as advance payments for the
fees and expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal and to cover the expenses and administrative

fee of ICSID. In the following cost computations these amounts are not included.

For the jurisdictional phase the Claimants claimed a total of USD 283,121.71, and the
Respondent claimed the sums of USD 170,000; EGP 236,021.11; and EUR 9,738.30!%,

"\ Técnicas Medioambientales TECMED S.A. v. Mexico, (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2), May 29, 2003, at para. 354,
available at http: -worldba 051903%20-English.pdf.

us

The abbreviation USD signifies United States Dollars, EGP signifies Egyptian Pounds, and EUR signifies Euros.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 37
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

168

169

170

17

172

173

174

175

For the merits phase the Claimants put forward a claim for USD 1,089,158. The
Respondent claims the sum of USD 548,075; EGP 152,679.88; and EUR 19,791.48.

Therefore, the Claimants claim for the total arbitration an amount of USD 1,375,279,
and the Respondent claims the sums of USD 668,075; EGP 388,700.99; and EUR
29,529.78.

In their submission of July 24, 2006, the Claimants state that they “have no reply

statement to make on the costs presented by [the] Arab Republic of Egypt.”

In its statement of July 24, 2006, the Respondent indicated that it has no comments
regarding the statements of the Claimants but draws the attention of the Arbitral
Tribunal to the important difference between the cost statements with respect to the

jurisdictional phase and the merits phase.

Each Party has requested that its costs be assumed by the other Party.

Neither the ICSID Convention nor the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings contain any provisions how the costs are to be apportioned between the
Parties. Article 61 of the ICSID Convention provides that, except as the parties
otherwise agree, which is not the case in this Arbitration, the Arbitral Tribunal shall
assess the expenses incurred by the Parties in connection with the proceedings, and shall
decide how and by whom these expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of the

Arbitral Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre shall be paid.

The Tribunal notes that the Claimants in the Decision on Jurisdiction were successful
with respect to the two corporate Claimants which represent 25% of the share capital of
NCC but that the claims of the three individual Claimants representing 37.5% of NCC

were denied.

In this Award, the Arbitral Tribunal comes to the conclusion that the claims of the
remaining Claimants are without any merit. The Tribunal notes that the Respondent
produced a great number of documents based on repeated production requests by the
Claimants after having already produced two witnesses for the hearing in Paris on

December 13, 2004.

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD, 38
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

 

176

177

178

The Tribunal is of the opinion that it is appropriate in this case that basically the costs
follow the event. Taking all factors into consideration, especially the fact that the claim
was denied, the Arbitral Tribunal comes to the conclusion that the Claimants shall
assume the total amount of the fees and expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal and of ICSID.

They are therefore ordered to pay an amount of USD 225,000 to the Respondent.

With respect to the costs of the Parties, the Arbitral Tribunal holds that the Claimants
have to carry their own costs and expenses as their claims were denied. Especially in
view of the fact that the Respondent contested the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and as the
Tribunal did allow the claims of the two Corporate Claimants to go forward, it would
seem appropriate that the Claimants pay to the Respondent one half its expenses. The
amounts claimed by the Respondent (at the September 2006 rates of exchange
approximately USD 775,000) seem reasonable also when compared to the total costs
claim of the Claimants. The Claimants shall therefore pay to the Respondent the amount

of USD 334,037.50; EGP 194,350; and Euro 14,765.

In its Decision on Jurisdiction the Arbitral Tribunal held that it did not have jurisdiction
to hear the claim of the three individuals, James T. Wahba, John B. Wahba and Timothy
T. Wahba. It has never been disputed that the Arbitral Tribunal is competent to order
these three original claimants to carry the appropriate costs of the jurisdictional phase of
this procedure. These three individual claimants hold 37.5% of the share capital of
NCC, compared to the 25% held by the two corporate Claimants. The question of costs
and arbitration fees was reserved in the Decision on Jurisdiction. It is not possible to
identify precisely the fees and costs which are attributable to the jurisdiction phase and
those attributable to the merits. Based on the information available to the Arbitral
Tribunal it would seem that approximately 20% of the overall activity of the Arbitral
Tribunal and of the Parties, their counsel, and their witnesses were devoted to the
Decision on Jurisdiction. The Arbitral Tribunal therefore holds that the three original
claimants, James T. Wahba, John B. Wahba and Timothy T. Wahba, are jointly and
severably liable to the Respondent for 20% of the total amount the Claimants owe to the
Respondent, therefore the sum of USD 66,807.50; EGP 38,870; and EUR 2,953
(accounting for 20% of the Claimants’ share of Respondent’s expenses), plus USD
45,000 (accounting for 20% of the advance made by the Respondent to cover the fees

and expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal and of ICSID). The total owed by the three

ICSID Case No. ARB/02/9 —-AWARD,
CHAMPION TRADING COMPANY & AMERITRADE INTERNATIONAL, INC. V. ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

39

 

original Claimants to the Respondent is, therefore, the sum of USD 111,807.50; EGP
38,870; and EUR 2,953.

NOW THEREFORE, the Arbitral Tribunal

DECIDES AND AWARDS AS FOLLOWS:

1. The claims of the Claimants are denied.

2. a) The Claimants shall carry the fees and expenses of the members of the Arbitral
Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes of United States Dollars 450,000.

b) The Claimants shall therefore pay to the Respondent the amount originally paid by
it to the Centre of United States Dollars 225,000.

3. The Claimants shall carry the expenses incurred by them in connection with these
proceedings and shall pay to the Respondent one half of the expenses incurred by it,
therefore: United States Dollars 334,037.50; Egyptian Pounds 194,350; Euros 14,765.

4. The original individual claimants:
Mr. James T. Wahba;
Mr. John B. Wahba; and
Mr. Timothy T. Wahba
are jointly and severally liable together with the Claimants to the Respondent for the
payment of the Respondent’s expenses up to the following amounts
United States Dollars 111,807.50
Egyptian Pounds 38,870

Euros 2,953
signed
Mr. Robert Briner
October 23, 2006
signed signed
Mr. L. Yves Fortier Professor Laurent Aynés

October 20, 2006 October 19, 2006

