IN AN ARBITRATION UNDER THE TREATY BETWEEN
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
CONCERNING THE ENCOURAGEMENT AND RECIPROCAL PROTECTION
OF INVESTMENT AND THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES

Interim Award

CLAIMANTS:

CLAIMANTS’ COUNSEL:

RESPONDENT:

RESPONDENT’S COUNSEL:

ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL:

SECRETARY TO THE TRIBUNAL:

December 1, 2008

Chevron Corporation (U.S.A.) and
Texaco Petroleum Corporation (U.S.A.)

R. Doak Bishop
Edward G. Kehoe
Wade M. Coriell
Roberto Aguirre-Luzi
King & Spalding LLP

Alejandro Ponce-Martinez
Quevedo & Ponce

The Republic of Ecuador

Bruno D. Leurent

Eric W. Bloom

Mark Clodfelter
Ricardo Ugarte

Tomas Leonard

C. MacNeil Mitchell
Winston & Strawn LLP

Paolo Di Rosa
Arnold & Porter

Diego Garcia Carrié6n
Procurador General del Estado

Prof. Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, Chairman
The Honorable Charles N. Brower
Prof. Albert Jan van den Berg

Brooks Daly (PCA)

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

A. The Partie: -7T-
B. The Tribunal -1l-
C. Short Identification of the Case ........cccccccsseseesesteestesesteseeeseeneseeseseeeseeneseeee -12-
C.I. The Claimants’ Perspective and Relief Sought on the Merits ................ -12-
C.Il. The Respondent’s Perspective and Relief Sought on the Merits............ -17-
D. Procedural History - 20 -

 

 

E. The Jurisdictional Issues.............
F. The Principal Relevant Legal Provisions ...........0.:cccccceesseseseeee testes - 39 -

FI. Treaty between the United States of America and Ecuador Concerning the

Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment (“BIT”) .............4. - 39 -
FIL Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (“WCLT”)..........:ceeseeeeeee - 42 -
G. Relief Sought by the Parties Regarding Jurisdiction.......0.0.0.0c cee - 45 -
G.I. Relief Sought by the Respondent .........0.. ccc ee eeneeeeeeee ee teeeeeeeeeees - 45 -

G.IL Relief Sought by the Claimants

 

H. Factual Background

 

lL Short Summary of Contentions regarding the Jurisdictional Issues ............. - 58 -

II. Arguments by the Respondent ...........c cece ees eeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeee

 

LI. Arguments by the Claimants...

J. Considerations of the Tribunal regarding the Jurisdictional Issues .............. - 63 -

 

JI. Preliminary Considerations...

 

 

 

1. The Standard of Review for Jurisdictional Objections .............ce - 63 -
2. Merits Claims as the Object of Examination of Jurisdiction ................. -71-
3. Applicable Law - 72 -
4. Relevance of Decisions of other Tribunals «10.0.0... cscs -72-
JI. Abuse of Rights, Estoppel and Waiver ou... ceceececeeeeeee eee eeeeeeees - 73 -
1. Arguments by the Respondent ..........0c cece eee eeneeeeeeeeee teste eeeeeeeeees - 73 -
2. Arguments by the Claimants... cece eee ee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeee -77-
3. The Tribunal - 78 -
JI. The Clai ” Investment - 83 -
1. Arguments by the Respondent ..........0c cece eee eeneeeeeeeeee teste eeeeeeeeees - 83 -

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 2

2. Arguments by the Claimants... cece eee ee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeee - 88 -
3. The Tribunal

 

J.IV. The Claimants’ Investment Agreements

 

 

 

 

1. Arguments by the Respondent ......0.0... ccc te seeee eee eeeeeeeeees
2. Arguments by the Claimants... cece eee este eeeeeeeeeeeeteeeeee - 101 -
3. The Tribunal - 102 -
J.V. Exhaustion of Local Remedies............c.cccccesesesteseseeesseseseeseseesesnenees - 106 -
1. Arguments by the Respondent ......0.0... ccc te seeee eee eeeeeeeeees - 106 -
2. Arguments by the Claimants... cece eee este eeeeeeeeeeeeteeeeee - 110 -
3. The Tribunal -114-
J.VI. Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis regarding Pre-Existing Disputes .......... - 116 -
1. Arguments by the Respondent ......0.0... ccc te seeee eee eeeeeeeeees - 116 -
2. Arguments by the Claimants... cece eee este eeeeeeeeeeeeteeeeee - 120 -
3. The Tribunal - 125 -
J.VIL. Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis regarding Pre-BIT Acts..........:000 - 128 -

1. Arguments by the Respondent

 
 

 

 

 

2. Arguments by the Claimants. 129 -

3. The Tribunal - 130 -
J.VIIL. Continuing and Composite Acts ....0..cccccce eects ee eeeeeeeenes - 132 -
1. Arguments by the Respondent ......0.0... ccc te seeee eee eeeeeeeeees - 132 -

2. Arguments by the Claimants... cece eee este eeeeeeeeeeeeteeeeee - 134 -

3. The Tribunal - 136 -
J.IX. Considerations regarding Costs at this Stage... ccc - 138 -
1. Relief Sought by the Respondent... e eee eeeeeeeeees - 138 -

2. Relief Sought by the Claimants 00... ccc ee eeeeeeneneneneeeeeeee - 138 -

3. The Tribunal - 139 -
K. Decisions - 140 -

 

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 3

1973 Agreement

1977 Agreement

1986 Refinancing
Agreement

1994 MOU

1995 Remediation
Agreement

1995 Global
Settlement

BIT

Cl
cil

cil

CIV

CV

CEPE

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award

ABBREVIATIONS

Agreement between the Government of Ecuador, Ecuadorian
Gulf Oil Company, and TexPet of August 6, 1973

Supplemental Agreement between TexPet and the Government
of Ecuador of December 16, 1977

Refinancing Agreement of Amounts Owed by CEPE through
the Operations Account to Texaco Petroleum Company for
Sales of Crude for Internal Consumption as of September 30,
1986, November 25, 1986

Memorandum of Understanding Among the Government of
Ecuador, PetroEcuador, and TexPet, December 14, 1994

Contract for Implementing of Environmental Remediation
Work and Release from Obligations, Liability, and Claims
among the Government of Ecuador, PetroEcuador, and
TexPet, May 4, 1995

Settlement Agreement and Release among the Government of
Ecuador, PetroEcuador, PetroProduccién, PetroComercial, and
TexPet, November 17, 1995

Bilateral Investment Treaty, specifically the Treaty Between
the Government of the United States of America and the
Government of the Republic of Ecuador for the
Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment of
August 27, 1993 (entered into force May 11, 1997)
Claimants’ Statement of Claim of October 19, 2007

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction of April 1, 2008

Claimants’ First-Round Post-Hearing Brief on Jurisdiction of
July 22, 2008

Claimants’ Second-Round Post-Hearing Reply on Jurisdiction
of August 12, 2008

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits of April 14, 2008

Corporaci6n Estatal Petrolera Ecuatoriana, an Ecuadorian
State-owned company

Concession
Agreements

Consortium

Exh. C-
Exh. R-

HC1

HC2

HC3

HRI

HR2

HR3

ICSID
ILC

ILC Draft Articles

p.
para.
PCA
PetroEcuador
POT

POT

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award

1973 Agreement and 1977 Agreement

Consortium between TexPet, Ecuadorian Gulf Oil Company,
and CEPE pursuant to the agreement of August 6, 1973
Claimants’ Exhibit

Respondent’s Exhibit

Claimants’ slides from their opening presentation at the
Hearing on Jurisdiction

Claimants’ list of letters of TexPet to Ecuador courts handed
out at the Hearing on Jurisdiction

Claimants’ slides from their closing presentation at the Hearing
on Jurisdiction

Respondent’s slides from their opening presentation at the
Hearing on Jurisdiction

Respondent’s first set of slides with their closing presentation
on retroactivity at the Hearing on Jurisdiction

Respondent’s second set of slides with their closing
presentation at the Hearing on Jurisdiction

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
International Law Commission

International Law Commission Draft Articles on State
Responsibility for Internationally Wrongful Acts, adopted by
the International Law Commission at its fifty-third session
(2001)

Page

Paragraph

Permanent Court of Arbitration

Empresa Estatal de Petréleos de Ecuador

Procedural Order No. 1

Procedural Order No. 2

PO Ill
PO IV
RI
RIE

RI

RIV

RV

Settlement

Agreements

SG-PCA

TexPet

Tr.

UNCITRAL

VCLT

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award

Procedural Order No. 3

Procedural Order No. 4

Respondent’s Statement of Defense of November 20, 2007
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction of January 31, 2008

Respondent’s First-Round Post-Hearing Brief on Jurisdiction
of July 22, 2008

Respondent’s Second-Round Post-Hearing Brief on Jurisdiction
of August 12, 2008

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits of September 23,
2008

1994 MOU, 1995 Remediation Agreement, and 1995 Global
Settlement

Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration
Texaco Petroleum Company, a corporation organized under
the laws of Delaware, U.S.A., and wholly-owned subsidiary of

Chevron Corporation

Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction in San Jose, Costa
Rica, May 19-20, 2008

United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of May 23, 1969

A. _The Parties

The Claimants

Represented by:

Chevron Corporation

6001 Bollinger Canyon Road
San Ramon, California, 94583
USA

Texaco Petroleum Company
6001 Bollinger Canyon Road
San Ramon, California, 94583
USA

Mr. R. Doak Bishop

Mr. Wade M. Coriell

Mr. Roberto Aguirre-Luzi
KING & SPALDING

1100 Louisiana, Suite 4000
Houston, TX 77002-5213
USA

Mr. Edward G. Kehoe

KING & SPALDING

1185 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10036-4003
USA

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award

Dr. Alejandro Ponce-Martinez
QUEVEDO & PONCE

Ave. 12 de Octubre y Lincoln
Edificio Torre 1492, Piso 16
P.O. Box 17-01-600

Quito

ECUADOR

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award

The Respondent The Republic of Ecuador

Represented by: Mr. Bruno D. Leurent
WINSTON & STRAWN LLP
25, avenue Marceau
75116 Paris
FRANCE

Mr. Eric W. Bloom

Mr. Mark Clodfelter

Mr. Ricardo Ugarte

Mr. Tomas Leonard

WINSTON & STRAWN LLP
1700 K Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20006-3817
USA

Mr. C. MacNeil Mitchell
WINSTON & STRAWN LLP
200 Park Avenue

New York, NY 10166-4193
USA

Mr. Paolo Di Rosa

ARNOLD & PORTER

555 Twelfth Street, NW
Washington, DC 20004-1206
USA

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award

Dr. Diego Garcia Carrién

Procurador General del Estado

c/o Dr. Carlos Venegas Olmedo

Director Nacional de Asuntos Internacionales y
Derechos Humanos

PROCURADURIA GENERAL DEL ESTADO

Robles 731 y Av. Amazonas

Quito

ECUADOR

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 10

The Tribunal

Appointed by the Claimants:

The Honorable Charles N. Brower
20 Essex Street Chambers

20 Essex Street

London WC2 R3AL

UNITED KINGDOM

Appointed by the Respondent:
Prof. Albert Jan van den Berg
Hanotiau & van den Berg

IT Tower, 9th Floor

480 Avenue Louise, B.9

1050 Brussels

BELGIUM

Appointed by agreement of the Co-Arbitrators with the consent of the Parties:
Prof. Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, Chairman

Parkstrasse 38
D-51427 Bergisch-Gladbach

GERMANY

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 11

 

C._ Short Identification of the C:

The short identification below is without prejudice to the full presentation of the
factual and legal details of the case by the Parties and the Tribunal’s

considerations and conclusions.
C.I. The Claimants’ Perspective and Relief Sought on the Merits

The following quotation from the Claimants’ Statement of Claim summarizes the

main aspects of the dispute as follows (C I, paras. 1-9):

1. Between 1991 and 1993, Texaco Petroleum Company (‘TexPet”)
filed seven breach-of-contract cases against the Ecuadorian Government in
Ecuadorian courts in which it claimed over US$ 553 million in damages (not
including all accumulated interest). (Six of the cases were filed against the
Republic of Ecuador, represented in the lawsuits by the Ministry of Energy
and Mines. The seventh case was filed against Ecuador’s state-owned oil
company, which had signed a Refinancing Agreement with TexPet.) The
cases allege breaches by Ecuador of its obligations to TexPet under binding
contracts dated August 6, 1973 (the “1973 Agreement’) and December 1977
(the “1977 Agreement”) (collectively the “Agreements”), as well as related
violations of Ecuadorian law.

2. Under the 1973 Agreement, TexPet was entitled to explore and
exploit oil reserves in certain regions of Ecuador, and the Agreements
required TexPet to provide a percentage of its crude oil production to the
Government to help meet Ecuadorian domestic consumption needs. The
Government was entitled to set the price at which it would purchase the oil
from TexPet for Ecuadorian domestic consumption needs, referred to as the
“domestic market price.” The Government also had the right to purchase the
remaining oil from TexPet at international market prices in the event that the
Government wished to refine that oil into derivative products for export.
After fulfilling its obligations to the Government, TexPet was free to export
the remainder of its oil at prevailing international market prices, which were
always substantially higher than the domestic market price. The key
principle under the Agreements was the ultimate use of the crude oil
contributed by TexPet. If the Government used the oil for any purpose other
than to produce derivative products to satisfy Ecuadorian domestic
consumption needs or to obtain funds for use in purchasing such derivative
products, then TexPet was entitled to receive the international market price.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 12

The Government was not entitled to export TexPet’s crude oil, nor was the
Government entitled to use oil acquired at the domestic market price for
purposes other than satisfying the domestic market.

3. The Ecuadorian Government breached the Agreements and related
Ecuadorian laws by overstating Ecuador’s true domestic consumption needs,
and by taking additional barrels of oil that belonged to Tex Pet and exporting
them. The Government caused TexPet to contribute substantially more oil
than it was obligated to provide at the reduced domestic market price and
exported it as derivatives or as crude. In neither case did it pay the
international price that it was contractually and legally required to pay.

4. TexPet filed seven breach-of-contract cases against the Government
before the Ecuadorian courts. TexPet proved its claim in each case, largely
through Government documents, some of which were made available to
TexPet through the court-sanctioned “judicial inspection” process under
Ecuadorian law. In three of the cases, the court appointed its own experts,
and in each of those cases, the experts agreed with TexPet’s analysis but
found that the damages were slightly higher than those claimed by TexPet.
In two other cases in which the court did not appoint its own experts, the
Government’s own experts agreed with TexPet’s analysis.

5. In six cases, TexPet filed all necessary evidence of its claims within
the proper time periods, took all steps necessary under Ecuadorian
procedural rules in a timely manner, and repeatedly requested final decisions
from the courts. But for well over a decade, 12 different judges in three
different courts refused to rule on any of the six cases. Those cases have
stood legally ready for decision under Ecuadorian law since at least 1998,
but the courts steadfastly refused to rule year after year. In the seventh case,
despite TexPet’s repeated requests, the court refused even to take evidence
from the appointed experts for over 14 years. In short, the Ecuadorian
judiciary has egregiously delayed all of TexPet’s claims against the
Government, and it has demonstrated a refusal to judge any of those claims
in a fair and impartial manner as required under Ecuadorian and international
law.

6. Meanwhile, in late 2004, the political branches of the same
Ecuadorian Government that is the defendant in all seven cases began to
exert control over Ecuador’s judiciary. Although Ecuador’s 1998
Constitution enshrines the principle of judicial independence that is so
fundamental to a state’s ability to meet its obligation to provide foreign
nationals with impartial justice under the law, the political branches purged
Ecuador’s Constitutional, Electoral and Supreme Courts, and replaced the
constitutionally-elected judges with political allies. The Supreme Court has
been unconstitutionally purged twice in less than three years, and the current
court was not legitimately elected under the Constitution. The Subrogate
President of the Supreme Court sits as a first-instance judge in three of
TexPet’s cases against the Government. Since 2004, judicial independence
in Ecuador has been virtually non-existent, as recognized by many
prominent international organizations and commentators.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 13

7. In light of the egregious delays suffered in its seven cases and the
move by the Executive Branch, which defends those cases, to extend its
control over the Ecuadorian judiciary, TexPet provided Ecuador with notice
of its intention to file this arbitration in May 2006. In response to that notice
and the subsequent filing of this arbitration proceeding in December 2006,
the long-dormant and now-politicized courts began to take some action. In
two of TexPet’s cases, the judge dismissed TexPet’s claims as “abandoned”
based on a grossly-wrong and manifestly-improper application of a Code of
Civil Procedure provision. In one of those cases, TexPet had provided all
evidence and taken all necessary steps to obtain a decision, and the only
thing left was for the court to decide the case. In the other case, TexPet had
repeatedly requested that the court move forward with the evidentiary phase
of the case, but the court had refused for 14 years to schedule a judicial
inspection. In a third case, the judge dismissed TexPet’s claim based on a
clearly inapplicable statute of limitations for sales to retail consumers, even
though under the unambiguous definition of those terms under Ecuadorian
law, the Government was not a retail consumer of TexPet’s. All three of
those cases were not simply decided wrongly, they were decided in a grossly
incompetent, biased and manifestly unjust fashion, in manifest disregard of
clear principles of Ecuadorian law. In a fourth case -- the smallest of
TexPet’s claims worth approximately one-tenth of one percent (0.1%) of the
total damages owed by Ecuador to TexPet -- the court belatedly ruled in
TexPet’s favor. The Government has appealed the decision, and the case
therefore continues to languish in the Ecuadorian courts without TexPet
being able to collect on its judgment. That judgment is clearly part of a
transparent tactic to posture the Government for this proceeding.

8. Ecuador’s conduct constitutes both a denial of justice under
customary international law and a violation of its treaty obligations to
TexPet in two independent respects: (1) undue delay in deciding TexPet’s
seven cases, which have languished for well over a decade in the Ecuadorian
courts; and (2) the courts’ grossly incompetent, biased and manifestly unjust
decisions in ultimately deciding some of the cases in manifest disregard of
Ecuadorian law. In both respects, Ecuador violated its treaty obligations to
(1) provide TexPet with effective means of asserting claims and enforcing its
rights; (2) provide fair and equitable treatment to TexPet’s investments; (3)
provide full protection and security to those investments; and (4) refrain
from treating those investments in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner.

9. Any further effort by TexPet to receive justice from the Ecuadorian
courts would be futile. Ecuador has denied justice to TexPet in two
independent ways -- first by refusing to judge its claims against the
Government for well over a decade, and then by illegally dismissing some of
those claims in direct response to TexPet’s attempt to vindicate its rights
before this Tribunal. The current bias of Ecuadorian judges, the lack of a
constitutionally-legitimate Supreme Court, and the frequent and successful
attacks in recent years by Ecuador’s political branches both on judicial
independence and on the Claimants themselves has created an untenable
situation in Ecuador for Claimants. International law provides that when a
country’s courts deny justice to a foreign investor, and it would be futile for
the investor to continue to pursue its claims in the host country’s courts, an
international arbitral tribunal must take and decide the claims. That is the
situation here.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 14

As set out in the Claimants’ Statement of Claim (C I, para. 102), the Claimants

ask the Tribunal to award as follows:

102. For the foregoing reasons, Claimants request that the Tribunal render
an award in favor of the Claimants:

@

Gi)

(ii)

(iv)

)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

Finding and declaring that Respondent has breached its
obligations under Article II(7) of the Treaty by failing to
provide to Claimants an effective means of asserting claims
and enforcing rights with respect to their investments and
investment agreements;

Finding and declaring that Respondent has committed a denial
of justice under customary international law;

Finding and declaring that Respondent has breached its
obligations under Article II(3)(a) of the Treaty by failing to
accord to Claimants’ investments fair and equitable treatment,
full protection and security and by providing treatment that is
less than that required by international law;

Finding and declaring that Respondent has breached its
obligations under Article II(3)(b) of the Treaty by impairing
by arbitrary or discriminatory measures the management,
operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition,
expansion, or disposal of Claimants’ investments;

Ordering Respondent to pay Claimants full compensation for
the above-mentioned breaches and violations, including all
damages to which TexPet was entitled in its seven underlying
cases against Respondent in the Ecuadorian courts, and
appropriate interest to the date of payment;

Ordering Respondent to pay all costs and expenses of this
arbitration proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the
Tribunal and the cost of legal representation, plus interest
thereon;

Ordering Respondent to pay both pre-and-post-award interest,
compounded annually, on all damages and costs awarded; and

Granting such other or additional relief as may be appropriate
under the circumstances or may otherwise be just and proper.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 15

4. In the Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits (C V, para. 504), the Claimants restate

their request for relief on the merits as follows:

504. For the foregoing reasons, Claimants request that the Tribunal render
an award in favor of the Claimants:

@

Gi)

(ii)

(iv)

)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

&

Declaring that Respondent has breached its obligations under
Article II(7) of the Treaty by failing to provide to Claimants
an effective means of asserting claims and enforcing rights
with respect to their investments and investment agreements;

Declaring that Respondent has committed a denial of justice
under customary international law;

Declaring that Respondent has breached its obligations under
Article II(3)(a) of the Treaty by failing to accord to
Claimants’ investments fair and equitable treatment and full
protection and security;

Declaring that Respondent has breached its obligations under
Article II(3)(b) of the Treaty by impairing by arbitrary or
discriminatory measures the management, operation,
maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion, or
disposal of Claimants’ investments;

Declaring that Respondent has breached the 1973 and 1977
Agreements;

Ordering Respondent to pay Claimants full compensation
including, without limitation, the damages to which TexPet
was entitled in its seven underlying cases against Respondent
in the Ecuadorian courts, including appropriate interest;

Ordering Respondent to pay all costs, fees and expenses of
this arbitration proceeding, including the fees and expenses of
the Tribunal and the cost and fees of legal representation, plus
interest thereon in accordance with the Treaty;

Ordering Respondent to pay all other costs incurred by
Claimants as a result of Respondent’s violations of the Treaty;

Order Respondent to pay pre- and post-award interest on all
amounts awarded, compounded annually; and

Granting such other or additional relief as may be appropriate
under the Treaty or may otherwise be just and proper, such as
enhanced damages.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 16

C.II. The Respondent’s Perspective and Relief Sought on the Merits

Apart from the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction which are described in a

separate section below, the following quotation from the Respondent’s Statement

of Defense summarizes the main aspects of the dispute as follows (R I, paras. 2-

6):

2. Chevron’s claim is so disingenuous as to amount to an abus de droit. In
virtually every respect, Chevron’s portrayal of the relevant is the complete
opposite of reality. What Chevron portrays as bona fide lawsuits were in
fact, as its own internal documents show, commenced solely to obtain
tactical advantage in its negotiations with the Republic while it was
withdrawing completely from the country. While Chevron portrays itself as
diligently pressing for judgments in its seven lawsuits, by its own admission
it took little action to meet its burden as plaintiff to advance the cases
beyond the minimum perfunctory actions it considered necessary to keep
them alive in the courts (by all appearances, for future negotiating leverage).
Chevron’s portrayal of the concordance of expert in some of the cases as
proof of its “indisputable” entitlement to the judgments it seeks masks the
overriding contract interpretation and other legal issues not within those
experts’ purview that remained strongly contested after their reports were
submitted. The delays that Chevron portrays as aimed at TexPet were in fact
the ordinary delays suffered by derelict plaintiffs of all nationalities in
Ecuador’s overtaxed judicial system.

3. Most egregiously, what Chevron portrays as a “politicization” of the
Ecuadorian judiciary since 2004 is in actuality, as universally attested to by
international commentators, a reform effort carried out by the Ecuadorian
people to raise the quality of jurisprudence in their country’s courts. Indeed,
the recent activity in TexPet’s lawsuits is not, as it alleges, the result of any
“retaliation” for Chevron’s initiation of arbitration in this case — a reckless
and completely unsubstantiated charge — but rather the early fruits of those
very reforms.

4. Chevron’s attack on the Ecuadorian judiciary is belied by its own private
documents and its many public pronouncements over the years. While
Chevron now complains about the adequacy of the Ecuadorian forum,
Chevron defended the Ecuadorian judiciary and lauded its competence and
fairness time and again in court papers in the United States from 1993 to
2002, specifically citing as examples the seven cases about which it now
complains, in a successful effort to have litigation terminated in the United
States in favor of an Ecuadorian forum. In papers filed in U.S. federal court
just last year, Chevron again sought dismissal of a case brought against it in
the United States, contending instead that the action should be brought and
tried in Ecuador, which it described as providing an adequate alternative
forum to resolve the claim.

5. Moreover, Chevron’s allegations are belied not only by its own words and
actions, but by the actions of the Ecuadorian courts that are the subject of the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 17

allegations. While Chevron accuses the Ecuadorian judiciary of bias and
incompetence, Chevron actually prevailed on the merits in one case and, in
three others, the court denied government motions to dismiss without even
waiting for the Republic’s opposition.

6. Consistent with its original strategy of using the underlying seven lawsuits
as “bargaining chips” in negotiations, Chevron has now found a new use for
them. Having prevailed in persuading the courts of the United States to
dismiss a lawsuit brought by Ecuadorian citizens for environmental damage
they suffered as a result of Chevron’s oil drilling activities - on the very
basis that the Ecuadorian courts were an adequate forum — Chevron now
faces the prospect of liability in the resurrection of that lawsuit in Ecuador.
To a large extent, the present claim is merely a component of Chevron’s
broader litigation strategy to undermine any judgment of its liability that
may emerge in that case by an award in this case condemning the
Ecuadorian court system.

As set out in the Respondent’s Statement of Defense (R I, paras. 117-123), the

Respondent asks the Tribunal to award as follows:

117. _ For the foregoing reasons, the Republic hereby requests the Tribunal
to render an award in its favor:

118. Finding and declaring that the present claim does not constitute an
“investment dispute” within the meaning of the consent given in Article
VI(4) of the Treaty;

119. Should the Tribunal uphold jurisdiction to examine the merits of
Claimants’ arbitration claim in any respect, finding and declaring that it
cannot assess liability based in whole or in part on actions or omissions
attributable to the Republic that occurred before the BIT came into force;

120. Should the Tribunal uphold jurisdiction to examine the merits of
Claimants’ arbitration claim, finding and declaring that the Republic has not
breached any obligation owed to Claimants under the BIT;

121. Should the Tribunal find that the Republic has breached any
obligation prescribed in the BIT, finding and declaring that Claimants have
suffered no compensable loss;

122. Ordering, pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 40 of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Claimants to pay all costs and expenses of
this arbitration proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal
and the cost of the Republic’s legal representation, plus pre-award and post-
award interest thereon; and

123. Granting such other or additional relief as may be appropriate under
the circumstances or as may otherwise be just and proper.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 18

In the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits (R V, paras. 706-710), the

Respondent restates its request for relief on the merits as follows:

706. For the foregoing reasons, the Republic hereby requests the Tribunal
to render an award in its favor:

707. Should the Tribunal uphold jurisdiction to examine the merits of
Claimants’ arbitration claim in any respect, finding and declaring that the
Respondent has not breached any right of Claimants conferred or created by
the Treaty, customary international law, or an investment agreement, and
dismissing the claims;

708. Should the Tribunal find that the Republic has breached any such
right, finding and declaring that Claimants have suffered no compensable
loss, and dismissing the claims;

709. Ordering, pursuant to paragraphs | and 2 of Article 40 of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Claimants to pay all costs and expenses of
this arbitration proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal
and the cost of the Republic's legal representation, plus pre-award and post-
award interest thereon; and

710. Granting such other or additional relief as may be appropriate under
the circumstances or as may otherwise be just and proper.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 19

D.__Procedural History

By a Notice of Arbitration dated December 21, 2006, Chevron and Texaco
commenced the current arbitration proceedings against Ecuador pursuant to
Article VI(3)(a)(iii) of the Treaty between the United States of America and
Ecuador Concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment
(the “BIT”). Article VI(3)(a)(iii) of the BIT provides that disputes arising under
the Treaty may be submitted to an arbitral tribunal established under the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

(the “UNCITRAL Rules”).

The Notice of Arbitration presents a dispute which is said to have arisen from
seven commercial cases that were filed by TexPet against Ecuador in Ecuadorian
courts between 1991 and 1994. These claims arise out of allegations of breaches
of contract with respect to compensation due to TexPet under two agreements

entered into between TexPet and Ecuador in 1973 and 1977, respectively.

The Claimants contend that the courts have refused to rule on these claims
because of bias against them and in favor of the Respondent. The Claimants

allege that this constitutes a breach of Ecuador’s obligations under the BIT.

On January 16, 2007, the Claimants appointed The Honorable Charles N. Brower

as arbitrator.

Pursuant to a letter to the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration (the “SG-PCA”) dated February 26, 2007, the Claimants formally
requested that the SG-PCA designate an appointing authority due to the
Respondent’s failure to designate an arbitrator within the thirty day period
allotted under Article 7(2) UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. By letter dated
March 2, 2007, the SG-PCA invited the Respondent to comment on the request
for designation of an appointing authority. The SG-PCA designated Dr. Robert
Briner as appointing authority on March 20, 2007.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 20

By letter dated March 21, 2007, the Claimants requested that Dr. Briner, as

appointing authority, appoint the second arbitrator on behalf of the Respondent.

By letter dated March 26, 2007, the Respondent appointed Prof. Albert Jan van
den Berg as the second arbitrator. Dr. Briner, by letter dated April 13, 2007,
informed the Parties that he had not yet been able to make any appointment on
behalf of the Respondent in his capacity as appointing authority and considered

that the issue had become moot.

By letter dated May 8, 2007, the two party-appointed arbitrators confirmed, with
the consent of the Parties, their appointment of Prof. Dr. Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel

as presiding arbitrator.

On May 22, 2007, the newly-constituted Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1,
inter alia, allowing the Respondent to submit a short Reply to the Notice of
Arbitration by June 30, 2007, and ordering that the PCA would act as registry in
the case. Procedural Order No. 1 also convened a Procedural Meeting to be held

in The Hague on August 2, 2007.

By letter dated June 13, 2007, the Respondent requested that the deadline for the
submission of the Reply to the Notice of Arbitration be extended until at least
August 27, 2007, and that the Procedural Meeting be deferred until at least
September 17, 2007. By letter dated June 15, 2007, the Tribunal invited the
Claimants to comment upon the Respondent’s requests. By letter dated June 20,
2007, the Claimants expressed their view that the proceedings should continue as
scheduled in Procedural Order No. 1 and that the Respondent’s requests be
rejected. By letter dated June 25, 2007, the Tribunal extended the deadline for
submission of the Reply to the Notice of Arbitration until August 27, 2007, and
deferred the Procedural Meeting until October 2, 2007.

By letter dated August 20, 2007, the Respondent’s newly-appointed counsel
informed the Tribunal of an agreement between the Parties on a schedule for the
proceedings, including a further deferral of the deadline for submission of the
Reply to the Notice of Arbitration until September 28, 2007. The Tribunal

acknowledged the Parties’ agreement and moved the date for submission of the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 21

20.

Reply to the Notice of Arbitration to September 28, 2007, with further details of
the schedule of proceedings to be discussed at the Procedural Meeting. By letter
dated September 17, 2007, the Tribunal circulated an Annotated Agenda for the
meeting. By letter dated September 26, 2007, the Claimants communicated a

further agreement of the Parties on the schedule of proceedings.

The Procedural Meeting took place in The Hague on October 2, 2007. On
October 9, 2007, a Draft Procedural Order No. 2 was circulated by the PCA on

behalf of the Tribunal to the Parties for comments.

Acknowledging the Parties’ comments on the draft, the Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 2 on October 19, 2007, deciding, inter alia, that English
and Spanish would be the official languages of the arbitration (with English
being authoritative between the two), that the place of arbitration would be The
Hague, The Netherlands, and that the venue for the Hearing on Jurisdiction
would be San Jose, Costa Rica. Procedural Order No. 2 also set out the schedule
of proceedings, taking into consideration the Parties’ previous agreement and the
discussions having taken place at the Procedural Meeting on October 2, 2007.
For ease of reference, the entire operative provisions of Procedural Order No. 2

are set out below:

This Procedural Order No. 2 puts on record the results of the discussion and
agreement between the Parties and the Tribunal at the 1“ Procedural Meeting
held on Tuesday, October 2, 2007, in the Small Court Room of the Peace
Palace, The Hague, The Netherlands:

1. Procedural Hearing
1d Names of all attending the meeting were notified in advance and are

set forth in the following sections 1.2 and 1.3.

The representation of the Parties at the Procedural Meeting was as
follows:

Claimants

Mr. R. Doak Bishop (King & Spalding)

Dr. Alejandro Ponce Martinez (Quevedo & Ponce)

Mr. Wade M. Coriell (King & Spalding)

Dr. Ana Belen Posso (Quevedo & Ponce)

Ms. Deborah Scott (Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum
Company)

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 22

Mr. Ricardo Reis Veiga (Chevron Corporation and Texaco
Petroleum Company)

Respondent

Mr. Eric W. Bloom (Winston & Strawn LLP)

Mr. Ricardo E. Ugarte (Winston & Strawn LLP)
Mr. Mark A. Clodfelter (Winston & Strawn LLP)
Ms. Karen S. Manley (Winston & Strawn LLP)
Mr. Carlos Venegas Olmedo (Republic of Ecuador)
Ms. Christel Gaibor (Republic of Ecuador)

The Tribunal Members and other attendees at the Procedural
Meeting were as follows:

Arbitral Tribunal

The Honorable Charles N. Brower

Professor Albert Jan van den Berg

Professor Karl-Heinz Bickstiegel (President)

Permanent Court of Arbitration
Mr. Brooks W. Daly

Ms. Rocio Digén

Ms. Evelien Pasman

Assistant to The Honorable Charles N. Brower
Mr. Peter Prows

 

Court Reporters/Interpreters (ALTO International,
R S:

Ms. Carmen Preckler Galguera

Ms. Maria Raquel Banos

Ms. Laura Evens

Ms. Michaela Philips

Interpreters:

Mr. Jon Porter

Mr. Javier Ferreira Ramos

Ms. Ute Sachs

2. Earlier Rulings

2.1. Earlier Rulings of the Tribunal remain valid unless changed
expressly. The Tribunal particularly recalls the following sections of
Procedural Order No. 1 and includes any additions and changes
made at the Procedural Meeting:

2.2. 7. Communications

Following the Meeting, paragraph 7.1 of Procedural Order No. | has
been deleted and this section renumbered.

7.1. The Parties shall not engage in any oral or written communications

with any member of the Tribunal ex parte in connection with the
subject matter of the arbitration.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 23

7.2.

7.3.

74.

75.

7.6.

77.

78.

The Parties shall address communications directly to each member
of the Tribunal by e-mail and confirmed by courier, with a copy to
the counsel for the other Party. Confirmation may be made by fax
instead of courier if it does not exceed 15 pages.

Copies of all communications shall be sent to the Registry.

To facilitate citations and word processing, Memorials and other
larger submissions shall be in Windows Word and preceded by a
Table of Contents.

Submissions of documents shall be submitted unbound in ring
binders separated from Memorials and preceded by a list of such
documents consecutively numbered with consecutive numbering in
later submissions (C-1, C-2 etc. for Claimant; R-1, R-2 etc. for
Respondent). As far as possible, in addition, documents shall also be
submitted in electronic form (preferably in Windows Word,
otherwise in Acrobat).

 

All written communications shall be deemed to have been validly
made when they have been sent to:

Claimants: to the addresses of counsel as above.

Respondent: to the address as above.
As Respondent has now appointed its Counsel for
this case, communications shall from now on be
addressed to Winston & Strawn LLP (Winston)
New York and Washington DC offices as given in
its letters.

Tribunal: to the addresses as above.

Registry: to the addresses as above.

The Parties shall send copies of correspondence between them to the
Tribunal only if it pertains to a matter in which the Tribunal is
required to take some action, or be apprised of some relevant event.

Any change of name, description, address, telephone number,
facsimile number, or e-mail address shall immediately be notified by
the Party or member of the Tribunal to all other addressees referred
to in paragraphs 1, 3 and 7.

After the discussion at the Procedural Meeting, the following
clarification regarding confidentiality is added:

7.9.

Either Party may publicly disclose submissions made in these
proceedings unless there has been a decision by the Tribunal to
the contrary. Requests for confidential treatment of any item
communicated in these proceedings may be submitted by either
Party to the Tribunal for a decision, in which case no item which
is the subject of such request may be publicly disclosed unless
and until the Tribunal has so decided.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 24

2.3.

8. Language of the arbitration

After consultation with the Parties at the Procedural Hearing, the Tribunal
shall determine the language or languages to be used in the proceedings in
accordance with Art. 17(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules.

After the discussion at the Procedural Meeting and further comments
from the Parties after the Meeting, the following is decided:

8.1.

8.2.

8.3.

8.4.

2.4.

English and Spanish will be the official languages of the
arbitration and, as between them, English will be the
authoritative language.

Communications by the Tribunal (including orders, decisions
and awards) and all submissions and communications by the
parties shall be in English, including translations in full of any
witness statements prepared in Spanish and translations in
relevant part of documentary evidence and legal authorities in a
language other than English.

Spanish translations of all writings referred to in paragraph 8.2
that are not already in Spanish shall be submitted or
communicated with the writings or as soon as_ possible
thereafter, but in no event later than three weeks after their
submission or communication, except that the Spanish
translations of any award or of Claimant’s Memorial on the
Merits and Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits may
be submitted up to six weeks after such award or submission is
made.

All oral proceedings shall be simultaneously interpreted and
transcribed into English and Spanish.

9. Place of arbitration

After consultation with the Parties at the Procedural Hearing, the
Tribunal shall determine the place of arbitration in accordance with
Article 16(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules.

After the discussion at the Procedural Meeting and the
submission of further written comments of the Parties, the
following is decided: The Hague, The Netherlands is the place of
arbitration.

In this context it is recalled that, according to UNCITRAL Rule
16.2, Hearings may be held at other venues.

Timetable
Taking into account the Parties’ proposal submitted by Claimants’

letter of September 26, 2007, and the discussion at the Procedural
Meeting, the timetable shall be as follows:

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 25

3.2.

3.3.

3.4.

3.5.

3.6.

3.7.

3.8.

3.9.

3.10.

By October 19, 2007,
Claimants’ Statement of Claim
By November 19, 2007,

Respondent’s Statement of Defense (including all jurisdictional
objections)

By January 25, 2008,

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, to be submitted together
with all evidence (documents, as well as witness statements and
expert statements if any) Respondent wishes to rely on in accordance
with the sections on evidence below.

By March 25, 2008,

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, to be submitted
together with all evidence (documents, as well as witness statements
and expert statements if any) Claimants wish to rely on in
accordance with the sections on evidence below.

By April 8, 2008,

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, to be submitted together with all
evidence (documents, as well as witness statements and expert
statements if any) Claimants wish to rely on in accordance with the
sections on evidence below.

May 19, 2008,

One day Hearing on Jurisdiction; should examination of witnesses or
experts be required, this hearing may be extended to up to two and a
half days if found necessary by the Tribunal after consultation with
the Parties, and be held May 19-21, 2008.

As soon as possible after the Hearing on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal
will decide on how it will address the question of jurisdiction and
inform the Parties by order, award, or otherwise.

By August 22, 2008,

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, to be submitted
together with all evidence (documents, as well as witness statements
and expert statements if any) Respondent wishes to rely on in
accordance with the sections on evidence below.

The Parties do not foresee the need for document requests in these
proceedings and the Tribunal accordingly makes no provision for
dealing with such requests in this Order. Either Party may apply to
the Tribunal should circumstances arise that would require revisiting
this question.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 26

3.11.

3.12.

3.13.

3.14.

3.15.

3.16.

3.17.

3.18.

5.1.

5.2.

By October 24, 2008, Claimants’ Reply Memorial on the Merits
with any further evidence (documents, witness statements, expert
statements) but only in rebuttal to Respondent’s Ist Counter-
Memorial on the Merits.

By December 26, 2008, Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits with
any further evidence (documents, witness statements, expert

statements) but only in rebuttal to Claimant’s Reply Memorial.

Thereafter, no new evidence may be submitted, unless agreed
between the Parties or expressly authorized by the Tribunal.

By January 23, 2009, the Parties submit

* notifications of the witnesses and experts presented by
themselves or by the other Party they wish to examine at the
Hearing,

* and a chronological list of all exhibits with indications where

the respective documents can be found in the file.

On a date to be decided, Pre-Hearing Conference between the Parties
and the Tribunal shall be held, if considered necessary by the
Tribunal, either in person or by telephone.

As soon as possible thereafter, Tribunal issues a Procedural Order
regarding details of the Hearing on the Merits.

Final Hearing on the Merits to be held April 20 to April 24, 2009,
and, if found necessary by the Tribunal after consultation with the
Parties, extended to continue from April 27 to April 29, 2009.

By dates set at the end of the Hearing after consultation with the
Parties, the Parties shall submit:

 

* Post-Hearing Briefs of up to 50 pages (no new documents
allowed)

* and Claims for Arbitration Costs.

Evidence

The Parties and the Tribunal may use, as an additional guideline, the
“IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Commercial
Arbitration”, always subject to changes considered appropriate in
this case by the Tribunal.

Documentary Evidence

All documents (which shall include texts of all law provisions, cases
and authorities) considered relevant by the Parties shall be submitted
with their Memorials, as established in the Timetable.

All documents shall be submitted with translations as provided in the
above section on language and in the form established above in the
section on communications.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 27

5.3.

5.4.

6.1.

6.2.

8.1.

8.2.

New factual allegations or evidence shall not be any more permitted
after the respective dates for the Rebuttal Memorials indicated in the
above Timetable unless agreed between the Parties or expressly
authorized by the Tribunal.

Unless a Party raises an objection within four weeks after receiving a
document, or a late objection is found justified by the Tribunal:

* a document is accepted as having originated from the
source indicated in the document;
* a copy of a dispatched communication is accepted

without further proof as having been received by the
addressee; and

* a copy of a document and its translation into English or
Spanish, if any, is accepted as correct.

Witness Evidence

Written Witness Statements of all witnesses shall be submitted
together with the Memorials mentioned above by the time limits
established in the Timetable. Although not presently anticipated,
should Witness Statements be submitted with the Parties’
submissions on jurisdiction, either Party may request that the
Tribunal establish a timetable for the submission of rebuttal Witness
Statements.

In order to make most efficient use of time at the Hearing, written
Witness Statements shall generally be used in lieu of direct oral
examination though exceptions may be admitted by the Tribunal.
Therefore, insofar as, at the Hearing, such witnesses are invited by
the presenting Party or asked to attend at the request of the other
Party, the available hearing time should mostly be reserved for
cross-examination and re-direct examination, as well as for questions
by the Arbitrators.

Expert Evidence

Should the Parties wish to present expert testimony, the same
procedure would apply as for witnesses.

Hearings

Subject to changes in view of the further procedure up to the
Hearings, the following is established for the Hearings:

The dates are as established in the Timetable above.
No new documents may be presented at the Hearings except by

leave of the Tribunal. But demonstrative exhibits may be shown
using documents submitted earlier in accordance with the Timetable.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 28

8.3. A live transcript shall be made of the Hearings and provided to the
Parties and the Arbitrators. The PCA as Registry shall make the
necessary arrangements in this regard.

8.4. Hearing on Jurisdiction:

8.4.1. After the discussion at the Meeting and the submission of
further written comments by the Parties, it is decided that the hearing
on jurisdiction shall be held at San Jose, Costa Rica.

8.4.2. Assuming that no witnesses or experts have to be examined
at this Hearing on Jurisdiction, the Agenda shall be as set forth
below. If witnesses are to be heard at the Hearing on Jurisdiction,
the Agenda will be modified.

Short Introduction by Chairman of Tribunal.

Opening Statement by Respondent of up to | hour.
Opening Statement by Claimants of up to | hour.
Questions by the Tribunal, and suggestions regarding
particular issues to be addressed in more detail in
Parties’ 2nd Round Presentations.

2nd Round Presentation by Respondent of up to | hour.
2nd Round Presentation by Claimants of up to 1 hour.
Final questions by the Tribunal.

Discussion on whether Post-Hearing Briefs are deemed
necessary and of any other issues of the further
procedure.

Rene

werIN NM

Members of the Tribunal may raise questions at any time considered
appropriate.

8.5. | Hearing on the Merits:

8.5.1. Should a Hearing on the Merits become necessary,
further details shall be established after the Hearing on
Jurisdiction and after consultation with the Parties.

8.5.2. Taking into account the time available during the period
provided for the Hearing in the Timetable, the Tribunal
intends to establish equal maximum time periods both for
the Claimants and for the Respondent which the Parties shall
have available. Changes to that principle may be applied for
at the latest at the time of the Pre-Hearing Conference.

 

9. Extensions of Deadlines and Other Procedural Decisions

9.1. Short extensions may be agreed between the Parties as long as they
do not affect later dates in the Timetable and the Tribunal is
informed before the original date due.

9.2. Extensions of deadlines shall only be granted by the Tribunal on
exceptional grounds and provided that a request is submitted
immediately after an event has occurred which prevents a Party from
complying with the deadline.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 29

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

9.3. The Tribunal indicated to the Parties, and the Parties took note
thereof, that in view of travels and other commitments of the
Arbitrators, it might sometimes take a certain period for the Tribunal
to respond to submissions of the Parties and decide on them.

9.4. Procedural decisions will be issued by the chairman of the Tribunal
after consultation with his co-arbitrators or, in cases of urgency or if
a co-arbitrator cannot be reached, by him alone.

10. Tribunal Fees

The Tribunal’s hourly billing rate for all time spent on this matter
shall be €500 and shall be charged along with any applicable VAT in
accordance with paragraph 11 of Procedural Order No. 1.

The Claimants submitted their Statement of Claim on October 19, 2007. The

Respondent submitted its Statement of Defense on November 20, 2007.

By letter dated January 24, 2008, the Respondent informed the Tribunal of an
agreement between the Parties to extend the deadline for submission of the
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction by five days to January 30, 2008, and,
correspondingly, to extend the deadline for submission of the Claimants’
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and Memorial on the Merits by five days each,
to March 30, 2008, and April 13, 2008, respectively. The Tribunal amended the

schedule of proceedings in Procedural Order No. 2 accordingly.

The Respondent submitted its Memorial on Jurisdiction by e-mail dated
January 31, 2008, and a Spanish translation thereof by e-mail received on

February 21, 2008.

The Claimants submitted their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction by e-mail dated

April 1, 2008, and a Spanish translation thereof by e-mail dated April 22, 2008.

The Claimants submitted their Memorial on the Merits by e-mail dated April 14,
2008, and a Spanish translation thereof by e-mail dated May 24, 2008.

By e-mail dated April 10, 2008, a draft Procedural Order No. 3 was circulated to
the Parties for comments. By letters dated April 17, 2008, both the Claimants and
Respondent submitted their comments. The Respondent objected that the

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdictional Objections had raised new claims

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 30

27.

not contained in the Statement of Claim. It requested that the Tribunal not admit
the new claims pursuant to Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules or
that the jurisdictional hearing be postponed to afford the Respondent time to

respond to the alleged new claims.

Acknowledging the Parties’ comments on the draft, the Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 3 on April 21, 2008, regarding the conduct of the Hearing
on Jurisdiction. The Tribunal provisionally admitted the alleged new claims
under Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, but reserved a final
decision on the matter for a later date. The Respondent’s request to postpone the
date of the jurisdictional hearing was rejected. For ease of reference, the entire

operative provisions of Procedural Order No. 3 are set out below:

1. Introduction

1.1. This Order recalls the earlier agreements and rulings of the
Tribunal, particularly in Procedural Order No. 2 sections 3.7. and
8.4.

1.2. In order to facilitate references to exhibits the Parties rely on in

their oral presentations, and in view of the great number of exhibits
submitted by the Parties to avoid that each member of the Tribunal
has to bring all of them to the Hearing, the Parties are invited to
bring to the Hearing:

for the other Party and for each member of the Tribunal Hearing
Binders of those exhibits or parts thereof on which they intend to
rely in their oral presentations at the hearing, together with a
separate consolidated Table of Contents of the Hearing Binders of
each Party,

for the use of the Tribunal, one full set of all exhibits the Parties
have submitted in this procedure, together with a separate
consolidated Table of Contents of these exhibits.

2. Time and Place of Hearing
2.1. The Hearing shall be held

at the Inter-American Court of Human Rights
Avenue 10, Street 45-47 Los Yoses, San Pedro
P.O. Box 6906-1000, San José, Costa Rica
Telephone: (506) 2234 0581

Fax: (506) 2234 0584

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 31

Since witnesses and experts will have to be heard, two and a half
days will be blocked and the Hearing will start on May 19, 2008, at
10:00 a.m., ending, at the latest, at 1 p.m. on May 21, 2008.

2.2. To give sufficient time to the Parties and the Arbitrators to prepare
for and evaluate each part of the Hearings, the daily sessions shall
not go beyond the period between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
However, the Tribunal, in consultation with the Parties, may change
the timing during the course of the Hearings

3. Conduct of the Hearing

3.1. | No new documents may be presented at the Hearing, unless agreed
by the Parties or authorized by the Tribunal. But demonstrative
exhibits may be shown using documents submitted earlier in
accordance with the Timetable.

3.2. To make most efficient use of time at the Hearing, written Witness
Statements shall generally be used in lieu of direct oral examination
though exceptions may be admitted by the Tribunal. Therefore,
insofar as, at the Hearing, such witnesses are invited by the
presenting Party or asked to attend at the request of the other Party,
the presenting Party may introduce the witness for not more than 10
minutes, but the further available hearing time shall be reserved for
cross-examination and re-direct examination, as well as for
questions by the Arbitrators.

3.3. If a witness whose statement has been submitted by a Party and
whose examination at the Hearing has been requested by the other
Party, does not appear at the Hearing, his statement will not be
taken into account by the Tribunal. A Party may apply with reasons
for an exception from that rule.

3.4. In so far as the Parties request oral examination of an expert, the
same rules and procedure shall apply as for witnesses.

4, Agenda of Hearing

4.1. In view of the examination of witnesses and experts, the following
Agenda is established for the Hearing:

1. Introduction by the Chairman of the Tribunal.

2. Opening Statements of not more than 30 minutes each for
the
a) Respondent,
b) Claimants.

3. Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties: Examination of

witnesses and experts presented by Respondent. For each:

a) Affirmation of witness or expert to tell the truth.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 32

b) Short introduction by Respondent (This may include
ashort direct examination on new developments
after the last written statement of the witness or

expert).

c) Cross examination by Claimants.

d) Re-direct examination by Respondent, but only on
issues raised in cross-examination

e) Re-Cross examination by Claimants.

f) Remaining questions by members of the Tribunal,

but they may raise questions at any time.

4. Examination of witnesses and experts presented by
Claimants. For each:
vice versa as under a) to f) above.

5. Any witness or expert may only be recalled for rebuttal
examination by a Party or the members of the Tribunal, if
such intention is announced in time to assure the availability
of the witness and expert during the time of the Hearing.

6. Rebuttal Arguments of not more than | hour each for the
a) Respondent,
b) Claimants.
c) Additional questions of members of the Tribunal, if
any.
7. Closing arguments of not more than 45 minutes each for the
a) Respondent,
b) Claimants.
c) Remaining questions by the members of the

Tribunal, if any.

8. Discussion regarding any post-hearing submissions and
other procedural issues.

4.2. Examination of witnesses and experts shall take place in the order
agreed by the Parties. If no such agreement has been reached, unless
the Tribunal decides otherwise, Respondent’s witnesses and experts
shall be heard first in the order decided by the Respondent, and then
Claimants’ witnesses and experts shall be heard in the order decided
by the Claimants.

4.3. Unless otherwise agreed between the Parties or ruled by the
Tribunal, witnesses and experts may be present in the Hearing room
during the testimony of other witnesses and experts.

4.4. _ As already foreseen in Procedural Order No. 2 for the hearing on
the merits, in view of the examination of witnesses and experts also
for this Hearing on Jurisdiction, taking into account the time
available during the period provided for the Hearing in the
timetable, the Tribunal establishes equal maximum time periods
which the Parties shall have available for their presentations and

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 33

28.

examination and cross-examination of all witnesses and experts.
Taking into account the Calculation of Hearing Time attached to
this Order, the total maximum time available for the Parties
(including their introductory and final statements) shall be as
follows:

5 hours for Claimants
5 hours for Respondent

The time limits “not more than” for the Parties’ Agenda items
above shall be considered as a guideline. However, it is left to the
Parties, subject to section 3.2. above, how much of their allotted
total time they want to spend on Agenda items in section 4.1. above,
subsections 2., 3. b, c,d, and e, 4., 6. and 7. as long as the total
time period allotted to them is maintained.

4.5. The parties shall prepare their presentations and examinations at the
Hearing on the basis of the time limits established in this Procedural
Order.

5. Other Matters
5.1. The PCA has organized
availability of the court reporter and translation,

that microphones are set up for all those speaking in the Hearing
room to assure easy understanding over a loud speaker and for
translation,

and, taking into account the numbers of persons attending from the
Parties’ side, sufficient supplies of water on the tables and coffee
and tea for the two coffee breaks every day.

5.2. The Tribunal may change any of the rulings in this order, after
consultation with the Parties, if considered appropriate under the
circumstances.

By letter dated April 23, 2008, the Respondent sought further clarification of the
Tribunal’s decisions relating to Procedural Order No. 3. First, it requested that
the Tribunal refrain from considering the submissions made in the Claimants’
Memorial on the Merits for the purposes of the Hearing on Jurisdiction and the
Tribunal’s ultimate decision on jurisdiction. The Respondent further noted its
intention to file a supplemental Statement of Defense regarding the Claimants’
allegedly new claims and its intention to seek permission to submit post-hearing

briefs on these issues.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 34

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

By letters both dated April 28, 2008, the Parties informed the Tribunal that they
did not intend to bring any of their witnesses or request the presence of any
opposing witnesses. In its letter, the Respondent also requested permission to
submit rebuttal witness and expert statements pursuant to Articles 6.1 and 7 of
Procedural Order No. 2. By letter dated April 30, 2008, the Tribunal modified the
hearing schedule to remove the agenda items relating to examination of witnesses
and invited the Parties to submit rebuttal witness and expert statements no later

than May 9, 2008.

By letter dated May 9, 2008, the Respondent sought leave to submit a limited
number of rebuttal documents in advance of the Hearing on Jurisdiction in order
to rebut the alleged new issues and factual submissions contained in the
Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction. By letter dated May 8, 2008, the
Tribunal authorized the submission of rebuttal documents by the Respondent by
May 13, 2008. The Claimant was authorized to submit a reply to such rebuttal
documents by May 17, 2008.

The Respondent submitted three rebuttal witness statements, including
astatement from a new expert witness, by e-mail dated May 10, 2008.
The Respondent submitted rebuttal documents by e-mail dated May 14, 2008.
The Claimants submitted reply rebuttal documents by e-mail dated May 17,
2008. The Respondent submitted a supplemental Statement of Defense by e-mail
dated May 17, 2008. The Respondent further submitted a number of rebuttal
legal authorities by e-mail dated May 18, 2008.

The Hearing on Jurisdiction took place in San José, Costa Rica on May 19

and 20, 2008.

The Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 on May 23, 2008. The Tribunal
authorized two rounds of Post-Hearing Briefs to be simultaneously submitted on
July 22, 2008, and August 12, 2008, respectively. The Tribunal invited the
Parties to address all arguments and evidence that stood unanswered as of that
time. For greater precision and ease of reference, the entire operative provisions

of Procedural Order No. 4 are set out below:

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 35

Taking into account the discussion and the agreements reached with the
Parties at the end of the Hearing on Jurisdiction in San José on May 20,
2008, the Tribunal issues this Procedural Order No. 4 as follows:

1. Post-Hearing Briefs

1.1. By July 22, 2008, the Parties shall simultaneously submit Post-
Hearing Briefs containing the following:

1.1.1. The relief sought by the Parties regarding both jurisdiction
and the merits;

1.1.2. Any comments they have regarding,

a) issues raised in submissions of the other side to which
they have not yet replied; and

b) issues raised at the Hearing on Jurisdiction;

1.1.3. Separate sections responding in particular to the following
questions:

a) Explain why the alleged investment in this case is or is
not an investment “existing at the time of entry into
force” of the Treaty.

b) What exactly is Claimants’ case regarding an
“investment agreement” under Article VI(1)(a) of the
Treaty?

1.2. The sections of the Post-Hearing Briefs requested under 1.1.2 and
1.1.3 above shall include short references to all sections in the
Party’s earlier submissions, as well as to exhibits (including legal
authorities, witness statements, and expert statements) and to hearing
transcripts on which it relies regarding the respective issue. For the
avoidance of doubt, the Tribunal wishes to receive from each Party,

1.2.1. A statement of each point of law it wishes the Tribunal to
adopt; and

1.2.2. A statement of each fact relevant to jurisdiction that it
wishes the Tribunal to accept.

1.3. New exhibits shall only be attached to the Post-Hearing Brief if they
are required to rebut factual or legal issues raised by the other side in
its unanswered written submissions or at the Hearing on Jurisdiction.

1.4. | By August 12, 2008, the Parties shall simultaneously submit a

second round of Post- Hearing Briefs, but only in rebuttal to the first
round Post-Hearing Briefs of the other side.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 36

34.

35.

36.

37.

2. Procedure on the Merits

2.1. As discussed and agreed at the Hearing on Jurisdiction, to avoid any
misunderstanding, the above schedule does not affect the Timetable
regarding the procedure on the merits as agreed between the Parties
and the Tribunal and recorded in sections 3.6 to 3.18 of Procedural
Order No. 2. This is without prejudice to the decision of the Tribunal
regarding jurisdiction provided for in section 3.8 of Procedural
Order No. 2.

By letter dated June 13, 2008, the Respondent sought a sixty day extension to the
deadline for the submission of its Counter-Memorial on the Merits. By letter
dated June 17, 2008, the Claimants objected to the granting of this extension. By

letter dated June 18, 2008, the Tribunal granted an extension of one month.

The Parties submitted their first-round Post-Hearing Briefs on Jurisdiction by e-
mails dated July 23, 2008, with Spanish translations following thereafter on

August 22 and 28, 2008, for the Claimants and the Respondent, respectively.

The Parties submitted their second-round Post-Hearing Briefs on Jurisdiction by
e-mails dated August 13, 2008, with Spanish translations following thereafter on

September 3 and 18, 2008, for the Claimants and the Respondent, respectively.

The Respondent submitted its Counter-Memorial on the Merits by e-mail dated
September 23, 2008, and a Spanish translation thereof by e-mail dated
November 3, 2008.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 37

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

E. The Jurisdictional Issues

Without prejudice to the full presentation of the factual and legal details of the
case by the Parties and the Tribunal’s considerations and conclusions, the issues
raised by the Parties in this jurisdictional phase, irrespective of whether each

issue is best characterized as jurisdictional, center around four principal subjects.

The first set of issues concerns the preclusive effect, if any, that the Claimants’
statements or conduct prior to the commencement of arbitration should have on

their ability to pursue the present claim (see Section J.II below).

The second set of issues concerns whether the Claimants’ contractual claims in
the lawsuits in Ecuadorian courts qualify as an investment or part of an
investment under the BIT (see Section J.III below). Alternatively, the question
concerns whether the claims arise out of or relate to “investment agreements”

under the BIT (see Section J.IV below).

The third set of issues concerns whether the Claimants must exhaust local
remedies in order to fulfill the requirements of their claims for denial of justice
and other BIT violations and, if so, whether they have in fact exhausted all

required local remedies (see Section J.V below).

The last set of issues concerns the application ratione temporis of the BIT to a
case whose factual background includes significant periods before the BIT’s
entry into force. In dispute is the temporal ambit of the BIT as regards pre-
existing disputes and pre-entry into force acts and omissions. Also at issue is
whether Ecuador’s conduct constitutes a continuing or composite act allowing
the conduct to be caught within the temporal ambit of the BIT (see Sections J.VI
— J.VIII below).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 38

F.__ The Principal Relevant Legal Provisions

F.I. Treaty between the United States of America and Ecuador
Concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of

Investment (“BIT’’)

43. The principal relevant provisions of the BIT are set out below:

Article I
1. For the purposes of this Treaty,

(a) “investment” means every kind of investment in the territory of one
Party owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or
companies of the other Party, such as equity, debt, and service and
investment contracts; and includes:

(i) tangible and intangible property, including rights, such as
mortgages, liens and pledges;

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a company or
interests in the assets thereof;

 

(iii) a claim to money or a claim to performance having economic
value, and associated with an investment;

(iv) intellectual property which includes, inter alia, rights relating to:
literary and artistic works, including sound recordings;
inventions in all fields of human endeavor;
industrial designs;
semiconductor mask works;

trade secrets, know-how, and _ confidential business
information; and

trademarks, service marks, and trade names; and

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 39

(v) any right conferred by law or contract, and any licenses and
permits pursuant to law;

 

Article VI

1. For purposes of this Article, an investment dispute is a dispute
between a Party and a national or company of the other Party arising
out of or relating to (a) an investment agreement between that Party
and such national or company; (b) an investment authorization
granted by that Party’s foreign investment authority to such national
or company; or (c) an alleged breach of any right conferred or
created by this Treaty with respect to an investment.

2. In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the dispute
should initially seek a resolution through consultation and
negotiation. If the dispute cannot be settled amicably, the national or
company concerned may choose to submit the dispute, under one of
the following alternatives, for resolution:

(a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Party that is a
party to the dispute; or

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute-
settlement procedures; or

(c) in accordance with the terms of paragraph 3.

3. (a) Provided that the national or company concerned has not
submitted the dispute for resolution under paragraph 2 (a) or (b) and
that six months have elapsed from the date on which the dispute
arose, the national or company concerned may choose to consent in
writing to the submission of the dispute for settlement by binding
arbitration:

(i) to the International Centre for the Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“Centre”) established by the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States, done at
Washington, March 18, 1965 (“ICSID Convention”),
provided that the Party is a party to such Convention; or

 

) to the Additional Facility of the Centre, if the Centre is
not available; or

in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law
(UNCITRAL); or

 

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 40

 

(iv) to any other arbitration institution, or in accordance with
any other arbitration rules, as may be mutually agreed
between the parties to the dispute.

(b) once the national or company concerned has so consented, either
party to the dispute may initiate arbitration in accordance with the
choice so specified in the consent.

Each Party hereby consents to the submission of any investment
dispute for settlement by binding arbitration in accordance with the
choice specified in the written consent of the national or company
under paragraph 3. Such consent, together with the written consent
of the national or company when given under paragraph 3 shall
satisfy the requirement for:

(a) written consent of the parties to the dispute for Purposes of
Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre) and
for purposes of the Additional Facility Rules; and

(b) an “agreement in writing” for purposes of Article II of the United
Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards, done at New York, June 10, 1958 (“New York
Convention”).

Any arbitration under paragraph 3(a) (ii), (iii) or (iv) of this Article
shall be held in a state that is a party to the New York Convention.

Any arbitral award rendered pursuant to this Article shall be final
and binding on the parties to the dispute. Each Party undertakes to
carry our without delay the provisions of any such award and to
provide in its territory for its enforcement.

In any proceeding involving an investment dispute, a Party shall not
assert, as a defense, counterclaim, right of set-off or otherwise, that
the national or company concerned has received or will receive,
pursuant to an insurance or guarantee contract, indemnification or
other compensation for all or part of its alleged damages.

For purposes of an arbitration held under paragraph 3 of this Article,
any company legally constituted under the applicable laws and
regulations of a Party or a political subdivision thereof that,
immediately before the occurrence of the event or events giving rise
to the dispute, was an investment of nationals or companies of the
other Party, shall be treated as a national or company of such other
Party in accordance with Article 25 (2) (b) of the ICSID Convention.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 4l

44.

Article XII

This Treaty shall enter into force thirty days after the date of
exchange of instruments of ratification. It shall remain in force for a
period of ten years and shall continue in force unless terminated in
accordance with paragraph 2 of this Article. It shall apply to
investments existing at the time of entry into force as well as to
investments made or acquired thereafter.

Either Party may, by giving one year’s written notice to the other
Party, terminate this Treaty at the end of the initial ten year period or
at any time thereafter.

With respect to investments made or acquired prior to the date of
termination of this Treaty and to which this Treaty otherwise applies,
the provisions of all of the other Articles of this Treaty shall
thereafter continue to be effective for a further period of ten years
from such date of termination.

The Protocol and Side Letter shall form an integral part of the
Treaty.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the respective plenipotentiaries have
signed this Treaty.

DONE in duplicate at Washington on the twenty-seventh day of

August, 1993, in the English and Spanish languages, both texts being equally

authentic.

F.II. Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (““VCLT”’’)

The principal relevant provisions of the VCLT are set out below:

SECTION 2. APPLICATION OF TREATIES

Article 28
Non-retroactivity of treaties

Unless a different intention appears from the treaty or is otherwise
established, its provisions do not bind a party in relation to any act or fact
which took place or any situation which ceased to exist before the date of the

entry into force of the treaty with respect to that party.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award

42

Article 30
Application of successive treaties relating to the same subject matter

1. Subject to Article 103 of the Charter of the United Nations, the rights and
obligations of States Parties to successive treaties relating to the same
subject matter shall be determined in accordance with the following
paragraphs.

2. When a treaty specifies that it is subject to, or that it is not to be
considered as incompatible with, an earlier or later treaty, the provisions of
that other treaty prevail.

3. When all the parties to the earlier treaty are parties also to the later treaty
but the earlier treaty is not terminated or suspended in operation under article
59, the earlier treaty applies only to the extent that its provisions are
compatible with those of the later treaty.

4. When the parties to the later treaty do not include all the parties to the
earlier one:

(a) as between States Parties to both treaties the same rule applies as
in paragraph 3;

(b) as between a State party to both treaties and a State party to only
one of the treaties, the treaty to which both States are parties governs
their mutual rights and obligations.

5. Paragraph 4 is without prejudice to article 41, or to any question of the
termination or suspension of the operation of a treaty under article 60 or to
any question of responsibility which may arise for a State from the
conclusion or application of a treaty the provisions of which are
incompatible with its obligations towards another State under another treaty.

SECTION 3. INTERPRETATION OF TREATIES

Article 31
General rule of interpretation

1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light
of its object and purpose.

2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise,
in addition to the text, including its preamble and annexes:

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all
the parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty;

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 43

(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties in
connection with the conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the
other parties as an instrument related to the treaty.

3.There shall be taken into account, together with the context:

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the
interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which
establishes the agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation;

(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations
between the parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the
parties so intended.

Article 32
Supplementary means of interpretation

Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation, including
the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion, in
order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or
to determine the meaning when the interpretation according to article 31:

(a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or

(b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 44

G.__Relief Sought by the Parties Regarding

 

Jurisdiction

G.I. Relief Sought by the Respondent

45. As identified in the Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction (R II, paras. 281-

287), the Respondent asks the Tribunal to award as follows:

281.

282.

283.

284.

285.

286.

For the foregoing reasons, the Republic hereby requests the Tribunal
to render an award in its favor:

Finding and declaring that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction ratione
temporis over Claimant’s BIT claims because the dispute that gave
rise to such claims is a continuation of disputes that arose prior to the
BIT’s entry into force, and that are therefore beyond the temporal
scope of the BIT;

Finding and declaring that the Tribunal cannot exercise jurisdiction
over any alleged acts or omissions by Ecuador that occurred prior to
the BIT’s entry into force insofar they lie outside the scope ratione
temporis of the BIT under the Vienna Convention nonretroactivity
principle as well as principles of state responsibility and the
intertemporal application of treaties;

Finding and declaring that the Tribunal cannot exercise jurisdiction
with respect to claims over any of Claimants’ contracts, activities, or
operations that had ceased to exist by the time of the BIT’s entry into
force, insofar as they too transcend the ratione temporis scope of the
BIT pursuant to the non-retroactivity principle enunciated in Article
28 of the Vienna Convention;

Finding and declaring that the present claim does not constitute an
“investment dispute” within the meaning of the consent given in
Article VI(4) of the Treaty and that the Tribunal does not have
jurisdiction over the claim;

Ordering, pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 40 of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Claimants to pay all costs and
expenses of this arbitration proceeding, including the fees and
expenses of the Tribunal and the cost of the Republic’s legal
representation, plus pre-award and post-award interest thereon; and

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 45

287.

Granting such other or additional relief as may be appropriate under
the circumstances or as may otherwise be just and proper.

46. In the Respondent’s First-Round Post-Hearing Brief on Jurisdiction (R IV,

paras. 9-12), the Respondent restates its request for relief as follows:

9.

The Republic hereby requests the Tribunal to render an award in its
favor finding and declaring, for the reasons it has argued and shall
argue, that the present claim does not constitute an “investment
dispute” within the meaning of the consent given in Article VI(4) of
the Treaty and that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction ratione
materiae over the claim.

The Republic hereby further requests the Tribunal to render an
award in its favor (a) dismissing the claims for lack of ratione
temporis jurisdiction; and (b) in the event that jurisdiction is asserted
over any of Claimants’ claims, issuing a declaration by the Tribunal
that Ecuador will not be bound by, and no liability may be based in
whole or in part upon, any acts or facts which took place, or any
situation which ceased to exist, before May 11, 1997, which was the
day of entry into force of the Ecuador-U.S. BIT, including in
particular the alleged contractual violations underlying Claimants’
pending claims before the Ecuadorian courts or delays in
adjudicating such claims, and that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction shall be
limited accordingly.

The Republic hereby further requests that, in the event that
jurisdiction is asserted over any of Claimants’ claims, the Tribunal
render an award in its favor dismissing such claims on the merits.

The Republic hereby further requests the Tribunal to render an
award in its favor ordering, pursuant to paragraphs | and 2 of Article
40 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Claimants to pay all costs
and expenses of this arbitration proceeding, including the fees and
expenses of the Tribunal and the cost of the Republic’s legal
representation, plus pre-award and post-award interest thereon, and
granting such other or additional relief as may be appropriate under
the circumstances or as may otherwise be just and proper.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 46

G.IL. Relief Sought by the Claimants

47. As identified in the Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction (C IL,

para. 427), the Claimants ask the Tribunal to award as follows:

427.

Based on Claimants’ presentations and clarifications made in this
Counter-Memorial, Claimants respectfully request the following
relief in the form of an Award:

@

Gi)

(ii)

A declaration that the dispute is within the jurisdiction and
competence of this Tribunal;

An order dismissing all of Respondent’s objections to the
jurisdiction and competence of the Tribunal; and

An order that Respondent pay the costs of this proceeding,
including the Tribunal’s fees and expenses, and the costs of
Claimants’ representation, along with interest.

48. In the Claimants’ Second-Round Post-Hearing Brief on Jurisdiction (C IV,

para. 116), the Claimants restate their request for relief as follows:

116.

Based on all of Claimants’ presentations, Claimants respectfully
request the following relief in the form of an Award:

@

Gi)

(ii)

(iv)

A declaration that the dispute in this case is within the
jurisdiction and competence of this Tribunal;

An order dismissing all of Respondent’s objections to the
jurisdiction and competence of the Tribunal;

A declaration that Respondent has breached its obligations
under Article II(7) of the Treaty by failing to provide to
Claimants an effective means of asserting claims and
enforcing rights with respect to their investments and
investment agreements;

A declaration that Respondent has breached its obligations
under Article II(3)(a) of the Treaty by failing to accord to
Claimants’ investments fair and equitable treatment, full
protection and security and/or by violating customary
international law;

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 47

)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

&

(xi)

A declaration that Respondent has breached its obligations
under Article II(3)(b) of the Treaty by impairing by arbitrary
or discriminatory measures the management, operation,
maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion, or
disposal of Claimants’ investments;

A declaration that Respondent has breached the 1973 and
1977 Agreements and has committed a denial of justice
under customary international law, and that these combined
acts constitute a violation of customary international law
related to an investment agreement, under Article VI(1)(a) of
the Treaty;

An order that Respondent pay Claimants full compensation
and damages for its breaches of contract, violations of the
BIT and denial of justice under customary international law,
including without limitation, all damages to which TexPet
was entitled in its seven underlying cases against
Respondent in the Ecuadorian courts, including appropriate
interest until the Award is paid;

An order that Respondent pay all costs, fees and expenses of
this arbitration proceeding, including the fees and expenses
of the Tribunal and the cost and fees of Claimants’ legal
representation, plus interest thereon in accordance with the
Treaty;

An order that Respondent pay all other costs incurred by
Claimants as a result of Respondent’s violations of the
Treaty;

An order that Respondent pay pre- and post-award interest
on all amounts awarded, compounded annually; and

An order granting such other or additional relief as may be
appropriate under the Treaty or may otherwise be just and
proper, such as enhanced damages.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 48

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

H._ Factual Background

Subject to more detail in later sections regarding particular issues, the following

is a summary of the facts leading up to the present arbitration.

In 1964, the Ecuadorian Government granted oil exploration and production
rights in Ecuador’s Amazon region to Texaco Petroleum Company (‘“TexPet”)
through a concession contract with TexPet’s local subsidiary. With Government
consent, TexPet assigned half of its ownership interest in the concession to Gulf
Oil Company (“Gulf”), forming a consortium (the “Consortium”). TexPet served

as operator of the Consortium’ s activities.

In September 1971, Ecuador formed a governmental entity, Corporacion Estatal
Petrolera Ecuatoriana (“CEPE”), which was replaced in 1989 by a successor
State-owned oil company, Empresa Estatal de Petrdleos de Ecuador

(“PetroEcuador”).

On August 6, 1973, TexPet and Gulf entered into a new concession contract (the
“1973 Agreement,” Exh. C-4) with the Republic and CEPE. This new agreement
replaced the 1964 concession contract. Pursuant to the 1973 Agreement, CEPE
exercised an option to acquire a 25% ownership interest in the Consortium. Later,
it also purchased Gulf’s interest, thereby providing it with a 62.5% interest in the
Consortium. TexPet owned the remaining 37.5% interest. However, TexPet

continued to function as operator of the Consortium.

The 1973 Agreement permitted TexPet to explore and exploit oil reserves in
Ecuador’s Amazon region, but it required TexPet to provide a percentage of its
crude oil production to the Government to help meet Ecuadorian domestic
consumption needs. The Republic was entitled to set the domestic price at which
it would purchase TexPet’s required contributions. Once it satisfied its obligation
to contribute oil for domestic consumption, TexPet was free to export the

remainder of its oil at prevailing international market prices, which were

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 49

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

substantially higher than the domestic price. If oil was used for purposes other
than to satisfy Ecuadorian domestic consumption needs, then TexPet was entitled
to receive compensation at the international market price. On December 16,
1977, the Republic, CEPE, and TexPet signed a supplemental agreement to the
1973 Agreement (the “1977 Agreement,” Exh. C-5).

In 1990, PetroEcuador took over as the Consortium’s operator. Despite the
parties’ efforts, no agreement was reached to extend the 1973 Agreement, which
was set to expire on June 6, 1992. TexPet, PetroEcuador, and the Republic thus
commenced negotiations on a settlement of all issues relating to the 1973
Agreement and its termination. At that time, TexPet also began winding up its

operations in Ecuador.

Between December 1991 and December 1993, during the settlement negotiations,
TexPet filed seven breach-of-contract cases against the Ecuadorian Government

in Ecuadorian courts in which it claimed over US$ 553 million in damages.

The cases alleged breaches by Ecuador of its obligations to TexPet under the
1973 and 1977 Agreements, as well as related violations of Ecuadorian law. The
Claimants allege in five of these cases that the Respondent misstated domestic
needs and consumption, and thereby appropriated more oil than it was entitled to
acquire at the domestic market price under the Concession Agreements. One
further case concerned a force majeure issue and the last one concerned an

alleged breach of the 1986 Refinancing Agreement.

On December 14, 1994, the Republic, PetroEcuador, and TexPet reached an
agreement, embodied in a Memorandum of Understanding (the “1994 MOU,”
Exh. R-22), settling any outstanding environmental remediation claims that the
Republic or PetroEcuador might have had against TexPet. It also set out TexPet’s
obligations vis-a-vis the environmental remediation of certain areas in the Oriente

region where the Consortium had operated.

On May 4, 1995, the Republic, PetroEcuador, and TexPet entered into another
agreement (the “1995 Remediation Agreement,” Exh. R-23) to replace the 1994

MOU and clarify TexPet’s remediation responsibilities and the terms of its

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 50

59.

60.

61.

release. Attached to the 1995 Remediation Agreement was a “Scope of Work”
schedule that TexPet and its contractors were obligated to follow. In September
1995, the Scope of Work was further detailed in a Remedial Action Plan
(the “RAP,” Exh. R-25) accepted by the parties. Pursuant to the 1995
Remediation Agreement and the RAP, TexPet’s contractors conducted

remediation of the specified areas between 1995 and 1998.

On November 17, 1995, the Republic, PetroEcuador, and TexPet reached an
agreement that resolved most of their outstanding issues (the “1995 Global
Settlement,” Ex. R-27). In that agreement, the parties released each other from
most of the remaining obligations arising out of the 1973 Agreement. The 1995
Global Settlement confirmed, at Article 2.2, that the 1973 Agreement “ended, on
account of the expiration of the period of time granted, on June 6, 1992,” and, at
Article 4.5, that “all the rights and obligations of each of the parties with respect
to the other and deriving from the [1973 Agreement] [...] are terminated.” The
release in the 1995 Global Settlement, however, excluded environmental
obligations that were already dealt with in other agreements. The release also
excluded, at Article 4.6, all pending claims which “exist[ed] judicially between

the parties,” which included TexPet’s seven court cases.

On May 11, 1997, the BIT between the United States and Ecuador entered into

force.

Previously, in November 1993, during the course of settlement negotiations
between TexPet and the Republic, a group of residents from the regions in which
TexPet had operated the concessions brought a class action under the name
Aguinda v. Texaco, Inc. in the United States District Court for the Southern
District of New York (the “Aguinda action”);! Texaco, Inc. was the ultimate
parent company of TexPet. The action claimed compensation for environmental
harm caused by TexPet as well as extensive equitable relief and an injunction
restraining TexPet from entering into further activities that risked environmental

harm.

' Maria Aguinda et al. v. Texaco, Inc., 945 F. Supp. 625 (S.D.N.Y. 1996), 142 F. Supp. 534 (S.D.N.Y.
2001), 93 Civ. 7527, 2000 WL 122143 (S.D.N.Y. Jan. 31, 2000), 303 F.3d 470 (U.S. Court of
Appeals for the Second Circuit, Aug. 16, 2002).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 51

62.

63.

64.

The Aguinda plaintiffs argued that they could obtain the class action relief they
were seeking only under United States law and from a court in the United States.
TexPet moved to dismiss the Aguinda action on several grounds, including for
forum non conveniens. This required that the parties to that litigation address the
adequacy of the Ecuadorian courts as an alternative forum for the Aguinda action.
During the course of jurisdictional debates at first instance and various levels of
appeal over a period ranging from December 17, 1993, to April 7, 2000, TexPet’s
counsel maintained in expert affidavits and briefs, inter alia, that the Ecuadorian
courts were efficient and fair. In further appeals through 2002, TexPet continued
to argue the adequacy of Ecuadorian courts as an alternative forum. The Aguinda
action was ultimately dismissed from US courts. The same plaintiffs then
commenced an action against TexPet in 2003 in a court seated in the town of

Lago Agrio, Ecuador (the “Lago Agrio action”).?

Since the Aguinda case, a number of events have occurred involving the
Ecuadorian judiciary. On November 25, 2004, Ecuador’s Congress passed
aresolution finding that the Constitutional Court and Electoral Court were
illegally appointed in 2003. It dismissed the members of both. On December 5,
2004, a special session of Ecuador’s Congress dismissed the entire Supreme
Court. The same session of Congress also impeached six of the recently-removed
judges of the Constitutional Court. On April 15, 2005, President Guttiérrez
declared a state of emergency, suspending certain civil rights and dismissing all
the newly-appointed judges of the Supreme Court. President Guttiérrez was later
ousted and fled the country. During this period, both the UN Special Rapporteur
on the independence of judges and lawyers and the Organization of American
States’ Mission in Ecuador intervened. Soon thereafter, the Ecuadorian Congress
nullified the 2004 resolution dismissing the Supreme Court judges, but did not

reappoint these former judges.

On April 25, 2005, Ecuador’s Congress approved amendments to the Organic
Law of the Judiciary which introduced a new mechanism to appoint judges to the

Supreme Court. Members of the international community monitored and

> Maria Aguinda et al. v. Chevron Texaco Corporation, Proceeding No. 002-2003, Sup. Ct. of Justice,
Nueva Loja, Ecuador.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 52

65.

66.

67.

supported the new selection process and new Supreme Court judges were
appointed in November 2005. Some observers, such as the Andean Community
and the Red De La Justicia, approved of these reforms as re-establishing the
independence and impartiality of the judiciary, while others, including the UN
Special Rapporteur, deemed the reforms insufficient to bring Ecuador back in

line with basic human rights norms.

On December 21, 2006, the Claimants filed their Notice of Arbitration

commencing the current arbitration proceedings.

In January 2007, President Rafael Correa called for a referendum to establish a
Constituent Assembly to create a new constitution. Despite initial opposition by
the Congress and Electoral Court, the holding of the referendum was eventually
approved. However, when President Correa modified the statute controlling the
Constituent Assembly to be proposed in the referendum, and the Electoral Court
approved President Correa’s changes, the Congress removed the President of the
Electoral Court in an apparent effort to block the referendum. In support of the
Executive, the military and police then physically prevented the Congress from
assembling in order to overturn President Correa’s measure. Some of the ousted
members of the Congress then sought relief from the Constitutional Court, which
eventually ruled that their ouster was illegal. The new Congress members who
had replaced them in the meantime, reacted by dismissing the entire
Constitutional Court and shortly thereafter selecting a member of President
Correa’s political party to head a new Constitutional Court. In the midst of the
above events, on April 15, 2007, the referendum in favor of establishing

a Constituent Assembly passed in a popular vote.

On September 30, 2007, the members of the Constituent Assembly were elected.
On November 27, 2007, the Constituent Assembly dismissed the Congress and
proclaimed that it held absolute authority. In particular, it claimed the power to
remove and sanction members of the judiciary that violate its decisions. It also
undertook a mandate of judicial reform, criticizing the corruption of the judiciary.
On December 14, 2007, the Constituent Assembly proposed to reduce judges’

salaries by more than 50%. This provoked a series of resignations by judges.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 53

68.

69.

On January 8, 2008, the Constitutional Court rejected a challenge to the
Constituent Assembly’s absolute powers. The Constitutional Court held that the
Constituent Assembly’s decisions were not subject to challenge by any other
organ of government. In February 2008, the current President of the Supreme
Court of Ecuador concurred in public statements that the Constituent Assembly
enjoys absolute authority and that, because of this, the rule of law is only a partial
reality in Ecuador: “No podemos cubrir el sol con un dedo; la realidad juridical
y constitucional que vive el pais es una realidad a medias, no vivimos en toda su
plenitud en un estado de derecho” [“We cannot deny it: the judicial and
constitutional reality in our country is a partial reality; we are not fully living in a

state of law’]. (Exh. C-104).

Of the Claimants’ seven Ecuadorian court cases at issue, three remain pending at
first instance, two are the subject of pending appeals, and two have been recently
dismissed and are now closed. Several of the cases have seen action subsequent

to service of the Notice of Arbitration.

Table 1. Claimants’ Seven Cases in Ecuadorian Courts

 

 

Case | Subject Date Procedural History Current

No. Matter Commenced Status

23-91 | 1973/1977 | 17 Dec 1991 | Evidentiary phase (to July 1995) Closed as of 9
Agreements Auto para sentencia (Dec 2002) June 2008
(Esmeraldas Auto para sentencia (Jan 2004)
Refinery) Dismissed - prescription (Jan 2007)

Appeal filed (9 Feb 2007)

Appeal dismissed (7 Mar 2008)
Cassation filed (4 Apr 2008)
Cassation dismissed (14 May 2008)
Fact appeal filed (16 May 2008)
Fact appeal dismissed (9 June 2008)

  

 

 

7-92 | 1973/1977 15 Apr 1992 | Date set for appointment of experts (11 | Closed as of
Agreements May 1993) 16 July 2008
(Amazonas Declared abandoned (9 Apr 2007)

Refinery) Appeal filed (25 Apr 2007)

Appeal dismissed (20 May 2008)
Cassation filed (27 May 2008)
Cassation dismissed (24 June 2008)
Fact appeal filed (30 June 2008)
Fact appeal dismissed (16 July 2008)

 

 

 

 

 

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 54

 

70.

71.

 

8-92 | 1973 15 Apr 1992. | Evidentiary phase (to Mar 1995) On appeal

 

 

 

 

 

Agreement Auto para sentencia (18 July 1995)
Force Declared abandoned (2 Oct 2006)
majeure — Overturned on appeal (22 Jan 2008)
earthquake Dismissed - prescription (1 July 2008)

Appeal filed (2 July 2008)

983-03 | 1986 15 Apr 1992. | Evidentiary phase (to Mar 1995) On appeal

(prev. | Refinancing Transferred btw courts (Oct 2003)

6-92) | Agreement Auto para sentencia (6 Feb 2007)

(Unpaid Judgment for TexPet (26 Feb 2007)
Interest) Appeal filed - CEPE (1 Mar 2007)
Appeal filed - TexPet (12 Mar 2007)

152-93 | 1973/1977 10 Dec 1993 | Evidentiary phase (mid-1996) Pending at
Agreements Auto para sentencia (22 May 2002) first instance
(Esmeraldas
Refinery)

153-93 | 1973/1977 14 Dec 1993 | Expert reports filed (31 Oct 1996) Pending at
Agreements Auto para sentencia (12 Oct 1998) first instance
(Amazonas Auto para sentencia (22 May 2002)

Refinery)

154-93 | 1973 14 Dec 1993 | Evidentiary phase (8 July 1997) Pending at
Agreement Auto para sentencia (8 Oct 1997) first instance
(Imported Auto para sentencia (21 May 2002)
products)

 

 

 

 

 

The first three of these seven cases, numbered 152-93, 154-93, and 153-93, were
filed between December 10 and 14, 1993. In case 152-93, the evidentiary phase
was completed by mid-1996 and an auto para sentencia, indicating that the trial
was closed and ready for judgment, was issued on May 22, 2002. In case 154-93,
the evidentiary phase was completed by July 8, 1997, and an auto para sentencia
was issued on October 8, 1997, and again on May 21, 2002. In case 153-93, all
expert reports were submitted by October 31, 1996, and an auto para sentencia
was issued on October 12, 1998, and again on May 22, 2002. In all three cases,
the courts have dismissed motions by the Respondent to dismiss the action on
grounds of failure to prosecute. To date, no decision at first instance has been

made in any of the three cases.

Case 8-92 was filed on April 15, 1992. By March 1995, the evidentiary phase of
the case was completed. An auto para sentencia was issued in that case on
July 18, 1995. Following the Notice of Arbitration, the case was dismissed by the

court for failure to prosecute the claims on October 2, 2006. That dismissal was

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 55

 

72.

73.

74.

reversed on January 22, 2008, on the grounds that an auto para sentencia had
already been issued. The case was sent back to the court of first instance and was
dismissed again on July 1, 2008, on grounds of prescription under a statute that
provides for two-year prescription for retail consumer sales. On July 2, 2008,

TexPet appealed the latest decision and that appeal remains pending.

Case 7-92 was filed on April 15, 1992. On May 11, 1993, the court set a date for
the experts to officially accept their appointments and to conduct a judicial
inspection of documents. Due to an error in the notification letter, the official
acceptance did not occur. Between July 1993 and February 2007, TexPet
repeatedly requested that the court set a new date for the experts to accept their
appointments and proceed with the evidentiary phase. The case was dismissed on
April 9, 2007, on the basis that the case had been abandoned by the Claimants.
This dismissal was appealed by the Claimants on April 25, 2007. On May 20,
2008, TexPet’s appeal was rejected. On May 27, 2008, TexPet filed a cassation
appeal. This was rejected on June 24, 2008. On June 30, 2008, TexPet filed a fact

appeal. This was rejected on July 16, 2008. The case is now closed.

Case 23-91 was filed on December 17, 1991. In late July, 1995, the evidentiary
phase of the case was completed. In December 2002 and January 2004, autos
para sentencia were issued. The court dismissed the case on January 29, 2007, on
grounds of prescription under a statute that provides for two-year prescription for
retail consumer sales. On February 9, 2007, TexPet appealed that decision. On
March 7, 2008, the dismissal was upheld on appeal. On April 4, 2008, TexPet
filed a cassation appeal. This was rejected on May 14, 2008. On May 16, 2008,
TexPet filed a fact appeal. This was rejected on June 9, 2008. The case is now

closed.

The last case, numbered 6-92 (eventually renumbered 983-03), was filed on
April 15, 1992. The evidentiary phase was completed in March 1995. In October
2003, the court decided that it did not have jurisdiction to hear the case and sent
the case to a different court. The new court issued an auto para sentencia on
February 6, 2007. Following the Notice of Arbitration, on February 26, 2007, the

court found in favor of TexPet, but the sum was unrecoverable by the Claimants

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 56

due to their having no legal representative in Ecuador that can collect on the
judgment. Both parties have appealed the judgment and the appeal remains

pending.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award s7

75.

76.

77.

IL

Short Summary of Contentions regarding the

Jurisdictional Issues

LI.

Arguments by the Respondent

Subject to more detail in later sections regarding particular issues, the

Respondent’s arguments on jurisdiction can be summarized as follows.

The Respondent argues that this Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear the BIT
claims for a number of reasons. As a preliminary matter, the Respondent argues
that the Claimants should be precluded from pursuing their claims altogether due
to abuse of process. The Respondent further objects to jurisdiction because the
Claimants have failed to plead an “investment dispute” within the meaning of the
BIT, thus placing the claims outside the ratione materiae scope of the BIT.
Lastly, the Respondent asserts that the claims lie outside the ratione temporis

scope of the BIT.

The Respondent’s preliminary objection on abuse of process posits that the
Claimants’ current position is inconsistent with repeated prior statements made in
litigation before US courts in which the Claimants attested to the fairness and
competence of Ecuador’s judiciary. The Respondent asks the Tribunal to
preclude the Claimants from contradicting themselves in order to found
jurisdiction on the basis of a new “dispute.” The Respondent further alleges that
the Claimants’ motive in commencing the present arbitration is to undermine the
enforceability of any potential adverse judgment in the Lago Agrio action. Both
the Claimants’ contradiction of themselves and their improper purpose for
seeking arbitration constitute abuses of rights such that the Claimants should be
treated as having waived any right to arbitrate any claims relating to the adequacy

of the Ecuadorian courts.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 58

78.

79.

80.

81.

On ratione materiae, the Respondent submits that the present claims based on
TexPet’s lawsuits do not fit within the definition of an “investment dispute”
found in Article VI(1) of the BIT. The Respondent thus asserts that the present
dispute is outside the substantive scope of Ecuador’s consent to arbitrate under

the BIT. The Respondent raises several objections in this regard.

The Respondent contends that the present claims do not arise out of or relate to
an “investment agreement” or a treaty breach “with respect to an investment.”
First, the Claimants’ lawsuits do not possess the necessary characteristics to
qualify as an “investment.” Moreover, the Claimants’ lawsuits cannot be fit under
the heading of “claims to money” in the BIT’s definition of covered investments.
This is because the claims are not “associated with an investment” as required
under that definition since the Claimants’ investments no longer existed at the
time of entry into force of the BIT. Nor do TexPet’s claims fall under the heading
of “rights conferred by law or contract” since the BIT only covers rights to do
something or otherwise engage in some activity sanctioned by law analogous to
rights under licenses or permits. Finally, the non-retroactivity of the BIT also
prevents the Claimants from relying on “investment agreements” that had ceased

to exist by the time of entry into force of the BIT.

Even if the claims constituted an “investment dispute” under the BIT, the
Respondent further contends that the claims for denial of justice are not ripe for
adjudication. Under international law, a State is not responsible for the acts of its
judiciary unless a claimant has exhausted all available procedural remedies.
Claims for denials of justice must therefore be based on the acts of the judicial
system as a whole. Since the Claimants have failed to demonstrably exhaust
potential procedural remedies in their cases, the claims for denial of justice

cannot be made out and the claims must be deemed premature.

With respect to jurisdiction ratione temporis, the Respondent argues that States
are responsible for the breach of treaty obligations only if such obligations were
in force at the time that the alleged breach occurred. Any pre-BIT conduct of

Ecuador’s thus falls outside the temporal scope of the BIT according to the non-

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 59

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

retroactivity principle of international law reflected in Article 28 VCLT.

The Respondent raises three distinct objections in this regard.

The first objection is that the current dispute and all its associated facts arose
prior to the coming into force of the BIT on May 11, 1997. It is merely
the continuation in a different form of a pre-BIT dispute. The Respondent argues
that such pre-BIT disputes are excluded from the temporal ambit of the BIT.
The Tribunal should thus dismiss the present claims on the basis that they do not

present a new dispute to which the BIT may apply.

According to the Respondent, the non-retroactivity principle and the law of State
responsibility also bar the consideration of any pre-BIT acts in the determination
of a breach. The Tribunal cannot judge Ecuador’s acts or omissions according to
BIT standards that did not exist at the time of such conduct. The foundation of
the claims — the original alleged breaches of contractual obligations — are thus
excluded from the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Moreover, the rest of the claim cannot
stand on its own because the Respondent’s conduct constitutes neither

a “composite” nor a “continuing” act at international law.

The third ratione temporis objection asserts that the claims concern investments
which ceased to exist upon TexPet’s withdrawal from Ecuador. By 1995, the
1973 Agreement had expired, TexPet’s operations in Ecuador had ended and all
remaining rights relating to the earlier contracts had terminated pursuant to the
Settlement Agreements. Accordingly, by the time of the BIT’s entry into force in
1997, the Claimants’ investment and related rights constituted a “situation which

ceased to exist” according to Article 28 VCLT.

I. Arguments by the Claimants

Subject to more detail in later sections regarding particular issues, the Claimants’

arguments on jurisdiction can be summarized as follows.

The Claimants first argue that they continued to have investments in Ecuador

after the entry into force of the BIT. The BIT’s definition of “investment” is

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 60

87.

88.

89.

90.

broad. Investments must also be examined holistically and not separated into
components. Therefore, the investments undertaken pursuant to the 1973 and
1977 Agreements must be taken to include the legal and contractual claims
emanating from those agreements that are the subject of their pending court cases
as well as the environmental remediation work related to TexPet’s operations that

continued into 1998, after the BIT had come into force.

The Claimants further argue that the dispute concerns “investment agreements,”
namely the 1973 and 1977 Agreements. Such disputes are independently covered
under the BIT. Moreover, since jurisdiction over such claims is not limited to
treaty-based claims, the temporal limitations that apply to BIT claims do not
apply. It is enough that these claims have continued to exist past the date of the

BIT’s entry into force.

The Claimants assert that the BIT does not bar pre-existing disputes. The BIT
would need to include explicit language in order to exclude such disputes.
Instead, according to Article XII of the BIT, disputes must merely be “existing”
at the time of entry into force to be covered by the BIT. In any event, since the
claims are for denials of justice, the dispute only crystallized after a critical

degree of undue delay and politicization of the judiciary that came about in 2004.

The Claimants also reject the idea that claims under the BIT must be strictly
based on post-BIT acts and omissions. First, pre-BIT conduct can serve as
background to the denial of justice claims which only truly arose after entry into
force of the BIT. Second, the non-retroactivity principle cannot bar responsibility
for “continuing” or “composite” acts. The persistent failure of the Ecuadorian
courts to decide the Claimants’ cases and the events leading to the destruction of
the independence of the Ecuadorian judiciary constitute continuing and

composite acts.

As to the argument that the Claimants have not exhausted the available
procedural remedies, they contend that any requirement of exhaustion is not a
jurisdictional issue, but an issue going to the merits. In any event, they claim that
all further efforts to seek to have their cases decided fairly would be futile. The

remedies cited by the Respondent are suited to the misdeeds of individual judges

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 61

91.

and would not be effective in the context of a systemic failure of the Ecuadorian

judiciary.

Finally, the Claimants find the Respondent’s abuse of rights, estoppel, and
waiver arguments baseless. The Claimants’ pleadings in the present matter do not
contradict their previous pleadings in litigation before U.S. courts because the
situation in Ecuador has significantly changed and worsened since any of the
impugned statements were made. Moreover, those statements were made by
different parties in a different litigation and are not transferable to the present

proceedings.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 62

92.

93.

94.

95.

J.

Considerations of the Tribunal regarding the

Jurisdictional Issues

The Tribunal has given consideration to the extensive factual and legal arguments
presented by the Parties in their written and oral submissions, all of which the
Tribunal has found helpful. In this Award, the Tribunal discusses the arguments
of the Parties most relevant for its decisions. The Tribunal’s reasons, without
repeating all the arguments advanced by the Parties, address what the Tribunal
itself considers to be the determinative factors required to decide the issues of

jurisdiction in this case.

J.I. Preliminary Considerations

1.

The Standard of Review for Jurisdictional Objections

The Parties have differing views of the approach to be taken by the Tribunal in
evaluating jurisdictional objections and, in particular, the standard for failure to

state a claim.

The Respondent’s position is that “simply making an arbitration demand stating
that a dispute exists is insufficient” to invoke the BIT (R II, para. 235). The
Claimants bear the burden of demonstrating that the Tribunal has jurisdiction

(R III, para. 56).

The Respondent argues that, when examining its jurisdiction over substantive
breaches of the BIT, the Tribunal should not limit itself to the bare allegations
presented by the Claimants. The Tribunal should consider both the Claimants’
and the Respondent’s submissions and subject the substantive claims at
a minimum to a prima facie review as to whether the Claimants have made out

acase for each element of an alleged breach of the BIT (R II, paras. 234-244).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 63

96.

97.

The Respondent cites Continental Casualty Co. v. Argentine Republic? in this
regard (R II, para. 236).

In the instant case, the Respondents contest that the Claimants have even made
a prima facie case that they have exhausted local remedies as is required to found
their denial of justice claims and, as a consequence, their claims should be
dismissed (R IV, para. 92; see Section J.V below). The Respondent cites
Impregilo v. Pakistan,’ inter alia, as an example of this approach (R II,

paras. 234-244).

The Respondent further submits that for disputed facts relating directly to
jurisdiction and distinct from the merits, the Tribunal should require the
Claimants to prove the facts necessary to jurisdiction to the level of
preponderance of the evidence (Tr. at 33:18-20; R III, para. 64). The Respondent
argues that Oil Platforms? and Methanex® decisions that are relied upon by the
Claimants were made in situations where there was no contrary evidence to
consider (Tr. at 31:6-24). The Respondent cites the Chorzé6w Factory’ and
Soufraki® cases as well as the ad hoc committee decision in Lucchetti v. Peru,
among others, as support for the higher standard of review when contrary
evidence is available (Tr. at 33:20-23, 34:10-21; R III, para. 73). According to
the Respondent, the Tribunal is also empowered to decide on disputed questions
of law at the jurisdictional stage (R III, para. 70). The Respondent submits that
the higher factual and legal standard above applies to all its other jurisdictional

objections, namely to ratione materiae, ratione temporis, and abuse of rights.

3 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9, Decision on
Jurisdiction (Feb. 22, 2006), para. 60 [hereinafter Continental Casualty].
* Impregilo S.p.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/3, Decision on
Jurisdiction (April 22, 2005) [hereinafter Jmpregilo].

* Case concerning Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), Judgment on
Preliminary Objection, 1996 L.C.J. Rep. p. 803 (Dec. 12, 1996) [hereinafter Oil Platforms].
° Methanex Corporation v. United States, Ad hoc — UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Partial Award
(Aug. 7, 2002) [hereinafter Methanex].
7 Case concerning the Factory at Chorz6w, P.C.LJ. Ser. A. No. 9 (1927), para. 32 (1927).
* Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, ICSID Case No. ARB 02/7, Award (July 7,
2004).
° Empresas Lucchetti S.A. and Lucchetti Peru S.A. v. Peru, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4, Decision on
Annulment (Sept. 5, 2007).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 64

98.

99.

100.

101.

According to the Respondent, under all the above bases, the Tribunal can and
should dismiss the Claimants’ claims at the jurisdictional stage for being
manifestly ungrounded on the substance and for failing to prove the facts or law

necessary to jurisdiction under the BIT (R III, paras. 75-78).

The Claimants, for their part, also refer to a prima facie standard (Tr. at 47: 2-6).
They also agree with the Respondent that the Tribunal may fully decide factual
and legal issues on jurisdiction (C IV, para. 6). This standard applies, for
example, to the issues of ratione materiae and ratione temporis jurisdiction (Tr.
at 46:5-13; HC1 p. 6; C IV, para. 6). However, “[t]he Tribunal cannot decide as a
jurisdictional matter whether Claimants have satisfied the substantive elements
of their claims, without exercising jurisdiction over the merits of the claims”

(CIV, para. 5).

The Claimants submit that, under the prima facie standard, the facts they have
presented relating to the substantive BIT breaches should be assumed to be true
for the purposes of determining whether the claims are within the jurisdiction of
the BIT. They insist “that the scope of inquiry at the jurisdictional threshold is
only whether the claimant’s allegations, if true, could constitute a violation of the
BIT or customary international law within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Claimants
need not establish at the jurisdictional level either that the facts alleged are true or
accurate or that such facts, if proved, would necessarily violate the BIT” (C II,
para. 18; Tr. at 47:2-16; HC1 p. 7; C IV, para. 10). Such further examination of
the facts should be reserved for the merits phase of the proceedings (C II,
paras. 18-25; Tr. at 46:19-22). The Claimants assert that this is the case for the
Respondent’s objections based on exhaustion of local remedies and abuse of
rights (Tr. at 46:5-13; see Sections J.II and J.V below). The Claimants cite the
Oil Platforms case and a line of cases following that decision in support of this

approach (C II, paras. 19-24).

The Claimants also refute the idea that the application of the prima facie test
varies according to the evidentiary stage of the proceedings. The test instead
depends simply on the duty to decide strictly jurisdictional issues and not merits

issues at the jurisdictional stage of the proceedings (C IV, paras. 12-15).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 65

102.

103.

The Claimants also note that the Respondent objected to the consideration of the
Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits at this stage while simultaneously relying on
this submission to say that there have been sufficient evidentiary presentations
such that the standard in the Oil Platforms case is inapplicable (C IV, para. 13).

The Claimants submit that the authorities cited by the Respondent for a higher

  

standard only apply that standard to truly jurisdictional issues, not merits

 

issues,
and it is to these merits issues that the prima facie standard applies (C IV,

para. 16).

Even when applying the test as set out by the Respondent, the Claimants contend
that the Respondent has not come close to the bar for dismissing a case as
“manifestly ungrounded or abusive.” The Claimants assert that they have put
forward substantial evidence that “establishes a compelling case of denial of
justice by the courts of Ecuador. At the very least it is sufficient to establish a real

dispute to be resolved on its merits” (C IV, para. 8).

The Tribunal accepts the prima facie approach as the correct standard to apply to
the question of whether the claimed breach would be covered by
the jurisdictional scope of the BIT. This approach was outlined by the tribunal in

Continental Casualty Co. v. Argentine Republic:

In order to determine its jurisdiction, the Tribunal must consider whether the
dispute, as presented by the Claimant, is prima facie, that is at a summary
examination, a dispute that falls generally within the jurisdiction of ICSID
and specifically within that of an ICSID Tribunal established to decide a
dispute between a U.S. investor and Argentina under the BIT. The
requirements of a prima facie examination for this purpose have been
elucidated by a series of international cases. [footnote omitted] The object of
the investigation is to ascertain whether the claim, as presented by the
Claimant, meets the jurisdictional requirements, both as to the factual
subject matter at issue, as to the legal norms referred to as applicable and
having been allegedly breached, and as to the relief sought. [footnote
omitted] For this purpose the presentation of the claim as set forth by the
Claimant is decisive. The investigation must not be aimed at determining
whether the claim is well founded, but whether the Tribunal is competent
to pass upon it. [emphasis in original]'°

° Continental Casualty, supra note 3, para. 60.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 66

104.

105.

In settling upon the above formulation, the Continental Casualty tribunal

' where the tribunal conducted an

makes reference to Impregilo v. Pakistan,'
extensive examination of arbitral and ICJ jurisprudence. That decision also
identified the broad rationales behind the approach:
The present Tribunal is in full agreement with the approach evident in this
jurisprudence. It reflects two complementary concerns: to ensure that courts
and tribunals are not flooded with claims which have no chance of success,
or may even be of an abusive nature; and equally to ensure that, in
considering issues of jurisdiction, courts and tribunals do not go into the
merits of cases without sufficient prior debate. In conformity with this
jurisprudence, the Tribunal has considered whether the facts as alleged by
the Claimant in this case, if established, are capable of coming within those
provisions of the BIT which have been invoked. [citations omitted]?
Despite general agreement between the Parties on the prima facie
approach, disputes persist concerning the characterization of the Respondent’s
objections as jurisdictional or not and the question of what comprises a prima
facie showing on the merits, particularly as regards the evidentiary burden on

each of the Parties at the jurisdictional stage.

The characterization of issues as jurisdictional or merits is dealt with in more
detail in the sections concerning those issues whose nature is disputed. In a
preliminary manner, however, the Tribunal mentions that it considers that
deciding upon the objections relating to exhaustion of local remedies and abuse
of process would require the determination of issues of the merits in the present

case.

As for the definition of the prima facie test, the Tribunal accepts that, in
principle, it should be presumed that the Claimant’s factual allegations are true.
This is the rule arising from the Oil Platforms jurisprudence. Judge Higgins, in
her 1996 Separate Opinion in the Oil Platforms case, proposed the following
approach:

The only way in which, in the present case, it can be determined whether the

claims of [the Claimant] are sufficiently plausibly based upon the 1955
Treaty is to accept pro tem the facts as alleged by [the Claimant] to be true

"' Impregilo, supra note 4, paras. 237-254.
"2 Impregilo, supra note 4, para. 254.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 67

106.

107.

108.

and in that light to interpret Articles I, IV and X for jurisdictional purposes,
that is to say, to see if on the basis of [the Claimant’s] claims of fact there
could occur a violation of one or more of them.'*

This approach has been adopted in a large number of investment arbitration cases
as a norm for review of jurisdictional objections by a State to an investor’s claim
absent any indication otherwise in the treaty in question. In addition to the
various cases cited by the Parties, the above test was confirmed in Plama v.
Bulgaria’ and Noble Energy v. Ecuador,"* the latter being a recent case under
the same BIT at issue here. The tribunal’s conclusion in Noble Energy at
para. 165 provides a restatement of the test:

Without prejudging the dispute on the merits, the Tribunal finds that the

facts alleged by Noble Energy in support of the claims just set forth may be

capable of constituting breaches of the BIT, if proven in the second stage of

this arbitration. It is thus satisfied that Noble Energy has made a sufficient
prima facie showing for purposes of jurisdiction.

As stated by Judge Higgins later in her opinion, this approach is concerned with

“protect[ing] the integrity of the proceedings on the merits” and “the obligation

to keep separate the jurisdictional and merits phases” in a_ bifurcated

proceeding.'° The Claimants must therefore prove the jurisdiction of the Tribunal

at this stage, but they need not prove their substantive claims. The tribunal in
Siemens v. Argentina made this point clear in its decision:

At this stage of the proceedings, the Tribunal is not required to consider

whether the claims under the Treaty made by Siemens are correct. This is a

matter for the merits. The Tribunal simply has to be satisfied that, if the

Claimant’s allegations would be proven correct, then the Tribunal has
jurisdiction to consider them."

To require the Claimants to prove facts or interpretation regarding their

substantive claims at this stage would also prejudge the merits of the dispute and

° Oil Platforms, supra note 5, Separate Opinion of Judge Higgins, para. 32.

4 Plama Consortium Ltd. v. Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision on Jursidiction (Feb. 8,
2005), paras. 118-119.

'S Noble Energy, Inc. and MachalaPower Cia Ltd. v. Ecuador and Consejo Nacional de Electricidad,
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/12, Decision on Jurisdiction (March 5, 2008), paras. 151-152.

'© Oil Platforms, supra note 5, Separate Opinion of Judge Higgins, para. 34.

'” Siemens AG v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction (Aug. 3, 2004),
para. 180.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 68

109.

110.

deny the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to decide these matters at the appropriate phase

of the proceedings. The Methanex decision summarizes this point:

Accordingly, there is no necessity at the jurisdictional stage for a definitive
interpretation of the substantive provisions relied on by a claimant: the
jurisdiction of the arbitration tribunal is established without the need for such
interpretation. Indeed a final award on the merits where a NAFTA tribunal
determines that the claimant has failed to prove its case within these
substantive provisions cannot signify that the tribunal lacked jurisdiction to
make that award. On the other hand, in order to establish its jurisdiction, a
tribunal must be satisfied that Chapter 11 does indeed apply and that a claim
has been brought within its procedural provisions. This means that it must
interpret, definitively, Article 1101(1) and decide whether, on the facts
alleged by the claimant, Chapter 11 applies. Similarly, insofar as the point is
in issue, the tribunal must establish that the requirements of Articles 1116-
1121 have been met by a claimant, which will similarly require a definitive
interpretation of those provisions (as we have decided, in Chapter H above,
in regard to Article 1116).'*

This presumption, however, is not meant to allow a claimant to frustrate
jurisdictional review by simply making enough frivolous allegations to bring its
claim within the jurisdiction of the BIT. As the tribunal in Pan American Energy
v. Argentina stated, “if everything were to depend on characterisations made by a
claimant alone, the inquiry to jurisdiction and competence would be reduced to
naught, and tribunals would be bereft of the compétence de la compétence
enjoyed by them.”!°

The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that Judge Higgins did not have any
rebuttal evidence to consider when she devised her test in the Oil Platforms case
and that her approach does not prevent the Tribunal from taking into account the
large amount of documentation the Parties have already submitted in this
jurisdictional phase of the proceedings. If, from this evidence, the Tribunal finds
that facts alleged by the Claimants are shown to be false or insufficient to satisfy

the prima facie test, jurisdiction would have to be denied.

'8 Methanex, supra note 6, para. 121.
' Pan American Energy LLC and BP Argentina Exploration Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID

Case No. ARB/03/13, Decision on Preliminary Objections (July 27, 2006), para. 50 [hereinafter Pan
American Energy).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award

69

111.

112.

113.

This approach is not inconsistent with either the jurisprudence of the Iran-United
States Claims Tribunal” or the recent decision in Canadian Cattlemen for Fair

2! The Tribunal notes that Kazazi’s review of the

Trade vy. United States.
approach of the Iran-U.S. Claims Tribunal highlights the Procedural Order of
20 December 1982 in the Flexi-Van case, where the test was stated in almost
identical fashion to that devised above:
The type of evidence to be submitted by a Claimant depends on the
circumstances of each particular case, as viewed by the Chamber. In this
case, the evidence described below will, prima facie, be considered
sufficient as to corporate nationality... Respondent will be free to offer
rebuttal evidence. From the totality of such evidence the Chamber will draw
reasonable inferences and reach conclusions as to whether the Claimant was,
or was not, a national of the United States.”
The ultimate result of the above presumption is that the Respondent bears the
burden of proof to disprove the Claimants’ allegations. This means that, if the
evidence submitted does not conclusively contradict the Claimants’ allegations,
they are to be assumed to be true for the purposes of the prima facie test. This

test will be applied to issues deemed merits issues in this Award.

On a separate note regarding the standard of review, the Parties agree that TexPet
could suffer a denial of justice in some of its cases but not in others (Tr. at
406:21-407:6; C III, para. 81; R IV, para. 75). Thus, each of TexPet’s lawsuits
must be analyzed individually to the extent that the facts surrounding each one
differ. However, the Parties do not believe that this is the case here: the
Respondent is adamant that no liability arises for any of the cases while the
Claimants assert that a completed denial of justice has occurred in each one of
their cases. In the present case, the Tribunal also accepts that the cases must be
treated individually, but has found no circumstances that would dictate a

distinction in their treatment for the purposes of jurisdiction.

20 MOJTABA KAZAZI, BURDEN OF PROOF AND RELATED ISSUES: A STUDY OF EVIDENCE BEFORE
INTERNATIONAL TRIBUNALS pp. 340-350 (Kluwer Law International, The Hague 1996) [hereinafter
KAZAZI].

*! Canadian Cattlemen for Fair Trade v. United States, NAFTA/UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,
Award on Jurisdiction (28 Jan. 2008) [hereinafter Canadian Cattlemen].

» Flexi-Van Leasing, Inc. v. The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Order of 20 Dec. 1982,
1 Iran-U.S. C.T.R. p. 455, at p. 458, cited in KAZAZI, supra note 20, at p. 342.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 70

2.

114.

115.

116.

Merits Claims as the Object of Examination of Jurisdiction

The starting point for any examination of jurisdiction must be the claims raised
by the Claimants on the merits. For any claim on the merits to succeed, there
must be jurisdiction of the Tribunal over that specific claim. Vice versa, insofar
as a claim has not been raised on the merits, the Tribunal cannot enter into an
examination of the question whether it has jurisdiction, even if it may think that,

had the claim been raised by the Claimants, it would have had jurisdiction.

Therefore, in the present case, the Tribunal must begin by examining the relief
sought by the Claimants on the merits. In this context, the Tribunal notes that the
list of merits claims raised by the Claimants has not been consistent. In particular,
after the relief sought in the Claimants’ Statement of Claim did not mention it,
both the Claimants’ Second-Round Post-Hearing Brief and their Memorial on the
Merits included a claim seeking a declaration that the Respondent had breached
the 1973 and 1977 Agreements. Since the wording in these two latter Memorials
is not identical, the Tribunal considers that it has to focus its examination of
jurisdiction in this regard on the wording used by the Claimants in their Second-
Round Post-Hearing Brief on jurisdiction as cited above in section G.II. of this

Award.
Accordingly, the Tribunal’s examination of jurisdiction will consider:

. The Claimants’ relief sought regarding jurisdiction in items (i) and (ii)
of the list, as they relate to the merits claims under items (iii) to (vi) of

the list,

. while the merits claims under items (vii) to (xi) of the list are
consequential merits claims not requiring a separate examination on
jurisdiction and only becoming relevant in the merits phase of these
proceedings should the Tribunal find some liability of the

Respondent.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 71

3.

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

Applicable Law

The procedural law to be applied by the Tribunal consists of the procedural
provisions of the BIT (particularly its Article VI), the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules, and, since The Hague is the place of arbitration, any mandatory provisions
of Dutch arbitration law; this Interim Award is made pursuant to Article 1049 of

the Netherlands Arbitration Act 1986.

The substantive law to be applied by the Tribunal consists of the substantive
provisions of the BIT, the VCLT, the ILC Draft Articles on State Responsibility
and any relevant provisions of customary international law. The Tribunal notes
that the VCLT, while being treaty law, has not been ratified by the United States.
Therefore, both it and the ILC Draft Articles may only apply in the present case
as customary international law. However, neither Party has disputed the relevant
provisions of the VCLT and ILC Draft Articles as authoritative statements of
customary international law. Indeed, both Parties have relied on them in these
proceedings. In addition to the above sources, the national law of Ecuador may

be relevant with regard to certain issues.

Relevance of Decisions of other Tribunals

In the legal arguments made in their written and oral submissions, the Parties rely
on numerous decisions of other courts and tribunals. Accordingly, it is
appropriate for the Tribunal to make certain general preliminary observations in

this regard.

First of all, the Tribunal considers it useful to make clear from the outset that it
regards its task in these proceedings as the very specific one of applying the
relevant provisions of the BIT and of arriving at the proper meaning to be given

to those particular provisions in the context of the BIT in which they appear.

On the other hand, Article 32 VCLT permits recourse, as supplementary means
of interpretation, not only to a treaty’s “preparatory work” and the

“circumstances of its conclusion,” but indicates by the word “including” that,

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 72

122.

123.

124.

beyond the two means expressly mentioned, other supplementary means of
interpretation may be applied in order to confirm the meaning resulting from the
application of Article 31 VCLT. Article 38(1)(d) of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice provides that judicial decisions and awards are
applicable for the interpretation of public international law as “subsidiary
means.” Therefore, these legal materials can also be understood to constitute

“supplementary means of interpretation” in the sense of Article 32 VCLT.

That being so, it is not evident how far arbitral awards are of determinative
relevance to the Tribunal’s task. It is at all events clear that the decisions of other
tribunals are not binding on this Tribunal. The many references by the Parties to

certain arbitral decisions in their pleadings do not contradict this conclusion.

However, this does not preclude the Tribunal from considering arbitral decisions
and the arguments of the Parties based upon them, to the extent that it may find

that they throw any useful light on the issues that arise for decision in this case.

Such an examination will be conducted by the Tribunal later in this Award, after
the Tribunal has considered the Parties’ contentions and arguments regarding the
various issues argued and relevant for the interpretation of the applicable BIT
provisions, while taking into account the above-mentioned specificity of the BIT

to be applied in the present case.

J.Il. Abuse of Rights, Estoppel and Waiver

1.

125.

Arguments by the Respondent

The Respondent submits that the Claimants contradict their prior statements and
conduct when they allege improper conduct by the Ecuadorian courts. Pursuant
to principles of good faith, the Claimants should not be allowed to completely

reverse their position in order to ground a new “dispute.”

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 73

126.

127.

The Respondent cites a number of statements where the Claimants have publicly
endorsed the Ecuadorian judicial system in judicial and other fora, spanning a
period from 1993 to 2006 (R II, para. 204). In particular, the Respondent points
to statements made in connection with the ten-year Aguinda action before the
U.S. courts. In Aguinda, a group of residents from the regions in which TexPet
had operated the concessions sued the Claimants for environmental damage. In
order to support a motion to dismiss on forum non conveniens grounds, the
Claimants submitted pleadings and affidavits attesting to the fairness and
competence of Ecuadorian courts. These pleadings were made in direct
contradiction to statements by the Aguinda plaintiffs and a 1998 U.S. State
Department Report criticizing the Ecuadorian judiciary that was also before the
court (R II, paras. 204-210; Tr. at 84:2-86:12; HRI pp. 24-25). The Aguinda
action was ultimately dismissed from U.S. courts and the plaintiffs recommenced
their suit before Ecuadorian courts in the Lago Agrio action. The Respondent also
highlights pleadings and public statements connected to another case, Doe v.
Texaco, Inc.,> dated July 20, 2006 — after filing their notice of intent to submit
the present claims — where the Claimants relied on the Aguinda decision in
support of the dismissal of the case against them in favor of the Ecuadorian
courts (R II, para. 211; Tr. at 86:21-87:16; HR1 p. 31; R IIL, paras. 123-130;
RIV, para. 66). The Respondent further points to the Texaco website, which has,
as recently as October 2007, contained statements supporting the decisions in
both cases concerning the adequacy of the Ecuadorian courts (Tr. at 88:12-19;

HRI p. 32; R Il, para. 131; R IV, para. 66).

The Respondent further asserts that there is no way to construe these statements
as being consistent with the Claimants’ current position. When the Claimants
took this position in the Aguinda litigation, they were on notice of a twenty-year
backlog of cases in the Ecuadorian courts at the time (HR1 p. 33; R III, para. 120;
RIV, paras. 71, 111-122). The Claimants’ statements in Aguinda were also made
without qualification and the seven cases underlying the present claims were

specifically cited by the Claimants as evidence of the fairness of Ecuadorian

?3 Jane Doe et al. v. Texaco, Inc., Texaco Petroleum Co. and Chevron Corporation, Defendants’ Reply

in Support of Motion to Dismiss
2006).

or, in the Alternative, to Stay, Case No. C-06-2820 WHA (July 20,

 

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 74

128.

129.

courts (R II, para. 213; HR1 pp. 26-29; R III, para. 121; R IV, para. 74).
The Respondent further notes that these representations were necessary in order
to prevail on forum non conveniens such that, during the pendency of these cases,
the Claimants “could have withdrawn — and likely had a duty to withdraw [their]
motions to dismiss” if their position on the Ecuadorian courts had changed (R III,
paras. 116-117; Tr. at 87:17-22). Thus, the Claimants cannot contend that their

previous statements do not apply to the present situation.

According to the Respondent, principles of good faith, venire contra factum
proprium and estoppel in international law prevent the Claimants “from taking an
unambiguous and voluntary position and later adopting a contrary position when
a court has relied on the initial position or when claimants have benefited from
their initial position” (R II, para. 219). Reliance on the statements by the
Claimants is not required, only that the Claimants have derived an advantage or
that the Respondent has suffered a disadvantage from those statements (R III,
paras. 133-135). The Respondent cites, inter alia, Megan Wagner and Kunkel v.
Polish State in support of the application of estoppel in the context of arbitral
jurisdiction. Megan Wagner, an authority also relied on by the Claimants, states
that “the application of estoppel to jurisdiction is neither required nor prohibited”
(Tr. at 82:2-4; HRI p. 20).4 In Kunkel v. Polish State,?> the tribunal precluded
Poland from objecting to jurisdiction on the basis that the claimant was a Polish
national since Poland had liquidated their estates on the ground that they were
Germans (R II, para. 216-220). For the Respondent, if the Claimants are not able
to contradict themselves and allege the inadequacy of the Ecuadorian judiciary,

the Claimants’ entire claim falls (R II, para. 222).

The Respondent further asserts that the Claimants’ reversal is motivated by
ulterior purposes related to a global litigation strategy surrounding its defense of
the Lago Agrio and Aguinda actions against them. The misuse of these cases to

found an arbitration claim — disconnected from their original intent and any

4 Megan L. Wagner, Jurisdiction by Estoppel in the International Court of Justice, 74 CALIF. L. REV.

p. 1789 (1986).

*5 Kunkel et al. v. Polish State (Germano-Polish Mixed Arbitration Tribunal, Dec. 2, 1925).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 75

130.

131.

legitimate desire to succeed in Ecuadorian courts — constitutes an abuse of

process.

As described in its version of the facts, the Respondent alleges that the Claimants
admitted in U.S. litigation that the seven underlying cases were only intended to
provide “bargaining chips” to TexPet in its negotiations with Ecuador concerning
its withdrawal from the country (R II, paras. 223-224; Tr. at 72:5-14; HRI p. 10).
After achieving a satisfactory “exit agreement,” the Claimants stopped pursuing
the seven cases (R II, para. 225). The Claimants’ prosecution of the cases only
recommenced now that they serve a purpose in undermining the legitimacy of
the ongoing Lago Agrio proceedings (R II, para. 226; Tr. at 74:22-75:7; HR1
pp. 13-14, 35-36). However, in order to serve that purpose, the Claimants have
necessarily let the claims languish and have only taken the minimum procedural
steps to keep the claims alive (R II, para. 227; Tr. at 73:7-23; HRI pp. 11-12;
RIII, paras. 82-88; R IV, paras. 105-109).

The Respondent submits that parties to arbitration proceedings must present their
claims honestly and be prevented from exercising rights for a purpose other than
that for which they exist (R II, para. 230; Tr. at 75:8-14; HRI p. 16).
The Respondent alleges that the Claimants have demonstrated a lack of any
legitimate interest in the outcome of the underlying cases through their failure
to duly prosecute them. The present arbitration is thus dishonest to the Claimants’
true intent with respect to the cases and a claim for denial of justice must
be considered abusive. The Claimants compound the abusiveness of their claims
by contradicting themselves. The Claimants’ abuse of process should lead to
aresult equivalent to a waiver of any claims relating to the adequacy of the
Ecuadorian court system (R II, paras. 226, 228-232; Tr. at 82:8-20; R II,
para. 139). The Respondent cites, among other authorities, two recent investor-
State cases that specifically considered potentially dismissing claims for abuse of
process, Pan American Energy v. Argentina® and Rompetrol v. Romania" (Tr. at

76:5-24; HR1 pp. 17-18; R III, paras. 105-107).

°6 Pan American Energy, supra note 19, para. 52.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 76

2.

132.

133.

134.

Arguments by the Claimants

Preliminarily, the Claimants assert that the Respondent’s abuse of rights
objections are, like their objections based on the lack of exhaustion of local

remedies, not jurisdictional issues (Tr. at 329:7-10; C IV, paras. 5, 92).

Even so, the Claimants argue that the Respondent has not made out a coherent
case for abuse of rights, estoppel or waiver. They insist that “there is nothing
inconsistent in the position taken in the present claims as compared to the expert
affidavits filed in the Aguinda matter in the 1990s” (C II, para. 412).
The situation has significantly deteriorated since the Claimants last made any
alleged endorsement of the Ecuadorian legal system, especially since the post-
November 2004 politicization of the judiciary (C II, para. 413; Tr. at 333:17-
334:21; HC3, pp. 84-85; C III, paras. 74, 76). The statements cited by the
Respondent “reflect opinions articulated at a different point in time, about a
different Ecuadorian judiciary, by different parties in different litigation” (C II,
para. 420). The Respondent also has not shown any detrimental reliance on these
statements as required for an estoppel argument (C II, para. 421-422). As to
waiver, the Claimants contend that they have not exhibited any intention to
relinquish their right to arbitrate the present dispute and that rights conferred by
BITs generally cannot be waived in any event (C II, paras. 423-426). The latter is
demonstrated by Lanco v. Argentina,* among other cases, holding that forum
selection clauses between the parties do not waive rights to arbitrate under a BIT

(C Il, para. 425).

In any event, the Claimants argue that even if a coherent case were put forward
by the Respondent, this still could not prevent the Claimants’ current claims from
proceeding. First, Claimant Chevron has made no statements about the
Ecuadorian judiciary (C II, para. 76). Second, “the fact that a party or its
affiliates opined and predicted that the Ecuadorian courts would provide an

adequate forum for the Lago Agrio case does not somehow license a country’s

 

27 The Rompetrol Group N.V. v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/3, Decision on Preliminary
Objections (April 18, 2008), para. 115 [hereinafter Rompetrol].

*8 Lanco International, Inc. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB97/6, Preliminary Decision
on Jurisdiction (Dec. 8, 1998), paras. 24-27.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 77

135.

136.

137.

138.

courts to deny justice to parties litigating in those courts, nor does it somehow
provide a legal defense to such denial of justice” (C III, paras. 75-76; Tr. at
332:11-333:16; C IV, para. 89).

The Claimants also reject the charge that they have brought this case for the
primary purpose of tarnishing the Ecuadorian judiciary in order to prevent
enforcement of a potential Lago Agrio judgment. The Respondent presents no
evidence of this theory beyond some statements by Chevron representatives that
they will, if necessary, pursue international remedies against Ecuador in that case
as well (C III, para. 104; C IV, para. 91). The Lago Agrio proceedings are not at
issue in this case and “no legal principle allows the dismissal of this case without
adjudicating its facts and merits because a different case involving different facts

might be filed in the future” (C III, para. 105; Tr. at 409-17-25).

The Tribunal

As mentioned above, the detailed analyses of these issues submitted by the
Parties have been helpful for this Tribunal. The following considerations of the
Tribunal, without addressing all the arguments of the Parties, concentrate on what

the Tribunal itself considers to be determinative on jurisdiction.

At the outset, it must be noted that abuse of process, estoppel and waiver are all
to be qualified as defenses to what may otherwise be a valid claim. They have the
effect that a right which existed at a certain time can no longer be relied upon or
enforced by the holder of that right. A claimant may therefore pursue its claim
unless it is shown to be abusive in the sense of one of these defenses.
The Tribunal notes that there does not appear to be complete agreement between
the Parties’ submissions nor among other authorities in this context on whether
these defenses should, as a general rule, be considered issues of jurisdiction,
admissibility, or the merits. Nonetheless, the following considerations apply and

dispose of the Respondent’s objections in the present phase of proceedings.

As a general rule, the holder of a right raising a claim on the basis of that right in

legal proceedings bears the burden of proof for all elements required for the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 78

139.

140.

141.

claim. However, an exception to this rule occurs when a respondent raises
a defense to the effect that the claim is precluded despite the normal conditions
being met. In that case, the respondent must assume the burden of proof for

the elements necessary for the exception to be allowed.

The nature of these defenses as exceptions to a general rule that lead to the
reversal of the burden of proof stem from, among other factors, the presumption
of good faith. A claimant is not required to prove that its claim is asserted in
anon-abusive manner; it is for the respondent to raise and prove an abuse as
a defense. A respondent whose defense overcomes the presumption of good faith
reveals the hierarchy between these norms, as even a well-founded claim will be
rejected by the tribunal if it is found to be abusive. Burden-shifting in the present
context is consistent with Article 24(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,
which provides that “[e]ach party shall have the burden of proving the facts relied
on to support his claim or defence.” Thus, in accordance with that provision, the
Tran-U.S. Claims Tribunal in Sabet v. Iran stated: “[a]s it was the Respondents
who brought the assignment argument as an affirmative defense, they bear the

burden of proof on the issue. . . cae

The shifting of the burden must also be influenced by an appreciation of the risk
of a mistake. The Tribunal in this respect derives inspiration from Horn and
Weiler’s discussion of an appropriate methodology for the allocation of the

burden of proof in WTO proceedings.*°

According to Horn and Weiler,
a significant consideration in allocating the burden of proof, particularly in the
rule-exception context, is the effect of a false positive finding as weighed against

the effects of a false negative.

In the present case, the question is whether a particular claimant is undeserving
of having its claim heard because of the circumstances surrounding that claim.

A false positive finding that the claim was estopped or brought for improper

» Aram Sabet et al. v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, et al., Case No. 593-815/816/817-2, Partial
Award (June 30, 1999), para. 48.

* Henrik Horn & Joseph H.H. Weiler, European Communities — Trade Description of Sardines:
Textualism and its Discontent, in THE WTO CASE LAW OF 2002 p. 248, at pp. 265-268 (Henrik Horn
& Petros C. Mavroidis, eds., Cambridge University Press 2005).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 79

142.

143.

144.

purpose would therefore have the Tribunal deny jurisdiction because the
Claimants had not been able to disprove doubts regarding the exercise of its right
to submit a claim. Meanwhile, a false negative finding that the claim was not
abusive would simply allow the claim to proceed on its merits where the
Respondent may continue to object on this basis and apply for costs to
compensate for the false negative finding. This was the case, for example, in the
recent award in Plama, where the Tribunal found a fraudulent misrepresentation
in obtaining the investment and ordered the claimant to pay full costs including
legal fees, but only at the end of the merits phase of proceedings.*! The potential
for unfairness in this situation weighs in favor of diminishing the risk of a false

positive finding by shifting the burden to the Respondent.

The Tribunal now has to examine whether the Respondent’s submissions and the
evidence filed are sufficient to support these defenses with the result that, even if
the Claimants may be found to have claims against the Respondent under the

BIT, they can no longer rely upon and enforce them due to the defenses raised.

In this context, it has further to be noted that in all legal systems, the doctrines of
abuse of rights, estoppel and waiver are subject to a high threshold. Any right
leads normally and automatically to a claim for its holder. It is only in very
exceptional circumstances that a holder of a right can nevertheless not raise and
enforce the resulting claim. The high threshold also results from the seriousness
of a charge of bad faith amounting to abuse of process. As Judge Higgins stated
in her 2003 Separate Opinion in the Oil Platforms case, there is “a general
agreement that the graver the charge the more confidence must there be in the

. . 993
evidence relied on.”

The threshold must be particularly high in the context of a prima facie
examination where the Claimants’ submissions are to be presumed true. This
Tribunal could only dismiss the Claimants’ claims at the jurisdictional stage if it
concluded that the Respondent’s submissions and evidence are sufficient to cross

the high threshold for the exceptions invoked to such an extent that the Claimants

*! Plama Consortium Ltd. v. Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARBO3/24, Award (Aug. 27, 2008).
* Case concerning Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), Judgment,
2006 L.C.J. Rep. p. 225 (Nov. 6, 2003), Separate Opinion of Judge Higgins, para. 33.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 80

145.

146.

have not even shown a prima facie justification for the claims they have raised.
After an examination of the submissions and the evidence filed, the Tribunal

finds that the Respondent has not met that threshold.

The Respondent seeks to convince the Tribunal that the Claimants’ motives in
pursuing the present arbitration are abusive because they have knowingly
allowed the BIT breach they complain of to occur through their deliberate lack of
diligence in prosecuting their Ecuadorian court cases. The Claimants have,
however, countered with evidence that they prosecuted their cases to the point
where a decision could be rendered and with an argument that doing any more
would have been futile. The Respondent has also alleged that the Claimants’ wish
to see the Tribunal declare that the courts of Ecuador are unfair in order to
undermine the Lago Agrio proceedings and not because of a sincere interest in
seeing the merits of their court cases decided. Taken together, however, the
Claimants’ cases before the Ecuadorian courts do involve significant monetary
claims and the Respondent acknowledges that at least the minimum procedural
steps have been taken to maintain them. Real disputes therefore persist about
these issues. Where such disputes persist, the Tribunal must find that
the Respondent has not borne its burden to an extent that would justify

dismissing the Claimants’ claims at this stage.

The tribunal in the recent case of Rompetrol v. Romania considered a similar
objection of abuse of process based on impugning the claimant’s motives in the
arbitration. In rejecting that submission, the tribunal demonstrated its uneasiness

with accepting such an extraordinary remedy at the jurisdictional stage:

 

Marshalled as it is as an objection at this preliminary stage, this is evidently
a proposition of a very far-reaching character; it would entail an ICSID
tribunal, after having determined conclusively (or at least prima facie) that
the parties to an investment dispute had conferred on it by agreement
jurisdiction to hear their dispute, deciding nevertheless not to entertain the
application to hear the dispute. ... it is plain enough to the Tribunal that, as
the question has been put by the Respondent in the specific circumstances of
this case, the abuse of process argument is one that seeks essentially to
impugn the motives behind the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration. It may or
it may not be appropriate for an ICSID tribunal to enquire into the question
whether either a Claimant or a Respondent party is actuated by a proper
motive in advancing or defending its interests in prosecuting or defending an
arbitration. That question remains at large, and the Tribunal expresses no

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 81

147.

148.

149.

view on it now. But, if it were appropriate to do so, the decision would
obviously be very closely dependent on the special circumstances of the
particular case. From all this it follows automatically, without the need for
further demonstration, that this Tribunal, at this very preliminary stage,
before it has had even the benefit of the Claimant’s case laid out in detail in
a Memorial, let alone the supporting evidence, could not in any event be ina
position either to assess a question of motive or to determine its relevance to
the case before it.”*
In the instant case, the Tribunal has received the Claimants’ Memorial on the
Merits and the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, but the
Respondent requested that the Claimants’ submissions on the merits not be
considered in the decision on jurisdiction and the Tribunal has, in any event, not
benefited from a hearing on the merits or any further submissions it might request
from the Parties. This Tribunal therefore finds itself in a situation similar to that

described by the Rompetrol tribunal.

As for the estoppel defense, the Tribunal finds that this defense must also be
subjected to a high threshold where the Respondent must conclusively disprove
the Claimants’ prima facie case. If the estoppel targeted a fact that was necessary
to establish in order for the Tribunal to find jurisdiction under the BIT,
the Tribunal would have to decide on the estoppel issue at the jurisdictional
phase. That was the case, for example, in Pan American Energy. However,
the Respondent’s present estoppel defense attempts to preclude the Claimants
from proving a fact necessary to establish that their rights under the BIT have
been violated, namely that the Ecuadorian courts have acted in an unfair and
unjust manner towards them. A finding on this fact would only impact
the Tribunal’s finding on liability at the merits phase of the proceedings. Thus,
without the benefit of a full examination of the merits, a finding by the Tribunal

regarding the significance of the Claimants’ prior statements would be premature.

The elements of the estoppel argument so far raised by the Respondent do not
conclusively exclude the Claimants’ prima facie case. The Respondent has
shown that, for an extended period of time, Claimant Texaco maintained that
the Ecuadorian courts were fair and just. Yet, the Tribunal cannot exclude

the possibility that subsequent developments or other factors sufficiently explain

8 Rompetrol, supra note 27, para. 115.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 82

any potential conflicts between the submissions before the U.S. courts and those
before this Tribunal about the fairness of Ecuadorian courts. The Respondent has
narrowed this possibility, but not eliminated it. The Tribunal notes that, for
the period from mid-2000 to the present date, the record shows no unequivocal
statement by the Claimants that the courts of Ecuador were fair (C III, paras. 74-
75; R IV, para. 66). The Respondent has also not managed, as the Claimants
point out, to attribute any contradictory statements to Claimant Chevron or show
why their claims should be affected by their co-Claimant’s statements.
The Tribunal finds that the relevance of the Claimants’ previous statements can

only be conclusively evaluated in the context of a full examination of the merits.

J.I1I. The Claimants’ Investment

1.

150.

Arguments by the Respondent

The Respondent rejects the possibility that the Claimants can fit their claims
under Article VI(1)(c) of the BIT. In order to fall within Article VI(1)(c) as
a“breach of any right conferred or created by this Treaty with respect to
an investment,” the Respondent argues that TexPet’s lawsuits must constitute
in “investment.” The Respondent argues that the claims themselves lack the
necessary characteristics of an “investment.” Along with “investment capital”
and “risk,” an investment must somehow contribute to the economic

development of the host State. The Respondent continues:

As a practical matter [...] Claimants have failed to plead an “investment” as
none of Claimants’ activities as of the date the BIT entered into force (May
11, 1997), or at any time thereafter, has contributed — or even been intended
to contribute — to the economic development of the Republic. To the
contrary, the 1973 and 1977 Contracts terminated years before the BIT
entered into force, and Claimants’ litigation claims are intended to take
money from the State, not to benefit the State

(R II, paras. 160-162; Tr. at 95:7-20, 114:6-19; HRI p. 54).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 83

151.

152.

The Respondent further argues that the lawsuits cannot be fit under BIT
Article I(1)(a)(iii), “claims to money or claims to performance having economic
value, and associated with an investment.” Under that article, the lawsuits qualify
as “claims” but are not associated with any “investment” because the investments
that they would potentially relate to ceased to exist before the entry into force of
the treaty. The non-retroactivity of the BIT prevents the Claimants from relying
on an association to pre-BIT investments (R II, paras. 165-167; Tr. at 95:21-96:2,
121:4-14; R TIL, para. 150; R IV, para. 27). The BIT only protects the “claims” so
long as the investment with which they are associated expired after the date when
the BIT entered into force. It does not protect purely historical investments that
are beyond being encouraged according to the forward-looking purpose of the
BIT (Tr. at 403:2-404:1; HR1 p. 44; R IV, paras. 10-15). However, when TexPet
withdrew from Ecuador, it also withdrew its investment capital and actively
sought to eliminate any remaining investment risk (R II, paras. 167-171; HRI
pp. 49-51). TexPet had no investment with which their claims could be
associated by the time the BIT entered into force. The Respondent submits that
the above temporal limitation is analogous to the implied territorial limitation to
the definition of investment found in Canadian Cattlemen™ (R II, para. 166;

Tr. at 119:22-120:10; R III, para. 161; R IV, paras. 28-29).

The Respondent rebuts several arguments advanced by the Claimants in regard to
Article I(1)(a)(iii). To the extent that Mondev v. United States*> is cited for
the idea that lawsuits can constitute investments, that case is distinguishable.
NAFTA, the treaty at issue in Mondev, differs significantly in its language from
the U.S.-Ecuador BIT. Amongst other differences, NAFTA’s definition of
“investment” does not require that claims be associated with an “investment” in
order to be protected. NAFTA instead includes any claims that “involve the same
kinds of interests” as its other categories of included investments. In fact,
the tribunal in Mondev based its decision on the fact that the claims in that case
involved the same kinds of interests as “interests arising from the commitment of

capital or other resources,” an extremely broad category with no parallel in

™ Canadian Cattlemen, supra note 21, para. 144.
* Mondev International Ltd. v. United States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award (Oct. 11,
2002); 42 LL.M. p. 85 (2003) [hereinafter Mondev].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 84

153.

154.

the U.S.-Ecuador BIT (Tr. at 107:7-108:19; HR1 p. 46; R III, para. 160; R IV,
para. 38). The Respondent also counters the Claimants’ reliance on the U.S.
President’s transmittal letter to the U.S. Senate concerning the BIT, which
suggests that the phrase “associated with an investment” was only inserted in
order to exclude simple trade transactions from coverage under the BIT.
Although this may be one effect of the phrase, the letter does not suggest that it is
the only effect (Tr. at 117:13-118:5; HR1 p. 58; R IV, para. 20).

Additionally, the Respondent argues that the lawsuits cannot be fit under
the heading of “rights conferred by law or contract” under Article I(1)(a)(v) of
the BIT. To start, the Respondent submits that the lawsuits fall squarely in
the category of “claims to money or claims to performance having economic
value” under BIT Article I(1)(a)(iii). In that provision, the claims must be
“associated with an investment,” which the Respondent asserts that they are not
for the reasons noted above. Article I(1)(a)(v) on the other hand envisages
“rights, not to receive money or performance from another, but to act in a
manner, or to do something, to which the owner of the right would not otherwise
be entitled” (R II, para. 172; Tr. at 96:3-10; HR1 p. 60). This is what is suggested
by the inclusion of the words “licenses and permits” in the provision (R II,
paras. 179-185; HR1 pp. 62-63; R III, paras. 167-169). The provision does not
intend to include mere “claims” already addressed in Article I(1)(a)(iii) (R I,
paras. 186-188). The Claimants should not be allowed to broaden the scope of
Article I(1)(a)(v) to the point of engulfing Article I(1)(a)(iii) and rendering that
provision meaningless (R II, paras. 172-178; Tr. at 123:16-20; HR1 p. 64; R II,
paras. 164-165). All the true “rights” that the Claimants may have held
definitively ended with the expiry of the Concession Agreements, TexPet’s
withdrawal from Ecuador, and the numerous Settlement Agreements signed

between the Parties (R II, paras. 186-197; Tr. at 123:5-15; HR1 p. 61).

Having argued that the lawsuits cannot be an investment in their own right, the
Respondent also refutes the idea that the investments could be considered a part
of an overall investment under the Claimants’ “lifespan” theory. They cite that
the language of Article I(1)(a)(iii) seems to separate and oppose “claims” to the

“investment” that they must be associated to under that provision.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 85

155.

156.

Article I(1)(a)(iii) would, in fact, become superfluous because the investment
would subsume the claims without the need to accord them separate status as an
investment (Tr. at 111:12-22; R III, paras. 176-177). Where the Claimants refer
to Article II(7), Article 1(3), and Article II(3)(b) as showing the different stages
of the “lifespan” of a protected investment, the Respondent asserts that these
provisions say nothing about what constitutes an investment, but only about what
investment-related activities are protected (R IV, para. 24). In fact, Article II(7),
like Article I(1)(a)(iii), distinguishes and opposes “claims” and “rights” from
“investments” (R IV, para. 22). The Respondent also points to Occidental
Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador which held that
disputed claims to money (tax refund claims) could not be considered to be an
“investment” or even part of one*® (Tr. at 112:4-18; HRI p. 48; R IV, paras. 16,
32-33).

The Respondent states that the only case possibly endorsing the “lifespan” theory
of investment advanced by the Claimants is the Mondev case, which is either
distinguishable or incorrect. First, the Respondent notes that the lifespan issue
was not the subject of written briefing in that case (Tr. at 101:15-19; R III,
paras. 183-184; R IV, para. 37). Second, the tribunal in Mondev was motivated
by an equitable consideration not present in this case, namely that a State should
not be able to defeat jurisdiction by virtue of the very expropriation claimed
against (Tr. at 102:8-21; HR1 pp. 446-47; R III, paras. 185-188; R IV, paras. 40-
43). Third, the tribunal’s logic in that case is circular. If a claim for a pre-treaty
expropriation is enough for jurisdiction, then every person who had property
expropriated, no matter how long before the treaty comes into effect, would be

entitled to claim under the treaty (Tr. at 104:19-105:19; R III, paras. 193-194).

According to the Respondent, other cases cited by the Claimants do not support
the “lifespan” theory either and bolster the Respondent’s own position. In Jan de
Nul v. Egypt," for example, both parties and the tribunal recognized that

the investment had ended even if some claims were still outstanding. Egypt,

*© Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador, LCIA Case No. UN
3467, Final Award (July 1, 2004), paras, 81, 86 [hereinafter Occidental v. Ecuador].
7 Jan de Nul N.V. and Dredging International N.V. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No.

ARBO04/13, Decision on Jurisdiction (June 16, 2006) [hereinafter Jan de Nul].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 86

157.

however, did not object to jurisdiction based upon the fact that the investment did
not exist on the date of entry into force of the BIT. The BIT did not expressly
require an investment to be in existence as of its effective date and
the investments were covered under a predecessor BIT in any event (R III,
paras. 195-199; R IV, paras. 34-35). Meanwhile, in the case of Occidental v.
Ecuador, the tribunal flatly rejected the idea that a tax refund claim could be an

investment or part of one** (R III, paras. 200-201).

Lastly, the Respondent challenges the Claimants’ reference to their remediation
work pursuant to environmental agreements to extend their investment past
the date of entry into force. The remediation work on its own does not exhibit
the characteristics of investments (R III, paras. 227-228). In any event, only a de
minimis portion of the work took place after the BIT’s entry into force and was
wholly disconnected from the matters involved in TexPet’s seven lawsuits
(ARI pp. 55-56; R III, paras. 226, 229). The remediation work also did not
continue the investment. There was a two-year hiatus between the expiration of
the investment and the execution of the first environmental agreement, breaking
the “continuum of events” required under the Claimants’ lifespan theory (R III,
para. 205). The Respondent cites an admission by TexPet’s in-house counsel that
“addressing potential environmental impact arising from the Consortium’s
operations was treated as a separate issue” from those involved in the global
settlement and was thus negotiated in a separate agreement with separate agreed
upon consideration (Tr. at 116:6-13; HR1 p. 52; R III, paras. 208-211; R IV,
para. 48). The Claimant is also not able to rely on the “unity of the investment”
principle because the 1994 MOU and 1995 Remediation Agreement do not
exhibit sufficiently close linkages to the 1973 and 1977 Agreements required by
the jurisprudence. Nor did the jurisprudence on the unity principle ever consider
the issue of whether or not an “investment” existed at the cut-off date under

the relevant treaty (Tr. at 116:14-117:6; R III, paras. 214-221).

8 Occidental v. Ecuador, supra note 36, paras. 81, 86.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 87

2.

158.

159.

160.

Arguments by the Claimants

The Claimants accuse the Respondent of mischaracterizing the Claimants’
investments. The Claimants state that, at the time the BIT entered into force on
May 11, 1997, TexPet still possessed legal and contractual rights, whose
enforcement was being sought through the claims pending in the seven court
cases. These rights derived from the investment agreements of 1973 and 1977
and from many millions of dollars invested in exploring for and producing oil in
Ecuador. In addition, at the time the BIT entered into force, TexPet was
undertaking and continued to undertake several projects associated with the
winding up of its investment under Settlement Agreements with Ecuador. These
included a substantial environmental investigation and remediation project and
several community development projects, both stemming from TexPet’s oil
exploration and production activities as part of the Consortium (C II, paras. 128-

130; Tr. at 246:13-248:8; HC3 p. 4; C IV, paras. 28-35).

The Claimants argue that the plain meaning of Article I(1)(a) covers a broad
scope of investments. The definition of the term “investment” therein includes
“every kind of investment” and the article provides a non-exhaustive list of
overlapping examples included in the definition of investment (C II, paras. 132-
135; Tr. at 233:19-25; HC3 pp. 6-7; C III, paras. 13-14). The Claimants cite a
number of cases that construed the inclusion of “every kind of investment” or
“every kind of asset” language to create a broad scope of covered investments
(C Il, paras. 140-143). The object and purpose of the BIT is also furthered by a
broad definition and not by a restrictive one (C II, para. 137; Tr. at 233:1-5;
HC3 p. 5; C Il, paras. 10-12).

The Claimants disagree with the Respondent’s assertion that TexPet’s investment
has not contributed to the development of Ecuador. When the investments are
seen as a whole, it is clear that the Claimants incurred substantial risk and made a
significant and direct contribution of revenues to the Government, technical and
human resources to the Consortium, and oil for domestic consumption (C II,
para. 153). In addition, the Claimants undertook significant environmental

investigation, remediation, and community development projects, which were

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 88

161.

162.

163.

still being carried out when the BIT entered into force (C II, para. 158; HC3
p. 14).

The Claimants also disagree with the Respondent’s argument that the Claimants
did not have a subsisting interest in Ecuador at the time of entry into force of the
BIT because the 1973 and 1977 Agreements had expired by that time. Viewing
the investments as a whole, the legal and contractual rights being enforced in the
domestic claims cannot be separated from the rest of the Claimants’ overall
investment in Ecuador pursuant to those agreements (C II, paras. 154-155; Tr. at

231:3-232:4; HC3 pp. 10-15).

The Claimants further dispute that the non-retroactivity of the BIT prevents them
from basing their claims on contractual rights related to pre-BIT investment
activity. Although Article XII of the BIT limits the application of the BIT’s
protections “to investments existing at the time of entry into force as well as to

investments made or acquired thereafter,” “this merely requires that the claim to
money or performance exist at the time of the BIT’s entry into force” (C II,

para. 169; C IV, paras. 19-20).

The Claimants emphasize that investments must be viewed holistically and not as
discrete transactions or components. Arbitral precedent supports the view that an
investment includes everything associated with a given “overall operation” or
“overall project” of an investor (CII, paras. 144-150). The Claimants rely in
particular on paragraphs 80-83 of the case of Mondev. In that case, the claimant’s
only subsisting interest was “certain claims for damages” relating to a failed
investment. The underlying investment project had failed and no longer existed
by the time of NAFTA’s entry into force. On this basis, the United States raised
an objection that there were no investments existing on the date of entry into
force of NAFTA. The tribunal rejected this argument. According to the
Claimants, the tribunal held that “once an investment exists it is protected
throughout its lifespan by an investment treaty that enters into force at any time
before the ultimate conclusion of the investment” (C II, paras. 156-157, 170-173;
Tr. at 251:14-252:19; HC3 pp. 16-20; C III, paras. 27-42). The provisions of the

BIT also support this view, such as Article I(3) which protects alterations in the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 89

164.

165.

form of the investment and Article II(3)(b) which protects investments
throughout their “management, operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment,

acquisition, expansion or disposal” (Tr. at 248:16-23; C III, para. 21).

In reference to the Respondent’s interpretation of Article I(1)(a)(iii), the
Claimants argue that the phrase restricting the definition of investments to claims
to money or performance “associated with an investment” was only intended to
exclude stand-alone claims associated with a simple commercial transaction.
President Clinton’s transmittal message to the U.S. Senate concerning the BIT
states that,

[t]he requirement that a “claim to money” be associated with an investment

excludes claims arising solely from trade transactions, such as a simple

movement of goods across a border, from being considered investments
covered by the Treaty.”

(C Il, para. 162; Tr. at 235:7-14; HC3 p. 7; C III, paras. 17-19)

Further support for this interpretation comes from commentary to the 1992 U.S.
Model BIT, which contains language identical to Article I(1)(a)(iii) of the BIT
(C Il, para. 163). The Claimants believe that the Canadian Cattlemen case relied
on by the Respondent also supports their position. In that case, the tribunal
interpreted NAFTA Article 1139(j) to exclude claims to money arising from
simple cross-border trade transactions in similar fashion to the interpretation of
the BIT that the Claimants urge here” (C Il, paras. 165-167). In fact, the
Claimants assert that the Respondent’s interpretation would render
Article I(1)(a)(iii) redundant because the investment with which the claim was
associated would already be sufficient to attract the protection of the BIT (C IV,
paras. 26-27).

The Claimants generally criticize the Respondent for importing and applying
notions of investment under the ICSID Convention to the present UNCITRAL

proceeding. For the Claimants, the definition of “investment” in the instant case

*® Transmittal Letter from the President of the United States to the United States Senate, Sept. 10,
1993.

*° Canadian Cattlemen, supra note 21, paras.140-147.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 90

166.

167.

168.

depends solely on interpretation of the plain language of the BIT (C II,
paras. 176-183).

In reference to the Respondent’s interpretation of Article I(1)(a)(v),
the Claimants argue that the “Respondent manufactures an artificial distinction
between ‘rights’ and ‘claims’”(C II, para. 186; Tr. at 258:13-259:7; HC3 pp. 23;
C IIl, para. 20). The Claimants allege that the 1995 Global Settlement did not
terminate the Claimants’ contractual rights at issue in the court cases and the
plain meaning of “rights” in Article I(1)(a)(v) includes court claims to enforce
pre-existing rights (C II, paras. 186-187). The reference to “licenses and permits”
does not limit the “rights” included in the provision because the provision
includes contractual rights and licenses and permits (C II, paras. 188-191). Even
if the reference did have a limiting effect, the rights that the Claimants seek to
enforce in the court claims are within the same broad category as licenses and
permits since they relate to the 1973 Agreement’s granting of rights to explore

for and exploit oil (C II, para. 192).

The provision also does not contain language limiting the rights included to those
“associated with an investment.” In response to the Respondent’s argument that
“associated with an investment” should be read into the clause in order not to
render Article I(1)(a)(iii) meaningless, the Claimants contend that this approach
would apply the rule of effectiveness so as to produce a result contrary to

the plain language and spirit of the BIT (C II, paras. 193-197).

The Tribunal

As mentioned above, the detailed analyses of the relevant provisions of the BIT
and related instruments submitted by the Parties have been helpful for this
Tribunal. The following considerations of the Tribunal, without addressing all the
arguments of the Parties, concentrate on what the Tribunal itself considers to be

determinative on jurisdiction.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 91

169.

170.

171.

172.

173.

3.a._ Retroactivity in general

The Parties have argued at length on the general issue of retroactivity of treaties
in relation to the Respondent’s ratione materiae objections as well as their
ratione temporis objections. Since the Parties have argued the present issue in
relation to the general issue of retroactivity of treaties, the Tribunal will deal with
certain aspects of this question preliminarily before applying any conclusions in
this regard to Article XII of the BIT and to the specific case at hand.

The Tribunal will draw from these conclusions in later sections of this Award.

The legal provisions relevant to the general question of retroactivity are, in
particular, Article 28 of the VCLT and Article 13 of the International Law

Commission’s Draft Articles on State Responsibility (“ILC Draft Articles”).
Article 28 VCLT is titled “Non-retroactivity of treaties” and reads as follows:

Unless a different intention appears from the treaty or is otherwise
established, its provisions do not bind a party in relation to any act or fact
which took place or any situation which ceased to exist before the date of the
entry into force of the treaty with respect to that party.
The language of Article 28 VCLT makes clear that there is no retroactivity unless
a different intention appears from the treaty or can otherwise be established. ILC
Draft Article 13 confirms this same principle for State responsibility:
An act of a State does not constitute a breach of an international obligation
unless the State is bound by the obligation in question at the time the act
occurs.
The principle of non-retroactivity is not different for provisions in treaties dealing
with the resolution of disputes, and in particular jurisdictional clauses contained
therein. In the drafting of the VCLT, the retroactivity of such treaties was
considered.*' However, specific rules regarding the retroactivity of these treaties
and clauses were not taken up in the final version of Article 28 of the VCLT. Its
“unless” language can nonetheless easily be applied to jurisdictional or arbitral

treaties dealing with acts or disputes that have arisen before the conclusion of the

* Sir Humphrey Waldock, Third Report on the Law of Treaties, in Special Rapporteur, Law of
Treaties, II YEARBOOK OF THE INTERNATIONAL LAW COMMISSION (1964) [hereinafter Waldock]; UN.
Doc. A/CN.4/167 and Add.1-3 at 10-11.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 92

174.

175.

176.

given treaty. As a result the final version of Article 28 of the VCLT applies also

to treaties dealing with the resolution of disputes.

None of the investment jurisprudence cited by the Parties establishes a different
approach. The cases of Luchetti and Vieira, on the one hand, and Mavrommatis,
on the other, can be seen as applying Article 28 in view of the specific wording
and intention of the respective treaties dealt with in those cases.” Tradex Hellas
applied the same principle to a situation where both a BIT and a domestic
investment law potentially provided alternative bases for jurisdiction over the
claim. The tribunal in that case found jurisdiction based on establishing
alegislative intent that the domestic investment law applied to pre-existing
disputes, but found no intention to apply the BIT retroactively to a claim filed

before the BIT had entered into force.

Therefore, in line with the Ambatielos case“ and the Respondent’s general line of
argument, the Tribunal finds that the BIT, including its jurisdictional provisions,
cannot apply retroactively unless such an intention can be established in the BIT

or otherwise.

There may be a different approach to retroactivity in the human rights context.
The Tribunal need not, however, decide if any presumption of retroactivity exists
for human rights treaties as a genre. The Tribunal considers that any possible
presumption must result from the specific context and purpose of international
human rights or a sui generis rule in that field. In either case, the Tribunal does
not find the analogy between BITs and human rights treaties sufficiently strong
to warrant deviating from the dominant legal framework for retroactivity just

described.

*? Empresas Lucchetti $.A. and Lucchetti Peru S.A. v. Peru, ICSID Case No. ARB03/4, Award, Feb.
7, 2005 [hereinafter Lucchetti]; Sociedad Anénima Eduardo Vieira v. Chile, ICSID Case No.
ARB/04/7, Award (Aug. 21, 2007) [hereinafter Vieira]; Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions case
(Greece v. Britain), 1924 P.C.LJ. Ser. A, No. 2 (Aug. 30, 1924) [hereinafter Mavrommatis}.

* Tradex Hellas S.A. v. Republic of Albania, ICSID Case No. ARB/94/2, Decision on Jurisdiction
(Dec. 24, 1996), 14 ICSID REV.- For. INV. LJ. p. 161 (1999), at pp. 179-180, 192 [hereinafter Tradex
Hellas}.

“4 Greece v. United Kingdom, 1952 C.J. Rep. p. 28 [hereinafter Ambatielos].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 93

177.

178.

179.

3.b. Application to the present case

Under Article VI(1)(c), the Tribunal has jurisdiction over “a dispute ... arising
out of or relating to ... an alleged breach of any right conferred or created by this
Treaty with respect to an investment.” The Tribunal has a twofold task to
determine whether the present dispute can be fit into this provision. First, the
Tribunal must determine whether the Claimants have an investment within the
meaning of that term in the BIT. If the Claimants do have an investment, the
Tribunal must then determine if that investment is covered by the BIT in light of
Article XII(1) of the BIT (“It shall apply to investments existing at the time of
entry into force as well as to investments made or acquired thereafter”). These
are two distinct determinations and they should be approached separately and

sequentially.

Assuming that those two questions (i.e., an investment ratione materiae and an
investment ratione temporis) are answered in the affirmative, a further question
is whether the BIT applies also to disputes that have arisen prior to its entry into
force. That question is addressed in Section J.VI below (“Jurisdiction Ratione
Temporis regarding Pre-Existing Disputes”). Thus, Article XII(1) addresses
retroactivity regarding investments, but not retroactivity regarding disputes.
Article VI(1) in turn concerns resolutions of disputes without addressing
retroactivity. The distinction between the applicability ratione temporis of
substantive obligations in a BIT and jurisdiction ratione temporis was also made

in Generation Ukraine* and Salini v. Jordan.”

The Tribunal finds it useful to start by repeating the BIT’s definition of

“investment,” found in Article I(1)(a):

“investment” means every kind of investment in the territory of one Party
owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or companies of the
other Party, such as equity, debt, and service and investment contracts; and
includes:

*5 Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9, Award (Sept. 16, 2003), para. 11.2
[hereinafter Generation Ukraine].

“© Salini Costruttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/13, Decision on Jurisdiction (Nov. 15, 2004), paras. 167-178 [hereinafter Salini].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 94

180.

181.

(i) tangible and intangible property, including rights, such as
mortgages, liens and pledges;

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a company or
interests in the assets thereof;

(iii) a claim to money or a claim to performance having economic
value, and associated with an investment;

(iv) intellectual property which includes, inter alia, rights relating to:

(v) any right conferred by law or contract, and any licenses and
permits pursuant to law;
The Tribunal must first determine whether the Claimants hold an investment that

falls within the above definition.

The Respondent does not and cannot reasonably deny that the Claimants had
what would be considered to be an investment in Ecuador in their oil exploration
and extraction activities ranging from the 1960s to the early 1990s. Nor can the
Respondent deny that all the necessary characteristics were present in this
investment. The Respondent disputes instead that the Claimants’ lawsuits in
Ecuadorian courts cannot, on their own, be considered to be an “investment”
under the BIT. The Tribunal, however, agrees with the Claimants that in the
present situation, which is similar to that in Mondev (discussed below), these
lawsuits concern the liquidation and settlement of claims relating to the

investment and, therefore, form part of that investment.

The Claimants highlighted in their submissions that the definition of
“investment” in the BIT is a broad one that covers “every kind of investment.”
Beyond being broad in its general terms, the definition enumerates a myriad of
forms of investment that are covered. It first specifies that it covers investment
forms “such as equity, debt, and service and investment contracts.” It then gives a
further non-exhaustive list of forms that an investment may take. The list covers,
among other things, multiple further incorporeal assets and speaks of a variety of

rights, claims, and interests that an investor may hold in them. In addition,

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 95

182.

183.

184.

185.

Article I(3) of the BIT provides that “[a]ny alteration of the form in which assets

are invested or reinvested shall not affect their character as investment.”

The Claimants have also highlighted that Article II(3)(b) of the BIT protects
investments from “arbitrary or discriminatory measures” with respect to their
“management, operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion or
disposal.” They also point to the further guarantee in Article II(7) of “effective

means of asserting claims and enforcing rights with respect to investment.”

Taken together, the above-mentioned provisions indicate to the Tribunal that
once an investment is established, the BIT intends to close any possible gaps in
the protection of that investment as it proceeds in time and potentially changes
form. Once an investment is established, it continues to exist and be protected
until its ultimate “disposal” has been completed — that is, until it has been wound

up.

The Claimants’ investments were largely liquidated when they transferred their
ownership in the concession to PetroEcuador and upon the conclusion of various
Settlement Agreements with Ecuador. Yet, those investments were and are not
yet fully wound up because of ongoing claims for money arising directly out of
their oil extraction and production activities under their contracts with Ecuador
and its state-owned oil company. These claims were excluded from any of the
Settlement Agreements (R II, para. 169; C II, para. 40). The Claimants continue
to hold subsisting interests in their original investment, but in a different form.
Thus, the Claimants’ investments have not ceased to exist: their lawsuits
continued their original investment through the entry into force of the BIT and to

the date of commencement of this arbitration.

This conclusion is consistent with the Mondev case, where the tribunal was clear
that by the time of entry into force of NAFTA “all Mondev had were claims to
money associated with an investment which had already failed” (emphasis
added).*” The United States objected that these claims were insufficient to

constitute an investment. However, the tribunal considered that it would merely

#7 Mondev, supra note 35, para. 77.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 96

186.

187.

188.

be providing protection to the subsisting interests that Mondev continued to hold

in the original investment. The tribunal summarized its finding as follows:

Issues of orderly liquidation and the settlement of claims may still arise and
require “fair and equitable treatment”, “full protection and security” and the
avoidance of invidious discrimination. A provision that in a receivership
local shareholders were to be given preference to shareholders from other
NAFTA States would be a plain violation of Article 1102(2). The
shareholders even in an unsuccessful enterprise retain interests in the
enterprise arising from their commitment of capital and other resources, and
the intent of NAFTA is evidently to provide protection of investments
throughout their life-span, i.e., “with respect to the establishment,
acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or other
disposition of investments.”*

Despite the Respondent’s comment that the Mondev decision may not have
benefited from a detailed written briefing, the Tribunal finds no reason to
disagree with the above statement. Nor does the Tribunal see any sufficient
difference between NAFTA and the BIT to depart from that reasoning. In the
present case, the relevant language of the BIT is at least as broad in scope as the
NAFTA provisions relied upon by the Mondev tribunal for its “life-span” theory

of investment protection.

The existence of an investment at the time of entry into force and at the time of
commencement of the arbitration does not completely resolve the issue. The
Tribunal must determine whether the BIT confers jurisdiction over pre-existing
investments. Recalling what has been stated on retroactivity above, this is not a
question of the general rule of non-retroactivity but of the interpretation of
Article XII(1) of the BIT. The general rule of non-retroactivity might restrict the
application of the BIT to only investments that come into existence after the entry
into force of the BIT. However, in accordance with Article 28 VCLT’s “unless”
clause, Article XII(1) of the BIT must be interpreted to determine to what extent

it makes an exception to non-retroactivity.

The relevant portion of Article XII(1) states that the BIT “shall apply to
investments existing at the time of entry into force as well as to investments

made or acquired thereafter.” Article XII(1) of the BIT has to be applied in the

+8 Mondev, supra note 35, para. 81.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 9o7

189.

190.

191.

192.

sense of Article 28 of the VCLT: in addition to investments made or acquired
after entry into force, it expressly provides for application to “investments
existing at the time of entry into force.” That can only mean that investments
made before entry are covered if they still existed at the time of entry into force.
How long the investment may have existed before the entry into force is in fact
irrelevant. Therefore, in spite of the general rule of non-retroactivity, the Tribunal
may apply the BIT to a pre-existing investment such as the Claimants’ lawsuits in

the present case.

The Tribunal has already found that the Claimants’ lawsuits are an “investment”
under the BIT. Consequently, and in view of the language of Article XII(1), the
Tribunal finds that the Claimants’ investments were “existing at the time of entry

into force” of the BIT.

Although the Tribunal is satisfied that the above reasoning disposes of the
Respondent’s ratione materiae objections, the Tribunal nonetheless wishes to
address certain of the Respondent’s submissions regarding interpretation of the
BIT’s definition of investment, given the extensive argument that the Parties

have submitted on the matter.

Under Article I(1)(a)(iii), the Respondent’s approach first notes that for “claims
to money” to constitute an investment, they must be associated with an
“investment.” The Respondent therefore argues that the Tribunal must refer back
to the BIT’s definition of “investment” to define a further investment with which
the claims to money are associated. The Respondent asks the Tribunal to
simultaneously restrict the definition of the associated “investment” through
Article XII(1)’s limitation to investments existing at the time of entry into force

of the BIT.

The Tribunal does not agree that the further mention of the term “investment”
within the definition itself should be understood as providing for a recursive
definition. Instead, the further mention of the term should be taken to refer to the
plain meaning of the word. This is shown by the opening phrase “‘investment’
means every kind of investment ... such as [certain kinds of investment] ... and

includes [other kinds of investment].” A recursive approach to the opening use of

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 98

193.

194.

“every kind of investment” would, in the Tribunal’s view, render the definition
circular and meaningless. Meanwhile, the use of the plain meaning of the word
“investment” provides a basis with which to supplement the non-exclusive list of
covered investments, particularly as regards new kinds of investment that may

arise in the future.”

This approach resolves the concern expressed in Mondev and Jan de Nul that
an investor whose investment was definitively expropriated would hold a claim
to compensation but would technically no longer hold any existing
“investment.”*” The Canadian Cattlemen decision is also consistent with this
approach. That decision interpreted NAFTA Article 1139(j)’s similar language to

exclude claims to money arising from “mere cross-border trade interests,” but

 

was willing to include claims arising from “something more permanent — such as
a commitment of capital or other resources in the territory of a Party to economic
activity in such territory” without necessarily requiring a separate and associated
investment to be proven.*! Given that NAFTA’s definition of investment is
worded in a more restrictive fashion, the phrase “associated with an investment”
requires, at its strictest, that the claims involve interests of the same nature as

other covered categories of investments.

As for Article I(1)(a)(v) “rights pursuant to law or contract,” the Tribunal
considers that, in isolation, the rights spoken of in this provision might be
construed according to canons of interpretation to be limited to “licenses and
permits” and rights analogous to those. The context and purpose of the BIT,
however, do not support this interpretation. The word “rights” is used in
a broader and more general sense in various other provisions of the BIT. As
mentioned above, the BIT intends a broad coverage, using language that is
inclusive. This is evident, for example, in Article II(7)’s guarantee of “effective

means of asserting claims and enforcing rights with respect to investment.”

* United Nations Commission on Trade and Development, Bilateral Investment Treaties 1995-2006:
Trends in Investment Rulemaking, UN Doc. UNCTAD/ITE/IIT/2006/5, at p. 10.

50

Mondev, supra note 35, para. 80; Jan de Nul, supra note 37, para. 135.

5! Canadian Cattlemen, supra note 21, para. 144.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 99

195.

The non-restrictive meaning of “rights” becomes even clearer when the structure
of Article I(1)(a)(v) is contrasted to the wording of the other categories of
investment. Article I(1)(a)(i) starts by stating that it covers the category of
tangible and intangible property. It then proceeds to specify that this coverage
“includ[es] rights, such as mortgages, liens and pledges.” Similarly, Article
I(1)(iv) begins with the general category of intellectual property and then
specifies that this category “includes, inter alia, rights relating to” a number of
specific types of intellectual property. Article I(1)(ii) covers “a company or
shares of stock or other interests in a company or interests in the assets thereof.”
In all the above cases, the category to which the “rights” or “interests” must
pertain is clearly stated prior to the use of the term. In light of the above, the
contrary formulation of Article I(1)(v) whereby the BIT covers “any right
conferred by law or contract, and any licenses and permits pursuant to law”
(emphasis added) suggests that the “rights conferred by law or contract” are
a general category unto themselves, not to be limited by the subsequent language

of “licenses and permits.”

J.IV. The Claimants’ Investment Agreements

1.

196.

Arguments by the Respondent

With respect to the introductory clause of Article VI(1)(a) of the BIT,
the Respondent rejects the idea that the current claims arise out of or relate to an
“investment agreement.” The Claimants’ lawsuits are the only subject matter of
the present dispute and are not investment agreements. However, even if
the Concession Agreements between TexPet and Ecuador were considered
“investment agreements,” they cannot form a basis for substantive jurisdiction in
the present case because these Concession Agreements ceased to exist before
the entry into force of the BIT (R II, paras. 198-200). Article XII of the BIT
requires that the investment agreements, as a form of investment recognized by
the BIT, must be in existence at the date of entry into force of the BIT to be

covered (Tr. at 136:1-9; HR1 p. 73; R II, para. 238; R IV, para. 53).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 100

197.

198.

199.

The Respondent further argues that Article VI(1)(a) does not confer jurisdiction
over customary international law claims as suggested by the Claimants.
The BIT’s substantive provisions already include customary international law
obligations, for example, where Article II(3) guarantees that investments are
accorded “fair and equitable treatment” and treatment not “less than that required
by international law.” If these claims were also covered under Article VI(1)(a),
this would render the substantive provisions of the BIT superfluous (R IV,
paras. 55-56). At most, Article VI(1)(a) potentially covers breach of contract
claims (Tr. at 133:3-19; R IV, para. 54). The authorities relied on by
the Claimants for this idea merely support the common proposition that
customary international law can be considered by the Tribunal (R IV, paras. 60-

62).

In any event, the Claimants’ claims under Article VI(1)(a) are also barred by
the “fork-in-the-road” provision of the BIT. Having already been submitted to
the Ecuadorian courts, the disputes over breaches of the 1973 and 1977
Agreements cannot now be brought before an international tribunal (Tr. at
136:10-137:6; HR1 pp. 74-76). Alternatively, the claims are barred by the forum
selection clause of the 1973 Agreement which provided that disputes arising from
that Agreement shall be submitted to Ecuadorian courts. The Respondent asserts

that the rule in SGS v. Philippines” should apply here (R IV, paras. 63-64).

Arguments by the Claimants

Article VI(1)(a) provides jurisdiction over any dispute “arising out of or relating
to an investment agreement.” The term “investment agreement” is not
specifically defined in the BIT and the Claimants assert that, in the ordinary
meaning of the term, the 1973 and 1977 Agreements are investment agreements
(C II, paras. 202-203; HC3 p. 47). The Claimants note that Article VI(1)(c) is
limited to breaches of the BIT. Article VI(1)(a), however, is not limited to causes

of action based on the treaty: “Thus, the BIT confers jurisdiction over Claimants’

® Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6,
Decision on Jurisdiction (Jan. 29, 2004), 8 ICSID Rep. p. 518 (2005) [hereinafter SGS v. Philippines].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 101

200.

201.

202.

203.

claims relating to investment agreements under both domestic and customary
international law” (C II, paras. 204-212; HC3 pp. 48-49; C III, paras. 45-69). Any
other interpretation would render Article VI(1)(a) redundant in relation to

Article VI(1)(c) (C Il, paras. 214-215).

Given the jurisdiction over claims under customary international law, the
Claimants assert that their investment agreement claims are not barred in any
way by the “fork-in-the-road” provision in the BIT. The Claimants’ seven
Ecuadorian court cases allege breaches of the investment agreements under
domestic Ecuadorian law. However, their investment agreement claim is a claim
under customary international law for denial of justice regarding those
underlying seven lawsuits. The latter claim has not been submitted for

adjudication before any other forum (C III, paras. 70-71; C IV, para. 42).

The Claimants dispute the Respondent’s attempt to imply a temporal limitation
into Article I(1)(a) on this same basis. Since “investment disputes arising under
Article VI(1)(a) do not invoke the substantive provisions of the BIT, Article XII
does not require that the investment agreement still be in effect; it is enough that
claims for breach of the rights provided by the agreement still exist” (C II,
para. 216; Tr. at 263:16-264:5; HCl p. 11; HC3 p. 51; C IV, paras. 40-41).
Therefore, Article VI(1)(a) provides an alternative jurisdictional basis for the

Claimants’ denial of justice claims.

The Tribunal

As mentioned above, the detailed analyses of the relevant provisions of the BIT
and related instruments submitted by the Parties have been helpful for this
Tribunal. The following considerations of the Tribunal, without addressing all the
arguments of the Parties, concentrate on what the Tribunal itself considers to be

determinative on jurisdiction.

The basic question at issue is whether the Claimants can bring their claims within
the purview of Article VI(1)(a) of the BIT. That article confers jurisdiction upon

this Tribunal over “a dispute ... arising out of or relating to ... an investment

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 102

204.

205.

206.

agreement.” The Tribunal must thus determine whether Article VI(1)(a) confers
jurisdiction over customary international law claims, whether the 1973 and 1977
Agreements are “investment agreements” and whether the dispute arises out of or
relates to them. The Tribunal must then also determine whether the non-
retroactivity of the BIT precludes the submission of the claims under this

heading.

Before commencing its analysis in regard to the Claimants’ investment
agreement claim, the Tribunal recalls its comments under section J.I.2 above. An
examination of jurisdiction over this particular claim must be conducted with
regard to the particular formulation of the claim by the Claimants. For ease of
reference, the Tribunal repeats the formulation used by the Claimants at the

Hearing on Jurisdiction:

MR. BISHOP: [... T]he claims involving the investment agreement are for
breach of the investment agreement and the failure to provide a remedy and
the denial of justice under customary international law, but it's a combination
of them. It is not strictly a stand-alone claim for breach of the investment
agreements, and that’s perhaps where I generated some confusion, and if I
did I apologize for that.

(Tr. at 277:3-10)

The Tribunal also repeats the relevant item of the Claimants’ latest restatement of

their Relief Sought:

116. Based on all of Claimants’ presentations, Claimants respectfully
request the following relief in the form of an Award:

(vi) A declaration that Respondent has breached the 1973 and
1977 Agreements and has committed a denial of justice
under customary international law, and that these combined
acts constitute a violation of customary international law
related to an investment agreement, under Article VI(1)(a) of
the Treaty;

The Tribunal has understood that by the above statements the Claimants do not
mean to make a claim directly for breach of contract under domestic law or under

the umbrella clause at Article II(3)(c) of the BIT. This was, in fact, specifically

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 103

207.

208.

209.

disclaimed by the Claimants (Tr. at 26:5-11, 277:7-8, 279:2-4, 280:1-8). Instead,
the Claimants make a claim for denial of justice under customary international
law. However, they take pains to state that the denial of justice relates to the

lawsuits for breaches of the investment agreements.

These claims are therefore not excluded by the fork-in-the-road provision at
Article VI(3) of the BIT, despite the fact that the original disputes over the
investment agreements were submitted to the Ecuadorian courts. The customary
international law claim for denial of justice by Ecuador’s judiciary with regard to
the breach-of-contract claims is fundamentally different than the breach-of-
contract claims themselves. As the Claimants correctly point out, their
investment agreement claims “are based on different conduct by a different State
organ that violated different legal obligations” (C II, para. 289). At the same
time, and despite their distinct nature, the claims’ connection to the investment
agreements is sufficient to qualify them as “arising out of or relating to

investment agreements” within the meaning of Article VI(1)(a) of the BIT.

Despite accepting that the fork-in-the-road provision does not pose an obstacle to
the denial of justice claim, the Tribunal must still ascertain the scope of
Article VI(1)(a) to decide if it can consider the specific claims made by the
Claimants under customary international law. The Claimants argue that the
article confers jurisdiction over customary international law claims and the
Respondent argues that, at its broadest, it merely covers domestic law contractual

claims.

The Tribunal finds that Article VI(1)(a) does confer jurisdiction over customary
international law claims. Article VI(1)(a), in contrast to Article VI(1)(c) and the
wording of a large number of other BITs, is not limited to causes of action based
on the treaty. Its language includes all disputes “arising out of or relating to”
investment agreements and this language is broad enough to allow the Tribunal
to hear a denial of justice claim relating to the Concession Agreements. Thus, any
limitation to BIT or domestic law causes of action, if it exists, must be found

elsewhere in the BIT.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 104

210.

211.

212.

The Respondent’s main submission is that the inclusion of customary
international law claims under this heading would render the substantive
provisions of the BIT redundant. The Tribunal disagrees. To accept that argument
would be to accept that the substantive obligations of the BIT entirely subsume
the content of customary international law or vice versa. The Tribunal is instead
persuaded that the inclusion of customary international law claims under
Article VI(1)(a) prevents the article from becoming redundant with respect to
BIT claims under Article VI(1)(c), given the coverage already provided to claims
under domestic law for breaches of investment agreements under the umbrella
clause found at Article II(3)(c) and the ancillary protection provided to such

claims under Article II(7).

Although this point was never seriously disputed, it remains to be answered: do
the Concession Agreements qualify as “investment agreements”? The Tribunal
agrees with the Claimants that, in the ordinary meaning of the term, the 1973 and
1977 Agreements are investment agreements. Furthermore, according to its
conclusions regarding the existence of the Claimants’ investment above, the
lawsuits based on the 1973 and 1977 Agreements are within the definition of
“investment” in Article I(1)(a) of the BIT in general and categories (iii) and (v)
of the non-exclusive listing in particular. The Concession Agreements, being the
agreements from which that “investment” arose, must be considered to be

“investment agreements.”

The Respondent, however, objects that the principle of non-retroactivity of
treaties precludes reliance on an investment agreement that had expired by the
time the BIT came into force. For the reasons given with regard to the Claimants’
“investments” under the BIT (see Section J.III.3 above), the Tribunal views this
again not as an issue of retroactivity, but of applying Article XII of the BIT,
which allows for the protection of “investments existing at the time of entry into
force.” Given that the claims and rights arising from these agreements were still
pending before the courts, the Claimants’ “investment” was not fully wound-up.
The rights and claims relating to the Concession Agreements still constituted an

existing investment at the time of entry into force. Therefore, the agreements

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 105

213.

pertaining to that covered “investment” must also be covered by the BIT as

“investment agreements.”

The tribunal in Jan de Nul considered and rejected a similar objection.
The tribunal noted that the mere fact that a claim for money does not continue
the original form of the investment, does not mean that the dispute over that
claim is not a dispute “‘in relation to [the original] investment.”** The present case
is no different. The Claimants’ denial of justice claims still relate to
the Concession Agreements even if the agreements expired before entry into

force of the BIT.

J.V. Exhaustion of Local Remedies

1.

214.

215.

Arguments by the Respondent

In its jurisdictional analysis, the Tribunal must consider whether a prima facie
case has been put forward as to all the essential substantive elements of
the claims (see Section J.I. above). The Respondent argues that a prerequisite for
a denial of justice claim — the exhaustion of all available local remedies — has not
been demonstrated. The Claimants’ claims are based solely on the acts of
the Ecuadorian courts at first instance and the Claimants have not taken
advantage of several procedural remedies open to them. As such, the claims are
not yet ripe and do not constitute an arbitrable “dispute” under Article VI of

the BIT.

In this case, a complete exhaustion of remedies against court delay under
Ecuadorian law is required to found an allegation of denial of justice. The
Respondent cites Jan Paulsson on the subject:

States are held to an obligation to provide a fair and efficient system of
justice, not to an undertaking that there will never be an instance of judicial

%3 Jan de Nul, supra note 37, para. 136.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 106

216.

misconduct. [...] National responsibility for denial of justice occurs only
when the system as a whole has been tested and the initial delict has
remained uncorrected. [...] [T]he very definition of ... denial of justice
encompasses the notion of exhaustion of remedies. There can be no denial of
justice before exhaustion.”*

(RIL, paras. 245-246)

Therefore, without proof of exhaustion, the Claimants have not made out
a substantive prima facie case of denial of justice (R II, paras. 245-252; Tr. at
138:22-140:23; HR1 pp. 78-81; R III, paras. 242-245). The Respondent broadens
this point further by stating that the requirement of exhaustion applies whenever
a State’s courts are impugned “no matter what the source of the obligation
alleged to be violated” (Tr. at 146:6-10). Thus, the Claimants must show
exhaustion to substantiate all their claims, whether these allege specific BIT
breaches or denials of justice under customary international law (Tr. at 144:8-16;

HRI pp. 85-89).

The Respondent points out that the Claimants have failed to take advantage of at

least five distinct remedies available to them under Ecuadorian law:

1. The Claimants never requested a “hearing in stands” to raise or reaffirm
their arguments with the judge (R II, para. 260: Code of Civil Procedure,
Article 1016).

2. The Claimants never submitted legal reports or written closing arguments
to the courts (R II, para. 261: Code of Civil Procedure, Article 837).

3. The Claimants never filed a disciplinary action against any of the judges
or justices involved (R II, paras. 262-263: Organic Law of the National
Council of the Judiciary, Article 17; Organic Law of the Judiciary,
Article 191).

4. The Claimants never moved for recusal of any of the judges for failing to
adjudicate the case within the statutory period (R II, paras. 264-267: Code
of Civil Procedure, Articles 856, 860, 865, 866, 868, 875).

“+ JAN PAULSSON, DENIAL OF JUSTICE IN INTERNATIONAL LAW pp. 100, 111, 125 (Cambridge
University Press 2005).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 107

217.

218.

219.

220.

5. The Claimants never sued any judges for damages resulting from the

delays (R II, paras. 268-269: Code of Civil Procedure, Article 979).

The Respondent notes that the Claimants’ lawyers in Ecuador are familiar with
the recusal procedures, as evidenced by successful motions for recusal on
conflict-of-interest grounds (R II, para. 266; Tr. at 376:19-377:6; HR1 p. 93).
However, they still did not pursue a single recusal on the basis of delay. Given
the Claimants’ failure to test these procedural mechanisms, the Ecuadorian

judicial system cannot be said to have failed to provide justice to the Claimants.

The Respondent contests the assertion that claims of undue delay are exempt
from the finality requirement. Even in cases of delay, a claimant must seek to
remedy the delay in the host State’s courts. The Respondent contends that
the cases relied on by the Claimants in this regard are either situations in which
the only available remedy was to continue to wait for a judgment or situations
where the tribunal, given an explicit exception in the applicable treaty, shifted
the burden to the Government to demonstrate which specific domestic remedies
remain to be exhausted and offer relief for the harm alleged. However, in no case
was the claimant exempted from the requirement of exhaustion merely because
its claim was one of undue delay (Tr. at 147:2-10, 371:3-14; HC1 p. 90; R II,
paras. 255-258).

Furthermore, according to the Respondent, the Claimants’ assertion that these
remedies would be (or would have been) futile is false. According to
the Respondent, once they have shown the availability of local remedies,
the burden shifts to the Claimants to show the ineffectiveness or futility of those
remedies. Remedies are presumed effective and futility is a high standard which
“requires more than the probability of failure or the improbability of success”
(RII, para. 260; R IV, paras. 85-86). A claimant is also not excused from
pursuing available remedies because they expect injustice to result or because

they are “indirect” remedies for delay (R III, para. 261; R IV, para. 89).

In the present case, the Respondent alleges that the Claimants not only did not
pursue available remedies, but limited themselves to doing the bare minimum to

keep their claims alive (Tr. at 151:2-7, 375:19-376:3; R III, para. 267; R IV,

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 108

221.

paras. 99-103). The Claimants’ assertion that autos para sentencia issued in their
cases relieved them of all burden to prosecute their cases is incorrect under
Ecuadorian law (R III, para. 268; R IV, paras. 97-98). The evidence of rulings
and judgments in favor of the Claimants also refute their claims of futility (Tr. at
153:2-12, 157:16-158:14; HR1 pp. 93-94; R III, para. 277). The Claimants,
therefore, cannot be excused from their failure to prosecute their own cases

diligently and must be taken as the authors of their own misfortune.

In any event, the Respondent states that the Claimants’ basis for alleged futility
in the recent political events in Ecuador does not hold. First of all,
“the Claimants’ allegation that the Ecuadorian courts are politicized and
incapable of rendering an unbiased decision rings hollow in light of their history
of public and judicial pronouncements to the contrary,” including statements as
recent as 2006 (RII, paras. 271-272). The international community has
recognized the impartiality, independence, and professional ability of
the Ecuadorian Supreme Court on many occasions following the dismissal and
replacement of the judges which forms the basis for the futility argument asserted
by the Claimants (R II, paras. 273-274; Tr. 154:12-17, 159:11-160:15; HR1
pp. 95-96). Moreover, the investigations into corruption that the Claimants
highlight are evidence that Ecuador has set up an effective system to investigate
and sanction judicial misconduct (Tr. at 161:13-21, 384:9-385:10; R IL
paras. 295-296). The Claimants also misstate that the Executive holds absolute
power over the judiciary simply because the Constituent Assembly has a majority
of members coming from the President’s party (Tr. at 161:22-163:23; R II,
para. 319). Finally, the Claimants fail to show the relevance of much of their
criticism of the Ecuadorian judiciary to the conduct of their cases, such as where
they criticize the lack of independence of the Constitutional and Electoral
Tribunals that do not hear their cases (Tr. at 163:24-165:7; HR1 pp. 97-99; R III,
para. 332). All in all, the Respondent accuses the Claimants of cobbling together
disparate sources and incidents in a manipulative way that could be used to make
almost any judiciary appear politicized, corrupt, and broken (HRI pp. 105-107;
R III, paras. 347-349).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 109

2.

222.

223.

55

Arguments by the Claimants

Preliminarily, the Claimants contend that any examination of “whether local
remedies must be exhausted under an investment treaty is a determination for
the merits” (C II, para. 317; Tr. at 289:22-291:1, 294:1-295:11; HC3 pp. 56-57;
Cll, paras. 87-90; C IV, paras. 44-50). To the extent that they have any burden
to meet this requirement, they have made a prima facie case of exhaustion of
local remedies and object to any further consideration of the issue at this stage of
the proceedings (Tr. at 327:18-20; C III, para. 97). The BIT contains no provision
requiring the exhaustion of local remedies for admission of a claim. In terms of
pre-arbitral procedure, the BIT merely contemplates a brief waiting period for
consultation and negotiation (C II, paras. 318-319). Indeed, the idea of a prior
requirement of exhaustion of local remedies is inconsistent with the choice given
in the BIT’s fork-in-the-road provision (Tr. at 291:16-292:7). Even if
the exhaustion of local remedies were to be considered an issue of admissibility
rather than substance, it would still have to be deferred until the merits phase of

the proceedings according to the UNCITRAL Rules (C III, paras. 89-90).

Furthermore, the substantive provisions of the BIT do not contain a requirement
of exhaustion of local remedies. The merits of the Claimants’ case require “an
analysis of the provision that requires Ecuador to provide effective means of
asserting claims and enforcing rights” as well as more subtle consideration “of
the elements of fair and equitable treatment [...] along with denial of justice”
(Cll, para. 320). While the fair and equitable treatment standard is commonly
understood to include a prohibition on denial of justice, a decision of a lower
court may in certain cases constitute an act or omission by the State that directly
violates international standards distinct from that of a denial of justice (C II,
para. 323-324; Tr. at 292:18-293:25; HC3 p. 58; C IV, paras. 51-55).
The Claimants criticize the Loewen decision® relied on by the Respondent for
“borrowing principles from customary international law that are inconsistent with

the hybrid nature of investment arbitration” (C II, paras. 321-322).

The Loewen Group Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United States, ICSID Case

No. ARB(AF)/98/3, Award (June 25, 2003) [hereinafter Loewen].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 110

224.

225.

226.

The Claimants also maintain that there is no requirement of exhaustion for
aclaim of undue delay under customary international law. The local remedies
tule is to be applied flexibly based on the context of a given case. According to
the Claimants, “this case is not about the Ecuadorian judicial system being denied
an opportunity to correct itself. There is no appeal possible under Ecuadorian law
from a refusal of a first instance judge to decide a case” (C II, paras. 330-331;
Tr. at 299:22-300:6). The Claimants further cite a number of authorities that
confirm their position that an unreasonable delay is either equivalent to
an absolute denial of justice or excuses a plaintiff from the requirement to
exhaust local remedies (C II, paras. 332-336; Tr. at 300:7-23; HC3 p. 60; C IV,
paras. 56-63).

Under customary international law, exhaustion of local remedies is also not
required when the local remedies cited are unreasonable, ineffective or futile
(Tr. at 301:18-24; HC3 p. 61; C IV, paras. 65-66). The Claimants rely in
particular on the cases of Robert E. Brown®® and Las Palmeras v. Colombia." In
Robert E. Brown, the South African Government removed the chief judge of the
High Court of South Africa after Brown won a lawsuit against the Government in
the High Court. The new court then dismissed Brown’s motion for a hearing on
damages based on the successful prior suit. It instead invited Brown to
commence a new lawsuit. When the United States later brought a denial of
justice claim on Brown’s behalf, England (acting for South Africa) objected that
local remedies were not exhausted. The tribunal rejected the objection, in part
“because the South African judiciary had been subordinated to the Executive”
and thus local remedies were futile (C II, paras. 339-344; Tr. at 302:15-303:5;
HC3 p. 63). According to the Claimants, in Las Palmeras, the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights also decided that “either a lack of judicial independence
or unwarranted delay demonstrates the futility of pursuing local remedies” (C II,

paras. 346-348; HC3 p. 62; C IV, para. 67).

To substantiate their claim of futility in the present case, the Claimants state that

“Ecuador’s judiciary — and specifically its Supreme Court — has been

* United States v. Britain, VI REP.INT’L ARB.AWARDS p. 120 (1923).
57 Las Palmeras v. Colombia, Inter-Am. Ct. H.R. (Ser. C) No. 90 (2001) [hereinafter Las Palmeras].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 111

227.

dysfunctional for four years [...] the Supreme Court has not been constituted in
accord with the Constitution since December 2004 [and] the courts of Ecuador
are dominated by the political branches of the Government and lack judicial
independence” (C II, para. 350; Tr. at 303:15-304:12; HCI pp. 18-19; HC3
p. 64). The Claimants allege a litany of violations of the provisions on judicial
independence in Ecuador’s 1998 Constitution (C II, para. 352). They produce
a similarly long list of instances of alleged interference by politicians in judicial
decision-making (C II, para. 353). The Claimants further cite a number of
statements and figures attesting to Ecuador’s lack of judicial independence made
by members of the U.S. Government, the Ecuadorian judiciary, and
the Ecuadorian Government itself, as well as by international observers and
Ecuadorian civil society (C II, paras. 356-380; HC3 pp. 65, 69, 72-73, 75).
The Claimants then proceed to highlight a number of recent and ongoing disputes
between the Ecuadorian Government and foreign oil companies, including its
own disputes, to show the particular politicization of these disputes (C II,
paras. 381-391; HC1 p. 20; HC3 pp. 66-67). The Claimants also cite the decision
by the Subrogate President dismissing case 8-92 as abandoned despite the fact
that an auto para sentencia had been issued, in direct contravention of the
Ecuadorian Supreme Court precedent that he himself had authored, as strong
evidence of specific judicial bias against TexPet and in favor of the Ecuadorian
Government (Tr. at 325:18-326:1; HCl p. 21; C IV, para. 68). Lastly, the
Claimants point to recent decisions by the newly-created Ecuadorian Constituent
Assembly that have also subverted judicial independence and a proposal for a
new constitution which will once again dismantle the Supreme Court and subject
it to further uncertainty (C IV, para. 71; Tr. at 314:5-315:10; HC1 pp. 22-23;
HC3 pp. 74-75).

The Claimants further argue that the Respondent has failed to demonstrate that
the specific procedural devices urged by them would be effective in remedying
the undue delays. The Claimants assert that “[i]n the case of elective or
discretionary procedural devices like the ones urged by Ecuador, it is the burden
of Respondent to prove both the availability of the remedy, as a remedy, and the

effectiveness of that remedy” (C III, para. 92; Tr. at 316:7-317:5; C IV, paras. 74-

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 112

228.

229.

77). None of the procedural devices cited by Ecuador demonstrates a strong
connection between the proposed remedy and success in ending the undue delay.
The Respondent’s proposed remedy of “hearings in stands” relies on the tenuous
ability of the litigant to affect the outcome by “commanding the attention of
the court” (C IV, para. 79). Disciplinary or monetary sanctions, for their part, rely
merely on the judge being “motivated to avoid the stigma” associated with such
sanctions (C IV, para. 80). A motion for recusal is also not an effective remedy
since “it does not in any way force the court to decide in a timely fashion
the underlying case that is being delayed” and causes further delays itself (C III,
para. 93; Tr. at 322:24-25; C IV, paras. 81-84). Furthermore, for the Claimants,
the effectiveness of these devices also depends on “whether any of these
proposed remedies could resolve the core tension between politics and the rule of
law” (C II, para. 395). The Claimants emphasize that “in this context of a system-
wide failure, penalties against a particular judge are not a remedy” (C II,

para. 400; HC3 p. 76).

Moreover, the Claimants submit that “TexPet tried some of these proposed
‘remedies’ in two cases [and] all such attempts proved to be futile” (C II,
para. 395; HC3 p. 76). Specifically, the Claimants state that they sought and gave
oral closing arguments and submitted written closing arguments, followed by
repeated requests for a judgment, to no avail (C II, paras. 396-397; Tr. at 316:12-
15). The Claimants also cite one of their cases where a recusal followed by
repeated interventions of members of the Ecuadorian Supreme Court did not

succeed in advancing the case (C II, para. 407; Tr. at 322:15-23).

Lastly, the Claimants counter the Respondent’s allegation that they did not do
enough to advance their cases. The Claimants presented cases and all their
evidence to the courts during the early-to-mid 1990s. The courts then issued
autos para sentencia in six of the seven cases by 1998 and, in the seventh case,
the court has refused to reschedule a judicial inspection despite repeated requests.
Thereafter, the Claimants sent one or two-sentence letters every year or two
simply reiterating their request that the cases be decided (HC2). Under
Ecuadorian law, an auto para sentencia stands as an official acknowledgment

that the case is ready for a judgment. At that point, the burden shifts solely to

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 113

230.

231.

232.

the court to decide the case in a timely manner (Tr. at 320:3-9, 411:10-20; HC3
p. 78; C III, paras. 102-103). Given that TexPet had done everything it could to
fully present its cases and the burden had shifted to the courts, it cannot be
blamed for doing too little and it is mere speculation to suggest that sending more
frequent or detailed letters would have helped (Tr. at 411:21-412:4; C II,
paras. 98-101).

As a separate argument, the Claimants also contend that, under Article VI(1)(a)
of the BIT, the Tribunal has jurisdiction over domestic and customary
international law claims “arising out of or relating to an investment agreement.”
That article contains no requirement for the exhaustion of local remedies and,
“even if an exhaustion requirement exists, the 15 years Claimants have already
suffered in Ecuadorian Courts reasonably fulfills this requirement, and the undue
delays and futility of continuing are sufficient to dispense with it” (C II,

para. 409).

The Tribunal

As mentioned above, the detailed analyses of this issue submitted by the Parties
have been helpful for this Tribunal. The following considerations of the Tribunal,
without addressing all the arguments of the Parties, concentrate on what

the Tribunal itself considers to be determinative on jurisdiction.

At the outset, the Tribunal notes that the Parties make a distinction between
the traditional exhaustion of local remedies rule under international law and
the objection to be considered here. As the Respondent points out, “[t]he local
remedies rule is a procedural prerequisite to the admissibility of a claim in
the normal situation” where a private party sues a State under international law
(Tr. at 371:20-21). However, the Respondent admitted at the Hearing that
“[m]odern BITs waive the local remedies rule. [...] We’re not invoking the local
remedies rule here” (Tr. at 371:24-25). Instead, the Respondent’s objection in
the present jurisdictional proceedings is based on the rule that a “Claimant must
first exhaust the remedies available to it within the [local] court system before

a State can be held liable for denial of justice” (Tr. at 139:24-140:1).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 114

233.

234.

235.

236.

This exhaustion requirement can be viewed as a necessary element both for
adenial of justice under customary international law and for the breach of
a substantive BIT obligation such as “fair and equitable treatment.” However, in
both cases, the question concerns the substance of the claims put before
the Tribunal. Despite couching its objection in the language of ripeness and
admissibility, what the Respondent raises is an issue affecting liability.

Exhaustion of local remedies in this context is therefore an issue of the meri

 

not jurisdiction.

There is consensus in this regard between the authorities put forward by
the Parties. The Respondent cites the following passage by Paulsson on the
subject:
National responsibility for denial of justice occurs only when the system as a
whole has been tested and the initial delict has remained uncorrected. [...]
[T]he very definition of ... denial of justice encompasses the notion of
exhaustion of remedies. There can be no denial of justice before
exhaustion.
The Tribunal agrees with Paulsson that exhaustion of local remedies is a required
substantive element of a claim for denial of justice. The Loewen case, cited by
both Parties in this respect, stands for the same proposition (C II, para. 317; CIV,
paras. 44-46; Tr. at 139:10-140:13). The Loewen tribunal decided against
the investor at the merits phase and on the merits of the claim. Thus, a full
examination of this issue must be reserved for the merits phase of this
proceeding. The Tribunal also need not decide at the jurisdictional stage whether,
in the context of a subsequent examination of damages in the event liability of
the Respondent would be established, the denial of justice would lead to damages
from the fact that the court cases would or should have been successful and

resulted in payments to Claimants.

Nevertheless, this does not mean that the Tribunal may not still examine the issue
prima facie in the context of the approach elucidated above (see Section J.L.1.
above). The Tribunal considers this to be the only legitimate request that

the Respondent can make at this stage. However, when so examining

°8 PAULSSON, supra note 54, at p. 111, 125.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 115

237.

238.

the Claimants’ case, the Tribunal finds itself amply satisfied that the Claimants
have put forward a prima facie case and that the Respondent has not been able to

conclusively contradict it.

Without prejudging the merits, the Tribunal observes that the Claimants have
established prima facie that, with the exception of one case, they pursued their
cases to the point where they were ready for a decision, as acknowledged by
the autos para sentencia that have been issued in six of their seven cases (see
Section H, Table 1 at para. 69 above). The remaining case was held up at
the evidentiary phase and could not progress for reasons apparently out of
the Claimants’ control. In all of the cases, the Claimants sent repeated requests to
the courts to decide their cases or to remove the impediment to no apparent effect

for periods ranging from 9-15 years (see HC2).

Meanwhile, the Respondent has raised a number of procedural remedies that
were available to the Claimants but not used. These points must be considered
when the Tribunal hears the merits of this case. For present purposes the Tribunal
finds that the Claimants have made a sufficient prima facie case of exhaustion of
local remedies and reserves its final determination of the question to the merits

phase of these proceedings.

J.VI. Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis regarding Pre-Existing Disputes

1.

239.

Arguments by the Respondent

In grounding its first ratione temporis objection — that a new and distinct
“dispute” must be found for the BIT to apply — the Respondent relies principally
on the ICSID case of Lucchetti (R II, paras. 66-71). In particular, the Respondent

references a passage that it claims embodies the “Lucchetti test”:

The Tribunal must therefore now consider whether, in light of other here
relevant factors, the present dispute is or is not a new dispute. In addressing
that issue, the Tribunal must examine the facts that gave rise to the [present]
dispute and those that culminated in the [previous] dispute, seeking to
determine in each instance whether and to what extent the subject matter or
facts that were the real cause of the disputes differ from or are identical to

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 116

240.

241.

242.

the other. According to a recent ICSID case, the critical element in
determining the existence of one or two separate disputes is whether or not
they concern the same subject matter. The Tribunal considers that, whether
the focus is on the “real causes” of the dispute or on its “subject matter,” it
will in each instance have to determine whether or not the facts or
considerations that gave rise to the earlier dispute continued to be central to
the later dispute. [citations omitted]?

(R II, para. 70)

In that case, the tribunal found that it lacked jurisdiction ratione temporis because
the alleged new dispute was a pre-BIT dispute that had continued past the date of
entry into force of the BIT. This finding was despite the allegation of wrongful
post-BIT acts that were related to but separate from the pre-BIT dispute (R II,
para. 71). The Respondent also highlights the tribunal’s finding that the fact that
an international law BIT cause of action was being invoked by the claimant as

opposed to obligations under municipal laws was irrelevant (R II, paras. 98-103).

The Respondent also cites Vieira v. Chile as a recent example of the affirmation
and application of the “Lucchetti test” above in similar circumstances. That case
added the proposition that post-entry into force acts will not create a new dispute
if these are “secondary” in importance or centrality to the overall dispute when

compared with the pre-BIT acts” (R I, paras. 72-76).

In applying Lucchetti to the present facts, the Respondent points out that, in
the Claimants’ own characterization of the present claim, the pre-BIT cases in
Ecuadorian courts are emphasized as the source of the present dispute and
the post-entry into force acts are merely accessory to the denial of justice claim
(R II, paras. 79-83). Even if the denial of justice is taken separately from the pre-
BIT acts, the resulting liability would necessarily be based on the substance of
the pre-BIT disputes: “If Claimants’ alleged dispute based on ‘denial of justice’
were truly a separate and independent one from the disputes that prompted
the seven claims, the outcome of the latter would be irrelevant — or at most, only

marginally relevant — to the present dispute” (R II, paras. 84-85).

» Lucchetti, supra note 42, para. 50.
© Vieira, supra note 42, paras. 295, 298, 303.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 117

243.

244.

ol

The Respondent deems irrelevant the fact that the claim is presented as a denial
of justice. Claims of denial of justice, regardless of their particular legal
characteristics, are no different than other BIT protections such as fair and
equitable treatment. The Lucchetti test concerns identity of subject matter and not
identity of claims. Because the dispute had crystallized prior to the entry into
force of the BIT and the current claims are a mere continuation of that dispute,
an assertion of jurisdiction over the dispute would equate to asserting jurisdiction
over pre-BIT investments. This would clearly violate the principle of non-
retroactivity enshrined in Article 28 VCLT and BIT Article XII, requiring that
the BIT only be applied to “investments existing at the time of entry into force as
well as to investments made or acquired thereafter” (R II, paras. 95-96; Tr. at
197:23-198:9). In this light, the Respondent asks the Tribunal to avoid setting
a precedent that allows would-be claimants to subvert temporal restrictions of
BITs by repackaging their pre-BIT claims as denials of justice (R II, para. 97;
Tr. at 194:15-197:22; HR2 pp. 24-25). “Differently put: the Tribunal should not
permit Claimants to use their denial of justice claim as a Trojan horse for pre-BIT

disputes” (R II, para. 93).

The Respondent also considers irrelevant the fact that the BIT in question here
does not contain an explicit clause barring its retroactive effect on pre-existing
disputes (as the BIT in Lucchetti did). According to the Respondent, “the Vienna
Convention establishes a presumption of non-retroactivity: the principle applies
tacitly in all cases unless the parties to the treaty have expressly established
otherwise” (R II, para. 106; Tr. at 202:10-13; R IV, para. 147). The Respondent
cites M.C.L. v. Ecuador®' as having settled upon this interpretation of the BIT at
issue here (RII, paras. 105-106; Tr. at 206:10-207:11; HR2 pp. 20-21). In
addition, the Peru-Chile BIT in Lucchetti had a broader scope, applying to
“investments made before or after the treaty’s entry into force.” Thus, the drafters
of that agreement might be presumed to have wanted to be more explicit about
non-retroactivity in that context (R II, paras. 107-108; Tr. at 202:13-203:12).

The Respondent further cites several cases, including Jmpregilo, Salini, and

M.C.L. Power Group L.C. and New Turbine, Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No.

ARB 03/6, Award (July 31, 2007) [hereinafter MCI Power].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 118

Generation Ukraine, where language indicating a broader scope of included
“disputes” still did not rebut the presumption of non-retroactivity (R II,

paras. 109-115; Tr. at 205:2-206:15, 392:8-394:7; HR2 pp. 12-19; HC3 pp. 7-8).

Next, the Respondent submits that “it is also not relevant whether Claimants may
have had a cause of action under customary international law for any pre-BIT
State acts ... As noted by the M.C./. tribunal, ‘[T]he existence of a breach of a
norm of customary international law before a BIT enters into force does not give
one a right to have recourse to the BIT’s arbitral Jurisdiction” (R I, para. 116).
These claims must be pursued, if at all, in another forum having jurisdiction over

these claims (R II, paras. 117-119; Tr. 209:20-210:10).

The Respondent refutes the sources relied on by the Claimants, principally
the Mavrommatis case, to argue that the non-retroactivity of the BIT only applies
to substantive provisions of the BIT and therefore the dispute need only exist at
the time of entry into force and need not arise thereafter. The Respondent asserts
that the distinction does not exist in the BIT or at international law (Tr. at 173:11-
20; R IV, para. 167). The Mavrommatis case constitutes an exception to
the general rule of non-retroactivity because the treaty involved required
retroactive effect by its nature and purpose (Tr. at 176:5-23; HR2 p. 4; R II,
para. 382; R IV, paras. 154, 165). Yet, even if Mavrommatis had at one point
stood for the Claimants’ proposition, it has since been superseded by the VCLT
and the Ambatielos case (Tr. at 175:2-8, HR2 pp. 5-7; HR3 p. 21; R IU,
para. 377; R IV, paras. 158, 161). Sir Humphrey Waldock, Special Rapporteur, in
his commentary to a precursor of Article 28 VCLT in the “Third Report on
the law of Treaties,” cites Ambatielos and distinguishes Mavrommatis when
stating that a “disputes clause will only cover pre-treaty occurrences in
exceptional cases”® (R II, paras. 406-415; Tr. at 177:12-22; HR2 pp. 8-11). As
for the retroactive application of human rights treaties, the Respondent maintains
that human rights treaties are sui generis and not analogous to modern BITs. So,
any retroactive application in that context is also exceptional and not transferable

to the present situation (Tr. at 184:2-21, 395:18-399:5; HR3 pp. 2-7; R II,

© MCI Power, supra note 61, para. 96.
° Waldock, supra note 41, at p. 11.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 119

247.

248.

249.

paras. 433-436; R IV, para. 155). Lastly, the Jan de Nul v. Egypt decision, which
the Respondent claims to be the only investor-State case to accept jurisdiction
over a pre-BIT dispute, is also sui generis because the tribunal was motivated by
the fact that the superseding BIT at issue did not include a saving clause for
disputes under the old BIT, likely due to inadvertence of the negotiators (Tr. at

391:16-392:23; R III, paras. 468-472).

The Respondent maintains that the same analysis and same conclusions apply
with equal force to the claims that the Claimants raise under Article VI(1)(a) of
the BIT. There is no difference in the non-retroactive effect of this provision as
compared to other provisions of the BIT (Tr. at 191:7-194:14; R IV, paras. 169-
177).

Arguments by the Claimants

The Claimants assert that the non-retroactivity principle “does not bar pre-treaty
disputes from falling within the jurisdictional provisions (the disputes clause) of
the treaty” (CII, para. 225). The Claimants argue that, in the absence of any
restrictive language, “the general rule in international law is that a clause in
atreaty that provides for jurisdiction over disputes applies to all disputes that
exist during the treaty’s duration, regardless of whether they first arose before

the entrance date” (C II, para. 251).

The commentary to a precursor of Article 28 VCLT in the Third Report on
the law of treaties, by Sir Humphrey Waldock, Special Rapporteur, supports this

view:

The word “disputes” according to its natural meaning is apt to cover any
dispute which exists between the parties after the coming into force of the
treaty. It matters not either that the dispute concerns events which took place
prior to that date or that the dispute itself arose prior to it; for the parties
have agreed to submit to arbitration or judicial settlement all of their existing
disputes without qualification."

(CI, para. 251)

 Waldock, supra note 41, at p. 11.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 120

250.

251.

252.

253.

The Claimants cite the judgment in the Mavrommatis case, among other cases
and commentaries that follow it, in support of the general distinction to be made
between jurisdiction ratione temporis and the temporal application of a BIT’s
substantive obligations. Even if pre-BIT conduct is excluded when determining
whether a BIT breach has occurred, it is not necessarily outside the ratione
temporis jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal (C II, paras. 253-259; Tr. at 265:5-20;
HC3 pp. 28-34; C III, paras. 124-136; C IV, paras. 96-104).

According to the Claimants, the decisions in the Lucchetti and Vieira cases that
the Respondent relies upon are predicated on specific treaty language that
derogates from the general rule above. The Lucchetti tribunal based its decision
on Article 2 of the Peru-Chile BIT which states that “[i]t shall not, however,
apply to differences or disputes that arose prior to its entry into force”® (C II,
paras. 262-263; Tr. at 268:3-21; HC3 p. 35; C III, paras. 143-147). The Vieira
tribunal also based its decision on language that excluded prior “claims or
disputes” in the Chile-Spain BIT (CII, para. 265).°° Given that there is no
equivalent language in the BIT at issue here, the present Tribunal has jurisdiction

over pre-BIT disputes.

The Claimants submit that the reason for the inclusion of specific language
barring prior disputes in the Chilean BITs was to bar a category of disputes that
otherwise would be admissible. Non-treaty-based claims and pre-BIT substantive
breaches were potentially open to be arbitrated under those BITs (C II,
paras. 272-273). Thus, the no-prior-disputes language was not superfluous and
limited the scope of consent to arbitration. The Claimants assert that the Lucchetti
Annulment Committee’s decision was based on the tribunal’s belief that pre-BIT
substantive breaches were covered by the BIT and that the no-prior-disputes

clause was needed to exclude these (C II, para. 273).

The Claimants further argue that the Respondent mischaracterizes the Impregilo
v. Pakistan and Salini v. Jordan decisions. According to the Claimants, those

decisions emphasize the distinction between jurisdiction ratione temporis and

© Lucchetti, supra note 42, para. 25.
° Vieira, supra note 42, paras. 227-234.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 121

254.

255.

the applicability ratione temporis of substantive treaty obligations (C II,
para. 277). The cases did not apply a general rule of exclusion of pre-existing
disputes. Rather, the tribunal in Jmpregilo refused to consider the pre-entrance-
date conduct because such conduct “had no ‘continuing character’” and therefore
could not support a_ substantive breach” (CII, para. 278). Meanwhile,
the disputes in Salini arose prior to the date of entry into force and the tribunal
refused jurisdiction over the claims based entirely on pre-BIT conduct. Yet,
the tribunal asserted jurisdiction over the claims based on Jordan’s post-entry
refusals to arbitrate, despite the fact that the underlying disputes and alleged
breaches concerned pre-BIT conduct (C II, para. 279; Tr. at 272:18-273:2).

The Claimants also dispute the Respondent’s interpretation of M.C.I. v. Ecuador
and Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine. With regard to M.C.I. v. Ecuador,
the Claimants admit that the passages cited by the Respondent “superficially
appear to support the Lucchetti approach, but if that is what the M.C.I. Tribunal
meant, Claimants respectfully submit that it was wrong on this point” (C II,
para. 281). When read as a whole, however, the Claimants contend that these
passages confuse jurisdictional non-retroactivity with substantive non-
retroactivity. Despite the statements cited by the Respondent about the preclusion
of pre-existing disputes, the tribunal also states that,

[a]cts or omissions prior to the entry into force of the BIT may be taken into

account as background, causal link, or the basis of circumstances

surrounding the occurrence of a dispute from the time the wrongful act was
consummated after the entry into force of the norm that had been breached.**

(CI, para. 281)

According to the Claimants, in the end, the M.C./. tribunal “exercised jurisdiction
over the post-entrance-date conduct without considering whether those acts
constituted a new dispute and did not insist on finding a new dispute that arose
after the entrance date” (C II, paras. 269, 282; Tr. at 271:5-8; HC3 pp. 37-39).
The Claimants suggest that, if the Respondent’s position were correct,

the tribunal should have dismissed the entire case.

°7 Impregilo, supra note 4, para. 312.
°§ MCI Power, supra note 61, para. 136.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 122

256.

257.

With regard to Generation Ukraine, the Claimants again note that the tribunal did
not apply a no-pre-existing-disputes rule; rather, like the other cases cited by
Ecuador, it discussed the indirect effect of a treaty’s substantive, non-retroactive
obligations (C II, para. 285). Moreover, the conclusion that “a cause of action
based on one of the BIT standards of protection must have arisen after [the BIT’s

entrance date)’

is only supported by one authority, Tradex Hellas vy. Albania.
According to the Claimants, the Tradex Hellas tribunal, however, “never
examined whether the post-entrance-date acts were part of a dispute that had
already arisen” and, in fact, “concluded that it had jurisdiction over pre-existing
disputes, so long as the specific acts or omissions that violated the investment
law occurred after the relevant legal obligation entered into force” (C II,

paras. 285-286; Tr. at 267:3-268:2; HC3 p. 34).

The Claimants also assert that their claims would satisfy the legal standard set out
by the Respondent’s Lucchetti test. The Claimants counter that their claims,
properly characterized, have only arisen after the critical date. The claims
concern the local courts’ denial of justice, which the Claimants argue stems from
acts and omissions of Ecuador’s courts and political branches that have taken
place since the BIT entered into force on May 11, 1997. Specifically,
the Claimants’ claims are said to “arise from the undue delay suffered by TexPet
in its seven breach-of-contract cases against the Ecuadorian Government, from
the grossly incompetent and biased rulings in three of those cases (which were
handed down in 2006 and 2007), and from the politicization of Ecuador’s
judiciary to the point that Ecuador has failed to provide Claimants with a fair and
effective forum for adjudicating claims and rights” (CII, para. 219; HC3 pp. 40,
42). The particular dispute thus only crystallized after entry into force: “at some
point, so much time elapses in a given case that it becomes apparent that
an international delict has occurred. Claimants allege that this point was reached
by December 31, 2004, which was more than seven years after the BIT’s entry

into force” (C II, para. 219).

© Generation Ukraine, supra note 45, para. 11.2.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 123

258.

259.

260.

The Claimants further disagree with the Respondent’s assertion that
the underlying lawsuits and their merits constitute the essence of the present
dispute. According to the Claimants, the underlying lawsuits provide the “factual
basis” for post-entry into force BIT violations. However, Ecuador’s liability for
a denial of justice may be determined without reference to the substantive merits
of the underlying cases. The only relevance of the merits of those cases is in
proving “as a measure of damages that but for Ecuador’s denial of justice, TexPet
would have won its underlying cases. The nature of a claimant’s damages,

however, is not a jurisdictional issue” (C II, para. 291).

The Claimants further posit that a denial of justice is a fundamentally different
claim than a failure to rectify earlier wrongs. They cite the Jan de Nul v. Egypt
award in this regard. In that case, Jan de Nul alleged wrongdoing by the Egyptian
courts and Egypt raised an argument based on Lucchetti. The tribunal decided
that Jan de Nul’s claims “address the actions of the court system as such, and are
thus separate and distinct from the conduct which formed the subject matter of
the domestic proceedings”? (C Il, para. 299; Tr. at 273:12-23; HC3 p. 41).
The tribunal admitted the centrality of the domestic claims in the dispute, but
deemed that the Egyptian court’s actions constituted “the intervention of a new
actor” and therefore “that the original dispute has (re)crystallized into a new
dispute”?! (C II, para. 301; Tr. at 273:24-274:8). The tribunal also specifically
rejected the argument that this allowed the claimants “to disguise their contract

case as a treaty case”” (CII, para. 300).

The Claimants also contend that the Tribunal has jurisdiction ratione temporis
because Article VI(1)(a) confers jurisdiction over disputes relating to an
“investment agreement.” According to the Claimants’ interpretation, this article
covers claims under domestic and customary international law as well as BIT
violations. Any other interpretation would render Articles VI(1)(a) and (b)
meaningless, since those claims would already be subsumed under

Article VI(1)(c) (C II, para. 304).

” Jan de Nul, supra note 37, para. 119.
” Jan de Nul, supra note 37, para. 128.
” Jan de Nul, supra note 37, para. 120.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 124

261.

262.

263.

264.

The Claimants note that the Respondent does not argue that the 1973 and 1977
Agreements are not “investment agreements,” but that the agreements ceased to
exist prior to the entry into force of the BIT (see Section J.IV above).
The Claimants counter that even if this is the case, under Article VI(1)(a)
the Tribunal would still have jurisdiction over claims that arise out of or relate to
those agreements under domestic or customary international law (C II,
para. 305). The temporal limitations that apply to BIT claims would not apply to
non-treaty claims. The Claimants submit that the Tribunal has jurisdiction as long
as a given dispute concerning an investment agreement either arises or continues
to exist after the BIT entered into force (C II, paras. 306-307; Tr. at 281:18-
282:4; HC3 p. 45).

In this regard, the Claimants distinguish two cases cited by the Respondent. In
M.C.I. Power v. Ecuador, the claimants only argued for jurisdiction over
substantive treaty violations under Article VI(1)(c) and the M.C./. tribunal did
not decide the scope of jurisdiction under VI(1)(a) (C II, para. 308). In Mondev v.
United States, the tribunal dismissed the claims simply because NAFTA does not
contain any provision allowing non-treaty claims equivalent to Article VI(1)(a)

of the BIT (C II, paras. 309-310).

The Tribunal

As mentioned above, the detailed analyses of the relevant principles and
jurisprudence submitted by the Parties have been helpful for this Tribunal. The
following considerations of the Tribunal, without addressing all the arguments of
the Parties, concentrate on what the Tribunal itself considers to be determinative

on jurisdiction.

In the examination of jurisdiction under Article VI of the BIT, given
the Tribunal’s finding of an “existing investment” at the time of entry into force,
the Tribunal sees no need to conduct a separate examination of jurisdiction over
disputes. However, because the Parties have exchanged wide-ranging argument
on jurisdiction ratione temporis regarding pre-existing disputes, the Tribunal will

briefly address this issue as well.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 125

265.

266.

267.

As discussed in the section dealing with “investment” (Section J.III.3 above),
Article XII(1) of the BIT makes an exception to the principle of non-retroactivity
in accordance to Article 28 VCLT. Under Article XII(1), the present BIT applies
as long as there are “investments existing at the time of entry into force.”
The BIT’s temporal restrictions refer to “investments” and not disputes. Thus,
the BIT covers any dispute as long as it is a dispute arising out of or relating to

“investments existing at the time of entry into force.”

Again, this is not an issue of retroactivity, but of application of the specific rule
to be found in Article XII of the BIT. The Luchetti and Vieira decisions were
based on the wording in the respective BITs’ temporal provisions. In contrast to
the present BIT, those BITs specifically concerned themselves with temporal

restrictions on “‘disputes” and not just “investments.”

Given the fulfillment of the temporal conditions of Article XII(1) and the absence
of any further temporal restriction on disputes, the word “disputes” must simply
be given its ordinary meaning as highlighted in the Claimants’ quote of Waldock
above. The ILC Commentary of Sir Arthur Watts, also cited by the Claimants,

repeats this idea:

The question has come under consideration in international tribunals in
connexion with jurisdictional clauses providing for the submission to an
international tribunal of “disputes,” or specified categories of “disputes,”
between the parties. The Permanent Court said in the Mavrommatis
Palestine Concessions case:

“The Court is of opinion that, in cases of doubt, jurisdiction based
on an international agreement embraces all disputes referred to it
after its establishment ... The reservation made in many arbitration
treaties regarding disputes arising out of events previous to the
conclusion of the treaty seems to prove the necessity for an explicit
limitation of jurisdiction and, consequently, the correctness of the
rule of interpretation enunciated above.”

This is not to give retroactive effect to the agreement because, by using the
word “disputes” without any qualification, the parties are to be understood as

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 126

268.

269.

270.

accepting jurisdiction with respect to all disputes existing after the entry into

force of the agreement. [emphasis in original] ”
The Claimants are also correct in their view of the Tradex Hellas case.
The Tradex tribunal refused jurisdiction under the BIT because the expropriation
complained of and the filing of the arbitration occurred before the entry into force
of the BIT. To take jurisdiction in light of either of these factors would require
clear retroactive application of the BIT’s respective substantive or jurisdictional
provisions. In the present case, however, the Claimants base their claims on post-

BIT conduct and commenced the arbitration after entry into force of the BIT.

In any event, the Tribunal concludes that the present dispute has arisen after
the entry into force of the BIT. As stated in the preceding section on “investment
agreements,” a customary international law claim for denial of justice is
a fundamentally different claim than a domestic law claim for breach of contract.

The Jan de Nul tribunal came to the same conclusion:

Admittedly, the previous dispute is one of the sources of the present dispute,
if not the main one. It is clear, however, that ... [s]ince the Claimants also
base their claim upon the decision of the Ismailia Court, the present dispute
must be deemed a new dispute.

The intervention of a new actor, the Ismailia Court, appears here as a
decisive factor to determine whether the dispute is a new dispute. As the
Claimants’ case is directly based on the alleged wrongdoing of the Ismailia
Court, the Tribunal considers that the original dispute has (re)crystallized
into a new dispute when the Ismailia Court rendered its decision.

Under these circumstances, the Tribunal considers that the decision of the
Ismailia Court is, in the words of the Luchetti award, “a legally relevant
element that compels a ruling that the dispute before this Tribunal is a new
dispute.” Hence, the Tribunal concludes that the present dispute arose on 22
May 2003. [citations omitted]"*

Similarly in the present case, separate from and subsequent to the disputes
relating to breaches of the 1973 and 1977 Agreements, the Claimants have

alleged actions (or inaction) of the Ecuadorian courts that have crystallized into

3 I] THE INTERNATIONAL LAW COMMISSION 1949-1998 p. 670 (Sir Arthur Watts, ed., Oxford

University Press 2000) [hereinafter WATTS].

™ Jan de Nul, supra note 37, paras. 127-129.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 127

anew dispute over denial of justice. This new dispute only arose after the entry

into force of the BIT.

J.VII. Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis regarding Pre-BIT Acts

1.

271.

272.

273.

Arguments by the Respondent

The second prong of the Respondent’s ratione temporis objections posits that the
Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to evaluate the wrongfulness of pre-BIT acts or facts
(R IL, para. 120; Tr. at 207:15-24). This objection is based on the wording of
Article 28 VCLT. It also relies on Article 13 of the ILC’s Draft Articles:

An act of a State does not constitute a breach of an international obligation

unless the State is bound by the obligation in question at the time the act
occurs.

(R II, para. 122)

The fifteen year period during which Claimants allege that they have been denied
justice includes a period of four to six years prior to the BIT’s entry into force
during which Ecuador had no BIT obligations to the Claimants. Thus,
the Tribunal cannot assume jurisdiction over these events and evaluate them
according to standards of protection that did not exist at the time of those events

(R I, paras. 130-131; Tr. at 207:24-208:15; R IV, paras. 160, 195).

The Respondent further objects on the basis that the alleged violation of the BIT
by Ecuador is a “situation that ceased to exist” according to Article 28 VCLT.
According to the Respondent’s version of events, TexPet’s operations and
investments in Ecuador, as well as its rights under the 1973 and 1977
Agreements, were terminated according to an agreement between the Parties on
June 6, 1992. Therefore, the Concession Agreements as well as TexPet’s
operations and investments constitute a “situation that ceased to exist” several

years before the BIT’s entry into force (R II, paras. 151-152).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 128

2.

274.

275.

276.

Arguments by the Claimants

The Claimants contest that the principle of non-retroactivity requires a claim to
be based purely on acts and omissions after the entry into force of the BIT.
“The principle that a treaty does not apply to acts which occurred before it
entered into force does not mean that it cannot apply to acts occurring after that
date but which have reference to investments made before that date” (C II,

para. 223).

The Claimants point to the ILC Commentary on Article 15 of the Draft Articles
on State Responsibility: “the non-retroactivity principle ‘need not prevent a court
taking into account earlier actions or omissions for other purposes,’ such as ‘to
establish a factual basis for the later breaches’” (C II, para. 244; Tr. at 275:9-13;
HC3 p. 43).

The Claimants further counter this objection by citing passages from the NAFTA
case Mondey v. United States — a case that is also relied upon by the Respondent.

The Mondev decision stated that,

as the Feldman Tribunal held, conduct committed before 1 January 1994
cannot itself constitute a breach of NAFTA.

On the other hand, it does not follow that events prior to the entry into force
of NAFTA may not be relevant to the question whether a NAFTA Party is in
breach of its Chapter 11 obligations by conduct of that Party after NAFTA’s
entry into force. To the extent that the last sentence of the passage from the
Feldman decision appears to say the contrary, it seems to the present
Tribunal to be too categorical, as indeed the United States conceded in
argument.

Thus events or conduct prior to the entry into force of an obligation for the
respondent State may be relevant in determining whether the State has
subsequently committed a breach of the obligation. But it must still be
possible. to point to conduct of the State after that date which is itself a
breach.”

(C IL, paras. 239, 241)

5 Mondev, supra note 35, paras. 68- 70.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 129

277.

278.

279.

280.

On the basis on the above, the Mondev tribunal proceeded to determine the treaty
compliance of certain U.S. court decisions that concerned pre-BIT State conduct.
The Claimants also reference a series of other decisions in which they assert that
pre-treaty conduct was relied on when determining whether a post-treaty breach

had occurred (C II, paras. 246-249).

Finally, the Claimants also insist that the non-retroactivity principle “is not
infringed by applying the treaty to continuing violations and composite breaches
that occur when the treaty is in force, even if those acts began before the treaty
became effective” (C II, para. 224). In support of this proposition, the Claimants
cite the ILC Commentary to a draft that later became Article 28 VCLT:
If, however, an act or fact or situation which took place or arose prior to the
entry into force of a treaty continues to occur or exist after the treaty has
come into force, it will be caught by the provisions of the treaty. The non-
retroactivity principle cannot be infringed by applying a treaty to matters that

occur or exist when the treaty is in force, even if they first began at an earlier
date.”°

(C Il, para. 226; HC3 p. 43)

The Tribunal

As mentioned above, the detailed analyses of the relevant principles submitted by
the Parties have been helpful for this Tribunal. The following considerations of
the Tribunal, without addressing all the arguments of the Parties, concentrate on

what the Tribunal itself considers to be determinative on jurisdiction.

Again, in the examination of jurisdiction under Article VI of the BIT, given
the Tribunal’s finding of an “existing investment” at the time of entry into force,
the Tribunal finds no need to conduct a separate examination as to its jurisdiction
over acts. However, since the Parties have exchanged wide-ranging argument on
jurisdiction ratione temporis regarding pre-BIT acts, the Tribunal will briefly

deal with this issue as well.

© WATTS, supra note 73, at p. 671.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 130

281.

282.

283.

284.

For the reasons given in more detail above in the section dealing with
“investment” (Section J.III.3), this is not an issue of the non-retroactivity of
treaties, but rather of the application of the specific rules found in Article XII(1)
of the BIT and Article 13 of the ILC Draft Articles on State Responsibility.

The Tribunal accepts that, according to Article 13 of the ILC Draft Articles, acts
or facts prior to the entry into force of the BIT cannot on their own constitute
breaches of the BIT, given that the norms of conduct prescribed by the BIT were
not in effect prior to its date of entry into force. Moreover, the Tribunal agrees
with the decision in the Mondev case that “[t]he mere fact that earlier conduct has
gone unremedied or unredressed when a treaty enters into force” does not justify
a tribunal applying the treaty retrospectively to that conduct.” That rule is also

embodied in Article 14(1) of the ILC Draft Articles:

The breach of an international obligation by an act of a State not having a
continuing character occurs at the moment when the act is performed, even
if its effects continue.
However, as the Claimants have argued, this does not mean that a breach must be
based solely on acts occurring after the entry into force of the BIT. The meaning
attributed to the acts or facts post-dating the entry into force may be informed by
acts or facts pre-dating the BIT; that conduct may be considered in determining
whether a violation of BIT standards has occurred after the date of entry into
force. The Tribunal again agrees with the passage from the Mondev award cited
by the Claimants in this regard:
[E]vents or conduct prior to the entry into force of an obligation for the
respondent State may be relevant in determining whether the State has
subsequently committed a breach of the obligation. But it must still be
possible to point to conduct of the State after that date which is itself a
breach.”
In the present case, a portion of the Respondent’s alleged acts or omissions
constituting a denial of justice may pre-date the entry into force of the BIT.

A finding of denial of justice may thus require taking into account pre-BIT acts.

” Mondev, supra note 35, para. 70.
"8 Mondev, supra note 35, para. 70.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 131

However, as already discussed, the Claimants held an “existing investment” at
the time of entry into force of the BIT. That investment, as it exists, has been
influenced by acts and omissions occurring prior to the entry into force of
the BIT. The Tribunal is thus satisfied that the alleged improper action or
inaction by the Ecuadorian courts post-dating the BIT’s entry into force could
still amount to a denial of justice that, in turn, could constitute a violation of the

BIT’s substantive standards.

J.VHI. Continuing and Composite Acts

1.

285.

286.

Arguments by the Respondent

The Respondent disputes the Claimants’ characterization of the alleged breaches
as a “composite act.” The Respondent also asserts that the allegation of
a“composite act” does not allow the Claimants to circumvent the temporal

limitations of the BIT.

According to the Respondent, the definition of a “composite act” is itself limited
by the temporal ambit of the BIT. The Respondent argues that a “composite act”
consists of a series of individual acts or omissions that are not in conformity with
a given international obligation. As such, the acts or omissions that make up
a “composite act” must postdate the entry into force of the given obligation. In
support of this point, the Respondent cites the commentary to Article 15 of

the ILC Draft Articles:

[T]he State must be bound by the international obligation for the period
during which the series of acts making up the breach is committed. In cases
where the relevant obligation did not exist at the beginning of the course of
conduct but came into being thereafter, the “first” of the actions or omissions
of the series for the purposes of State Responsibility will be the first
occurring after the obligation came into existence.”

(R II, para. 136)

” JAMES CRAWFORD, THE INTERNATIONAL LAW COMMISSION’S ARTICLES ON STATE RESPONSIBILITY
p. 144 (Cambridge University Press 2002).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 132

287.

288.

289.

290.

The Respondent further posits that a “composite act” must consist of at least two
acts or omissions occurring after the BIT’s entry into force. The Respondent
submits, however, that the only post-entry into force act complained of here is
the alleged “politicization of the courts” in 2004. Thus, given only one
admissible act to examine, there exists no series of acts making up a “composite

act” (R II, paras. 137-138).

Generation Ukraine is cited as an example of a situation where the tribunal
rejected a claim that a series of acts straddling the entry into force of a BIT
constituted expropriation. In that case, non-retroactivity barred the consideration
of the acts predating the BIT, leaving the claimant unable to substantiate

an expropriation claim (R II, para. 139).

Alternatively, the Respondent contends that even if the alleged contractual
breaches were not barred ratione temporis, those breaches and the politicization
of the Ecuadorian courts do not exhibit the requisite complementarity to be
composite acts. The Report of the ILC on its Thirtieth Session is referred to in

this respect:

[T]he composite act of the State does not consist of a single course of
conduct extending over a period of time but remaining the same; it consists
of a series of individual acts of the State succeeding each other in time, that
is to say, a sequence of separate courses of conduct, actions or omissions,
adopted in separate cases, but all contributing to the commission of the
aggregate act in question. The performance of these individual acts is
required to fulfill the conditions for the breach of an international obligation,
which consists precisely in prohibiting the commission of the aggregate act
that is the resultant of the sum of the individual acts. . . . To conclude, the
distinctive common characteristic of State acts of the type here considered is
that they comprise a sequence of actions which, taken separately, may be
lawful or unlawful, but which are interrelated by having the same intention,
content, and effects, although relating to different specific cases.*”

(R II, para. 140)

The politicization of the Ecuadorian courts is substantially disconnected from
the alleged contractual breaches that form the basis of the claim. Moreover,

“the same intention, content, and effects” are not present because

®° International Law Commission’s Report on the Work of Its Thirtieth Session, UN Doc. A/33/10, in

Il YEARBOOK OF THE INTERNATIONAL LAW COMMISSION pp. 92-93 (1978).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 133

291.

2.

292.

the politicization of the courts is a general event that was not specifically targeted

at the Claimants (R II, paras. 141-143; Tr. at 210:22-211:8).

The Respondent rejects the Claimants’ assertion that the alleged breaches
constitute a “continuing act” on largely the same basis. Ecuador is not
responsible under the BIT for acts prior to the date of entry into force.
The contractual breaches that are alleged to have commenced the continuing act
were not unlawful at that time and are barred from consideration by the Tribunal.
Therefore, since the starting point for the continuing act is excluded, there is no
act or violation within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction which can be considered to be
“continuing” (R II, paras. 144-148). The Respondent cites a particular passage
from Mondeyv v. United States in this respect:
The mere fact that earlier conduct has gone unremedied or unredressed when
a treaty enters into force does not justify a tribunal applying the treaty
retrospectively to that conduct. Any other approach would subvert both the
intertemporal principle in the law of treaties and the basic distinction

between breach and reparation which underlies the law of State
responsibility.”

(R II, para. 148)
The Respondent quotes from Waldock’s Third Report as well:

The mere continuance of a situation after a treaty comes into force does not
suffice to bring the fact which produced that situation within the regime of
the treaty. The matter claimed to fall under the provisions of the treaty must
itself occur or arise after the treaty came into force.**

(RIV, para. 183)

Arguments by the Claimants

According to the Claimants, in determining whether State conduct constitutes
acontinuing or composite act, “the critical distinction is one between
a continuing breach and a breach that has been consummated but the effects of

which continue to be felt” (C II, para. 229; HC3 p. 44). The Claimants also cite

*! Mondev, supra note 35, para. 70.
® Waldock, supra note 41, at p. 12.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 134

SGS v. Philippines as an example of a tribunal holding that “the failure to pay
sums due under a contract is an example of a continuing breach,” despite the fact
that the refusal of payment manifested itself before the BIT entered into force*

(C Il, para. 232).

The Claimants disagree with the Respondent’s argument that a continuing or
composite act must be based on more than one post-BIT entry into force act and
that the Claimants have only alleged one such act. First, they respond that
“the destruction of Ecuadorian judicial independence is itself a continuing and
composite wrong, consisting of numerous related acts that began in 2004 and
continues more than three years later” (C II, paras. 236). Second, they state that
the Respondent’s argument “ignores that the treaty and denial of justice
customary international law violations of which Claimants complain occurred
wholly after the BIT entered into force,” including by undue delay, incompetent
and unjust decisions, and acts of bias in the Claimants’ cases after May 11, 1997

(C Il, paras. 236).

The Claimants further counter the objection that pre-BIT conduct is absolutely
outside of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction by relying on the NAFTA cases of Feldman
v. Mexico® and Mondev v. United States, including in particular, the following

passage from Feldman:

[I]f there has been a permanent course of action by Respondent which
started before [NAFTA’s entrance date] and went on after that date and
which, therefore, “became breaches” of [NAFTA] on that date ... that [post-
entrance-date] part of Respondent’s alleged activity is subject to the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction, as the Government of Canada points out ... and also
Respondent [Mexico] concedes.**

(CI, para. 238)

83 SGS v. Philippines, supra note 52, para. 167.

“ Marvin Roy Feldman Karpa v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1, Interim
Decision on Preliminary Jurisdictional Issues (Dec. 6, 2000) [hereinafter Feldman].

85 Feldman, para. 62.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 135

3.

295.

296.

297.

298.

299.

The Tribunal

As mentioned above, the detailed analyses of the relevant principles and
jurisprudence submitted by the Parties have been helpful for this Tribunal.
The following considerations of the Tribunal, without addressing all the
arguments of the Parties, concentrate on what the Tribunal itself considers to be

determinative on jurisdiction.

This section overlaps to a great extent with the preceding sections and
the Tribunal again considers that, given its finding of an “existing investment” at
the time of entry into force, there is no need to conduct a separate examination as
to its jurisdiction over specific acts. However, since the Parties have exchanged
wide-ranging argument on jurisdiction ratione temporis regarding pre-BIT acts,

the Tribunal will shortly deal with this issue as well.

For the reasons given in more detail above in the section dealing with
“investment” (Section J.III.3 above), this is again not an issue of the non-
retroactivity of treaties, but of the application of the specific rules found in
Article XII(1) of the BIT and Article 15 of the ILC Draft Articles on State
Responsibility.

In regard to continuing acts, the impugned delays by the Ecuadorian courts have
already been found to have existed at the date of entry into force of the BIT and
to have continued afterwards. Therefore, the Tribunal finds that the Respondent
has engaged in a “permanent course of action” in the sense used in the passage
from Feldman cited by the Claimants above. Given that the temporal scope set by
Article XII(1) specifies that the BIT applies to acts or situations affecting
“investments existing at the time of entry into force,” the Tribunal finds that
the Respondent’s continuing conduct in relation to the seven lawsuits could

constitute a denial of justice within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction under the BIT.

With regard to the continuing acts, the Watts ILC Commentary explained as

follows:

If, however, an act or fact or situation which took place or arose prior to the
entry into force of a treaty continues to occur or exist after the treaty has

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 136

300.

301.

come into force, it will be caught by the provisions of the treaty. The non-
retroactivity principle cannot be infringed by applying a treaty to matters that
occur or exist when the treaty is in force, even if they first began at an earlier
date.*°

As for composite acts, the Respondent cites the commentary to Article 15 of
the ILC Draft Articles for the idea that a composite act must be based exclusively
on post-BIT conduct. While the commentary seems superficially to support this

position, it is in light of the wording of Article 15 that the Commentary must be

read. Article 15 reads as follows:

Article 15
Breach consisting of a composite act

1. The breach of an international obligation by a State through a series of
actions or omissions defined in aggregate as wrongful, occurs when the
action or omission occurs which, taken with the other actions or omissions,
is sufficient to constitute the wrongful act.

 

2. In such a case, the breach extends over the entire period starting with the
first of the actions or omissions of the series and lasts for as long as these
actions or omissions are repeated and remain not in conformity with the
international obligation.
In the present case, the “acts” alleged here are the actions and inaction of
the Ecuadorian courts in relation to the Claimants’ lawsuits. Article 15(1) thus
establishes that a BIT breach can only have arisen when the actions or inaction of
the Ecuadorian judiciary, when “taken with [its] other actions or omissions,”
became sufficient to constitute a denial of justice. In accordance with Article 13
of the ILC Draft Articles, that breach must have arisen, if at all, after the BIT
entered into force. Meanwhile, Article 15(2) merely provides that the denial of
justice persists for as long as the Ecuadorian courts continue and repeat
the actions or omissions alleged. In light of the above, the commentary cited by
the Respondent merely clarifies that the alleged breach commenced upon
the occurrence of the action or inaction that consummated the denial of justice.
As discussed in the preceding section, it does not, however, establish that pre-
BIT acts may not be taken into account in evaluating when the denial of justice

arose. Thus, the Tribunal finds that, if true, the Respondent’s alleged conduct

8° WATTS, supra note 73, at p. 671.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 137

could constitute a composite act giving rise to a denial of justice within its

jurisdiction.

J.IX. Considerations regarding Costs at this Stage

1. Relief Sought by the Respondent

302. The Respondent requests that the Tribunal issue an award on costs at this stage in
its Memorial on Jurisdiction (R II, paras. 281, 286) and again in its Post-Hearing

Brief of July 22, 2008 (R III, para. 12) as follows:

281. For the foregoing reasons, the Republic hereby requests the Tribunal
to render an award in its favor:

286. Ordering, pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 40 of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Claimants to pay all costs and
expenses of this arbitration proceeding, including the fees and
expenses of the Tribunal and the cost of the Republic’s legal
representation, plus pre-award and post-award interest thereon

2. Relief Sought by the Claimants

303. The Claimants request that the Tribunal issue an award on costs at this stage in
their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction (C II, para. 427) and again in both their

Post-Hearing Briefs (C III, para. 154; C IV, para. 116) as follows:

427. Based on Claimants’ presentations and clarifications made in this
Counter-Memorial, Claimants respectfully request the following
relief in the form of an Award:

L..]
(iii) | An order that Respondent pay the costs of this proceeding,

including the Tribunal’s fees and expenses, and the costs of
Claimants’ representation, along with interest.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 138

304.

3. The Tribunal

At this stage, the Tribunal takes due note of the Parties’ positions and requests

with respect to costs. It decides, however, to defer any decision on questions of

 

until the conclusion of the merits stage.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 139

K. Decisions

1. The Respondent’s jurisdictional objections are denied.
2. The Tribunal has jurisdiction concerning the claims as formulated by the
Claimants in their second Post Hearing Brief dated August 12, 2008, in

paragraph 116.

3. The decision regarding the costs of arbitration is deferred to a later stage

of these proceedings.

4, The further procedure in this case will be the subject of a separate
Procedural Order of the Tribunal.

Place of Arbitration: The Hague, The Netherlands

Date of this Interim Award: December 1, 2008

Signatures of the Tribunal:

 

The Hon. Charles N. Brower

Prof. Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel
Chairman

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Interim Award 140

