PCA CASE NO. 2009-23

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION BEFORE A TRIBUNAL CONSTITUTED
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE TREATY BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA AND THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR CONCERNING THE
ENCOURAGEMENT AND RECIPROCAL PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS,
SIGNED 27 AUGUST 1993 (THE “TREATY”) AND THE UNCITRAL
ARBITRATION RULES 1976 (THE “UNCITRAL RULES”)
BETWEEN:-

1. CHEVRON CORPORATION

2. TEXACO PETROLEUM COMPANY

(both of the United States of America)

The First and Second Claimants

- and —

THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR

The Respondent

 

FOURTH INTERIM AWARD
ON INTERIM MEASURES

 

dated 7 February 2013

THE ARBITRATION TRIBUNAL:
Dr. Horacio A. Grigera Na6n;
Professor Vaughan Lowe;

V.V. Veeder (President)

Administrative Secretary: Martin Doe

PARTI:

®
aD
(uly
(Iv)

PART II: THE TRIBUNAL’S ORDERS AND AWARDS

®
aD
(uly
(Iv)
(Vv)
(VD
(VID
(VII)

PART III: THE TRIBUNAL’S REASONS

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

THE CLAIMANTS’ CURRENT APPLICATION

 

The Claimants’ Seventh Request for Interim Measures of | June 2012

The Oral Hearing of 26-28 November 2012

 
 

Developments After the November Oral Hearing

 

The Parties’ Relief Sought from the Tribunal .................

 

 

The First Order on Interim Measures of 14 May 2010.....

 

The Second Order on Interim Measures of 6 December 2010

 

The Third Order on Interim Measures of 28 January 2011....

 

The Fourth Order on Interim Measures of 9 February 2011 ......
The Fifth Order on Interim Measures of 16 March 2011

 

 

The First Interim Award on Interim Measures of 25 January 2012

 

The Second Interim Award on Interim Measures of 16 February 2012

 

The Third Interim Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of 27 February 2012.

 

PART IV: THE OPERATIVE PART 31

 

PARTI: THE CLAIMANTS’ CURRENT APPLICATION

(D) THE CLAIMANTS’ SEVENTH REQUEST FOR INTERIM MEASURES OF 1 JUNE 2012

1. On 30 May 2012, the Lago Agrio Plaintiffs initiated proceedings for the recognition and
enforcement of the Lago Agrio Judgment in the Superior Court of Justice in Ontario, Canada,
against Chevron and two wholly-owned subsidiaries, Chevron Canada Limited and Chevron
Canada Finance Limited (the “Canadian proceedings”).

2. By letter dated 1 June 2012, the Claimants requested further interim relief from the Tribunal
in relation to these Canadian proceedings (the “Claimants’ Seventh Request for Interim
Measures”). This relief was sought in addition to the Orders and Interim Awards on Interim
Measures made earlier in these arbitration proceedings directed at the enforcement of the
Lago Agrio Judgment, which are set out below in Part Two of this Fourth Interim Award.

3. By letter dated 20 June 2012, the Respondent requested more time to respond to the
Claimants’ Seventh Request for Interim Measures and, separately, “that the Tribunal find that
the Claimants are in violation of the Tribunal’s Orders on Interim Measures or otherwise
require that the Claimants’ cease their efforts to terminate Ecuador’s U.S. trade benefits on
the basis of the pending arbitration”.

4. By letter dated 27 June 2012, the Claimants responded to the Respondent’s letter dated 20
June 2012.
5. The Tribunal subsequently issued its Procedural Order No. 12 dated 29 June 2012, which

provided as follows:

“I. The Tribunal refers to the Claimants’ application for revised interim measures and
other matters made by letters dated 1 June 2012, the Respondent’s response and
application by letter dated 20 June 2012 and the Claimants’ letter dated 27 June 2012.

2. As regards the Respondent's application (page 3 of its letter dated 20 June 2012), the
Tribunal grants the Respondent more time to respond substantively in writing to the
Claimants’ letters dated 1 and 27 June 2012; but the Tribunal requires that: (i) such
response is submitted by the Respondent no later than 15 August 2012, (ii) with the
Claimants’ replying substantively in writing to such response no later than
14 September 2012 and (iii) the Respondent responding in writing to such reply no later
than 12 October 2012.

3. The Tribunal currently intends that the Claimant’s application and the Respondent’s
opposition to such application shall be addressed by the Parties during the hearing
currently fixed for 26 and 27 November 2012, for which additional time shall be made
available.

4. However, depending on events over this summer and autumn, it may become necessary
for the Tribunal to convene a special hearing before November 2012, at short notice to the
Parties.”

On 27 June 2012, the Lago Agrio Plaintiffs initiated proceedings for the recognition and
enforcement of the Lago Agrio Judgment against Chevron Corporation in the Superior Court
of Justice in Brasilia, Brazil (the “Brazilian proceedings”).

By letter dated 9 July 2012, the Tribunal requested that the Respondent add the Brazilian
proceedings as a further item to be covered in its written response already ordered by the
Tribunal for 15 August 2012 under paragraph 2 of its Procedural Order No 12 of 29 June
2012.

By letter dated 7 August 2012, the Claimants (i) informed the Tribunal that the Lago Agrio
Court had on 3 August 2012 issued a mandamiento de ejecucién, formally ordering payment
of the sum of the Lago Agrio Judgment; and (ii) requested further relief from the Tribunal in
relation to this alleged breach of the Tribunal’s orders and awards on interim measures,
joining this additional request to their Seventh Request for Interim Measures.

By letter dated 15 August 2012, the Respondent responded to the Claimants’ Seventh Request
for Interim Measures.

By letter dated 14 September 2012, the Claimants responded to the Respondent’s letter dated
15 August 2012.

By letter dated 12 October 2012, the Respondent responded to the Claimants’ letter dated 14
September 2012.

By letter dated 16 October 2012, the Claimants informed the Tribunal of certain orders for
execution issued against Chevron and its subsidiaries by the Lago Agrio Court, as well as of
certain statements made by Ecuadorian public authorities.

By letter dated 7 November 2012, the Claimants, inter alia, informed the Tribunal of (i)
certain orders issued by the Argentine courts against Chevron subsidiaries located in
Argentina for the enforcement of the Lago Agrio Judgment against those subsidiaries (the
“Argentinean proceedings”); (ii) a decision issued by the Lago Agrio Court expanding the
scope of its earlier execution orders for the Lago Agrio Judgment and granting a request for
letters rogatory to be sent to corresponding foreign authorities for its enforcement, and (iii) an
application made by the Government of Ecuador before the Lago Agrio Court to revoke the
latter’s execution order in respect of the USD 96 million Commercial Cases Award (but not
the Lago Agrio Judgment itself).

By letter dated 21 November 2012, the Respondent responded to the Claimants’ letter dated 7
November 2012.

(1) THE ORAL HEARING OF 26-28 NOVEMBER 2012

On 26-28 November 2012, an oral hearing was held in London regarding the Track | merits
issues, as well as the Claimants’ Seventh Request for Interim Measures (the “November Oral
Hearing”).

The November Oral Hearing was attended by the Parties’ legal representatives, as follows: (i)
for the Claimants, Mr. Hewitt Pate (Chevron), Mr. Ricardo Reis Veiga (Chevron), Mr. José
Martin (Chevron), Ms. Tanya Valli (Chevron), Professor James Crawford SC (Matrix
Chambers), Mr. R. Doak Bishop (King & Spalding), Mr. Edward Kehoe (King & Spalding),

Mr. Wade Coriell (King & Spalding), Mr. David Weiss (King & Spalding), Ms. Elizabeth
Silbert (King & Spalding), Ms. Kristi Jacques (King & Spalding), Mr. Jorge Mattamouros
(King & Spalding), Ms. Sara McBrearty (King & Spalding), Ms. Zhennia Silverman (King &
Spalding) and Ms. Carol Tamez (King & Spalding), Mr. Luke A. Sobota (Jones Day), Mr.
Francisco Aninat (Jones Day), Ms. Andrea Neuman (Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher), Mr. Daniel
Sullivan (Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher); and (ii) for the Respondent, Dr. Diego Garcia Carrién
(Attorney-General of Ecuador), Dr. Christel Gaibor (Director of International Disputes,
Attorney General’s Office), Dr. Cristina Viteri (Counsel, Attorney General’s Office),
Professor Zachary Douglas (Matrix Chambers) — in part, Mr. Luis Gonzalez (Matrix
Chambers), Mr. Eric Bloom (Winston & Strawn), Mr. Ricardo Ugarte (Winston & Strawn),
Mr. Tomas Leonard (Winston & Strawn), Ms. Nicole Silver (Winston & Strawn), Ms.
Carolina Romero (Winston & Strawn) and Mr. Gregory Ewing (Winston & Strawn).

On the first day of the November Oral Hearing (26 November 2012), Mr. Hewitt Pate,
Chevron’s General Counsel, made the following statement (in English), which is appropriate
to cite in full, as recorded in the English transcript:

“|. Mr. President and Members of the Tribunal, Chevron appreciates this opportunity to
appear before you again today, and Chevron looks forward to presenting its case on the
merits on Phase I and to demonstrating why Texaco’s completion of its remediation and
social programs and the Releases it obtained in 1995 fully settled its environmental liability
in Ecuador.

That settlement should have precluded the litigation that began in 2003 as a cooperative
enterprise of American [Lago Agrio] Plaintiffs’ lawyers and the Government of Ecuador.
Recall that before Chevron brought this proceeding, Ecuador used to proclaim that it
would be getting 90 percent of the proceeds of that litigation.

An equally important aspect of today’s hearing concerns this Tribunal’s authority to
protect its own jurisdiction over the merits of this case. On February 16th of this year, the
Tribunal in its Second Interim Award ordered Ecuador to take all measures necessary to
prevent enforcement of the Lago Agrio Judgment within and without Ecuador. Since that
time, Ecuador has not only failed to prevent enforcement, but affirmatively acted to
promote enforcement actions that have now been filed against Chevron Affiliates in
Canada, Argentina, and Brazil.

With public encouragement from President Correa, Ecuador has taken numerous actions in
support of enforcement. The Lago Agrio Court has acted at the bidding of the Plaintiffs’
lawyers. It has issued multiple orders purporting to declare numerous Chevron subsidiary
and affiliate companies as debtors on the Lago Agrio Judgment. Those Orders have been
issued with no notice to Chevron.

 

The Orders also purport to embargo Chevron assets in Argentina and Colombia.

Ecuador’s Minister of Foreign Affairs, apostilled the power of attorney by Pablo Fajardo
in favor of an Argentine law firm, when the Lago Agrio Court issued letters rogatory in
support of the Plaintiffs’ request for a freezing order in Argentina, the Ecuadorian
Transitional Judicial Council certified these letters and the Minister of Foreign Affairs
apostiled them.

Last month the Lago Agrio Court sent a letter on Republic of Ecuador letterhead to the
bank holding the remaining accounts of TexPet in Ecuador ordering the bank to freeze all
accounts relating to Chevron. When the Lago Agrio Court added Chevron’s $96 million
commercial cases arbitration Award against Ecuador to its freezing order, the Attorney
General of Ecuador finally appeared. He publicly sought revocation of that order, but only

as to the 96 million dollar Commercial Case Award. There was no objection to the rest of
the activity taken in violation of this Tribunal’s Awards.

Enforcement actions, therefore, continue both within Ecuador and in three countries
without Ecuador, and the Plaintiffs’ lawyers promise more enforcement cases to come. In
Argentina, the Plaintiffs have now obtained an ex parte freezing order preventing Chevron
Affiliates from making and receiving the payments needed to run their operations in
Argentina. Chevron is addressing this matter through the courts of Argentina, but the
embargo in the meantime may prove to have serious consequences not only for Chevron’s
Affiliates, but for their employees, and for Argentina.

 

It is the Plaintiffs’ stated goal to make it impossible for Chevron entities to invest further in
Argentina.

If the Plaintiffs seriously believe they possess a legitimate judgment, they would seek to
enforce it in the United States where Chevron can be found. Instead, they proceed on an
international campaign of disruption and threats, hoping that Chevron will give in and pay
them money without regard to the merits. They could not be doing this without the active
and passive support of Ecuador.

If this Tribunal is to maintain its own authority to reach a decision on the merits or to give
Chevron a meaningful opportunity to vindicate its legal rights, strong relief is needed in the
format of a declaration from this Tribunal and other measures.

As always, when I address this Tribunal, I will reiterate that Chevron has no desire for
conflict with any sovereign. Texaco was a good partner to Ecuador for 20 years, generating
$23 billion for Ecuador while Texaco earned $500 million, and Texaco cleaned up its
share.

Ecuador has claimed that Chevron’s goal in seeking a declaration of breach from this
Tribunal is to cause revocation of Ecuador's trade benefits with the United States, but
Chevron gains no benefit from that result. What Chevron seeks is for Ecuador to stop its
misconduct and respect this Tribunal’s orders.

To repeat myself once again, Chevron would welcome an opportunity for constructive
dialogue with Ecuador and urges Ecuador to live up to its promises. In the meantime, we
appreciate the opportunity to appear before this Tribunal and to combat a fraudulent and
farcical judgment by invoking the rule of law. Thank you.”

18. On the same first day of the November Oral Hearing, Dr. Diego Garcia Carrién, Attorney
General of Ecuador, made the following response (as interpreted from Spanish and as now
recorded in the English transcript) as follows:

“|. Mr. President, Members of the Tribunal, today we approach the end of more than seven
years of litigation over Claimants’ allegations of breach of the 1995 Settlement
Agreements. Claimant first raised their claims in prior litigation in New York. Back then,
Claimants sought both to hold the Republic liable under a Joint Operating Agreement, and
to hold the Republic liable for the alleged breach of the 1995 Settlement Agreement under
theories of laws virtually identical to those raised here, albeit then under the labels of
parens patriae.

At the time of the New York litigation, Claimants’ public relations machine condemned the
Republic in public, and in political forums as a recalcitrant State that refuses to comply
with its contractual obligations. But after years of litigation, both the New York courts and
the Court of Appeals of the Second Circuit summarily rejected Claimants’ allegations of

breach of the Joint Operating Agreement, finding that the Republic was not even a Party to
that Agreement.

That Judgment signaled to the Claimant that the United States Court offered no prospects
of success in respect to their then remaining claims for breach of the Settlement Agreement.
In fact, the presiding U.S. District Court Judge noted the fallacy in Claimants’ position
considering it as highly unlikely that the 1995 Settlement Agreement would have neglected
to mention the Aguinda claims if it had been intended to release those claims or to create
an obligation to indemnify against them.

Claimant, obviously concerned that their breach of the settlement claim was likely facing
the same fate as their other breach claims, chose to withdraw their earlier opposition to the
Republic’s motion to dismiss. They then allowed the case to die on jurisdictional grounds
so that they could bring this identical claim to a more favorable forum.

 

Claimants filed this arbitration two months later, and they simultaneously relaunched their
public relations campaign against the Republic.

Members of the Tribunal, the Parties have re-pleaded their arguments in relation to the
breach-of-contract claim in this forum, and at this juncture it must be apparent to you as it
was to the U.S. District Judge in New York that Claimants’ breach of contractual
allegations are illusory.

The 1995 Settlement Agreement contains no covenants regarding the Ecuadorian
Government's purported obligation to indemnify, protect, or defend TexPet or any other
Party for that matter, against claims by third parties. Nor does it bind third parties or
trigger any liability for the Republic. And while the Claimants predicate their case here on
the basis of distinction between the New York litigation and Lago Agrio dispute, the Second
Circuit of New York has stated that this argument is without merit. That is the final word of
the Court that granted Claimant’s forum non conveniens dismissal in the Aguinda case.

Dear Members of the Tribunal, Claimants’ accusations are based on non-existing
contractual obligations but that has not stopped Claimants’ public relations machine from
attacking Ecuador as a country that refuses to abide by its contractual obligations. Nor has
it stopped Claimants from waging a relentless attack against the Republic in the United
States political arena, to deprive it of billions of dollars in foreign trade benefits.

Defending against this vicious campaign is demanding an enormous diplomatic effort and
is seriously affecting the Republic's interest. I respectfully ask that you follow the United
States Court’s lead and put an end to this abuse of the legal process at your earliest
convenience.

With your indulgence, I would like to also address a different but related issue. Claimants
have sought and obtained protective measures that gave rise to various Interim Awards and
now they seek a declaration of breach of these awards. It is now apparent that neither the
request for the Interim Awards nor the relief sought herein is designed to protect any right
in this arbitration from irreparable harm, but rather it’s intended to disrupt Ecuador's
bilateral relationship with the United States and inflict severe economic harm upon the
Republic and its constituents. On an almost daily basis, Claimants’ lobbyist firms have
added the Interim Awards to the allegations of breach of the 1995 Settlement Agreement to
press the United States Congress and Trade Representatives to take away more than a
billion dollars in trade and thousands of jobs that will affect hundreds of thousands of
Ecuadorian citizens.

Claimants now seek from this Tribunal a declaration of breach of those Interim Awards. I
will not delve into legal issues relevant to the appropriateness of the relief that Claimants
request, but I do want to caution this Tribunal about the gravity of a request that we regard
as an unprecedented abuse of rights and the legal processes. A declaration of breach would
serve no purpose other than to cause grave and irreparable economic harm to the
Republic. The loss of international trade benefits would be irreversible, no matter what the
outcome of these proceedings might be.

So, an irreparable harm will have been inflicted upon the Republic on the basis of
allegations that to date the Republic has not had a full opportunity to answer. But several
courts in the United States have looked into Claimants’ allegations; and, while Claimants
can point to certain findings by Judge Kaplan, the majority of the U.S. Courts that have
considered Chevron’s allegations have rejected its crime fraud allegations or otherwise
declined to opine on them. And while powerful economies, such as the United States or
Brazil, can impose billions of dollars in fines against companies like British Petroleum and
Chevron for environmental liability, a declaration that the Republic is in breach of Interim
Awards at this juncture for not having interfered in environmental litigation between
private parties would confirm that Chevron was not misguided when it declared that “we
cannot let small countries screw with us.”

Mr. President and Members of the Tribunal, Claimants should not be allowed to
deliberately turn this Tribunal into an instrument of their manipulation plan. With this, I
finish my intervention and with your permission, Mr. President, I will hand the floor to
Zachary Douglas who will continue representing the interests of Ecuador. Many thanks.”

19. On the second day of the November Oral Hearing (27 November 2012), the Tribunal
addressed the following invitation to the Respondent, as recorded in the English transcript:

“[The Tribunal]: ... Now, returning to the preliminary issues, we would like to address a
question to the Respondent. Now, please understand we've decided none of the merits in
this case, but it is possible that in the enforcement proceedings in Canada, Brazil, or
Argentina, the Respondent may have a special status as to how far those proceedings are
pursued whilst these [arbitration] proceedings are pending.

It is possible that if the Claimants are right, the result of these [arbitration] proceedings
would be a very significant monetary award against the Respondent in circumstances
where, if execution had taken place outside Ecuador, in Canada, Brazil, Argentina, or
elsewhere, the Respondent would be facing a difficulty in funding such an award without
access to the proceeds of the [foreign] judgment.

What we would like to inquire of the Respondent is whether they have considered, and if
they have considered whether they are minded to do it, to intervene in these enforcement
proceedings to prevent execution of those foreign judgments whilst these [arbitration]
proceedings are pending. This would be not only for itself in its own interests for the
reasons I’ve just indicated, but also because the Respondent may be facing a conflict, a
conflict as a party within these proceedings subject to the Orders and Awards of this
Tribunal and, of course, other obligations and duties in regard to its own citizens and the
Ecuadorian Judgment being in force within and without Ecuador.”

20. On the last day of the November Oral Hearing (28 November 2012), the Respondent agreed
to respond to the Tribunal’s invitation within two weeks, as recorded in the English transcript:

“[The Respondent]: And just to conclude, Mr. President, we, of course, received the
invitation by the Tribunal yesterday, and it is important to mention that we are taking note
of that invitation and to also inform the Tribunal that this has not been the first time that we

have been discussing internally and at different levels the importance of the possibility that
the State, the Attorney General can do--to do whatever is possible, legally possible, to
comply with the Interim Awards.

And although the invitation yesterday is extremely important, we take note of the
importance that the Tribunal has indicated. We would like to, of course, take time. Of
course, we cannot decide one day or another what to do with--what to respond to the
Members of the Tribunal today on an issue that, of course, involves serious legal
considerations; and, for that purpose, we would like to reflect on that, and we, of course,
cannot take a position right now. We need to go back. And, of course, the Attorney General
cannot decide by himself issues as to determine whether there is a public interest, and
whether it’s justified. We’re considering the options, the legal consequences, and then the
constitutional limits that that would imply, and for that purpose, we would like and request
the Tribunal if we could have some time to come back to the Tribunal and respond to that
specific invitation.

[The Tribunal]: We will certainly address housekeeping later, but I wouldn't have thought
that was a problem, subject to timing, obviously. This is a very important matter and a very
important step to be very carefully considered.

[The Respondent]: Of course, and we would take the issue immediately to the point where
we—thinking that we could do this in a period of two weeks.

[.]

[The Tribunal]: Can I raise another matter that the Tribunal has discussed; it is that we are
very concerned about being overtaken by events. There is no purpose in a procedure like
this, which is complicated, expensive, and difficult for all concerned if at the end of the day
the piece of paper that’s produced by the Tribunal is completely irrelevant because events
have overtaken the Tribunal. Now, we have discussed the possibility, depending on events
over the next few weeks, of advancing the hearing date by six months. It’s only fair to
mention that to you now because there will be an enormous change in preparations for a
hearing advanced by six months when we had anticipated that January/February [2014]
was the earliest date that could be fairly met by the Parties. But there is no point in having
a hearing in 2014 for no purpose whatsoever. So, we're not making any order at the
moment, but we're just telling you that that is an option which we'll be considering in the
light of the events that may take place over the next few weeks. ...

On Interim Measures, obviously we will await a response from the Respondent as
indicated, and I think two weeks would be an acceptable period to the Tribunal. ... But we
are very concerned about the Respondent’s potential position in this case. Please
understand we've not decided any of the merits of this case, but on one view of the case it
exposes Respondent potentially to quite serious difficulties ...

I think all of us, both Parties and the Tribunal, have a common interest in ensuring that the
proceedings are fair in all respects and effective, and obviously we're facing real
difficulties with the possible developments of actions in other jurisdictions. And given the
common interest that we have, I think the Tribunal would appreciate it if either Parties,
both parties, had any thoughts as to steps which might be taken which would do something
to assist the preservation of the fairness and the efficacy of the exercise of this Tribunal’s
jurisdiction.

[The Respondent]: I can certainly speak to that and really reiterate what Mr. Gonzalez said
earlier [for the Respondent]. That is a subject that we have discussed, and had discussed at
length, and one after yesterday’s invitation from the President, we renewed that discussion

last night and expect to have some further extensive and serious discussions, and we will
certainly advise the Tribunal within the timeframe that we agreed to.

[The Tribunal]: Well, thank you for that observation. We welcome it wholeheartedly, and
we look forward to the response when it comes in due course. And if you need a little bit
longer than two weeks, please let us know because we attach very considerable importance
to somehow maintaining a status quo which doesn’t infringe the substantive or procedural
rights of either side. But we are in unchartered waters. I don’t think any of us have quite
seen the situation before; and we’re all, at least the Tribunal, struggling for guidance as to
how to maintain this balance.”

(11) DEVELOPMENTS AFTER THE NOVEMBER ORAL HEARING

21. By letter dated 5 December 2012, the Claimants informed the Tribunal of certain
developments arising since the November Oral Hearing. In regard to the Argentinean
proceedings, the Claimants stated:

“... Since Claimants’ remarks on the last day of the Track I hearing, the Plaintiffs’
Argentine embargo proceedings continue to proceed apace. On November 28, 2012, the
Argentine judge issued a clarification order at the request of two of Chevron Argentina’s
customers (YPF and Shell), which have been ordered to withhold 40% of all amounts
payable to Chevron Argentina [footnote omitted]. These customers were uncertain of the
scope of the embargo and whether taxes, including, inter alia, VAT and royalties, should be
excluded from the sums subject to the 40% calculation. The judge ruled that the 40% must
be applied on the amounts for the purchase of hydrocarbons net of “fiscal charges” of any
nature [footnote omitted]. As to the merits of the Argentine embargo order, the Plaintiffs
are due to file their response to Chevron’s subsidiaries’ defenses to that order today,
December 5, 2012, after which time the Argentine Judge will be in a position to issue a
ruling at any time on the continued application of the embargo order. In parallel to these
embargo proceedings, Claimants understand that the Plaintiffs have escalated their attack
against Chevron and its subsidiaries by initiating formal re ition pr dings of the
Lago Agrio Judgment in Argentina ....”

22. The Claimants also reformulated their request for an urgent order or award (final or partial) to
include the following relief:

“Claimants, therefore, respectfully request that the Tribunal urgently issue a Partial Final
Award, or in the alternative an Interim Award, in the terms discussed at the Track 1
hearing, including that the Tribunal:

J. Declare that Ecuador is in breach of the First and Second Interim Awards;

2. Declare that pending the outcome of this arbitration, the Lago Agrio Judgment is not
final, enforceable, or conclusive under Ecuadorian and international law;

3. Declare that Ecuador is responsible to Claimants for indemnification and damages for
all damages, costs, expenses, and attorneys’ fees incurred by Claimants as a result of its
breach; and

4. Deposit the Partial Final Award without delay with the Registry of the District Court of
The Hague, in accordance with Article 1058(1) of the Dutch Code of Civil Proceedings.

10

23.

24.

25.

26.

In sum, Claimants request from the Tribunal the strongest possible relief, in the strongest
possible form, to preserve the fairness and efficacy of this arbitration.”

By letter dated 6 December 2012, the Respondent responded to the Claimants’ letter dated 5
December 2012, stating it would report on the “serious discussions ... ongoing in response to
the Tribunal’s invitation to find and suggest a mechanism to accomplish certain goals
articulated by the Tribunal”, not later than 14 December 2012.

By letter dated 7 December 2012, the Tribunal indicated as follows:

“The Tribunal acknowledges safe receipt of the Claimants’ letter dated 5 December and
the Respondent’s letter dated 6 December 2012.

As there advised by the Respondent, the Tribunal intends to await the Respondent’s further
letter to be received by the Tribunal no later than 14 December 2012. The Tribunal also
intends thereafter to provide to the Claimants a fair opportunity of responding to the
Respondent’s further letter.

For the time being, until receipt of the Respondent's further letter (or further order), the
Tribunal requests that no further correspondence take place in regard to the Parties’
differences over interim measures.”

By letter of 14 December 2012, the Respondent requested more time, until 10 January 2013,
to provide its substantive response to the Tribunal’s invitation made during the November
Oral Hearing.

By letter dated 16 December 2012, the Claimants opposed the Respondent’s request for more
time to respond to the Tribunal’s invitation made at the end of the November Oral Hearing.
As regards the Argentinean proceedings, the Claimants stated:

“The Argentine court has ordered Chevron Argentina’s business partners to withhold 40%
of any amounts owed to Chevron Argentina and ordered banks to re-apply the 40%
embargo order to the 60% of these receivables that come into Chevron Argentina’s
accounts. The net effect is that 64% of Chevron Argentina’s receivables are being withheld
[footnote omitted]. Chevron Argentina has publicly stated that the embargo affects more
than 90% of its revenues for the sale of crude [footnote omitted] and that due to taxation
and the need to distribute revenue among joint-venturers, the actual net effect of the
embargo is even greater than 100% for some of Chevron Argentina's operations.

An Argentine government representative has publicly stated that “[the province of]
Neuquén could lose some 1,200 direct jobs” as a result of the embargo against Chevron
[footnote omitted].The Secretary General of the Private Oil and Gas Union of Rio Negro
and Neuquen has also said that the embargo “directly affects approximately 1,700 workers,
which means the same number of families, affecting at least 6,800 residents in our region,
very seriously threatening the social peace’ [footnote omitted].

The Tribunal should be aware that, as Respondent knows, the Argentine court system is in
recess from December 31, 2012 to Jan. 31, 2013. Respondent's request for further delay is
thus a request that this Tribunal forego any action that could be effective against
enforcement actions in violation of the Tribunal’s prior awards until at least February 1,

Respondent has demonstrated repeatedly that this Tribunal can have no confidence in
Respondent's compliance with the Tribunal’s awards. Chevron respectfully submits that the
Tribunal should therefore take actions that can be brought directly to the attention of the

ll

courts of other nations. Specifically, the Tribunal should declare that the enforcement
actions violate the Interim Awards issued by the Tribunal to preserve the status quo
pending a decision on the merits, and that the enforcement actions are therefore contrary to
international law.”

27. By letter dated 17 December 2012, the Tribunal indicated as follows:

“The Tribunal has considered the letter dated 14 December 2012 from the Respondent,
requesting further time to 10 January 2013 for the Respondent's substantive response to the
Tribunal’s invitation made at the end of the hearing on 28 November 2012.

The Tribunal confirms its view as to the significance of the Respondent's substantive
response. Accordingly, the Tribunal is minded to grant the extension requested by the
[Respondent], subject to any new urgent circumstances arising during this extended period.

The Tribunal acknowledges receipt of the Claimants’ letter dated 16 December 2012 in
response to the Respondent’s letter dated 14 December 2012.”

28. By letter dated 22 January 2013, the Respondent provided its substantive response to the
Tribunal’s invitation made during the November Oral Hearing. It is appropriate to cite here
the substance of this response in full:

“On November 28, 2012, counsel for the Republic represented during the Track 1 Hearing
on the Merits that the Respondent and counsel were re-engaged in serious discussions
aimed at resolving the Tribunal’s concerns about the enforcement actions commenced by
the Lago Agrio Plaintiffs in courts outside Ecuador. The results of the extensive
deliberations are outlined below.

At the outset, however, the Republic reiterates its concern that the Claimants have
introduced the core elements of their “fraud” case on the merits through a series of
applications for interim measures that have repeatedly required the Republic to respond to
the Claimants’ evolving set of allegations either spontaneously or over a period of weeks.
As a result, the Tribunal has been forced to consider unprecedented requests for relief with
far-reaching effects absent a full and complete record, and without affording the Republic
the time it needed to critically examine the Claimants’ and other available evidence. The
Respondent has yet to file a substantive pleading in response to these allegations and
respectfully requests that the Tribunal give careful consideration to the Respondent’s
Counter Memorial in Track II before taking any further action.

The interim measures — now interim awards — impose obvious and substantial legal
conundrums for any public official trying to faithfully carry out his legal responsibilities.
Whatever this Tribunal may currently and preliminarily conclude regarding the Lago Agrio
judicial proceedings based on substantially less than a full record, the Tribunal presumably
also understands that from a State official’s perspective, the State’s own courts have
determined — albeit subject to further review at the cassation appellate level — that the
Plaintiffs’ lands, water, and air have been polluted, that Chevron is liable for that
pollution, that over the course of many years the existing pollution has caused (and is
continuing to cause) the Plaintiffs harm, and that the judgment in the underlying
Ecuadorian action is intended, in part, to remedy that harm. Officials of the State,
therefore, are caught between this Tribunal’s Interim Awards, on the one hand, and the
officials’ legal duties and obligations under both domestic law and international
obligations relating to equal treatment under the law that arise from international human
rights conventions to which Ecuador is a party, on the other. Under the domestic legal
regime, there is no conceivable basis for the Republic to interfere in private party litigation
either within Ecuador or in foreign jurisdictions.

12

Claimants have construed the Interim Awards as imposing on the Republic an obligation to
violate its Constitution and domestic laws. The Republic has not interpreted the Interim
Awards as requiring State officials to violate their own laws and considers Claimants’
position utterly untenable under any conceivable principle of law or equity.

Claimants assert that they are confronting imminent irreparable harm by the Lago Agrio
Plaintiffs’ successive enforcement actions. In fact, Plaintiffs’ enforcement actions in
Canada and Brazil pose no imminent threat at all to Chevron. The Republic has previously
offered declarations of Canadian and Brazilian legal experts affirming that these
enforcement actions will take years to resolve [Footnote I omitted]. These declarations
remain uncontested. Additionally, though perhaps anecdotally, news coverage of the
Canadian enforcement action suggests that Plaintiffs’ effort to enforce against Chevron
subsidiaries will be rejected [Footnote 2 omitted].

 

Plaintiffs’ actions for recognition and enforcement in Argentina are no different. Those
proceedings will take years to resolve and may well share the fate of the Canadian
proceedings insofar as they are also targeted against Chevron subsidiaries. Argentina
does, however, raise other issues.

 

In Argentina, special rules deriving from a Latin American convention on the enforcement
of interim measures [Footnote 3 omitted] allowed the Plaintiffs to secure the temporary
attachment of certain Chevron assets — and those of Chevron’s subsidiaries in Argentina
— pending a final determination on the merits of the recognition and enforcement action
there. The purpose of the attachment proceedings is merely to ensure that Chevron does not
dissipate its assets in the jurisdiction. Even here, however, Claimants’ decision to
characterize the Argentine developments as threatening “irreparable” harm to the
company is plainly strategic. To date, Chevron’s 10-K and 10-Q filings fail to advise either
its shareholders or the capital markets that have been to the contrary, instead affirming
that the ongoing proceedings pose no material harm to the company.

Moreover, under the applicable law, if Chevron fails to have the attachment order reversed
on the grounds that the Argentine courts cannot reach assets of Chevron’s subsidiaries, it
still is entitled to post substitute collateral that would have the effect of denying the
plaintiffs the right to freeze, attach or garnish income or bank accounts or otherwise affect
Chevron’s (or its subsidiaries’) presence in Argentina. By offering substitute collateral,
therefore, Chevron can eliminate any further alleged disruption to its Argentine operations
for the foreseeable future. Indeed, Respondent is concerned that Chevron may eschew such
a remedy based on its considered analysis that it is better to leverage any alleged
disruption in Argentina to obtain even more dramatic relief here than it is to prevent the
disruption in the first instance. In either event, it is clear that Chevron has the ability and
wherewithal, should it choose to do so, to eliminate any disruption to its Argentine

ions and thus elimi any risk of immii harm (irrey or otherwise).

 

Interim Measures and Interim Awards are intended to ensure that this Tribunal’s
jurisdiction and its ability to grant meaningful relief are not impeded by developments on
the ground. But no enforcement action brought by the Lago Agrio Plaintiffs — who are not
coordinating with the Republic and who do not take orders from the Republic — will lead
to collections of any portion of the Lago Agrio Judgment or the seizure of assets for a
number of years. Accordingly, neither of the pending actions in Canada, Brazil or
Argentina will affect this Tribunal’s jurisdiction or its ability of rendering a monetary
award [Footnote 4 omitted].

The Republic, as | ised, has hel sidered (and re-considered) options in an
effort to address the Tribunal’ 's concerns regarding Plaintiffs’ ongoing efforts to enforce

the judgment [Footnote 5 omitted]. The Republic considers that a combination of the
following three actions should adequately address those concerns.

First, while the Respondent has no competence under domestic law to intervene in and
move the Argentine court to lift the order of attachment currently in place, it might be
possible to work with the Tribunal to remove any alleged immediate threat of harm to the
Argentine subsidiaries. Chevron is currently under an obligation to mitigate damages. As
such, as noted above, it could post substitute collateral, which could take the form of (i) a
surety insurance (“Seguro de Caucion”), (ii) a deposit in escrow in an international
financial institution with operations in Argentina, (iii) a surety bond issued by an
accredited financial institution with operations in Argentina, or (iv) any other form that
Chevron might consider appropriate. The premise of this proposal is to find a way in which
the Republic is not intervening in the private-party litigation while affording the Tribunal
comfort that there is no possible imminent threat to Chevron’s global operations. Should
the Tribunal ultimately find against the Republic on the issue of denial of justice or breach
of the BIT, the financial cost involved in structuring and implementing any of the foregoing
alternatives may be computed within the quantum of any monetary award.

Second, in the interim, the Republic would not object to the Tribunal releasing the fifty
million dollar bond currently held in escrow back to the Claimants if Chevron requested
those funds to apply them against any cost in which it might incur while structuring and
posting substitute collateral with the courts in Argentina.

Third, the Attorney General intends to file a letter with the National Court - specifically
with the Chamber that has been recently appointed to hear Chevron’s cassation appeal - to
keep the National Court apprised of the existence of these arbitral proceedings and of the
issues currently under consideration of the Tribunal.

We reiterate our affirmation that much time, thought and resources have been and are still
being devoted to these issues. The Republic believes that the process might be advanced if
the Tribunal should convene a short hearing to discuss, informally, these proposals and
perhaps others that the Tribunal might consider on its own. Should the Tribunal consider it
necessary to hold such hearing prior to Respondent's filing of the Track 2 Merits Counter-
memorial, the Republic would respectfully request a one week extension of the February
18, 2013, deadline for such filing.”

29. By letter dated 27 January 2013, at the request of the Tribunal (made on 23 January 2013), the
Claimants replied to the Respondent’s letter dated 22 January 2013, rejecting its contents as
both “disappointing” and “wholly inadequate”. The Claimants’ letter concluded:

“Respondent's proposal for an informal hearing to discuss these matters — which is entirely
unnecessary — is yet another effort to delay until real-time events overtake this arbitration,
precisely what the Interim Awards were designed to prevent. Accordingly, Claimants
respectfully request that the Tribunal (1) grant Claimants’ requested relief as soon as
possible [footnote omitted, referring to the Claimants’ letters dated 5 and 16 December
2012] and (2) order an expedited briefing and hearing schedule for the Track 2 merits
phase, as the Tribunal suggested at the close of the Track I hearing [footnote omitted],
namely (i) Claimants’ Reply Memorial on the Merits on April 25, 2013, (ii) Respondent’s
Rejoinder on the Merits on June 30, 2013, and (iii) a final Track 2 hearing on the merits in
August 2013”

 

30. By letter dated 29 January 2012, the Respondent responded to the Claimants’ letter dated 27
January 2013, refuting in particular the Claimants’ request for an expedited procedure.

(IV) THE PARTIES’ RELIEF SOUGHT FROM THE TRIBUNAL

31.

32.

33.

34.

By the Claimants’ letter dated | June 2012 (pp. 2-3), the Claimants requested that the
Tribunal issue a further interim award deciding as follows:

“Wi declaring that Ecuador is in breach of the First and Second Interim Awards on

Interim Measures;

(ii) declaring that, on account of Ecuador's breaches of the Tribunal’s Interim Awards,

Ecuador is responsible for, and shall reimburse Claimants for any and all
s, costs, and other expenses incurred in defending, or preparing to
defend against, recognition and enforcement actions related to the Lago Agrio

 

Judgment; and

(iii) cancelling the US$50 million bond requirement imposed by the Second Interim
Award, returning the funds deposited by Claimants, and otherwise maintaining and

reaffirming all other orders and aspects of the Second Interim Award.”

By the Respondent’s letter dated 15 August 2012 (p. 6), the Respondent requested that the

Tribunal decide the Claimants’ Seventh Request for Interim Measures as follows:

“For the foregoing reasons, the Republic respectfully requests that this Tribunal declare
that Claimants have failed to show the requisite elements for interim relief and accordingly
deny the first two requests for interim protection in their June 1, 2012 letter. Should the
Tribunal find that this interim relief would be warranted under the attendant
circumstances, the Republic respectfully requests that the Tribunal exercise its discretion
not to grant the relief requested and join resolution of this matter to the final adjudication

of the merits of Claimants’ claims.”

During the Claimants’ opening statement at the November Oral Hearing, the Claimants
submitted a further “Definitive Request for Relief’, seeking the following relief from the
Tribunal in regard to its Seventh Request for Interim Measures:

“TL. Request for an Immediate Interim Award as a Result of Ecuador's Breaches of the

First and Second Interim Awards:

1. Declare that Ecuador is in breach of the First and Second Interim Awards;

2. Declare that pending the outcome of this arbitration, the Lago Agrio
Judgment is not final, enforceable, or conclusive under Ecuadorian and
international law, and thus, is not subject to recognition and enforcement

within or without Ecuador; and

3. Declare that Ecuador is responsible to Claimants in indemnification and
damages for all damages, costs, expenses, and attorneys’ fees incurred by

Claimants as a result of its breach.”

Following the November Oral Hearing, the Claimants sought further relief, as set out above in
their letters dated 5 December 2012, 16 December 2012 and 27 January 2013; and the
Respondent sought an order in regard to its application made by letter dated 22 January 2013,

also as set out above.

PART IT: THE TRIBUNAL’S ORDERS AND AWARDS

(D) THE FIRST ORDER ON INTERIM MEASURES OF 14 MAY 2010

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43,

On 23 September 2009, the Claimants served a Notice of Arbitration on the Respondent
pursuant to Article VI(3)(a)(iii) of the Treaty between the United States of America and the
Republic of Ecuador concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investment,
signed on 27 August 1993 (the “Treaty”), which provides that disputes arising under it may
be submitted to an arbitration tribunal established under the Arbitration Rules of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law of 1976 (the “UNCITRAL Rules”).

On 29 September 2009, the Respondent received the Notice of Arbitration.

On 25 February 2010, through the appointment of V.V. Veeder QC as the presiding arbitrator
by the Secretary-General of the PCA, the Tribunal was constituted.

On 26 March 2010, the Tribunal held a procedural meeting with the Parties by telephone
conference-call to discuss, inter alia, the procedure in respect of a request for interim
measures that the Claimants indicated they would soon submit to the Tribunal.

By e-mail message dated 1 April 2010, the Claimants submitted a Request for Interim
Measures (here, the “First Request for Interim Measures”).

By e-mail messages dated 3 May 2010, the Respondent submitted its Response to the First
Request for Interim Measures.

By e-mail messages dated 7 May 2010, the Claimants submitted their Reply on the First
Request for Interim Measures.

An oral hearing on interim measures and procedural meeting was held in London on 10-11
May 2010.

The Tribunal issued an Order on Interim Measures dated 14 May 2010 (the “First Order on
Interim Measures”), the operative part of which ordered as follows:

“J. Until further decision the Tribunal takes, pursuant to Article 26(1) of the UNCITRAL
Rules, the following interim measures up to and including the next procedural meeting
beginning on 22 November 2010:

(i) The Claimants and the Respondent are both ordered to maintain, as far as
possible the status quo and not to exacerbate the procedural and substantive disputes
before this Tribunal, including (in particular but without limiting howsoever the
ity of the foregoing) the avoidance of any public statement tending to
compromise these arbitration proceedings;

  

(ii) The Claimants and the Respondent are both ordered to refrain from any conduct
likely to impair or otherwise adversely affect, directly or indirectly, the ability of the
Tribunal to address fairly any issue raised by the Parties before this Tribunal;

(iii) The Claimants and the Respondent are both ordered not to exert, directly or
indirectly, any unlawful influence or pressure on the Court addressing the pending
litigation in Ecuador known as the Lago Agrio Case;

(iv) The Claimants and the Respondent are ordered to inform the Tribunal (in
writing) of the likely date for the issue by the Court of its judgment in the Lago Agrio
Case as soon as such date becomes known to any of them;

(v) The Respondent is ordered to communicate (in writing and also by any other
appropriate means) the Tribunal’s invitation to the Court in the Lago Agrio Case to
make known as a professional courtesy to the Tribunal the likely date for the issue by
the Court of its judgment in the Lago Agrio Case; and, to that end, the Respondent is
ordered to send to the Court the full text in Spanish and English of the Tribunal’s
present order; and

(vi) The Respondent is ordered to facilitate and not to discourage, by every
appropriate means, the Claimants’ engagement of legal experts, advisers and
representatives from the Ecuadorian legal profession for the purpose of these
arbitration proceedings (at the Claimants’ own expense).

2. This Order is and shall remain subject to modification in the light of any future event,
upon the Tribunal’s own motion or upon any Party’s application, particularly in the light of
any new development in the Lago Agrio Case and the issue of the Court’s judgement in
such Case; and any of the Parties may apply to the Tribunal for such modification upon 24
hours’ written notice.

3. This Order is made strictly without prejudice to the merits of the Parties’ procedural and

disputes, i ling the R dent's jurisdictional and admi: ty

and the merits of the Claimants’ claims.”

(ID) THE SECOND ORDER ON INTERIM MEASURES OF 6 DECEMBER 2010

44, By letter dated 26 May 2010, the Claimants complained that the Respondent had breached the
First Order on Interim Measures.

45. By letter dated 3 June 2010, the Respondent commented on the Claimants’ letter of 26 May
2010, rejecting their complaint and raising its own complaint against the Claimants.

46. On 14 June 2010, after considering the letters from the Parties, the Tribunal issued its
Procedural Order No. 4, inter alia, deciding that no breach of its order had been established
against any Party.

47. By letter dated 27 October 2010, the Claimants presented an additional request for interim
measures (here, the “Second Request for Interim Measures”).

48. By letter dated 12 November 2010, the Respondent responded to the Second Request for
Interim Measures.

 

49, A Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admi: lity was held in London on 22-23 November 2010. It
included further oral submissions by the Parties on the Claimants’ Second Request for Interim
Measures.

50.

51.

During the Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, the Respondent confirmed that it had
no objection to the continuation of paragraphs 1(i), I(ii), 1(iii), I(iv) and I(vi) of the
Tribunal’s First Order on Interim Measures.

The Tribunal issued its further Order on Interim Measures dated 6 December 2010 (the
“Second Order on Interim Measures”), the operative part of which ordered as follows:

“YZ. Until further decision the Tribunal takes, pursuant to Article 26(1) of the UNCITRAL
Rules, the following interim measures up to and including the date of issuance of the
Tribunal’s decision on jurisdiction:

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(vy)

(vi)

The Claimants and the Respondent are both ordered to maintain, as far as
possible the status quo and not to exacerbate the procedural and substantive
disputes before this Tribunal, including (in particular but without limiting
howsoever the generality of the foregoing) the avoidance of any public
statement tending to compromise these arbitration proceedings;

The Claimants and the Respondent are both ordered to refrain from any
conduct likely to impair or otherwise adversely affect, directly or indirectly,
the ability of the Tribunal to address fairly any issue raised by the Parties
before this Tribunal;

The Claimants and the Respondent are both ordered not to exert, directly or
indirectly, any unlawful influence or pressure on the Court addressing the
pending litigation in Ecuador known as the Lago Agrio Case;

The Claimants and the Respondent are ordered to inform the Tribunal (in
writing) of the likely date for the issue by the Court of its judgment in the
Lago Agrio Case as soon as such date becomes known to any of them;

The Tribunal has decided, of its own motion, to write a letter to the Court in
the Lago Agrio Case (in the form of the draft attached) inviting that Court to
make known as a professional courtesy to the Tribunal the likely date for the
issue of its judgment in that Case; and

The Respondent is ordered to facilitate and not to discourage, by every
appropriate means, the Claimants’ engagement of legal experts, advisers and
representatives from the Ecuadorian legal profession for the purpose of these
arbitration proceedings (at the Claimants’ own expense).

2. This Order is and shall remain subject to modification in the light of any future event,
upon the Tribunal’s own motion or upon any Party’s application, particularly in the
light of any new development in the Lago Agrio Case and the issue of the Court's
judgement in such Case; and any of the Parties may apply to the Tribunal for such
modification upon 24 hours’ written notice.

3. This Order is made strictly without prejudice to the merits of the Parties’ procedural

and

ludi

disputes, ii the Respondent’s jurisdictional and adi ty

objections and the merits of the Claimants’ claims.”

(1) THE THIRD ORDER ON INTERIM MEASURES OF 28 JANUARY 2011

52.

53.

54.

55.

By letter dated 14 January 2011, the Claimants submitted a revised application for interim
measures (here, the “Third Request for Interim Measures” and also “the Claimants’ Second
Application”).

On 26 January 2011, the Tribunal heard the Parties’ legal representatives at a procedural
meeting (held by telephone conference-call) as regards the procedure required to address the
Claimants’ Third Request for Interim Measures and the Respondent’s opposition to the Third
Request for Interim Measures.

During the procedural meeting, the Claimants indicated that the Tribunal should determine
their Third Request for Interim Measures urgently without any oral hearing (i.e., on the
Parties’ written submissions and other materials already submitted); the Respondent opposed
such procedure and requested an oral hearing preceded by an opportunity to make written
submissions opposing the Third Request for Interim Measures; and the Claimants indicated
that if their application could not be determined by the Tribunal timeously, the Claimants
requested an immediate “temporary order” in like terms pending such determination.

The Tribunal issued its Procedural Order and Further Order on Interim Measures dated 28
January 2011 (the “Third Order on Interim Measures”), the operative part of which decided as
follows:

“(A) The Respondent shall submit its written submissions in response to the Claimants’
[Third Request for Interim Measures] as soon as practicable but no later than 1700
hours (Netherlands time) on Friday, 4 February 2011 (or such other date as may be
ordered by the Tribunal);

(B) There shall be an oral hearing on the Claimants’ [Third Request for Interim
Measures] and the Respondent's opposition thereto at the Peace Palace, The Hague,
provisionally on Sunday, 6 February 2011 (or such other date as may be ordered by
the Tribunal) at a time and in a form to be decided later by the Tribunal;

(C) Pending such oral hearing or further order (on application by any Party or by the
Tribunal upon its own initiative), the Tribunal takes the following interim measures
pursuant to Article 26 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules:

1. The Tribunal re-confirms Paragraphs I(i) to (iv) of its Order dated 14 May 2010
(as amended); namely:

(i) The Claimants and the Respondent are both ordered to maintain, as
far as possible the status quo and not to exacerbate the procedural
and substantive disputes before this Tribunal, including (in
particular but without limiting howsoever the generality of the
foregoing) the avoidance of any public statement tending to
compromise these arbitration proceedings;

(ii) The Claimants and the Respondent are both ordered to refrain from
any conduct likely to impair or otherwise adversely affect, directly or
indirectly, the ability of the Tribunal to address fairly any issue
raised by the Parties before this Tribunal;

(iii) The Claimants and the Respondent are both ordered not to exert,
directly or indirectly, any unlawful influence or pressure on the
Court addressing the pending litigation in Ecuador known as the
Lago Agrio Case;

(iv) The Claimants and the Respondent are ordered to inform the
Tribunal (in writing) of the likely date for the issue by the Court of its
judgment in the Lago Agrio Case as soon as such date becomes
known to any of them;

(v) The Tribunal has decided, of its own motion, to write a letter to the
Court in the Lago Agrio Case (in the form of the draft attached)
inviting that Court to make known as a professional courtesy to the
Tribunal the likely date for the issue of its judgment in that Case; and

(vi) The Respondent is ordered to facilitate and not to discourage, by
every appropriate means, the Claimants’ engagement of legal
experts, advisers and representatives from the Ecuadorian legal
profession for the purpose of these arbitration proceedings (at the
Claimants’ own expense).

2. Whilst the Lago Agrio plaintiffs are not named parties to these arbitration
proceedings and the Respondent is not a named party to the Lago Agrio Case, the
Tribunal records that, as a matter of international law, a State may be
responsible for the conduct of its organs, including its judicial organs, as
expressed in Chapter II of Part One of the International Law Commission’s
Articles on State Responsibility;

3. If it were established that any judgment made by an Ecuadorian court in the Lago
Agrio Case was a breach of an obligation by the Respondent owed to the
Claimants as a matter of international law, the Tribunal records that any loss
arising from the enforcement of such judgment (within and without Ecuador) may
be losses for which the Respondent would be responsible to the Claimants under
international law, as expressed in Part Two of the International Law
Commission’s Articles on State Responsibility; and

4. This order for further interim measures is made by the Tribunal strictly without
prejudice to any Party’s case as regards the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, the
Claimants’ [Third Request for Interim Measures and other applications of 14
January 2011], the Respondent’s opposition to [the Claimants’ Third Request for
Interim Measures and other applications of 14 January 2011] and any claim or
defence by any Party as to the merits of the Parties’ dispute.”

(IV) THE FOURTH ORDER ON INTERIM MEASURES OF 9 FEBRUARY 2011

56. By letter dated 1 February 2011, the Respondent declared its intention not to make written
submissions on the Claimants’ Third Request for Interim Measures, in accordance with
Paragraph A of the Tribunal’s Third Order on Interim Measures.

20

57.

58.

59.

On 6 February 2011, an oral hearing was held at the Peace Palace in The Hague at which the
Parties made oral submissions to the Tribunal on the Claimants’ Third Request for Interim
Measures.

On 6 February 2011, at the conclusion of the hearing, the Tribunal continued, until further
order, Paragraph C of its Third Order on Interim Measures.

The Tribunal issued its further Order on Interim Measures dated 9 February 2011 (the “Fourth
Order on Interim Measures”), the operative part of which decided as follows:

“(A) As to jurisdiction, the Tribunal records that it has not yet determined the

(B)

(C)

(D,

(E)

Respondent's challenge to its jurisdiction (as recorded in the fourth preamble to its
Order of 28 January 2011). Nonetheless, for the limited purpose of the present
decision, the Tribunal provisionally assumes that it has jurisdiction to decide upon
the Claimants’ Second Application for Interim Measures on the ground that the
Claimants have established, to the satisfaction of the Tribunal, a sufficient case for
the existence of such jurisdiction at this preliminary stage of these arbitration
proceedings under the written arbitration agreement invoked by the Claimants
against the Respondent under the Treaty between the United States of America and
the Republic of Ecuador concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of
Investment (the “BIT”), incorporating by reference the 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules (the “UNCITRAL Rules”);

The Tribunal notes that: (i) Article 26 of the UNCITRAL Rules permits a tribunal, at
the request of a party, to take interim measures (established in the form of an order
or award) in respect of the subject-matter of the parties’ dispute; (ii) Article 32(1) of
the UNCITRAL Rules permits a tribunal to make (inter alia) an award in the form of
a final, partial or interim award; (iii) Article 32(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules provides
that any award is final and binding on the parties, with the parties undertaking to
carry out such award without delay; and (iv) Articles VI.3(6) of the BIT provides
(inter alia) that an award rendered pursuant to Article VI.3(a)(iii) of the BIT under
the UNCITRAL Rules shall be binding on the parties to the dispute, with the
Contracting Parties undertaking to carry out without delay the provisions of any such
award and to provide in its territory for its enforcement;

As to form, the Tribunal records that, whilst this decision under Article 26 of the
UNCITRAL Rules is made in the form of an order and not an interim award, given
the urgency required for such decision, the Tribunal may decide (upon its own
initiative or any Party’s request) to confirm such order at a later date in the form of
an interim award under Articles 26 and 32 of the UNCITRAL Rules, without the
Tribunal hereby intending conclusively to determine the status of this decision, one
way or the other, as an award under the 1958 New York Convention.

As to the grounds for the Claimants’ Second Application, the Tribunal concludes that
the Claimants have made out a sufficient case, to the Tribunal’s satisfaction, under
Article 26 of the UNCITRAL Rules, for the order made below in the discretionary
exercise of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to take interim measures in respect of the
subject-matter of the Parties’ dispute;

Bearing in mind the Respondent’s several obligations under the BIT and
international law, including the Respondent's obligation to carry out and provide for
the enforcement of an award on the merits of the Parties’ dispute in these arbitration
proceedings (assuming this Tribunal’s jurisdiction to make such an award), the
Tribunal orders:

21

(F)

(G

(H,

)

(J)

(i) the Respondent to take all measures at its disposal to suspend or cause to be
suspended the enforcement or recognition within and without Ecuador of any
judgment against the First Claimant in the Lago Agrio Case; and

(ii) the Respondent's Government to inform this Tribunal, by the Respondent's
legal representatives in these arbitration proceedings, of all measures which
the Respondent has taken for the implementation of this order for interim
measures;

pending further order or award in these arbitration proceedings, including the
Tribunal’s award on jurisdiction or (assuming jurisdiction) on the merits;

The Tribunal records that it is common ground between the Claimants and the

dent in these arbitrati dings, as also re-conf d by the Respond
at the oral hearing on 6 February 2011 (page 107 of the English transcript and page
101 of the Spanish transcript) that, under Ecuadorian law, a judgment entered in a
domestic proceeding at first instance (such as a first-instance judgment in the Lago
Agrio Case) is not final, conclusive or enforceable during the pendency of a first-
level appeal until at least such time as that appeal has been decided by the first-level
appellate court;

The Tribunal continues Paragraph C (1) to (3) of its order of 28 January 2011 (which
order is incorporated by reference herein);

The Tribunal decides further that the Claimants shall be legally responsible, jointly
and severally, to the Respondent for any costs or losses which the Respondent may
suffer in performing its obligations under this order, as may be decided by the
Tribunal within these arbitration proceedings (to the exclusion of any other
jurisdiction);

This order shall be immediately final and binding upon all Parties, subject only to
any subsequent variation made by the Tribunal (upon either its own initiative or any
Party’s request); and

This order, as with the earlier order of 26 January 2011, is made by the Tribunal
strictly without prejudice to any Party’s case as regards the Tribunal’s jurisdiction,
the Claimants’ First Application made by letter dated 12 December 2010, the
Respondent’s opposition to such First Application, and to any claim or defence by
any Party as to the merits of the Parties’ dispute.”

(V) THE FIFTH ORDER ON INTERIM MEASURES OF 16 MARCH 2011

60.

61.

On 14 February 2011, a judgment was issued against the First Claimant in Maria Aguinda et
al. v. Chevron Texaco Corporation, Proceeding No. 002-2003 before the Provincial Court of
Sucumbios in Lago Agrio, Ecuador (the “Lago Agrio Judgment”).

By letter dated 23 February 2011, the Claimants renewed and extended their request for
interim measures regarding the criminal proceedings pending in Ecuador against Chevron
attorneys Messrs. Ricardo Veiga and Rodrigo Pérez (the “Fourth Request for Interim
Measures”).

22

62.

63.

64.

65.

By letter dated 24 February 2011, the Respondent informed the Tribunal of the measures that
it had taken to comply with the Tribunal’s Fourth Order for Interim Measures and requested
the immediate revocation of that order.

By letter dated 28 February 2011, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal find that the
Claimants had violated the Tribunal’s prior Orders for Interim Measures or issue new interim
measures to specifically prohibit the Claimants’ alleged breaches.

By letter dated 4 March 2011, the Claimants alleged that the Respondent had violated the
Tribunal’s Fourth Order for Interim Measures and request relief in relation thereto (here, the
“Fifth Request for Interim Measures”).

The Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 7 dated 16 March 2011 (the “Fifth Order on
Interim Measures”), which decided as follows:

“I. The Tribunal here addresses the four disputed applications in these arbitration
proceedings regarding the Tribunal’s several orders for interim measures dated 14 May
2010, 28 January 2011 and 9 February 2011; namely: (i) the first application by the
Claimants made by letter dated 23 February 2011; (ii) the second application by the
Respondent made by letter dated 24 February 2011; (iii) the third application by the
Respondent made by letter dated 28 February 2011; and (iv) the fourth application by the
Claimants made by letter dated 4 March 2011.

 

2. First Application: As regards the first application by the Claimants for further interim
measures against the Respondent in regard to the criminal proceedings in Ecuador
concerning (inter alios) two of the Claimants’ legal representatives (Messrs Ricardo Veiga
and Rodrigo Pérez), the Tribunal refers to the Claimants’ letter dated 23 February 2011,
the Claimants’ email message dated 25 February 2011 and the Respondent's letter dated
10 March 2011.

3. Having considered the Parties’ written submissions listed in paragraph 2 above (with
attached exhibits), together with all other relevant circumstances in this case, the Tribunal
does not consider it appropriate to grant the Claimants’ application pleaded specifically at
page 21 of their letter dated 23 February 2011, beyond maintaining the Tribunal’s existing
orders for interim measures.

4. Second Application: As regards the second application made by the Respondent seeking
the revocation of the Tribunal’s order dated 9 February 2011, the Tribunal refers to Part II
of the Respondent's letter dated 24 February 2011 and the Claimants’ letter dated 4 March
2011.

5. Having considered the Parties’ written submissions listed in paragraph 4 above (with
attached exhibits), together with all other relevant circumstances in this case, the Tribunal
does not consider it appropriate to grant the Respondent's application or the Claimants’
counter-application, beyond maintaining its existing order for interim measures dated 9
February 2011.

6. Third Application: As regards the third application made by the Respondent in regard to
alleged violations by the Claimants of the Tribunal’s orders for interim measures and for
further interim measures, the Tribunal refers to the Respondent’s letter dated 28 February
2001 and the Claimants’ letters dated 4 and 10 March 2001.

7. Having considered the Parties’ written submissions listed in paragraph 6 above (with

attached exhibits), together with all other relevant circumstances in this case, the Tribunal
does not consider it appropriate to grant the Respondent's application pleaded specifically

23

at page 3 of its letter dated 28 February 2011, beyond maintaining the Tribunal’s existing
orders for interim measures.

8. Fourth Application: As regards the fourth application made by the Claimants in regard
to alleged violations by the Respondent of the Tribunal’s order dated 9 February 2011, the
Tribunal refers to the Claimants’ letter dated 4 March 2011.

9. Having considered the written submissions listed in paragraph 8 above (with attached
exhibits), together with all other relevant circumstances in this case, the Tribunal does not
consider it appropriate to grant the Claimants’ application, beyond maintaining the
Tribunal’s existing order for interim measures dated 9 February 2011.

10. This procedural order shall not prejudice any issue as regards jurisdiction,
admissibility or merits in these proceedings; nor shall it preclude any future application by
any Party for interim measures or like relief in the event of any change in relevant
circumstances.”

(VD) THE FIRST INTERIM AWARD ON INTERIM MEASURES OF 25 JANUARY 2012

66. On 4 January 2012, the appellate division of the Provincial Court of Sucumbjos in Lago
Agrio, Ecuador affirmed the first-instance judgment of the court in Maria Aguinda et al. v.
Chevron Texaco Corporation, Proceeding No. 002-2003.

67. By letter dated 4 January 2012, the Claimants requested that the Tribunal immediately “(i)
convert the order dated February 9, 2011 (the ‘Interim Measures Order’) into the form of an
Interim Award, as the Tribunal contemplated in the Order; and (ii) request that the Republic
of Ecuador inform the Tribunal, by this Friday, 6 January, 2012, of the steps that it intends to
take to comply with the Interim Measures Order and prevent the Lago Agrio Judgment from
becoming enforceable” (here, the “Sixth Request for Interim Measures”).

68. By letter dated 9 January 2012, the Respondent responded to the Claimants’ Sixth Request for
Interim Measures and requested that the Tribunal vacate its Fourth Order on Interim
Measures.

69. By letter dated 12 January 2012, the Claimants responded to the Respondent’s letter dated 9
January 2012 and again requested that the Tribunal immediately issue an award on interim
measures.

70. By letter dated 13 January 2012, the Respondent replied to the Claimants’ letter dated 12
January 2012, disputing (inter alia) the Claimants’ application and indicating that it would
make a further reply “on or before 24 January 2012”.

71. By letter dated 24 January 2012, as earlier indicated, the Respondent replied further to the
Claimants’ said letter dated 12 January 2012.

72. On 25 January 2012, the Tribunal held a procedural meeting by telephone conference-call
with the Parties’ legal representatives regarding procedural arrangements for an oral hearing
to be held on 11-12 February 2012 in regard to the Parties’ respective applications regarding
interim measures.

24

23. Pending such oral hearing, the Tribunal issued its First Interim Award on Interim Measures
dated 25 January 2012 (the “First Interim Award on Interim Measures”), the operative part of
which decided as follows:

“J. Pursuant to Paragraph (C) of its Order dated 9 February 2011 and upon the following
terms, the Tribunal confirms and re-issues such Order as an Interim Award pursuant to
Articles 26 and 32 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, specifically Paragraph (E) of such
Order; namely (as here modified):

2. Bearing in mind the Respondent’s several obligations under the BIT and international
law, including the Respondent’s obligation to carry out and provide for the enforcement of
an award on the merits of the Parties’ dispute in these arbitration proceedings (assuming
this Tribunal’s jurisdiction to make such an award), the Tribunal orders:

(i) _ the Respondent to take all measures at its disposal to suspend or cause to be
suspended the enforcement or recognition within and without Ecuador of any
judgment against the First Claimant in the Lago Agrio Case; and

(ii) the Respondent’ 's. Government shall continue to inform this Tribunal, by the

yz ’s legal repres ives in these arbitration 5 dings, of all

measures which the Respondent has taken for the implementation of this Interim
Award;

 

pending the February Hearing’s completion and any further order or award in these
arbitration proceedings;

3. This Interim Award is and shall remain subject to modification (including its extension
or termination) by the Tribunal at or after the February Hearing; and, in the meantime, any
of the Parties may also apply to the Tribunal for such modification upon 72 hours’ written
notice for good cause shown;

4. This Interim Award is made strictly without prejudice to the merits of the Parties’
substantive and other procedural disputes, including (but not limited to) the Parties’
respective applications to be heard at the February Hearing;

5. This Interim Award shall take effect forthwith as an Interim Award, being immediately
final and binding upon all Parties as an award subject only to any subsequent modification
as herein provided, whether upon the Tribunal’s own initiative or any Party’s application;
and

6. This Interim Award, although separately signed by the Tribunal’s members on three
signing pages constitutes an “interim award” signed by the arbitrators under Article 32of
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.”

(VI) THE SECOND INTERIM AWARD ON INTERIM MEASURES OF 16 FEBRUARY
2012

74. On 11 February 2012, an oral hearing was held in Washington DC to hear the Parties’
respective applications regarding interim measures.

25

75. Following that hearing, the Tribunal issued its Second Interim Award on Interim Measures
dated 16 February 2012 (the “Second Interim Award on Interim Measures”), the operative
part of which decided as follows:

J. The Tribunal determines that: (i) Article 26 of the UNCITRAL Rules (forming part of the
arbitration agreement invoked by the Claimants under the Treaty) permits this Tribunal, at
the request of a Party, to take interim measures (established in the form of an order or
award) in respect of the subject-matter of the Parties’ dispute; (ii) Article 32(1) of the
UNCITRAL Rules permits this Tribunal to make (inter alia) an award in the form of an
interim award, (iii) Article 32(2) of the UNCITRAL Rules provides that any award by this
Tribunal is final and binding on the Parties, with the Parties undertaking to carry out such
award without delay; and (iv) Articles VI.3(6) of the Treaty provides (inter alia) that an
award rendered by this Tribunal pursuant to Article VI.3(a)(iii) of the Treaty under the
UNCITRAL Rules shall be binding on the parties to the dispute (i.e. the Claimants and the
Respondent), with the Contracting Parties (i.e. here the Respondent) undertaking to carry
out without delay the provisions of any such award and to provide in its territory for its
enforcement;

2. The Tribunal determines further that the Claimants have established, for the purpose of
their said applications for interim measures, (i) a sufficient case as regards both this
Tribunal’s jurisdiction to decide the merits of the Parties’ dispute and the Claimants’ case
on the merits against the Respondent; (ii) a sufficient urgency given the risk that substantial
harm may befall the Claimants before this Tribunal can decide the Parties’ dispute by any
final award; and (iii) a sufficient likelihood that such harm to the Claimants may be
irreparable in the form of monetary compensation payable by the Respondent in the event
that the Claimants’ case on jurisdiction, admissibility and the merits should prevail before
this Tribunal;

3. Bearing in mind the Respondent's several obligations under the Treaty and international
law, including the Respondent's obligation to carry out and provide for the enforcement of
an award on the merits of the Parties’ dispute in these arbitration proceedings and the
Tribunal’s mission (required under the arbitration agreement) efficaciously and fairly to
decide the Parties’ dispute by a final award, the Tribunal hereby orders:

(i) the Respondent (whether by its judicial, legislative or executive branches) to take
all measures necessary to suspend or cause to be suspended the enforcement and
recognition within and without Ecuador of the judgments by the Provincial Court
of Sucumbios, Sole Division (Corte Provincial de Justicia de Sucumbios, Sala
Unica de la Corte Provincial de Justicia de Sucumbios) of 3 January 2012 and of
13 January 2012 (and, to the extent confirmed by the said judgments, of the
judgment by Judge Nicolés Zambrano Lozada of 14 February 2011) against the
First Claimant in the Ecuadorian legal proceedings known as “the Lago Agrio
Case”;

(ii) in particular, without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, such measures
to preclude any certification by the Respondent that would cause the said
judgments to be enforceable against the First Claimant; and

(iii) the Respondent ' ’s Government to continue to inform this Tribunal, by the

‘p ’s legal repres ives in these arbitration dings, of all

measures which the Respondent has taken for the implementation of its legal
obligations under this Second Interim Award;

 

until any further order or award made by the Tribunal in these arbitration proceedings;

26

4. The Tribunal determines that the Claimants shall be legally responsible, jointly and
severally, to the Respondent for any costs or losses which the Respondent may suffer in
performing its legal obligations under this Second Interim Award, as may be decided by the
Tribunal within these arbitration proceedings (to the exclusion of any other jurisdiction);
and further that, as security for such contingent responsibility the Claimants shall deposit
within thirty days of the date of this Second Interim Award the amount of US$
50,000,000.00 (United States Dollars Fifty Million) with the Permanent Court of
Arbitration in a manner to be designated separately, to the order of this Tribunal;

5. The Tribunal dismisses the application made by the Respondent to vacate its order for
interim measures of 9 February 2011;

6. The Tribunal’s existing orders for interim measures (as recited in the First Interim
Award) and the First Interim Award shall continue to have effect subject to the terms of this
Second Interim Award;

7. This Second Interim Award is and shall remain subject to modification at any time before
the Tribunal’s final award in these arbitration proceedings; and, in the meantime, any of
the Parties may also apply to the Tribunal for such modification upon seventy-two hours’
written notice for good cause shown, including any material change in the legal or factual
circumstances prevailing as at the date of the Hearing;

8. This Second Interim Award is made strictly without prejudice to the merits of the Parties’
substantive and other procedural disputes, including the Respondent’s objections as to
jurisdiction, admissibility and merits;

9. This Second Interim Award shall take effect forthwith as an Interim Award, being
immediately final and binding upon all Parties as an award subject only to any subsequent
modification as herein provided, whether upon the Tribunal’s own initiative or any Party’s
application; and

10. This Interim Award, although separately signed by the Tribunal’s members on three
signing pages constitutes an “interim award” signed by the three arbitrators under Article
32 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

(VID) THE THIRD INTERIM AWARD ON JURISDICTION AND ADMISSIBILITY OF 27
FEBRUARY 2012

76.

The Tribunal issued its Third Interim Award on Interim Measures dated 16 February 2012
(the “Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility”), the operative part of which decided as
follows:

“5.1 For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal here decides as a third interim award:

5.2. The Tribunal declares that it has jurisdiction to proceed to the merits phase of these
arbitration proceedings with the claims pleaded in the Claimant’s Notice of
Arbitration dated 23 September 2009, subject to the following sub-paragraphs;

5.3 As regards the claims pleaded by the Second Claimant (Texaco Petroleum Company

or “TexPet”) in the Claimants’ said Notice of Arbitration, to reject all objections
made by the Respondent as to jurisdiction and admissibility by its Memorial on

27

54

5.5

Jurisdiction and Admissibility dated 26 July 2010, its Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction
Objections dated 6 October 2010 and its further submissions at the Jurisdiction
Hearing on 22 and 23 November 2010;

As regards the claims pleaded by the First Claimant (Chevron Corporation or
“Chevron”) in the Claimants’ said Notice of Arbitration, to reject all objections
made by the Respondent as to jurisdiction and admissibility in its said memorials and
further submissions, save those relating to the jurisdictional objections raised against
the First Claimant as a investor under Article I(1)(a) alleging a “direct” investment
under Article VI(1)(c) and an “investment agreement” under Article VI(1)(a) of the
Ecuador-USA Treaty of 27 August 1993 which are joined to the merits of the First
Claimants’ claims under Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules forming
part of the Parties’ arbitration agreement under the Treaty; and

As regards the Parties’ respective claims for costs, the Tribunal here makes no order

save to reserve in full its jurisdiction and powers to decide such claims by a later
order or award in these arbitration proceedings.”

28

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

PART HI: THE TRIBUNAL’S REASONS

The Tribunal confirms and restates with full force and effect its earlier orders and awards on
interim measures. Each of these orders and awards was and remains binding upon the Parties
under the Treaty, the UNCITRAL Rules and international law. Under Article VI of the Treaty
and Article 32(3) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the Parties undertook to carry out any award
without delay, including the First and Second Interim Awards on Interim Measures of 25
January and 16 February 2012.

As regards the Respondent, these orders and awards were directed not only to the
Respondent’s executive branch but to all branches and organs that make up the Respondent as
a State, including its judiciary and legislature. Neither disagreement with the Tribunal’s
orders and awards on interim measures nor constraints under Ecuadorian law can excuse the
failure of the Respondent, through any of its branches or organs, to fulfil its obligations under
international law imposed by the Treaty, the UNCITRAL Rules and the Tribunal’s orders and
awards thereunder, particularly the First and Second Interim Awards on Interim Measures.

The Tribunal determines that the Lago Agrio Judgment was made final, enforceable and
subject to execution within Ecuador by the Respondent no later than 3 August 2012 (upon its
judiciary’s certifying the Lago Agrio Judgment’s enforceability), in violation of the
Tribunal’s First and Second Interim Awards requiring the Respondent, respectively, “to take
all measures at its disposal” and “to take all measures necessary” to suspend or cause to be
suspended the enforcement and recognition both within and without Ecuador of that Lago
Agrio Judgment.

Thereafter, the status accorded by the Respondent to the Lago Agrio Judgment led directly to
what the Tribunal was seeking expressly to preclude temporarily by its orders and awards on
interim measures, namely the attempted enforcement and execution of the Lago Agrio
Judgment against the First Claimant (with its subsidiary companies) by persons acting in the
name of the Lago Agrio plaintiffs not only within but also outside Ecuador, currently in the
state courts of Canada, Brazil and Argentina and possibly in the near future also in the state
courts of other countries.

Accordingly, the Tribunal requires the Respondent to show cause to this Tribunal why the
Respondent should not now compensate the First Claimant for any harm caused by the
Respondent’s violations of the First and Second Interim Awards in regard to the Lago Agrio
Judgment’s enforcement and execution, both within and outside Ecuador. The Tribunal
intends presently to establish a further procedural timetable to address such compensation
(including any issues as to causation and quantification) in consultation with the Parties, by a
further procedural order.

Moreover, from its perspective under international law, this Tribunal is the only tribunal with
the power to restrain the Respondent generally from aggravating the Parties’ dispute and
causing irreparable harm to the Claimants in regard to the enforcement and execution of the
Lago Agrio Judgment. Such restraint has not been achieved by any state court (including
courts in the USA); nor could it be in the circumstances of this most unusual case. The
Tribunal therefore confirms and declares, as a matter of international law, that the Respondent
has a continuing obligation to ensure that the commitments that it has given under the Treaty
and the UNCITRAL Rules are not rendered nugatory by the finalisation, enforcement or
execution of the Lago Agrio Judgment in violation of the First and Second Interim Awards.

29

83.

84.

85.

86.

The Tribunal bears much in mind that the amounts at stake are potentially huge in these
arbitration proceedings, measured in multiple billions of US dollars. For the Claimants, that
means that an award of damages expressed in tens of billions of US dollars could provide no
adequate remedy, if their full case were to prevail against the Respondent and if the Lago
Agrio Judgment were in the meantime enforced and executed. Conversely for the
Respondent, on these same assumptions, that means an award of damages could nonetheless
be recovered by the Claimants, albeit not in tens of billions, but in many millions or even
billions of US dollars.

The Tribunal also takes note that the first part (probably a substantial part) of any recoveries
on execution of the Lago Agrio Judgment outside Ecuador appears unlikely to be paid to the
Lago Agrio plaintiffs in Ecuador, but rather to foreign funding and other financial institutions
associated with persons acting in their name, based in countries other than Ecuador.

It is therefore difficult now to exaggerate the risks facing the First Claimant and thus,
indirectly, the Respondent also from the enforcement and execution of the Lago Agrio
Judgment. In the Tribunal’s view, based on the materials filed by both sides in this arbitration,
there are increasingly grave risks that enforcement and execution of the Lago Agrio Judgment
against the First Claimant (with its subsidiary companies) will imperil to a very significant
extent the overall fairness and the efficacy of these arbitration proceedings.

In accordance with the existing timetable requested by the Respondent, the Tribunal has yet to

decide any of the substantive merits of this dispute; and nothing in any order or award
(including this award) should be read as pre-judging any of those merits.

30

PARTIV: THE OPERATIVE PART

Accordingly, the Tribunal now makes this Fourth Interim Award as follows:

D

2)

3

2

4

The Tribunal declares that the Respondent has violated the First and Second Interim
Awards under the Treaty, the UNCITRAL Rules and international law in regard to the
finalisation and enforcement subject to execution of the Lago Agrio Judgment within and
outside Ecuador, including (but not limited to) Canada, Brazil and Argentina;

The Tribunal decides that the Respondent shall show cause, in accordance with a
procedural timetable to be ordered by the Tribunal separately, why it (the Respondent)
should not compensate the First Claimant for any harm caused by the Respondent’s
violations of the First and Second Interim Awards;

The Tribunal declares and confirms that the Respondent was and remains legally obliged
under international law to ensure that the Respondent ’s commitments under the Treaty
and the UNCITRAL Rules are not rendered nugatory by the finalisation, enforcement or
execution of the Lago Agrio Judgment in violation of the First and Second Interim
Awards; and

The Tribunal states expressly that: (i) it has not yet decided any of the substantive merits of
the Parties’ dispute; and (ii) this award is made strictly without prejudice to those merits,
including all claims adi d by the Claii and all d dy d by the
Respondent.

31

PLACE (SEAT) OF ARBITRATION: The Hague, The Netherlands
DATE: 7 February 2013

THE TRIBUNAL:

   

Dr. Horacio: Grigera Naén

Professor Vaughan Lowe

V.V. Veeder (President)

32

PLACE (SEAT) OF ARBITRATION: The Hague, The Netherlands
DATE: 7 February 2013

THE TRIBUNAL:

Dr. Horacio A. Grigera Naén

Professor Vaughan Lowe

V.V. Veeder (President)

32

PLACE (SEAT) OF ARBITRATION: The Hague, The Netherlands
DATE: 7 February 2013

THE TRIBUNAL:
Dr. Horacio A. Grigera Naén
Professor Vaughan Lowe

V.V. Veeder (President) ,

32

