IN AN ARBITRATION UNDER THE TREATY BETWEEN
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
CONCERNING THE ENCOURAGEMENT AND RECIPROCAL PROTECTION
OF INVESTMENT AND THE UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES

Partial Award on the Merits

CLAIMANTS:

CLAIMANTS’ COUNSEL:

RESPONDENT:

RESPONDENT’S COUNSEL:

ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL:

SECRETARY TO THE TRIBUNAL:

March 30, 2010

Chevron Corporation (USA) and
Texaco Petroleum Company (USA)

R. Doak Bishop

Edward G. Kehoe

Wade M. Coriell

Roberto Aguirre-Luzi
Margrete Stevens

Isabel Fernandez de la Cuesta
David H. Weiss

King & Spalding LLP

Alejandro Ponce-Martinez
Quevedo & Ponce

The Republic of Ecuador

Bruno D. Leurent

Eric W. Bloom

Mark Clodfelter
Ricardo Ugarte

Tomas Leonard

C. MacNeil Mitchell
Winston & Strawn LLP

Diego Garcia Carrié6n
Procurador General del Estado

Prof. Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, Chairman
The Honorable Charles N. Brower
Prof. Albert Jan van den Berg

Brooks Daly (PCA)
Assisted by Martin Doe (PCA)

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. The Partie: 10
B. The Tribunal 13
C. Short Identification of the Case ........c.ccescccsessesteseseeseseesestesestesestesestesssneneseeness 14
CI. The Jurisdictional Phase 14
1. The Jurisdictional Issues ...........c.cccccscsscssssesseseeeseeeseeseseesesnessseeseseeneseeneas 14
2. Arguments by the Respondent ............ cece eee ee eeeeeeneneeeeeeeneeeeees 15
3. | Arguments by the Claimants............
4. — The Tribunal’s Interim Award on Jurisdiction ........0.c.cccccceeseeceeeteeeeees 19
C.IL. The Merits Phase 20
1. The Issues on the Merits ...........csccccsccscssesseseeseseeeseeeseesesesseseessssenssneneaeeneas 20
2. The Clai ” Perspective 21
3. The Respondent’s Perspective ...........ccccecessesesses eset eeeeeeneneneeseeeeeeeees 25
D. Procedural History 27
E. The Principal Relevant Legal Provisions.
EI. The BIT 59
EJIL The VCLT 63
F. Relief Sought. 64
FI. Relief Sought by the Claimant: 64
F.II. Relief Sought by the Respondent ...0........ cece ce eeeeeeeneneseeeeee tsetse 67
G. Factual Background 68
H. Considerations of the Tribunal .........0...cccccscsceseeseseeseseeeseeseseeseseensseeneseensseeees 82
HI. Preliminary Considerations ..........0.ccceccesesee es eseseeeeseeeeeeeeeneeseseeeeeeeees 82
1. Applicable Law 82
2. Treaty Interpretation and Relevance of Decisions of other Tribunals...... 83
HLIL Breach of the BIT — Liability 0.00. eeneneneeeeeet tennant 85

1. Denial of Justice under Customary International Law for Undue Delay.. 85

a) Arguments by the Claimants... cece eee tees eeeeeeneneeeeeeeeees 85

 

b) Arguments by the Respondent ..
2. Denial of Justice under Customary International Law for Manifestly

Unjust Decisions 9o7

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 2

a) Arguments by the Claimants... cece eee eeeeeeneneseneeeteeeeees
b) Arguments by the Respondent ..
3. Violation of Specific BIT Standards of Protection ..

a) Arguments by the Claimants...........0......

97

 
 

 

i) Effective means of asserting claims and _ enforcing rights

105

(Article II(7))
ii) Fair and equitable treatment (Article II(3)(a)) 0.0...

 

iii) Full protection and security (Article II(3)(a)) ....... cee
iv) Arbitrary or discriminatory measures (Article II(3)(b))...............

b) Arguments by the Respondent

 

i) Effective means of asserting claims and _ enforcing rights

(Article II(7))
ii) Fair and equitable treatment (Article II(3)(a)) 0.0...

 

iii) Full protection and security (Article II(3)(a)) ....... cee

iv) Arbitrary or discriminatory measures (Article II(3)(b))...............

4. Breach of the Investment Agreements .
a) Arguments by the Claimant:
b) Arguments by the Respondent «0.0.0.0... cece cece ee tees eeeeeeneneeeeeeee

5. The Tribunal

 

HII. Exhaustion of Local Remedies...........ccccccccsseccsseeseseeeseeteseeseseeeseeeseensseenes
1. Arguments by the Claimant ......0.0.c ccc cece eeseeeeeeneeeeeteeteteteeenenes
2. Arguments by the Respondent ............c cece eee eee ee eeeeneteneeeeteteees
3 The Tribunal

 

HIV. Abuse of Rights and Estoppel ......0.0.0.c cece ee eeeeeeseseeeeeeeteceeeeeeeeenes
1. Arguments by the Claimant ......0.0.c ccc cece eeseeeeeeneeeeeteeteteteeenenes
2. Arguments by the Respondent ............c cece eee eee ee eeeeneteneeeeteteees
3 The Tribunal

 

H.V. The Claimants’ Loss — Measure of Damages ...........0.00cccssseeeeeeeees
1. Arguments by the Claimant ......0.0.c ccc cece eeseeeeeeneeeeeteeteteteeenenes
2. Arguments by the Respondent ............c cece eee eee ee eeeeneteneeeeteteees
3 The Tribunal

 

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits

113
114
116
117

 
 

156
161
161
162
167
170
170
173
178

H.VI. The Underlying Seven Court Cases in Ecuadot.........ccccccceeeeeeeees 184
1. The Esmeraldas Refinery cases (Cases 23-91 and 152-93) and Amazonas
Refinery cases (Cases 7-92 and 153-93).

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

a) Arguments by the Claimants .....0....000cc cece ees eeeeeeeeeeneneneeeeeeeees 184

b) Arguments by the Respondent «0.0.0.0... cece cece ee tees eeeeeeneneeeeeeee 197

c) The Tribunal 206

2. Imported Products case (Case 154-93) .....cccccecee ee eeeeeeseneneseeeeeeeees 210
a) Arguments by the Claimants .....0....000cc cece ees eeeeeeeeeeneneneeeeeeeees 210

b) Arguments by the Respondent «0.0.0.0... cece cece ee tees eeeeeeneneeeeeeee 213

c) The Tribunal 216

3. Force Majeure case (Case 8-92) ....cccccececccceceseeeeseseseeeeseneneneseeeeneeees 217
a) Arguments by the Claimants .....0....000cc cece ees eeeeeeeeeeneneneeeeeeeees 217

b) Arguments by the Respondent «0.0.0.0... cece cece ee tees eeeeeeneneeeeeeee 218

c) The Tribunal 220

4. Refinancing Agreement case (Case 983-03)........cccceeeseseeseseeeseeestenees 222
a) Arguments by the Claimant: -222

b) Arguments by the Respondent .. 223

c) The Tribunal 224
H.VIL The Quantum of Damages 226
1. Arguments by the Claimant ......0.0.c ccc cece eeseeeeeeneeeeeteeteteteeenenes 226

2. Arguments by the Respondent ............c cece eee eee ee eeeeneteneeeeteteees 233

3. The Tribunal 241

I. Decisions 249
Appendix 1: Table of TexPet’s Cases before Ecuadorian Coutts.......0.0ccccee 251

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 4

1/1

1971
Hydrocarbons Law
1973 Agreement

1977 Agreement

1986 Refinancing
Agreement

1994 MOU

1995 Global
Settlement

1995 Remediation
Agreement

1995 Remediation
Action Plan

Aguinda

BIT

Cl

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits

ABBREVIATIONS
Paragraph / paragraphs

Law of Hydrocarbons, Supreme Decree 1459, passed on
September 27, 1971, published in Official Registry No. 322,
October 1, 1971

Agreement between the Government of Ecuador, Ecuadorian
Gulf Oil Company, and TexPet of August 6, 1973

Supplemental Agreement between TexPet and the Government
of Ecuador of December 16, 1977

Refinancing Agreement of Amounts Owed by CEPE through
the Operations Account to TexPet for Sales of Crude for
Internal Consumption as of September 30, 1986, November
25, 1986

Memorandum of Understanding Among the Government of
Ecuador, PetroEcuador, and TexPet, December 14, 1994

Settlement Agreement and Release among the Government of
Ecuador, PetroEcuador, PetroProduccién, PetroComercial, and
TexPet, November 17, 1995

Contract for Implementing of Environmental Remediation
Work and Release from Obligations, Liability, and Claims
among the Government of Ecuador, PetroEcuador, and
TexPet, May 4, 1995

Texaco Petroleum Company Remedial Action Plan for the
Former PetroEcuador-TexPet Consortium, September 8, 1995

Maria Aguinda et al. v. Texaco, Inc., 945 F. Supp. 625
(S.D.N.Y. 1996), 142 F. Supp. 534 (S.D.N.Y. 2001), 93 Civ.
7527, 2000 WL 122143 (S.D.N.Y. Jan. 31, 2000), 303 F.3d
470 (U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, Aug. 16,
2002).

Bilateral Investment Treaty, specifically the Treaty Between
the United States of America and the Republic of Ecuador
Concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of
Investment of August 27, 1993 (entered into force May 11,
1997)

Claimants’ Statement of Claim of October 19, 2007

cil

cil

CIV

CV

CVI

C VII
C VII
CIx

cx
CxI

C XII

C XI

C XIV

CEPE

CEPE/PE

Concession
Agreements

Consortium

Decree 1258

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction of March 31,
2008

Claimants’ First-Round Post-Hearing Brief on Jurisdiction of
July 22, 2008

Claimants’ Second-Round Post-Hearing Brief on Jurisdiction
of August 12, 2008

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits of April 14, 2008

Claimants’ Reply Memorial on the Merits of November 24,
2008

Claimants’ First-Round Post-Hearing Brief of June 19, 2009
Claimants’ Second-Round Post-Hearing Brief of July 15, 2009

Claimants’ letter of August 6, 2009 regarding the relevance of
the judgment issued by the Provincial Court of Pichincha on
July 14, 2009 in Case 153-93

Claimants’ Cost Claim of August 7, 2009

Claimants’ Brief in Response to Respondent’s New Evidence
of August 7, 2009

Claimants’ Reply to Respondent’s Cost Claim of August 21,
2009

Claimants’ Rebuttal Brief in Response to Respondent’s New
Evidence of August 21, 2009

Claimants’ letter of October 19, 2009 regarding the relevance
of the judgment issued by the Provincial Court of Pichincha on
September 10, 2009 in Case 154-93

Corporacién Estatal Petrolera Ecuatoriana, an Ecuadorian
State-owned company

CEPE, as later succeeded by PetroEcuador

1973 Agreement and 1977 Agreement

Consortium between TexPet, Ecuadorian Gulf Oil Company,
and CEPE pursuant to the 1973 Agreement

Supreme Decree 1258, passed on November 8, 1973,
published in Official Registry No. 433, November 15, 1973

Exh. C-

Exh. R-

Exh. RE-

Gulf

HC1

HC2

HC3

HC4

HCS

HRI

HR2

HR3

HR4

HRS

ICSID

ILC

ILC Draft Articles

Interim Award

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits

Claimants’ Exhibit

Respondent’s Exhibit

Respondent’s Expert Witness Statement
Gulf Oil Company

Claimants’ slides from their opening presentation at the
Hearing on Jurisdiction

Claimants’ list of letters of TexPet to Ecuador courts handed
out at the Hearing on Jurisdiction

Claimants’ slides from their closing presentation at the Hearing
on Jurisdiction

Claimants’ slides from their opening presentation at the
Hearing on the Merits

Claimants’ slides from their closing presentation at the Hearing
on the Merits

Respondent’s slides from their opening presentation at the
Hearing on Jurisdiction

Respondent’s first set of slides with their closing presentation
on retroactivity at the Hearing on Jurisdiction

Respondent’s second set of slides with their closing
presentation at the Hearing on Jurisdiction

Respondent’s slides from their opening presentation at the
Hearing on the Merits

Respondent’s slides from their closing presentation at the
Hearing on the Merits

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
International Law Commission.

International Law Commission Draft Articles on State
Responsibility for Internationally Wrongful Acts, adopted by
the International Law Commission at its fifty-third session

(2001)

Tribunal’s Interim Award of December 1, 2008

Lago Agrio

OPAH

p./ pp.
PCA
PetroEcuador
POT
POI
PO III
PO IV
POV
PO VI
PO VII
RI
RII

RI

RIV

RV

RVI

R VII
R VII

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits

Maria Aguinda et al. v. Chevron Texaco Corporation,
Proceeding No. 002-2003, Sup. Ct. of Justice, Nueva Loja,
Ecuador.

Operaciones para el Abastecimiento de Hidrocarburos
(Hydrocarbons Supply Operations)

Page/pages

Permanent Court of Arbitration

Empresa Estatal de Petréleos de Ecuador

Procedural Order No. 1 of May 22, 2007

Procedural Order No. 2 of October 19, 2007

Procedural Order No. 3 of April 21, 2008

Procedural Order No. 4 of May 23, 2008

Procedural Order No. 5 of March 19, 2009

Procedural Order No. 6 of April 30, 2009

Procedural Order No. 7 of July 24, 2009

Respondent’s Statement of Defense of November 19, 2007
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction of January 30, 2008

Respondent’s First-Round Post-Hearing Brief on Jurisdiction
of July 22, 2008

Respondent’s Second-Round Post-Hearing Brief on Jurisdiction
of August 12, 2008

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits of September 22,
2008

Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial on the Merits of January 26,
2009
Respondent’s First-Round Post-Hearing Brief of June 19, 2009

Respondent’s Second-Round Post-Hearing Brief of July 15,
2009

RIx

RX
RXI

R XII

R XI

Resolution 1179
Settlement
Agreements
SG-PCA

TexPet

Tr. I

UNCITRAL

UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules

VCLT

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits

Respondent’s letter of July 27, 2009 regarding the relevance of
the judgment issued by the Provincial Court of Pichincha on
July 14, 2009 in Case 153-93

Respondent’s Cost Claim of August 7, 2009

Respondent’s Reply to Claimants’ Brief in Response to

Respondent’s New Evidence of August 14, 2009

Respondent’s Reply to Claimants’ Cost Claim of August 22,
2009

Respondent’s letter of October 2, 2009 regarding the relevance

of the judgment issued by the Provincial Court of Pichincha on
September 10, 2009 in Case 154-93

Resolution 1179, issued by the Deputy Director of the
Department of Finance of CEPE on November 19, 1980

1994 MOU, 1995 Remediation Agreement, and 1995 Global
Settlement

Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration
Texaco Petroleum Company, a corporation organized under
the laws of Delaware, U.S.A., and wholly-owned subsidiary of

Chevron Corporation

Transcript of the Hearing on Jurisdiction in San Jose, Costa
Rica, May 19-20, 2008

Transcript of the Hearing on the Merits in Washington, D.C.,
April 20-29, 2009

United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law, 1976

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties of May 23, 1969

A. The Parties

The Claimants

Represented by:

Chevron Corporation

6001 Bollinger Canyon Road
San Ramon, CA, 94583
USA

Texaco Petroleum Company
6001 Bollinger Canyon Road
San Ramon, CA, 94583
USA

Mr. R. Doak Bishop

Mr. Wade M. Coriell

Mr. Roberto Aguirre-Luzi

Ms. Isabel Fernandez de la Cuesta
Mr. David H. Weiss

KING & SPALDING LLP

1100 Louisiana, Suite 4000
Houston, TX, 77002-5213

USA

Mr. Edward G. Kehoe

KING & SPALDING LLP

1185 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY, 10036-4003
USA

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 10

Ms. Margrete Stevens
KING & SPALDING LLP

1730 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.

Washington, D.C., 20006
USA

Dr. Alejandro Ponce-Martinez.
QUEVEDO & PONCE

Ave. 12 de Octubre y Lincoln
Edificio Torre 1492, Piso 16
P.O. Box 17-01-600

Quito

ECUADOR

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits

The Respondent The Republic of Ecuador

Represented by: Mr. Bruno D. Leurent
WINSTON & STRAWN LLP
25, avenue Marceau
75116 Paris
FRANCE

Mr. Eric W. Bloom

Mr. Mark Clodfelter

Mr. Ricardo Ugarte

Mr. Tomas Leonard

WINSTON & STRAWN LLP
1700 K Street, NW
Washington, D.C., 20006-3817
USA

Mr. C. MacNeil Mitchell
WINSTON & STRAWN LLP
200 Park Avenue

New York, NY, 10166-4193
USA

Dr. Diego Garefa Carrién

Procurador General del Estado

c/o Dr. Carlos Venegas Olmedo

Director Nacional de Asuntos Internacionales y
Derechos Humanos

PROCURADURIA GENERAL DEL ESTADO

Robles 731 y Av. Amazonas

Quito

ECUADOR

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 12

The Tribunal

Appointed by the Claimants:

The Honorable Charles N. Brower
20 Essex Street Chambers

20 Essex Street

London WC2 R3AL

UNITED KINGDOM

Appointed by the Respondent:
Prof. Albert Jan van den Berg
Hanotiau & van den Berg

IT Tower, 9th Floor

480 Avenue Louise, B.9

1050 Brussels

BELGIUM

Appointed by agreement of the Co-Arbitrators with the consent of the Parties:
Prof. Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel, Chairman

Parkstrasse 38
D-51427 Bergisch-Gladbach

GERMANY

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 13

1.

2.

4.

C. Short Identification of the Case

The short identification below is without prejudice to the full presentation of the
factual and legal details of the case made by the Parties and the Tribunal’s

considerations and conclusions.
C.I. The Jurisdictional Phase

As the Parties’ positions with respect to jurisdiction of the Tribunal may be
relevant to a full understanding of the merits phase of the proceedings, the
Tribunal restates in the following sections its summary of the issues and
contentions on jurisdiction from its Interim Award of December 1, 2008 (Interim

Award, 938-42, 75-91).

1. The Jurisdictional Issues

Without prejudice to the full presentation of the factual and legal details of the
case by the Parties and the Tribunal’s considerations and conclusions, the issues
raised by the Parties in this jurisdictional phase, irrespective of whether each

issue is best characterized as jurisdictional, center around four principal subjects.

The first set of issues concerns the preclusive effect, if any, that the Claimants’
statements or conduct prior to the commencement of arbitration should have on

their ability to pursue the present claim (see Interim Award, {{J125-149).

The second set of issues concerns whether the Claimants’ contractual claims in
the lawsuits in Ecuadorian courts qualify as an investment or part of an
investment under the BIT (see Interim Award, {{[150-195). Alternatively, the
question concerns whether the claims arise out of or relate to “investment

agreements” under the BIT (see Interim Award, {{J196-213).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 14

The third set of issues concerns whether the Claimants must exhaust local
remedies in order to fulfill the requirements of their claims for denial of justice
and other BIT violations and, if so, whether they have in fact exhausted all

required local remedies (see Interim Award, {{[214-238).

The last set of issues concerns the application ratione temporis of the BIT to a
case whose factual background includes significant periods before the BIT’s
entry into force. In dispute is the temporal ambit of the BIT as regards pre-
existing disputes and pre-entry into force acts and omissions. Also at issue is
whether Ecuador’s conduct constitutes a continuing or composite act allowing
the conduct to be caught within the temporal ambit of the BIT (see Interim

Award, 9239-301).

Arguments by the Respondent

Subject to more detail in later sections regarding particular issues, the

Respondent’s arguments on jurisdiction can be summarized as follows.

The Respondent argues that this Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear the BIT
claims for a number of reasons. As a preliminary matter, the Respondent argues
that the Claimants should be precluded from pursuing their claims altogether due
to abuse of process. The Respondent further objects to jurisdiction because the
Claimants have failed to plead an “investment dispute” within the meaning of the
BIT, thus placing the claims outside the ratione materiae scope of the BIT.
Lastly, the Respondent asserts that the claims lie outside the ratione temporis

scope of the BIT.

The Respondent’s preliminary objection on abuse of process posits that
the Claimants’ current position is inconsistent with repeated prior statements
made in litigation before U.S. courts in which the Claimants attested to the
fairness and competence of Ecuador’s judiciary. The Respondent asks the
Tribunal to preclude the Claimants from contradicting themselves in order to
found jurisdiction on the basis of a new “dispute.” The Respondent further

alleges that the Claimants’ motive in commencing the present arbitration is to

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 15

undermine the enforceability of any potential adverse judgment in the Lago Agrio
action. Both the Claimants’ contradiction of themselves and their improper
purpose for seeking arbitration constitute abuses of rights such that the Claimants
should be treated as having waived any right to arbitrate any claims relating to

the adequacy of the Ecuadorian courts.

On ratione materiae, the Respondent submits that the present claims based on
TexPet’s lawsuits do not fit within the definition of an “investment dispute”
found in Article VI(1) of the BIT. The Respondent thus asserts that the present
dispute is outside the substantive scope of Ecuador’s consent to arbitrate under

the BIT. The Respondent raises several objections in this regard.

The Respondent contends that the present claims do not arise out of or relate to
an “investment agreement” or a treaty breach “with respect to an investment.”
First, the Claimants’ lawsuits do not possess the necessary characteristics to
qualify as an “investment.” Moreover, the Claimants’ lawsuits cannot be fit under
the heading of “claims to money” in the BIT’s definition of covered investments.
This is because the claims are not “associated with an investment” as required
under that definition since the Claimants’ investments no longer existed at the
time of entry into force of the BIT. Nor do TexPet’s claims fall under the heading
of “rights conferred by law or contract” since the BIT only covers rights to do
something or otherwise engage in some activity sanctioned by law analogous to
rights under licenses or permits. Finally, the non-retroactivity of the BIT also
prevents the Claimants from relying on “investment agreements” that had ceased

to exist by the time of entry into force of the BIT.

Even if the claims constituted an “investment dispute” under the BIT, the
Respondent further contends that the claims for denial of justice are not ripe for
adjudication. Under international law, a State is not responsible for the acts of its
judiciary unless a claimant has exhausted all available procedural remedies.
Claims for denials of justice must therefore be based on the acts of the judicial
system as a whole. Since the Claimants have failed to demonstrably exhaust
potential procedural remedies in their cases, the claims for denial of justice

cannot be made out and the claims must be deemed premature.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 16

With respect to jurisdiction ratione temporis, the Respondent argues that States
are responsible for the breach of treaty obligations only if such obligations were
in force at the time when the alleged breach occurred. Any pre-BIT conduct of
Ecuador’s thus falls outside the temporal scope of the BIT according to the non-
retroactivity principle of international law reflected in Article 28 VCLT.

The Respondent raises three distinct objections in this regard.

The first objection is that the current dispute and all its associated facts arose
prior to the coming into force of the BIT on May 11, 1997. It is merely
the continuation in a different form of a pre-BIT dispute. The Respondent argues
that such pre-BIT disputes are excluded from the temporal ambit of the BIT.
The Tribunal should thus dismiss the present claims on the basis that they do not

present a new dispute to which the BIT may apply.

According to the Respondent, the non-retroactivity principle and the law of State
responsibility also bar the consideration of any pre-BIT acts in the determination
of a breach. The Tribunal cannot judge Ecuador’s acts or omissions according to
BIT standards that did not exist at the time of such conduct. The foundation of
the claims — the original alleged breaches of contractual obligations — are thus
excluded from the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Moreover, the rest of the claim cannot
stand on its own because the Respondent’s conduct constitutes neither

a “composite” nor a “continuing” act at international law.

The third ratione temporis objection asserts that the claims concern investments
that ceased to exist upon TexPet’s withdrawal from Ecuador. By 1995, the 1973
Agreement had expired, TexPet’s operations in Ecuador had ended and all
remaining rights relating to the earlier contracts had terminated pursuant to the
Settlement Agreements. Accordingly, by the time of the BIT’s entry into force in
1997, the Claimants’ investment and related rights constituted a “situation which

ceased to exist” according to Article 28 VCLT.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 17

20.

21.

22.

3.

Arguments by the Claimants

Subject to more detail in later sections regarding particular issues, the Claimants’

arguments on jurisdiction can be summarized as follows.

The Claimants first argue that they continued to have investments in Ecuador
after the entry into force of the BIT. The BIT’s definition of “investment” is
broad. Investments must also be examined holistically and not separated into
components. Therefore, the investments undertaken pursuant to the 1973 and
1977 Agreements must be taken to include the legal and contractual claims
emanating from those agreements that are the subject of their pending court cases
as well as the environmental remediation work related to TexPet’s operations that

continued into 1998, after the BIT had come into force.

The Claimants further argue that the dispute concerns “investment agreements,”
namely the 1973 and 1977 Agreements. Such disputes are independently covered
under the BIT. Moreover, since jurisdiction over such claims is not limited to
treaty-based claims, the temporal limitations that apply to BIT claims do not
apply. It is enough that these claims have continued to exist past the date of the

BIT’s entry into force.

The Claimants assert that the BIT does not bar pre-existing disputes. The BIT
would need to include explicit language in order to exclude such disputes.
Instead, according to Article XII of the BIT, disputes must merely be “existing”
at the time of entry into force to be covered by the BIT. In any event, since the
claims are for denials of justice, the dispute only crystallized after a critical

degree of undue delay and politicization of the judiciary that came about in 2004.

The Claimants also reject the idea that claims under the BIT must be strictly
based on post-BIT acts and omissions. First, pre-BIT conduct can serve as
background to the denial of justice claims which only truly arose after entry into
force of the BIT. Second, the non-retroactivity principle cannot bar responsibility
for “continuing” or “composite” acts. The persistent failure of the Ecuadorian

courts to decide the Claimants’ cases and the events leading to the destruction of

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 18

23.

24.

25.

the independence of the Ecuadorian judiciary constitute continuing and

composite acts.

As to the argument that the Claimants have not exhausted the available
procedural remedies, they contend that any requirement of exhaustion is not a
jurisdictional issue, but an issue going to the merits. In any event, they claim that
all further efforts to seek to have their cases decided fairly would be futile. The
remedies cited by the Respondent are suited to the misdeeds of individual judges
and would not be effective in the context of a systemic failure of the Ecuadorian

judiciary.

Finally, the Claimants find the Respondent’s abuse of rights, estoppel, and
waiver arguments baseless. The Claimants’ pleadings in the present matter do not
contradict their previous pleadings in litigation before U.S. courts because the
situation in Ecuador has significantly changed and worsened since any of the
impugned statements were made. Moreover, those statements were made by
different parties in a different litigation and are not transferable to the present

proceedings.

The Tribunal’s Interim Award on Jurisdiction
The Tribunal issued its Interim Award on December 1, 2008. For the reasons set
out in that award, the Tribunal decided the following:
1. The Respondent’s jurisdictional objections are denied.

2. The Tribunal has jurisdiction concerning the claims as
formulated by the Claimants in their second Post Hearing Brief
dated August 12, 2008, in paragraph 116.

3. The decision regarding the costs of arbitration is deferred to a
later stage of these proceedings.

4, The further procedure in this case will be the subject of a
separate Procedural Order of the Tribunal.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 19

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

C.IL. The Merits Phase

1.

The Issues on the Merits

The issues raised by the Parties in this merits phase center around six principal

subjects.

The first set of issues concerns whether the Respondent has committed a denial
of justice under customary international law either on the basis of undue delay or

manifestly unjust decisions (see Sections H.II.1 and H.II.2 below).

The second set of issues concerns whether the Respondent has violated specific
BIT standards through its conduct or inaction in relation to the Claimants’ court

cases (see Section H.II.3 below).

The third set of issues concerns whether the Respondent has breached obligations
under the BIT with respect to “investment agreements” as that term is understood

in the BIT (see Section H.II.4 below).

The fourth set of issues concerns whether the Claimants must exhaust local
remedies in order to fulfill the requirements of their claims for denial of justice
and other BIT violations and, if so, whether they have in fact exhausted all

required local remedies (see Section H.III below).

The fifth set of issues concerns the preclusive effect, if any, that the Claimants’
statements or conduct prior to the commencement of arbitration should have on

their ability to pursue the present claim (see Section H.IV below).

The last set of issues concerns the damages consequent upon a finding of denial
of justice or breach of the BIT. The Parties dispute the proper definition of
Claimants’ loss, whether the Claimants should have prevailed in the underlying
court cases in the Ecuadorian courts, and the quantum of damages to be awarded
as a result of any breach that may have prevented the Claimants from recovering

on meritorious claims (see Sections H.V, H.VI, and H.VII below).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 20

33.

2.

The Claimants’ Perspective

Subject to more detail in later sections regarding particular issues, the following
quotation from the Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits summarizes the

Claimants’ main arguments as follows (C V, {{[2-14):

2. Between 1991 and 1993, TexPet filed seven breach-of-contract
cases against the Ecuadorian government in Ecuadorian courts in which it
claimed more than US$ 553 million in damages, which included interest to
that point in time. The cases involve breaches by Ecuador of its payment
obligations to TexPet under a contract dated August 4, 1973 (the “1973
Agreement”), a supplemental agreement dated December 1977 (the “1977
Agreement”) and related provisions of Ecuadorian law. The 1973 and 1977
Agreements are referred to collectively throughout this Memorial as the
“Agreements.”

3. Under the 1973 Agreement, TexPet was entitled to explore and
exploit oil reserves in certain regions of Ecuador, and TexPet was required
to provide a percentage of its crude oil production to the Government to help
meet Ecuadorian domestic consumption needs. The Government of Ecuador
was entitled to set the price at which it would purchase oil from TexPet for
Ecuadorian domestic consumption needs, referred to as the “Domestic
Market Price.” The Government consistently set the Domestic Market Price
well below the prevailing international market price. Once TexPet satisfied
its obligation to contribute oil for Ecuador’s domestic consumption at the
low Domestic Market Price, TexPet was entitled to receive prevailing
international prices for the remainder of its oil. Specifically, once it satisfied
its obligation to contribute its share of oil for domestic consumption, TexPet
was free to export its remaining oil internationally. The sole exception to
TexPet’s important right to export was the Government’s right to purchase
TexPet’s oil for refining and export, but if the Government made such a
request for oil that it would not use to satisfy domestic consumption, the
Government was obligated to pay TexPet the prevailing international price
for oil.

4. The key principle under the 1973 Agreement was the ultimate use of
the crude oil contributed by TexPet. If the government requested an oil
contribution from TexPet and the Government used the oil for any purpose
other than to satisfy Ecuadorian domestic consumption needs, then TexPet
was entitled to receive the international market price.

5. The Ecuadorian Government breached the Agreements and related
Ecuadorian laws by requiring TexPet to contribute substantially more oil
than it was obligated to provide at the reduced Domestic Market Price.
Ecuador then exported this additional contribution by TexPet, either directly
or as refined derivative oil products, but it did not pay TexPet the
international market price that it was contractually and legally required to
pay.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 21

6. TexPet commenced lawsuits in Ecuador seeking the difference in
price between the reduced Domestic Market Price that it received and the
international market price at the time, or a return of the barrels over-
contributed. TexPet proved each claim before the Ecuadorian courts, largely
through Government documents made available to TexPet through the court-
sanctioned “judicial inspection” process under Ecuadorian law. In three of
the cases, the court appointed its own experts, and in each of those cases, the
court-appointed experts agreed with TexPet’s analysis but found that the
damages were slightly higher than those claimed by TexPet. Two other cases
are identical (except for the time periods) to cases in which independent
court-appointed experts confirmed TexPet’s case. In the final two cases, the
GOE’s own expert agreed with TexPet’s analysis and calculations.

7. Importantly, the Government admits, as it must, that it requested
crude oil from TexPet for domestic consumption, paid TexPet the Domestic
Market Price, and exported portions of the oil for its own profit. The
Government admits these facts because they are confirmed through
irrefutable documentation from Government sources that were revealed
during the judicial inspections in the underlying cases and confirmed by
legal and economic experts subsequently in this arbitration. The sources
include the Central Bank of Ecuador and Ecuador’s National Hydrocarbons
Directorate, which is part of Ecuador’s Ministry of Energy and Natural
Resources. Indeed, the Government’s own records permit a straightforward
calculation of the number of equivalent barrels that TexPet contributed, but
which the Government used to export for its own gain. Not only did the
experts appointed by the Ecuadorian courts agree with TexPet’s analysis
(and point out that the damages actually were higher than TexPet claimed),
but Navigant Consulting has performed an independent analysis for
purposes of this Arbitration to determine whether TexPet contributed oil for
domestic consumption that the Government did not use for that purpose, and
if so, the number of such equivalent barrels. The results of Navigant’s
current independent analysis confirm the primary expert’s calculations in the
underlying litigation as to the total number of barrels that TexPet over-
contributed.

8. The Government’s defense in the underlying Ecuadorian litigation
and in this arbitration is one of attempted misdirection. Specifically, the
Government argues that once it requested the oil from TexPet to satisfy
domestic consumption obligations, the oil became the property of the
Government, and the Government was free to do with that oil and its
byproducts as it wished, including refining and exporting it for a profit
without paying TexPet the prevailing international prices. This argument is
misleading and baseless. The Government’s ownership interest in the oil is
not the issue in these cases. The issue here and in the underlying cases is the
price that the Government must pay for oil that it required from TexPet.
Under the express language of the Agreements and applicable law, the
Government was obligated to pay TexPet international prices for oil that it
required and did not use domestically (or return to TexPet the barrels of oil
it over-contributed). The Government’s argument to avoid honoring its
contractual obligations was specious in the underlying cases and remains so
here.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 22

9. In all seven cases, TexPet filed evidence of its claims within the
proper time period, recommended experts at the appropriate times under
Ecuadorian procedural rules, and repeatedly requested final decisions from
the courts. But for well over a decade, 15 different judges in three different
courts failed to rule on any of the seven separate cases. Six of those cases
stood legally ready for decision under Ecuadorian law since at least 1998,
but the courts refused to rule. In the seventh case, the court refused even to
take evidence for 14 years. In short, the Ecuadorian judiciary egregiously
delayed all of TexPet’s claims against the Government, and it has
demonstrated a refusal to judge any of those claims in a fair manner as
required under Ecuadorian and international law.

10. In December 2004, the political branches of the same Ecuadorian
Government that is the defendant in the seven cases began to exert control
over Ecuador’s judiciary. Although Ecuador’s 1998 Constitution enshrines
the principle of judicial independence that is so fundamental to a state’s
ability to meet its obligation to provide foreign nationals with impartial
justice under the law, the political branches purged Ecuador’s
Constitutional, Electoral, and Supreme Courts and replaced the
constitutionally-appointed judges with political allies. Since 2004, judicial
independence in Ecuador has been compromised, as recognized by several
prominent international organizations and commentators. The Supreme
Court—the Subrogate President of that Court sits as a first instance judge in
three of TexPet’s cases against the government—has been unconstitutionally
purged a total of three times in less than four years, and the current Court
was not legitimately constituted under the Constitution. Ecuador has
justified its judicial purges on the basis that its courts were politicized and
the judges issued rulings that the Government did not like, and the
Constitutional Court repeatedly has been threatened and purged merely for
attempting to exercise its fundamental responsibility to determine whether
certain governmental actions are constitutional. Since 2004, Ecuador’s
Government has not permitted its courts to function independently, and local
and international observers of varied political affiliations agree that the
political branches now dominate the courts. Moreover, today a Constituent
Assembly dominated by the Executive's political party has declared that it
has ultimate authority over all branches of the Ecuadorian Government,
including the judiciary. The President of the Supreme Court announced just
two months ago that Ecuador does not live under the rule of law.

ll. In light of the egregious delays suffered in its seven cases and the
move by the Executive Branch, which defends those cases, to extend its
control over the entire Ecuadorian judiciary, Claimants provided Ecuador
with notice of this dispute in May 2006. In response to that notice and the
subsequent filing of this proceeding in December 2006, some of the now-
politicized courts began to take some action. In two of TexPet’s cases, the
courts dismissed TexPet’s claims as “abandoned” based on a manifestly-
improper reading of a straightforward Civil Code provision as well as the
unconstitutional retroactive application of that provision, and despite the fact
that TexPet had taken all actions necessary to prosecute the cases and the
next action required was that of the courts. In a third case, the court
dismissed TexPet’s claim based on an inapplicable prescription period for
breach of contract for small sales to retail consumers, even though under the
unambiguous definition of those terms under Ecuadorian law, the supply did

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 23

not involve small sales and the Government was not a retail consumer of
TexPet’s. All three of those cases were not simply decided wrongly, they
were decided in a grossly incompetent fashion in manifest disregard of
Ecuadorian law and created a manifest injustice. And in a fourth case—the
smallest of TexPet’s claims worth approximately one-tenth of one percent
(0.1%) of the total damages owed by Ecuador to TexPet—the court ruled in
TexPet’s favor, although the Government has appealed the ruling and it
remains on appeal. That judgment is part of a transparent tactic to posture
the Government for this proceeding.

12. Ecuador’s undue delays in deciding TexPet’s seven cases, which
have languished for well over a decade in the Ecuadorian courts, its bias or
gross incompetence in manifest disregard of Ecuadorian law in ultimately
deciding three of those cases, and its failure to provide an impartial and
independent judicial forum in which TexPet may prosecute its claims and
vindicate its rights, constitute a denial of justice under customary
international law, and independently, a violation of Ecuador’s treaty
obligations under the BIT. Specifically, Ecuador violated its BIT obligations
to (1) provide TexPet with an effective means of asserting claims and
enforcing its rights; (2) provide fair and equitable treatment to TexPet’s
investments; (3) provide full protection and security to those investments;
and (4) refrain from treating those investments in an arbitrary or
discriminatory manner. Moreover, the Agreements constitute investment
agreements, which have been breached by Ecuador. Under international law,
when a country’s courts deny justice to a foreign investor, and when it
would be futile for the investor to continue to pursue its claims in the host
country’s courts, an international arbitral tribunal must take and decide the
claims.

13. Any further effort by TexPet to receive justice from the Ecuadorian
courts would be futile. Ecuador has denied justice to TexPet first by refusing
to judge its claims against the Government for more than a decade, and then
by illegally dismissing several of those claims in direct response to TexPet’s
attempt to vindicate its rights before this Tribunal. The current bias of
Ecuadorian judges, the lack of a constitutionally-legitimate Supreme Court,
and the frequent and successful attacks in recent years by Ecuador’s political
branches on judicial independence requires adjudication by this Tribunal.

14. Claimants seek damages of approximately US$ 1.6 billion for
Ecuador’s various breaches of the governing agreements and laws, together
with costs and fees as set forth in Section VIII below concerning current
damages. TexPet sought US$ 553,456,850 in its originally-filed Ecuadorian
claims, increased to US$ 587,823,427 cumulatively after judicial
inspections. Applying simple interest (not compound) under Ecuadorian law
through December 31, 2004, yields approximately US$ 1.1 billion, and
applying compound interest to that amount from January 1, 2005, through
April 1, 2008, under international law yields US$ 1,577,768,929 in damages
owed through April 1, 2008 using the claim amounts from the underlying
litigation. Moreover, as addressed below, Navigant Consulting performed its
own independent analysis of the underlying Ecuadorian claims using mostly
government documents as its source and independently calculated damages
of US$ 1,605,220,794.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 24

3. The Respondent’s Perspective

34. Subject to more detail in later sections regarding particular issues, the following
quotation from the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits summarizes

the Respondent’s main arguments as follows (R V, {{f[1-7):

1. Years after the operative events, and in the midst of negotiating a
final accounting in connection with its exit from Ecuador, TexPet
commissioned a special task force to come up with possible counterclaims to
offset large monetary claims then being asserted against it by the Republic
of Ecuador ("Republic"). To concoct these counterclaims, the task force
pored through old documents and “discovered” new contract rights reaching
back more than a decade and fabricated damages theories based on them, all
with an eye toward “leveraging” the Republic into the smallest settlement
possible. TexPet never had any serious hope of legitimately prevailing on
the lawsuits it brought on these claims and opted to maintain them for other
purposes instead.

2. Indeed, TexPet managed the cases in such a way as to assure that
they would not emerge from the Ecuadorian judiciary’s huge backlog of
cases and go to judgment, while at the same time self-creating the conditions
under which they could claim a denial of justice for delay. TexPet also
mismanaged it claims, failing to take care to bring some of them within all
possibly applicable limitations periods and to keep others current under all
possible applicable legal requirements.

3. When reforms, instituted to improve the courts and end the brief
period of political turmoil affecting them, resulted in significant progress on
that backlog and further action on TexPet’s cases, Claimants attacked the
dismissals of cases resulting from TexPet’s mismanagement as incompetent
and unjust. Finally, to evade the requirement that denials of justice must
reflect an exhaustion of the court system’s remedies, they seized upon
reforms in the Republic’s courts as a pretext to add a claim of denial of
justice based upon a wholly spurious charge of lack of independence.
Claimants bear a heavy burden in asking this Tribunal to declare that
Ecuador’s courts are guilty of a denial of justice. They must overcome
TexPet’s own conscious passivity in advancing its cases and show that mere
court congestion alone — applicable to all litigants — violated international
law. They must overcome the presumption that national courts alone are
properly enabled to decide matters pertaining to national law. And they must
show that the courts’ independence has actually been compromised, causing
them to be singled out for mistreatment. And they must do all this with clear
and convincing evidence. On all counts, Claimants have failed.

4. The very circumstances of TexPet’s claims reveal Claimants’ bad
faith. While Claimants complain about court delays, they themselves
continually affirmed in United States courts that the Ecuadorian courts are
fair and adequate, notwithstanding their known and growing congestion.
They should not be heard now to object on this basis, especially since

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 25

reforms over the years have reduced court backlogs and expedited the
adjudicatory process. This is especially true in light of TexPet’s own failure
to invoke rights under Ecuadorian law to advance their cases in the queue,
despite its representation by distinguished and powerful litigation counsel.
TexPet’s underlying cases are based on asserted contract rights that were
never agreed to by Ecuador. That TexPet did not bring any of these claims
until many years after the practices of which it complains had been
implemented, and indeed after TexPet had acquiesced in those practices, is
itself evidence of the false indignation which accompanied the filing of these
claims.

5. Claimants have offered no evidence that any of the judges hearing
any of TexPet’s cases acted corruptly or with bias. In fact, TexPet has
prevailed on the merits before one of the judges, having obtained judgment
on the full amount it requested; it has defeated several government motions
to dismiss; and it has successfully appealed a dismissal. Along the way
TexPet has surely suffered defeats, but the receipt of one or more adverse
decisions does not satisfy the Claimants’ heavy burden in proving that
Ecuador’s justice system as a whole failed to accord TexPet due process.
The judicial system about which Claimants now complain is a significantly
better judicial system than the one that Claimants represented was fair and
adequate in the Aguinda action from 1993-2002, and in the Doe action in
2006. This Tribunal surely cannot act as a super-Supreme Court of Ecuador
in the stead of that court system.

6. Finally, Claimants cannot establish that TexPet would have
prevailed on the merits of its claims before the domestic courts of Ecuador,
and thus that it would have suffered a loss even if a denial of justice had in
fact occurred. And Claimants’ calculation of their losses are so riddled with
improper amounts and exaggerations as to warrant dismissal even if
Claimants could show that TexPet would have prevailed.

7. As previously urged by Respondent, Claimants’ current denial of
justice claim should be dismissed because this Tribunal lacks jurisdiction
over the claim. But this claim can and should be dismissed "on the merits"
because (1) Claimants have failed to show bias or corruption of the courts;
(2) the delays experienced by TexPet were previously accepted by them; (3)
TexPet has affirmatively caused the delays about which Claimants now
complain; and (4) Claimants cannot show that any Ecuadorian court,
applying the law of Ecuador, would find in their favor in any of the cases.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 26

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

D.

Procedural History

By a Notice of Arbitration dated December 21, 2006, Chevron and TexPet
commenced the current arbitration proceedings against Ecuador pursuant to
Article VI(3)(a)(iii) of the BIT. Article VI(3)(a)(iii) of the BIT provides that
disputes arising under the Treaty may be submitted to an arbitral tribunal

established under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

The Notice of Arbitration presents a dispute which is said to have arisen from
seven commercial cases that were filed by TexPet against Ecuador in Ecuadorian
courts between 1991 and 1994. These claims arise out of allegations of breaches
of contract with respect to compensation due to TexPet under the 1973

Agreement and the 1977 Agreement, respectively.

The Claimants contend that the courts have refused to rule on these claims
because of bias against them and in favor of the Respondent. The Claimants

allege that this constitutes a breach of Ecuador’s obligations under the BIT.

On January 16, 2007, the Claimants appointed The Honorable Charles N. Brower

as arbitrator.

Pursuant to a letter to the SG-PCA dated February 26, 2007, the Claimants
formally requested that the SG-PCA designate an appointing authority due to the
Respondent’s failure to designate an arbitrator within the thirty-day period
allotted under Article 7(2) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. By letter dated
March 2, 2007, the SG-PCA invited the Respondent to comment on the request
for designation of an appointing authority by March 16, 2007. No comments
were submitted by the Respondent. The SG-PCA designated Dr. Robert Briner as
appointing authority on March 20, 2007.

By letter dated March 21, 2007, the Claimants requested that Dr. Briner, as

appointing authority, appoint the second arbitrator on behalf of the Respondent.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 27

41.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

By letter dated March 26, 2007, the Respondent appointed Prof. Albert Jan van
den Berg as the second arbitrator. Dr. Briner, by letter dated April 13, 2007,
informed the Parties that he had not yet been able to make any appointment on
behalf of the Respondent in his capacity as appointing authority and considered

that the issue had become moot.

By letter dated May 8, 2007, the two party-appointed arbitrators confirmed, with
the consent of the Parties, their appointment of Prof. Dr. Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel

as presiding arbitrator.

On May 22, 2007, the newly-constituted Tribunal issued PO I, inter alia,
allowing the Respondent to submit a short Reply to the Notice of Arbitration by
June 30, 2007, and ordering that the PCA would act as registry in the case. PO I
also convened a Procedural Meeting to be held in The Hague on August 2, 2007.

By letter dated June 13, 2007, the Respondent requested that the deadline for the
submission of the Reply to the Notice of Arbitration be extended until at least
August 27, 2007, and that the Procedural Meeting be deferred until at least
September 17, 2007. By letter dated June 15, 2007, the Tribunal invited the
Claimants to comment upon the Respondent’s requests. By letter dated June 20,
2007, the Claimants expressed their view that the proceedings should continue as
scheduled in PO I and that the Respondent’s requests be rejected. By letter dated
June 25, 2007, the Tribunal extended the deadline for submission of the Reply to
the Notice of Arbitration until] August 27, 2007, and deferred the Procedural
Meeting until October 2, 2007.

By letter dated August 20, 2007, the Respondent’s newly-appointed counsel
informed the Tribunal of an agreement between the Parties on a schedule for the
proceedings, including a further deferral of the deadline for submission of the
Reply to the Notice of Arbitration until September 28, 2007. The Tribunal
acknowledged the Parties’ agreement and moved the date for submission of the
Reply to the Notice of Arbitration to September 28, 2007, with further details of
the schedule of proceedings to be discussed at the Procedural Meeting. By letter

dated September 17, 2007, the Tribunal circulated an Annotated Agenda for the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 28

46.

47.

meeting. By letter dated September 26, 2007, the Claimants communicated a

further agreement of the Parties on the schedule of proceedings.

The Procedural Meeting took place in The Hague on October 2, 2007. On
October 9, 2007, a Draft PO II was circulated by the PCA on behalf of the

Tribunal to the Parties for comments.

Acknowledging the Parties’ comments on the draft, the Tribunal issued PO IT on
October 19, 2007, deciding, inter alia, that English and Spanish would be the
official languages of the arbitration (with English being authoritative between the
two), that the place of arbitration would be The Hague, The Netherlands, and that
the venue for the Hearing on Jurisdiction would be San Jose, Costa Rica. PO II
also set out the schedule of proceedings, taking into consideration the Parties’
previous agreement and the discussions having taken place at the Procedural
Meeting on October 2, 2007. For ease of reference, the entire operative

provisions of PO II are set out below:

This Procedural Order No. 2 puts on record the results of the discussion and
agreement between the Parties and the Tribunal at the 1 Procedural Meeting
held on Tuesday, October 2, 2007, in the Small Court Room of the Peace
Palace, The Hague, The Netherlands:

1. Procedural Hearing

1d Names of all attending the meeting were notified in advance and are
set forth in the following sections 1.2 and 1.3.

The representation of the Parties at the Procedural Meeting was as
follows:

Claimants

Mr. R. Doak Bishop (King & Spalding)

Dr. Alejandro Ponce Martinez (Quevedo & Ponce)

Mr. Wade M. Coriell (King & Spalding)

Dr. Ana Belen Posso (Quevedo & Ponce)

Ms. Deborah Scott (Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum
Company)

Mr. Ricardo Reis Veiga (Chevron Corporation and Texaco
Petroleum Company)

Respondent

Mr. Eric W. Bloom (Winston & Strawn LLP)
Mr. Ricardo E. Ugarte (Winston & Strawn LLP)
Mr. Mark A. Clodfelter (Winston & Strawn LLP)
Ms. Karen S. Manley (Winston & Strawn LLP)

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 29

2.1.

2.2.

7A.

7.2.

7.3.

Mr. Carlos Venegas Olmedo (Republic of Ecuador)
Ms. Christel Gaibor (Republic of Ecuador)

The Tribunal Members and other attendees at the Procedural
Meeting were as follows:

Arbitral Tribunal

The Honorable Charles N. Brower

Professor Albert Jan van den Berg

Professor Karl-Heinz Bickstiegel (President)

Permanent Court of Arbitration
Mr. Brooks W. Daly

Ms. Rocio Digén

Ms. Evelien Pasman

Assistant to The Honorable Charles N. Brower
Mr. Peter Prows

Court Reporters/Interpreters (ALTO International,
Reporte:
Ms. Carmen Preckler Galguera
Ms. Maria Raquel Banos

Ms. Laura Evens

Ms. Michaela Philips
Interpreters:

Mr. Jon Porter

Mr. Javier Ferreira Ramos

Ms. Ute Sachs

 

Earlier Rulings

Earlier Rulings of the Tribunal remain valid unless changed
expressly. The Tribunal particularly recalls the following sections of
Procedural Order No. 1 and includes any additions and changes
made at the Procedural Meeting:

7. Communications

Following the Meeting, paragraph 7.1 of Procedural Order No. | has
been deleted and this section renumbered.

The Parties shall not engage in any oral or written communications
with any member of the Tribunal ex parte in connection with the
subject matter of the arbitration.

The Parties shall address communications directly to each member
of the Tribunal by e-mail and confirmed by courier, with a copy to
the counsel for the other Party. Confirmation may be made by fax
instead of courier if it does not exceed 15 pages.

Copies of all communications shall be sent to the Registry.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 30

74.

75.

7.6.

77.

78.

To facilitate citations and word processing, Memorials and other
larger submissions shall be in Windows Word and preceded by a
Table of Contents.

Submissions of documents shall be submitted unbound in ring
binders separated from Memorials and preceded by a list of such
documents consecutively numbered with consecutive numbering in
later submissions (C-1, C-2 etc. for Claimant; R-1, R-2 etc. for
Respondent). As far as possible, in addition, documents shall also be
submitted in electronic form (preferably in Windows Word,
otherwise in Acrobat).

All written communications shall be deemed to have been validly
made when they have been sent to:

Claimants: to the addresses of counsel as above.

Respondent: __ to the address as above.
As Respondent has now appointed its Counsel
for this case, communications shall from now on
be addressed to Winston & Strawn LLP
(Winston) New York and Washington DC offices
as given in its letters.

Tribunal: to the addresses as above.

Registry: to the addresses as above.

 
 

 

 

The Parties shall send copies of correspondence between them to the
Tribunal only if it pertains to a matter in which the Tribunal is
required to take some action, or be apprised of some relevant event.

Any change of name, description, address, telephone number,
facsimile number, or e-mail address shall immediately be notified by
the Party or member of the Tribunal to all other addressees referred
to in paragraphs 1, 3 and 7.

After the discussion at the Procedural Meeting, the following
clarification regarding confidentiality is added:

7.9.

2.3.

Either Party may publicly disclose submissions made in these
proceedings unless there has been a decision by the Tribunal to
the contrary. Requests for confidential treatment of any item
communicated in these proceedings may be submitted by either
Party to the Tribunal for a decision, in which case no item which
is the subject of such request may be publicly disclosed unless
and until the Tribunal has so decided.

8. Language of the arbitration

After consultation with the Parties at the Procedural Hearing, the Tribunal
shall determine the language or languages to be used in the proceedings in
accordance with Art. 17(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules.

After the discussion at the Procedural Meeting and further comments
from the Parties after the Meeting, the following is decided:

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 31

8.1.

8.2.

8.3.

8.4.

2.4.

English and Spanish will be the official languages of the
arbitration and, as between them, English will be the
authoritative language.

Communications by the Tribunal (including orders, decisions
and awards) and all submissions and communications by the
parties shall be in English, including translations in full of any
witness statements prepared in Spanish and translations in
relevant part of documentary evidence and legal authorities in a
language other than English.

Spanish translations of all writings referred to in paragraph 8.2
that are not already in Spanish shall be submitted or
communicated with the writings or as soon as_ possible
thereafter, but in no event later than three weeks after their
submission or communication, except that the Spanish
translations of any award or of Claimant’s Memorial on the
Merits and Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits may
be submitted up to six weeks after such award or submission is
made.

All oral proceedings shall be simultaneously interpreted and
transcribed into English and Spanish.

9. Place of arbitration

After consultation with the Parties at the Procedural Hearing, the
Tribunal shall determine the place of arbitration in accordance with
Article 16(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules.

After the discussion at the Procedural Meeting and the
submission of further written comments of the Parties, the
following is decided: The Hague, The Netherlands is the place of

arbitration.

In this context it is recalled that, according to UNCITRAL Rule
16.2, Hearings may be held at other venues.

Timetable

Taking into account the Parties’ proposal submitted by Claimants’
letter of September 26, 2007, and the discussion at the Procedural
Meeting, the timetable shall be as follows:

By October 19, 2007,

Claimants’ Statement of Claim

By November 19, 2007,

Respondent’s Statement of Defense (including all jurisdictional
objections)

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 32

3.4.

3.5.

3.6.

3.7.

3.8.

3.9.

3.10.

3.11.

3.12.

By January 25, 2008,

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, to be submitted together
with all evidence (documents, as well as witness statements and
expert statements if any) Respondent wishes to rely on in accordance
with the sections on evidence below.

By March 25, 2008,

Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, to be submitted
together with all evidence (documents, as well as witness statements
and expert statements if any) Claimants wish to rely on in
accordance with the sections on evidence below.

By April 8, 2008,

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, to be submitted together with all
evidence (documents, as well as witness statements and expert
statements if any) Claimants wish to rely on in accordance with the
sections on evidence below.

May 19, 2008,

One day Hearing on Jurisdiction; should examination of witnesses or
experts be required, this hearing may be extended to up to two and a
half days if found necessary by the Tribunal after consultation with
the Parties, and be held May 19-21, 2008.

As soon as possible after the Hearing on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal
will decide on how it will address the question of jurisdiction and
inform the Parties by order, award, or otherwise.

By August 22, 2008,

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, to be submitted
together with all evidence (documents, as well as witness statements
and expert statements if any) Respondent wishes to rely on in
accordance with the sections on evidence below.

The Parties do not foresee the need for document requests in these
proceedings and the Tribunal accordingly makes no provision for
dealing with such requests in this Order. Either Party may apply to
the Tribunal should circumstances arise that would require revisiting
this question.

By October 24, 2008, Claimants’ Reply Memorial on the Merits
with any further evidence (documents, witness statements, expert
statements) but only in rebuttal to Respondent’s Ist Counter-
Memorial on the Merits.

By December 26, 2008, Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits with
any further evidence (documents, witness statements, expert
statements) but only in rebuttal to Claimant’s Reply Memorial.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 33

3.13.

3.14.

3.15.

3.16.

3.17.

3.18.

5.1.

5.2.

5.3.

Thereafter, no new evidence may be submitted, unless agreed
between the Parties or expressly authorized by the Tribunal.

By January 23, 2009, the Parties submit

* notifications of the witnesses and experts presented by
themselves or by the other Party they wish to examine at the
Hearing,

* and a chronological list of all exhibits with indications where

the respective documents can be found in the file.

On a date to be decided, Pre-Hearing Conference between the Parties
and the Tribunal shall be held, if considered necessary by the
Tribunal, either in person or by telephone.

As soon as possible thereafter, Tribunal issues a Procedural Order
regarding details of the Hearing on the Merits.

Final Hearing on the Merits to be held April 20 to April 24, 2009,
and, if found necessary by the Tribunal after consultation with the
Parties, extended to continue from April 27 to April 29, 2009.

By dates set at the end of the Hearing after consultation with the
Parties, the Parties shall submit:

* Post-Hearing Briefs of up to 50 pages (no new documents
allowed)

* and Claims for Arbitration Costs.

Evidence

The Parties and the Tribunal may use, as an additional guideline, the
“IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International Commercial
Arbitration”, always subject to changes considered appropriate in
this case by the Tribunal.

Documentary Evidence

All documents (which shall include texts of all law provisions, cases
and authorities) considered relevant by the Parties shall be submitted
with their Memorials, as established in the Timetable.

All documents shall be submitted with translations as provided in the
above section on language and in the form established above in the
section on communications.

New factual allegations or evidence shall not be any more permitted
after the respective dates for the Rebuttal Memorials indicated in the
above Timetable unless agreed between the Parties or expressly
authorized by the Tribunal.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 34

5.4.

6.1.

6.2.

8.1.

8.2.

8.3.

8.4.

 

Unless a Party raises an objection within four weeks after receiving a
document, or a late objection is found justified by the Tribunal:

* a document is accepted as having originated from the
source indicated in the document;

* a copy of a dispatched communication is accepted
without further proof as having been received by the addressee; and

* a copy of a document and its translation into English or
Spanish, if any, is accepted as correct.

Witness Evidence

Written Witness Statements of all witnesses shall be submitted
together with the Memorials mentioned above by the time limits
established in the Timetable. Although not presently anticipated,
should Witness Statements be submitted with the Parties’
submissions on jurisdiction, either Party may request that the
Tribunal establish a timetable for the submission of rebuttal Witness
Statements.

In order to make most efficient use of time at the Hearing, written
Witness Statements shall generally be used in lieu of direct oral
examination though exceptions may be admitted by the Tribunal.
Therefore, insofar as, at the Hearing, such witnesses are invited by
the presenting Party or asked to attend at the request of the other
Party, the available hearing time should mostly be reserved for
cross-examination and re-direct examination, as well as for questions
by the Arbitrators.

Expert Evidence

Should the Parties wish to present expert testimony, the same
procedure would apply as for witnesses.

Hearings

Subject to changes in view of the further procedure up to the
Hearings, the following is established for the Hearings:

The dates are as established in the Timetable above.

No new documents may be presented at the Hearings except by
leave of the Tribunal. But demonstrative exhibits may be shown
using documents submitted earlier in accordance with the Timetable.

A live transcript shall be made of the Hearings and provided to the
Parties and the Arbitrators. The PCA as Registry shall make the
necessary arrangements in this regard.

Hearing on Jurisdiction:
8.4.1. After the discussion at the Meeting and the submission of

further written comments by the Parties, it is decided that the
hearing on jurisdiction shall be held at San Jose, Costa Rica.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 35

8.5.

9.1.

9.2.

9.3.

9.4.

8.4.2. Assuming that no witnesses or experts have to be examined
at this Hearing on Jurisdiction, the Agenda shall be as set
forth below. If witnesses are to be heard at the Hearing on
Jurisdiction, the Agenda will be modified.

Short Introduction by Chairman of Tribunal.

Opening Statement by Respondent of up to | hour.
Opening Statement by Claimants of up to | hour.
Questions by the Tribunal, and suggestions regarding
particular issues to be addressed in more detail in
Parties’ 2nd Round Presentations.

2nd Round Presentation by Respondent of up to | hour.
2nd Round Presentation by Claimants of up to 1 hour.
Final questions by the Tribunal.

Discussion on whether Post-Hearing Briefs are deemed
necessary and of any other issues of the further
procedure.

REN

eI NM

Members of the Tribunal may raise questions at any time considered
appropriate.

Hearing on the Merits:

8.5.1. Should a Hearing on the Merits become necessary, further
details shall be established after the Hearing on Jurisdiction
and after consultation with the Parties.

8.5.2. Taking into account the time available during the period
provided for the Hearing in the Timetable, the Tribunal
intends to establish equal maximum time periods both for
the Claimants and for the Respondent which the Parties shall
have available. Changes to that principle may be applied
for at the latest at the time of the Pre-Hearing Conference.

Extensions of Deadlines and Other Procedural Decisions

Short extensions may be agreed between the Parties as long as they
do not affect later dates in the Timetable and the Tribunal is
informed before the original date due.

Extensions of deadlines shall only be granted by the Tribunal on
exceptional grounds and provided that a request is submitted
immediately after an event has occurred which prevents a Party from
complying with the deadline.

The Tribunal indicated to the Parties, and the Parties took note
thereof, that in view of travels and other commitments of the
Arbitrators, it might sometimes take a certain period for the Tribunal
to respond to submissions of the Parties and decide on them.

Procedural decisions will be issued by the chairman of the Tribunal
after consultation with his co-arbitrators or, in cases of urgency or if
a co-arbitrator cannot be reached, by him alone.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 36

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

10. Tribunal Fees

The Tribunal’s hourly billing rate for all time spent on this matter
shall be €500 and shall be charged along with any applicable VAT in
accordance with paragraph 11 of Procedural Order No. 1.

The Claimants submitted their Statement of Claim on October 19, 2007.

The Respondent submitted its Statement of Defense on November 20, 2007.

By letter dated January 24, 2008, the Respondent informed the Tribunal of an
agreement between the Parties to extend the deadline for submission of the
Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction by five days to January 30, 2008, and,
correspondingly, to extend the deadline for submission of the Claimants’
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and Memorial on the Merits by five days each,
to March 30, 2008, and April 13, 2008, respectively. The Tribunal amended the
schedule of proceedings in PO II accordingly.

The Respondent submitted its Memorial on Jurisdiction by e-mail dated
January 31, 2008, and a Spanish translation thereof by e-mail received on

February 21, 2008.

The Claimants submitted their Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction by e-mail dated

April 1, 2008, and a Spanish translation thereof by e-mail dated April 22, 2008.

The Claimants submitted their Memorial on the Merits by e-mail dated April 14,

2008, and a Spanish translation thereof by e-mail dated May 24, 2008.

By e-mail dated April 10, 2008, a draft PO III was circulated to the Parties for
comments. By letters dated April 17, 2008, both the Claimants and Respondent
submitted their comments. The Respondent objected that the Claimants’ Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdictional Objections had raised new claims not contained in the
Statement of Claim. It requested that the Tribunal not admit the new claims
pursuant to Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules or that the
jurisdictional hearing be postponed to afford the Respondent time to respond to

the alleged new claims.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 37

54.

Acknowledging the Parties’ comments on the draft, the Tribunal issued PO III on
April 21, 2008, regarding the conduct of the Hearing on Jurisdiction.
The Tribunal provisionally admitted the alleged new claims under Article 20 of
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, but reserved a final decision on the matter for
a later date. The Respondent’s request to postpone the date of the jurisdictional
hearing was rejected. For ease of reference, the entire operative provisions of

PO Ill are set out below:

1. Introduction

1.1. This Order recalls the earlier agreements and rulings of the
Tribunal, particularly in Procedural Order No. 2 sections 3.7. and
8.4.

1.2. In order to facilitate references to exhibits the Parties rely on in

their oral presentations, and in view of the great number of exhibits
submitted by the Parties to avoid that each member of the Tribunal
has to bring all of them to the Hearing, the Parties are invited to
bring to the Hearing:

for the other Party and for each member of the Tribunal Hearing
Binders of those exhibits or parts thereof on which they intend to
rely in their oral presentations at the hearing, together with a
separate consolidated Table of Contents of the Hearing Binders of
each Party,

for the use of the Tribunal, one full set of all exhibits the Parties
have submitted in this procedure, together with a separate
consolidated Table of Contents of these exhibits.

2. Time and Place of Hearing
2.1. The Hearing shall be held

at the Inter-American Court of Human Rights
Avenue 10, Street 45-47 Los Yoses, San Pedro
P.O. Box 6906-1000, San José, Costa Rica
Telephone: (506) 2234 0581

Fax: (506) 2234 0584

Since witnesses and experts will have to be heard, two and a half
days will be blocked and the Hearing will start on May 19, 2008, at
10:00 a.m., ending, at the latest, at 1 p.m. on May 21, 2008.

2.2. To give sufficient time to the Parties and the Arbitrators to prepare
for and evaluate each part of the Hearings, the daily sessions shall
not go beyond the period between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
However, the Tribunal, in consultation with the Parties, may change
the timing during the course of the Hearings.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 38

3. Conduct of the Hearing

3.1. | No new documents may be presented at the Hearing, unless agreed
by the Parties or authorized by the Tribunal. But demonstrative
exhibits may be shown using documents submitted earlier in
accordance with the Timetable.

3.2. To make most efficient use of time at the Hearing, written Witness
Statements shall generally be used in lieu of direct oral examination
though exceptions may be admitted by the Tribunal. Therefore,
insofar as, at the Hearing, such witnesses are invited by the
presenting Party or asked to attend at the request of the other Party,
the presenting Party may introduce the witness for not more than 10
minutes, but the further available hearing time shall be reserved for
cross-examination and re-direct examination, as well as for
questions by the Arbitrators.

3.3. If a witness whose statement has been submitted by a Party and
whose examination at the Hearing has been requested by the other
Party, does not appear at the Hearing, his statement will not be
taken into account by the Tribunal. A Party may apply with reasons
for an exception from that rule.

3.4. In so far as the Parties request oral examination of an expert, the
same rules and procedure shall apply as for witnesses.

4, Agenda of Hearing
4.1. In view of the examination of witnesses and experts, the following

Agenda is established for the Hearing:

1. Introduction by the Chairman of the Tribunal.

2. Opening Statements of not more than 30 minutes each for
the
a) Respondent,
b) Claimants.

3. Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties: Examination of

witnesses and experts presented by Respondent. For each:

a) Affirmation of witness or expert to tell the truth.

b) Short introduction by Respondent (This may include
a short direct examination on new developments
after the last written statement of the witness or

expert).

c) Cross examination by Claimants.

d) Re-direct examination by Respondent, but only on
issues raised in cross-examination.

e) Re-Cross examination by Claimants.

f) Remaining questions by members of the Tribunal,

but they may raise questions at any time.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 39

4.2.

43.

44.

4. Examination of witnesses and experts presented by
Claimants. For each:
vice versa as under a) to f) above.

5. Any witness or expert may only be recalled for rebuttal
examination by a Party or the members of the Tribunal, if
such intention is announced in time to assure the availability
of the witness and expert during the time of the Hearing.

6. Rebuttal Arguments of not more than | hour each for the
a) Respondent,
b) Claimants.
c) Additional questions of members of the Tribunal, if

any.

7. Closing arguments of not more than 45 minutes each for the
a) Respondent,
b) Claimants.
c) Remaining questions by the members of the

Tribunal, if any.

8. Discussion regarding any post-hearing submissions and
other procedural issues.

Examination of witnesses and experts shall take place in the order
agreed by the Parties. If no such agreement has been reached, unless
the Tribunal decides otherwise, Respondent’s witnesses and experts
shall be heard first in the order decided by the Respondent, and then
Claimants’ witnesses and experts shall be heard in the order decided
by the Claimants.

Unless otherwise agreed between the Parties or ruled by the
Tribunal, witnesses and experts may be present in the Hearing room
during the testimony of other witnesses and experts.

As already foreseen in Procedural Order No. 2 for the hearing on
the merits, in view of the examination of witnesses and experts also
for this Hearing on Jurisdiction, taking into account the time
available during the period provided for the Hearing in the
timetable, the Tribunal establishes equal maximum time periods
which the Parties shall have available for their presentations and
examination and cross-examination of all witnesses and experts.
Taking into account the Calculation of Hearing Time attached to
this Order, the total maximum time available for the Parties
(including their introductory and final statements) shall be as
follows:

5 hours for Claimants
5 hours for Respondent

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 40

55.

56.

The time limits “not more than” for the Parties’ Agenda items
above shall be considered as a guideline. However, it is left to the
Parties, subject to section 3.2. above, how much of their allotted
total time they want to spend on Agenda items in section 4.1. above,
subsections 2., 3. b, c,d, and e, 4., 6. and 7. as long as the total
time period allotted to them is maintained.

4.5. The parties shall prepare their presentations and examinations at the
Hearing on the basis of the time limits established in this Procedural
Order.

5. Other Matters

5.1. The PCA has organized
availability of the court reporter and translation,

that microphones are set up for all those speaking in the Hearing
room to assure easy understanding over a loud speaker and for
translation,

and, taking into account the numbers of persons attending from the
Parties’ side, sufficient supplies of water on the tables and coffee
and tea for the two coffee breaks every day.

5.2. The Tribunal may change any of the rulings in this order, after
consultation with the Parties, if considered appropriate under the
circumstances.

By letter dated April 23, 2008, the Respondent sought further clarification of the
Tribunal’s decisions relating to PO III. First, it requested that the Tribunal refrain
from considering the submissions made in the Claimants’ Memorial on the
Merits for the purposes of the Hearing on Jurisdiction and the Tribunal’s ultimate
decision on jurisdiction. The Respondent further noted its intention to file
asupplemental Statement of Defense regarding the Claimants’ allegedly new
claims and its intention to seek permission to submit post-hearing briefs on these

issues.

By letters both dated April 28, 2008, the Parties informed the Tribunal that they
did not intend to bring any of their witnesses or request the presence of any
opposing witnesses. In its letter, the Respondent also requested permission to
submit rebuttal witness and expert statements pursuant to Articles 6.1 and 7 of
PO II. By letter dated April 30, 2008, the Tribunal modified the hearing schedule

to remove the agenda items relating to examination of witnesses and invited the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 41

57.

58.

59.

60.

Parties to submit rebuttal witness and expert statements no later than May 9,

2008.

By letter dated May 9, 2008, the Respondent sought leave to submit a limited
number of rebuttal documents in advance of the Hearing on Jurisdiction in order
to rebut the alleged new issues and factual submissions contained in the
Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction. By letter dated May 8, 2008, the
Tribunal authorized the submission of rebuttal documents by the Respondent by
May 13, 2008. The Claimant was authorized to submit a reply to such rebuttal
documents by May 17, 2008.

The Respondent submitted three rebuttal witness statements, including
astatement from a new expert witness, by e-mail dated May 10, 2008.
The Respondent submitted rebuttal documents by e-mail dated May 14, 2008.
The Claimants submitted reply rebuttal documents by e-mail dated May 17,
2008. The Respondent submitted a supplemental Statement of Defense by e-mail
dated May 17, 2008. The Respondent further submitted a number of rebuttal
legal authorities by e-mail dated May 18, 2008.

The Hearing on Jurisdiction took place in San José, Costa Rica on May 19

and 20, 2008.

The Tribunal issued PO IV on May 23, 2008. The Tribunal authorized two
rounds of Post-Hearing Briefs to be simultaneously submitted on July 22, 2008,
and August 12, 2008, respectively. The Tribunal invited the Parties to address all
arguments and evidence that stood unanswered as of that time. For greater
precision and ease of reference, the entire operative provisions of PO IV are set

out below:

Taking into account the discussion and the agreements reached with the
Parties at the end of the Hearing on Jurisdiction in San José on May 20,
2008, the Tribunal issues this Procedural Order No. 4 as follows:

1. Post-Hearing Briefs

1.1. By July 22, 2008, the Parties shall simultaneously submit Post-
Hearing Briefs containing the following:

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 42

2.1.

1.1.1. The relief sought by the Parties regarding both jurisdiction
and the merits;

1.1.2. Any comments they have regarding,

a) issues raised in submissions of the other side to which
they have not yet replied; and

b) issues raised at the Hearing on Jurisdiction;

1.1.3. Separate sections responding in particular to the following
questions:

a) Explain why the alleged investment in this case is or is
not an investment “existing at the time of entry into
force” of the Treaty.

b) What exactly is Claimants’ case regarding an
“investment agreement” under Article VI(1)(a) of the
Treaty?

The sections of the Post-Hearing Briefs requested under 1.1.2 and
1.1.3 above shall include short references to all sections in the
Party’s earlier submissions, as well as to exhibits (including legal
authorities, witness statements, and expert statements) and to hearing
transcripts on which it relies regarding the respective issue. For the
avoidance of doubt, the Tribunal wishes to receive from each Party,

 

1.2.1. A statement of each point of law it wishes the Tribunal to
adopt; and

1.2.2. A statement of each fact relevant to jurisdiction that it
wishes the Tribunal to accept.

New exhibits shall only be attached to the Post-Hearing Brief if they
are required to rebut factual or legal issues raised by the other side in
its unanswered written submissions or at the Hearing on Jurisdiction.

By August 12, 2008, the Parties shall simultaneously submit a
second round of Post- Hearing Briefs, but only in rebuttal to the first
round Post-Hearing Briefs of the other side.

Procedure on the Merits

As discussed and agreed at the Hearing on Jurisdiction, to avoid any
misunderstanding, the above schedule does not affect the Timetable
regarding the procedure on the merits as agreed between the Parties
and the Tribunal and recorded in sections 3.6 to 3.18 of Procedural
Order No. 2. This is without prejudice to the decision of the Tribunal
regarding jurisdiction provided for in section 3.8 of Procedural
Order No. 2.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 43

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

By letter dated June 13, 2008, the Respondent sought a sixty day extension to the
deadline for the submission of its Counter-Memorial on the Merits. By letter
dated June 17, 2008, the Claimants objected to the granting of this extension. By

letter dated June 18, 2008, the Tribunal granted an extension of one month.

The Parties submitted their first-round Post-Hearing Briefs on Jurisdiction by e-
mails dated July 23, 2008, with Spanish translations following thereafter on

August 22 and 28, 2008, for the Claimants and the Respondent, respectively.

The Parties submitted their second-round Post-Hearing Briefs on Jurisdiction by
e-mails dated August 13, 2008, with Spanish translations following thereafter on

September 3 and 18, 2008, for the Claimants and the Respondent, respectively.

The Respondent submitted its Counter-Memorial on the Merits by e-mail dated
September 23, 2008, and a Spanish translation thereof by e-mail dated
November 3, 2008.

The Claimants submitted their Reply Memorial by e-mail dated November 25,
2008, and a Spanish translation thereof by e-mail dated December 16, 2008.

The Tribunal issued its Interim Award on December 1, 2008. For the reasons set

out in that award, the Tribunal decided the following:
1. The Respondent’s jurisdictional objections are denied.

2. The Tribunal has jurisdiction concerning the claims as
formulated by the Claimants in their second Post Hearing Brief
dated August 12, 2008, in paragraph 116.

3. The decision regarding the costs of arbitration is deferred to a
later stage of these proceedings.

4, The further procedure in this case will be the subject of a

separate Procedural Order of the Tribunal.
By letter dated January 12, 2009, the Tribunal confirmed that the Hearing on the
Merits would be held on April 20 to 24, 2009, with possible extension through
April 27 to 29, 2009, and noted and confirmed the Parties’ agreement on

Washington, D.C., USA, as the venue for the Hearing. The Tribunal invited the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 44

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

Parties to comment on the site and the length of the Hearing in Washington,

D.C., by January 19, 2009.

By letter dated January 16, 2009, the Respondent provided the Tribunal with its
comments on the site and the length of the Hearing. The Respondent asked the
Tribunal to reserve the entire period previously agreed upon and proposed to

extend the Hearing by two additional days, namely April 30 and May 1, 2009.

By letter dated January 19, 2009, the Claimants provided the Tribunal with their
comments on the site and the length of the Hearing, proposing that the Hearing
be officially extended through April 29, 2009. By letter dated January 29, 2009,
the Claimants indicated their belief that the extension of the Hearing by two days

proposed by the Respondent, through May 1, 2009, would not be necessary.

The Respondent submitted its Rejoinder on the Merits by e-mail dated January

27, 2009, and a Spanish translation thereof by e-mail dated February 16, 2009.

By letter dated January 30, 2009, the Tribunal informed the Parties that the
original schedule of April 20 to 24, 2009, and April 27 to 29, 2009, remained. In
addition, the Tribunal indicated that the two additional days of April 30 and
May 1, 2009 would be reserved by the Tribunal in case they proved absolutely
necessary. In that context, the Tribunal informed the Parties that a Procedural
Order regarding the details of the Hearing would be issued and invited the Parties
to attempt to come to an agreement on any pertinent details of the conduct of the

Hearing on the Merits.

By letter dated February 6, 2009, the Tribunal circulated the Spanish translation

of its Interim Award of December 1, 2008.

By e-mails dated February 13, 2009, the Parties informed the Tribunal that they
had come to an agreement on the use of the Washington, D.C., offices of

Respondent’s counsel as the venue for the Hearing on the Merits.

By letter dated February 23, 2009, the Claimants provided the Tribunal with
a Consolidated List of Exhibits.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 45

75.

76.

77.

78.

By letter dated February 24, 2009, the Respondent provided the Tribunal with
a Consolidated List of Exhibits and Expert Reports.

On February 27, 2009, a Pre-Hearing Conference was held by telephone between
the Parties and the PCA. Amongst other matters, the Parties agreed on logistical
arrangements for the hearing, including a daily schedule for the Hearing and
confirmed that they would (1) by March 9, 2009, submit lists of witnesses they
wished to cross-examine at the Hearing, and (2) by March 20, 2009, submit lists

of Hearing attendees.

By letters dated March 9, 2009, both the Claimants and the Respondent
submitted their comments on the organization and schedule of the Hearing on the
Merits and a list of those witnesses they intended to call for cross-examination.
By letters dated March 10 and further letters dated March 11, 2009, the Parties

submitted further comments on the organization of the Hearing.

Acknowledging the Parties’ comments, the Tribunal issued PO V on March 19,
2009, regarding the conduct of the Hearing on the Merits. For ease of reference,

the entire operative provisions of PO V are set out below:

1. Introduction

Ll. This Order recalls the earlier agreements and rulings of the Tribunal
and particularly takes into account the recent submissions and letters
of the Parties.

1.2. In order to facilitate references to exhibits the Parties rely on in their
oral presentations, and in view of the great number of exhibits
submitted by the Parties to avoid that each member of the Tribunal
has to bring all of them to the Hearing, the Parties are invited to
bring to the Hearing:

for the other Party and for each member of the Tribunal
Hearing Binders of those exhibits or parts thereof on which
they intend to rely in their oral presentations at the hearing,
together with a separate consolidated Table of Contents of
the Hearing Binders of each Party,

for the use of the Tribunal, one full set of all exhibits the
Parties have submitted in this procedure, together with a
separate consolidated Table of Contents of these exhibits.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 46

2.

2.1.

2.2.

2.3.

2.4.

Time and Place of Hearing
The Hearing shall be held at

Winston & Strawn LLP

1700 K Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20006-3817
USA

Tel: — +1 202 282 5000

Fax: — +1 202 282 5100

As agreed, eight days will be blocked and the Hearing will
start at 10:00 a.m. on April 20, 2009, and
end, at the latest, at 6 p.m. on April 29, 2009

Two extra days, April 30 and May 1, will also be blocked as a
contingency in the event that the Tribunal deems absolutely
necessary to extend the Hearing.

To give sufficient time to the Parties and the Arbitrators to prepare
for and evaluate each part of the Hearings, the daily sessions shall
not go beyond the period between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
However, the Tribunal, in consultation with the Parties, may change
the timing during the course of the Hearings.

By March 20, 2009, the Parties shall submit notifications of the
persons that will be attending the Hearing on their respective sides.

Conduct of the Hearing

No new documents may be presented at the Hearing, unless agreed
by the Parties or authorized by the Tribunal. But demonstrative
exhibits may be shown using documents submitted earlier in
accordance with the Timetable.

Documents in rebuttal of recent witness statements to which the
respective Party has not had an opportunity to reply may be
introduced, together with a short explanatory note, by April 1, 2009.

To make most efficient use of time at the Hearing, written Witness
Statements shall generally be used in lieu of direct oral examination
though exceptions may be admitted by the Tribunal. Therefore,
insofar as, at the Hearing, such witnesses are invited by the
presenting Party or asked to attend at the request of the other Party,
the presenting Party may introduce the witness for not more than 10
minutes, or, regarding new developments after the last statement of
the witness, for not more than 20 minutes, but the further available
hearing time shall be reserved for cross-examination and re-direct
examination, as well as for questions by the Arbitrators. Argument
by a Party may only be presented during the opening and closing
statements as provided in the Agenda.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 47

3.4. If a witness whose statement has been submitted by a Party and
whose examination at the Hearing has been requested by the other
Party, does not appear at the Hearing, his statement will not be taken
into account by the Tribunal. A Party may apply with reasons for an
exception from that rule.

3.5. In so far as the Parties request oral examination of an expert, the
same rules and procedure shall apply as for witnesses.

4, Agenda of Hearing
41. In view of the examination of witnesses and experts, the following

Agenda is established for the Hearing:

1.

2.

Introduction by the Chairman of the Tribunal.
Opening Statements of not more than 2 hours each for the

a) Claimants,
b) Respondent.

Unless otherwise agreed by the Parties: Examination of
Claimants’ witnesses and experts. For each:

a) Affirmation of witness or expert to tell the truth.

b) Short introduction by Claimants (This may include
a short direct examination on new developments
after the last written statement of the witness or

expert.).

c) Cross-examination by Respondent.

d) Re-direct examination by Claimants, but only on
issues raised in cross-examination.

e) Re-cross examination by Respondent.

Remaining questions by members of the Tribunal,
but they may raise questions at any time.

Examination of Respondent’s witnesses and experts. For
each:
vice versa as under a) to f) above.

Any witness or expert may only be recalled for rebuttal
examination by a Party or the members of the Tribunal, if
such intention is announced in time to assure the availability
of the witness and expert during the time of the Hearing.

Closing arguments of not more than 2 hours each for the

a) Claimants,
b) Respondent.
c) Remaining questions by the members of the

Tribunal, if any.

Discussion regarding any post-hearing submissions and
other procedural issues.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 48

4.2.

4.3.

44.

45.

Examination of witnesses and experts shall take place in the order
agreed by the Parties. If no such agreement has been reached, unless
the Tribunal decides otherwise, Claimants’ witnesses and experts
shall be heard first in the order decided by Claimants, and then
Respondent’s witnesses and experts shall be heard in the order
decided by Respondent.

Unless otherwise agreed between the Parties or ruled by the
Tribunal, witnesses and experts may be present in the Hearing room
during the testimony of other witnesses and experts.

As already foreseen in Procedural Order No. 2 for the hearing on the
merits, in view of the examination of witnesses and experts, taking
into account the time available during the period provided for the
Hearing in the timetable, the Tribunal establishes equal maximum
time periods which the Parties shall have available for their
pr i and examinati and cross~ ination of all
witnesses and experts. Taking into account the Calculation of
Hearing Time attached to this Order, the total maximum time
available for the Parties (excluding their introductory and final
statements) shall be as follows:

 

16,25 hours for Claimants
16,25 hours for Respondent

It is left to the Parties how much of their allotted total time they
want to spend on Agenda items in sections 3, 4, and 5, as long as the
total time period allotted to them is maintained.

By April 1, 2009, the Parties may submit a further notification as to
whether they do not intend to examine any of the witnesses so far
notified. Thereafter, the Tribunal will re-examine whether, in view
of the numbers of witnesses to be examined from each side, the
above allotment of periods to each Party has to be changed. If a
Party does not call a witness for cross-examination at the hearing,
this will not be considered as an acceptance of that witness’s
testimony.

The Parties shall prepare their presentations and examinations at the
Hearing on the basis of the time limits established.

Other Matters

The PCA has organized availability of the court reporter and
translation.

Counsel for Respondent will assure that microphones are set up for
all those speaking in the Hearing room to assure easy understanding
over a loud speaker and for translation.

Counsel for Respondent, in consultation with counsel for Claimants
and the PCA, will arrange for catering of lunches and, taking into
account the numbers of persons attending from each side, sufficient

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 49

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

supplies of water on the tables and coffee and tea for the two coffee
breaks every day.

5.4. The Tribunal may change any of the rulings in this Order, after
consultation with the Parties, if considered appropriate under the
circumstances.

By letter dated March 20, 2009, the Respondent communicated its list of

attendees for the Hearing on the Merits.

By letter dated March 23, 2009, the Respondent objected to certain provisions of
PO V. In its letter, the Respondent requested an amendment to the agenda of the
Hearing on the Merits and the opportunity to submit further documents in
rebuttal to any submitted by the Claimants pursuant to PO V. By letter dated
March 24, the Tribunal informed the Parties that the agenda set out in PO V was
maintained but that the Respondent was authorized to submit rebuttal documents

by April 8, 2009.

By separate letters both dated April 1, 2009, the Respondent communicated
arevised list of attendees for the Hearing on the Merits and a revised list of

witnesses it intended to call for cross-examination.

By separate letters both dated April 1, 2009, the Claimants submitted their
rebuttal documents and communicated their list of attendees for the Hearing on

the Merits and a revised list of witnesses it intended to call for cross-examination.

By letter dated April 2, 2009, the Claimants communicated to the Tribunal that
two witnesses not called for cross-examination by Respondent would be
attending the hearing as potential rebuttal witnesses. The Claimants also provided

the Tribunal with an additional exhibit and updated List of Exhibits.

By letter dated April 6, 2009, the Respondent objected to the Claimants’
notification of their two potential rebuttal witnesses. The Respondent also
requested that, as a result of Claimants’ provision of various rebuttal exhibits
without translation into English, the Tribunal grant the Respondent an extension
of time until April 12, 2009 for submitting further rebuttal documents. The

Claimants submitted the remaining English translations of its rebuttal documents

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 50

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

on April 6, 2009 and notified the Tribunal that they agreed to the April 12, 2009

deadline for the Respondent’s submission of its rebuttal documents.

By letter dated April 7, 2009, the Claimants responded to the Respondent’s

objection to Claimants’ notification of their two potential rebuttal witnesses.

By letter dated April 7, 2009, the Tribunal notified the Parties that it accepted the
Claimants’ notification of its two potential rebuttal witnesses and that the
Respondent was granted until April 12, 2009 to notify any of its own witnesses or

experts for rebuttal testimony and to submit rebuttal documents.

By letter dated April 9, 2009, the Tribunal provided the Parties with a chart of the
Ecuadorian court cases relevant to the arbitration and requested that any
suggestions for modification of the chart from the Parties be submitted by April

15, 2009.

By letter dated April 10, 2009, the Respondent requested an additional extension
of time to April 14, 2009 for submission of additional rebuttal documents due to
certain public holidays in Ecuador, noting that Claimants’ counsel had agreed to

this extension of time.

By letter dated April 13, 2009, the Respondent communicated that it wished to
reserve the right to recall for additional rebuttal testimony any of its witnesses,

including those who would be called for cross-examination by the Claimants.

By letter dated April 14, 2009, the Respondent communicated its additional

rebuttal documents.

By letter dated April 15, 2009, the Respondent provided its suggestions for
modification of the chart of Ecuadorian cases and submitted its concerns as to the

content of the chart.

By e-mail dated April 16, 2009, the Claimants provided their suggestions for

modification of the chart of Ecuadorian cases.

By letter dated April 18, 2009, the Tribunal responded to the Respondent’s

concerns regarding the content of the chart of Ecuadorian cases.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 51

94.

95.

96.

97.

By letter dated April 19, 2009, the Claimant requested that the Tribunal order
sequestration of any witnesses called for cross-examination and that the Tribunal
strike the statement of a deceased witness. By letter also dated April 19, 2009, the

Respondent objected to both of Claimants’ requests.

By e-mail dated April 20, 2009, the Respondent provided the Tribunal with a
revised List of Exhibits and Expert Reports.

The Hearing on the Merits took place in Washington, D.C., USA from April 20
to 24 and 27 to 28, 2009.

With reference to agreements reached with the Parties at the Hearing on the
Merits, the Tribunal issued PO VI on April 30, 2009. The Tribunal authorized
two rounds of Post-Hearing Briefs to be submitted simultaneously by June 19,
2009 and July 15, 2009, respectively. The Tribunal also authorized two rounds of
Cost Claims to be submitted simultaneously by August 7, 2009 and August 21,
2009, respectively. The Tribunal also requested that the Parties address certain
questions specified in the Order in their Post-Hearing Briefs. For ease of

reference, the entire operative provisions of PO VI are set out below:

Taking into account the discussion and the agreements reached with the
Parties at the Hearing on the Merits held in Washington, D.C. from April 20
to 24 and April 27 to 28, 2009, the Tribunal issues this Procedural Order No.
6 as follows:

1. Post-Hearing Briefs

Ll. By June 19, 2009, the Parties shall simultaneously submit Post-
Hearing Briefs, limited to a maximum of 80 pages (double-spaced)
in length, containing the following:

1.1.1. Any comments they have regarding issues raised at the
Hearing on the Merits;

1.1.2. To the extent not fully and completely answered during the
Hearing on the Merits, separate sections responding in
particular to any questions posed by the Tribunal during the
Hearing on the Merits as well as those in section 3 below.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 52

2.1.

2.2.

The sections of the Post-Hearing Briefs requested under 1.1.1 and
1.1.2 above shall include short references to all sections in the
Party’s earlier submissions, as well as to exhibits (including legal
authorities, witness statements, and expert statements) and to
hearing transcripts on which it relies regarding the respective issue.

No new documents shall be attached to the Post-Hearing Briefs
unless expressly authorized in advance by the Tribunal.

By July 15, 2009, the Parties shall simultaneously submit a second
round of Post- Hearing Briefs, limited to a maximum of 40 pages
(double-spaced) in length, but only in rebuttal to the first round
Post-Hearing Briefs of the other side.

Cost Claims

By August 7, 2009, the Parties shall simultaneously submit Cost
Claims, briefly setting out the costs incurred by each side. Such Cost
Claims need not include supporting documentation for the costs
claimed.

By August 21, 2009, the Parties shall simultaneously submit any
comments on the Cost Claims submitted by the other side.

Questions

In addition to providing any further comments on the questions already
posed during the Hearing on the Merits, the Parties are requested to address
the following questions in the Post-Hearing Briefs:

3.1.

What is the standard applicable under Article II(7) of the BIT
(“effective means of asserting claims and enforcing rights”)? Is that
standard lower than the standard for denial of justice?

. Even if the Claimants have the burden of proof to show a denial of

justice, is it of any relevance which of the processing of the 7 cases by
the courts of Ecuador occurred before the Claimants filed their Notice
of Arbitration in December 2006, and which occurred after that point
in time?

. What is it about the order of payment to TexPet’s legal representative

that prevents TexPet from collecting on the judgment in the
Refinancing Agreement case? Why cannot TexPet designate its local
counsel as its legal representative to collect on the judgment in the
Refinancing Agreement case?

. To what extent can the Tribunal apply its own interpretation of the

three relevant Contracts?

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 53

3.5. To what extent are the conclusions of the court-appointed experts in
the seven cases relevant in our context? Does this impact the question
of the probability of success or the likely outcome in the Ecuadorian
courts?

3.6. Can a State rely on the invalidity of a contract despite it having been
signed by its own Ministers?

3.7. What is the Claimants’ reason for specifically asking for a declaration
that the 1973 and 1977 Agreements were breached as a part of its
Relief Sought?

3.8. What is the relevance of the treatment accorded to TexPet’s cases (1)
by the Ecuadorian courts before the Notice of Arbitration in December
2006 as compared to (2) after the Notice of Arbitration was filed? Is
there a difference?

3.9. Apart from,

(1) the references to “the period between the date of the signature of
the herein agreement until 12 months subsequent to that date” in
Section 1 (“Works of Geology and Geophysics’) and Sections 3 and
3(c) (“Production”),

(2) the reference to “the period between the 12 months of the work
program” in Section 3(g) (“Production”), and

(3) the reference to “this annual period” in Section 1.2 (“General
Rules that shall rule the Production”),

does the 1977 Agreement contain any indication suggesting that it is
limited to a one-year term, having particular regard to the purpose of
the 1977 Agreement as set forth in the preambular section entitled
“Object of the Agreement”?

3.10. In the event that the Tribunal were to consider a monetary award, in
order to ensure payment by the Claimants of taxes legitimately due in
respect of any such award, what mechanism would the Parties consider
to be an acceptable alternative to the Tribunal deducting taxes from
any amount awarded?

98. The Parties submitted their first-round Post-Hearing Briefs on the Merits by e-
mails dated June 20, 2009, with Spanish translations following thereafter on July

9 and July 8, 2009, for the Claimants and the Respondent, respectively.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 54

99.

100.

101.

The Parties submitted their second-round Post-Hearing Briefs on the Merits by e-
mails dated July 16, 2009, with Spanish translations following thereafter on
August 6, 2009.

By letter dated July 16, 2009, the Claimants objected to the Respondent’s
introduction of new exhibits in its second-round Post-Hearing Brief on the Merits
without prior authorization of the Tribunal in accordance with PO VI. By letter
dated July 17, 2009, the Tribunal invited a reply to this objection from the
Respondent. By letter dated July 22, 2009, the Respondent replied to the

Claimants’ objection.

The Tribunal issued PO VII on July 24, 2009, addressing the admissibility of the
Respondent’s Exhibits accompanying its Post-Hearing Brief. For ease of

reference, the entire operative provisions of PO VII are set out below:

Taking into account the Claimants’ letter dated July 16, 2009, the
Respondent's letter dated July 22, 2009, and paragraph 1.3 of the Tribunal’s
Procedural Order No. 6, which states:

No new documents shall be attached to the Post-Hearing Briefs unless
expressly authorized in advance by the Tribunal[,]

the Tribunal issues this Procedural Order No. 7 as follows:

1. The above ruling in paragraph 1.3. refers to all “documents” and
therefore is also applicable to authorities. Respondent, therefore,
should not have submitted exhibits R-1020 to R-1033 without an
authorization by the Tribunal “in advance”.

2. The Tribunal notes that Claimant’s letter of July 16, 2009, while
containing a general objection to all new documents submitted by
Respondent, presents detailed reasons for objections only regarding
exhibits R-1022, 1023, 1025, 1027, 1028, 1029, 1030, 1031, and
1033.

3. Since the Tribunal wants to assure that it has all exhibits and
authorities considered relevant by the Parties available by the time
of its deliberations for the Award on the Merits, and since the
timetable of Procedural Order No. 6 still provides time for two
rounds of submissions regarding costs so that no delay is caused by
short further rounds of submissions, the Tribunal rules as follows:

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 55

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

3.1. By August 7, 2009, Claimant may submit a further short
Brief commenting on the new documents submitted by
Respondent and may attach to this Brief any further
documents in rebuttal of Respondent’s new documents.

3.2. Should Respondent wish to submit any new documents in
rebuttal to such further documents submitted by Claimant, it
may submit a reasoned application by August 14, 2009, but
without any new documents attached, and Claimant may
comment on such an application by August 21, 2009.

By letter dated July 27, 2009, the Respondent communicated that a decision had
been rendered in the second Amazonas Refinery case (Case 153-93) and
requested permission to submit the decision and two briefs as exhibits. The

Respondent also provided a description of the judgment and its relevance.

By letter dated July 28, 2009, the Tribunal invited comments from the Claimants
on the Respondent’s letter of July 27, 2009, to be submitted by July 31, 2009.

By letter dated July 29, 2009, the Claimants requested permission to submit
comments in response to the Respondent’s letter dated July 27, 2009 by

August 6, 2009. The Tribunal granted the Claimants request on July 30, 2009.

By letter dated August 6, 2009, the Claimants submitted comments in response to
the Respondent’s request of July 27, 2009 to admit the Ecuadorian decision and
two briefs. The Claimants objected to the admission of the Ecuadorian decision
into evidence. However, in the event that the Tribunal would grant the
Respondent’s request to admit the decision and briefs, the Claimants requested
that they be permitted to submit a further brief and additional evidence in support

thereof.

By e-mail dated August 8, 2009 and by letter dated August 7, 2009, the

Claimants and the Respondent submitted their respective Costs Claims.

By e-mail dated August 8, 2009, the Claimants submitted a Brief in Response to
the Respondent’s New Evidence, commenting on sources cited in the

Respondent’s Second Round Post-Hearing Brief.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 56

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.

By letter dated August 11, 2009, the Respondent responded to the Claimants’
comments of August 6, 2009 and objected to the Claimants’ submission of

additional documents to the Tribunal.

On August 14, 2009, the Respondent submitted a Reply to Claimants’ Brief
submitted on August 8, 2009.

By e-mail dated August 22, 2009, the Respondent submitted its Reply to the

Claimants’ Cost Claim.

By e-mail dated August 22, 2009, the Claimants submitted their Reply to the
Respondent’s Cost Claim and a Rebuttal to the Respondent’s Reply Brief on the

Respondent’s New Evidence.

By letter dated August 24, 2009, the Tribunal informed the Parties that it
accepted all evidence submitted by the Parties. The Tribunal also granted the
Respondent permission to submit all documents for which permission to submit
had been requested in the Respondent’s Reply Brief of August 14, 2009, noting
that other than for the purposes of that grant, the procedure was closed. Finally,
the Tribunal notified the Parties that it would inform the Parties if it had any

further questions, including any questions regarding the Parties’ Costs Claims.

By e-mail dated August 28, 2009, the Respondent submitted the evidence for

which permission was granted by the Tribunal in its letter of August 24, 2009.

By letter dated September 15, 2009, the Respondent communicated that
a decision had been rendered in the Imported Products case (Case 154-93) and

requested permission to submit the decision to the Tribunal as evidence.

By letter dated September 17, 2009, the Claimants objected to the admission of
the Ecuadorian decision into evidence. By letter dated September 18, 2009, the

Respondent submitted comments in response to the Claimants’ objection.

By letter dated September 28, 2009, the Tribunal informed the Parties that,
although the procedure remained closed, it exceptionally admitted the new

Ecuadorian judgment into the record. The Tribunal granted the Respondent

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits s7

117.

permission to submit the judgment together with a short cover note explaining its
relevance by October 5, 2009. The Tribunal also granted the Claimants until
October 19, 2009 to submit comments on the relevance of the judgment to the

present case.

By letter dated October 2, 2009, the Respondent submitted the judgment of
September 10, 2009 in the Imported Products case (Case 154-93) and provided
comments on its relevance. By letter dated October 19, 2009, the Claimants

submitted comments on the relevance of the judgment.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 58

118.

E.

EI.

The Principal Relevant Legal Provisions

The BIT

The principal relevant provisions of the BIT are set out below:

[Preamble]

The United States of America and the Republic of Ecuador (hereinafter the
Parties");

Desiring to promote greater economic cooperation between them, with
respect to investment by nationals and companies of one Party in the
territory of the other Party;

Recognizing that agreement upon the treatment to be accorded such
investment will stimulate the flow of private capital and the economic
development of the Parties;

Agreeing that fair and equitable treatment of investment is desirable in order
to maintain a stable framework for investment and maximum effective
utilization of economic resources;

Recognizing that the development of economic and business ties can
contribute to the well-being of workers in both Parties and promote respect
for internationally recognized worker rights; and

Having resolved to conclude a Treaty concerning the encouragement and
reciprocal protection of investment;

Have agreed as follows:
Article I
1. For the purposes of this Treaty,

(a) “investment” means every kind of investment in the territory of one
Party owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or
companies of the other Party, such as equity, debt, and service and
investment contracts; and includes:

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 59

(i) tangible and intangible property, including rights, such as
mortgages, liens and pledges;

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a company or
interests in the assets thereof;

(iii) a claim to money or a claim to performance having economic
value, and associated with an investment;

(iv) intellectual property which includes, inter alia, rights relating to:
literary and artistic works, including sound recordings;
inventions in all fields of human endeavor;
industrial designs;
semiconductor mask works;

trade secrets, know-how, and confidential business
information; and

trademarks, service marks, and trade names; and

(v) any right conferred by law or contract, and any licenses and
permits pursuant to law;

 

Article IT

 

3. (a) Investment shall at all times be accorded fair and equitable
treatment, shall enjoy full protection and security and shall in no
case be accorded treatment less than that required by international
law.

(b) Neither Party shall in any way impair by arbitrary or
discriminatory measures the management, operation, maintenance,
use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion, or disposal of investments.
For purposes of dispute resolution under Articles VI and VII, a
measure may be arbitrary or discriminatory notwithstanding the fact
that a party has had or has exercised the opportunity to review such
measure in the courts or administrative tribunals of a Party.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 60

(c) Each Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into
with regard to investments.

L..]

7. Each Party shall provide effective means of asserting claims and
enforcing rights with respect to investment, investment agreements, and
investment authorizations.

 

Article VI

1. For purposes of this Article, an investment dispute is a dispute
between a Party and a national or company of the other Party arising
out of or relating to (a) an investment agreement between that Party
and such national or company; (b) an investment authorization
granted by that Party’s foreign investment authority to such national
or company; or (c) an alleged breach of any right conferred or
created by this Treaty with respect to an investment.

2. In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the dispute
should initially seek a resolution through consultation and
negotiation. If the dispute cannot be settled amicably, the national or
company concerned may choose to submit the dispute, under one of
the following alternatives, for resolution:

(a) to the courts or administrative tribunals of the Party that is a
party to the dispute; or

(b) in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed dispute-
settlement procedures; or

(c) in accordance with the terms of paragraph 3.

3. (a) Provided that the national or company concerned has not
submitted the dispute for resolution under paragraph 2 (a) or (b) and that six
months have elapsed from the date on which the dispute arose, the national
or company concerned may choose to consent in writing to the submission
of the dispute for settlement by binding arbitration:

(i) to the International Centre for the Settlement of
Investment Disputes (“Centre”) established by the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States, done at
Washington, March 18, 1965 (“ICSID Convention”),
provided that the Party is a party to such Convention; or

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 61

(ii) to the Additional Facility of the Centre, if the Centre is
not available; or

 

(iii) in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law
(UNCITRAL); or

(iv) to any other arbitration institution, or in accordance with
any other arbitration rules, as may be mutually agreed
between the parties to the dispute.

(b) once the national or company concerned has so consented, either
party to the dispute may initiate arbitration in accordance with the
choice so specified in the consent.

Each Party hereby consents to the submission of any investment
dispute for settlement by binding arbitration in accordance with the
choice specified in the written consent of the national or company
under paragraph 3. Such consent, together with the written consent
of the national or company when given under paragraph 3 shall
satisfy the requirement for:

(a) written consent of the parties to the dispute for Purposes of
Chapter II of the ICSID Convention (Jurisdiction of the Centre) and
for purposes of the Additional Facility Rules; and

(b) an “agreement in writing” for purposes of Article II of the United
Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign
Arbitral Awards, done at New York, June 10, 1958 (“New York
Convention”).

Any arbitration under paragraph 3(a) (ii), (iii) or (iv) of this Article
shall be held in a state that is a party to the New York Convention.

Any arbitral award rendered pursuant to this Article shall be final
and binding on the parties to the dispute. Each Party undertakes to
carry our without delay the provisions of any such award and to
provide in its territory for its enforcement.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 62

E.II. The VCLT

119.

The principal relevant provisions of the VCLT are set out below:

SECTION 3. INTERPRETATION OF TREATIES

Article 31
General rule of interpretation

1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light
of its object and purpose.

2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise,
in addition to the text, including its preamble and annexes:

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made between all
the parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty;

(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties in
connection with the conclusion of the treaty and accepted by the
other parties as an instrument related to the treaty.

3.There shall be taken into account, together with the context:

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the
interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the treaty which
establishes the agreement of the parties regarding its interpretation;

(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations
between the parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is established that the
parties so intended.

Article 32
Supplementary means of interpretation

Recourse may be had to supplementary means of interpretation, including
the preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion, in
order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or
to determine the meaning when the interpretation according to article 31:

(a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or

(b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 63

F. Relief Sought

F.I. Relief Sought by the Claimants

120. In the Interim Award of December 1, 2008, the Tribunal decided as follows:

The Tribunal has jurisdiction concerning the claims as formulated by the
Claimants in their second Post Hearing Brief dated August 12, 2008, in

paragraph 116.

121. As set out in the Claimants’ Second-Round Post-Hearing Brief on Jurisdiction

(CIV, {116), the Claimants ask the Tribunal to award as follows:

116. Based on all of Claimants’ presentations, Claimants respectfully

request

@

Gi)

(ii)

(iv)

)

(vi)

the following relief in the form of an Award:

A declaration that the dispute in this case is within the
jurisdiction and competence of this Tribunal;

An order dismissing all of Respondent’s objections to the
jurisdiction and competence of the Tribunal;

A declaration that Respondent has breached its obligations
under Article II(7) of the Treaty by failing to provide to
Claimants an effective means of asserting claims and
enforcing rights with respect to their investments and
investment agreements;

A declaration that Respondent has breached its obligations
under Article II(3)(a) of the Treaty by failing to accord to
Claimants’ investments fair and equitable treatment, full
protection and security and/or by violating customary
international law;

A declaration that Respondent has breached its obligations
under Article II(3)(b) of the Treaty by impairing by arbitrary
or discriminatory measures the management, operation,
maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion, or
disposal of Claimants’ investments;

A declaration that Respondent has breached the 1973 and
1977 Agreements and has committed a denial of justice
under customary international law, and that these combined
acts constitute a violation of customary international law
related to an investment agreement, under Article VI(1)(a) of
the Treaty;

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 64

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

&

(xi)

An order that Respondent pay Claimants full compensation
and damages for its breaches of contract, violations of the
BIT and denial of justice under customary international law,
including without limitation, all damages to which TexPet
was entitled in its seven underlying cases against
Respondent in the Ecuadorian courts, including appropriate
interest until the Award is paid;

An order that Respondent pay all costs, fees and expenses of
this arbitration proceeding, including the fees and expenses
of the Tribunal and the cost and fees of Claimants’ legal
representation, plus interest thereon in accordance with the
Treaty;

An order that Respondent pay all other costs incurred by
Claimants as a result of Respondent’s violations of the
Treaty;

An order that Respondent pay pre- and post-award interest
on all amounts awarded, compounded annually; and

An order granting such other or additional relief as may be
appropriate under the Treaty or may otherwise be just and
proper, such as enhanced damages.

122. The latest statement of Relief Sought by the Claimants was set out in their Reply

Memorial on the Merits (C VI, §528), asking the Tribunal to award as follows:

528.

For the foregoing reasons, Claimants request that the Tribunal
render an award in favor of the Claimants:

@

Gi)

(ii)

(iv)

Declaring that Respondent has breached its obligations
under Article II(7) of the Treaty by failing to provide to
Claimants an effective means of asserting claims and
enforcing rights with respect to their investments and
investment agreements;

Declaring that Respondent has committed a denial of justice
under customary international law;

Declaring that Respondent has breached its obligations
under Article II(3)(a) of the Treaty by failing to accord to
Claimants’ investments fair and equitable treatment and/or
full protection and security;

Declaring that Respondent has breached its obligations
under Article II(3)(b) of the Treaty by impairing by arbitrary
or discriminatory measures the management, operation,

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 65

(v)

(vi)

(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

(x)

 

maintenance, use, enjoyment, acqu
disposal of Claimants’ investments;

ion, expansion, or

Declaring that Respondent has breached the 1973 and 1977
Agreements;

Ordering Respondent to pay Claimants full compensation
including, without limitation, the damages to which TexPet
was entitled in its seven underlying cases against
Respondent in the Ecuadorian courts, including appropriate
interest;

Ordering Respondent to pay all costs, fees and expenses of
this arbitration proceeding, including the fees and expenses
of the Tribunal and the cost and fees of legal representation,
plus interest thereon in accordance with the Treaty;

Ordering Respondent to pay all other costs and damages
incurred by Claimants as a result of Respondent’s violations
of the Treaty;

Order Respondent to pay pre- and post-award interest on all
amounts awarded, compounded annually, until the date of
payment; and

Granting such other or additional relief as may be
appropriate under the Treaty or may otherwise be just and
proper, such as enhanced damages and satisfaction.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 66

F.II. Relief Sought by the Respondent

123. As set out in the Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits (R VI, 1793-797), the

Respondent asks the Tribunal to award on the merits as follows:

793. For the foregoing reasons, the Republic hereby requests the Tribunal
to render an award in its favor:

794. The Republic respectfully requests that this Tribunal find and
declare that the Respondent has not breached any right of Claimants
conferred or created by the Treaty, customary international law, or an
investment agreement, and dismissing the claims;

795. Should the Tribunal find that the Republic has breached any such
right, finding and declaring that Claimants have suffered no compensable
loss, and dismissing the claims;

796. Ordering, pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 40 of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Claimants to pay all costs and expenses of
this arbitration proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal
and the cost of the Republic’s legal representation, plus pre-award and post-
award interest thereon; and

797. Granting such other or additional relief as may be appropriate under
the circumstances or as may otherwise be just and proper.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 67

G

124.

125.

126.

127.

128.

Factual Background

Subject to more detail in later sections regarding particular issues, the following

is a summary of the facts leading up to the present arbitration.

In 1964, the Ecuadorian Government granted oil exploration and production
rights in Ecuador’s Amazon region to TexPet through a concession contract with
TexPet’s local subsidiary. With Government consent, TexPet assigned half of its
ownership interest in the concession to Gulf, forming the Consortium. TexPet

served as operator of the Consortium’s activities.

In September 1971, Ecuador formed a governmental entity, CEPE, which was

replaced in 1989 by a successor State-owned oil company, PetroEcuador.

On August 6, 1973, TexPet and Gulf entered into a new concession contract, i.e.,
the 1973 Agreement, Exh. R-570, with Ecuador and CEPE. This new agreement
replaced the 1964 concession contract. Pursuant to the 1973 Agreement, CEPE
exercised an option to acquire a 25% ownership interest in the Consortium. Later,
it also purchased Gulf’s interest, thereby providing it with a 62.5% interest in the
Consortium. TexPet owned the remaining 37.5% interest. However, TexPet

continued to function as operator of the Consortium.

The 1973 Agreement permitted TexPet to explore and exploit oil reserves in
Ecuador’s Amazon region, but it required TexPet to provide a percentage of its
crude oil production to the Government to help meet Ecuadorian domestic
consumption needs. The Republic was entitled to set the domestic price at which
it would purchase TexPet’s required contributions. Once it satisfied its obligation
to contribute oil for domestic consumption, TexPet was free to export the
remainder of its oil at prevailing international market prices, which were
substantially higher than the domestic price. If oil was used for purposes other
than to satisfy Ecuadorian domestic consumption needs, then TexPet was entitled

to receive compensation at the international market price. The relevant portions

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 68

of the 1973 Agreement in their original Spanish and their English translation

agreed upon by the Parties are set out below:

 

 

 

Spanish Original English Translation
CLAUSULA DECIMA-NOVENA: CLAUSE 19:
ABASTECIMIENTO INTERNO LOCAL SUPPLY

19.1 Para el abastecimiento de las plantas
refinadoras e industriales establecidas 0 que se
establecieren en el Pafs, el Ministerio del Ramo
podra exigir a los contratistas, cuando lo juzgue
necesario, el suministro de un porcentaje uniforme
del petréleo que les pertenece y efectuar entre ellos
las compensaciones econémicas que estime
convenientes para que esas plantas se abastezcan
con el petrdleo crudo que sea el més adecuado, en
raz6n de su calidad y ubicacién.

   

El porcentaje a que se refiere el inciso anterior se
aplicaré a todos los productores del Pais, incluyendo
a CEPE y se determinara trimestralmente
dividiendo el consumo interno nacional en barriles
por dia entre la producci6n total que corresponde a
dichos prod también en barriles
por dia y multiplicando el resultado por cien.

Se entiende que no existe obligacién alguna para
utilizar el petréleo que corresponde al Estado segtin
el Articulo cuarenta y seis de la Ley de
Hidrocarburos, en el consumo interno del Pais.

19.2 Los i se a

si el ministerio del Ramo lo pidiere, su parte
proporcional, de cualquier voltimen [sic] de petrdleo
crudo que fuese necesario para la produccién de
derivados destinados al consumo interno del Pais,
calculada de acuerdo a lo previsto en el numeral
anterior de esta cldusula. Esta obligacién de los
contratistas no serd limitada por las disposiciones
del numeral 19.3 de esta cldusula.

19.3 En el caso de que la plantas refinadoras,
industriales 0 petroquimicas ubicadas en el Pais
elaboren derivados para la exportacién y si para el
efecto fuere necesario el suministro de un volimen
[sic] adicional de crudo, después de haberse
utilizado en dichas plantas todo el petréleo que
corresponde al Estado de acuerdo con el Articulo
cuarenta y seis de la Ley de Hidrocarburos y el que
produzca o corresponda a CEPE por cualquier
concepto, el Ministerio del Ramo podrd exigir a los
contratistas, del crudo que les pertenece, un

je uniforme en relacién al exigido a los

 

19.1 For the supply of refining and industrial plants
established or which may be established in the
country, the respective Ministry may require from
the contractors, when it deems it necessary, the
supply of a uniform percentage of the oil belonging
to them, and make the economic compensations it
considers appropriate between them in order that
such plants may be supplied with the crude oil
which is the most appropriate by reason of its
quality and location.

The percentage referred to in the preceding
paragraph shall be applied to all producers in the
country, including CEPE, and will be determined
quarterly by dividing the national domestic
consumption in barrels per day by the total

ion cor ing to such also
expressed in barrels per day, and multiplying the
result by 100.

It is understood that there is no obligation
whatsoever to use oil corresponding to the State
pursuant to Article 46 of the Hydrocarbons Law in
the internal consumption of the country.

19.2 The agree to supply, if the
respective Ministry so requests, their proportionate
part of whatever quantity of crude oil may be
necessary for the production of derivatives for the
internal consumption of the country, calculated in
accordance with the provisions of the preceding
numbered paragraph of this clause. This obligation
of the contractors shall not be limited by the
provisions of paragraph 19.3 of this clause.

 

19.3 In the event that the refining, industrial or
petrochemical plants located in the country
manufacture derivatives for export and if the supply
of an additional quantity or crude should be
necessary for that purpose, after all oil
corresponding to the State in accordance with
Article 46 of the Hydrocarbons Law and that which
is produced by or corresponds to CEPE for any
reason has been utilized in said plants, the
respective Ministry may require of the contractors,
from the crude that belongs to them, a percentage
equal to that required of the other prod in the

 

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits

69

 

 

 

demas productores del Pais. Tal porcentaje sera
calculado dividiendo el mencionado voltimen [sic]
adicional, expresado en barriles por dia, para la
produccién total del Pais, después de deducir el
voltimen [sic] total que produzca 0 corresponda a
CEPE por cualquier concepto, también expresado
en barriles por dia y multiplicando el resultado por
cien. Tal porcentaje se aplicaré a la produccién total
del area de los contratistas excluyendo la
participacién parcial o total que haya ejercido
CEPE, segtin la cldusula quincuagésima segunda de
este Contrato y el voltimen [sic] resultante, sera tal
que permita disponer, para la exportacién por parte
de los contratistas, de un volumen de crudo de no
menos del cuarenta y nueve por ciento del petréleo
total producido en el area del contrato.

19.4 El Estado autorizara a los contratistas la
exportacién del petréleo que les corresponda, una
vez satisfechas las necesidades del Pafs de acuerdo
con lo establecido en los numerales anteriores de
esta cldusula y en la 26.1.

CLAUSULA VIGESIMA: PRECIOS DEL
PETROLEO PARA REFINERIAS O
INDUSTRIAS

20.1 Los precios de los diversos tipos de petréleo
crudo que se requieran para las refinerias 0
industrias de hidrocarburos establecidas en el Pais,
destinadas al consumo interno de derivados, seran
los sefialados por el Ministerio del Ramo y para su
determinacién se tomardn en cuenta los costos de
produccién incluyendo las amortizaciones, tarifas
de transporte y una utilidad razonable.

20.2 Los precios de los diversos tipos de petréleo
crudo que se requieran para las refinerias 0
industrias de hidrocarburos establecidas en el Pais,
destinados a la elaboracién de derivados 0
productos de exportaci6n, serdn convenidos de
acuerdo a los precios del petréleo crudo en el
mercado internacional.

 

(Exh. C-4)

 

country. Such percentage shall be calculated by
dividing the said additional quantity, expressed in
barrels per day, by the total production of the
country, after deducting the total quantity produced
by or corresponding to CEPE for any reason, also
expressed in barrels per day, and multiplying the
result by 100. Such percentage shall be applied to
the total production from the contractors’ area,
excluding the partial or total participation elected by
CEPE, pursuant to Clause 52 of this contract, and
the resulting volume shall be such that will permit
availability, for export by the contractors, of a
volume of crude not less than 49% of the total oil
produced in the contract area.

19.4 The State will authorize the contractors to

export the oil that corresponds to them once the

requirements of the country are satisfied in

accordance with the provisions of the preceding

numbered paragraphs of this clause and paragraph
6.1.

CLAUSE 20:
OIL PRICES FOR REFINERIES OR
INDUSTRIES

20.1 Prices of the various types of crude oil required
for hydrocarbon refineries or industries established
in the country, for internal consumption of
derivatives, shall be those determined by the
respective Ministry, and for their determination
production costs including amortization,
transportation tariffs and a reasonable profit shall be
taken into account.

20.2 Prices of the various types of crude oil required
for the hydrocarbon refineries or industries
established in the country for the production of
derivatives or products for export shall be agreed
upon in accordance with the prices of crude oil on
the international market.

(Exh. R-570; Tr. II at 947:19-949:5)

 

129.

On December 16, 1977, the Republic, CEPE, and TexPet signed a supplemental

agreement to the 1973 Agreement (the 1977 Agreement, Exh. R-3). The relevant

portions of the 1977 Agreement in their original Spanish and their English

translation agreed upon by the Parties are set out below:

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits

70

 

 

Spanish Original

English Translation

 

 

OBJETO DEL CONVENIO.-
EI presente convenio tiene por objeto:

- Promover la exploracién tendiente al
descubrimiento de nuevas reservas de petréleo;

- Desarrollar en forma integral el area del
contrato de 6 de agosto de 1973, a fin de
incorporar a la produccién petrolera nacional
nuevos campos hidrocarburiferos:

  

- Continuar realizando un adecuado
mantenimiento de los pozos productivos, de
conformidad con las ificaci que
aconseja la técnica;

- Incentivar la inversién del consorcio en
programas de recuperacién secundaria y métodos
mejorados de produccién; y,

- Lograr un incremento de la produccién de
petréleo, siempre dentro de las normas de
conservacién de reservas establecidas por el
Ministerio de Recursos Naturales y Energéticos.

L.]
Petréleo destinado a Consumo Interno

De conformidad con lo que dispone el articulo 31
de la Ley de Hidrocarburos y la cléusula 19 del
contrato de exploracién y explotacién de
hidrocarburos suscrito entre el Gobierno
Nacional y las compafifas Texaco Petroleum
Company y Ecuadorian Gulf Oil Company, el 6
de agosto de 1973, el consorcio CEPE-Texaco
Petroleum Company suministrara las cantidades
de petréleo crudo que sean necesarias para el
consumo interno del pais.

La Direccién General de Hidrocarburos, en forma
trimestral y con quince dias hdbiles de
anticipacién al inicio de cada trimestre fijaré un
estimado del Consumo Nacional Interno. Esto es,
el volumen de crudo a ser procesado en las
refinerias, menos el volumen de productos
exportables y mas el crudo de compensacién.

EI volumen de productos exportables sera
multiplicado por el cuociente que resulte de dividir
el precio promedio ponderado de las exportaciones
de productos de la Corporacién Estatal Petrolera
Ecuatoriana en el trimestre anterior, por el precio
promedio ponderado de las ventas de petrdleo
crudo realizadas en dicho trimestre anterior, por la
misma Corporacién Estatal.

 

OBJECT OF THE AGREEMENT.-
The herein agreement has the object of, namely:

- Promoting the exploration tending to the
discovery of new oil reserves;

- Developing in an integral way, the area of the
contract of August 6 of 1973, in order to
incorporate new hydrocarbon fields to the
national oil production;

- Continuing with the performance of an
appropriate maintenance of the productive wells,
in with the ifi that the
technique advised;

- Fostering the investment of the Consortium in
programs of secondary recovery and improved
methods of production; and,

- Achieving an increase of the production of oil,
always within the rules of conservation of
reserves established by the Ministry of Energy
and Natural Resources.

Ll

Oil destined to Internal Consumption

In accordance with what is set forth in article 31
of the Hydrocarbons Law and clause 19 of the
Contract of Exploration and Exploitation of
Hydrocarbons, subscribed between the National
Government and the Companies Texaco
Petroleum Company and Ecuadorian Gulf Oil
Company, on August 6 of 1973, the Consortium
CEPE-Texaco Petroleum Company shall supply
the crude oil amounts that are necessary for the
internal consumption of the country.

The General Hydrocarbons Directorate, quarterly
and with fifteen business days in advance to the
initiation of each quarter shall fix an estimate of
the National Internal Consumption. This is, the
volume of crude to be processed in the refineries,
less the volume of exportable products and plus
the crude oil of compensation.

 

The volume of exportable goods shall be
multiplied by the coefficient that results from
dividing the weighted average price of the
exports of products of the Ecuadorian State Oil
Company in the previous quarter, for [sic] the
average weighted price of the sales of crude oil
performed in such quarter above mentioned, by
the same State Company.

 

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 71

 

 

En ambos casos, los precios serén ajustados a
pago al contado. (No mas de 20 dias laborales de
crédito.) En los veinte dfas posteriores a la
finalizaci6n de cada trimestre, la misma
Direccién realizar la reliquidacién respectiva del
Consumo Nacional Interno segiin la definicién
que antecede, tomando para ello los datos reales
durante el trimestre sujeto a reliquidacién. Los
saldos que resulten de tal reliquidacién se
imputardn a los 90 dfas siguientes a la fecha de
tal reliquidacién, haciéndose los ajustes que
correspondan.

 

Los productos exportables serén de propiedad
exclusiva de la Corporacién Estatal Petrolera

In both cases, the prices shall be adjusted to cash
payment. (No more than 20 business days of
credit). In the following twenty days to the end of
each quarter, the same Directorate shall perform
the corresponding reliquidation of the National
Internal Consumption according to the definition
above mentioned, taking for that the real data
during the quarter subject to reliquidation. The
balances that result of such reliquidation shall be
allocated the [sic] to 90 following days to the
date of such reliquidation, performing the
corresponding adjustments.

The exportable products shall be exclusive
property of the Ecuadorian Oil State Company.

 

Ecuatoriana.

(Exh. R-3)

(Exh. R-3; Tr. II at 949:1-10)

 

 

130.

131.

132.

On March 5, 1987, an earthquake hit Ecuador. This earthquake damaged the
Trans-Ecuadorian pipeline and effectively severed the connection between the
inland oil fields on one end and the coastal refineries and the port of Balao on the
other. As a result, crude oil production by the Consortium was “shut in” and
therefore dropped significantly. The Trans-Ecuadorian pipeline was repaired and

normal production resumed by August 1987.

During this period of approximately six months, the Consortium delivered
whatever oil it could transport to the appropriate refineries or the port of Balao
through an alternative pipeline known as the Colombian pipeline. These
deliveries included the entire amount of crude oil produced during this period and
all the crude oil held in storage. The Republic, through CEPE, bartered fuel oil
from the Esmeraldas Refinery in order to obtain derivative products to meet

domestic consumption during this time.

After the Trans-Ecuadorian pipeline was repaired and normal crude oil
production and transport resumed, the Republic required TexPet, among other
producers, to deliver approximately 1.4 million barrels of crude, the proceeds of
which were used to reimburse CEPE and the Government for the cost of the fuel

oil CEPE had bartered during the six-month period the Trans-Ecuadorian

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 72

 

133.

134.

135.

136.

137.

pipeline was inoperative. TexPet was compensated at the domestic price for this

requisitioned crude.

In 1990, PetroEcuador took over as the Consortium’s operator. Despite the
parties’ efforts, no agreement was reached to extend the 1973 Agreement, which
was set to expire on June 6, 1992. TexPet, PetroEcuador, and the Republic thus
commenced negotiations on a settlement of all issues relating to the 1973
Agreement and its termination. At that time, TexPet also began winding up its

operations in Ecuador.

Between December 1991 and December 1993, during the settlement negotiations,
TexPet filed seven breach-of-contract cases against the Ecuadorian Government

in Ecuadorian courts in which it claimed over US$ 553 million in damages.

The cases alleged breaches by Ecuador of its obligations to TexPet under the
1973 and 1977 Agreements, as well as related violations of Ecuadorian law. The
Claimants allege in five of these cases that the Respondent misstated domestic
needs and consumption, and thereby appropriated more oil than it was entitled to
acquire at the domestic market price under the Concession Agreements. One
further case concerned a force majeure issue arising from the events following
the 1987 earthquake, and the last one concerned an alleged breach of the 1986

Refinancing Agreement.

On December 14, 1994, the Republic, PetroEcuador, and TexPet reached an
agreement, embodied in the 1994 MOU, Exh. R-22, settling any outstanding
environmental remediation claims that the Republic or PetroEcuador might have
had against TexPet. It also set out TexPet’s obligations vis-a-vis the
environmental remediation of certain areas in the Oriente region where the

Consortium had operated.

On May 4, 1995, the Republic, PetroEcuador, and TexPet entered into the 1995
Remediation Agreement, Exh. R-23, to replace the 1994 MOU and clarify
TexPet’s remediation responsibilities and the terms of its release. Attached to the
1995 Remediation Agreement was a “Scope of Work” schedule that TexPet and

its contractors were obligated to follow. In September 1995, the Scope of Work

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 73

138.

139.

140.

141.

was further detailed in the 1995 Remedial Action Plan, Exh. R-25, accepted by
the parties. Pursuant to the 1995 Remediation Agreement and the 1995 Remedial
Action Plan, TexPet’s contractors conducted remediation of the specified areas

between 1995 and 1998.

On November 17, 1995, the Republic, PetroEcuador, and TexPet reached an
agreement that resolved most of their outstanding issues, i.e., the 1995 Global
Settlement, Exh. R-27. In that agreement, the parties released each other from
most of the remaining obligations arising out of the 1973 Agreement. The 1995
Global Settlement confirmed, at Article 2.2, that the 1973 Agreement “ended, on
account of the expiration of the period of time granted, on June 6, 1992,” and, at
Article 4.5, that “all the rights and obligations of each of the parties with respect
to the other and deriving from the [1973 Agreement] [...] are terminated.” The
release in the 1995 Global Settlement, however, excluded environmental
obligations that were already dealt with in other agreements. The release also
excluded, at Article 4.6, all pending claims which “exist[ed] judicially between

the parties,” which included TexPet’s seven court cases.

On May 11, 1997, the BIT between the United States and Ecuador entered into

force.

Previously, in November 1993, during the course of settlement negotiations
between TexPet and the Republic, a group of residents from the regions in which
TexPet had operated the concessions brought a class action under the name
Aguinda v. Texaco, Inc. in the United States District Court for the Southern
District of New York (the Aguinda action); Texaco, Inc. was the ultimate parent
company of TexPet. The action claimed compensation for environmental harm
caused by TexPet as well as extensive equitable relief and an injunction
restraining TexPet from entering into further activities that risked environmental

harm.

The Aguinda plaintiffs argued that they could obtain the class action relief they
were seeking only under United States law and from a court in the United States.
TexPet moved to dismiss the Aguinda action on several grounds, including for

forum non conveniens. This required that the parties to that litigation address the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 74

142.

143.

adequacy of the Ecuadorian courts as an alternative forum for the Aguinda action.
During the course of jurisdictional debates at first instance and various levels of
appeal over a period ranging from December 17, 1993, to April 7, 2000, TexPet’s
counsel maintained in expert affidavits and briefs, inter alia, that the Ecuadorian
courts were efficient and fair. In further appeals through until a final judgment
was rendered in 2002, TexPet continued to argue the adequacy of Ecuadorian
courts as an alternative forum. The Aguinda action was ultimately dismissed
from U.S. courts on grounds of forum non conveniens. The same plaintiffs then
commenced an action against TexPet in 2003 in a court seated in the town of

Lago Agrio, Ecuador (the Lago Agrio action).

Since the close of the Aguinda case, a number of events have occurred involving
the Ecuadorian judiciary. On November 25, 2004, Ecuador’s Congress passed
aresolution finding that the Constitutional Court and Electoral Court were
illegally appointed in 2003. It dismissed the members of both. On December 5,
2004, a special session of Ecuador’s Congress dismissed the entire Supreme
Court. The same session of Congress also impeached six of the recently-removed
judges of the Constitutional Court. On April 15, 2005, President Guttiérrez
declared a state of emergency, suspending certain civil rights and dismissing all
the newly-appointed judges of the Supreme Court. President Guttiérrez was later
ousted and fled the country. During this period, the UN Special Rapporteur on
the independence of judges was dispatched to Ecuador to assess the situation and
make recommendations. The Organization of American States’ Mission in
Ecuador likewise sent representatives to the country. Soon thereafter, the
Ecuadorian Congress nullified the 2004 resolution dismissing the Supreme Court

judges, but did not reappoint these former judges.

On April 25, 2005, Ecuador’s Congress approved amendments to the Organic
Law of the Judiciary which introduced a new mechanism to appoint judges to the
Supreme Court. Members of the international community monitored and
supported the new selection process and new Supreme Court judges were
appointed in November 2005. Some observers, such as the Andean Community
and the Red De La Justicia, approved of these reforms as re-establishing the

independence and impartiality of the judiciary, while others, including the OAS

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 75

Mission to Ecuador and the UN Special Rapporteur in his Preliminary Report,

remained critical of these efforts.'

144. Following the conclusion of the process re-constituting the Supreme Court, the

145.

146.

UN Special Rapporteur submitted a further “Follow-up Report” on January 31,

2006, in which he gave a generally positive assessment of that process:

Pursuant to the recommendations made by the Special Rapporteur in his
preliminary report, the Ecuadorian institutions set up a Qualifications
Committee which selected the new judges of the Supreme Court in a
transparent manner, with public oversight, under the supervision of
international and national bodies and with the participation of judges from
other countries in the region.”

Nonetheless, the Special Rapporteur continued to criticize certain aspects of the

Ecuadorian judiciary and highlighted “the urgent need to [further] reform the

whole of the judiciary.”>

On December 21, 2006, the Claimants filed their Notice of Arbitration
commencing the current arbitration proceedings. At that time, six of the
Claimants’ seven cases were pending at first instance. The seventh case had been
recently dismissed on the grounds of abandonment. The dismissal was later

overturned on appeal.

In January 2007, newly-elected President Rafael Correa called for a referendum
to establish a Constituent Assembly to create a new constitution. Despite initial
opposition by the Congress and Electoral Court, the holding of the referendum
was eventually approved. However, when President Correa modified the statute
controlling the Constituent Assembly to be proposed in the referendum, and the
Electoral Court approved President Correa’s changes, the Congress removed the

President of the Electoral Court in an apparent effort to block the referendum. In

" INTER-AMERICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS, OAS MISSION TO ECUADOR, REPORT TO THE
PERMANENT COUNCIL ON THE SITUATION IN ECUADOR, May 20, 2005; LEANDRO DESPOUY, REPORT
OF THE SPECIAL RAPPORTEUR ON THE INDEPENDENCE OF JUDGES AND LAWYERS, PRELIMINARY
REPORT ON A MISSION TO ECUADOR, Mar. 29, 2005.

2 LEANDRO DESPOUY, FOLLOW-UP REPORT SUBMITTED BY THE SPECIAL RAPPORTEUR ON THE
INDEPENDENCE OF JUDGES AND LAWYERS, FOLLOW-UP MISSION TO ECUADOR, January 31, 2006, at
p.2.

3 Id. 436.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 76

147.

148.

149.

support of the Executive, the military and police then physically prevented the
Congress from assembling in order to overturn President Correa’s measure. Some
of the ousted members of the Congress then sought relief from the Constitutional
Court, which eventually ruled that their ouster was illegal. The new Congress
members who had replaced them in the meantime, reacted by dismissing the
entire Constitutional Court and shortly thereafter selecting a member of President
Correa’s political party to head a new Constitutional Court. In the midst of the
above events, on April 15, 2007, the referendum in favor of establishing

a Constituent Assembly passed in a popular vote.

On September 30, 2007, the members of the Constituent Assembly were elected.
On November 27, 2007, the Constituent Assembly dismissed the Congress and
proclaimed that it held absolute authority. In particular, it claimed the power to
remove and sanction members of the judiciary that violate its decisions. It also
undertook a mandate of judicial reform, criticizing the corruption of the judiciary.
On December 14, 2007, the Constituent Assembly introduced a cap on the
salaries of all public officials, by mandating that they could not earn more than
the President. This measure had the effect, inter alia, of reducing judges’ salaries

by more than 50%. A number of judges resigned as a consequence.

On January 8, 2008, the Constitutional Court rejected a challenge to the
Constituent Assembly’s absolute powers. The Constitutional Court held that the
Constituent Assembly’s decisions were not subject to challenge by any other
organ of government. In February 2008, the President of the Supreme Court of
Ecuador concurred in public statements that the Constituent Assembly enjoys
absolute authority and that, because of this, the rule of law is only a partial reality
in Ecuador: “No podemos cubrir el sol con un dedo; la realidad juridica y
constitucional que vive el pais es una realidad a medias, no vivimos en toda su
plenitud en un estado de derecho” [“We cannot deny it: the judicial and
constitutional reality in our country is a partial reality; we are not fully living in a

state of law”] (Exh. C-104).

Of TexPet’s seven Ecuadorian court cases at issue, one remains pending at first

instance, two are the subject of pending appeals, two have been dismissed and are

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 77

now closed, and two have been the subject of recent decisions. Several of the
cases have seen action subsequent to service of the Notice of Arbitration in the

present case.

Table 1. TexPet’s Seven Cases in Ecuadorian Courts*

 

 

Case | Subject Date Procedural History Current

No. Matter Commenced Status

23-91 | 1973 17 Dec 1991 | Evidentiary phase (to Aug 1995) Closed as of 9
Agreements Auto para sentencia (13 Dec 2002) June 2008
(Esmeraldas Auto para sentencia (29 Jan 2004)
Refinery) Declaration of nullity of 13 Dec 2002

and 29 Jan 2004 rulings (17 June 2004)
Dismissed - prescription (29 Jan 2007)
Appeal filed (9 Feb 2007)

Appeal dismissed (7 Mar 2008)
Cassation filed (4 Apr 2008)

Cassation dismissed (14 May 2008)
Fact appeal filed (16 May 2008)

Fact appeal dismissed (9 June 2008)

 

 

152-93 | 1973/1977 10 Dec 1993 | Evidentiary phase (to mid-1996) Pending at
Agreements Auto para sentencia (22 May 2002) first instance
(Esmeraldas
Refinery)

7-92 1973 15 Apr 1992. | Date set for appointment of experts (5 _| Closed as of
Agreements May 1993) 16 July 2008
(Amazonas Motion for recusal of the President of
Refinery) the Supreme Court (4 Mar 1994)

Order recusing the President of the
Supreme Court (6 May 1994)
Declared abandoned (9 Apr 2007)
Appeal filed (25 Apr 2007)

Appeal dismissed (20 May 2008)
Cassation filed (27 May 2008)
Cassation dismissed (24 June 2008)
Fact appeal filed (30 June 2008)
Fact appeal dismissed (16 July 2008)

 

153-93 | 1973/1977 14 Dec 1993 | Expert reports filed (31 Oct 1996) Judgment at
Agreements Auto para sentencia (12 Oct 1998) first instance
(Amazonas Auto para sentencia (22 May 2002)

Refinery) Judgment for Government of Ecuador

(14 July 2009)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

* The information included in this table reflects the last information provided by the Parties. It should
be noted that the order of cases presented in this table also differs from the table found in the
equivalent section of the Tribunal’s Interim Award of December 1, 2008. A further Table of Cases
containing a more detailed procedural history of TexPet’s cases in the Ecuadorian courts is attached to
this Award as Appendix 1.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 78

150.

151.

152.

 

154-93 | 1973 14 Dec 1993 | Evidentiary phase (to 8 July 1997) Judgment at

Agreement Auto para sentencia (8 Oct 1997) first instance
(Imported Auto para sentencia (21 May 2002)
products) Judgment for Government of Ecuador

(10 Sept 2009)

 

8-92 1973 15 Apr 1992. | Motion for recusal of the President of _ | On appeal
Agreement the Supreme Court (4 Mar 1994)
(Force Order recusing the President of the
majeure — Supreme Court (8 Jun 1994)
earthquake) Evidentiary phase (to Mar 1995)

Auto para sentencia (18 July 1995)
Declared abandoned (2 Oct 2006)
Overturned on appeal (22 Jan 2008)
Dismissed - prescription (1 July 2008)
Appeal filed (2 July 2008)

 

 

983-03 | 1986 15 Apr 1992 | Evidentiary phase (to Mar 1995) On appeal
(prev. | Refinancing Transferred btw courts (Oct 2003)
6-92) | Agreement Auto para sentencia (6 Feb 2007)

(Unpaid Judgment for TexPet (26 Feb 2007)

Interest) Appeal filed - CEPE (1 Mar 2007)

Appeal filed - TexPet (12 Mar 2007)

 

 

 

 

 

The first Esmeraldas Refinery claim, Case 23-91, was filed on December 17,
1991. In early August 1995, the evidentiary phase of the case was completed. In
December 2002 and January 2004, autos para sentencia were issued. The court
subsequently dismissed the case on January 29, 2007, on grounds of prescription
under a statute that provides for a two-year prescription period for retail sales. On
February 9, 2007, TexPet appealed that decision. On March 7, 2008, the
dismissal was upheld on appeal. On April 4, 2008, TexPet filed a cassation
appeal. This was rejected on May 14, 2008. On May 16, 2008, TexPet filed a fact

appeal. This was rejected on June 9, 2008. The case is now closed.

The second Esmeraldas Refinery claim, Case 152-93, was filed on December 10,
1993. The evidentiary phase of the case was completed by mid-1996 and an auto
para sentencia, indicating that the trial was closed and ready for judgment, was

issued on May 22, 2002. To date, no decision at first instance has been made.

The first Amazonas Refinery claim, Case 7-92, was filed on April 15, 1992. On
May 5, 1993, the court set a date for the experts to officially accept their
appointments and to conduct a judicial inspection of documents. As explained in
paragraph 258, below, the official acceptance did not occur. Between July 1993

and February 2007, TexPet repeatedly requested that the court set a new date for

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 79

 

153.

154.

155.

156.

the experts to accept their appointments and proceed with the evidentiary phase.
The case was dismissed on April 9, 2007, on the basis that the case had been
abandoned by the Claimants. This dismissal was appealed by the Claimants on
April 25, 2007. On May 20, 2008, TexPet’s appeal was rejected. On May 27,
2008, TexPet filed a cassation appeal. This was rejected on June 24, 2008. On
June 30, 2008, TexPet filed a fact appeal. This was rejected on July 16, 2008.

The case is now closed.

The second Amazonas Refinery claim, Case 153-93, was filed on December 14,
1993. In this case, all expert reports were submitted by October 31, 1996, and an
auto para sentencia was issued on October 12, 1998, and again on May 22, 2002.
On July 14, 2009, the President of the Provincial Court of Pichincha (formerly
the Superior Court of Quito) rendered a judgment in favor of the Government of

Ecuador.

The Imported Products claim, Case 154-93, was filed on December 14, 1993. In
that case, the evidentiary phase was completed by July 8, 1997, and an auto para
sentencia was issued on October 8, 1997, and again on May 21, 2002. On
September 10, 2009, the President of the Provincial Court of Pichincha (formerly
the Superior Court of Quito) rendered a judgment in favor of the Government of

Ecuador.

The Force Majeure claim, Case 8-92, was filed on April 15, 1992. By March
1995, the evidentiary phase of the case was completed. An auto para sentencia
was issued in that case on July 18, 1995. Following the Notice of Arbitration, the
case was dismissed by the court for failure to prosecute the claims on October 2,
2006. That dismissal was reversed on January 22, 2008, on the grounds that an
auto para sentencia had already been issued. The case was sent back to the court
of first instance and was dismissed again on July 1, 2008, on grounds of
prescription under a statute that provides for two-year prescription for retail
consumer sales. On July 2, 2008, TexPet appealed the latest decision and that

appeal remains pending.

The last claim, made under the Refinancing Agreement, was filed on April 15,

1992 and originally numbered Case 6-92. The evidentiary phase was completed

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 80

by March 1995. In October 2003, the court decided that it did not have
jurisdiction to hear the case and sent the case to a different court (and
renumbered it Case 983-03). The new court issued an auto para sentencia on
February 6, 2007. Following the Notice of Arbitration, on February 26, 2007, the
court found in favor of TexPet. However, the judgment stipulated that the claim
was to be paid to the “legal representative” of TexPet. According to the
Claimants, this has prevented them from collecting on the judgment because,
under Ecuadorian law, only domestic corporations may have “legal
representatives,” while foreign corporations act only through “attorneys-in-fact.”

Both parties have appealed the judgment and the appeal remains pending.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 81

157.

158.

159.

H. Considerations of the Tribunal

The Tribunal has given consideration to the extensive factual and legal arguments
presented by the Parties in their written and oral submissions, all of which the
Tribunal has found helpful. In this Award, the Tribunal discusses the arguments
of the Parties most relevant for its decisions. The Tribunal’s reasons, without
repeating all the arguments advanced by the Parties, address what the Tribunal
itself considers to be the determinative factors required to decide the issues

arising in this case.

H.I. Preliminary Considerations

Applicable Law

The procedural law to be applied by the Tribunal consists of the procedural
provisions of the BIT (particularly its Article VI), the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules and, since The Hague is the place of arbitration, any mandatory provisions

of Dutch arbitration law.

The substantive law to be applied by the Tribunal consists of the substantive
provisions of the BIT and any relevant provisions of other sources of
international law. The Tribunal notes that the VCLT, while being treaty law, has
not been ratified by the United States. Therefore, both it and the ILC Draft
Articles may only apply in the present case insofar as they reflect customary
international law. However, neither Party has disputed the relevant provisions of
the VCLT and ILC Draft Articles as authoritative statements of customary
international law. Indeed, both Parties have relied on them in these proceedings.
In addition to the above sources, the national law of Ecuador may be relevant

with regard to certain issues.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 82

2.

Treaty Interpretation and Relevance of Decisions of other

Tribunals

160.

161.

162.

In the legal arguments made in their written and oral submissions, the Parties rely
on numerous decisions of other courts and tribunals. Accordingly, it is
appropriate for the Tribunal to make certain general preliminary observations in

this regard.

First of all, the Tribunal considers it useful to make clear from the outset that it
regards its task in these proceedings as the very specific one of applying the
relevant provisions of the BIT as far as necessary in order to decide on the relief
sought by the Parties. In order to do so, the Tribunal must, as required by the
“General rule of interpretation” of Article 31 VCLT, interpret the BIT’s
provisions in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to
them in their context and in light of the BIT’s object and purpose. The “context”
referred to in the first paragraph of Article 31 is given a specific definition in the
second paragraph of Article 31 and comprises three elements: (i) the BIT’s text,
including its preamble; (ii) any agreement between the parties to the BIT in
connection with its conclusion; and (iii) any instrument which was made by one
of the parties to the BIT in connection with its conclusion and accepted by the
other party to the BIT. The “ordinary meaning” as defined above applies unless a
special meaning is to be given to a term if it is established that the parties to the

BIT so intended, as it is stated in the fourth paragraph of Article 31.

As provided in the “Supplementary means of interpretation” of Article 32 VCLT,
the Tribunal may have recourse to supplementary means of interpretation (i) in
order to confirm the meaning resulting from the application of Article 31 VCLT,
or (ii) when the interpretation according to Article 31 VCLT either leaves the
meaning ambiguous or obscure, or leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or
unreasonable. Those supplementary means of interpretation include the
preparatory work of the treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion. Thus,
recourse to the supplementary means of interpretation of Article 32 may only be

had if the situations mentioned at (i) and (ii) above occur.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 83

163.

164.

165.

It is not evident whether and if so to what extent arbitral awards are of relevance
to the Tribunal’s task. It is in any event clear that the decisions of other tribunals
are not binding on this Tribunal. The many references by the Parties to certain

arbitral decisions in their pleadings do not contradict this conclusion.

However, this does not preclude the Tribunal from considering arbitral decisions
and the arguments of the Parties based upon them, to the extent that it may find

that they shed any useful light on the issues that arise for decision in this case.

Such an examination is conducted by the Tribunal later in this Award, after the
Tribunal has considered the Parties’ contentions and arguments regarding the
various issues argued and relevant for the interpretation of the applicable BIT
provisions, while taking into account the above-mentioned specificity of the BIT

to be applied in the present case.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 84

H.II. Breach of the BIT - Liability

a)

166.

Denial of Justice under Customary International Law for Undue

Delay

Arguments by the Claimants
Although the Claimants maintain that international law governs the merits of this
dispute (C V, [{[259-266; C VIL, {[129-130), they submit that Ecuador has in fact
violated its own laws through undue delay of TexPet’s seven cases. The
Claimants argue that, contrary to the way their court cases have been treated,
Ecuadorian law requires the prompt and effective administration of justice.
Specifically, they state that “[t]he Ecuadorian courts’ undue delays and refusals
to judge TexPet’s seven cases against the [Government of Ecuador] are in clear
violation of Ecuador’s own laws governing judicial proceedings [including]
Ecuador’s 1998 Constitution, its Organic Law on the Judiciary, and its Code of
Civil Procedure” (C V, 267; Tr. II at 29:24-30:17; HC4 p. 21). For example, the
1998 Constitution at Article 23(17) lists as a fundamental right, “the right to “due
process of law and justice without delay’” (C V, 269). International treaties to
which Ecuador is party, such as the American Convention on Human Rights, also
guarantee “the right to a hearing...within a reasonable time, by a competent,
independent, and impartial tribunal...for the determination of...rights and
obligations of a civil...or any other nature”> (C V, 9271). The practice of the
Ecuadorian Supreme Court also supports the idea that “slow justice is a serious
injustice” (C V, 273). In fact, there are specific time-limits under Ecuadorian
law for a decision in verbal summary proceedings such as TexPet’s as well as
following the issuance of autos para sentencia (C V, 267, 273; C VI, 212;
Tr. II at 30:18-25; HC4 p. 21). Given both general and specific obligations of the

Ecuadorian courts to decide cases promptly, the Claimants submit that a 15-year

* American Convention on Human Rights art. 8(1), O.A.S.Treaty Series No. 36, 1144 U.N.T.S. 123,
entered into force July 18, 1978.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 85

167.

168.

169.

delay and refusal to render a judgment in their cases in violation of these norms

in fact constitutes a denial of justice under Ecuadorian law.

Passing to denial of justice under international law, the Claimants state that any
violation of customary international law automatically becomes a BIT breach by
virtue of Article II(3)(a) of the BIT, which provides that, “[i]nvestment...shall in
no case be accorded treatment less than that required by international law.” As
such, when “Ecuador violated customary international law by denying justice to

TexPet...it thereby breached its obligations under the BIT as well” (C V, 286).

The Claimants state that “[i]nternational law guarantees aliens ‘fair courts,
readily open to aliens, administering justice honestly, impartially, without bias or
political controls’” (C V, §287). They submit that “[denials] of justice...are
understood as all direct or disguised refusals of judgment, of all illegal procedural
delays and of all definite failures to enforce judgments” (C V, 298). A variety of
acts may thus constitute denials of justice, including “denial, unwarranted delay
or obstruction of access to courts, gross deficiency in the administration of
judicial or remedial process, failure to provide those guaranties which are
generally considered indispensable to the proper administration of justice, or a
manifestly unjust judgment” (C V, 289). Moreover, the minimum standard for
denial of justice is objective; a denial of justice may exist despite evidence that

the nationals of that state are similarly treated (C VII, 141-142).

More specifically, the Claimants assert that undue delay constitutes “an
independent breach of customary international law” that “may be ‘even more
ruinous’ than absolute refusal of access [to justice], because in the latter situation
the claimant knows where he stands and [can] take action accordingly” (C V,
293). The Claimants also contend that “the test to determine whether delay is
justifiable is objective. Bad faith is not required” (C V, 294, C VI, 217-220;
Tr. II at 24:10-21; HC4 p. 15). Local standards, including the backlogs in the
Ecuadorian courts cannot excuse the amount of delay suffered by TexPet (C V,
4308; C VI, [221-222). Distinctions between corporations and individuals or
between human rights cases and property rights cases are also irrelevant (C VI,

1223-236). Thus, according to the Claimants and their experts, once a delay

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 86

170.

171.

reaches a sufficient length, it will be considered undue unless it can be somehow
justified by the circumstances of the case including (1) the complexity of the case
before the court, (2) the litigants’ behavior during the proceedings, and (3) the
courts’ conduct (C V, 274; C VI, (199; Tr. II at 24:22-25:1; HC4, p.15).

The Claimants cite several cases in support of these contentions. In El Oro
Mining, the Mixed Claims Commission ruled that a delay of nine years without a
response from the court could not be justified in “[e]ven those cases of the
highest importance and of a most complicated character”® (C V, 4295). In Ruiz-
Mateos, the European Court of Human Rights deemed excessive a delay of
almost eight years from the date of institution of the action to judgment in a case
reviewing the legislative expropriation of the claimant’s business. That court
found that, in particular, a violation of domestic legal time-limits was strong
evidence of undue delay’ (C V, 4301, 305, 311). In Quintana,’ the Inter-
American Court of Human Rights ruled a delay of over ten years to constitute
“undue delay” under Article 46 of the American Convention on Human Rights,
“despite claims by the respondent (Argentina) that the case was very complex”
(C V, 303). The Claimants further cite the cases of Genie Lacayo v. Nicaragua’
and Las Palmeras v. Colombia'’ before the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights for the proposition that “unless the State provides a compelling
explanation for the delays...first-instance delay of five years or more
automatically constitutes an unreasonable delay” (C V, {{[304-305; Tr. II at
27:21-29:21; HC4 p. 18).

Applying the above principles to their situation, the Claimants note that six of
their seven claims have stood legally ready for decision since at least 1998 and

autos para sentencia were issued in five of those cases (C V, 307; Tr. II at

° El Oro Mining and Railway Company (Ltd.) Case (Great Britain v. Mexico), 5 R. INT'L ARB.
AWARDS p. 191, p. 198 (1931) [hereinafter El Oro].

7 Ruiz-Mateos v. Spain, App. No. 12952/87, 262 Eur. Ct. H. R. (Ser. A) at paras, 9-23 (1993).

® Tomas Enrique Carvallo Quintana v. Argentina, Case 11.859, Inter-Am. C.H.R., Report No. 67/01,
OEA/Ser./L/V/II.114 Doc. 5 rev. at paras. 66-76 (2001).

° Genie Lacayo v. Nicaragua (Merits), Inter-Am. Ct. H.R. (ser. C) No. 30, at para. 81 (Jan. 29, 1997).

Las Palmeras v. Colombia (Preliminary Observations), Inter-Am. Ct. H.R. (ser. C) No. 67, at para.

38 (Feb. 4, 2000).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 87

172.

1080:12-1081:7; HCS pp.59-60; C VII, {| 46-47). The last case “has lain
dormant at the inception of its evidentiary phase for more than 14 years because
of the court’s refusal to set the evidentiary stage in motion” (C V, 1316; C VII,
47). However, there is no justification for these delays. According to the
Claimants, the delay cannot be justified on the basis that the seven cases are
unduly complex. The “expert reports [...] total only 386 pages in the case with
the most voluminous expert reports (Case 152-93).” Any justification based on
complexity becomes especially weak when taking into account that the simplest
case, Case 983-03 involving simple interest calculations under the Refinancing
Agreement, has suffered the same delay as the other cases (C V, {{[276, 319;
C VI, {{200-203; Tr. II at 25:14-22, 1082:13-23; HC4 p. 16). Even if they were
deemed complex, however, the Claimants contend that “the length of the delays
alone proves TexPet’s denial-of-justice case because delays this long cannot be
considered reasonable under international law” (C V, 9317; Tr. II at 25:23-26:15,
Tr. II at 1081:8-1082:12; HC4 p. 16; HCS p.61). Cases before the IACHR, for
example, have found delays of 8 years and less than 12 years to be unjustifiable

despite the high complexity of the cases at issue (C VI, 204).

The Claimants acknowledge that the conduct of the parties during the proceeding
may be taken as a justification of delay in certain cases (C V, {{[318, 320; C VI,
205). This conduct is only relevant, though, when the plaintiff is somehow
responsible for part of the delay incurred: “[t]he relevant inquiry is whether that
litigant affirmatively contributed to the delays alleged, not whether the litigant
complained loudly enough about those delays once they occurred” (C VI, 205;
C VIII, (20, 22). In particular, they note that the Claimants’ conduct after autos
para sentencia were issued, officially acknowledging the cases as being closed
and ready for a decision, cannot in any way justify delay in rendering that
decision (C VI, 205-208; C VIII, 923). In any event, the Claimants argue that
they did diligently pursue their cases and deny that their conduct could be taken
as responsible for any delays. They cite their efforts in getting their cases to the
point of being ready for a decision, followed by numerous and continuous
requests for a judgment to which the courts were unresponsive (C V, §321; C VI,

(209; Tr. II at 26:24-27:20, 1082:24-1083:22; C VIII, 121, 24-25; HC4 p. 17).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 88

173.

174.

The Claimants instead point to evidence that the courts were directly responsible
for the delay. This evidence includes their 47 requests for decisions, the autos
para sentencia issued in five of the cases, and the fact that, out of the decisions
that have been recently rendered, most did not even rule on the merits of the case
(C V, 9279-282, 310; C VI, 9211; Tr. II at 31:1-19, 1084:15-1089:15; HC4
pp. 22-23). The Claimants also note in general that, despite six of the seven cases
being officially acknowledged as ready for a decision by 1998, no decision was
issued in any of these cases or any explanation offered for this delay until after
notice of this arbitration was transmitted to the Respondent (C V, {{[310, 322;
CVI, 211). The violation of time limits mandated for verbal summary
proceedings under Ecuadorian law are further strong evidence that the delays are
unjustified (C V, 311; C VI, 212). Looking at the particular circumstances of
these cases, the Claimants highlight two further factors: the cases involve large
claims against the Government in a situation where judicial independence has
been compromised and the cases “have been systematically delayed in the first
instance” by “three different courts and 15 different judges” (C V, {[283-284;
Tr. II at 37:2-8).

The Claimants reject the Respondent’s reliance on general court congestion to
excuse the delays. The jurisprudence of the Inter-American and European Courts
of Human Rights establishes that the backlogs in the courts may explain but not
excuse the delay, including in the previously cited cases such as El Oro Mining.''
According to the opinion provided by Paulsson in this arbitration “[t]here is no
authority supporting the proposition that backlog or congestion in a domestic
court system operates as a general defence to a denial of justice claim.”"? In fact,
to accept such a contention would “undermine the entire aim of developing an
international law minimum standard” (C VI, {{[238-240, 243-249; Tr. II at 33:8-
25, 1089:20-1090:1, 1092:4-17; HC4 p. 27; HCS p.70; C VII, 948; C VIII, (2,
9-10).

"' EL Oro, supra note 6.

2 Opinion of Jan Paulsson, para. 36 (Nov. 2008), Exh. C-646 [hereinafter Paulsson Opinion].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 89

175.

176.

177.

To the extent that court congestion could be relevant to determining if a delay
was reasonable, the Claimants submit that the Respondent has neither established
the existence of a backlog, nor the necessary diligence of Ecuador in addressing
the alleged backlog. The Respondent’s arguments focus on congestion and efforts
to address congestion at the Supreme Court and certain appellate courts, but say
nothing about the specific caseload before the President or Subrogate President of
the Supreme Court or the other courts before which TexPet had cases (C VI,
(1241-242; Tr. II at 351:2-352:10, 826:6-827:1, 1090:1-1090:18; C VIII, {[3-5).
The Respondent’s argument is further contradicted by the statistical analysis
performed by Claimants’ expert. In addition to refuting the idea of an “explosion
of litigation” as claimed by the Respondent, that analysis shows that the
Claimants’ cases were delayed for much longer periods than comparable cases
and concludes that they were singled out: it is highly unlikely that TexPet’s cases
could have taken as long as they have to decide without deliberate action to delay
them (C VI, {{[250-260). Moreover, the data presented by the Respondent is at
odds with their congestion argument as pertains to the courts seized of the
Claimants’ actions. Those figures show that the Ecuadorian district courts were
resolving approximately 1,000 cases per year, while only approximately 50 to
350 cases were being filed annually before either the President and Subrogate
President of the Supreme Court or before the President of the Superior Court of
Quito during this period (Tr. If at 31:20-33:7, 34:17-36:3; 392:23-396:3,
1090:19-1092:3; HC4 pp. 25-26; HCS pp. 68-69; C VII, 149).

The data provided at the hearing by the Respondent’s expert is also unavailing.
The sample size in that data on the cases filed and resolved was admitted to be
too small to make meaningful conclusions. The data also “double-counts” certain
cases and does not allow for year-to-year comparisons to be made, only
comparisons in two-year groups. For the Claimants, this portrayal is misleading
since it attempts to show a progressive increase in the clearance rate over two-
year periods when the rate in any one year may have actually decreased

significantly. (Tr. II at 836:3-839:8; C VIII, {6-7).

The Claimants further argue that the Respondent’s argument is unsustainable

when looking at the actual numbers of cases filed and resolved during the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 90

b)

178.

179.

relevant time periods. For example, the Claimants note that in the period between
1994 and 1996, the President of the Supreme Court only received 30 cases and
only resolved two cases. According to the Claimants, the Respondent’s defense
depends “on the notion that the relevant courts faced a backlog through no fault
of their own.” Yet, the data provides “not evidence of a backlogged docket, but of
an unproductive and inefficient court” (C VIII, 8). In sum, the Respondent has
failed to prove either the existence of court congestion or the exhaustive and

systematic efforts necessary to sustain their arguments.

Arguments by the Respondent
As a preliminary point, the Respondent argues that denial of justice is a grave
charge under international law that requires proof of exceptional circumstances.
In particular, they contend that the Claimants must show clear and convincing
evidence rebutting the presumption of regularity of the decisions of national
judiciaries and demonstrating highly egregious conduct (R V, {{[32-35; R VI,
[1 16-125; Tr. If at 128:10-22; HR4 pp. 77-82; R VIL, 16-7).

The Respondents argue that a presumption exists as to the correctness of the
conduct of a State’s judicial system. They cite authority to the effect that “review
of that conduct should always proceed from a posture of great deference” and
“the reviewing court must not sit as a ‘court of appeal’ over the foreign court”
(RV, 936-38). According to the Respondent, this presumption requires the
Claimants to prove more than a wrong and a loss pursuant to the ordinary burden.
It sets a higher threshold for denial of justice. While the Respondent
acknowledges that the standard for what conduct constitutes denial of justice has
not been clearly defined in the jurisprudence, it contends that it does uniformly
require proof of some form of egregious conduct that amounts to bad faith and
“shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of judicial propriety” (R V, (39-44; Tr. II
at 107:6-108:12; HR4 pp. 3-6). Moreover, this conduct must be proven by the
Claimants with clear, convincing, and conclusive evidence. The Respondent cites

the cases of Putnam’? and El Oro Mining," as well as Freeman! and one of the

'S Ida Robinson Smith Putnam (U.S.) v. United Mexican States, Opinion of Commissioners of April

15,

1927, reproduced in 4 R. INT’L ARB. AWARDS p. 151 (U.S.-Mex. Cl. Comm'n 1927).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 91

180.

181.

Claimants’ experts,’

VIL, {6).

among other authorities in this regard (R V, 946-49; R

In order to constitute a denial of justice, the Respondent argues that a delay must
amount to a refusal to judge. In this aspect, the Respondent contends that the
Claimants “must show more than the mere passage of time or innocent obstacles
to the expeditious administration of justice. They must show delays that evidence
a refusal” (R V, {§130-134; R VI, 210-214). The Respondent refers to the
Schrijver opinion they have submitted in this arbitration:

[I]nternational law draws a line between a delay tantamount to an effective

refusal to judge, which exposes a State to liability, and an explicable delay,
which is justified under the circumstances.'”

(R VI, 4213)

In alleging that Claimants are unable to show such a refusal to judge here, the
Respondent first refers to the enormous backlog of cases that plagued the
Ecuadorian courts since the early 1990s, which became progressively worse
throughout that decade (R V, {[135-140; Tr. II at 1129:12-1130:14; HRS p.14;
R VII, (32). Starting with a pilot program in 1997 and continuing with various
other reforms through the early 2000s, the courts steadily caught up with their
increasing caseload and began making headway on the backlog (R V, 141-143;
Tr. IT at 1130:15-1132:15; HRS pp.15-22). According to the Respondent,
evidence of the court backlogs, Ecuador’s reform efforts, and their success in
relieving congestion all stand uncontradicted in this arbitration (Tr. II at 345:3-
13; 811:14-814:14; R VII, (98-12). The Respondent also states that the Claimants
have not presented any convincing evidence that they have been treated

differently from any other litigant, as exemplified by the McDonald's case tried

 

' EL Oro, supra note 6 at p. 198.

'S ALWYN FREEMAN, THE INTERNATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY OF STATES FOR DENIAL OF JUSTICE, p. 330
(1970).

‘© ©. Greenwood, State Responsibility for the Decisions of National Courts, in M FITZMAURICE AND D
SAROOSHI (EDS), ISSUES OF STATE RESPONSIBILITY BEFORE INTERNATIONAL JUDICIAL INSTITUTIONS,
p. 58. (2004), quoted in Paulsson Opinion, supra note 12 at para. 10.

‘7 Legal Opinion of Professor Dr. Nico J. Schrijver, para. 64 (Jan. 25, 2009), Exh. R-19 [hereinafter
Schrijver Opinion].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 92

182.

by TexPet’s own counsel (R V, {{{146-147). The Respondent thus alleges that the
delays experienced by TexPet are “the predictable result of the judiciary’s
increasing caseload and TexPet’s own failure to press its cases” (R V, 7149).

They are not a result of action tantamount to a refusal to judge.

Alternatively, the Respondent contends that “[e]ven if delays not amounting to a
refusal to judge may constitute a denial of justice, Claimants have not shown that,
taking all circumstances into account, the delays experienced by TexPet were
sufficiently long in duration” (R V, (150). There is no automatic amount of delay
that constitutes a denial of justice; the analysis must be performed on a case-by-
case basis. Citations from Freeman, Trindade, and Amerasinghe agree on this
point and contradict the Claimants’ purported rule whereby an unexplained five-
year delay will always suffice (R V, J{[151-155). The human rights cases relied
on by the Claimants to support such a proposition are also distinguishable.
“Human rights law is not analogous to the doctrine of state responsibility,” and
the test under the treaty-based standard of “reasonable time” differs from the
customary international law “undue delay” standard (R V, {[156-160; R VI,
(215-226; Tr. II at 1145:14-24). The Respondent quotes the Mox Plant case to
caution generally against equating standards issued out of different contexts:
[T]he application of international law rules on interpretation of treaties to
identical or similar provisions of different treaties may not yield the same
results, having regard to, inter alia, differences in the respective contexts,

objects and purposes, subsequent practice of parties and travaux
préparatoires.'*

(R VI, 4222)
The Respondent further refers to Trindade specifically for human rights norms:

Generally recognized rules of international law . . . necessarily undergo,
when enshrined in human rights treaties, some adjustment, dictated by the
special character of the object and purpose of those treaties and by generally
recognized specificity of the international protection of human rights.'°

'8 Mox Plant Case (Ir. v. U.K.), Decision on the Request for Provisional Measures, para. 51, Int’l Trib.
L. Sea (Dec. 3, 2001).

© A.A. Cangado Trindade, Book Review: Local Remedies in International Law by Amerasinghe, 86
AMJ.INT’LL. p. 626 at p. 631 (1992).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 93

183.

184.

(R VI, 223)

Lastly, Schrijver’s opinion in this arbitration and former works of Paulsson’s
echo that “due caution must be observed when transposing human rights

standards to investment arbitrations””°” (R VI, 9222-226).

Even if the cases were relevant, however, they do not actually establish any such
five-year rule (R V, (161). In general, the Respondent points out that the
“Claimants have failed to cite a single precedent where judicial inactivity of ten
years was sufficient for the finding of undue delay in a business contract case” (R
V, ¥163). The El Oro Mining case did not involve a claim of denial of justice.
The question was rather whether the claimant had satisfied the requirement of the
Calvo Clause in the concession agreement (requiring exhaustion of local
remedies) (R V, {164). The Claimants’ cases are factually distinguishable as
well. In El Oro Mining, there was literally no judicial action whatsoever for nine
years: “no hearing...no award...Not the slightest indication has been given that
the claimant...might be granted the opportunity of pleading its cause before that
Court”?! (R V, 165-166). Likewise, in Fabiani the claimant faced active
collusion on the part of opposing parties and the courts to impede the

enforcement of his French judgment in Venezuela (R V, (167).

The Respondent submits further that the totality of the circumstances must be
taken into consideration when evaluating a case for denial of justice (R VI,
1227-231; Tr. II at 125:24-126:6; HR4 pp. R VII, 133; R VIII, 14). In the
present case, the Respondent alludes to certain circumstances that distinguish the
Claimants’ authorities and militate against finding undue delay in the present
case. According to Amerasinghe, among others, “injuries to large corporations,

which may give rise to more complicated issues than injuries to individuals, [are]

°° Schrijver Opinion, supra note 17 at para. 79.

2! El Oro, supra note 6 at p. 198.

» Antonie Fabiani (no. 1) (Fr. v. Venez.), reprinted in JOHN BASSETT MooRrE (ED.) 5 HISTORY AND
DIGEST OF THE INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATIONS TO WHICH THE UNITED STATES HAS BEEN A PARTY, p.
4878 (1898).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 94

185.

subject to longer time limits than injuries to individuals””> (R V, 168; R VI,
1293-298). The cases themselves are factually and legally complex, involving
multiple expert reports and issues of how to define domestic consumption as well
as who owned the residual oil, as the Respondent has already argued in relation
to the underlying cases themselves (R VI, 278-286). For the Respondent,
TexPet’s attitude towards its cases, using them as bargaining chips, and its lack
of due diligence in taking advantage of potential procedural tools to move them
forward, must also weigh against the Claimants. As described at length in other
sections of argument (see Section H.III below), the Respondent contends that the
Claimants did only the absolute minimum to keep the claims alive and nothing to
move them forward (R V, {169; R VI, 9259-277; Tr. If at 127:2-15, 1132:15-
1133:18; HR4 p. 63; HRS pp. 23-26; R VII, {{[34-36). As compared with
criminal detention and human life at stake in most of Claimants’ cited cases,
“there is no concern for TexPet’s, or the Claimants’ impending ruin as a result of
the delays” (R V, 170). There is, indeed, no indication that time is of the essence
and that the Claimants have suffered any damages for which prejudgment interest

cannot compensate (R V, {{[170-175; R VI, 1287-292).

The Ecuadorian courts’ large backlog of cases also excuses the delays. Bjorklund
has affirmed the relevance of local practices to the analysis:
Undue delay in the proceedings may effect a denial of justice throughout the
judicial process. Delay in coming to trial, delay during trial, delay in
decision-making, and delay in appellate decision-making can all give rise to
denials of justice. Most often delay is measured against the rules or practices

prevailing in local courts; so long as the timing in a particular case comports
with the usual practices, delays will not be fatal.”

(R V, (187; R VI, 234; Tr. If at 126:7-12; HR4 p. 64).

Contrary to the Claimants’ arguments, the Respondent argues that the case law at
most only establishes that backlogs will not provide an excuse when time is of

the essence and measures taken to relieve the backlog are hollow or ineffective

?3 CHITTHARANIAN FELIX AMERASINGHE, LOCAL REMEDIES IN INTERNATIONAL LAW, pp. 211-12
(Cambridge University Press, 2nd Ed., 2004).

* Andrea K. Bjorklund, Reconciling State Sovereignty and Investor Protection in Denial of Justice
Claims, 45(4) VA. J. INTL L. p. 809 at pp. 845-46 (2005).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 95

186.

187.

(R V, J9176-182; R VI, {[241-251). By contrast, Ecuador undertook significant
and effective judicial reforms over the past 15 years to counter this backlog (R V,
9183-184; R VI, 7]252-258; Tr. II at 126:13-127:1; HR4 p. 66). Furthermore,
the Respondent gives examples where significant delay with no indication of bad
faith has not even been remotely considered undue. For example, the Respondent
argues that the Iran-US Claims Tribunal has taken more than 20 years to dispose
of approximately 870 private claims (R V, {[[185-186). A final and determinative
factor according to the Respondent is whether the delay is “abnormal or abusive”
relative to local circumstances. The length of proceedings in TexPet’s cases did
not exceed the average processing times in the Ecuadorian Supreme Court when

examined in the context of court congestion (R V, {{[187-191).

The Respondent notes that the Claimants have not submitted any direct evidence
at all of direct interference in their court cases. The only evidence put forward is
their expert report that circumstantially suggests through statistics that the cases
were “singled out.” However, “almost every factual predicate assumed by
Professor Easton in reaching his opinion is demonstrably false.” According to the
Respondent, his analysis assumes the cases are “treated as unrelated by the court”
and that cases are decided in chronological order according to the date they were
filed. His analysis did not take into account factors such as the complexity of the
cases and the efforts made by the respective plaintiffs to move their cases
forward, nor did it account for a significant change in the respective courts’
jurisdiction during the time period in question. His “peer group” of cases were
thus not representative (R VI, {{300-307). As further evidence against
impropriety, the Respondent puts forward statistics to show that plaintiffs
regularly win cases against the Government (R VI, 9309-310). Finally, the
Respondent cites several judicial victories of TexPet in the Ecuadorian courts in

other cases spanning from 1994-1999 (R VI, 7311).

The Respondent contends that, in any event, Professor Easton conceded at the
hearing that recent success at reducing court backlogs was a valid alternative
explanation for the delays and recent decisions in the Claimants’ cases (R VII,

1140-142).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 96

188.

189.

2. Denial of Justice under Customary International Law for

Manifestly Unjust Decisions

a) Arguments by the Claimants

The Claimants maintain that a denial of justice was consummated in all their
cases by December 31, 2004, at which point they had been sufficiently delayed to
constitute a denial of justice under international law. In the alternative, however,
they argue that the Ecuadorian courts’ recent decisions are manifestly unjust,
grossly incompetent and constitute a further independent denial of justice under
customary international law (C V, 9323; Tr. II at 21:18-22:2; HC4 p. 4). In
essence, they contend that “while international tribunals do not provide an
appellate forum for parties aggrieved by the rulings of national courts [...] a
misapplication of national law that is sufficiently egregious as to indicate
fundamental incompetence or bad faith on the part of the judicial decision-
maker...gives rise to a denial-of-justice claim” (C V, 324, 331). The Claimants
cite Paulsson? and Azinian v. Mexico,” to the effect that direct proof of bad faith
is not necessary. A denial of justice can be found from a “clear and malicious
misapplication of the law” (C V, 324-326; C VI, 1334-341). They further cite
Jacob Idler v. Venezuela,” Bronner v. Mexico,* and the Orient”? case among
others as examples where denials of justice were found under this standard (C V,

9327-330; C VI, 9335-339).

In the present case, the Claimants assert that the Ecuadorian courts’ decisions and

their context meet the above standard. With regard to the two cases dismissed for

?5 JAN PAULSSON, DENIAL OF JUSTICE IN INTERNATIONAL LAW, p- 200 (Cambridge Univ. Press 2005).

? Azinian, Davitian, & Baca v. The United Mexican States, ICSID Case No ARB(AF)/97/2), 39
LL.M. 537, at paras. 102-03 (Nov. 1, 1999).

27 Jacob Idler v. Venezuela (U.S. v. Venez.), reprinted in JOHN BASSETT MOORE (ED.) 4 HISTORY AND
DIGEST OF THE INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATIONS TO WHICH THE UNITED STATES HAS BEEN A PARTY, p.
3491 at p. 3510 (1898) [hereinafter Idler].

?8 Frederic Bronner v. Mexico (U.S. v. Mex.), reprinted in JOHN BASSETT MOoRE (ED.) 3 HISTORY
AND DIGEST OF THE INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATIONS TO WHICH THE UNITED STATES HAS BEEN A
PARTY, p. 3134 at p. 3134 (1898).

® The Orient (U.S. v. Mex.), reprinted in JOHN BASSETT MOORE (ED.) 3 HISTORY AND DIGEST OF THE
INTERNATIONAL ARBITRATIONS TO WHICH THE UNITED STATES HAS BEEN A PARTY, p. 3229 at pp.
3229-31 [hereinafter The Orient].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 9o7

190.

“abandonment” or “want of prosecution” (the first Amazonas Refinery claim and
the Force Majeure claim, Cases 7-92 and 8-92), the Claimants argue that the
courts relied on an obviously inapplicable provision of the Civil Code, including
by applying that provision retroactively (C V, (333; Tr. II at 59:17-60:8; HC4
p. 59; C VIL, (954-55; C XIII, 17-9). The Claimants also note that Judge Troya
never articulated in his judgments any of the arguments now put forward by the

Respondent (C VI, 352).

In any event, the Claimants submit that the arguments offered by the Respondent
in defense of these decisions are groundless. The Claimants observe that the
Respondent does not argue that the three-year rule in Article 386 of the Civil
Code does not apply, but that it is pre-empted by the two-year rule in Article 388
(C VI, 9353). For the Claimants, that argument ignores the fact the Article 388
applies “unless otherwise provided by law.” As Article 386 already provides the
applicable abandonment rule, Article 388 cannot apply on its face (C V, {251-
252; C VI, 1354; Tr. II at 60:14-61:7, 1117:11-1119:13; HC4 p. 59; HC5 pp.102-
107; C VIL, (56-61; C VIL, 9{[29-31; C XI, (9-11). Furthermore, in Case 8-92,
the court went as far as to blatantly ignore the rule prohibiting dismissal for
abandonment after the court has issued an auto para sentencia. This rule is
“black-letter law” according to the Claimants and was set out in a previous
judgment of Judge Troya’s (C V, 9333; C VI, 99347, 355; Tr. II at 1108:23-
1109:9; HC4 p. 48; HC5 p.86). They contend that even Respondent’s expert in
this arbitration, Dr. Eguiguren, has agreed that this violated well-established
Supreme Court precedent (Tr. II at 50:14-51:11, 693:3-12; HC4 p. 48; C VIL,
q15). The Claimants argue as well that the principle behind that rule, “that a
court may not seize upon delay caused by its own improper inaction to find that a
litigant has abandoned a case,” applies equally to Case 7-92 given that the case
was delayed purely because of the court’s refusal to set a date for the
appointment of the experts. If necessary, the Tribunal should consider the court’s
act of seizing upon its own delinquency to dismiss the case to constitute a denial
of justice under international law, even if technically correct under Ecuadorian
law (C VI, 99355; Tr. II at 1117:1-10; HC4 p. 58; HCS5 p.101; C XI, 412; C XII,
qi).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 98

191.

192.

According to the Claimants, in the cases dismissed for prescription (the first
Esmeraldas Refinery and Amazonas Refinery cases, Cases 23-91 and 7-92), the
court patently misapplied a special prescription period for small retail sales to
end consumers, a category that TexPet’s claims clearly are not. Article 2422 of
the Ecuadorian Civil Code provides that it applies to sales “al menudeo.” Several
legal authorities confirm that “al menudeo” refers to small retail sales to an end
consumer and the transactions at issue in the Claimants’ cases are simply not
small retail sales (C V, 9334; C VI, 1360, 364; Tr. II at 52:7-54:14; 699:22-
700:14, 1110:8-23, 1112:3-15; HC4 pp. 50-51; HCS5 pp.89-91; C VII, 64;
C VIII, 37).

In response to the Respondent’s arguments by which Article 2422 is applicable to
fill a legal void by analogy, the Claimants respond:
Ecuador’s general statute-of-limitations regime is unremarkable, similar to
other regimes the world over. There are general default rules as well as
special exceptions to those default rules. When an exception does not apply,

the default rule does. It is simply untenable to assert that such a regime has a
legal lacuna.

(C VI, 9358)

TexPet’s actions are not sui generis; they are ordinary actions. The fact that they
are conducted as verbal summary proceedings or are actions against the
government is also irrelevant. The Claimants argue that Ecuadorian law provides
that the regular prescription periods apply to the State and a default 10-year
prescription period applies by default in the absence of another specifically-
applicable period (C VI, 9§369-373; Tr. II at 51:17-52:6, 1109:10-1110:7,
1112:18-1113:17, 1114:7-1116:19; HC4 p. 49; HCS pp.87-99; C VII, (71-73;
C VIIL, (132-36). Moreover, this analogy argument with respect to Article 2422
was never pleaded before in over 16 years over the course of these cases and was
not mentioned at all in Judge Troya’s decisions (C VI, (365; Tr. II at 57:25-58:6;
HC4 p. 57; C VII, 74). Judge Troya’s decisions are instead explained by a
completely unreasoned resort to principles of equity. Without any basis, Judge
Troya uses equitable principles to apply a two-year period to some obligations

and apply the default ten-year period to other obligations under the same

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 99

193.

194.

contract. According to the Claimants, resort to equity under Ecuadorian law is
proper only to fill a legal gap or to dispense with a mere legal formality. They
state that decisions applying equity are rare in Ecuadorian law and are always
accompanied by lengthy reasoning demonstrating the existence of a legal gap or
the mere legal formality that is being dispensed with and the further analysis.
Reasoning by analogy is also never used for prescription issues since it defeats
the predictability of prescription periods (C VI, (365-368; Tr. II at 55:18-56:18,
1110:24-1112:2, 1113:18-1114:6; HC4 p. 54; HC5 p.93; C VII, (162-64).

The Claimants also point out that the Respondent and its experts have
significantly wavered in their defense of Judge Troya’s reliance on equity. The
Claimants assert that the Respondent originally put forth a “legal gap” theory,
then switched to a “legal formality” theory, but then acknowledged at the
Hearing on the Merits that prescription periods are not mere “legal formalities.”
In particular, they note that while the Respondent and its experts originally
defended Judge Troya’s citation of Article 1009 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code to
justify his resort to equity, they later acknowledged that this provision was not
applicable and support for this theory would have to be found elsewhere (C VII,
165-66; Tr. II at 705: 23-25, 1160:20-22).

For all the above cases, the first Esmeraldas Refinery claim, the first Amazonas
Refinery claim, and the Force Majeure claim (Cases 23-91, 7-92, and 8-92), the
Claimants highlight that the courts’ rulings were only made after notice of this
arbitration had been filed, despite complete inactivity in the cases for a decade or
more. This, the Claimants assert, is strong circumstantial evidence of bad faith by
the Ecuadorian courts (C V, 332; C VII, (115-116). Additionally, the
Claimants draw attention to the general evidence of the lack of judicial
independence in Ecuador, the courts’ bias against foreign oil companies in
general and TexPet in particular, and that TexPet’s cases were singled out. They
argue that an inference of bad faith by the courts in this context is inescapable
(CV, 9335; C VI, 9342-350, 357; Tr. If 1120:17-1121:16; HCS p.110). In
essence, the Claimants allege that there is no “reasonable difference of opinion”

as the Respondent would have the Tribunal believe. The grounds of abandonment

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 100

and prescription were contrived pretexts for dismissing TexPet’s claims without

adjudicating their merits (C VI, §374).

b) Arguments by the Respondent

195. The Respondent argues that the Claimants have not made out a case that they
have suffered “incompetent” or “unjust” decisions in their cases, nor have they
shown that any impugned decisions could rise to the level of an international
wrong. According to the Respondent, “Claimants are asking this Tribunal to
venture beyond the proper role of international arbiters, which forbids them from
acting as a supreme court[] of appeal with power of review over the host
country’s domestic courts” (R V, (260; R VI, 9314; Tr. II at 1147:21-1148:5;
HRS p.61). The cases of Barcelona Traction,” Mondev,*' and Loewen,” among
others, reinforce this point (R V, 262-266). Furthermore, the Respondent cites

Paulsson:

The erroneous application of national law cannot, in itself, be an
international denial of justice. Unless somehow qualified by international
law, rights created under national law are limited by national law, including
the principle that by operation of the fundamental rule of res judicata a
determination by a court of final appeal is definitive.

(R V, 1267; Tr. If at 128:20-22, 1148:13-18)

196. The Respondent goes on to cite Judge Fitzmaurice, also relied upon by the
Claimants, for the proposition that a finding of bad faith is necessary to

substantiate a denial of justice:

[T]he rule may be stated that the merely erroneous or unjust decision of a
court, even though it may involve what amounts to a miscarriage of justice,
is not a denial of justice, and, moreover, does not involve the responsibility
of the state. To involve the responsibility of the state the element of bad faith
must be present, and it must be clear that the court was actuated by bias, by
fraud, or by external pressure, or was not impartial; or the judgment must be

* Barcelona Traction, Light & Power Co. (Belg. v. Spain), 1970 LC.J. p. 3 at p. 160 (Feb. 3, 1970)
(separate opinion of Judge Tanaka) [hereinafter Barcelona Traction (Tanaka Op.)].

*! Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America, NAFTA Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award
(Oct. 11, 2002), paras. 126, 136 [hereinafter Mondey].

* The Loewen Group Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United States, ICSID Case
No. ARB(AF)/98/3, Award (June 25, 2003), para. 158 [hereinafter Loewen].

%3 PAULSSON, supra note 25 at p. 81.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 101

197.

198.

199.

such as no court which was both honest and competent could have
delivered.

(R V, 1269)

Further support for this point is drawn from Judge Tanaka’s opinion in the

Barcelona Traction case:

[I]t remains to examine whether behind the alleged errors and irregularities
of the Spanish judiciary some grave circumstances do not exist which may
justify the charge of a denial of justice. Conspicuous examples thereof
would be ‘corruption, threats, unwarrantable delay, flagrant abuse of judicial
procedure, a judgment dictated by the executive, or so manifestly unjust that
no court which was both competent and honest could have given it’...We
may sum up these circumstances under the single head of bad faith’.**

(R V, 9272)

Given the above, “[o]nly in cases where the breach of municipal law is
exceptionally outrageous or monstrously grave” will an unjust decision itself
suffice as circumstantial evidence of bad faith (R V, {[277-278; R VI, [317-
321). In fact, contrary to the Claimants’ implications, the cases of Orient®® and
Idler*’ were decided on the basis of direct evidence of bad faith and not
circumstantial evidence (R V, {{[279-282). Quoting the opposing opinion of
Paulsson in this arbitration, the Respondent thus states the test as whether “there
is no reasonable objective foundation for the substantive outcome of the
decision” and falls “outside the spectrum of the juridically possible”** (R VI,
(1321-323; Tr. II at 129:2-8, 1148:19-1149:18; HR4 p. 83; HRS p.63; R VII,
43).

The Respondent briefly notes in this context that appeals are still pending and, as

such, have not been exhausted in the Force Majeure and Refinancing Agreement

™ Gerald G. Fitzmaurice, The Meaning of the Term Denial of Justice, 13 BRIT. Y.B. INT’LL. p. 93 at
pp. 110-11 (1932).

* Barcelona Traction, supra note 30 at p. 158.
* The Orient, supra note 29 at p. 3231.
” Idler, supra note 27 at p. 3516.

* Paulsson Opinion, supra note 12 at paras. 68, 70.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 102

200.

claims (Cases 8-92 and 983-03). Therefore, a claim for denial of justice based on

unjust decisions is precluded for those cases (R VI, 1316; Tr. II at 128:2-6).

While insisting on the high threshold just mentioned, the Respondent contends
that the Claimants cannot show that the decisions attacked are even incorrect
under Ecuadorian law. With regard to the decision dismissing the first Amazonas
Refinery claim (Case 7-92) on the basis of abandonment under Article 388 of the
Ecuadorian Code of Civil Procedure, the Respondent disputes the contention that
the judge illegally applied the provision retroactively: “[w]Jhile it is true that
Article 388 (and, concomitantly, its two-year abandonment period) were not
codified in the Code of Civil Procedure until 2005, the two-year abandonment
period had already been in force because it was originally enacted into law on
November 25, 1997 as part of the Law Amending the Organic Law of the
Judiciary” (R V, {9287-288; Tr. II at 130:16-131:5, 1151:1-1152:11; HR4 p. 88;
R VI, 947, R VIII, (21; R XI, f11). As an “organic” and “special” law that
applies to first instance cases at the Supreme Court, the 1997 act also takes
precedence under Ecuadorian law over any inconsistent provision of the Code of
Civil Procedure that the Claimants argue might have applied instead (R V,
(1289-290; R VI, [329-330; Tr. If at 131:6-19, 1149:23-1151:10, 1152:19-
1153:7; HR4 pp. 89-90; HRS pp.65-68; R VII, 146; R VIII, (18-19). The phrase
“unless otherwise provided by law” in that provision only refers to other special
provisions in force (R VI, 329-330; R XI, (12). The Respondent also counters
the argument that the case should not have been dismissed given TexPet’s many
letters requesting a decision, saying that there is no legal basis under which this
would excuse TexPet from the applicable statutory period (R V, 291). The
Respondent further claims that the citation to Article 386 (the three-year period)
instead of Article 388 (the two-year period) in Ecuador’s motion to the court that
prompted the dismissal was a simple and obvious mis-citation since the motion
was filed precisely after two years had elapsed (Tr. II at 1153:8-17; R VII, 51).
Finally, the Respondent cites a number of short judgments that it has submitted in
this arbitration and states that the mere existence of other concise judgments

applying Ecuadorian abandonment rules in the same way proves that the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 103

201.

202.

203.

dismissal in Case 7-92 falls within the “juridically possible” standard above (R

XI, (910, 13).

According to the Respondent, the dismissals of the first Esmeraldas and
Amazonas Refinery cases (Cases 23-91 and 7-92) for prescription under Article
2422 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code are also not at all unjust. TexPet’s cases do
not fall under the categories of “executory actions” or “ordinary actions” under
Ecuadorian civil procedure. As such, they do not benefit from the five-year or
ten-year prescription periods afforded to those actions under Article 2439 (now
Article 2415) of the Ecuadorian Civil Code. Cases 23-91 and 8-92 instead fall
under the category of “special actions” according to the public nature of disputes
arising under the Ecuadorian Hydrocarbons Law and the fact that the cases are
conducted by “summary oral proceedings” (R V, {{[293-296; R VI, 9337-343;
Tr. I at 133:5-134:13, 1154:24-1156:24; HR4 pp. 95-97; HRS pp.75-76; R VII,
q53).

Ecuadorian law generally assigns specific prescription periods for each category
of “special actions.” However, in this case, there is no clear category that
TexPet’s cases fall under. According to the Respondent, because there existed a
legal lacuna, the judge was required to determine the applicable prescription
period by analogy. The judge thus applied the two-year prescription period under
Article 2422, since it applies to “suppliers” (and not just “small retail sales’), and
given the consistent application of short limitation periods in “summary oral
proceedings” and cases against the government (R V, 297-298; R VI, {{[355-
356; Tr. II at 136:2-20, 1154:25-1159:22; HR4 pp. 98-101; HRS pp.75-77; R VII,
54-56; R VIII, 923-24).

The Respondent notes that the Claimants’ arguments rely heavily on their
translation and interpretation of the term “despacho al menudeo” in Article 2422
as “small retail sales.” The Respondent argues, however, that this term does not
hold such a narrow meaning in the legal literature or is at least ambiguous, as
demonstrated by the differing interpretation put forward by Claimants’ experts.
Thus, the Ecuadorian court decision deserves deference and cannot be labeled as

manifestly unjust (R V, {[300-303; R VI, 9357).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 104

204.

a)

205.

206.

In any event, the Respondent asserts that the default prescription period for
breach-of-contract actions against the State would be the five-year period for
executory actions, not the ten-year period for ordinary actions (R VI, 345-349).
The Claimants misinterpret Article 2397, which they cite for the proposition that
the same prescription periods apply against the same. That provision only
provides that the same general rules regarding prescription also apply against the
State, not that the same time periods apply to actions against the State (R VIII,
q25).

Violation of Specific BIT Standards of Protection

Arguments by the Claimants
Citing the same general factual arguments as with regard to denial of justice
under customary international law (see Sections H.II.1 and H.II.2 above), the
Claimants argue that the Respondent’s conduct amounts to specific violations of
the BIT’s Article II(7) (effective means of asserting claims and enforcing rights),
Article II(3)(a) (fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security, and
treatment no less than that required by international law), and Article II(3)(b)

(arbitrary and discriminatory measures).

Effective means of asserting claims and enforcing rights (Article II(7))
With regard to Article II(7), the Claimants assert that this is an obligation of
result, providing a distinct and lower standard than that of denial of justice under
customary international law (C VII, 99-100). The Claimants dissect the
provision into its component parts: “1) ‘effective means,’ 2) ‘enforcing rights,’
3) ‘investment,’ and 4) ‘investment agreements’” (C V, 337). The Claimants
affirm that the ordinary meaning of these terms “obligates Ecuador to provide an
available instrumentality that will make or force others—including itself—[to]
observe rights provided by contract” (C V, §341). The Claimants argue that the
context, object, and purpose of the BIT also confirm their interpretation since the
ability to effectively enforce rights promotes legal stability and enables investors
to more accurately take risks and implement business plans” (C V, 342). In sum,

“Telither a failure to provide court access or a failure of the courts to enforce

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 105

207.

ii)

208.

tights effectively will violate this provision” (C V, 343). In the case at hand, the
“long periods of judicial inactivity and refusal to judge fails to satisfy the
standard of a method or instrumentality capable of compelling any defendant to
respect a plaintiff's contract rights, much less the [Government] itself’ (C V,
345; C VI, 9425). In addition, the allegedly incompetent, manifestly unjust, and
biased decisions and erosion of judicial independence in Ecuador since 2004 also
constitute violations of Article II(7) (C V, 346-350; C VI, 9426). The
Claimants cite the tribunal’s comment in EnCana v. Ecuador that “[i]t is difficult
to see how any oil company litigant with a case pending at that time could have

received impartial justice”? (CV, 9348).

The Claimants reject Respondent’s idea that only extreme, detrimental
interference will violate this standard. There is no textual support for this idea
and Respondent misrepresents the holding of the Petrobart’® case on this issue
(C VI, 9421-424). In any case, the Claimants have proffered substantial
evidence of interference by the Ecuadorian Government in cases involving

Claimants, specifically in the ongoing Lago Agrio litigation (C VI, 424).

Fair and equitable treatment (Article II(3)(a))
On the subject of fair and equitable treatment, the Claimants argue that denials of
justice, including “[a]ny national court that fails to issue a judgment within a
reasonable amount of time or that deliberately allows a case to sit idle when it is
the court that must take the next action (in essence refusing to rule)” violates this
standard (C V, 352). They cite the OECD 2004 Working Paper on the subject as
well as the Tecmed,"' Mondev, and Loewen® tribunals, among other authorities,

for the idea that fair and equitable treatment encompasses “the international law

° Encana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador, LCIA Case No. UN3481, UNCITRAL, Award (Feb. 3,
2006), para. 198.

* Petrobart v. Kyrgyz Republic, SCC Arbitration No. 126/2003 (Award of March 29, 2005)
[hereinafter Petrobart].

“| Tecnicas Medioambientales Tecmed v. Mexico, ICSID Case. No. ARB (AF)/00/2, Award (May 29,
2003) [hereinafter Tecmed].

* Mondev, supra note 31.

“3 Loewen Group Inc. and Loewen v. United States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3, Award (June 25,
2003) [hereinafter Loewen].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 106

requirements of due process, economic rights, obligations of good faith and
natural justice” (C V, (351) and conduct amounting to a denial of justice also

violates this standard (C V, 9357-363; C VI, 385-390).

209. The Claimants argue that, according to its wording, the “fair and equitable
treatment” clause also provides for guarantees autonomous of customary
international law, such as requiring a host state to provide a stable, predictable,
and consistent legal regime in which to operate (C V, {{{[364-369). This is made
clear by wording providing for “fair and equitable treatment and...treatment
[not] less than that required by international law.” The provision in question is
also distinct from those that refer only to a “minimum standard” such as NAFTA
and the 2004 U.S. Model BIT. Rather, this specific wording has been interpreted
as independently providing for this guarantee (C VI, (1376-381). The Claimants
add that the preamble of the BIT explicitly encourages a broad interpretation of
fair and equitable treatment and cite Saluka v. Czech Republic* in support of this
argument (C V, 355). In any event, the cases of Siemens v. Argentina,” Mondev,
and Tecmed, among other decisions and scholars have found that the
international law minimum standard has evolved to encompass the ordinary
meaning of fair and equitable treatment, including this particular guarantee.
Specifically, the Claimants cite a passage from LG&E v. Argentina concluding

upon the jurisprudence in this area:

These tribunals have repeatedly concluded based on the specific language
concerning fair and equitable treatment, and in the context of the stated
objectives of the various treaties, that the stability of the legal and business
framework in the State party is an essential element in the standard of what
is fair and equitable treatment. As such, the Tribunal considers this
interpretation to be an emerging standard of fair and equitable treatment in
international law.*°

(C V, 9367, 404)

210. The LG&E tribunal referred to earlier decisions including Occidental Exploration

v. Ecuador where it was said that “[t]he stability of the legal and business

“ Saluka Investments BV v. Czech Rep., UNCITRAL, Partial Award (Perm. Ct. Arb. Mar. 17, 2006).
* Siemens v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Award (Feb. 6, 2007).
“© LG&E v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability (Oct. 3, 2006), para. 125.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 107

211.

framework is...an essential element of fair and equitable treatment” (C VI,

491401-407).

The Claimants also argue that the “fair and equitable treatment” standard protects
investors’ legitimate expectations. According to the Claimants, these legitimate
expectations need not specifically arise from assurances and representations
provided by the host state. Normative expectations of universal and objective
requirements, such as the right to fair and impartial justice, are also included. The
Claimants again cite the Saluka and Tecmed cases for the idea that fair and
equitable treatment bars a host state from frustrating the basic and reasonable
expectations of the investor by failing to uphold transparency, consistency, even-
handedness, and unbiased treatment in government conduct. In no case were
specific assurances or representations of an adequate legal system required (C VI,

1391-400).

212. In relation to the case at hand, the Claimants once again maintain that the

213.

systemic delays and unjust decisions suffered in TexPet’s cases each
independently fail to live up to the standard of fair and equitable treatment and
indeed strongly support an inference of bad faith by the courts (C V, {{[371-376;
C VI, 1408-420).

iti) Full protection and security (Article II(3)(a))

The Claimants next analyze the present case in terms of the Article II(3)(a)
guarantee of full protection and security. The Claimants argue that “this standard
imposes an obligation of objective vigilance and due diligence upon States”
(C V, 9377). They endorse the finding in AAPL v. Sri Lanka that, “[a]ccording to
modern doctrine, the violation of international law entailing the State’s
responsibility has to be considered constituted by ‘the mere lack or want of
diligence’, without any need to establish malice or negligence” (C V, 9379).

The Claimants further insist that the standard extends beyond physical security

*7 Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. The Republic of Ecuador, LCIA Case
No. UN3467, Final Award, para. 183 (July 1, 2004) [hereinafter Occidental].

*S Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. v. Sri Lanka, ICSID Case No. ARB/87/3, Final Award (June 27,
1990), para. 77.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 108

iv)
214.

215.

216.

and applies to legal protection as well. According to the CME v. Czech
Republic,” Siemens, and Azurix v. Argentina” cases, the Claimants state that
“the standard also requires the provision of legal security, which involves
certainty in legal norms and their foreseeable application” (C V, §381; C VI,
9427-429). In the instant case, the Claimants insist that the Government has
done nothing to remedy the delays or unjust decisions and, in fact, has in most

cases directly participated in these alleged injustices (C V, (382; C VI, 1430).

Arbitrary or discriminatory measures (Article II(3)(b))
As a final breach of the BIT’s standards of investment protection, the Claimants
allege that the Respondent’s conduct has been arbitrary and discriminatory in
contravention of Article II(3)(b). The Claimants point out that, under this
heading, a measure need only be arbitrary or discriminatory, not necessarily both

(CV, 9384).

The Claimants also note that the second sentence of Article II(3)(b) adds that
“[flor the purposes of dispute resolution under Article VI and VII, a measure may
be arbitrary or discriminatory notwithstanding the opportunity to review such
measure in the courts or administrative tribunals of a Party.” According to the
Claimants, this expressly provides that local remedies need not be exhausted as a
prerequisite to a claim for arbitrary or discriminatory treatment under the BIT

(CV, 4385).

With regard to “arbitrary” measures, the Claimants submit that, according to its
plain meaning, “arbitrary” means “depending on individual discretion. ..founded
on prejudice or preference rather than on reason or fact” or simply without
justification (C V, 9386-389; C VI, 432-435). In this context, the Claimants
assert that “[nJeither the [Respondent] nor its courts have advanced any reasons
that can legitimately justify the undue delays and improper rulings issued against
TexPet” (C V, 9390). As an example of unjustifiable conduct, they point to the

fact that, after a decade of inactivity by the court, the Subrogate President of the

*° CME Czech Republic B.V. v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award, (Sept. 13, 2001).

° Azurix v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Award (July 14, 2006).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 109

217.

b)

218.

Supreme Court dismissed Case 8-92 on the basis of abandonment, despite clear
law to the contrary, in direct contradiction with a previous ruling of his in another
case, and when all that remained to be done was issue a judgment (C V, 9390;

C VI, 1436).

As for “discriminatory” measures, the Claimants submit that these include both
measures that are “discriminatory in effect as well as those which are
intentionally discriminatory” (C V, 392). In any event, they argue that
Ecuador’s conduct has been discriminatory in intent as well as in effect against
TexPet (C V, 9393). Again, they mention that, after a decade or more of delays,
and almost immediately after this arbitration was filed, the Ecuadorian courts
dismissed several of their cases (C V, 393; C VI, 437). For example, the
dismissal of the Force Majeure claim (Case 8-92) for abandonment despite the
bar against this due to the auto para sentencia is a “textbook instance” of
discriminatory treatment: the court dismissed a foreign investor’s claim after
having earlier refused to dismiss an Ecuadorian’s claim on exactly the same
grounds (C VI, 438). The systemic nature of the delays suffered, involving
15 different judges in three different courts, is also evidence of discrimination
(C V, 9394). Ecuador’s overt acts against the Claimants and criminal indictments
of their lawyers in the context of the Lago Agrio case add support to the finding
of discrimination (C VI, 439-440). Finally, they again quote the EnCana
tribunal’s conclusion that oil companies generally have not benefited from

impartial justice in Ecuador (C V, 1395).

Arguments by the Respondent
The Respondent claims that despite the fact that their BIT claims are “wholly
subsumed within their denial of justice claim,” the Claimants attempt to refer to
specific standards in the BIT “[i]Jn an effort to evade both the ‘exhaustion’
requirement and the high standard for imposing liability for a denial of justice
under international law” (R V, {{[304-306; R VI, 9362; R VII, 957). However,
“merely putting a different label on identical factual allegations cannot evade

[these] threshold requirement[s]” (R V, 306).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 110

219.

220.

The Respondent argues that the BIT provisions are “deeply rooted in customary
international law. Merely incorporating these standards into a BIT does not
disconnect them from the ambit of customary international law” (R V, §330). The
cases of Duke Energy v. Ecuador, ' Occidental v. Ecuador,” and Noble Ventures
v. Romania™ are all cited as examples where the tribunal held that BIT standards
of protection generally do not impose stricter liability than customary
international law. Similarly, the analyses to be performed here in the Claimants’
four claims of specific BIT violations “do not depart in any material fashion from
the customary international law framework establishing a State’s responsibility
for misconduct in the administration of justice” (R V, 330-333; R VI, 9363-
368; R VII, 7589). The Respondent insists that “there is no indication
whatsoever that the parties to the Treaty contemplated lowering the standard for
establishing a denial of justice through the Treaty provisions” (R V, 307). As
the tribunal in Loewen said in relation to similar allegations under NAFTA:
Claimants’ reliance on Article 1110 adds nothing to the claim based on
Article 1105. In the circumstances of this case, a claim alleging an

appropriation in violation of Article 1110 can succeed only if Loewen
establishes a denial of justice under Article 1105.

(R VI, 4366)
Thus, if the denial of justice claim fails, the BIT claims must fail as well.

More particularly, on the requirement of exhaustion of local remedies, the
Respondent maintains that TexPet’s seven court cases constitute the “primary
disputes” underlying their denial of justice claims (which make up a “secondary
dispute”). Yet, “[n]o claim based on the maladministration of justice or a
violation of the obligation to establish a just system of the type described can,
consistently with customary international law, be adjudged until local efforts to

remedy the wrong have been exhausted with regard to the primary dispute” (R V,

5! Duke Energy Electroquil Partners & Electroquil S.A. v. Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case
No ARB/04/19 Award, (Aug. 18 2008) [hereinafer Duke Energy].

» Occidental, supra note 47.
*3 Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/11, Award (Oct. 12 2005).

* Loewen, supra note 32 at para. 141.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 111

221.

222.

318). The Respondent quotes Paulsson: “Having sought to rely on national
justice, the foreigner cannot complain that its operations have been delictual until
he has given it scope to operate, including by the agency of its ordinary

corrective functions” (R V, 321).

The Loewen case is also referred to as an example of the application of these
principles. In Loewen, breaches of NAFTA’s substantive protections were
alleged, including inter alia Article 1105, based on injustice to the investor
committed by the U.S. courts. The tribunal’s decision called the exhaustion
requirement “[a]n important principle of international law [that] should not be
held to have been tacitly dispensed with by international agreement, in the
absence of words making clear an intention to do so.”*> The tribunal went on to
find no basis, express or implied, in NAFTA to dispense the claimants from this

requirement, but rather found the opposite:

encourag[ing] resort to NAFTA tribunals rather than resort to the appellate
courts and review processes of the host State [...] would seem surprising,
having regard to the sophisticated legal systems of the NAFTA Parties. Such
an outcome would have the effect of making a State potentially liable for
NAFTA violations when domestic appeal or review, if pursued, might have
avoided any liability on the part of the State. Further, it is unlikely that the
Parties to NAFTA would have wished to encourage recourse to NAFTA
arbitration at the expense of domestic appeal or review when, in the general
run of cases, domestic appeal or review would offer more wide-ranging
review as they are not confined to breaches of international law.”

(R V, 9324-325)

The Respondent also alludes to an article by Delanoy and Portwood supporting

this view:

[Neither the Washington Convention, which is silent on the question, nor
the bilateral or multilateral treaties aimed at encouraging and protecting
investments contain provisions which would tend to have the effect of
rendering States liable on the basis of court decisions for which appeal is
available.

% Td. at para. 160.
%6 Td. at para. 162.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 112

223.

224.

225.

[N]o example of international case law exists to counter or otherwise lessen
the impact of the treaties’ failing to call into question the condition of
exhaustion of recourse avenues as a constituent element of denial of justice.
This is, indeed, what the Loewen tribunal pointed out in its June 26, 2003
Award, without being contradicted by either the claimant investors or the
numerous commentators of the award.””

(R V, 1326-327, Respondent’s translation)

Lastly, the Respondent cites the recent Duke Energy v. Ecuador award, where an
allegation was made that Ecuador failed to provide the investor with “effective
means of asserting claims and enforcing rights”** under Article II(7) of the US-
Ecuador BIT. The tribunal dismissed this claim on the ground that local remedies
had not been exhausted (R V, 9329). Hence, if the tribunal finds that the
Claimants have not demonstrated the required exhaustion of local remedies or
have not met the high threshold of actionable conduct for their denial of justice

claims, their BIT claims must also be rejected.

Nevertheless, the Respondent argues that each of the claims individually lacks

merit, even as framed by the Claimants.

Effective means of asserting claims and enforcing rights (Article II(7))
Regarding the Article II(7) guarantee of “effective means of asserting claims and
enforcing rights,” the Respondent again notes that the Duke Energy tribunal
stated that the provision merely “seeks to implement and form part of the more
general guarantee against denial of justice”? (R V, 337; R VI, 1459-464; Tr. II
at 1126:13-1127:22; R VII, 761; R VII, 137). The provision in no way lowers
the threshold as compared to that for denial of justice at customary international
law. In fact, the provision has been interpreted to guarantee only “system
attributes” for which an even higher threshold applies. For example, the tribunal
in Amto v. Ukraine held that the analogous provision in the Energy Charter

Treaty obliges the State to “provide an effective framework or system for the

*7 Louis-Christophe Delanoy & Tim Portwood, La Responsabilite de l’Etat Pour Deni de Justice dans
l'Arbitrage d' Investissement, 2005(3) REVUE DE L’ ARBITRAGE at 630-631.

%8 Duke Energy, supra note 51 at para. 104.
% Td. at para. 391.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 113

226.

ii)

227.

enforcement of rights, but does not offer guarantees in individual cases”? (R VO,

9138-139).

As further argued in the section regarding exhaustion of local remedies (see
Section H.III below), Ecuador has provided effective procedural and substantive
means and, to the extent that Claimants have elected not to use them, the
Respondent cannot be held responsible (R VI, 465-486; Tr. II at 1126:23-
1128:8, 1128:17-1129:1; R VII, (61). Regardless, “to prevail on their Article
II(7) claim, Claimants must produce evidence of the host State’s extreme
interference in the judicial proceedings to the investor’s detriment” (R V, 340).
For example, in Petrobart v. Kyrgyz Republic,*' there were ex parte
communications between a government official and the judge. However, in the
present case, the Claimants have failed to produce any evidence of improper
government interference in the courts’ affairs (R V, [{[340-342; R VI, [[487-492;
Tr. II at 1128:9-16).

Fair and equitable treatment (Article II(3)(a))
On the subject of “fair and equitable treatment” under Article II(3)(a) of the BIT,
the Respondent submits that the function of the “fair and equitable treatment”
clause “is to incorporate the customary international law minimum standard of
treatment, not to create new standards binding upon the treaty parties” (R V,
346; R VI, 9373-378). The Respondent supports this assertion with particular
evidence of U.S. BIT practice, including in situations where language identical to
the US-Ecuador BIT is found (R VI, {{[379-391). International jurisprudence is
also cited in support. At best, the idea of a stand-alone “fair and equitable
treatment” standard independent of customary international law reflects a
minority view (R VI, 392-399). Moreover, the limited number of decisions
referenced by the Claimants are not sufficient to establish that customary
international law has evolved to now include this alleged new standard (R VI,

441400-409).

© Limited Liability Company Amto v. Ukraine, SCC Arbitration No. 080/2005, Final Award,
(Mar. 26, 2008), para 88.

°' Petrobart, supra note 40.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 114

228.

229.

2

Once again, this means that the claims remain subject to the same exhaustion and
threshold requirements as denials of justice. However, even absent such
considerations, the claims fail because the Claimants have failed to explain how
their “‘legitimate expectations’ — as measured at the time of the creation of their
‘investment’ — were not satisfied” (R V, (344). According to the Respondent,
tribunals consistently require proof of the breach of an investor’s legitimate
expectations is required to find a violation of “fair and equitable treatment”
obligations. An investor must point to representations and assurances that were
given when the initial investment was made and how these have been reneged
upon. Dolzer and Schreuer,” as well as Fietta® and a series of case including
Parkerings,®' ADF Group, Tecmed,® CME,” and Duke Energy® are cited as
unanimous on the application of this approach (R V, {{[349-359; R VI, {{[410-
421). Stability and predictability of a domestic legal environment is not
independently guaranteed under the “fair and equitable treatment” standard
absent such representations as would give rise to legitimate expectations, such as

through a stabilization clause in an agreement (R VI, 422-440; R VII, 60).

In this case, the Claimants have not shown any proof of a warranty as to
particular characteristics or qualities of the Ecuadorian court system, nor have
they demonstrated a significant change for the worse since the acquisition of the
Napo Concession in 1964 or its renegotiation in 1973 (R V, {{[351, 360). Court
congestion has long been a problem in Ecuador and the Claimants were aware
that local litigation could last 20 years. This fact was undisputed by the

Claimants when raised by the Aguinda plaintiffs. Moreover, delay has

RUDOLF DOLZER & CHRISTOPH SCHREUER, PRINCIPLES OF INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT Law 133-

34 (2008)

8

Stephen Fietta, Expropriation and the “Fair and Equitable” Standard: The Developing Role ofthe

Investors’ “Expectations” in International Investment Arbitration, 23(5) J. INT'L ARB. p. 375 at p.
398 (2006).

64

Parkerings-Compagniet AS v. The Republic of Lithuania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/8, Award

(Sept. 11, 2007), para. 331.

65

ADF Group, Inc. v. United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/1, Award, (Jan. 9,

2003), para. 189.

66

6

68

Tecmed, supra note 41 at paras, 152, 154.
CME, supra note 49 at paras. 157, 611.
Duke Energy, supra note 51 at para. 340.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 115

230.

iii)

231.

progressively lessened through reforms carried out since the Claimants’ entry
into Ecuador (R V, {{[362-364). As for bias, discrimination, or bad faith on the
part of the courts, the Respondent claims that “the Ecuadorian judiciary is vastly
superior to its counterpart at the time Claimants made their investment or when
they brought their underlying commercial claims,” as detailed in the arguments
regarding judicial independence below (see Section H.III below). Those
arguments also show that Claimants’ evidence of bias is generally misleading and
only potentially show that some isolated incidents of bias or corruption
disconnected from the Claimants’ cases may still occur. However, the Claimants
have not put forward any direct evidence as to the bias or bad faith of the judges
hearing their cases or how the Ecuadorian Government has interfered in their
cases (R V, J{[365-370; R VI, 99434, 441-446). Finally, with respect to judicial
competency, the judicial selection process, judicial training, and court
infrastructure have all been significantly improved since the 1960s or 1990s

(RV, B71).

Taking the argument one step further, the Respondent asserts that the Claimants
have not met the requirements of their own purported application of the “fair and
equitable treatment” standard. Again, as detailed in the arguments on judicial
independence, Ecuador does provide a stable and predictable legal regime that
has been lauded by international observers (see Section H.III below). Moreover,
the Claimants’ case does not fit with arbitration decisions dealing with issues of
transparency, predictability and stability. The cases in which a treaty violation
was found involved representations or assurances by the State that induced the
investor to make a significant investment (R V, {[374-377). The Claimants’
allegations as to the transparency, discrimination, and bad faith of the Ecuadorian
courts are simply baseless, as demonstrated in the context of their arguments
above on denial of justice under customary international law (see Sections H.II.1

and H.II.2 above).

Full protection and security (Article II(3)(a))
With respect to the BIT standard of “full protection and security,” the
Respondent reiterates that it does not create separate and independent obligations,

but merely incorporates the customary international law standard of full

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 116

iv)
232.

233.

protection and security, which is “almost universally restricted to the host State’s
duty to provide foreign investors with physical protection from violence” (R V,
(9385-387; R VI, 1448-449, 451-457). In any event, to the extent that it could
have any potential application to the present case, it is indistinguishable from the
“fair and equitable treatment” standard. Thus, for the same reasons as provided
with respect to fair and equitable treatment, this claim should also be dismissed
(R V, 388-393; R VI, 450). Furthermore, the Claimants simply have not put
forward a sufficient case that Ecuador has failed to provide them with “legal

security” (R VI, 7458).

Arbitrary or discriminatory measures (Article II(3)(b))
Finally, with respect to the prohibition of “arbitrary” or “discriminatory”
measures under Article II(3)(b) of the BIT, the Respondent disputes the assertion
that the second sentence of that Article dispenses with the requirement of
exhaustion of local remedies. According to the Respondent, this proviso was
intended only to derogate from the “fork-in-the-road” clause stipulated in Article
‘VI(2). Thus, while that clause might have the effect that “an investor challenging
an ‘arbitrary or discriminatory measure’ — perhaps a law, a regulation, or other
official act of the host state — may not be required to seek and exhaust a judicial
remedy before resorting to contractual arbitration [...] this exemption does not
apply where, as here, the judicial system is itself under review.” This was the
interpretation given to this very provision in Occidental v. Ecuador® (RV,

9397-403; R VI, 9494-496).

Nonetheless, the allegations of “arbitrary” or “discriminatory” conduct by
Ecuador lack substance. As with the other BIT provisions raised by the
Claimants, the Respondent submits that this provision does not create obligations
distinct from the general prohibition of denial of justice under international law
(R_ VI, 9497-499). With particular reference to “arbitrary” conduct, the
Respondent adopts the definition from the ELS/ case:

Arbitrariness is not so much something opposed to a rule of law, as
something opposed to the rule of law... It is a willful disregard of due

© Occidental, supra note 47 at paras. 38-63

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 117

234.

235.

10

process of law, an act which shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of juridical
propriety.”°

(R V, 1406; R VI, 1503)

The Respondent cites this among a number of sources applying this definition in
support of “a high bar for proof that a State acted in an arbitrary manner [...]
requir[ing] a demonstration that the act in question (1) was entirely irrational,
lacking any coherent foundation and/or (2) bordered on the deliberately
improper” (R V, {§406-409; R VI, 501-512). The Respondent then asserts that
the Claimants “have been unable to identify even one act particular to them, as
opposed to reflecting the workings of the Ecuadorian judiciary as a whole to
litigants in Ecuador’s courts.” Furthermore, to the extent that the Claimants might
attempt to characterize the dismissals of their cases as “arbitrary,” the “Claimants
have failed to adduce any evidence that these decisions were motivated by bias or
corruption, or that the decisions were reached either as a result of some form of
judicial impropriety or capricious, despotic, or irrational conduct” (R V, 9411;

R VI, (513-517).

As for “discriminatory” conduct, the Respondent argues that the simple
coincidence of adverse decisions in their cases with the commencement of the
arbitration is clearly insufficient to prove discriminatory conduct, particularly
given no proof that the judges were even aware of the existence of this arbitration
(R V, 9412-415). In response to the allegations of systematic discrimination in
the treatment of the Claimants’ court cases, the Respondent states that the
Claimants “greatly oversimplify the status of the seven proceedings by
suggesting that all seven cases are stagnating, when, in reality, the respective
procedural postures of these cases has proven much more fluid and far less
homogeneous than represented” (R V, 9417). The Respondent contends that
showing discriminatory treatment requires demonstrating treatment that is
different from that accorded to other, similarly-situated investors and lack proper

justification for that difference. Meanwhile, the Claimants have failed to identify

Case Concerning Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (U.S. v. Italy), 1989 LCJ. p. 15 at p. 76 (July

20).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 118

a)

236.

237.

actions specifically directed against them. Nor have they shown treatment that
differs from other similarly-situated litigants in Ecuadorian courts (R V, {{[418-
424; R VI, 1520-525).

Breach of the Investment Agreements

Arguments by the Claimants
Given that the BIT provides jurisdiction over disputes “arising out of or relating
. an investment agreement,” the Claimants submit that the Respondent has
committed a BIT breach by having breached the 1973 and 1977 Agreements and
subsequently committing a denial of justice when TexPet sought a remedy for

these breaches (C V, 401; C VI, 1443).

The essential difference that results from a claim of breach of the investment
agreements, according to the Claimants is the approach to damages. The

Claimants summarize:

Under their investment agreement claims, the Claimants seek damages
directly for the underlying breaches of contract that are the subject of
TexPet’s seven cases. By breaching the 1973 and 1977 Agreements as
discussed above, and then by abusing its sovereign power for the purpose of
avoiding the consequences of those breaches, Ecuador breached investment
agreements. This course of conduct violated customary international law.
Claimants contend that under both their BIT and their investment-agreement
claims, this Tribunal must ultimately award compensation based on the
merits of TexPet’s underlying cases. But with respect to the claims for
violations of the BIT, to the extent that Ecuador asks the Tribunal to
determine what an Ecuadorian court might have done in judging those cases
(which Claimants contend is the wrong approach), rather than for it simply
to decide those cases itself, that argument has no application to the claim for
breach of the investment agreements. Under Claimants’ investment-
agreement claim, the underlying breaches of contract are themselves a part
of the internationally wrongful act, and the Tribunal may therefore
adjudicate those breaches directly since a denial of justice has occurred
under customary international law either by refusals of the Ecuadorian
judiciary to decide those cases or by decisions taken incompetently or in bad
faith, in manifest disregard of Ecuadorian law or a manifest misapplication
of the law.

(C VI, 4445; Tr. Il at 1078:16-1079:23)

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 119

b)

238.

239.

240.

Arguments by the Respondent
The Respondent contends that the Claimants argue their “investment agreement”
claims as a ploy to avoid the principles of exhaustion of local remedies and “loss
of chance” (R VI, 9526). According to the Respondent, these claims have no
merit. The claim formulated is a novel “combined claim” for breach of contract
combined with a denial of justice under customary international law. However,
the Respondent argues that the Claimants have “no support for their proposed
hybrid ‘domestic law and customary international law’ claim, much less a cogent
explanation of how this ‘combined claim’ differed from their denial of justice
claim” (R V, 9428). As such, the claim must fail for the same reasons as their

denial of justice claims (R V, {{[428-432; R VII, 62).

In addition, in order to prove the first prong of their claim, the Claimants must be
able to show that they would have prevailed in the underlying court cases for
breach of the 1973 and 1977 Agreements, which the Respondent contends they
cannot do for the reasons set out below in the section regarding the underlying

cases (R V, 9433-434).

Regardless, the Respondent submits that the claims as they are now formulated
were actually dismissed by the Tribunal’s Interim Award. The Tribunal declared
that it had jurisdiction over the claims. This finding, however, hinged on the fact
that the Claimants did not invoke the “umbrella clause” of the BIT, but instead
“make a claim for denial of justice under customary international law” (R VI,
527). The Respondent thus asserts that there is no difference between the

“investment agreement” claims and their denial of justice claims:

The Tribunal has thus affirmed that it cannot act in the merits phase as a
court of first instance and adjudicate the seven underlying breach of contract
cases directly, but must limit itself to adjudicating Claimants’ investment
agreement claim as a claim for denial of justice under customary
international law. Therefore, Claimants’ investment agreement claim under
Article VI(I)(a) adds nothing to their Treaty breach claims under Article
VI(D(c). Consequently, Claimants cannot, by making a claim under the 1973
and 1977 Agreements, avoid application of the “loss of chance” principle in
measuring their alleged losses.

(R VI, (528; Tr. Tat 1124:11-1126:12; HRS pp.2-5)

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 120

5.

241.

242.

The Tribunal

The Tribunal recalls the text of Article II(7) of the BIT:

Each Party shall provide effective means of asserting claims and enforcing
rights with respect to investment, investment agreements, and investment
authorizations.
BIT provisions such as this one are relatively rare. They appear only in U.S.
BITs, the Energy Charter Treaty, and a handful of other BITs. Only three cases
considering such provisions have been brought to the attention of this Tribunal,
those of Petrobart v. Kyrgyz Republic,” Amto v. Ukraine,” Duke Energy v.

Ecuador.”

The obligations created by Article II(7) overlap significantly with the prohibition
of denial of justice under customary international law. The provision appears to
be directed at many of the same potential wrongs as denial of justice. The
Tribunal thus agrees with the idea, expressed in Duke Energy v. Ecuador, that
Article II(7), to some extent, “seeks to implement and form part of the more
general guarantee against denial of justice.””* Article II(7), however, appears in
the BIT as an independent, specific treaty obligation and does not make any
explicit reference to denial of justice or customary international law. The
Tribunal thus finds that Article II(7), setting out an “effective means” standard,
constitutes a /ex specialis and not a mere restatement of the law on denial of
justice. Indeed, the latter intent could have been easily expressed through the
inclusion of explicit language to that effect or by using language corresponding
to the prevailing standard for denial of justice at the time of drafting. The
Tribunal notes that this interpretation accords with the approach taken in Amto v.

Ukraine, another case that is cited by the Respondent, which considered the

” Petrobart, supra note 40.

” Amto, supra note 60.

” Duke Energy, supra note 51.

™ Td., para. 391.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 121

243.

244.

identically worded provision found at Article 10(12) of the Energy Charter

Treaty. 75

The lex specialis nature of Article II(7) is also confirmed by its origin and
purpose. According to Vandevelde, such “judicial access” provisions arose in
USS. treaty practice at a time when disagreement existed among publicists about
the content of the right of access to the courts of the host state, “thus making
treaty protection desirable.””° Article 1(7) was thus created as an independent
treaty standard to address a lack of clarity in the customary international law
regarding denial of justice. Vandevelde further notes that this provision was later
deleted from the U.S. Model BIT when U.S. drafters deemed that other BIT
provisions and customary international law provided adequate protection and that
a separate treaty obligation was no longer necessary, as is shown by the reference
to “effective means” in the preamble and the express reference to denial of justice

in the formulation of the fair and equitable treatment standard.””

In view of the above considerations and the language of Article II(7), the
Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that a distinct and potentially less-demanding
test is applicable under this provision as compared to denial of justice under
customary international law. The test for establishing a denial of justice sets, as
the Respondent has argued, a high threshold. While the standard is objective and
does not require an overt showing of bad faith, it nevertheless requires the

demonstration of “a particularly serious shortcoming””*®

and egregious conduct
that “shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of judicial propriety” (R V, (32-44).

By contrast, under Article II(7), a failure of domestic courts to enforce rights

* Amto, supra note 60 at para. 88.

7 KENNETH J. VANDEVELDE, UNITED STATES INVESTMENT TREATIES: POLICY AND PRACTICE p. 112

(Kluwer Law & Taxation 1992). The Tribunal notes that the new edition of Vandevelde’s treatise,
published after the submission of the Parties’ Memorials, further confirms the origin and purpose of

the provision. See KENNETH J. VANDEVELDE, U.S. INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS p. 411

(Oxford, 2009) (“Although customary international law guarantees an alien the right of access to the

courts of the host state, disagreement among publicists about the content of the right [of access to the
courts of the host state] prompted the United States to seek treaty protection.”) [hereinafter

VANDEVELDE 2009].

77. ANDEVELDE 2009, p. 415.

*8 Opinion of Jan Paulsson, para. 10 (Nov. 2008), Exh. C-646 [hereinafter Paulsson Opinion].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 122

245.

246.

247.

“effectively” will constitute a violation of Article II(7), which may not always be
sufficient to find a denial of justice under customary international law. Given the
related genesis of the two standards, the interpretation and application of Article
II(7) is informed by the law on denial of justice. However, the Tribunal
emphasizes that its role is to interpret and apply Article II(7) as it appears in the

present BIT.

The Respondent asserts that Article II(7) only concerns “system attributes” and
does not allow review of investor treatment in individual cases. The Respondent
relies in particular on the holding in Amto v. Ukraine:
[T]he State must provide an effective framework or system for the
enforcement of rights, but does not offer guarantees in individual cases.
Individual failures might be evidence of systematic inadequacies, but are not
themselves a breach of Article 10( 12).”
While such a dichotomy can theoretically be made, one cannot fully divorce the
formal existence of the system from its operation in individual cases. The Amto v.
Ukraine tribunal appears to acknowledge this in the second sentence of the
passage above. This Tribunal further notes that the statement in the Amto case
was made in the context of considering specific complaints against the legislative
framework governing bankruptcy in the Ukraine and not while considering

potential injustices arising in a particular case.

In any event, the Tribunal does not share the Respondent’s view. While Article
II(7) clearly requires that a proper system of laws and institutions be put in place,
the system’s effects on individual cases may also be reviewed. This idea is
reflected in the language of the provision. The article specifies “asserting
claims,” so some system must be provided to the investor for bringing claims, as
well as “enforcing rights,” so the BIT also focuses on the effective enforcement
of the rights that are at issue in particular cases. The Tribunal thus finds that it
may directly examine individual cases under Article II(7), while keeping in mind
that the threshold of “effectiveness” stipulated by the provision requires that

a measure of deference be afforded to the domestic justice system; the Tribunal is

” Amto, supra note 60 at para. 88.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 123

248.

249.

not empowered by this provision to act as a court of appeal reviewing every

individual alleged failure of the local judicial system de novo.

Additionally, within the /ex specialis of Article II(7), the Tribunal finds no
requirement that evidence be shown “of the host State’s extreme interference in
the judicial proceedings” in order to breach the BIT as had been initially argued
by the Respondent (R V, 340). The Respondent subsequently acknowledged as
much in its Rejoinder Memorial on the Merits, where it stated that it “has not
cited Petrobart, Amto, and Duke Energy to show that governmental interference
is the only way to violate Article II(7). Rather, Respondent cited these awards to
illustrate the nature, gravity, and effect of the interference that would violate
Article II(7)” (R VI, 9490). The Tribunal reiterates that the standard under Article
II(7) is one of “effectiveness” which applies to a variety of State conduct that has
an effect on the ability of an investor to assert claims or enforce rights.
Furthermore, the obligation in Article II(7) is stated as a positive obligation of the
host State to provide effective means, as opposed to a negative obligation not to
interfere in the functioning of those means. The Tribunal therefore finds that,
while instances of governmental interference may be relevant to the analysis
under Article II(7), the provision is applicable to the Claimants’ claims for undue

delay and manifestly unjust decisions even if no such interference is shown.

While not seriously disputed by the Parties, the Tribunal finds that the terms of
the 1973 and 1977 Agreements as well as the 1986 Refinancing Agreement
created rights for the Claimants with respect to TexPet’s investment in Ecuador,
and that Ecuador had an obligation under Article II(7) of the BIT to provide
effective means for TexPet to assert any claims for violation of those rights and
to enforce those rights. Regarding TexPet’s claims arising from alleged breaches
of the 1973 and 1977 Agreements and the 1986 Refinancing Agreement, the
“means” made available by Ecuador for TexPet to assert its claims was recourse
to the Ecuadorian courts. These claims were introduced to the Ecuadorian courts
by the Claimants, but remained undecided as of the commencement of this

arbitration.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 124

250.

251.

252.

For any “means” of asserting claims or enforcing rights to be effective, it must
not be subject to indefinite or undue delay. Undue delay in effect amounts to a
denial of access to those means. The Tribunal therefore finds that Article II(7)
applies to the Claimants’ claims for undue delay in their seven cases in the
Ecuadorian courts. The Ecuadorian legal system must thus, according to
Article II(7), provide foreign investors with means of enforcing legitimate rights
within a reasonable amount of time. The limit of reasonableness is dependent on
the circumstances of the case. As with denial of justice under customary
international law, some of the factors that may be considered are the complexity
of the case, the behavior of the litigants involved, the significance of the interests
at stake in the case, and the behavior of the courts themselves. The Tribunal must
thus come to a conclusion about if and when the delay exceeded the allowable

threshold under Article II(7) in light of all such circumstances.

Neither side alleges and the Tribunal does not find that the delay had reached the
threshold of unreasonable delay before the entry into force of the BIT on May 11,
1997. Such a conclusion would take the consequent BIT breach out of the bounds
of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction according to the Tribunal’s Interim Award. The
Tribunal recalls from its Interim Award, however, that acts and circumstances
pre-dating the entry into force of the BIT may be taken into account in
determining whether a BIT breach was later completed (Interim Award, {{[282-
284, 298-301). For the reasons that follow, the Tribunal finds that delay with
respect to each of the seven court cases had become unreasonable, and a breach
of Article II(7) was completed, at the date of the Claimants’ Notice of

Arbitration.

The Claimants’ Notice of Arbitration was dated December 21, 2006 and the most
recent of the seven court cases were commenced in December 1993 (Case 152-93
commenced December 10, 1993; Case 153-93 commenced December 14, 1993;
Case 154-93 commenced December 14, 1993).°°

° The other four cases were commenced on December 17, 1991 (Case 23-91) and April 15, 1992

(Cases 7-92, 8-92, and 983-03), respectively.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 125

253.

254.

255.

Therefore, all cases had been pending for at least 13 years at the time of
commencement of the present arbitration. Thirteen years is a significant period,
but the Tribunal does not find that a specific amount of delay alone results in an
automatic breach of Article II (7) of the BIT. The Tribunal must also consider
evidence regarding the reasons for the 13 or more years of delay in each of the

seven court cases to ascertain whether the delay was undue.

The Tribunal considers that neither the complexity of the cases, nor the
Claimants’ behavior justify this delay. These cases involve very significant sums
of money, but are in essence straightforward contractual disputes. At most, these
cases may be considered cases of average complexity due to the submission of
expert reports and laborious calculations required for the assessment of damages.
The cases, however, cannot be considered so complex as to justify many years of
delay in deciding them. Indeed, the recent court decisions on the merits of two of
TexPet’s cases do not make mention of or otherwise demonstrate the existence of
any extraordinary complexity encountered in the resolution of these disputes. The
fact that all seven cases have suffered similar delays, including the most simple
and straightforward amongst them (i.e., the Refinancing Agreement case), further

convinces the Tribunal that this factor does not justify the delay.

As for the Claimants’ behavior, subject to the Tribunal’s considerations below
regarding resort to local remedies for delay, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants
pursued their cases to the point of being ready for a decision and sent numerous
and continuous requests for a judgment. There is also no evidence that any action
by the Claimants has actively and significantly contributed to the delays. The
only discrete act of the Claimants that might be impugned is the filing of recusals
in Cases 23-91, 7-92, and 8-92 for conflict of interest (followed by the filing of
recusals for delay in deciding these prior recusals). However, these were pursued
and resolved in under a year in 1993-1994 and cannot therefore explain or justify
the later delays. Once again, the existence of similar delays in cases where
recusals were not filed reinforces the Tribunal’s conclusion that the Claimants’

actions are not responsible for the delay.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 126

256.

257.

258.

Instead, the facts demonstrate that the Ecuadorian courts have failed to act with
reasonable dispatch. In each of the seven cases, the Tribunal finds prolonged
periods of complete inactivity on the part of the Ecuadorian courts. In particular,
in all of the cases except the first Amazonas claim (Case 7-92), the Tribunal
notes that the evidentiary phase was closed by mid-1997 or earlier and the
Ecuadorian courts had over nine years between the closing of the record and the
Notice of Arbitration to render a first instance judgment. In the first Amazonas
claim (Case 7-92), the court simply did not set a date for judicial inspection to

take place for over thirteen years prior to the Notice of Arbitration.

The Ecuadorian courts further officially acknowledged the closure of the cases
and their responsibility to render a judgment promptly through the various autos
para sentencia they issued. For example, in the Force Majeure case (Case 8-92),
the court issued an auto para sentencia on July 18, 1995, but only first decided
the case on October 2, 2006 (on the grounds of abandonment, which decision was
later overturned). In the Imported Products case (Case 154-93), an auto para
sentencia was issued on October 8, 1997. However, a judgment was not rendered
until after the close of proceedings in the present arbitration. In the two
Esmeraldas Refinery cases (Cases 23-91 and 152-93) as well as the second
Amazonas Refinery case (Case 153-93), autos para sentencia were issued
between 1998 and 2002. Yet no explanation has been provided to excuse the
inactivity of the courts for periods ranging from four to eight years from the time
they had officially declared themselves ready to issue a decision in these three

cases until the date of the Notice of Arbitration.

As for the other two cases, namely the first Amazonas Refinery case (Case 7-92)
and the Refinancing Agreement case (Case 983-03), these proceeded somewhat
differently than the previously-mentioned cases. Yet, similarly unjustifiable
delays are also observed. In Case 7-92, on May 5, 1993, the court issued a
notification letter setting a date for the experts to officially accept their
appointments and to conduct a judicial inspection of documents. The Claimants
assert, however, that the notification letter erroneously set the date for the
experts’ appointment as “Tuesday, May 11 this year [1993]” when May 11, 1993

was in fact a Wednesday and that, due to this error, the official acceptance did

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 127

259.

260.

261.

262.

not occur (Exh. C-283, Tab 17; C V, {166 n. 167; C VI, {79 n. 132). The
Tribunal cannot find the error in the notification letter alleged by the Claimants;
May 11, 1993 was indeed a Tuesday.*! Nonetheless, the absence of any initial

error by the Ecuadorian courts does not excuse their later delays.

Between July 1993 and February 2007, TexPet sent nine separate requests for a
new date to be set for the experts to accept their appointments and proceed with
the evidentiary phase. However, the court did not set a new date and the
evidentiary phase could not therefore be completed. The failure to complete the
evidentiary phase explains why no auto para sentencia was issued in this case as
compared to the other cases mentioned above. Nonetheless, a period of inactivity
by the court of more than 13 years is observed between the original notification

letter and the Notice of Arbitration.

In Case 983-03, the evidentiary phase was completed by March 1995, but no
activity by the court is observed for eight years until, in October 2003, the court
decided that it did not have jurisdiction to hear the case and sent the case to a
different court. The new court was similarly inactive for three years through to

the Notice of Arbitration.

The Tribunal generally refers to the attached Table of Cases for further
background on the Claimants’ cases and their procedural history in the

Ecuadorian courts (see Appendix 1).

Accordingly, it is the nature of the delay, and the apparent unwillingness of the
Ecuadorian courts to allow the cases to proceed that makes the delay in the seven
cases undue and amounts to a breach of the BIT by the Respondent for failure to
provide “effective means” in the sense of Article II(7). In particular, the Tribunal

finds the existence of long delays, even after official acknowledgements by the

8! The Tribunal notes that the Claimants named this exhibit “Court Order Requesting Both Experts to
Appear in Court on Tuesday, May 12, 1993 to Accept Their Appointments,” and have elsewhere
asserted that the letter convoked the experts to appear in court on Tuesday, May 12, 1993, which
would have indeed been an error since May 12, 1993 was a Wednesday (C V, 97). However, the
exhibit, in both the original Spanish and the English translation, refers to Tuesday, May 11, 1993. No
apparent explanation can be found, however, for the above discrepancy within the Claimants’ own

pleadings or between the Claimants’ pleadings and the record.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 128

263.

264.

courts that they were ready to decide the cases, to be a decisive factor
demonstrating that the delays experienced by TexPet are sufficient to breach the
BIT. The Tribunal ultimately concludes that the Ecuadorian courts have had
ample time to render a judgment in each of the seven cases and have failed to do

so.

The Respondent contends that a generalized backlog in the Ecuadorian courts
explains and excuses the delays. Court congestion and backlogs are relevant
factors to be considered in determining the period of delay that is reasonable in
the circumstances. Court congestion, however, cannot be an absolute defense.
The question of whether effective means have been provided to the Claimants for
the assertion of their claims and enforcement of their rights is ultimately to be
measured against an objective, international standard. To the extent that
generalized court congestion could alone produce the persistent and long delays
of the kind observed here, it would evidence a systemic problem with the design
and operation of the Ecuadorian judicial system and would breach Article II(7)

according to the systemic standard advocated by the Respondent itself.

The Tribunal finds that court congestion must be temporary and must be
promptly and effectively addressed by the host state if it is to act as a defense to
an otherwise valid claim for breach of Article II(7). That is to say, the State must
have previously been in compliance with and must return to compliance with the
international standard within a short amount of time from when the backlogs
arise. The Respondent appears to acknowledge this idea, first when, in the
context of denial of justice under customary international law, it frames its case
in terms of a “sudden and extraordinary” increase in court congestion, and second
when it and its expert, Prof. Schrijver, acknowledge that backlogs will not
provide an excuse when measures taken to relieve the backlog are hollow or
ineffective (R V, {{[176-182; R VI, 9241-251). Thus, despite the evidence of
judicial reform in Ecuador aimed at increasing the clearance rate of cases in
Ecuadorian courts, the Tribunal finds that the delays observed in Claimants’

cases are too long to be excused.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 129

265.

266.

267.

268.

In the present case, the Tribunal might, for example, find the Respondent excused
for the backlog and delay occasioned by the political upheaval that resulted in the
absence of a Supreme Court for the period of about a year in 2004-2005.
According to the above, however, despite the Respondent’s evidence of a
situation of general court congestion and evidence of judicial reform in Ecuador
aimed at increasing the clearance rate of cases in Ecuadorian courts, the fact that
congestion applied from the filing of the Claimants’ cases in the early 1990s and
continued unabated through the end of that decade, means that the backlogs
cannot be considered temporary enough to provide justification for otherwise
undue delay. Looked at from another perspective, the judicial reform efforts were

not effective enough to prevent a breach of Article II(7).

A further factor comes into play in the present case. The Tribunal, according to
reasons further expanded upon below under the discussion of estoppel (see
Section H.IV below), does not find that the Claimants’ statements made in the
U.S. courts regarding the fairness and efficiency of the Ecuadorian courts should

preclude them from being able to bring a claim for undue delay in this arbitration.

The Claimants’ statements, however, may still have some effect on that claim.
These statements qualify as admissions against interest for the purposes of
considering if the delay experienced is unreasonable. This is particularly so in
light of the fact that the Claimants cited the seven cases presently at issue as
examples of the proper administration of justice in Ecuador. Therefore, the
Tribunal concludes that the limit of reasonable delay cannot have been reached
until after the final judgment was issued on August 16, 2002 in the Aguinda
litigation in which the Claimants relied on these cases in contradiction to their
current position in this arbitration. Furthermore, in the same way that changed
circumstances allow the Claimants to validly change their position and avoid
estoppel on this basis, so too must changed circumstances be shown to claim that

the limit of undue delay has been reached.

As discussed later in this award under the heading of local remedies (see Section
HII below), the Tribunal also does not accept the Respondent’s contention that

the Claimants must prove a strict exhaustion of local remedies in order for the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 130

269.

270.

271.

Tribunal to find a breach of Article II(7) through undue delay in the Claimants’
seven court claims. The Claimants must, however, have adequately utilized the
means made available to them to assert claims and enforce rights in Ecuador in

order to prove a breach of the BIT.

In the present case, the Tribunal is persuaded that the Claimants have indeed
adequately utilized the means available to assert claims in a manner that attracts
the protection of Article II(7) of the BIT. The Tribunal is not convinced that any
further actions on the part of the Claimants were required to trigger the
application of Article II(7) or would have made any of their seven cases proceed
more rapidly. As further explained later in this award (see Section H.III below),
the Respondent has not demonstrated that its proposed remedies of oral and
written closing arguments or disciplinary or monetary sanctions could have been
effective in reducing delay. The Claimants were also not required to bring actions
for the recusal of judges in the seven cases. Judges changed regularly in the
Claimants’ court cases even without recusal and therefore recusals would also not

have had any effect.

Taking into account the totality of the circumstances that the Tribunal deems
relevant, the Tribunal ultimately concludes that a breach of Article II(7) of the
BIT was completed by reason of undue delay at the date of the Claimants’ Notice
of Arbitration, December 21, 2006. At that time, the Claimants’ cases had been
pending in the Ecuadorian courts for 13 to 15 years. Six of these cases had never
seen any decision. The last of the cases, Case 8-92, had recently been dismissed
for abandonment, but that decision would soon be overturned and leave the case
again pending at first instance. At that time, the political turmoil of 2004-2005
had passed and a re-constituted Supreme Court had been in place for over a year
since November 2005. More than four years had also passed since the close of
the Aguinda litigation. As such, the Tribunal concludes that this date constitutes

the critical date upon which the breach of Article II(7) was completed.

Pursuant to the finding of a breach of Article II(7) of the BIT as of the date of the
Notice of Arbitration, the Tribunal must proceed to consider the questions of

causation between the breach by Ecuador and the alleged damages to the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 131

272.

273.

274.

Claimants in each of the seven cases as well as the quantum of any damages.

This will be done later in this Award.

The Tribunal notes in this respect that, once delay has become unreasonable and
a breach of the BIT has been completed, a decision issued after that date cannot
affect the liability of the State for the undue delay. The Tribunal agrees with the
statement offered in Paulsson’s Opinion submitted by the Claimants in this
arbitration, which, although it addresses denial of justice, is equally applicable

under Article II(7):

The delict of denial of justice by unreasonable delay is fully consummated at
the point in time at which the length of the delay, in the circumstances of the
case, rises to the level of a breach of the international standard. The
obligation on the part of the state is to provide justice within a reasonable
period. Once the period of reasonableness has lapsed, the alien has been
definitively deprived of an opportunity to have his/her rights properly
vindicated in the domestic courts; time cannot be recaptured. The
wrongdoing state’s second-order obligation to provide reparation for breach
of international law arises at that point. Once the delict is fully
consummated, the state that has committed the wrong cannot avoid the
obligation to make reparation. Thus, any subsequent activity in the
underlying cases does not negate the obligation of the state to provide
reparation for the original wrong.

(Paulsson Opinion, CEX-646, (55)

The decisions issued by the Ecuadorian courts after the completion of the breach
of Article II(7) can only thus affect the questions of causation and damages that

flow from that breach.

The Tribunal notes that all relevant judgments of the Ecuadorian courts have
post-dated the Notice of Arbitration in the present case. The earliest such
judgment, the first decision in the Force Majeure case (Case 8-92) on the basis of
abandonment was rendered on October 2, 2006, prior to the Notice of Arbitration
on December 21, 2006. However, this decision was overturned on appeal and the
case effectively sat pending again at first instance at the date of the Notice of
Arbitration. All other judgments that have been rendered by the Ecuadorian
courts were issued after this date. Thus, all seven of the Claimants’ cases fall
within the Tribunal’s finding of a breach of Article II(7) of the BIT for undue
delay.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 132

275.

Accordingly, in view of the Tribunal’s decision that Article II(7) of the BIT
constitutes a lex specialis with greater specificity than the customary law
standard of denial of justice and that a breach of Article II(7) for undue delay was
complete by the date of the Notice of Arbitration, prior to the issuance of any
relevant decision by the Ecuadorian courts, further consideration of the
Claimants’ allegations of denial of justice by undue delay or manifestly unjust
decisions is unnecessary. Any additional breach of the BIT or — in view of Article
‘VI(1)(a) — of customary international law is not relevant unless it leads to further
damages. As will be seen in the later considerations of the Tribunal regarding
causation and damages, the Parties have not claimed and indeed there is no
evidence that additional damages have been caused by the alleged breaches of
other BIT provisions or of customary international law. Accordingly, as the
award of damages in respect of the breach of Article II(7) encompasses any
compensation owed with regard to the remaining BIT and custom-based claims,

those claims need no longer be decided.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 133

H.III. Exhaustion of Local Remedies

1.

276.

277.

278.

Arguments by the Claimants

Following on its arguments in the jurisdictional phase, in response to the
Respondent’s objection, the Claimants submit that they have exhausted local
remedies. Preliminarily, however, they assert that the local remedies rule is

inapplicable for a variety of reasons.

First, they argue that there is no requirement of exhaustion for a claim of undue
delay amounting to denial of justice under customary international law (C V,
312). The local remedies rule is to be applied flexibly based on the context of a
given case. According to the Claimants, “this case is not about the Ecuadorian
judicial system being denied an opportunity to correct itself. There is no appeal
possible under Ecuadorian law from a refusal of a first instance judge to decide a
case” (C II, 330-331; Tr. Lat 299:22-300:6). The Claimants quote Professor
Freeman, cited with approval by Paulsson, to the effect that “[i]t has been
axiomatic that unreasonable delays are properly to be assimilated to absolute
denials of access...”*” (C V, 4313). Amerasinghe is also cited in this respect:
“The principle that undue delay would operate in customary international law to
exempt the claimant or applicant from exhausting remedies is undisputed”** (Cc
V, 9315). Moreover, the proof of an undue or unreasonable delay under
international law serves in itself to show that the “system as a whole” has failed
and that local remedies are ineffective (C V, (314, C VI, 1262-266, 288-295; Tr.
II at 36:11-24; HC4 p. 32). Thus the Claimants are not required to pursue local

remedies.

Furthermore, the substantive provisions of the BIT do not contain a requirement
of exhaustion of local remedies. The merits of the Claimants’ case require “an

analysis of the provision that requires Ecuador to provide effective means of

© See PAULSSON, supra note 25 at p. 177.

®3 AMERASINGHE, supra note 23 at p. 211.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 134

279.

280.

asserting claims and enforcing rights” as well as more subtle consideration “of
the elements of fair and equitable treatment [...] along with denial of justice”
(C II, 9320). While the fair and equitable treatment or effective means standards
may be understood to include a prohibition of denial of justice, a decision of a
lower court may constitute an act or omission by the State that directly violates
the BIT standards separately from any consideration of denial of justice under
customary international law (C II, 1323-324; Tr. I at 292:18-293:25; HC3 p. 58;
C IV, 51-55; Tr. Il at 36:8-11). The Claimants assert that the Saipem v.
Bangladesh decision recently dealt with this issue in the context of expropriation
under a BIT. The tribunal stated that, despite local remedies not being exhausted,
the Bangladeshi courts’ conduct could violate the BIT: “exhaustion of local
remedies does not constitute a substantive requirement of a finding of
expropriation by a court (C VIII, 17). The Claimants also criticize the
Loewen decision® relied on by the Respondent for “borrowing principles from
customary international law that are inconsistent with the hybrid nature of
investment arbitration” (C II, §{[321-322). Finally, the Claimants note that
requirement of exhaustion of local remedies is explicitly excluded by the BIT
with respect to their claim under Article II(3)(b) (C V, 385). That article states
that “a measure may be arbitrary or discriminatory notwithstanding the fact that a
party has had or has exercised the opportunity to review such measure in the

courts or administrative tribunals of a Party.”

To the extent that a requirement of local remedies would apply, the Claimants
argue that it would be futile to continue prosecuting its claims in Ecuadorian
courts and so they are excused from any requirement to further exhaust local
remedies. In particular, the Claimants contend that the Ecuadorian courts’ bias

and lack of independence evidence the futility of local remedies.

This argument is based on the idea expressed by John Dugard, the ILC Special

Rapporteur to the Third Report on Diplomatic Protection:

“ Saipem SpA v. Bangladesh, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/7, Award (June 20, 2009), para. 181

[hereinafter Saipem].

s
Loewen, supra note 32.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 135

281.

282.

in a situation in which the best local legal advice suggests that it is ‘highly
unlikely’ that further resort to local remedies will result in a disposition
favourable to the claimant, the correct conclusion may well be that local
remedies have been exhausted if the cost involved in proceeding further
considerably outweighs the possibility of any satisfaction resulting...*°

(C V, 4409)
Paulsson also affirms this idea in his treatise:

The victim of a denial of justice is not required to pursue improbable
remedies. Nor is he required to contrive indirect or extravagant applications
beyond the ordinary path of a frontal attempt to have the judgment by which
he was improperly treated set aside, or be granted a trial he was denied.*”

(CV, 4411)

The Claimants further argue that “a prime example of a situation in which local
remedies are deemed futile and ineffective under international law is when courts
are “notoriously lacking independence” and cite Mr. Dugard to this effect (C V,
410). The Claimants also rely on the case of Robert E. Brown,®* acknowledged
by Paulsson as a leading precedent on the question of futility. In Robert E.
Brown, the South African Government removed the chief judge of the High
Court of South Africa after Brown won a lawsuit against the Government in the
High Court declaring a legislative act unconstitutional. The new court then
dismissed Brown’s motion for a hearing on damages based on the successful
prior suit. It instead invited Brown to commence a new lawsuit. The Claimants
point out that “[i]n doing so, the new Court ignored one of its earlier decisions
that permitted on identical facts the same damage procedure as that requested by
Brown” (C V, 9415). When the United States later brought a denial of justice
claim on Brown’s behalf, England (acting for South Africa) objected that local

remedies were not exhausted. The tribunal rejected the objection in part “because

86 JOHN DUGARD, INTERNATIONAL LAW COMMISSION, THIRD REPORT ON DIPLOMATIC PROTECTION,

UN Doc. A/CN.4.523 (2002), para. 37 (quoting David R. Mummery, The Content of the Duty to

Exhaust Local Remedies, 58 AM. J. INT'L L. p. 389 at p 401 (1964)) [hereinafter ICL REPORT].

87 PAULSSON, supra note 25 at p. 113.

§§ Robert E. Brown (U.S.) v. Great Britain, 6 R. INT’L ARB. AWARDS p. 120 at pp. 121-29 (decision of
Nov. 23, 1923) {hereinafter Brown].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 136

283.

284.

the South African judiciary was subordinated to the Executive” and thus local

remedies were futile:

[W]e are persuaded that on the whole case, giving proper weight to the
cumulative strength of the numerous steps taken by the Government of the
South African Republic with the obvious intent to defeat Brown’s claims, a
definite denial of justice took place... We are not impressed by the argument
founded upon the alleged neglect to exhaust legal remedies by taking out a
new summons...In the actual circumstances, however, we feel that the
futility of further proceedings has been fully demonstrated, and that the
advice of his counsel was amply justified. In the frequently quoted language
of an American Secretary of State: ‘A claimant in a foreign State is not
required to exhaust justice in such a State when there is no justice to
exhaust.”

(C V, 1416-418)

The Claimants further rely on the case of Las Palmeras v. Colombia before the

TACHR. In that case, Colombian police and military forces were accused of

executing seven civilians. The relatives then alleged that their right to a proper

investigation had been violated. The IACHR then weighed in on the effectiveness

required before local remedies can be invoked:

It is the jurisprudence constante of this Court that it is not enough that such
recourses exist formally; they must be effective; that is, they must give
results or responses to the violations of rights established in the Convention.
This Court has also held that remedies that, due to the general situation of
the country or even the particular circumstances of any given case, prove
illusory cannot be considered effective. This may happen when, for
example, they prove to be useless in practice because the jurisdictional body
does not have the independence necessary to arrive at an impartial decision
or because they lack the means to execute their decisions; or any other
situation in which justice is being denied, such as cases in which there has
been an unwarranted delay in rendering a judgment.”

(C V, 9420; C VI, 1299)

In the context of the present case, the Claimants allege that Ecuador’s judiciary,

and specifically its Supreme Court, has been dysfunctional and has lacked

judicial independence since at least December 2004. The Claimants present a list

of recent instances where judicial independence has allegedly been undermined,

© Id. at p. 129.

°° Las Palmeras v. Colombia (Merits), Inter-Am. Ct. HR. (Ser. C) No. 90, para. 58 (Dec. 6, 2001).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 137

including the various events generally affecting the three top Ecuadorian courts

since 2004, as well as certain more specific events:

¢ The November 2004 removal of the Electoral and Constitutional
Tribunal judges without using the impeachment process;

e The Di ber 2004 impeact Pp di against Sup Court
justices, faulting them for a decision in a particular case;

e The December 2004 dismissal of all Supreme Court judges and the
appointment of their replacements, with President Gutierrez publicly
stating it was because the Court had agreed to hear oil companies’ VAT
cases;

e The President’s April 2005 firings of the replacement Supreme Court
judges;

e The April 2005 Congressional Resolution firing the Supreme Court
judges who were removed in December 2004 under the theory that they
abandoned their post;

e The amendments to the Organic Law of the Judiciary enacting the new
(and unconstitutional) selection process to appoint Supreme Court
judges after the previous replacement judges were removed;

e The ad-hoc selection committee barring all lawyers and their partners
who have represented clients in litigation against the Ecuadorian state
from serving on the Supreme Court;

e The ad-hoc selection committee appointing two Supreme Court judges
whom it knew did not meet the qualification requirements and lied about
it under oath;

e The Congressional attempt to “substitute” the President of the Electoral
Court after that Court approved President Correa’s unilateral changes to
the referendum statute without Congressional approval;

e Three of the new Supreme Court judges’ apparent acceptance of
US$500,000 in bribes to overturn a legislator’s criminal convictions;

e The Constituent Assembly’s act of drastically reducing judicial salaries
to force sitting judges to resign;

e ~The 2007 removal of the entire Constitutional Court;

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 138

285.

e The new unconstitutional Supreme Court forcing all district and superior
court judges to undergo concursos immediately and every two years
going forward;

e The Constituent Assembly’s assertion of absolute power including its
order that the highest courts will continue in their positions until the
Assembly determines otherwise and its express threat to remove and
criminally prosecute any judge that does not follow its dictates;

e The new 2007 Constitutional Court’s upholding of the Constituent
Assembly’s assertion of its absolute power to act without any judicial
check whatsoever;

e The President of the Supreme Court’s call for criminal investigation of
certain of Claimants’ employees without any evidence; and

e An internal email in which an attorney in Ecuador’s Attorney General’s
(or Prosecutor General’s) office discusses the Lago Agrio case against
Chevron with the Lago Agrio plaintiffs’ attorneys, states that the
Attorney General’s office is actively looking for ways to nullify or
undermine the 1995 Remediation Agreement and the 1998
Environmental Release, and further states that the Attorney General
wants to criminally prosecute the government officials that executed the
1998 Environmental Release with TexPet to help the plaintiffs’ case
against Chevron, and discusses various ways for the government to
assist the Lago Agrio plaintiffs.

(C V, 9426; C VI, (9302-303; Tr. II at 48:10-20)

Even more recently, an Ecuadorian government agency seized the assets of two
unpopular businessmen. These businessmen were the former proprietors of a
failed bank in which many Ecuadorians lost their deposits and were thus “widely
disliked in Ecuador” (C VI, 110). Following the seizure, the Constituent
Assembly promptly issued Mandate No. 13, barring any right to challenge the
seizure in court and threatening judges with removal and criminal prosecution if
they disobeyed (C VI, {{110-113). A similar seizure has now occurred with the
Brazilian construction company Odebrecht (C VI, §121). The Claimants further
describe that, under the new Ecuadorian Constitution recently voted in through
referendum in September 2008, the Supreme Court has become subordinate to
the Constitutional Court and ten of the former judges were randomly dismissed
through a lottery that took place at the end of October 2008. The Claimants allege
that these actions have been openly acknowledged as ways to consolidate

political control. The Claimants note that the Respondent has, in fact, admitted

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 139

286.

287.

the politicization of the Constitutional Court in its arguments. They further argue
that, because all but one of the Supreme Court judges refused to participate in the
lottery, the Supreme Court has been effectively purged once more (C VI, f{{114-
115, 127-128, 133, 306).

The Claimants further highlight instances where Ecuadorian officials have
admitted that Ecuador’s judiciary is not independent. For example, President
Gutiérrez declared in 2005, “[e]veryone knows that here a court case couldn’t be
won by the side that was in the right, but rather by the side that bought the
judges” (C V, 7429; Exh. C-48). Ecuador’s Attorney General stated in 2007 that
“...the court systems have been acting in a manner that has invalidated their
legitimacy in the eyes of the people” (C V, 9429; Exh. C-35). President Correa
announced in 2007 that he would disregard any adverse decision from the
Constitutional Court because “we know that [the Constitutional Court] has been
politicized” (C V, 9429; Exh. C-133). In February 2008, the President of the
Supreme Court, Dr. Roberto Gomez Mera, stated, “We cannot hide the truth
about the current state of our legal and constitutional system, it is only a partial
system, the rule of law is not absolute” (C V, 9430; Exh. C-14). In August 2008,
Dr. Gomez and another Supreme Court judge stated that the new constitution
would effectively turn Ecuador into a dictatorship. Threats against these judges
were reported thereafter. Finally, President Correa himself stated on November
11, 2008 that “Ecuador is not currently living under the rule of law” (C VI, (129;
Exh. C-462). The Claimants point also to the statements of several media
commentators who agree that the rule of law has been completely subverted (C

V, 991429-430; C VI, (118, 124, 129-134).

The Claimants also present evidence from observers and academics. According
to the Claimants, the U.S. State Department’s Human Rights Reports and
Investment Climate Statements have grown increasingly critical of the
Ecuadorian judiciary’s susceptibility to corruption and outside pressures (C V,
(1432-436). In addition, the Inter-American Human Rights Commission, Human
Rights Watch, The Economist, Freedom House, the World Bank and the
International Crisis Group are cited as saying that the rule of law and judicial

independence are weak or non-existent in Ecuador (C V, 437-443; C VI,

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 140

288.

289.

290.

126). Academics are cited as saying that President Correa has destroyed all
separation of powers in Ecuador (C VI, {J116-117, 123). The Claimants also cite
a series of relative assessments of Ecuador by different organizations that put it at
or near the bottom in the categories of rule of law, judicial independence, judicial
corruption, and other related areas (C V, 9444-452; C VI, 9304; C XIII, (12-
14). The Claimants then describe a number of recent and ongoing disputes
between the Ecuadorian Government and foreign oil companies, including its
own disputes along with those involving Occidental, City Oriente, and, in
particular, EnCana, to show the particular politicization of these disputes (C V,

1453-456; C VI, 4300).

The courts’ handling of the ongoing Lago Agrio case, in the Claimants’ view, has
exhibited a general bias against TexPet, including through refusals to rule on
objections raised by Chevron and several blatantly illegal or unfounded decisions
favorable to the plaintiffs (C V, 9457; C VI, 135-163). The Ecuadorian
Government has also adopted a strong anti-Chevron stance, including by direct
cooperation with the plaintiffs, encouraging the public to do the same, and
baseless threats of criminal sanctions against the Claimants and their employees
and lawyers (C V, {{[458-459; C VI, 9164-197). Finally, the Claimants put
forward the actions of the courts in their seven commercial cases as evidence

themselves of political interference in judicial decision-making (C V, 461).

In sum, the Claimants argue that, after going through incredible upheaval over
the past several years, the current judiciary is under the absolute control of the
Constituent Assembly, which has the authority to fire any judge in the country
for any reason. The Constituent Assembly is, in turn, controlled by President
Correa’s party, while President Correa publicly vilifies Chevron. As a result of
this situation, the Claimants allege that “[e]ven if one judge wanted to decide a
case fairly, it would be impossible [to] do so” without fear of reprisals (C V,
1462-463). As such, they claim that “this Tribunal provides Claimants’ only
hope for obtaining an effective remedy” (C V, 1408, 464).

The Claimants further argue that the Respondent has failed to demonstrate that

the specific procedural devices urged by it would be effective in remedying the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 141

291.

292.

undue delays. The Claimants assert that “[i]n the case of elective or discretionary
procedural devices like the ones urged by Ecuador, it is the burden of Respondent
to prove both the availability of the remedy, as a remedy, and the effectiveness of
that remedy” (C III, (92; Tr. I at 316:7-317:5; C IV, 174-77; C VI, (1267-273;
Tr. IE at 37:9-41:14, 1092:21-1093:22, 1105:19-1106:2; HC4 pp. 33-36; HC5S
pp.72-73; C VIL, (137-140; C VIII, 716). None of the procedural devices cited
by Ecuador demonstrates a direct connection between the proposed remedy and
success in ending the undue delay. The Respondent’s proposed remedies of
“hearings in stands” and written closing arguments rely on the tenuous ability of
the litigant to affect the outcome by “commanding the attention of the court” (C
IV, 79; C VI, 1274-275; Tr. II at 45:5-46:9, 1093:23-1094:11; HC4 p. 39; HCS
p.74). Disciplinary or monetary sanctions, for their part, rely merely on the judge
being “motivated to avoid the stigma” associated with such sanctions (C IV, 80;

C VI, 9276-279; Tr. II at 41:15-42:17, 1094:12-1095:5; HC4 p. 37; HCS p.75).

With regard to motions for recusal, the Claimants assert that this is also not an
effective remedy since “it does not in any way force the court to decide in a
timely fashion the underlying case that is being delayed” and causes further
delays itself (C II, (9404-408; C III, (93; Tr. I at 322:24-25; C IV, [81-84; C V,
(1477-480; C VI, 9280-287; Tr. II at 42:18-43:21, 1095:6-1096:6, 1105:5-9;
HC4 p. 38; HCS p.76; C VII, (50-53). The Claimants object to the analogy
made between recusals and appeals. A successful appeal directly corrects the
wrong complained of by, at the very least, annulling the mistaken decision, while
a successful recusal achieves nothing until the new judge takes the additional step
of deciding the case (C VIII, 13). While the Claimants acknowledge that
recusals are generally available to litigants in Ecuador and that these cases are
occasionally decided quickly by the substitute judge, “[t]he point is that a recusal
action is not a generally effective remedy for undue delay to the point that its
exhaustion is required under international law” (C VIII, 14-15; Tr. II at 1098:3-
21, 1101:17-1105:4; HCS p.80).

The Claimants also contend that the availability of recusal motions has not even
been proven. According to Ecuadorian case law, recusals are not available once

an auto para sentencia has been issued, as is the case in five of TexPet’s actions

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 142

293.

294.

(Tr. II at 44:14-25, 1098:22-1101:16; HCS p.77; C VIII, 19). The Claimants
also note that a litigant is only allowed to file two recusal motions per case.
Although the Claimants acknowledge that TexPet did not exhaust this limit, they
state that the judges already rotated every two years and that there are strategic
reasons for not having done so, such as preserving the right to recuse a judge for
conflict of interest. As the Ambatielos case”! suggests, the Claimants urge the
Tribunal to be very cautious in retrospectively questioning strategic litigation

decisions (Tr. II at 43:22-44:13, 1105:11-18; HC4 p. 38; C VIII, (118).

For the Claimants, the effectiveness of the suggested procedural devices depends,
in any event, on “whether any of these proposed remedies could resolve the core
tension between politics and the rule of law” in Ecuador (C II, (395; C V, 467)
and emphasize that “in this context of a system-wide failure, penalties against a
particular judge are not a remedy” (C II, 1400; HC3 p. 76; C V, 475; Tr. II at
1096:7-1098:2).

Moreover, the Claimants submit that “TexPet tried some of these proposed
‘remedies’ in two cases [and] all such attempts proved to be futile” (C II, (395;
HC3 p. 76; C V, 1468-469, 479). Specifically, the Claimants state that they
sought and gave oral closing arguments in the Imported Products claim (Case
154-93) and submitted written closing arguments in the Force Majeure claim
(Case 8-92). These submissions were then followed by repeated requests for a
judgment, to no avail (C II, (9396-397; Tr. I at 316:12-15; C V, 468-469). The
Claimants also cite the first Amazonas Refinery claim (Case 7-92), where a
recusal motion was accepted and followed by repeated interventions by members
of the Ecuadorian Supreme Court, but this did not succeed in advancing the case

(C Il, 4407; Tr. I at 322:15-23; C V, 479).

°! Ambatielos Claim (Greece v. U.K.), Award, 7 R. INT'L ARB. AWARDS, p. 83 at p. 119. (decision of
Mar. 6, 1956) [hereinafter Ambatielos].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 143

2.

295.

296.

297.

298.

Arguments by the Respondent

The Respondent argues that a denial of justice claim — as a condemnation of a
State’s judiciary as a whole — cannot arise unless local remedies have been
exhausted. Without exhaustion, the Claimants’ denial of justice claims lack the
element of finality essential to establish State Responsibility for the acts of its

judiciary.

Two of the seven Ecuadorian court cases have been appealed to the highest court.
However, the other five of seven of the Claimants’ present claims are based
solely on the acts of the Ecuadorian courts at first instance and the Claimants
have not taken advantage of several procedural remedies open to them. Indeed,
two of the cases are the subject of pending appeals by TexPet. Consequently, an

essential substantive element of a claim for denial of justice is missing.

As summarized above (see Section H.II.3 above), the Respondent contends that
the various BIT-based claims all require a basic finding of denial of justice under
customary international law. The exhaustion of local remedies is therefore
required and bars recovery under all of the different headings under which the
Claimants set forth their claims. In the jurisdictional phase, the Tribunal rejected
an objection that the Claimants had failed to put forward even a prima facie case
of exhaustion of local remedies. The Respondent now asks the Tribunal to fully

consider and rule upon this question.

In this case, a complete exhaustion of remedies against court delay under
Ecuadorian law is required to found an allegation of denial of justice. The

Respondent cites Paulsson on the subject:

States are held to an obligation to provide a fair and efficient system of
justice, not to an undertaking that there will never be an instance of judicial
misconduct. [...] National responsibility for denial of justice occurs only
when the system as a whole has been tested and the initial delict has
remained uncorrected. [...] [T]he very definition of ... denial of justice
encompasses the notion of exhaustion of remedies. There can be no denial of
justice before exhaustion.”

°? PAULSSON, supra note 25 at pp. 7, 100, 111, 125.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 144

299.

300.

301.

(R II, 1245-246; R V, 55-57; Tr. II at 108:19-109:7; HR4 pp. 8-9)
The Respondent further refers to a pertinent passage of the Loewen decision:

No instance has been drawn to our attention in which an international
tribunal has held a State responsible for a breach of international law
constituted by a lower court decision when there was available an effective
and adequate appeal within the State’s legal system.”*

(R V, 458)

Therefore, without proof of exhaustion, the Claimants have not made out a case
of denial of justice (R II, 245-252; Tr. I at 138:22-140:23; HRI pp. 78-81;
R III, (242-245; R VI, 127-130; R VII, 113). In the first place, the Claimants
cannot complain of “incompetent” or “unjust” decisions when an adequate appeal
process exists. Such is the case in all their cases, but, at the very least, in the
cases where appeals filed by TexPet are currently pending (R V, {{{[196-203).
However, the Respondent goes further and states that exhaustion “‘is not limited
to appeals to higher level courts,” but rather also “requires the use of the means
of procedure which are essential to redress the situation complained of by the
person who is alleged to have been injured” (R V, 60; Tr. II at 109:13-110:6;
HR4 pp. 10-11; R VII, 14). Respondent cites Judge Lauterpacht’s statement in
the Norwegian Loans case that a claimant must attempt even “contingent and
theoretical” remedies’ (R V, 87). Furthermore, the requirement applies
whenever a State’s courts are impugned “no matter what the source of the
obligation alleged to be violated” (Tr. I at 146:6-10). Thus, the Claimants must
show exhaustion to substantiate all their claims, whether these allege specific
BIT breaches or denials of justice under customary international law (Tr. I at

144:8-16; HR1 pp. 85-89).

According to the Respondent, once they have shown the availability of local
remedies, the burden shifts to the Claimants to show that they attempted these

remedies or were exempted from doing so (R V, {{[81-84; R VI, 9131-135; Tr. IL

°§ Loewen, supra note 32 at para. 154.

°* Norwegian Loans Case (Fr. v. Nor.), 1957 LC.J. Rep. 34, 39 (July 6) (separate opinion of Judge
Lauterpacht).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 145

302.

303.

at 112:2-14, 120:20-25; HR4 pp. 15-16; R VII, {{[17, 22). They cite the ILC’s
Third Report on Diplomatic Protection:
[T]he burden of proof in respect of the availability and effectiveness of local
remedies will in most circumstances be on different parties. The respondent
State will be required to prove that local remedies are available, while the

burden of proof will be on the claimant State to show that such remedies are
ineffective and futile.”*

(R V, 483; R VI, (132)

The Respondent points out that the Claimants have failed to take advantage of at

least five distinct remedies available to them under Ecuadorian law:

1. The Claimants have not requested a “hearing in stands” to raise or
reaffirm their arguments with the judge (R II, (260; R V, 964; R VI,
9161-162: Code of Civil Procedure, Article 1016).

2. The Claimants have not submitted legal reports or written closing
arguments to the courts (R II, (261; R V, 65; R VI, (163: Code of Civil
Procedure, Article 837).

3. The Claimants have not filed a disciplinary action against any of the
judges or justices involved (R II, {{[262-263; R V, 66; R VI, {[155-160:
Organic Law of the National Council of the Judiciary, Article 17; Organic
Law of the Judiciary, Article 191).

4. The Claimants have not moved for recusal of any of the judges for failing
to adjudicate the case within the statutory period (R II, (264-267; R V,
q68; R VI, (146-148, 152-153, R VII, 18: Code of Civil Procedure,
Articles 856, 860, 865, 866, 868, 875).

5. The Claimants have not sued any judges for damages resulting from the

delays (R II, [[268-269; R V, 67: Code of Civil Procedure, Article 979).

More specifically, the hearings in stands or closing arguments would “at the very
least have focused the court’s attention on the case in question as ready for
adjudication” (R V, 995; R VI, {162; Tr. If at 116:2-13; HR4 pp.28-30).

The Respondent further argues that “the mere threat of some form of sanction,

°5 TLC REPORT, supra note 86 at p. 6, para. 19.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 146

304.

305.

monetary or disciplinary, is likely to motivate a judge to act on a matter more

expeditiously” (R V, 997; Tr. II at 115:12-116:2; HR4 pp. 26-27).

As for recusals, the Respondent notes that the Claimants’ lawyers in Ecuador are
familiar with recusal procedures and must consider them effective, as evidenced
by successful motions for recusal on conflict-of-interest grounds in these cases,
recusals for delay pursued in other cases, and even as described in a textbook on
civil procedure written by TexPet’s counsel (R II, {266; Tr. I at 376:19-377:6;
HRI p. 93; R V, 498; R VI, 9149; Tr. II at 114:4-12, 1137:24-1138:21; HR4
pp. 19-25; HRS pp.42-43; R VII, 15-21; R VIII, (4-5). The Claimants even
filed motions to recuse a judge for delay for failing to resolve their conflict of
interest motions. However, they still did not pursue a single recusal on the basis

of delay in the underlying cases.

The Respondent also argues, contrary to the Claimants’ assertions, that recusal
actions are available at “any stage” of the proceedings, as occurred in the
McDonald’s case after an auto para sentencia had been issued (R VII, (27; Tr. IL
at 116:19-117:4, 656:8-661:21, 1143:20-1144:2; HRS p.56). Indeed, the
Respondent asserts that the McDonald’s case, the Filanbanco case, and the
expert evidence provided by Drs. Arias and Easton all show the general
effectiveness of recusals in resolving delay (Tr. II at 113:3-115:10, 1133:21-
1137:23; HR4 pp. 20-22; HRS pp.29-41; R VIII, 94). The Respondent further

argues that recusal actions should not be treated differently from appeals:

In fact, a recusal action is substantively no different than an appeal of an
allegedly mistaken trial court decision. Here, the challenge is to the court’s
inaction rather than to a substantive decision. But in both an appeal and in a
recusal action, the challenge is before a new judge (or panel of judges) and
has a new case number. In the case of an appeal, if the aggrieved party
prevails, the matter may return to the same judge requiring still further
proceedings. Successful appeals often delay rather than facilitate a quick
resolution, and just as frequently require the same, potentially “upset judge”
to resolve remaining issues.

(R VII, (28; Tr. II at 1142:24-1143:19; HRS p.55)

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 147

306.

307.

For the Respondent, given the Claimants’ failure to test these procedural
mechanisms, the Ecuadorian judicial system cannot be said to have failed to

provide justice to the Claimants.

The Respondent contests the Claimants’ assertion that claims of undue delay are
exempt from the finality requirement. Even in cases of delay, a claimant must
seek to remedy the delay in the host State’s courts. According to the Respondent,
the Claimants’ main authorities in this respect only address the traditional local
remedies rule, which requires exhaustion as a procedural prerequisite for access
to an international forum (R V, 74). Even were the cases to be relevant to the
substantive doctrine alluded to here, the cases relied on by the Claimants only
address situations in which the only available remedy was to continue to wait for
a judgment or situations where the tribunal, given an explicit exception in the
applicable treaty, shifted the burden to the Government to demonstrate which
specific domestic remedies remain to be exhausted and offer relief for the harm
alleged. However, in no case was the claimant exempted from the requirement of
exhaustion merely because its claim was one of undue delay (Tr. I at 147:2-10,

371:3-14; HC1 p. 90; R III, {{[255-258).

To the extent that delay does operate as an excuse, it only excuses the Claimants
from waiting any longer for a judgment and then appealing to a higher court, that
is “vertical” remedies and not “horizontal” remedies. It does not excuse the
Claimants from pursuing other potential avenues for redress of the particular
situation complained of (R V, 76-77; R VI, (1172-176; Tr. II at 117:7-17; HR4
p. 31). The absence of any mention of such an exception to the exhaustion
requirement in the ILC Final Draft Articles on Diplomatic Protection” is proof of
the non-existence of the claimed exception (R V, 78). In fact, the Respondent
claims that the Claimants’ key authority, Amerasinghe,”” admits that the alleged
exception for undue delay is but an application of the futility exception (R V,
75). However, in that case, the question concerns the delay potentially

associated with the proposed remedies, not the delay affecting the underlying

°° International Law Commission, Draft Articles on Diplomatic Protection, U.N. GAOR, 61st Sess.,
Supp. No. 10, U.N. Doc. A/61/10 (2006).

°7 AMERASINGHE, supra note 23 at p. 210.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 148

308.

309.

court action (R V, 78). Consequently, the proper analysis need only focus on
whether all possible local remedies to the delay were “obviously futile” (R V,

(79).

In the present case, the Respondent alleges that the Claimants not only did not
pursue available remedies, but limited themselves to doing the bare minimum to
keep their claims alive (Tr. I at 151:2-7, 375:19-376:3; R III, 267; R IV, {{199-
103; R VI, 9141-145; Tr. II at 106:15-107:2). The Respondent contests the idea
that the 47 letters that TexPet sent to the courts asking for a judgment to be
rendered somehow excuse them from pursuing the above remedies. These one-
page form letters sent to the court every couple of years did not even address the
issue of delay. They merely sufficed to avoid a ruling of abandonment for failure
to prosecute under Ecuadorian law (R V, {{[69-70). The Claimants’ assertion that
autos para sentencia issued in their cases relieved them of all burden to prosecute
their cases is also incorrect under Ecuadorian law. According to the Respondent’s
expert, “even after the issuance of auto para sentencia, a plaintiff in an
Ecuadorian court is always under a general obligation to move its case forward
and should always be motivated by that interest” (R III, {268; R IV, {[97-98;
RV, {71). The evidence of rulings and judgments in favor of the Claimants also
refute their claims of futility (Tr. I at 153:2-12, 157:16-158:14; HR1 pp. 93-94;
RII, 277; Tr. I at 1141:14-1142:4; HR4 pp. 42-43; HRS pp. 49-52; R VII,
q25).

According to the Respondent, the Claimants’ assertion that these remedies would
be (or would have been) futile is false. Remedies are presumed effective and
futility is a high standard which “requires more than the probability of failure or
the improbability of success” (R III, (260; R IV, {85-86; R V, [{[85-86; R VI,
136-137; R VII, 126). A claimant is also not excused from pursuing available
remedies because they expect injustice to result or because they are “indirect”
remedies for delay. All normal means to resolve delay that are effective in local
practice must be exhausted (R III, 261; R IV, 189; R V, (87; R VI, {[139-140;
Tr. I at 111:2-24; HR4 p. 13; R VIII, {Jf 6-12). For example, in the Finnish Ships

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 149

310.

311.

case,”* the appellate courts at issue simply did not have the power to overrule the
lower court’s finding of fact. The remedies were thus “obviously futile.”
Meanwhile, in Duke Energy, it was merely “unclear” whether further pursuit of
local remedies would allow for the relief sought (R V, 100). The tribunal,
however, deemed this insufficient to excuse the claimants from their duty of
exhaustion:

Yet, lack of clarity it is not sufficient to demonstrate that a remedy is futile.

In other words, the Claimants have not established to the satisfaction of the

Tribunal that it was improbable that the Ecuadorian courts would have made
such an assimilation.

On this basis, the Tribunal concludes that the Claimants have failed to show
that no adequate and effective remedies existed.”

(R V, 1100)

Thus, “if in the eyes of this Tribunal it remains unclear whether or not any of
these procedural devices would have worked, Claimants have failed to meet their
burden of proof on exhaustion of remedies” (R V, Q101; Tr. 1144:3-8). In
particular, the Claimants cannot excuse themselves from pursuing remedies
because of a belief that, were those remedies to fail, they would have angered the
judge: “[e]very means of seeking redress of a judge’s action, including appeals,
risks the judge’s ire; if this were the criterion, exhaustion would never apply”

(R V, 999; R VI, (150; Tr. If at 121:1-122:1).

In any event, the Respondent states that the Claimants’ basis for alleged futility
in the recent political events in Ecuador lacks support in both law and fact. In the
Respondent’s view, “the Robert E. Brown case shows that a lack of judicial
independence must be extreme to render local remedies futile” (R V, [88; R VI,
q166). In Robert E. Brown,’ the Executive had declared itself the “sole
authority in the land” and the situation was so dire that a war and intervention by

Great Britain was necessary. A “causal nexus” must also be shown,

°8 Finnish Ships (Fin. v. U.K.), 3 R. INT'L ARB. AWARDS p.1479 at p. 1504 (1934).

* Duke Energy, supra note 51 at paras. 401-02.

1 Brown, supra note 88 at p. 126.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 150

312.

313.

demonstrating “that the State had manipulated the courts to specifically impact an
individual case” (RV, {90). Again, Robert E. Brown involved “massive
interference in a pending case, with the executive removal of the chief judge who
had been instrumental in acknowledging Brown’s rights and with the legislative
reversal of a substantive rule which had already become res judicata in Brown’s

specific case”!0!

(R V, {91). In the present case, “there is no nexus between the
2004 dismissal of the Supreme Court judges and the seven lawsuits underlying

Claimants’ case” (R V, 93; Tr. II at 118:2-119:3; HR4 pp. 32-34).

Regardless, the alleged claims of futility because of a lack of judicial
independence do not withstand scrutiny on the facts. First of all, “the Claimants’
allegation that the Ecuadorian courts are politicized and incapable of rendering an
unbiased decision rings hollow in light of their history of public and judicial
pronouncements to the contrary,” including statements as recent as 2006 (R II,
1271-272; R V, 106, 205; R VI, 7165; R VIL, 23). TexPet’s Ecuadorian
counsel also submitted an affidavit to the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights that “more than 12,000 cases had been settled” by the Ecuadorian
Supreme Court from 1997 to 2004 without any credible allegation that “one
single case” had been decided “for political reasons” (Tr. II at 1141:8-13; HRS
p. 48; R VII, 924; R VIII, 75).

The Respondent further points out that the Claimants allege that their denial of
justice had been completed by December 31, 2004. However, this is before the
so-called “judicial crisis” arose that forms the basis of their futility argument.
Thus, the denial of justice could not have been completed by then and the alleged
judicial crisis cannot have any “causal nexus” with the delay or denial of justice
complained of (R V, {{[106-107; Tr. II at 119:4-13, 1140:3-12; HRS p. 46).
Moreover, the Claimants have all but abandoned their previous position
regarding the 2004 changes in the Supreme Court and admitted that none of the
Ecuadorian Government’s actions were ever targeted specifically at TexPet and

its cases (R VI, 34-35).

1! PAULSSON, supra note 25 at pp. 52-53.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 151

314.

315.

The Respondent also points out how the U.S. State Department reports as well as
other statistics relied on by the Claimants have remained unchanged or improved
since 1998, belying the allegations of a worsening judicial environment (R III,
9322-327; R V, 243-248). Even if these contradictions were ignored, the
Respondent claims that the international community has recognized the
impartiality, independence, and professional ability of the Ecuadorian Supreme
Court on many occasions following the dismissal and replacement of the judges
which forms the basis for the futility argument asserted by the Claimants (R II,
(1273-274; Tr. I 154:12-17, 159:11-160:15; HR1 pp. 95-96; R V, 108, 206-
211; R VI, (169; Tr. If at 119:14-23; HR4 pp. 37-38).

The Respondent accuses the Claimants of grossly mischaracterizing facts in order
to create a false impression of the Ecuadorian judiciary. To start, the
investigations into corruption that the Claimants draw attention to are not
evidence of corruption, but rather that Ecuador has set up an effective system to
investigate and sanction judicial misconduct (Tr. I at 161:13-21, 384:9-385:10;
RII, 4295-296; R V, 9213-214; R VI, (170). The Claimants also misstate that
the Executive holds absolute power over the judiciary simply because the
Constituent Assembly has a majority of members coming from the President’s
party when the reality is quite the opposite (Tr. I at 161:22-163:23; R III, 4319;
RV, (227-230). In fact, at all relevant times during the events of 2007,
President Correa was not a member of any party or affiliated with any member of
the Congress, the Constitutional Tribunal, or the Electoral Tribunal (R VI, 63).
The Claimants further mischaracterize the reinstatement of the requirement that
lower court judges participate in concursos every four years, which is but a return
to applying the actual law, rather than a unilateral or illegal change (R V, {{[215-
216). The resignation of a number of judges following The Constituent
Assembly’s Mandate No. 2 was, contrary to what the Claimants portray,
voluntary and done in order to maximize retirement benefits (R V, (217; R VI,
79). Finally, the Claimants fail to show the relevance of much of their criticism
of the Ecuadorian judiciary to the conduct of their cases, such as where they
criticize the lack of independence of the Constitutional and Electoral Tribunals

which are inherently political institutions by design and are not hearing the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 152

316.

317.

Claimants’ cases (Tr. I at 163:24-165:7; HR1 pp. 97-99; R III, 1332; R V, §{[220-
223, 249-250; R VI 125,167).

The Respondent also charges the Claimants with selectively misconstruing public
statements in order to support their case. For example, President Correa’s
statements are taken out of context in order to appear as threats (R V, {{[225-
226). Former President Guttiérrez’s statements upon dismissing the court are also
portrayed as admissions of bias against foreign oil companies when the record
demonstrates that they were the political rationalizations for the desperate actions
of a president facing impeachment (R V, 9252). The dicta in the EnCana v.
Ecuador award'” is also misrepresented, given that “the EnCana tribunal
specifically acknowledged that it did not evaluate the 2004/2005 reorganization
of the Supreme Court” (R V, 9253). All in all, the Respondent charges the
Claimants with cobbling together disparate sources and incidents in a
manipulative way that could be used to make almost any judiciary appear
politicized, corrupt, and broken (HRI pp. 105-107; R III, (1347-349; R V, 4212;
R XI, (15) The Tribunal should reject this purported “evidence” of a lack of
judicial independence or, at the very least, the Tribunal should decline to give

any more than trivial weight to it (R VI, (27-33).

The Respondent draws particular attention to the Claimants’ mischaracterization
of certain recent events in Ecuador. For example, in the City Oriente
arbitration, !°° contrary to the Claimants’ implications, the Ecuadorian courts
actually sided with the oil company against the Executive in enforcing an Interim
Order of the tribunal suspending a criminal investigation (R VI, 66-68). In the
Odebrecht dispute, President Correa only intervened to address the widespread
blackouts and other dire consequences caused by the dam’s closing. Ecuador
actually invoked the arbitration clause in the relevant agreement to settle the
dispute and it has now been resolved (R VI, {{[69-72). The Claimants are also
wrong about the effects of Mandate No. 13 of the Constituent Assembly

following the Filanbanco asset seizure. The Mandate only foreclosed certain

'© EnCana, supra note 39 at para. 191.

City Oriente v. Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21, Decision on Provisional Measures, (Nov.

19, 2007), para. 62.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 153

318.

319.

constitutional recourses, while all other forms of compensatory and injunctive
relief against the seizure remained available (R VI, {{[73-75). The Respondent
further argues that recent criminal investigations against former TexPet
employees are blatantly taken out of context. According to the Respondent, there
are good grounds for the indictments, even if there has been an extended debate
between two executive offices regarding the proper basis and jurisdiction under

which these complaints were meant to proceed (R VI, {{[105-115).

The Respondent also objects to the Claimants’ references to the Lago Agrio
litigation in these proceedings. That case is not before the Tribunal. Nor has the
Ecuadorian Government intervened in that case. In any event, the Claimants’
portrayals of the decisions in that case are erroneous. According to the
Respondent, the Claimants’ grievances regarding that case largely concern
matters that fall within the full discretion of the plaintiffs’ right to present their
case as they see fit or allege that the courts have no discretion in cases where they
clearly do. Furthermore, the motions that the Claimants complain of having been
ignored by the courts, such as objections on the basis of retroactive application of
law or a recurso de hecho, are only properly decided in a final judgment or
thereafter, not in the interim. In sum, the Lago Agrio proceedings are irrelevant to
this arbitration and certainly do not provide evidence of judicial wrongdoing

(R VI, 4980-104).

As to the adoption of a new Ecuadorian constitution by referendum in September
2008, the Respondent acknowledges that this will imply a re-constitution of the
Supreme Court into a new National Court. However, this is part of a general
reform and renewal of all political institutions in Ecuador that has occurred
through a public, democratic, and transparent process lauded by the international
community. This process culminated with a referendum, monitored by different
international observers, in which the public overwhelmingly approved of the new
Constitution. In fact, the changes envisioned for the judiciary are the least
extreme of the changes contemplated, coupled with a comprehensive transitional
regime and a new, enhanced merit-based selection process and other measures
designed to further bolster judicial independence and the separation of powers (R

V, (1231-238; R VI, [{[24-26, 36-39, 56-61). The Respondent also disputes the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 154

320.

Claimants’ allegation that the Constitutional Court is to become a “super”
Supreme Court. The Respondent submits that the Constitutional Court will have
jurisdiction only over a narrow set of cases involving proven violations of
constitutional rights and that checks exist on the Constitutional Court to make
sure this recourse is not abused. The Constitutional Court is also moving to
operate more like a formal court, acting with full independence from the other
branches of government and issuing decisions instead of resolutions. Moreover,
this new court will still not have any involvement in TexPet’s cases (R V, {{[239-
240; R VI, (125-26, 47-5). The Respondent also rejects the portrayal of recent
voluntary resignations of judges as a new “purge.” This idea, in fact, stands in
contradiction with their simultaneous assertions that the court is already under the

control of the Executive (R VI, {{[40-46).

Finally, as a consequence of the Claimants’ lack of prosecution and lack of resort
to potential local remedies, the Respondent asserts that the Claimants’ own
lackadaisical attitude towards their cases should be taken as the proximate cause
of any delay or loss. Even if a denial of justice were proven, that breach does not
immediately entitle a claimant to damages if an intervening cause of said
damages exists: “a claimant must show that the ‘last, direct, and immediate
cause’ of the claimant’s alleged damage was the State’s conduct, rather than
some other event or conduct” (R V, {{f[112-113). In Generation Ukraine,
despite holding that no exhaustion of local remedies was required, the tribunal
rejected a claim for indirect expropriation because of the absence of a reasonable
effort by the investor to obtain correction before the local courts. Therefore, even
if local remedies were now to be considered futile, the Claimants’ failure to
prosecute their own cases diligently all along has broken the “causal nexus”
required for a denial of justice. The Claimants must be taken as the authors of
their own misfortune (R V, 114-116; R VI, 177-185; Tr. II at 122:2-8,
1144:22-1145:2; HR4 p. 49; R VII, {ff 37-38; R VIL, (15).

4 Generation Ukraine, Inc. v. Ukraine, ICSID Case No., ARB/00/9, Award (Sept. 16, 2003).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 155

3.

321.

322.

323.

105

106

The Tribunal

Although the Tribunal is amply satisfied that a requirement of exhaustion of local
remedies applies generally to claims for denial of justice, the Claimants’ claims
for BIT violations and Article II(7) in particular are not subject to that same strict
requirement of exhaustion. The Tribunal recalls its conclusion that Article II(7)
creates a lex specialis distinct from customary international law standards.
Certain principles of customary international law, such as the principle of
“judicial finality” requiring complete exhaustion of local remedies in order to
establish State Responsibility for the acts of a State’s judiciary, are not applicable
in the same way under this /ex specialis. In particular, as further discussed below,
specific considerations become relevant to examine whether and how the non-
exhaustion of local remedies can be raised and applied in cases where the delay
of the domestic courts in deciding a case is the breach, because it is the domestic

courts themselves that cause the non-exhaustion of the local remedies.

As the Claimants have argued, the decision of a lower court may in certain
circumstances directly violate BIT provisions. Paulsson states in a passage cited
by the Claimants that “[a] national court’s breach of other rules of international
law, or of treaties, is not a denial of justice, but a direct violation of the relevant
obligation imputable to the state like any acts or omissions by its agents.”!°° The
above possibility has been highlighted in various decisions including the recent
decision in Saipem v. Bangladesh, which considered local remedies in the context
of expropriation under that BIT. Just as in the Saipem case, “[t]he question that
arises is whether the requirement of exhaustion of local remedies which applies
as a matter of substance and not procedure in the context of claims for denial of

justice, may be applicable here by analogy.”!

The Tribunal finds that a qualified requirement of exhaustion of local remedies
applies under the “effective means” standard of Article II(7). Given that its

conclusion that Article II(7) has been breached is dispositive on the issue of

PAULSSON, supra note 25 at p. 98.

Saipem, supra note 84 at para. 176.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 156

324.

325.

326.

327.

liability in the present case, the Tribunal expresses no view on whether or to what
extent the requirement of exhaustion of local remedies might apply under other

provisions of the BIT.

As mentioned above, in the consideration of whether the means provided by the
State to assert claims and enforce rights are sufficiently “effective” (see Section
H.IL3 above), the Tribunal must consider whether a given claimant has done its
part by properly using the means placed at its disposal. A failure to use these
means may preclude recovery if it prevents a proper assessment of the

“effectiveness” of the system for asserting claims and enforcing rights.

The Claimants have presented an argument that delay itself should excuse them
from attempting certain remedies. Although this argument was presented in the
context of the Parties’ debate on denial of justice under customary international
law, the Claimants would appear also to rely on it in relation to Article II(7) of
the BIT. In response, the Respondent acknowledges that, in certain situations, the
undue delay itself is proof of the unavailability or futility of certain recourses,
such as appeals. However, the Respondent maintains that resort to local remedies
is necessary where mechanisms appear to be available and could potentially have

an impact upon the expediency of proceedings in the Ecuadorian courts.

While reiterating its view that strict exhaustion of local remedies is not necessary,
the Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that a claimant is required to make use
of all remedies that are available and might have rectified the wrong complained
of (R V, §{175-79; R VI, (9172-176; Tr. I at 117:7-17; HR4 p. 31). Moreover, a
high likelihood of success of these remedies is not required in order to expect a
claimant to attempt them. In the case of undue delay, the delay itself usually
evidences the general futility of all remedies except those that specifically target
the delay. Resort to these remedies may also be excused if another traditional
exemption applies, such as if these remedies were shown to be ineffective or
futile in resolving delay. Otherwise, resort to remedies for delay is required in the

same manner as in other contexts.

Moreover, even if exhaustion of local remedies is not treated as a substantive

element of a claim for undue delay, the litigants’ behavior in domestic courts

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 157

328.

329.

remains part of the circumstances that the Tribunal must consider in determining
if the delays experienced are undue. As the Respondent has argued, this matter
goes to the causal link between the courts’ conduct and the delay that the
Claimants suffered as a result. Should the Claimants be found not to have
exhausted available local remedies for delay, their inaction may be taken as a
contributing cause of the delay. Once again, this means that the Tribunal may
take the exhaustion or not of local remedies into account when it evaluates
whether the Ecuadorian legal system has provided the Claimants with “effective
means” to recover for alleged breaches of its various agreements with
CEPE/PetroEcuador and the Government of Ecuador. The Tribunal has done so
in its reasoning on Article II(7) of the BIT (see Section H.II.3 above), but

expands upon that discussion here.

Before proceeding with an analysis of the instant case, the Tribunal also finds it
useful to clarify the burden of proof with regard to local remedies. A summary of
the distribution of burden of proof was made in the ILC’s Third Report on
Diplomatic Protection, which has been cited by the Parties in the context of
denial of justice:
[T]he burden of proof in respect of the availability and effectiveness of local
remedies will in most circumstances be on different parties. The respondent
State will be required to prove that local remedies are available, while the
burden of proof will be on the claimant State to show that such remedies are
ineffective and futile.'”’
The Tribunal adopts the same approach under Article II(7) of the BIT.
A respondent State must prove that remedies exist before a claimant will be
required to prove their ineffectiveness or futility or that resort to them has been
unsuccessful. Proving the availability of remedies extends to proving a direct and
objective relationship between the proposed device and the resolution of the
wrong, which in this case is delay. This is not to say that the pursuit of indirect
remedies for delay may be exempted due simply to their indirect nature. Rather,

it means that the Tribunal must be satisfied that the proposed remedies could

17 TLC REPORT, supra note 86 at para. 19.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 158

330.

331.

have had a significant effect on the expediency of the Claimants’ court

proceedings prior to their having reached the limit of reasonable delay.

In the present case, the Respondent has highlighted certain remedies that remain
unused by the Claimants. The first two of these are the “hearing in stands” and
written closing arguments. The Tribunal finds that the Respondent has not shown
how further oral or written argument could have led to the prompt issuance of a
decision. These devices could not achieve more than reminding the court to
decide the pending case, in much the same way as the Claimants’ periodic letters
did. The next two remedies put forward by the Respondent are disciplinary and
monetary sanctions. Again, the Tribunal is unconvinced that pursuing sanctions
against individual judges could have expedited the judgment. These sanctions are
quite modest and, as the Claimants have argued, they are unlikely to persuade a
judge who, for innocent motives or otherwise, is delaying judgment in a case.
Therefore, except with respect to recusals for delay, the Tribunal accepts the
Claimants’ view that the remedies proposed do not actively advance a case once

the case is ready for a judgment.

With respect to recusals, the Tribunal finds that the Respondent has presented
evidence that recusals are directed at resolving delay and do often work to
resolve delay, although not necessarily in all cases. It is also peculiar that, despite
the Claimants’ belief that recusals for delay are mostly ineffective, they still
would not at least have attempted them once in over 15 years of litigating their
claims. Furthermore, the Claimants’ arguments that they needed to reserve their
right to present a recusal at a later time given that only a certain number of
recusal motions are allowed in a given case, is hard to reconcile with the
Claimants’ position that such remedies are futile. That said, the Tribunal accepts
the warning from the Ambatielos case that tribunals should be very cautious in
retrospectively questioning strategic litigation decisions.'°> The Tribunal also
notes that the Claimants have generally tried various different remedies in the
Ecuadorian courts to no avail. The Tribunal is ultimately convinced by the

Claimants’ arguments that the judge rotated every two years in TexPet’s three

18 Ambatielos, supra note 91 at p.120.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 159

332.

cases before the Superior Court of Quito (C V, 7480; C VI, 9283) and that a
recusal would therefore not have achieved anything beyond what already
occurred automatically every few years over an extended period of time. The
Tribunal also notes that the President and Subrogate President of the Supreme
Court also changed over time in TexPet’s other cases. Moreover, the Refinancing
Agreement case (Case 983-03) has been decided in TexPet’s favor and is now on
appeal. The Claimants’ failure to file recusals for delay thus does not preclude a
finding of breach of Article II(7). This effectively disposes of the Respondent’s

objection.

In light of the above finding that the remedies presented by Ecuador did not rise
to the level where their exhaustion is required under the standard of Article II(7),
there is no need to pass judgment generally upon the independence or lack

thereof of Ecuador’s judiciary, and the Tribunal refrains from doing so.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 160

H.IV. Abuse of Rights and Estoppel

1.

333.

334.

335.

109

Arguments by the Claimants

Following on arguments made in the jurisdictional phase of the present
proceedings, in response to the Respondent’s objection, the Claimants submit
that their previous statements in the context of the Aguinda case and related

litigation are irrelevant to the present proceedings.

The Claimants argue that the Respondent has not made out a coherent case for
estoppel or abuse of rights. The Claimants state that, to invoke estoppel, the
“Respondent must show: (1) a clear and unambiguous statement of fact; and
(2) good-faith reliance upon this statement to its detriment, which has caused it
prejudice.” The Claimants refer to the Case Concerning the Temple of Preah

Vihear of the ICJ in this respect!” (C VI, 9311).

Applying this framework, the Claimants first argue that the statements impugned
were individuals’ opinions and not “clear and unambiguous statements of fact”
(C VI, 314). The Claimants further insist that “there is nothing inconsistent in
the position taken in the present claims as compared to the expert affidavits filed
in the Aguinda matter in the 1990s” (C II, {412). The situation has significantly
deteriorated since the Claimants last made any alleged endorsement of the
Ecuadorian legal system in April 2000, especially since the post-November 2004
politicization of the judiciary (C II, 413; Tr. I at 333:17-334:21; HC3, pp. 84-85;
C IIL, 1174, 76; Tr. I at 63:17-24, 1106:17-23; HC4 p. 63; C VIII, 126-27). The
statements cited by the Respondent “reflect opinions articulated at a different
point in time, about a different Ecuadorian judiciary, by different parties in
different litigation” (C II, 1420; C VI, 314; Tr. II at 63:8-16, 1106:3-1108:15;
HC4 p. 64; HCS pp.82-84). Even under the domestic U.S. case law on which it
relies, the Respondent cannot establish the necessary contradiction (C VI, {{[319-

323). The Respondent also has not shown any detrimental reliance on these

Temple of Preah Vihear (Cambodia v. Thail.), 1962 I.C.J. p. 6 at pp. 143-44 (June 15) (dissenting

opinion of Judge Spender) [hereinafter Preah Vihear (Spender Op.)].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 161

336.

337.

338.

339.

statements as required for an estoppel argument (C II, 421-422; C VI, {]310-
312, 315-317; Tr. II at 64:3-6; HC4 p. 64).

In any event, the Claimants argue that even if a coherent case were put forward
by the Respondent, this still could not prevent the Claimants’ current claims from
proceeding. First, Claimant Chevron has made no statements about the
Ecuadorian judiciary (C III, (76). Second, “the fact that a party or its affiliates
opined and predicted that the Ecuadorian courts would provide an adequate
forum for the Lago Agrio case does not somehow license a country’s courts to
deny justice to parties litigating in those courts, nor does it somehow provide a
legal defense to such denial of justice” (C II, {{{75-76; Tr. I at 332:11-333:16;
CIV, 489; C VI, 191324-330; C VII, 128).

The Claimants also reject the charge that they have brought this case for the
primary purpose of tarnishing the Ecuadorian judiciary in order to prevent
enforcement of a potential Lago Agrio judgment. The Respondent presents no
evidence of this theory beyond some statements by Chevron representatives that
they will, if necessary, pursue international remedies against Ecuador in that case
as well (C III, 1104; C IV, 191). The Lago Agrio proceedings are not at issue in
this case and “no legal principle allows the dismissal of this case without
adjudicating its facts and merits because a different case involving different facts

might be filed in the future” (C II, (105; Tr. I at 409-17-25).

Arguments by the Respondent

The Respondent submits that the Claimants contradict their prior statements and
conduct when they allege improper conduct by the Ecuadorian courts or the
futility of further pursuing remedies before them. Pursuant to principles of good
faith and estoppel, the Claimants should be precluded from now alleging that a

denial of justice has occurred.

The Respondent cites a number of statements where the Claimants have publicly
endorsed the Ecuadorian judicial system in judicial and other fora, spanning a

period from 1978 to 2006 (R II, (204; R VI, (187; R VII, 940). In particular, the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 162

340.

Respondent points to statements made in connection with the ten-year Aguinda
action before the U.S. courts throughout the period from 1993 to 2002. In order
to support a motion to dismiss on forum non conveniens grounds, the Claimants
submitted pleadings and affidavits attesting to the fairness and competence of
Ecuadorian courts. These pleadings were made in direct contradiction to
statements by the Aguinda plaintiffs and a 1998 U.S. State Department Report
criticizing the Ecuadorian judiciary that was also before the court (R II, {{[204-
210; Tr. I at 84:2-86:12; HRI pp. 24-25; R V, 127; R VI, [191-192 Tr. II at
1139:4-22; HRS p.44).

Among other examples of such statements, the Respondent points to portions of
sworn affidavits submitted by the Claimants’ experts on Ecuadorian law in

Aguinda:

I have reviewed the 1998 Report on Ecuador by the United States
Department of State. Despite isolated problems that may have occurred in
individual criminal proceedings, Ecuador’s judicial system is neither corrupt
nor unfair. Such isolated problems are not characteristic of Ecuador’s
judicial system, as a whole. . . . Ecuador has a democratic government with
an independent judiciary.

(Exh. R-55, Affidavit of Enrique Ponce y Carbo, February 4, 2000)

[T]here is a corruption-free history of litigation against multi-nationals and
other oil companies in Ecuador. Ecuador’s courts have adjudicated, and
continue to adjudicate, many cases involving oil companies in an impartial
and fair manner.

(Exh. R-64, Affidavit of Dr. Jose Maria Perez-Arteta, April 7, 2000)

The Respondent also points to examples of statements in the Claimants’
pleadings where they unequivocally adopt the position stated in these affidavits

as support for their forum non conveniens arguments:

Ecuador’s judicial system provides a fair and adequate alternative forum, as
Dr. Enrique Ponce y Carbo, a former Justice of Ecuador’s Supreme Court
and a former law professor at the Catholic University of Ecuador, has
attested.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 163

341.

342.

"° Defendants’ Reply in Support of Motion to Dis
v. Texaco, Inc., Texaco Petroleum Co. and Chevron Corporation, Case No. C-06-2820 WHA, 2006

(Exh. R-53, Excerpts from Texaco Inc.’s Memorandum of Law in Support
of Its Renewed Motions to Dismiss Based on Forum Non Conveniens and
International Comity, Aguinda v. Texaco, Inc., January 11, 1999)
The Aguinda action was ultimately dismissed from U.S. courts on this basis and
the plaintiffs recommenced their suit before Ecuadorian courts in the Lago Agrio

action.

The Respondent also highlights pleadings and public statements connected to
another case, Doe v. Texaco, Inc., "0 dated July 20, 2006 — after filing their notice
of intent to submit the present claims — where the Claimants relied on the
Aguinda decision in support of the dismissal of the case against them in favor of
the Ecuadorian courts (R II, 211; Tr. I at 86:21-87:16; HR1 p. 31; R IH, {123-
130; RIV, 66; R V, (127; R VI, {196 Tr. II at 1140:21-1141:7; HRS p. 47).
The Respondent further points to the Texaco website, which has, as recently as
October 2007, contained statements supporting the decisions in both cases
concerning the adequacy of the Ecuadorian courts:

The only issues heard in the U.S. courts have been those of venue; that is,

determination of the appropriate place for the cases to be heard—in a U.S.

court or in an Ecuadorian court. Texaco has always maintained that Ecuador
is the appropriate place to hear these cases.

 

(Exh. R-88; R II, (209 n. 251; Tr. I at 88:12-19; HRI p. 32; R IIL, (131;
RIV, 466; R V, 128).
The Respondent further asserts that there is no way to construe these statements
as being consistent with the Claimants’ current position. When the Claimants
took this position in the Aguinda litigation, they were on notice of a twenty-year
backlog of cases in the Ecuadorian courts at the time, as specifically highlighted
in an opposing affidavit:
[T]he administration of justice in Ecuador is extremely inefficient [... A]t
least twenty years will be needed to eliminate the volumes of cases

accumulated. This growth of the number of cases in the hands of each judge,
makes the administration of justice an extremely slow process.

 

r, in the Alternative, to Stay, Jane Doe et al.

WL 2053504 (N.D. Cal. dismissed July 21, 2006).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 164

343.

ut

(Exh. R-40; R II, (205-206; HRI p. 33; R II, (120; R IV, 9971, 111-122;

RV, (118; R VE {189).
The Claimants’ statements in Aguinda were also made without qualification and
span a significant time period in which the Claimants now allege their cases were
“singled out.” In fact, the seven cases underlying the present claims were
specifically cited by the Claimants as evidence of the fairness of Ecuadorian
courts (R II, (213; HR1 pp. 26-29; R III, (121; R IV, 974; R V, 118; R VI,
(195). The Respondent further notes that these representations were necessary in
order to prevail on forum non conveniens such that, during the pendency of these
cases, the Claimants “could have withdrawn — and likely had a duty to withdraw
[their] motions to dismiss” if their position on the Ecuadorian courts had changed
(R IL, (9116-117; Tr. I at 87:17-22; R VI, {[193-194). According to the
Respondent, the statements, while made by Texaco, can also be attributed to
Chevron since it acquired Texaco before the conclusion of these cases and is
claiming in this arbitration through its subsidiary (Tr. I at 80:8-11; RII, {114
n. 122; RIV, {66 n. 102; R V, {123 n. 192; R VI, {187 n. 389; Tr. II at 123:9-24;
HR4 p. 56). Thus, the Claimants cannot contend that their previous statements do

not apply to the present situation.

According to the Respondent, principles of good faith, venire contra factum
proprium and estoppel in international law prevent the Claimants “from taking an
unambiguous and voluntary position and later adopting a contrary position when
a court has relied on the initial position or when claimants have benefited from
their initial position” (R II, (219). Megan Wagner, an authority also relied on by
the Claimants, explains that estoppel is to be applied flexibly in international law
and that the Tribunal enjoys broad discretion in its application:

International estoppel...is based on good faith and promotes consistency in

international relations. It is a broad concept, capable of myriad applications,

and as a ‘general principle of law recognized by civilized nations’ it carries

persuasive moral weight that can be applied in the International Court of
Justice."

Megan L. Wagner, Jurisdiction by Estoppel in the International Court of Justice, 74 CAL. L. REV.

p. 1777 at p. 1779 (1986).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 165

344.

345.

346.

(R V, (120; R VI, (198; Tr. Hat 122:19-23)

The Respondent argues here for the application of a doctrine equivalent to the
U.S. legal doctrine of “judicial estoppel” and claims that this particular
formulation of the principle should not surprise the Claimants, given that it is
commonly applied in their jurisdiction of incorporation (R V, {122). This
doctrine requires that a clearly inconsistent earlier position have been taken and
that a court have relied on that earlier position. Direct reliance by the Respondent
on the prior statements is not required, only that the Claimants have derived an
advantage or that the Respondent has suffered a disadvantage from those
statements (R III, (133-135; R V, {123; R VI, 199-206; Tr. I at 122:23-
123:8). For the Respondent, if the Claimants are not able to contradict themselves
and allege the inadequacy of the Ecuadorian judiciary, the Claimants’ entire
claim falls (R I, 222). At the very minimum, the Claimants’ contradictory
statements constitute repeated admissions against interest and should be given

evidentiary value accordingly (R VI, (207; R VII, 941).

The Respondent further asserts that the Claimants’ reversal is motivated by
ulterior purposes related to a global litigation strategy surrounding its defense of
the Lago Agrio and Aguinda actions against them. The misuse of these cases to
found an arbitration claim — disconnected from their original intent and any
legitimate desire to succeed in Ecuadorian courts — constitutes an abuse of

process.

As described in the Respondent’s pleadings, the Respondent alleges that the
Claimants admitted in U.S. litigation that the seven underlying cases were only
intended to provide “bargaining chips” to TexPet in its negotiations with Ecuador
concerning its withdrawal from the country (R II, 223-224; Tr. I at 72:5-14;
HRI p. 10; Tr. If at 100:1-22, 102:7-22; R VII, {[1-2). After achieving a
satisfactory “exit agreement,” the Claimants stopped pursuing the seven cases.
The Claimants’ prosecution of the cases only recommenced now that they serve a
purpose in undermining the legitimacy of the ongoing Lago Agrio proceedings
(R IL, 1225-226; Tr. I at 74:22-75:7; HR1 pp. 13-14, 35-36; Tr. II at 101:4-13,

102:23-104:11). However, in order to serve that purpose, the Claimants have

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 166

347.

348.

necessarily let the claims languish and have only taken the minimum procedural
steps to keep the claims alive (R II, 227; Tr. I at 73:7-23; HR1 pp. 11-12; R III,
(182-88; R IV, {105-109).

The Respondent submits that parties to arbitration proceedings must present their
claims honestly and be prevented from exercising rights for a purpose other than
that for which they exist (R II, §230; Tr. I at 75:8-14; HRI p. 16).
The Respondent alleges that the Claimants have demonstrated a lack of any
legitimate interest in the outcome of the underlying cases through their failure
to duly prosecute them. The present arbitration is thus dishonest to the Claimants’
true intent with respect to the cases and a claim for denial of justice must
be considered abusive. The Claimants compound the abusiveness of their claims
by contradicting themselves. The Claimants’ abuse of process should lead to
aresult equivalent to a waiver of any claims relating to the adequacy of the
Ecuadorian court system (R II, (226, 228-232; Tr. I at 82:8-20; R III, §139).
The Respondent cites, among other authorities, two recent investor-State cases
where, although abuse of process was rejected on the facts, the tribunal
specifically considered dismissing the claims on this basis, Pan American Energy
v. Argentina’? and Rompetrol v. Romania'' (Tr. I at 76:5-24; HR1 pp. 17-18;
R III, (105-107).

3. The Tribunal

The Tribunal recalls its Interim Award of December 1, 2008, in particular its
findings that it is the Respondent who must assume the burden of proof with
respect to the defenses of estoppel and abuse of rights (Interim Award, {{[137-
139). It further notes the higher standard of proof established in international law
for such allegations of bad faith (Interim Award, 143). Finally, the Tribunal

reiterates its finding that for the period from mid-2000 onwards, the record shows

"2 ban American Energy LLC and BP Argentina Exploration Company vy. Argentine Republic, ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/13, Decision on Preliminary Objections (July 27, 2006).

‘3 ‘The Rompetrol Group N.V. v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/3, Decision on Preliminary
Objections (April 18, 2008), para. 115 [hereinafter Rompetrol].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 167

349.

350.

351.

no unequivocal statements by the Claimants that the courts of Ecuador were fair

(Interim Award, 7149).

The Respondent has cited statements by the Claimants as contradictory to their
position taken in this arbitration, regarding the fairness and competence of
Ecuadorian courts. The Tribunal, however, notes the significant changes that took
place in Ecuador in 2004, affecting the Ecuadorian judiciary. These events
occurred after the Claimants’ statements in 2000, as well as after the termination
of the Aguinda litigation in 2002. The Tribunal does not find that the Claimants’
citation of the previous judgment in Aguinda during the Doe v. Texaco litigation
or the statements from the Claimants’ website constitute a “clear and
unequivocal” repetition of previous statements. The Tribunal therefore finds that
the Claimants are not estopped from making representations at the time of
commencement of this arbitration that may not coincide with those made in the

other litigation.

The Tribunal also notes that it is the rules and principles of international law that
govern the application of estoppel and abuse of rights in the present proceedings.
In a dissent to the Case Concerning the Temple of Preah Vihear cited by the
Claimants, Judge Spender described the test for estoppel in international law in
the following terms:
[T]he principle [of estoppel] operates to prevent a State contesting before the
Court a situation contrary to a clear and unequivocal representation
previously made by it to another State, either expressly or impliedly, on
which representation the other State was, in the circumstances, entitled to
rely and in fact did rely, and as a result the other State has been prejudiced
or the State making it has secured some benefit or advantage for itself.''*
The Tribunal agrees with this formulation of the elements necessary for the
application of estoppel, which have been reiterated in the subsequent

jurisprudence of the Icy.'5 Accordingly, the representation upon which the

Preah Vihear (Spender Op.), supra note 109.

See Land, Island and Maritime Frontier Dispute (El Sal. v. Hond.), Application to Intervene,

Judgment, 1990 1.C.J. p. 92, p.118 (Sept. 13) (“essential elements required by estoppel: a statement or
representation made by one party to another and reliance upon it by that other party to his detriment or
to the advantage of the party making it.”); North Sea Continental Shelf 1969 LC.J. p. 3, p. 26 (Feb.
20); accord Gulf of Maine (Can. v. U.S.) 1984 1.C.J p. 246, p. 309 (Oct. 12).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 168

352.

353.

354.

estoppel is based has to be “clear and unequivocal” and there must be actual,

justified reliance by the other party.

The Respondent points out that estoppel at international law is to be applied
flexibly. However, this does not allow the Respondent to invoke domestic
doctrines of estoppel in order to avoid certain prerequisites to the application of
this doctrine. Therefore, the U.S. doctrine of “judicial estoppel” proposed by the
Respondent is not applicable to the present dispute. Reliance by a domestic court

that is not a party to the present dispute is not sufficient.

In the present case, the Respondent has not provided positive evidence of any
clear and unequivocal representations made by the Claimants since many years
prior to the commencement of this arbitration. Nor has the Respondent shown
that it has undertaken any actions in reliance on these statements. Therefore, the
Tribunal concludes that the Claimants are not estopped from pursuing their
claims. On this basis, it also decides that the representations made by the
Claimants did not amount to a waiver of their respective rights and claims
relating to the adequacy of the Ecuadorian judicial system and its treatment of the

seven cases under consideration.

As for the allegations of bad faith and abuse of process, the Tribunal, recalling
the substantial delays of the Ecuadorian court proceedings and subject to its
consideration of the circumstances of each particular case, finds that Respondent
has not fulfilled its burden of proof to show that the Claimants did not have a
legitimate interest in instituting proceedings pursuant to the BIT. In particular,
given the high standard of proof and the insufficient evidence produced by the
Respondent, the Tribunal is not convinced by the Respondent’s allegations that
the present case is brought solely in support of a larger litigation strategy by the
Claimants. Therefore, the Respondent has not overcome the presumption in favor
of the Claimants’ right to bring their claims under the BIT. This is confirmed by
the Tribunal’s prior findings with respect to the breach of the BIT, as well as the

breaches found the underlying contract claims, discussed below.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 169

H.V. The Claimants’ Loss — Measure of Damages

1.

355.

356.

116

Arguments by the Claimants

According to the “but-for” damage principle, the Claimants submit that they
should be awarded damages equivalent to that sought in their cases before the
Ecuadorian courts, as well as the damages incurred as a result of the delay. In this
respect, the Claimants refer to the seminal 1928 case of Chorzéw Factory before

the PCIJ:

[t]he essential principle contained in the actual notion of an illegal act—a
principle which seems to be established by international practice and in
particular by the decisions of arbitral Tribunals—is that reparation must, as
far as possible, wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act and
reestablish the situation which would, in all probability, have existed if that
act had not been committed. Restitution in kind, or, if it is not possible,
payment of a sum corresponding to the value which a restitution in kind
would bear; the award, if need be, of damages loss sustained which would
not be covered by restitution in kind or payment in place of it—such are the
principles which should serve to determine the amount of compensation due
for an act contrary to international law.''

(C V, $405; C VI, 1446)

This establishes the principle of full reparation under international law. Article 34
of the ILC Draft Articles on State Responsibility also endorses the principle of
full reparation: “[fJull reparation for the injury caused by the internationally
wrongful act shall take the form of restitution, compensation and satisfaction,
either singly or in combination...” Article 36 of the ILC Draft Articles explains

in more detail:

1. The State responsible for an internationally wrongful act is under an
obligation to compensate for the damage caused thereby, insofar as such
damage is not made good by restitution.

Factory at Chorzéw (F.R.G. v. Pol.), Judgment, 1928 P.C.1J. (ser. A.) No. 17, at p. 47 (Sept. 13)

[hereinafter Chorzéw Factory].

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 170

2. The compensation shall cover any financially assessable damage
including loss of profits insofar as it is established.'"”

(C VI, 1447-448)

357. The Claimants further state that “[t]he leading scholarly authorities recognize that
the Chorzéw Factory principle applies to a denial of justice” and cite the 1961
Draft Convention on International Responsibility of States for Injuries to Aliens:
If a court ... to which the alien has been permitted to resort gives a decision
for the defendant or otherwise denies the plaintiff a remedy or a right he

sought, the amount which the alien claimant must be paid is the amount he
should have secured in the action or its monetary equivalent.''*

(C V, 9403-406; C VI, 19451, 458)

358. In the present circumstances, the Claimants argue that they have shown that
“[b]ut for the conduct of the Ecuadorian courts, TexPet would have prevailed in
its seven claims against the [Government] and obtained damages in the amounts
requested in the underlying cases. Claimants are therefore entitled to those
underlying damages from this Tribunal, plus interest and costs for the period of
delay by the Ecuadorian courts” (C V, 9407; C VI, 452). The Claimants
therefore frame the debate by citing Paulsson’s opinion submitted in this

arbitration:

So the question for this Tribunal becomes: What would a proper disposition
of the legal proceedings have been? Once that question is answered, the
measure of compensation is clear: to award the Claimants the value of the
difference between a proper disposition and the treatment they actually
suffered.'”

(C VI, 1453; C VII, 98)

359. While reaffirming that their claims were proven in Ecuadorian courts, the

Claimants also assert that the Tribunal is competent to apply its own

"7 Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, art. 34, G.A. Res. 56/83, U.N. GAOR,
56th Sess., Supp. No. 10, Annex., U.N. Doc. A/RES/56/83 (2002).

 

"8 Touis B. Sohn and R.R. Baxter, Convention on the International Responsibility of States for
Injuries to Aliens (Final Draft with Explanatory Notes, 1961), Explanatory Note to Art. 30(1), p. 325.

"' Paulsson Opinion, supra note 12 at para. 144.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 171

360.

361.

362.

interpretation of the 1973 and 1977 Agreements. Both with respect to liability as
well as damages, “[t]his Tribunal has the authority to directly engage in this
analysis, and it need not engage in the exercise of determining how an

Ecuadorian court might have decided those cases” (C VII, (102).

The Claimants further maintain that the Tribunal should decide the merits of the
underlying cases de novo without taking into account the decisions that have

been rendered or could be rendered. They again cite Paulsson’s opinion:

Once the delay exceeds what is reasonable in the circumstances of the case,
the wrong has been fully consummated. At that point, the harm suffered by a
claimant has also crystallized. That harm is the absence of a judgment to
which the claimant was entitled by that time. From the perspective of an
international tribunal, the fact that a domestic court is still seised of the
underlying claim is of no consequence. The possibility remains theoretically
open that the domestic courts may still proceed to resolve the claim; but
from an international law perspective they have already had their chance and
failed to do so.'”

(C VI, 1456-457)

The Claimants assert that Respondent’s analogies to malpractice cases are
inapposite and that Respondent mischaracterizes the law of malpractice in putting

forward its analogy (C VI, 9459-463, 469-470).

The Claimants also reject the Respondent’s “loss of chance” theory: “[a]lthough
Ecuador’s denial of justice did indeed deprive Claimants of the opportunity to
have its claims adjudicated in a fair and impartial system of justice, there is no
justification for adjusting Claimants’ damages in this case to account for the
possibility that, despite the legal validity of their claims, Claimants would not
have been successful on the underlying cases” (C VI, 9464). The Claimants
further cite Paulsson’s opinion in this arbitration against the quotations by the
Respondent of his treatise:

[H]aving carefully considered the facts and arguments in the case at hand, I

perceive that an attempt to quantify the probability of the Claimants’ success

in the underlying disputes; if the local system operated in a way that did not

contravene international law, might be practically impossible without
engaging in speculation. I believe traditional principles of remedies in

120 Td. at para. 136.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 172

363.

international law provide a simpler and more satisfactory approach to
assessing the quantum of compensation.’

(C VI, 1465-466; Tr. II at 92:24-93:22, 1077:1-1078:15; HC4 p. 107)

The Claimants state that “[d]iscount factors are often applied to determining lost
profits or the future financial performance of an enterprise, but they are rarely if
ever applied by a court of law to the probability of obtaining a particular legal
outcome, much less to the measure of damages properly due in the case of a
successful outcome” (C VI, 7467). They further argue that “[i]t is one thing to
imagine a ‘but for’ scenario that depends on market forces, but it is quite another
to imagine a ‘but for’ scenario in which a fair and impartial system of justice
reaches a correct legal outcome under domestic law. While Claimants agree with
Ecuador that the Tribunal has a duty to scrutinize the amount of Claimants’
damages, the Tribunal cannot put a discount factor on damages properly proved”

(C VI, 4471).

364. The Respondent’s argument that the Claimants ought to have attempted to

365.

mitigate their damages through resort to local remedies is also contested.
According to the Claimants, mitigation normally arises when a party suffering
from a contractual breach is forced to cover for the breaching party’s failure to
perform. In any case, “[i]t would be unreasonable at this point for Ecuador to
invoke its own continued delays and judicial incompetence as a ground to reduce
the Claimants’ damages...After all, it is a general rule of international law that
Ecuador may not derive benefit from its own unlawful conduct at Claimants’

expense” (C VI, 1474-475).

2. Arguments by the Respondent

The Respondent argues that, in order to establish a denial of justice, the
Claimants must prove that they have suffered a loss. In this case, the Claimants
have not shown a loss resulting from the delays or from the dismissals of their

cases. The Claimants cannot prove that they would likely have prevailed in their

21 Td. at para. 146.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 173

366.

367.

368.

369.

122

123

court cases. Nor can the Claimants show the existence of any harm resulting from

delay that is not reparable through an award of pre-judgment interest.

The Respondent contends that a showing of State responsibility requires the
establishment of three elements: (1) that a violation of international law has
occurred, (2) that the violation can be attributed to the respondent State, and (3)
that injury has resulted to the claimant. The lack of any of these is fatal to any
claim for State responsibility. The Respondent cites many authors as well as the
Chorzéw Factory case’ in support of this point. Many of them further confirm

its application to a denial of justice claim (R V, {]437-442; R VI, (1530-531).

Loss due to an international wrong is, in turn, measured by the comparison of the
victim’s actual situation to that which would have prevailed had the act not been
committed. In the case of denial of justice, the loss is the loss of the opportunity
to receive a final judgment in each case before the local judicial system. The
Respondent cites Paulsson on the subject:
If a foreigner’s claim before a national court was thwarted by a denial of
justice, the prejudice often falls to be analysed as the loss of a chance — the
possibility, not the certainty, of prevailing at trial and on appeal, and of

securing effective enforcement against a potential judgment debtor whose
credit-worthiness may be open to doubt.'*

(R V, 9444)

In order to prove their loss, the Claimants are therefore required to prove in this
case that they were more likely than not to prevail on the merits of their cases.
Any other result “would be contrary to the principle of restitutio in integrum”
(RV, 1447-449; R VI, 9532-533; Tr. I at 138:4-22, 1186:24-1187:8; HR4
p. 171).

The Respondent further asserts that the Tribunal’s task in this regard is to
determine what an Ecuadorian court, applying Ecuadorian law, would have done
in these cases. The Claimants’ alleged “loss” in this case is the chance for a

judgment by the Ecuadorian courts. The Tribunal must thus refrain from directly

Chorz6w Factory, supra note 116 at p. 30.

PAULSSON, supra note 25 at p. 225 (emphasis in original).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 174

370.

371.

adopting its own interpretation of the 1973 and 1977 Agreements where such an
interpretation would not accord with Ecuadorian law and practice (R VII, {1145-
146; R VIII, (60). According to the Respondent, this idea is particularly pertinent
when addressing the validity of the 1977 Agreement, which the Respondent
alleges is invalid under Ecuadorian law. The question of validity is governed in
this arbitration by Ecuadorian law, as it would have been in the Ecuadorian
courts, and the Respondent is not estopped by any principle of international law
from raising this defense. The Respondent quotes Sornarajah in this regard:
[W]here...the state clearly contracts in order to achieve a public benefit, the
failure to follow the procedures designed to safeguard public interest will be
looked at differently... The assumption simply is that a large corporation
making a contract with the state does so almost on an equal footing with the
government or public corporation. It should familiarize itself with the

procedure for making the contract as well as the authority and power of the
corporation and the officers acting on its behalf to make the contract.'*

(R VIL, 4149-153; R VIII, $9162-66)

Following on the above, the Respondent argues that the Claimants have not and
cannot meet their burden to show that they would more likely than not have
prevailed on their Ecuadorian court cases. This is demonstrated in their
arguments presented with respect to the underlying cases (see Section H.VI
below). Furthermore, the Respondent notes that, contrary to their present
arguments in this arbitration, the Claimants never alleged breaches of the 1977
Agreement before the Ecuadorian courts in Cases 7-92 or 153-93. They must
therefore prove breaches of the 1973 Agreement in those cases to show that they

would have prevailed in Ecuadorian courts (R VI, (537-538; R VII, 163-65).

Further to their other arguments on damages, the Respondent asserts that the
Claimants’ loss, if any, is the opportunity to have their cases decided. Even if the
Claimants are able to show that they would have more likely than not prevailed
in those cases, they cannot “prove that there is a hundred percent certainty that
they would prevail” (Tr. II at 156:8-10). The Tribunal should therefore use the

“loss of a chance” principle to award only the damages corresponding to the

4M. SORNARAJAH, THE SETTLEMENT OF FOREIGN INVESTMENT DISPUTES 96-97 (2000).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 175

likelihood of success that TexPet had of prevailing on the merits of its
Ecuadorian court cases. The Respondent insists that the Claimants cannot “ask
the Tribunal to assume away the uncertainty associated with the litigation
process” and asserts that “it is important that the relief awarded not over-
compensate the victim” (R V, 689). This can be done here “by taking into
account the chances — rather than the certainty — of success on the merits in the
underlying actions” (R V, {689). The Tribunal should thus multiply the damages
it determines by TexPet’s probability of success in the Ecuadorian courts. The
Respondent contends that multiple legal systems endorse this principle, as have a
number of investor-State arbitrations, notably in the application of the
“discounted cash flow” method to lost income-producing opportunities. This
principle is also consistent with approaches taken in a number of jurisdictions
with regard to legal malpractice cases where the negligence forecloses
aclaimant’s chance to win a lawsuit. It is further enshrined in transnational
sources such as Article 7.4.3(2) of the UNIDROIT Principles of Commercial
Contracts, often applied by ICC tribunals (R VI, {680). Finally, the Respondent

cites Paulsson in specific relation to a denial of justice claim:

If a foreigner’s claim before a national court was thwarted by a denial of
justice, the prejudice often falls to be analysed as the loss of a chance — the
possibility, not the certainty, of prevailing at trial and on appeal, and of
securing effective enforcement against a potential judgment debtor whose
credit-worthiness may be open to doubt...

The difficulties arise when the complainant was thwarted from pursuing or
defending a claim. After all, if the case had been given a fair hearing, it may
have been a poor one in any event.

It seems difficult to justify the conclusion that the prejudice to a claimant
who was prevented from having his grievance heard should be deemed equal
to whatever relief he had initially seen fit to ask. In establishing an amount
so that it corresponds to what the international tribunal feels was the true
loss, it may be necessary to evaluate probabilities of the outcome if the local
system had proceeded in accordance with its laws but without violating
international law.

The notion that no international wrong must go unpunished is arguably
inconsistent with Chorzéw if its consequence is that it leads to recovery even

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 176

372.

373.

in the absence of demonstrable prejudice. Such recovery could only be
viewed as a penalty in the interest of the international rule of law.'”

(R V, 1696)

As such, even if the Claimants can prove that they would have had a good chance
of prevailing in the Ecuadorian courts, their prejudice only amounts to the chance
that they would have succeeded and should be calculated as such. The
Respondent states that the Tribunal is free to use its judgment in this regard. In
the context of this case, however, the Respondent proposes that the rate of 14%,
corresponding to the proportion of the value of the claims that TexPet expected to
obtain from the lawsuits according internal documents contemporaneous to the
time they filed their claims, is an appropriate guideline for determining the
discount rate to apply here (R V, (687-702; R VI, [{[665-696; Tr. II at 156:2-20,
1186:7-23. 1187:9-1189:17; HR4 pp. 172-178; HRS p. 144; R VIII, 76, 78-79).

As a final argument on the measure of damages, the Respondent asserts that the
Claimants have failed to mitigate their damages through their failure to actively
attempt to move their cases forward. The Claimants’ failure to exhaust local
remedies for delay and general passivity, such as is alleged by the Respondent in
previous sections of argument, is a classic example of failure to mitigate
damages. The Respondent thus argues that “[i]n the event that the Tribunal were
to find that Claimants have proven a denial of justice and also demonstrated an
entitlement to recovery, any appraisal of damages must include a discount factor
to account for the fact that the ‘delay damages’ were caused, or at the very least
aggravated, by TexPet’s own failure to undertake reasonably appropriate
mitigation initiatives to alleviate or moderate the amount of those damages.” The
Respondent therefore proposes that the Claimants be precluded from claiming
pre-award interest for any more than the period of five years, corresponding to
more than the median time for a normal case to go from filing to judgment in

Ecuador (R V, (703-705; R. VI, §{697-700).

5 DAULSSON, supra note 25 at pp. 225, 226-27 (emphasis in original).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 177

3.

374.

375.

376.

The Tribunal

The Tribunal initially notes that both sides refer to the Chorzéw Factory case!”
as authoritative and agree that the loss due to an international wrong is to be
measured by the comparison of the victim’s actual situation to that which would
have prevailed had the illegal acts not been committed (C V, {{[403-406; C VI,
(1446-453; R V, 9437-442; R VI, {§530-531). Both sides further agree that,

according to the “but for’ analysis demanded by Chorz6w,'?"

the Tribunal may
only award compensation to the Claimants if the Claimants are able to prove that
they would more likely than not have prevailed on the merits in their cases before
the Ecuadorian courts, that is if the Tribunal believes that the underlying claims
have merit and should have been accepted by the Ecuadorian courts (C VI, 9458;
R V, 9447; R VI, 533). In essence, the Claimants must prove the element of
causation — i.e., that they would have received judgments in their favor as they

allege “but for” the breach by the Respondent.

Applying the above principle, and in keeping with the fact that the Claimants’
alleged primary “loss” in this case is the chance for a judgment by the
Ecuadorian courts, the Tribunal must ask itself how a competent, fair, and
impartial Ecuadorian court would have resolved TexPet’s claims. The Tribunal
must step into the shoes and mindset of an Ecuadorian judge and come to a
conclusion about what the proper outcome of the cases should have been; that is,
the Tribunal must determine what an Ecuadorian court, applying Ecuadorian law,
would have done in these cases, rather than directly apply its own interpretation

of the agreements.

The Tribunal notes that this is a different test of causation from that which would
apply to the evaluation of other substantive bases for State responsibility on the
basis of a domestic court’s actions. One must be careful not to confuse the two.
The more deferential standard of what is “juridically possible” within the

Ecuadorian legal system may be the applicable standard if what was being

°° Chorzéw Factory, supra note 116.

27 Td. at p. 29.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 178

377.

378.

evaluated was whether Ecuador breached Article II(7) (or committed a denial of
justice) through a court’s rendering of a manifestly unjust decision. There
appears to be some agreement between the Parties and the sources they cite on
this point (C VI, 1341; R VI, (321-323; R VII, 943). In light of its finding that,
prior to the issuance of any relevant decision by the Ecuadorian courts, Article
II(7) had already been breached by reason of undue delay, the Tribunal need not
express a view on what the exact standard of review would be if the question
before it concerned compensation for the consequences of a manifestly unjust
decision. It is not relevant whether any decision rendered after the completion of
that breach was manifestly unjust or not. As mentioned above (see Section H.II
above), once delay has become unreasonable and a breach of the BIT has been
completed, a decision issued after that date cannot affect the liability of the State
for the undue delay. The decisions issued by the Ecuadorian courts after the
completion of the breach of Article II(7) can only impact the questions of

causation and damages that flow from that breach.

The Tribunal’s task, given a completed breach for undue delay, is to evaluate the
merits of the underlying cases and decide upon them as it believes an honest,
independent, and impartial Ecuadorian court should have. In doing so, the
Tribunal may take into account a judgment issued after the critical date as
evidence of how a hypothetical honest, independent, and impartial Ecuadorian
court would have decided. However, the Tribunal owes that judgment no
deference. The Tribunal must weigh it against other evidence before the Tribunal
as to how the court should have decided and come to its own conclusions on the

matter.

The above considerations also lead the Tribunal to reject the Respondent’s “loss
of chance” argument. Given that the Parties agree with Paulsson’s assertion that
“t]he goal of reparations in international law is to restore the victim of a breach
to the position it would have enjoyed if the infraction had not occurred,” the
Tribunal must determine what TexPet should have received in judgments issued
by the Ecuadorian courts. No matter what their estimation of the merits of the
claims, it is clear that the Ecuadorian courts would not have applied a discount

factor based on the doctrine of “loss of chance” when issuing a judgment.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 179

379.

380.

381.

Furthermore, the uncertainty involved in the litigation process that is noted by the
Respondent is taken into account in determining the standard of review. As noted
above, if the alleged breach were based on a manifestly unjust judgment rendered
by the Ecuadorian court, the Tribunal might apply deference to the court’s
decision and evaluate it in terms of what is “juridically possible” in the
Ecuadorian legal system. However, in the context of other standards such as
undue delay under Article II(7), no such deference is owed. As Paulsson’s
opinion in this arbitration has stated, the Ecuadorian courts have “already had
their chance [to decide the cases] and have failed to do so.”!?8 Tt thus falls to the
Tribunal to step into the shoes of the Ecuadorian courts and decide the merits of
the cases as it determines a fair and impartial judge in Ecuador would have

decided the matter.

The Tribunal finds that Paulsson’s treatise is consistent with this view. The
passages cited by the Respondent only appear to stand for the proposition that
simply proving the breach does not automatically entitle a claimant to get the
amount of his original claim, but that he must prove the merit of that underlying

claim.

Moreover, the Respondent cannot simultaneously maintain both (1) that a
claimant be required to prove that it would more likely than not have prevailed in
the domestic courts and (2) that a claim be discounted to reflect the probability of
success. To apply both propositions would lead to an approach that would
necessarily and systematically undercompensate claimants in cases that allege
misconduct by a State’s judiciary. Indeed, the inconsistency of these two
arguments is highlighted when the Respondent asks the Tribunal to apply 14% as
the appropriate discount factor (R VI, 688). To accept 14% as the probability of
Claimants’ success in their cases would logically mean that the Claimants have
not sustained their burden to show that they would more likely than not have

prevailed in the Ecuadorian courts.

°8 Paulsson Opinion, supra note 12 at para. 136.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 180

382.

383.

Finally, the “loss of chance” principle does not have wide acceptance across legal
systems such that it can be considered a “general principle of law recognized by
civilized nations.” At most it can be said that the “loss of chance” principle is
applied in exceptional situations where there exists a “harm whose existence

cannot be disputed but which it is difficult to quantify,”!”°

(sic) as noted in the
commentary to the UNIDROIT Principles cited by the Respondent. In this case,
the Tribunal finds no exceptional difficulties in coming to a conclusion as to what
should have occurred but for the breach of the BIT and what damages result
therefrom. The Tribunal therefore declines to apply the “loss of chance”

principle.

As previously noted in this Award, the damages principally claimed in this
arbitration correspond to “the damages to which TexPet was entitled in its seven
underlying cases against Respondent in the Ecuadorian courts” (see Section F.I
above). According to the Claimants, these damages arise independently from
each of the alleged violations of the BIT and customary international law. The
Respondent for its part assimilates all the BIT violations to the allegation of
denial of justice under international law (see Section H.IL.3 above), and thus also
puts forward its arguments against such damages without limitation as to the
violation alleged. The Claimants’ Relief Sought also includes a further demand
for compensation for “all other costs incurred by Claimants as a result of
Respondent’s violations of the Treaty” (see Section F.I above). The only concrete
claim put forward in this regard, however, is for the “wasted legal costs” of
litigating their cases in the Ecuadorian courts (see Section H.VII below), which
claim is also put forward generally irrespective of the particular breach of the
BIT or customary international law. Therefore, where the test for causation
discussed above is met, neither side argues that any particular violation of the
BIT or — in view of Article VI(1)(a) — of customary international law leads to any
additional damages or a different assessment of damages as compared to any

other alleged violation.

° UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts with Official Commentary, art.

7.4.3(2) (1994) [hereinafter UNIDROIT Principles}.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 181

384.

385.

386.

387.

In light of the decisions above regarding the breach of Article II(7) of the BIT
(“effective means of asserting claims and enforcing rights”) and the measure of
damages, the Tribunal must, as a matter of causation, now decide on the merits of

the underlying seven Ecuadorian court cases.

According to the above considerations and prior to considering the Parties’
arguments on the 1973 and 1977 Agreements, however, the Tribunal must deal
with the grounds of abandonment and prescription dealt with in Judge Troya’s
decisions in various of TexPet’s cases. These issues were argued by the Parties in
relation to denial of justice by manifestly unjust decisions (see Section H.II.2
above), an issue which the Tribunal need not decide in light of its conclusions
regarding the breach of Article II(7) of the BIT. Nonetheless, by arguing the
propriety of Judge Troya’s decisions on these bases (see {200-204 above), the
Respondent has also implicitly argued that they would dispose of the cases even
in a de novo review, no matter what merit TexPet’s claims might otherwise have

had.

The issue of abandonment is only relevant to the first Amazonas Refinery case
(Case 7-92). Although the Force Majeure case (Case 8-92) was also dismissed as
abandoned, this decision was later overturned on the basis that the auto para
sentencia previously issued in that case precluded a finding of abandonment. As
pertains to Case 7-92, the Tribunal concludes that the case should not have been
dismissed as abandoned. Had the court proceeded with reasonable dispatch, the
Claimants’ cases would not have been in a position to be declared abandoned.
This would be so either because a decision would have been rendered prior to the
abandonment or because an auto para sentencia would have been issued, as it
was in the other six cases, thereby precluding the abandonment. Conversely, the
fact that it took four years or longer from the Respondent’s requests for a
declaration of abandonment to render what were simple and straightforward
procedural decisions, bolsters the Tribunal’s conclusions above with respect to

the breach of Article II(7) for undue delay.

With respect to the issue of prescription, the Tribunal does not express an opinion

on whether Judge Troya’s rulings in Cases 23-91 and 8-92 are “juridically

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 182

388.

possible” within the Ecuadorian legal system. Instead, as explained above, the
applicable standard of review requires the Tribunal to step into the shoes of an
honest, independent, and impartial Ecuadorian judge and review de novo the
issue of prescription. Under this standard, the Tribunal concludes that the default
prescription period should have applied and therefore that the Claimants’ cases
should not have been dismissed. The Tribunal does not agree with the complex
reasoning necessary to reach the conclusion that a special prescription period,
normally applicable only to retail sales, applies in these cases instead of the
default period. This reasoning, reflected in Judge Troya’s decisions, relies on
equity and is not supported by the arguments put forward by the Parties in the
Ecuadorian courts. The Tribunal thus concludes that the correct approach would
have been and is simply to apply the default prescription period in the absence of

any applicable special prescription period.

Consequently, the Tribunal is not precluded by either of the grounds of
abandonment or prescription from further examining the merits of the Claimants’
underlying cases in its determination of the damages that follow from a breach of

Article II(7) of the BIT.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 183

H.VI. The Underlying Seven Court Cases in Ecuador

1.

a)

389.

The Esmeraldas Refinery cases (Cases 23-91 and 152-93) and
Amazonas Refinery cases (Cases 7-92 and 153-93)

Arguments by the Claimants
The Claimants contend that they proved their cases in the Ecuadorian courts.
With the exception of the Refinancing Agreement case (Case 983-03) and Force
Majeure case (Case 8-92), the Claimants’ cases focus on alleged systematic
breaches of the 1973 and 1977 Agreements. In particular, they focus on Clauses

19 and 20 of the 1973 Agreement, which provide as follows:

CLAUSE 19. Local Supply

19.1 For the supply of refining and industrial plants established or which
may be established in the country, the respective Ministry may require from
the contractors, when it deems it necessary, the supply of a uniform
percentage of the oil belonging to them, and make the economic
compensations it considers appropriate between them in order that such
plants may be supplied with the crude oil which is the most appropriate by
reason of its quality and location.

The percentage referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be applied to all
the producers in the country, including CEPE, and will be determined
quarterly by dividing the national domestic consumption in barrels per day
by the total production corresponding to such producers, also expressed in
barrels per day, and multiplying the result by 100.

It is understood that there is no obligation whatsoever to use oil
corresponding to the State pursuant to Article 46 of the Hydrocarbons Law
in the internal consumption of the country.

19.2 The contractors agree to supply, if the respective Ministry so requests,
their proportionate part of whatever quantity of crude oil may be necessary
for the production of derivatives for the internal consumption of the country,
calculated in accordance with the provisions of the preceding numbered
paragraph of this clause. This obligation of the contractors shall not be
limited by the provisions of paragraph 19.3 of this clause.

19.3 In the event that the refining, industrial or petrochemical plants located
in the country manufacture derivatives for export and if the supply of an
additional quantity or crude should be necessary for that purpose, after all oil
corresponding to the State in accordance with Article 46 of the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 184

390.

Hydrocarbons Law and that which is produced by or corresponds to CEPE
for any reason has been utilized in said plants, the respective Ministry may
require of the contractors, from the crude that belongs to them, a percentage
equal to that required of the other producers in the country. Such percentage
shall be calculated by dividing the said additional quantity, expressed in
barrels per day, by the total production of the country, after deducting the
total quantity produced by or corresponding to CEPE for any reason, also
expressed in barrels per day, and multiplying by 100. Such percentage shall
be applied to the total production from the contractors’ area, excluding the
partial or total participation elected by CEPE, pursuant to Clause 52 of this
contract, and the resulting volume shall be such that will permit availability,
for export by the contractors, of a volume of crude not less than 49% of the
total oil produced in the contract area.

19.4 The State will authorize the contractors to export the oil that
corresponds to them once the requirements of the country are satisfied in
accordance with the provisions of the preceding numbered paragraphs of
this clause and paragraph 26.1.

CLAUSE 20. Oil Prices for Refineries or Industries

20.1 Prices of the various types of crude oil required for hydrocarbon
refineries or industries established in the country, for internal consumption
of derivatives, shall be those determined by the respective Ministry, and for
their determination production costs including amortization, transportation
tariffs and a reasonable profit shall be taken into account.

20.2 Prices of the various types of crude oil required for the hydrocarbon
refineries or industries established in the country for the production of
derivatives or products for export shall be agreed upon in accordance with
the prices of crude oil on the international market.

(Exh. R-570; Tr. II at 947:19-949:5)

Under Clause 19.1, TexPet would provide crude oil for refining into derivatives
(such as gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil, and other oil-based products) to satisfy
domestic consumption. Such crude would be purchased at the “domestic market
price” as set out in Clause 20.1 of the 1973 Agreement, which was equivalent to
production costs (including royalties) plus a marginal profit. This method of
supplying oil for domestic consumption was reflected in Article 30 of the 1971
Hydrocarbons Law. Ecuador’s refining capacity was quite limited at the time of
conclusion of the 1973 Agreement. As a result, Clause 19.1 was rarely invoked
until the Esmeraldas refinery came on-line in 1977. Instead, TexPet would also
provide “Compensation Crude” to Ecuador under Clause 19.2 to meet domestic

need. This crude would be purchased at the domestic price and exported at the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 185

391.

392.

international price. The profit from this transaction would be used to purchase
derivative products destined for domestic consumption in Ecuador. Domestic
consumption was to be satisfied by the combination and balance between these
two methods. The total volume of crude was to be determined by dividing the
total national consumption of barrels per day into the proportional production
corresponding to each of the producers in the country. This volume would remain
the same regardless of the heading under which it was requested. If the
contribution under one of the two headings increased, a corresponding decrease

would be made in the contribution under the other heading.

Under Clause 19.3 of the 1973 Agreement, Ecuador could requisition further
supplies of crude oil from TexPet necessary for domestic refineries to produce
derivatives to export into the international market. TexPet was paid at the
“international market price” for this crude, consistent with Clause 20.2. If the
price of derivatives exceeded the price of crude oil at any given time, this
allowed Ecuador to profit from any excess refining capacity beyond domestic
needs. After providing the oil requisitioned under Clauses 19.1 to 19.3, TexPet
was free to export the remainder of its crude oil at the international market price.
According to the Claimants, the guiding principles in Clauses 19 and 20 were
that the use of the crude oil contributed would determine the price to be paid and
that the domestic obligations would be shared amongst all producers, including
CEPE. The reason that Clause 19.1 starts with the words “for the supply of
refining and industrial plants established or which may be established in the
country” is to distinguish between the crude supplied to be refined by plants
within Ecuador and the crude exported as Compensation Crude. Similarly,
Clause 19.2 states that it is not limited by Clause 19.3 in order to make clear that
crude requested under this heading could be obtained at the domestic price and
exported because it was in effect used for domestic consumption (C V, 21-41;

C VI, 9129-35; Tr. II at 65:3-67:21; HC4 pp. 67-74; C VII, 7-10).

By 1977, Ecuador was on the verge of opening a new refinery that would finally
give it sufficient capacity beyond domestic consumption to take advantage of
rights under Clause 19.3. According to the Claimants, at this time, although the

1973 Agreement was clear enough, the parties reaffirmed their previous

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 186

393.

agreement in the 1977 Agreement. The 1977 Agreement provided in pertinent

part:

(

2]

(3)

[4]

(5]

Oil destined to Internal Consumption

In accordance with what is set forth in article 31 of the Hydrocarbons Law
and clause 19 of the Contract of Exploration and Exploitation of
Hydrocarbons, subscribed between the National Government and the
Companies Texaco Petroleum Company and Ecuadorian Gulf Oil Company,
on August 6 of 1973, the Consortium CEPE-Texaco Petroleum Company
shall supply the crude oil amounts that are necessary for the internal
consumption of the country.

The General Hydrocarbons Directorate, quarterly and with fifteen business
days in advance to the initiation of each quarter shall fix an estimate of the
National Internal Consumption. This is, the volume of crude to be processed
in the refineries, less the volume of exportable products and plus the crude
oil of compensation.

The volume of exportable goods shall be multiplied by the coefficient that
results from dividing the weighted average price of the exports of products
of the Ecuadorian State Oil Company in the previous quarter, for [sic] the
average weighted price of the sales of crude oil performed in such quarter
above mentioned, by the same State Company.

In both cases, the prices shall be adjusted to cash payment. (No more than
20 business days of credit). In the following twenty days to the end of each
quarter, the same Directorate shall perform the corresponding reliquidation
of the National Internal Consumption according to the definition above
mentioned, taking for that the real data during the quarter subject to
reliquidation. The balances that result of such reliquidation shall be allocated
the [sic] to 90 following days to the date of such reliquidation, performing
the corresponding adjustments.

The exportable products shall be exclusive property of the Ecuadorian Oil
State Company.

(Exh. R-3; Tr. II at 949:1-10)

According to the 1977 Agreement, domestic consumption would be calculated by

subtracting the crude equivalent of any exported products from the actual

deliveries of crude to Ecuador’s refineries and then adding back the

Compensation Crude:

Deliveries to refineries
— Exported products (crude equivalent)
+ Compensation Crude

Total Domestic Consumption

(CV, 945)

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 187

394.

395.

396.

The 1977 Agreement also established a formula to calculate the crude equivalent
of exported products, based on the relative price of the exported product as

compared to the price of crude (C V, 42-46).

The 1977 Agreement “neither changed nor superseded the terms of the 1973
Agreement, but merely clarified it” and the Claimants deny the assertion that it
was only a 12-month agreement (C V, 943; Tr. 1060:4-8). The Claimants cite
Mr. Sevilla, who testified that, as the Ecuadorian Minister of Finance who signed
the agreement, he had no intention that the 1977 Agreement contradict the 1973
Agreement (Tr. II at 593:1-595:1, 1063:20-1064:2; HCS p. 24; C VIII, 51).

The Claimants also point out that these arguments were never raised in the
Ecuadorian courts and further argue that the intention of the negotiation of the
1977 Agreement was to resolve outstanding issues and provide a better basis for
a long-term relationship between TexPet and Ecuador (Tr. II at 1065:1-12; HCS
p. 27; C VII, 933). At the time of negotiations, “Texaco was considering exiting
the Consortium because Ecuador’s conduct was preventing long-term,
sustainable profitability, and arriving at a long-term agreement on the economic
parameters of the projects was critical” (C VI, §51). In communications to the
Government, TexPet expressed its displeasure with certain unilateral changes that
had occurred since the 1973 Agreement and sought to establish “a relation stable
enough to allow the Companies to carry out any long-term hydrocarbon
exploration and exploitation, which requires great investments” (C VI, 953).
During the negotiations, the Claimants contend that the Government admitted
that “local consumption [was] what [was] actually consumed in the country, and
that exports were not local consumption” (C VI, {58). However, the end result of
the negotiations was instead a set of fixed figures for January 1, 1977 to
November 30, 1978 and a commitment by the Government to seek a ruling from
the Judge of Hydrocarbons confirming the above principle whereby local
consumption was defined by the ultimate use of the crude oil. This principle was,
in turn, intended to govern the parties’ relations, through the domestic
consumption formula, for all periods after those for which figures were fixed

(C VI, (9149-58).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 188

397.

398.

399.

In addition to TexPet’s clear intention to negotiate a long-term agreement, the
Claimants submit that the 1977 Agreement does not contain a general provision
limiting its duration to one year. Only those sections specifically relating to the
1978 annual work program contain references to a 12-month time period. In
particular, the section entitled “Oil destined to Internal Consumption” has no
term and the items addressed in the “Object of the Agreement” as set out on the
second page also relate to activities extending through to the end of the 1973
Agreement. According to the Claimants, “[t]he accomplishment of all these
objects of the 1977 Agreement would by definition exceed a one-year term”

(C VIL, 9121, 33, 117-119; Tr. II at 1064:15-1065:1; HCS p.26; C VIII, (149-50).

The Claimants explain that annual work programs were never recorded in high-
level signed agreements. The 1978 annual work program was only included in
the 1977 Agreement and subsequently in Resolution 14052 because Ecuador
wanted to give the “force of law” to TexPet’s commitment to increase its
investment (which was clearly not just a one-year investment) (C VI, 159). The
Claimants accuse the Respondent of misconstruing certain items of
correspondence between TexPet and government officials and ignoring the
majority of correspondence that refutes the idea of a 12-month term. Several
letters sent by TexPet after the 1977 Agreement would allegedly have expired
confirm that TexPet still asserted the validity of the 1977 Agreement well beyond
one year (Tr. II at 76:6-22; HCS p.28). Even documents submitted by the
Respondent demonstrate that the 1977 Agreement was meant to settle the
domestic consumption issue “once and for all” (C VI, §62). The Claimants,
however, contend that “[u]nfortunately, as it had done in the past, Ecuador
simply ignored its contractual commitments” (C VI, {[59-69; Tr. II at 76:23-
77:24, 1065:13-1066:2; HC4 p. 80; C VII, {[51-53).

The Claimants also dispute the Respondent’s assertion that the 1973 and 1977
Agreements violated the 1971 Hydrocarbons Law or were invalid due to not
meeting the requisite formalities for government contracts (C VI, 947; C VII,
128-29). According to the Claimants, these defenses were not raised from the

signing of the agreements, through the pendency of the Ecuadorian court cases,

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 189

400.

401.

402.

until the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits (C VII, (145; C VIII,
54).

In regard to compliance with the Hydrocarbons Law, the Claimants assert that
“Ecuador’s domestic consumption is properly determined by reference to the oil
products consumed by Ecuadorians, not by the oil delivered to Ecuador’s
refineries, and nothing whatsoever in Article 30 of the 1971 Hydrocarbons Law,
or any other provision of either the 1971 Hydrocarbons Law or any other
Ecuadorian law, is inconsistent with this fact” (C VI, 948; Tr. If 1048:21-
1050:16; HCS pp. 7-8). In fact, the preamble to the 1973 Agreement specifically
states its compliance with the Hydrocarbons Law (C VII, 27). Meanwhile, the
1977 Agreement has been acknowledged not to vary or contradict the terms of
the 1973 Agreement and must logically therefore also be in compliance with the
Hydrocarbons Law (Tr. II at 74:8-75:8, 1048:1-20; C VII, 934). In any case, the
Claimants assert that, under both international law and Ecuadorian law, Ecuador
is precluded from relying on the invalidity of its own acts to avoid its obligations

(Tr. IL at 1064:3-10; C VII, (135, 105-112; C VIII, (54).

The Claimants do note, however, that, contrary to Dr. Merlo’s testimony, the
1973 Agreement specifically deviates from the language of the Hydrocarbons
Law and Ecuadorian model concession contract at Clause 19.1, where it specifies
that the amount that the Minister could demand was to be determined in
accordance with national domestic consumption (C VII, {{[23-26; Tr. II at

462:20-470:4, 1054:16-1055:7; HCS p.17).

Citing the provisions of the 1973 and 1977 Agreements as set out above, the
Claimants assert that the Respondent breached those agreements by
“systematically requir[ing] TexPet to contribute more crude oil at the low
Domestic Market Price than TexPet was contractually and legally obligated to
contribute. Stated differently, the Government systematically failed to pay
TexPet the higher international prices for crude oil that the Government
requested for domestic consumption but used to create derivative products for
export and not for domestic consumption” (C V, 47). As a result, the Claimants

commenced five lawsuits against the Government of Ecuador between 1991 and

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 190

403.

404.

1993 relating to these allegations of over-contribution of crude oil to domestic
consumption. These included the two Amazonas Refinery claims and the two
Esmeraldas Refinery cases, the basic claims of which the Claimants summarize

as follows:

Esmeraldas refinery claims (Case 23-91 and Case 152-93), which focus on
the [Government of Ecuador’s] failure to reimburse TexPet at the
international market price for 18,721,441 barrels of crude oil that TexPet
contributed at the Domestic Market Price, but that the [Government of
Ecuador] did not use to satisfy domestic consumption, and instead using it at
the Esmeraldas Refinery to produce and export fuel oil.

Amazonas refinery claims (Case 7-92 and Case 153-93), which focus on
the [Government of Ecuador’s] failure to return to TexPet (or alternatively
to reimburse TexPet at the international market price for) 1,821,954 barrels
of crude oil that TexPet contributed at the Domestic Market Price, but that
the [Government of Ecuador] reinjected into the Transecuadorian pipeline
(or the “SOTE”) as residual oil and exported, rather than using it to satisfy
domestic consumption.

(CV, 447)

A fifth claim relating to alleged over-contribution of crude oil to domestic
consumption under the 1973 and 1977 Agreements was filed in the form of the
Imported Products case (Case 154-93). The Claimants also filed two further
cases. Of these cases, one related to a force majeure issue (Case 8-92) and the
other concerned the alleged breach of the 1986 Refinancing Agreement

(Case 983-03) (C V, 147-48).

The Claimants argue that they proved their claim in each case. In every case,
except for the Refinancing Agreement claim (Case 153-03), TexPet appointed
Mr. Borja as its expert, who was accepted and ratified by the court in each
instance. Mr. Borja submitted expert reports in five of the six cases in which he
was appointed,'*° confirming the over-contribution of crude to domestic
consumption at the domestic market price. Mr. Borja also calculated the specific
number of barrels and the value of the over-contributions made. In the same five

cases, an expert on behalf of Ecuador confirmed Mr. Borja’s analysis. In two of

'39 These five cases were Cases 23-91, 152-93, 153-93, 154-93, and 8-92 (i.e.,every case but Case 7-

92, where TexPet sought to appoint Mr. Borja, but he never assumed this charge due to the failure of
the Ecuadorian courts to schedule a date for the formal appointment of the experts).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 191

405.

406.

these cases (Cases 23-91 and 152-93), the value of the claim was, in fact, revised
upwards after judicial inspection. In the sixth case (Case 7-92), Mr. Borja could
not present his findings because the court refused to schedule the date for the
judicial inspection by the experts. Finally, in the Refinancing Agreement claim
(Case 983-03), the court actually awarded TexPet the amount it claimed (but in
such a manner that it could not be collected). The total of the initial quantified
claims in these seven cases was US$ 553,456,850.81. After judicial inspections,
the total claim was US$ 587,823,427.18 (C V, 49-57; C VI, 170-72). To the
Claimants, the fact that the Respondent now contests the merits of the underlying
claims in the Ecuadorian courts is symptomatic of “the same fundamental
problem that plagued the relationship between the Government and TexPet
during the lifespan of the investment. Specifically, the GOE routinely did not
honor its promises, and this required TexPet to constantly seek to persuade the
Government to comply with the agreements already negotiated and finalized”

(C VI, 21).

More specifically, in the Esmeraldas Refinery cases (Cases 23-91 and 152-93),
the Claimants maintain that TexPet proved the legal foundation of its claims in
the Ecuadorian courts. From 1978 until 1992, Ecuador refined crude oil required
from TexPet for domestic consumption at the Esmeraldas refinery and sold the
derivative products in the Ecuadorian domestic market. Ecuador, however,
exported at a profit a portion of those derivative products that it could not sell
domestically, mainly fuel oil and diesel. TexPet’s case was based on the
argument that, when any derivative products are exported, TexPet was entitled to
be compensated at the international market price according to Clauses 19 and 20

of the 1973 Agreement, as confirmed by the 1977 Agreement (C V, (58).

In the Amazonas Refinery cases (Cases 7-92 and 153-93), the Claimants also
assert that TexPet fully proved its claim in the Ecuadorian courts. TexPet
contributed crude to the Amazonas refinery, where the crude was turned into
derivatives for domestic consumption and residual oil. The residual oil was not
used for domestic consumption, but re-injected into the Trans-Ecuadorian
pipeline where it was mixed with other pure crude oil, transported to the Balao

terminal on the Pacific coast, and exported as crude oil at the international market

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 192

407.

408.

price. The re-injection of the residual oil increased the volume of crude
substantially, but caused little degradation of the quality of the original crude
such that the export price remained unchanged. The legal basis for the claim is
essentially the same as for the Esmeraldas Refinery cases. TexPet claimed that,
as a portion of the crude contributed to domestic consumption was ultimately
exported, TexPet had over-contributed to domestic consumption and Ecuador
was required to pay the international market price of the crude equivalent that

was exported (C V, 791-92).

The second Amazonas Refinery claim (Case 153-93), covering the period of
September 1991 until June 1992, was the subject of judicial inspection by
TexPet’s expert, Ecuador’s expert, and two joint, independent court-appointed
experts. “With only one barrel of difference,” the court-appointed experts
confirmed Mr. Borja’s conclusions:

From the documents examined, it can be observed that Texaco Petroleum

Company was paid the price of crude oil for domestic consumption, but it
did not receive the international price for the excess contributions made [...]

[T]he amount Texaco Petroleum Company should receive as payment for
the barrels which were contributed in excess throughout the period under
analysis, provided that the 259,974 barrels are not returned to the company,
would be US$3,630,81 1.23.

(C V, 103-116)

The first Amazonas Refinery claim (Case 7-92), however, has been stalled at the
judicial inspection stage since 1993. According to the Claimants, the court
scheduled the judicial inspection by the experts for “Tuesday, May 12, 1993”
(CV, 997). May 12, 1993 was, however, a Wednesday. Thus, the inspection
never took place, and despite repeated requests by TexPet has never been
rescheduled. The Claimants maintain that the claims are identical to those
presented in the second Amazonas Refinery claim, except that it covers a
different time period. There is no reason to believe the result would be any
different in this case. The legal basis of both of TexPet’s claims is confirmed in
this arbitration by Mr. Paz. The damages calculations are confirmed here by

Navigant, the Claimants’ expert on valuation (C V, {{[94-102, 117-119).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 193

409.

410.

411.

According to the Claimants, Ecuador’s defense to these claims was completely
baseless. Ecuador argued that, once legitimately purchased from TexPet for
domestic need, the crude became its property. Ecuador was thus free to sell for its
own profit any portion of derivatives that could not be sold locally. The
Claimants submit that, consistent with the “ultimate destination” principle
embodied in Clauses 19 and 20 of the 1973 Agreement, if the crude oil was in
any part “destined to the manufacture of derivatives or products to be exported,”
the international market price was applicable as provided in Clause 20.2 (and
confirmed by the 1977 Agreement’s provision on “Oil for Domestic
Consumption”):
The issue is not whether the GOE owned the derivatives and products that it
manufactured from the crude oil that TexPet supplied in response to the
GOE’s call for contributions to Ecuadorian domestic consumption. That is
irrelevant and constitutes misdirection. The issue is whether the GOE over-
stated Ecuador’s domestic consumption requirements and secured more

crude oil from TexPet at the low Domestic Market Price than it should have
under the Agreements, or did not credit TexPet with such contributions.

(CV, 459)

Similarly, in response to Ecuador’s argument in the Amazonas Refinery cases
that the re-injection was the only option because the residual oil could not be
marketed in the Amazon region, the Claimants assert that “[w]hether or not it is
marketable domestically is completely irrelevant” (C V, 92). The relevant
consideration is that, under the 1973 and 1977 Agreements, Ecuador was
required to state its domestic consumption accurately, taking into account
products exported, and compensate TexPet at the international price for any

crude equivalent that was exported (C V, 792).

The Claimants’ expert on oil concession contracts further confirms that it is
contrary to industry custom that a producer would be compensated at less than
the international price if any oil products or derivatives are ever exported:
“[w]hat is relevant...is the destination of the products that are derived from
the...contribution,” not the issue of ownership (Exh. C-294, 24; C V, 63; Tr. II
at 67:23-68:2; C VII, 13). Mr. Kaczmarek further testified that “national

domestic consumption” is a recognized economic term that excludes exports:

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 194

412.

413.

414.

“[t]he formula for domestic consumption...is production plus imports, minus
exports, plus change in inventory” (Tr. II at 261:21-25, 1052:25-1053:15; HCS
p.13). Mr. Paz, the Claimants’ expert on Ecuadorian law, has also confirmed this
meaning of the contractual term and confirmed his opinion that Ecuador breached
the 1973 Agreement (C VII, {{14). Navigant has further confirmed the accuracy
of Mr. Borja’s analysis and calculations in these cases (C V, {{[59-63, 76-77, 88-
89). The Claimants assert that such indications of the meaning “domestic” or
“internal” consumption extrinsic to the contract help to confirm their
interpretation of the express terms of the 1973 Agreement and are further
relevant because, under Ecuadorian law, a contract is to be interpreted in
accordance with its “nature” (Tr. II at 1050:17-1052:24; HCS pp.10-12; C VII,
qs; C VII, 945).

The Claimants also counter the Respondent’s argument that TexPet should have
foreseen the output of residue from the refineries and expressly reserved its rights
to it. The Claimants state that no example has been provided of another
concession contract where this was done. In any case, the plain meaning of
“domestic consumption” excludes all exports, including exports of residual oil,
and a specific reference to “residue” was thus not necessary to be included in the
1973 Agreement. The Claimants contend that the Respondent does not contest
that this is what the 1977 Agreement does, even though it does not mention
“residue” either (Tr. II at 264:4-265:15, 1055:14-1056:9; HCS pp. 15-16; C VIII,
146-47).

The Claimants contend that, in any event, their position is independently
supported by the express terms of the 1977 Agreement, which the Claimants
assert was in force throughout the relevant periods. In this regard, the Claimants
note that both Drs. Merlo and Schargrodsky, Respondent’s experts, affirmed that
the formula under the 1977 Agreement excluded the exported products from the
calculation of “National Internal Consumption” (C VII, 16; Tr. II at 499:10-
500:7, 885:4-889:7, 1060:9-1061:4, 1062:13-1063:3).

The Claimants contend that Respondent characterizes all the crude it requested at

issue in the Ecuadorian court cases as requested under Clause 19.2 because this

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 195

415.

allows it to argue that it was entitled to all crude “necessary for the production of
derivatives for internal consumption of the country.” Therefore, despite the
inevitable by-product of the refining process, all the barrels requested were
“necessary” in order to achieve a given end amount of derivatives for domestic
consumption. The Claimants declare that, until the submission of its Counter-
Memorial on the Merits, the Respondent had never before advanced this

argument in this arbitration or in the underlying court cases (C VI, 36-38).

Nevertheless, the Claimants counter this argument in various ways. First, for the
Claimants the distinction between crude for domestic refining under 19.1 and
Compensation Crude under 19.2 is clear from the agreements and practice.
Indeed, the Claimants cite other sections of the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial
on the Merits where the Respondent contradicts itself on this point and agrees
that Clauses 19.1 and 19.2 respectively deal with domestic refining and
Compensation Crude, as the Claimants have argued. Second, the 1973
Agreement does not support the idea that Ecuador could requisition all crude
“necessary for the production of derivatives.” Third, Clause 19.1 sets out the
formula for domestic consumption which is also applicable for crude requested
under Clause 19.2 and “[n]owhere does paragraph 19.1 state or remotely suggest
that TexPet must contribute any portion of crude that is not consumed
domestically” (C VI, 942; Tr. II at 469:3-24, 1056:10-1058:21; HCS5 pp. 16-20;
C VIII, 144). Moreover, the plain meaning of “domestic consumption” excludes
exports. Lastly, the Claimants argue that it is not factually correct to say that the
crude requested from TexPet was “necessary” since Ecuador could have satisfied
domestic need “by using the funds from the exported fuel oil and residual oil at
issue to purchase derivatives for import—exactly as the Compensation Crude
process contemplates” (C VII, 31; Tr. II at 1058:22-1059:17; C VIII, 48).
Indeed, the Claimants point out that, in the formula contained in the 1977
Agreement, “Ecuador agreed and acknowledged that the amount of crude oil
‘necessary for the internal consumption of the country’ does not include
exportable products” (C VII, §31). For these reasons, the Claimants conclude that
Ecuador should have either (1) directly credited TexPet for the portion of the

crude exported, (2) counted it as Compensation Crude, or (3) paid the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 196

416.

b)

417.

international price for it (C VI, [[39-43; Tr. II at 70:14-74:7; HC4 pp. 75-76;
C VIL, 1930-31).

Lastly, the Claimants assert that the judgment against TexPet in the second
Amazonas Refinery case (Case 153-93), issued by the Provincial Court of
Pichincha on July 14, 2009 following the submission of the Parties’ Post-Hearing
Briefs, is “untimely and irrelevant.” The Claimants argue, citing Paulsson’s
Opinion, that a decision taken by a domestic court after a denial of justice has
been completed cannot affect the Respondent’s liability for that wrong. The
Claimants assert that they “must prove only that they should have prevailed
before an honest, competent, and independent Ecuadorian court properly
applying Ecuadorian law.” According to the Claimants, given that the recent
decision is the product of a court that is subject to the undue influence of the
Ecuadorian Government (see Section H.III above), it must be disregarded as
irrelevant, especially in light of the fact that “[b]oth Parties have fully briefed the

merits of Case 153-93 exhaustively” in this arbitration (C IX).

Arguments by the Respondent
The Respondent generally contests the merits of TexPet’s seven court claims
underlying this arbitration. The Respondent argues that the claims misinterpret
TexPet’s and Ecuador’s respective obligations under the 1973 Agreement and
Ecuadorian law, and that reliance on the 1977 Agreement is wholly
inappropriate. In the underlying cases TexPet and Ecuador disagree on their
respective obligations with respect to residue crude from the refining process, in
particular whether the Respondent was entitled to export it without compensating
TexPet at the international market price or crediting TexPet for the equivalent
barrels of crude against its domestic market obligations. The Respondent
contends that TexPet’s arguments fundamentally misinterpret its contribution
obligations under the 1973 Agreement. As such, Ecuador would properly have
prevailed in these cases. At the very least, there was a proper dispute for
adjudication and the Claimants cannot prove with any degree of certainty that

they would have prevailed.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 197

418.

419.

420.

The Respondent first notes that TexPet entered into the 1973 and 1977
Agreement after the 1971 Hydrocarbons Law came into effect, and TexPet was

aware of its existence. Article 30 of that law,

establish[ed] a general, unrestricted, and unavoidable obligation for
contracting companies to supply crude oil to the country’s refineries [...]
and permitted the Republic to enter into agreements allowing contractors to
exploit Ecuador’s crude oil reserves and export their share of the crude oil
for their benefit, but expressly provided that these contractors could do so
only after the country’s needs were first satisfied.

(R V, 1453-457).

Clause 19 of the 1973 Agreement enshrined this obligation within the Concession
Agreements with TexPet. In particular, Clause 19.2 gives Ecuador the right to
require a contribution “of whatever quantity of crude oil may be necessary for the
production of derivatives for the internal consumption of the country.” However,
Clause 19.2 expressly states that “[t]his obligation shall not be limited by the
provisions of paragraph 19.3 of this clause.” Meanwhile, Clause 19.3 addresses
contributions made where domestic refineries require crude in order to
“manufacture derivatives for export.” Clauses 20.1 and 20.2 determine the prices
to be paid in each case, these being the domestic market price for requests under
19.2 and the international market price for requests under 19.3, respectively

(R V, (1458-466).

In 1977, CEPE agreed to buy out Gulf’s participation in the Consortium, leading
CEPE to hold a 62.5% interest in the venture. At the same time, Ecuador’s
Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources was pressing for an expansion of the
Consortium’s exploration and production which would require a significant
increase in TexPet’s investment. TexPet and Ecuador thus commenced
negotiations on these issues in the context of the Consortium’s 1978 Annual
Work Program. According to the Respondent, TexPet leveraged its commitment
to expand its activities and investment to obtain significant improvements beyond
the 1973 Agreement. In particular, TexPet sought to establish that it should
obtain a credit against its internal consumption demands for any products
exported, rather than just exported crude. The Respondent claims that the fact

that TexPet never mentioned the 1973 Agreement at all in these negotiations

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 198

421.

422.

contradicts the Claimants and TexPet’s later assertions that the 1973 Agreement
already embodied this “domestic consumption” definition and the 1977

Agreement did not change anything.

Although the negotiations centered around the 1978 Annual Work Program,
which would not normally have been set out in contract form, the result was put
into a contract, namely the 1977 Agreement. This was done in order to make
enforceable against TexPet its commitment to increase its investment and scope
of operations. Regardless of its contractual form, however, the Respondent cites
internal TexPet documents and letters to the Ecuadorian Ministry that
acknowledge that the 1977 Agreement was still just intended as a one-year work
program establishing for that year alone “new economic parameters” for
TexPet’s operations. The Respondent also notes that TexPet reserved the right to
reduce its investment and expenditures in the work program if the Ministry
changed the defined domestic contribution obligations. Thus, according to the
Respondent, for the one-year period of the work program, the 1977 Agreement
changed the previous definition under the 1973 Agreement from one of local
refining to one of local consumption (R V, {{[469-487; R VI, (9584-598; Tr. II at
1172:19-1173:25; HRS pp.98-99; R VIL, (81-86).

The one-year term of the 1977 Agreement is evidenced by the numerous

references to an “annual period,” a period of “12 months,” and activities that
were stipulated to take place within one year. These references span all sections
of the agreement and the Annex. Only the section entitled “Oil destined to
Internal Consumption” does not contain an explicit reference. The Respondent
argues, however, that “one section of the Agreement could not possibly have a
different term unless such a result was expressly provided” (R VII, (161). In this
vein, the Respondent highlights the reference to a singular “period of the
Agreement herein” in subsection 1.1 of the section entitled “General Rules that
shall rule the Production.” The preambular section “Object of the Agreement”
also does not support a longer term, since all five listed objectives are all
effectuated in other sections of the agreement that are limited in duration to one
year. In particular, the Respondent notes that the last objective refers to

“achieving an increase of the production of oil” in the singular, implying a single

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 199

423.

424.

425.

year of performance (Tr. II at 1176:9-21; HR4 p. 149; R VIL, 155-161; R VII,
(169-70).

Eventually, the 1978 Work Program came to an end and negotiations failed to
renew it. Ecuador thus enacted a Ministerial Resolution canceling the 1977
Agreement and reestablishing the 1973 Agreement for 1979 and beyond. When
that resolution was applied retroactively to the year covered by the 1977
Agreement, TexPet filed a complaint with the Ministry. However, TexPet did not
challenge the validity of the new resolution going forward, nor did TexPet allege
a breach of the 1977 Agreement. Rather, TexPet continued to negotiate in an
attempt to reestablish the definition from the 1977 Agreement, but was
repeatedly rejected. The Respondent further alleges that “the 1977 Agreement
was treated as a dead letter until 1989 when it was resurrected as the basis for
potential counterclaims against the Republic which could help leverage the
global settlement desired by TexPet” and “[i]t was not until October 1991 that
TexPet filed its first administrative claim [...and not until] December 1991 [that]
TexPet filed its first claim with the Ecuadorian courts alleging that the Republic’s
failure to provide a credit for CEPE’s exports of the residue resulting from the
Esmeraldas refining process constituted a breach of the 1977 Agreement” (R V,
(1488-498; R VI, 9597; Tr. II at 147:6-149:21; HR4 pp. 150-3; R VII, (187-91,
162; R VIII, 135-37).

Even in the underlying cases, no direct breach of the 1977 Agreement was
alleged, only that it was a supplementary means of interpretation for the 1973
Agreement. Given that the 1977 Agreement was not at issue in the underlying
claims, the Claimants’ complaints that the invalidity of the 1977 Agreement was
not raised until these arbitration proceedings are misguided (Tr. II at 145:21-

146:3, 1175:10-1176:8; HR4 p. 146; R VIII, (75, 77)

With specific reference to the first Esmeraldas Refinery claim (Case 23-91),
TexPet argued that, from July 1, 1981 through December 31, 1983, it delivered
crude to the Esmeraldas refinery under its domestic market obligation that —

after the refining process — yielded residue that was mixed with diesel and

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 200

426.

427.

subsequently exported into the international market. The Respondent summarizes

the counterargument it presented as follows:

[T]he Republic has disputed the claim, noting that all of the [Domestic
Market Obligation] crude processed in the Esmeraldas refinery was for
domestic consumption purposes only; that the volume of [Domestic Market
Obligation] crude received by the Republic was “necessary,” to generate
sufficient refined product to satisfy the consumption needs of the country,
and that any resulting residue from the refined [Domestic Market
Obligation] crude belonged to the Republic to dispose of as it wished.

The Republic has added that ‘these residues are exclusively owned by
CEPE, now PetroEcuador, but again we emphasize that the derivatives
produced were not intended to be exported and, therefore,’ the purchase
price for the DMO crude, including the residue that could not be refined for
domestic consumption, is governed by the internal or domestic market price.

(R V, 1500-503)

The claims in the second Esmeraldas Refinery case (Case 152-93) are essentially
the same as in the first case, while covering the later time period from January 1,
1984 through June 6, 1992. The Respondent’s position is therefore essentially the
same in the second case as well (R V, 504-506).

In the first Amazonas Refinery claim (Case 7-92), TexPet again alleged that it
had over-contributed crude during the period of August 1, 1987 until August 31,
1991, because the nonrefinable residue from the refining of derivative products
for domestic consumption was re-injected into the Trans-Ecuadorian pipeline,
thereby exporting it at the international market price. The Respondent

summarizes its counterargument as follows:

[O]nce the crude oil is delivered to the refinery, the State pays the
corresponding values, and at that moment the State-company relationship is
over, i.e., the crude oil buying — selling relationship is also over. Because of
this fact, The State of Ecuador through Cepe, now Petroecuador is, because
of this fact, the owner of the derivatives resulting from the crude oil
[purchased from] the producing companies at domestic market prices, as
well as the crude oil coming from their fields.

(R V, 9507-510; Tr. Il at 142:15-17; HR4 p. 136)

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 201

428.

429.

430.

The second Amazonas Refinery claim (Case 153-93) again mirrors that
submitted in the first claim, but covers the period between September 1, 1991 and

June 6, 1992 (R V, 4511-514).

Overall, the disputes all center on the same issue. The Respondent insists that
“[a]lthough the Agreement is silent regarding the residue from the refining
process, it certainly does not require that the Republic pay an international price
for residue that is a necessary by-product of producing refined oil for domestic
consumption” (R V, 9516). According to the Respondent, “Clauses 19 and 20
focus on the refinery’s need for the crude. If the crude was ‘necessary for the
production of derivatives for the internal consumption of the country,’ the crude
was supplied pursuant to Clause 19.2 and such crude was priced, in accordance
with Clause 20.1, at the domestic price” (R V, 9519). According to the
Respondent, the phrase “necessary for the production of derivatives” makes clear
that “domestic consumption” is defined according to the input into the refining
process, rather than according to the ultimate destination of the derivatives
produced. Thus, given that the crude oil in question was all requisitioned under
Clause 19.2 and Clause 19.3 was never invoked, the international market price
under Clause 20.2 was never applicable. The Claimants’ references to industry
custom are simply attempts to use extrinsic sources to change the ordinary
meaning of the terms of the 1973 Agreement (R V, {[J515-527; R VI, {{[543-548;
Tr. If at 139:20-142:14, 143:13-144:19, 455:6-457:4, 516:14-519:17, 540:1-
541:2, 916:23-925:8, 1122:20-1123:14, 1165:7-1170:25; HR4 pp. 134-135, 139-
140; HRS pp.88-96; R VII, 1{71-80; R VIII, 129-33).

The Respondent maintains that, as a large, sophisticated, international contractor
in the oil business, TexPet could hardly claim not to have known that residue oil
would result from the refining process. The residual oil is an inevitable by-
product of all refining processes and neither CEPE nor any other refiner goes out
of its way to produce the residue. Hence, TexPet’s failure to include any
provisions regarding this residue is evidence that TexPet never intended to
reserve itself rights in the residue oil under the 1973 Agreement (as Respondent
alleges would be required by industry custom). The Respondent contends that

this is not surprising given that, at the time of conclusion of the 1973 Agreement,

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 202

431.

432.

Ecuador’s refining capacity and the difference between the domestic and
international market prices were both small enough to make the residue oil of
negligible value to TexPet. It was only after the outbreak of war in the Middle
East and the OPEC embargo in October 1973, soon after the 1973 Agreement
was signed, that the international market price skyrocketed, giving TexPet a
significant interest in the residue oil. The Respondent repeats that the
negotiations leading to the 1977 Agreement effected a significant change (though
only temporary) to the economics of the relationship between TexPet and
Ecuador (R V, {{528-547; R VI, (549-564; Tr. II at 142:17-143:12, 145:2-20;
HR4 pp. 137-138; R VIL, 176; R VIII, (83).

The Respondent also disputes the contention that the export of the residual oil
created a “windfall” for Ecuador and asserts that it in fact created a loss. The
Respondent notes that, at the relevant times, the crude export price was
approximately double the export price of the residual oil. Meanwhile, CEPE held
a 62.5% stake in the Consortium’s oil productions and Ecuador heavily taxed
both CEPE and TexPet’s revenues. Thus, Ecuador lost substantial revenues with

each barrel of crude requisitioned for domestic refining:

Had the crude not been required by the local refineries to process derivatives
required for internal consumption, CEPE would have received double the
price for its own portion of the crude oil not required for domestic
consumption (62.5% of the Consortium’s production alone), and the
Republic would have been able to collect income tax on the higher net
proceeds realized by both TexPet and CEPE on additional volumes of crude
oil exports, benefiting the myriad Ministries and agencies of the Republic
which were funded by petroleum income tax revenues. There was thus no
financial incentive whatsoever for the Republic and CEPE to demand more
crude oil to satisfy the requirements of the local refineries than the minimum
required, given that CEPE was the principal domestic consumption supplier
and thus the biggest loser when quantities of crude had to be diverted from
the export market to the local refineries to meet domestic consumption needs
as required under the 1971 Law of Hydrocarbons.

(R VI, (565-569; Tr. II at 523:8-526:24; HR4 p. 141; R VII, {{[66-70)

The arguments of the Claimants’ expert, Mr. Paz, are also contradictory. He
rejects the idea that a sale contract giving ownership of the crude to Ecuador was

ever formed because of a lack of agreement on essential terms such as price.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 203

433.

434,

435.

However, if no contract was formed, there is no basis for the contractual breaches

that form the basis of the claims (R VI, 570-572).

The Respondent further argues that “no Ecuadorian court would grant TexPet the
relief it seeks based on [the 1977] Agreement” (R VI, 9548). According to the
Respondent, the 1977 Agreement, particularly as construed by the Claimants,
violates the provisions of the Ecuadorian Hydrocarbons Laws and_ is
unenforceable as a consequence. TexPet’s claims argue that Ecuador was only
entitled to a reduced number of barrels of crude based on the residue oil that was
produced. However, given that this residue was an unavoidable by-product of the
refining process and was useless for domestic consumption, this reduction would
have left Ecuador unable to satisfy domestic needs, thereby violating the
sovereign rights and prerogatives enshrined in Article 30 of the 1971
Hydrocarbons Law (R V, (548-561; R VI, {[575-579; Tr. II at 146:4-18, 500:7-
503:11, 1171:1-1172:18; HR4 p. 147; HRS p.97; R VII, 193; R VII, 9134, 38).

Ecuadorian law also provides for strict formalities to be adhered to in order to
create an enforceable contract with the Government, in particular in the
hydrocarbons sector. Thus the 1977 Agreement would also run afoul of
Ecuadorian law and be unenforceable if it purported to be a longer-term
“investment agreement” rather than just an annual work program (R VI, {{580-
582; Tr. II at 146:21-147:5, 664:23-667:25, 1174:1-1175:9; HR4 p. 148; HRS
pp.102-104; R VII, 492).

Even assuming the 1977 Agreement could be enforced, the Respondent reaffirms
that it was a one-year arrangement that expired in the immediately following
year. The Agreement itself repeatedly refers to its 12-month duration throughout
its provisions. TexPet’s internal documents and letters to the Ministry also
confirmed that it would terminate in its entirety after one year, unless renewed.
TexPet confirmed this when it began ultimately unsuccessful renegotiations
(R V, 9562-569; R VI, (9584-598). At least the intention of those negotiating on
behalf of the Government to conclude only a 12-month arrangement has been

firmly established. Thus, the Respondent submits that, even in case that the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 204

436.

Tribunal does find some ambiguity, the one-year term is more consistent with the

text of the agreement and should apply (R VI, (1582-583).

As a final argument, the Respondent cites various excerpts from the recent
decision in favor of Ecuador in the second Amazonas Refinery case (Case 153-
93) that was rendered by the Provincial Court of Pichincha on July 14, 2009,
following the submission of the Parties’ Post-Hearing Briefs. In particular, the
Respondent draws attention to the judgment’s citations of Article 2(b) of Decree
1258 and Ministerial Resolutions 14052 and 14895, which provide that crude oil
requested from the oil producers was “to be used for supplying the refineries
operating in Ecuador,” define “[dJomestic consumption...as the crude oil
delivered to the State,” and stipulate that exported oil derivatives “are owned
exclusively by the Government of Ecuador” (Exh. R-1034, {{[9-10). The

Respondent notes that on this basis, the Court concluded as follows:

[T]he Government of Ecuador paid Texaco, at the aforementioned price, for
all of the crude used at the Amazonas refinery during the aforementioned
period, and such price included the price for the residue contained in the
crude, which necessarily had to be separated in the refining process. Thus,
the residue from this (already paid for) crude oil, which could not be
processed at the Amazonas refinery for the reasons hereinabove set forth,
belongs to the Government of Ecuador, since the price for the residual
crude, which forms a part of the raw material, was paid, as already indicated,
upon delivery of the crude oil barrels at the Amazonas refinery... [In
contrast,] Clause 15.3 of the August 6, 1973 agreement deals with gas and
provides that “Any gas surplus which is not used by CEPE or the contractors
and cannot be injected, recirculated or reinjected in the relevant gas fields
shall be subject to special agreements.” This agreement does not contain any
clause requiring the Government of Ecuador to pay or compensate for or
reach special agreements regarding the residual crude resulting from the
crude oil refining process aimed at producing oil derivatives, and this does
not exist because he who acquires the essence of a thing also acquires the
incidentals thereof, the essence being the crude oil and the incidentals the
residual or reduced crude. Otherwise, the State would be paying twice for
the crude, once upon receiving it for delivery to the Amazonas refinery, and
again when being charged, as is the case now, for the barrels of residue,
whether or not reinjected into the SOTE trans-Ecuadorian pipeline.

(Exh. R-1034, (10)

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 205

437.

°)

438.

439.

440.

The Respondent argues that the above judgment is further strong evidence that
the Claimants cannot meet their burden to prove that “an Ecuadorian court,
applying Ecuadorian law, would more likely than not have granted judgment to

TexPet” (R IX, 76).

The Tribunal
Preliminarily, the Tribunal recalls its disposition of the issues of abandonment
and prescription with respect to the first Esmeraldas Refinery case (Case 23-91)
and the first Amazonas Refinery case (Case 7-92) (see Section H.V, {{[385-388
above). The Tribunal concludes that Case 7-92 should not have been dismissed as
abandoned and that the default prescription period applied to TexPet’s cases. The
Tribunal is therefore not precluded by either of the grounds of abandonment or
prescription from further examining the merits of the Claimants’ underlying
cases in its determination of the damages that follow from a breach of Article

11(7) of the BIT.

Turning to the Concession Agreements, the Tribunal initially notes that there is
significant ambiguity on the face of the 1973 Agreement, giving rise to the
essential divide between the Parties’ respective interpretations: was the crude oil
requested by Ecuador from TexPet to be priced according to the crude oil inputs
to the refineries or according to the ultimate destination of the derivatives

products from the refineries?

However, there does not appear to be significant disagreement between the
Parties on the meaning of the 1977 Agreement and the result that would be
obtained if that Agreement was valid and applied throughout the relevant periods.
As the Claimants have noted, both Drs. Merlo and Schargrodsky, Respondent’s
experts, affirmed that the formula under the 1977 Agreement excluded the
exported products from the calculation of “National Internal Consumption”
(C VIL, 16; Tr. If at 499:10-500:7, 885:4-889:7, 1060:9-1061:4, 1062:13-
1063:3). Thus, if the 1977 Agreement is found to be in force during the relevant
periods, this would independently resolve the essential question posed above.
The Tribunal thus considers first the questions relating to the term and duration

of the 1977 Agreement.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 206

441.

442.

443.

444,

The Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s argument that the 1977 Agreement was
limited to a duration of one year. The Tribunal notes in this respect the many
references to a singular, one-year period of duration of the agreement, including

in particular the following:

(a) the references to “for the year 1977” and “the period between the date of
the signature of the herein agreement until 12 months subsequent to that
date” in Section 1 (“Works of Geology and Geophysics”);

(b) the references to “the period of execution of the program (date of the
signature of the herein agreement until 12 months subsequent to that date)”,
“the period of performance of the program”, and “the period between the 12
months of the work program” in Sections 3(c), 3(d), and 3(g)
(“Production”); and

(c) the references to “the programmed period of twelve months”, “the period of
the Agreement herein”, and “this annual period” in Sections 1, 1.1, and 1.2
(“General Rules that shall rule the Production”).

Thus, despite the absence of a mention of a one-year period in the preamble or in

the section titled “Oil destined to Internal Consumption,” the Tribunal is
convinced that the agreement expired in 1978. As such, the 1977 Agreement

cannot independently support the Claimants’ case.

The Claimants alternatively argue that the 1977 and 1973 Agreements are
consistent with one another and therefore the interpretation accepted by the
Respondent for the 1977 Agreement must also apply to the 1973 Agreement. The
Tribunal must thus resolve the question above regarding Articles 19 and 20 of the
1973 Agreement: was the crude oil requested by Ecuador from TexPet to be
priced according to the crude oil inputs to the refineries or according to the

ultimate destination of the derivatives produced by the refineries?

The Tribunal recalls the relevant provisions of the 1973 Agreement. Article 19.2
states the obligation of the contractors to supply oil for “internal consumption”

and states that the amount will be calculated in accordance with Article 19.1:

19.2 The contractors agree to supply, if the respective Ministry so requests,
their proportionate part of whatever quantity of crude oil may be necessary
for the production of derivatives for the internal consumption of the country,
calculated in accordance with the provisions of the preceding numbered
paragraph of this clause. This obligation of the contractors shall not be
limited by the provisions of paragraph 19.3 of this clause.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 207

445.

446.

447.

448.

The second paragraph of Article 19.1 sets out a formula for determining the
proportion to be requisitioned from each contractor by reference to “national

domestic consumption”:

19.1 [...]

The percentage referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be applied to all
the producers in the country, including CEPE, and will be determined
quarterly by dividing the national domestic consumption in barrels per day
by the total production corresponding to such producers, also expressed in
barrels per day, and multiplying the result by 100.

Articles 20.1 and 20.2 of the 1973 Agreement then set out the prices to be paid
for the crude requested, where crude requested “for internal consumption of
derivatives” is paid for at the domestic price and crude requested “for the
production of derivatives or products for export” is paid at the international price:
20.1 Prices of the various types of crude oil required for hydrocarbon
refineries or industries established in the country, for internal consumption
of derivatives, shall be those determined by the respective Ministry, and for

their determination production costs including amortization, transportation
tariffs and a reasonable profit shall be taken into account.

20.2 Prices of the various types of crude oil required for the hydrocarbon
refineries or industries established in the country for the production of
derivatives or products for export shall be agreed upon in accordance with
the prices of crude oil on the international market.
The key questions that arise here are, first, the definition of “national domestic
consumption” in Article 19.1 and, second, whether the pricing scheme of Articles
20.1 and 20.2 is based on the purpose of the crude oil at the time of input into the
refining process or is based on the ultimate destination of the derivatives

produced from the crude oil.

The Tribunal ultimately agrees with the Claimants’ interpretation of the 1973
Agreement. The 1973 Agreement, read as a whole, supports the Claimants’ view
that the guiding principle in Clauses 19 and 20 was to be that the ultimate
destination or use of the crude oil contributed would determine the price to be

paid.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 208

449.

450.

451.

452.

Several factors inform the Tribunal’s analysis in this regard. First, neither Party
disputed that, in the 1973 Agreement, the word “derivatives” is modified by the
phrase “destined to the domestic consumption in the country” in both Articles 19
and 20 of the 1973 Agreement (Tr. II at 163:5-16, 971:15-973:25). The Parties
later agreed on a translation of “for internal consumption” in lieu of “destined to
the domestic consumption” in Articles 20.1 and 20.2. Nonetheless, the Tribunal
remains convinced that the original Spanish text, which reads “destinadas al
consumo interno,” suggests a pricing scheme based on the ultimate destination of

derivatives produced from requisitioned crude oil.

Second, the Tribunal also agrees with the Claimants that the oil supply
obligations under the 1973 Agreement are not equivalent to barrel-by-barrel sale
contracts. The language of these provisions suggests that the determination of the
amounts of crude oil requisitioned and the prices to be paid for them were meant
to be global calculations determined on a quarterly basis. This interpretation of
the language of the 1973 Agreement is confirmed by the Parties’ practice. As
such, the pricing of any crude oil supplied by TexPet was still open at the time of

input and until the ultimate destination of the derivatives was ascertained.

Further, in particular, the acceptance of this interpretation by Ecuador in the 1977
Agreement, even if only temporarily, and the evidence of industry practice for
these types of concession contracts, convinces the Tribunal that the Claimants’

interpretation is more reasonable than the Respondent's.

With respect to the 1977 Agreement, the Tribunal is persuaded that that
Agreement was meant to be consistent with and clarify the 1973 Agreement as
contended by the Claimants. The Tribunal notes Mr. Sevilla’s testimony that, as
the Ecuadorian Minister of Finance who signed the agreement, he had no
intention that the 1977 Agreement contradict the 1973 Agreement (Tr. II at
593:1-595:1). Although Ecuador may have subsequently recanted in this
concession to TexPet, this does not prevent the 1977 Agreement from indicating
that TexPet’s interpretation of the 1973 Agreement was both possible and

reasonable.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 209

453.

454.

a)

455.

On the issue of industry custom, the Tribunal is persuaded to accept the evidence
of the Claimants’ expert that industry practice is such that a producer is
compensated at the international price for all derivatives that are exported, and
that domestic set prices, royalties, taxes and other mechanisms are used to
regulate the economics of the relationship between the host state and the
producer (Exh. C-294, 24). The Claimants’ expert also established that “national
domestic consumption” is a recognized economic and industry term that excludes
exports (Tr. II at 261:21-25). The Claimants’ expert on Ecuadorian law has
further confirmed this meaning of the contractual term in light of Ecuadorian

contract law (Exh. C-323, 68).

On the basis of the above, the Tribunal finds that an honest, independent and
impartial Ecuadorian judge would have ruled in TexPet’s favor in the Esmeraldas
and Amazonas Refinery cases (Cases 23-91, 152-93, 7-92, and 153-93,

respectively).

Imported Products case (Case 154-93)

Arguments by the Claimants
The Claimants further declare that TexPet proved its claims in the Imported
Products case (Case 154-93). This claim is based on the fact that Ecuador did not
credit into the OPAH Account the funds received from sales made to retail sellers
(such as gas stations) of the imported derivatives bought with TexPet’s
Compensation Crude. Under the Compensation Crude system, Ecuador would
request crude from TexPet at the domestic price and sell it at the international
price. The net proceeds were then used by CEPE/PetroEcuador to purchase
derivatives for local consumption. CEPE/PetroEcuador, in turn, sold them to
retail sellers such as gas stations (also owned by CEPE). All of these transactions
were to be accounted for in the OPAH Account, whose balance affected the
amount of Compensation Crude requested. The Claimants cite the Respondent’s
own witness in this arbitration, Mr. Orbe, as agreeing to the relation between the
OPAH Account balance and TexPet’s required Compensation Crude

contributions:

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 210

456.

457.

458.

If any positive balance or deficit existed in the OPAH Account at the end of
a quarter, it would be taken into consideration in the calculation of crude oil
contribution of compensation crude oil.

(Exh. RE-13; C VI, 190; Tr. II at 79:1-7; HC4 p. 82; C VIII, 156)

More specifically, according to Article 1(b) of Decree 1258 of 1973, the OPAH
Account was required to include “[t]he amounts paid by the refineries of the
country for the imported hydrocarbons they receive from the Ministry of Energy
and Natural Resources” (C VI, 189; C VII, 36). Decree 1258, established a new
accounting mechanism in the OPAH Account. The Claimants contend that this
simply continued the previous practice of crediting these sales under Article 4 of

the previous Ecuadorian Decree 88 (C VIII, {[57-58, 62).

In response to the cited article, the Respondent characterizes the OPAH, CEPE,
and the retail sellers all as separate entities and claims that no imported
derivatives were ever supplied by the Ministry to the refineries (R V, {583). The
Claimants argue, however, that CEPE held a monopoly on refining, pipelines, gas
stations, import and export, and OPAH was an office within CEPE. The imported
derivatives were in fact received at the export and import terminals connected to
CEPE refineries. As of 1975, CEPE had also become both the manager of the
OPAH Account and the entity responsible for assessing and satisfying Ecuador’s
domestic need. CEPE directly requested the Compensation Crude, exported it,
imported the derivatives, supplied these to its own gas stations, and sold them on
the retail market. As such, Article 1(b) of Decree 1258 required the “refineries”
(ie, CEPE) to pay into the OPAH Account for the imported products they
received through the Compensation Crude scheme and passed down to CEPE-
owned gas stations. The Claimants submit that the OPAH Account in fact
included accounts receivable for these expected payments, but no deposits were
ever made by CEPE. As a consequence, the Claimants conclude that the OPAH
Account balance was lower, which, in turn, required TexPet to over-contribute
Compensation Crude to make up for this deficiency (C V, {{{[120-124; C VI,
(88-95; C VII, {il 36-37, 42; C VIL, 1759-61).

According to the Claimants, the issuance of an internal resolution by CEPE

(Resolution 1179 of November 19, 1980) was meant to address this failure.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 211

459.

460.

Resolution 1179 provided “Transfer Prices” at which the different kinds of
derivative products would be paid for by CEPE into the OPAH Account. Three
problems persisted despite this solution. First, the “Transfer Prices” were
artificially low given that the derivatives at issue were sold at much higher
“Public Sale Prices.” Second, for the nine-year period they were in effect, the
“Transfer Prices” were never updated contrary to the annual updating required by
Resolution 1179. Finally, the “Transfer Prices” were never paid and the
corresponding accounts receivable in the OPAH Account were eventually written
off. Mr. Borja summarized the effects of this situation as follows:
Because CEPE did not actually pay the Transfer Prices to the Operations
Account, the Operations Account did not use these funds for the purchase
and import of derivatives. Thus, in order to satisfy Ecuador’s Domestic
Consumption needs, the Operations Account requested additional volumes
of Compensation Crude for the import of these derivatives. This was further

aggravated by the fact that CEPE never updated the Transfer Prices, and by
the fact that the Operations Account wrote off these amounts.

This resulted in an over-contribution of Texaco’s own share of crude oil at
the Internal Market Price.

(CV, 1128; C VIL, 38)

The Claimants assert that the Respondent cannot reconcile its position with the
existence of Resolution 1179 or with the fact that accounts receivable were
carried in the OPAH Account for these transactions by merely calling Resolution
1179 the act of a “misguided finance bureaucrat” and once again alleging the
illegality of official acts undertaken by its agents (Tr. II at 81:2-82:16, 1066:21-
1066:19; HC4 pp. 85-87; HCS pp.32-34; C VIII, 64-65).

The Claimants dispute the Respondent’s assertion that Article 1(b) of Decree
1258 only addressed the situation where CEPE imported and delivered
“reconstituted crude oil” to refineries. Under the compensation crude process,
there was no reason whatsoever that CEPE would purchase and import
“reconstituted crude.” Article 1(b) refers to “hydrocarbons” which naturally
includes the derivatives that were the object of the compensation crude process

(Tr. IE 1066:12-20; HCS p.31; C VII, 40-41).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 212

461.

462.

b)

463.

The end result is, Claimants contend, that CEPE/PetroEcuador “received free
derivatives” at TexPet’s expense. Mr. Borja’s calculation of damages was
confirmed in judicial inspection by the two court-appointed experts (C V, {{[132-
134). The Claimants’ experts on Ecuadorian law and valuation of damages have
also confirmed the legal basis for the claim and the corresponding damage

calculations (C V, {{[125-136; C VII, 939).

As with the recent decision in the second Amazonas Refinery case (Case 153-
93), the Claimants also object to the consideration of the decision against TexPet
in the Imported Products case (Case 154-93), rendered on September 10, 2009
following the closing of proceedings in the present arbitration. The Claimants
reiterate that a decision taken by a domestic court after a denial of justice has
been completed cannot affect the Respondent’s liability for that wrong and they
“must prove only that they should have prevailed before an honest, competent,
and independent Ecuadorian court properly applying Ecuadorian law.” In this
context, the judgment in Case 154-93 is irrelevant because they have shown a
“general lack of judicial independence that discredits any ruling emanating from
an Ecuadorian court in politically-sensitive cases like Case 154-93 and TexPet’s
other cases.” The Claimants also note that the timing of the decision is
suspicious, as is the parallel between the Respondent’s arguments in this
arbitration, which were not timely presented in the Ecuadorian courts, and the
judgment’s reasoning. According to the Claimants, the judgment also ignores
Article 1(b) of Decree 1258 and Resolution 1179, which are key to TexPet’s case
and instead relies on two self-serving letters from the National Director of
Hydrocarbons to justify its conclusions. The Claimants consider that this
judgment was made in manifest disregard of Ecuadorian law and constitutes

another example of denial of justice against TexPet (C XIV).

Arguments by the Respondent
The Respondent argues that the Claimants cannot show that TexPet would more
likely than not have prevailed on the merits of the Imported Products case (Case
154-93). The case is based on allegedly improper accounting practices in the
management of the OPAH Account. In particular, the OPAH Account managed

the proceeds of the sale of compensation crude requested from TexPet and

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 213

464.

exported at the international market price in order then to import derivative
products for domestic consumption as allowed by the 1973 Agreement. The
OPAH Account thus included the amounts paid in and disbursed when crude was
requisitioned and either sent to local refineries for processing or exported to then
pay for the importation of derivatives for local consumption. The OPAH Account
also included the expenses and reimbursements associated with these
transactions. According to the Respondent, the “Claimants argue that the
Republic failed to properly credit the OPAH account with payments from a
fourth transaction category,” corresponding to the sales of imported derivatives to
retail sellers such as gas stations (R V, (582). This “artificially decreased” the
OPAH Account’s revenues available for further purchases of derivatives and, in
turn, caused TexPet to over-contribute crude for domestic consumption (R V,
572-578; R VI, 9599-608; Tr. If at 150:8-151:9, 1180:13-1181:13; HRS
p.116; R VII, 1194-95).

The Respondent first rejects this argument on the basis that the OPAH Account
was simply an accounting mechanism, not the basis for requisitioning crude,
which was instead done based on actual refining and consumption projections
and the express provisions of the 1973 Agreement. Second, since the imported
refined products were supplied directly by the Government to the retailers upon
importation, Ecuador’s refineries never actually received any imported products
nor made any sales of imported products to retailers. The only “imported
hydrocarbons” that would have been received by the refineries was crude or
“reconstituted crude” imported by the Ministry to supply any excess refining
capacity of the refineries. However, for various reasons, this never occurred.
Third, TexPet was not entitled to be credited with the benefit of the income from
retail sellers because the exported crude had already been purchased from
TexPet: “TexPet cannot both sell the crude oil to the Republic that is the basis for
the income and also expect to receive credit for the refined products purchased
with that income” (R V, 7583). Finally, retailers are not refineries and only
income from sales to refineries was required to be credited to the OPAH

Account. Overall, the Respondent submits that,

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 214

465.

[t]he fundamental premise of Claimants’ Imported Products claim is the
proposition that the importation of derivative products for internal
consumption was to be funded with resources other than TexPet’s and other
producers’ supply of Compensation Crude at the discounted domestic
market price. [...] In so arguing, Claimants seek to have Ecuadorian
refineries assume, at least in significant part, TexPet’s contractual obligation
to supply ‘whatever quantity of crude oil may be necessary for the
production of derivatives for the internal consumption of the country.”

(R VI, 610-611)

This would, the Respondent submits, clearly be contrary to the express provisions
of the 1973 Agreement, the 1971 Hydrocarbons Law, and other provisions of
Ecuadorian law (R V, {{[579-584; R VI, (609-624; Tr. II at 151:10-153:12,
470:12-476:10, 479:2-482:20, 1179:9-1180:12, 1181:14-1183:18; HR4 pp. 156-
160; HRS pp. 115-120; R VI, {{[96-106; R VIII, [[40-44).

The Respondent also points to the recent decision of the Provincial Court of
Pichincha in the Imported Products case (Case 154-93) as evidence that TexPet’s
claims are unfounded. In this judgment, the Court first cites a letter from the
National Hydrocarbons Director (Exh. C-287.62) which certified that “the
volume required for the domestic market from Texaco and all the companies that
have operated in the country...is strictly necessary to cover the refinery
requirements and to import derivatives,” and states that this certification had “not
been challenged.” The Court then noted that Clause 19.2 of the 1973 Agreement
set out an obligation to provide oil for domestic consumption and that both
Clause 20.1 of the 1973 Agreement and Article 72 of the Hydrocarbons Law
gave the Ecuadorian Ministry the power to set the prices to be paid for oil
contributed for domestic consumption. The Court further noted that Decree 88
established that crude oil required for domestic consumption included both crude
oil “[1] directly used for refining in the country or [2] that the Government
requires to purchase reconstituted crude oils or mixes of products required by the
existing refinery facilities” and that Article 2(b) of Decree 1258 authorized the
withdrawal from the OPAH Account of the following amounts:

amounts to be used for the purchase of crude oil from oil producing

companies, both for the direct supply of refineries operating in the Country,

as well as the crude oil for export in order to import derivatives to meet
domestic demand; and domestic demand shall be understood as the crude oil

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 215

466.

°)
467.

468.

469.

470.

471.

supplied to the State, part of which shall be used for refining and another
part of which shall be used for export in order to fund the import of products
required in the country.
The Court then concluded that TexPet was not owed any additional payments, as
“there is no clause obligating the Ecuadorian State to pay more than the price
calculated as indicated above (clause 20.1 = Art. 72 of the Hydrocarbons Law)

and especially not the price on the international market” (R XIII).

The Tribunal
The Tribunal reiterates that its task is to decide the court case as it determines an
honest, independent, and impartial Ecuadorian judge, applying Ecuadorian law,

would have done.

The Tribunal recalls that, according to the relevant portion of Article 1(b) of
Decree 1258 of 1973, the OPAH Account was required to include “[t]he amounts
paid by the refineries of the country for the imported hydrocarbons they receive
from the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources.” This phrase once again

presents ambiguity that the Tribunal must resolve by resort to context.

The essential difference between the Claimants’ and the Respondent’s position is
whether CEPE/PetroEcuador-owned hydrocarbon retailers such as gas stations
were entitled to received imported derivatives free of charge or whether these
derivatives would be paid for into the OPAH Account at the so-called “Transfer

Prices”.

The Tribunal considers the Claimants’ interpretation to be the more reasonable
one. In coming to this conclusion, the Tribunal is convinced that the
“compensation crude” system was meant to allow Ecuador to satisfy domestic
need at no cost to itself. However, the interpretation alleged by the Respondent
would not only allow Ecuador to satisfy its domestic need at no cost to itself, but

would allow the State to make a sizeable profit through its state-owned retailers.

The Tribunal further considers Resolution 1179 to be decisive. This resolution,
made by TexPet’s Consortium partner, as well as the accounts receivable for

these amounts, carried on the books of the OPAH Account for a significant

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 216

472.

a)

473.

474.

period, essentially amount to an admission that TexPet’s position was correct.
The Respondent has not sufficiently explained these events or countered their

significance to convince the Tribunal otherwise.

On the basis of the above, the Tribunal finds that an honest, independent and
impartial Ecuadorian judge would have ruled in TexPet’s favor in the Imported

Products case (Case 154-93).

Force Majeure case (Case 8-92)

Arguments by the Claimants
As for the Force Majeure case (Case 8-92), the Claimants also argue that they
made a clear and irrefutable case. An earthquake, which hit Ecuador on March 5,
1987, destroyed several kilometers of the Trans-Ecuadorian pipeline. This
effectively “shut in” TexPet’s production capacity. TexPet, however, through a
Colombian pipeline, provided to Ecuador the crude oil that it had in its storage
tanks in Ecuador. During the months following the earthquake (the force majeure
period), TexPet thus supplied Ecuador with 100% of its production plus all of its
stored oil. Given the inability of Ecuador’s refineries to refine oil, CEPE instead
bartered fuel oil produced with TexPet’s crude (obtained at the domestic price)

for other derivative products to meet domestic consumption during this time.

The Claimants argue that Clause 19 of the 1973 Agreement only required TexPet
to contribute in proportion to its actual production during a given quarter. Clause
19.1 of the 1973 Agreement, for example, requires oil producers to “supply an
equal percentage of the oil belonging to them.” This percentage is calculated
“every quarter by dividing the domestic national consumption of barrels per day
into the total production corresponding to such producers, also expressed in
barrels per day, and multiplying the result times one hundred.” Once the Trans-
Ecuadorian pipeline was restored, however, Ecuador required TexPet to
retroactively contribute over 100% of its output to Ecuador’s domestic
consumption during the force majeure period, thereby “effectively shift[ing] to
TexPet all the burden of the effects of the earthquake” (C V, {{[137-142; C VI,
{198-101; Tr. II at 1067:25-1068:20; HCS p.36).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 217

475.

476.

477.

b)

478.

The Claimants summarize the legal arguments put forward by TexPet for its

claim as follows:

Pursuant to the 1973 Agreement, TexPet’s obligation to contribute crude oil
for domestic consumption was proportionate to and contingent on its own
production of crude oil. Thus, because TexPet was unable to produce crude
oil (or only produced very small volumes) during the time period following
the earthquake, its obligations to contribute to domestic consumption were
concomitantly reduced in proportion to its production. Furthermore, under
the applicable force majeure provisions of the Ecuadorian Civil Code,
TexPet had no obligation to contribute additional volumes of crude oil to
cover its lack of contribution during the force majeure period, and it
certainly was not required to contribute crude oil retroactively to
compensate for the derivatives that [Ecuador] imported”

(C V, 143-144)

The Claimants contest the Respondent’s argument based on the idea that
obligations are only suspended and not extinguished by force majeure under
Ecuadorian law. While this premise may be true, the resumption of TexPet’s
obligations after the force majeure period still did not require TexPet to
retroactively contribute crude from subsequent quarterly production to satisfy
domestic consumption corresponding to earlier quarters. Contrary to the
Respondent’s attempts to do so, the retroactive contributions also cannot be
categorized as mere “true-ups” of previous quarterly contribution estimations. All
these arguments are consistent with what was put forward originally by TexPet in

the underlying Ecuadorian litigation (C VI, {{J102-104; C VIII, 1166-68).

The legal foundation of the claim is confirmed by Mr. Paz, the Claimants’ expert
on Ecuadorian law (C V, {145). The Claimants’ position that the number of
barrels over-contributed in the case is clearly stated in government documents,
which was confirmed in Ecuadorian courts by the parties’ experts on both sides,

and was further confirmed by Navigant (C V, {{J137-150).

Arguments by the Respondent
The Respondent also contests the merits of the Force Majeure case (Case 8-92).
The earthquake of March 5, 1987 damaged the Trans-Ecuadorian pipeline and
effectively “shut in” all the crude that would have been otherwise available to

supply local refineries. During the force majeure period, producers were required

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 218

479.

480.

481.

to deliver whatever oil they could deliver through an alternative pipeline. This
was far less, however, than what was needed to satisfy domestic consumption.
Therefore, an emergency decree (Decree 1280) was enacted under Article 93 of
the Hydrocarbons Law, reading in pertinent part as follows:

Whereas the trans-ecuadorian pipeline has been damaged...the country is
undergoing a state of emergency...

Article No. 1 - the General Manager of CEPE is authorized to continue,
without any further requirements, to directly negotiate with Furness Withy
(Shipping) Ltd. to obtain [LPG] (petroleum derived liquid gas) by bartering
the fuel oil No. 6, produced in the State Refinery of Esmeraldas, and to
execute the corresponding contracts.

Article No. 2 — The technical, economic, legal and performance aspects of
the negotiations and execution of the contract are the exclusive
responsibility of CEPE.

(Exh. R-585; R V, 1587)

After the pipeline was repaired, all the producers, including TexPet, were
required to contribute compensation crude purchased at the domestic price over a
period of 14 months to be sold on the international market to compensate for the

emergency transactions noted above (R V, 585-589).

In its claim, TexPet argued, not that the 1977 Agreement or some principle of
non-retroactivity was breached as it argues now, but that its obligation to
contribute crude to domestic consumption was contingent on its own production
of crude oil and therefore claimed that its own reduced capacity during the force
majeure period led to a concomitant reduction in its required contributions. The
Respondent claims that there is no support anywhere for establishing that
TexPet’s contribution obligations are conditional. The Respondent asserts that
this argument runs directly counter to Clause 19 of the 1973 Agreement and
Article 30 of the Hydrocarbons Law, which provide that export of oil by TexPet
will only be authorized “once the needs of the country have been satisfied” (R V,

1590-596).

Moreover, the argument that this constituted a “retroactive” requisitioning of

crude ignores the discretion accorded to the Ministry by Clause 19.1, which says

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 219

482.

483.

°)

484.

485.

that crude can be requested “when [the Ministry] deems it necessary.” The
Claimants’ translation of Clause 19.1 is erroneous insofar as it negates this
discretion, which is clear from the Spanish text. However, even if estimates and
forecasts would be provided quarterly, the parties’ practice clearly demonstrate
that “retroactive” requests were regularly made to reconcile the quarterly
estimates to the actual production and consumption figures of a given quarter.
Regardless, the Respondent points out that this retroactivity argument was not
properly pursued in the underlying court litigation (R VI, {{[630-645; Tr. 153:21-
25, 154:17-23; HR4 p. 164; R VII, {J108, 110, 112).

The Respondent further argues that this absolute obligation of contribution was
also not defeated by the doctrine of force majeure under Article 1590 (currently
1563) of the Ecuadorian Civil Code. According to the Respondent, “[u]nder
Ecuadorian law, the doctrine of force majeure releases a debtor from liability due
to delay in performing the contractual obligation, but does not eliminate the
obligation itself.” Force majeure therefore merely deferred TexPet’s duty to
contribute to domestic consumption. The Respondent further submits that force
majeure is subject to an exception when “the thing that is owed has not been
damaged” and it is evident that the crude owed by TexPet was not damaged
(R V, 9597-600; R VI, 1646-649; Tr. II at 154:4-16; HR4 pp. 163-164; R VII,
q109).

The Respondent claims that the conduct of the parties to the 1973 Agreement
confirms this understanding of TexPet’s obligations following the earthquake and
that TexPet’s conduct, in fact, amounts to a waiver under Ecuadorian law that
would prevent recovery by TexPet in any event (R V, {601-602; R VI, {{[650-
654; Tr. IL at 154:24-155:2; HR4 pp. 166-167; R VIL, 111).

The Tribunal
The Tribunal reiterates that its task is to decide the case as it determines an
honest, independent, and impartial Ecuadorian judge, applying Ecuadorian law,

would have done.

Preliminarily, the Tribunal recalls its disposition of the issues of abandonment

and prescription with respect to the first Esmeraldas Refinery case (Case 23-91)

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 220

486.

487.

488.

and the first Amazonas Refinery case (Case 7-92) (see Section H.V, {{[385-388
above). The Tribunal concludes that Case 7-92 should not have been dismissed as
abandoned and that the default prescription period applied to TexPet’s cases. The
Tribunal is therefore not precluded by either of the grounds of abandonment or
prescription from further examining the merits of the Claimants’ underlying
cases in its determination of the damages that follow from a breach of Article

11(7) of the BIT.

As with the first Esmeraldas Refinery case (Case 23-91) and first Amazonas
Refinery case (Case 7-92), the Tribunal recalls its disposition of the issues of
abandonment and prescription with respect to TexPet’s claim in the Force
Majeure case (Case 8-92) (see Section H.V, {385-388 above). The Tribunal
concludes that the default prescription period applied to Case 8-92. Therefore,
prescription also does not apply to dispose of the Force Majeure case and the

Tribunal may proceed to evaluate the merits of the case.

With respect to TexPet’s underlying claim, the Tribunal recalls the second
paragraph of Article 19.1 of the 1973 Agreement, which sets out the formula for

determining the producers’ oil contribution obligations:
19.1[...]

The percentage referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be applied to all
the producers in the country, including CEPE, and will be determined
quarterly by dividing the national domestic consumption in barrels per day
by the total production corresponding to such producers, also expressed in
barrels per day, and multiplying the result by 100.
The language of the above formula stipulates that TexPet’s contribution
obligation is to be calculated as a proportion of its total quarterly production. The
maximum contribution in any given quarter must necessarily then be capped at
100% of said total quarterly production. Therefore, aside from issues of force
majeure, the Tribunal finds that TexPet met and exceeded its obligations when it
contributed all its production and inventory during the quarters that the Trans-
Ecuadorian pipeline was non-operational due to damage from the earthquake. As
the Claimants argue, Ecuador’s further requisitioning of crude oil in later quarters

at the domestic price to make up for earlier emergency purchases of derivatives

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 221

489.

490.

a)

491.

abroad during the earthquake period constituted a retroactive request that
conflicts with the provisions of the 1973 Agreement. Since the Tribunal
determines that no further obligation existed to contribute beyond the maximum
production in a given quarter, there was no obligation to be reduced or deferred
by the doctrine of force majeure under Ecuadorian law. These issues are

therefore moot.

Moreover, the doctrine of force majeure, like the doctrine of hardship and other
related concepts, is designed to “distribute between the parties in a just and
equitable manner the losses and gains resulting from” an unforeseeable event.'*!
The Respondent’s interpretation would in fact mean that any negative effect of a
force majeure situation would exclusively have to be borne by TexPet and in no
way by the Respondent. The Respondent has not been able to show that the 1973
Agreement or Ecuadorian law provide support for such an unusual interpretation

in cases of force majeure.

On the basis of the above, the Tribunal finds that an honest, independent and
impartial Ecuadorian judge would have ruled in TexPet’s favor in the Force

Majeure case (Case 8-92).

Refinancing Agreement case (Case 983-03)

Arguments by the Claimants
The final case, the Refinancing Agreement case (Case 983-03, formerly Case 6-
92), is not based on over-contribution of crude oil. By September 30, 1986,
Ecuador had accumulated a large debt for unpaid purchases of TexPet’s crude at
the domestic market price, totaling US$ 41,316,033.98. TexPet and Ecuador
entered into the 1986 Refinancing Agreement, requiring CEPE to pay back its
debt in 18 monthly installments. The Claimants submit that Ecuador was
systematically late in its payments of principal and interest, thus accruing further

interest on the delayed payments at the New York Prime Rate, as specified in the

' Art. 6:111(3)(b) Principles of European Contract Law 2002; UNIDROIT Principles, supra note
XX at art. 7.1.7 comment 3; id. at arts. 6.2.2 and 6.2.3(3)(b).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 222

492.

b)

493.

agreement. TexPet and CEPE later formed a commission that determined that
Ecuador owed US$ 1,522,552.54 in further interest (C V, 153). TexPet
subsequently filed Case 6-92 (which was later renumbered Case 983-03),
claiming this amount. As part of its claim, TexPet countered the Respondent’s
argument that interest was suspended during the force majeure period following
the earthquake. According to the Claimants, Article 30 of the Ecuadorian Civil
Code provides that force majeure does not suspend or excuse performance of
financial obligations. The Claimants further point out that Ecuador’s experts in
the court case “submitted a joint expert report to the court, in which they stated
that CEPE/PE owed TexPet US$ 1,522,522.54” (C V, {156). Navigant has
subsequently confirmed this “straightforward” calculation of the original interest
accrued with only one small correction pertaining to one interest payment,

leading to a claim of US$ 1,530,615 (C V, 1151-157).

The Claimants acknowledge that, following the Notice of Arbitration, the court
found in favor of TexPet for the full amount sought. However, the judgment
stipulated that the judgment was to be paid to the “legal representative” of
TexPet. The Claimants assert that this made it impossible to collect on the
judgment because, under Ecuadorian law, only domestic corporations may have
“legal representatives,” while foreign corporations act only through “attorneys-
in-fact.” TexPet requested that the Court clarify its ruling to say that it meant
TexPet as represented by its attorney-in-fact, but the Court refused to do so and
they were therefore forced to appeal the judgment on this point. The Claimants
assert that they are therefore left in the same position as before the purported

decision in their favor (C VII, (101).

Arguments by the Respondent
The Refinancing Agreement case (Case 983-03) is also without merit according
to the Respondent. In that case, the parties dispute the amount of interest owed
due to late payments of installments under the agreement of November 25, 1986.
The Respondent cites two relevant provisions of the agreement:
[Section 2.3:] CEPE through its Operations Account agrees to pay interest in

U.S. dollars at the PRIME rate in effect on New York market on the due
date exclusively for the late payment period.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 223

494,

495.

°)

496.

[Section 2.6:] [TexPet] waives collection of interest on amounts owed as of
November 1, 1987, except as provided in Clause 2.3 hereunder. As of such
date, chargeable to the Operations Account, CEPE agrees to pay interest in
U.S. dollars on unpaid balances at the PRIME rate in effect on the New
York market on the I* day of each month... Such interest will be paid to
[TexPet] jointly with the dividend owed at the end of each month.

(R V, $604)

PetroEcuador (as CEPE’s successor) argued that the earthquake of March 5, 1987
was a force majeure event that excused it from making payments during the force
majeure period. That case was first transferred from the Supreme Court in which
TexPet filed the case to the First Civil Court of Pichincha where it was promptly
decided in TexPet’s favor. PetroEcuador has argued on appeal, however, first that
the judge did not have jurisdiction as a result of the 1971 Hydrocarbons Law
which provides that, “the Minister of Energy and Mines is the Special
Hydrocarbons judge with original jurisdiction to hear and decide all controversies
which may arise as a result of the application of the Hydrocarbons Law.” Second,
PetroEcuador maintains that the Refinancing Agreement specifies that the
payments to TexPet were specifically to be charged against oil exports. Given no
oil exports to be charged against during the force majeure period, these payments
were made impossible and PetroEcuador was excused from making them until oil

exports resumed (R V, {{[603-609; R VI, {{[655-659).

The Respondent notes, nonetheless, that the Claimants have won this case.
Moreover, contrary to their claims regarding technical obstacles, nothing
prevents them from collecting on the judgment. According to the Respondent,
“TexPet’s appeal on this ground is a charade designed to preserve the appearance

of a grievance with respect to this case” (R VII, (1143-144; R VIII, 59).

The Tribunal
The Tribunal reiterates that it has found that its task is to decide the case as it
determines an honest, independent, and impartial Ecuadorian judge, applying
Ecuadorian law, would have done. The Tribunal must do so in order to assess
what damages, if any, have been caused to the Claimants by the breach of

Article II(7) of the BIT for undue delay.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 224

497.

498.

In this case, however the Ecuadorian courts did rule in favor of TexPet for the
full amount sought. The question that arises therefore does not concern the merits
of the claim before the Ecuadorian courts, but rather the stipulation in the
judgment that payment should be made to TexPet’s local legal representative. As
a matter of causation, the Tribunal must then decide whether the Claimants have
been improperly prevented from collecting on this judgment due to the acts of the

Ecuadorian judiciary in rendering their judgment.

The Tribunal finds that the Claimants have not presented sufficient evidence that
the judgment is flawed. Therefore, despite the breach of Article II(7) of the BIT
for undue delay, no damage has resulted from this breach inasmuch as a
favorable decision has been received so far. In particular, while the Claimants
generally argue that the stipulation regarding payment to a local legal
representative creates a technical impediment to their collection on the judgment,
the Claimants have not put forth evidence of any attempt to collect on the
judgment by TexPet itself or its Ecuadorian attorney-in-fact or even examples of
similar situations precluding collection. Given that the Claimants have not borne
their burden of proving that they have suffered a loss under this head, it is not
necessary for the Tribunal to determine whether an honest, impartial and
independent Ecuadorian judge would have ordered payment to a local legal
representative — that is, whether the Claimants could establish a causal link
between the breach of Article II(7) and the Claimants’ failure to receive an award

of damages upon which they could collect.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 225

H.VIL. The Quantum of Damages

1.

499.

500.

Arguments by the Claimants

As described in the preceding section, the Claimants contend that they have
proven their claim in each of the seven underlying cases in Ecuadorian courts.
They also claim to have proven their damages through their party-appointed
expert, Mr. Borja, whose results were confirmed by independent, court-appointed
experts and, in some cases, the opposing party-appointed expert in those
litigations. At the time of prosecution of TexPet’s claims, it had allegedly proven
US$ 587,823,427 worth of damages. With accumulated interest, TexPet’s
damages rise to between US$ 1.484 billion and US$ 1.605 billion (C V, {[481-
482; C VI, 1476; Tr. II at 86:14-24; HC4 p. 96; C VII, 9176, 103-104).

For this initial assessment, the Claimants refer to Mr. Borja’s witness statement

to describe the method used to calculate damages:

For the Esmeraldas Refinery Claim (Cases 23-91 and 152-93), damages
were proven and calculated as the price differential between the price that
the GOE paid TexPet for the crude oil that TexPet contributed for domestic
consumption but which was exported and not used for domestic
consumption, and the international price of crude oil TexPet should have
received, times the number of equivalent barrels over-contributed. Simple
interest was added to these resulting calculations based on the Prime interest
rate published by the Central Bank of Ecuador, from the month following
that in which payment from the GOE was due on the overcontribution
through the time Mr. Borja submitted his expert report in the litigation. This
analysis and calculation did not seek return of barrels of oil “in-kind.”
Rather, it was a damages calculation with a simple interest component.

ed

For each of the other cases, TexPet requested (i) restitution in-kind of the
barrels of crude that it never should have been required to contribute (and
TexPet agreed to reimburse the GOE the domestic market price that the
GOE had paid TexPet for these equivalent barrels), and, in the alternative,
(ii) full payment of the cash-equivalent of barrels that it contributed for
domestic consumption but which were exported, at the prevailing
international market price at the time payment would have been ordered by
the Ecuadorian judge (minus the prior internal market price payments that
TexPet received for the oil).

(C V, 1483)

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 226

501.

502.

503.

In this arbitration, the Claimants hired Navigant to conduct an independent
assessment of damages as at April 1, 2008. Navigant provides three calculations
arrived at through slightly different methods. First, Navigant independently re-
calculated damages using its own independent underlying source data (which
derives mostly from Ecuadorian government sources). This produced a result of
US$ 1.605 billion (C V, 9485). Navigant then made a second calculation relying
on Mr. Borja’s underlying calculation of the number of barrels over-contributed
at the domestic price. This produced a result of US$ 1.578 billion (C V, 9486).
Third, Navigant made a calculation using Mr. Borja’s results, updating these
through December 31, 2004 and then applying a further interest factor through
April 1, 2008. This produced a result of US$ 1.484 billion (C V, 487; C VI,
(477; Tr. II at 86:24-87:15; HC4 pp. 96-97; C VII, 177).

Navigant’s calculations, in turn, rely on the Claimants’ assertions of the
applicable interest. The Claimants submit that Ecuadorian law determines the
interest to be applied up until the date the denial of justice was completed,
December 31, 2004. In accordance with Ecuadorian law, only simple interest is
therefore claimed from the time of the breach (C VII, {{[134-136). In this case,
given no provision in the Concession Agreements, Mr. Borja calculated interest
using simple interest at the New York Prime Rate (C V, 489). Meanwhile,
Navigant states that this approach is too conservative and applies (as of June 20,
1995) simple interest at the Tasa Activa Referencial, a rate that began to be used
by the Ecuadorian Government as the key rate for international obligations (C V,
490). Under Navigant’s independent damage analysis, this produces a claim of

US$ 1,128,619,116 (C V, 1492).

Past the date of December 31, 2004, the Claimants argue that international law
determines the interest to be applied to the period since the breach of international
law had crystallized by that point. The Claimants state that compound interest “‘is
the generally-accepted standard for compensation in international investment
arbitrations” (C V, 9495). In support of this proposition, the Claimants note that,
since 2000, 15 out of 16 BIT awards in favor of claimants have awarded
compound interest in a variety of situations. They also cite authorities which

assert that “awarding simple interest generally fails to compensate claimants fully

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 227

504.

505.

506.

and can create strong incentives for respondents to delay arbitration proceedings
and cause harms” (C V, 499). In addition, reference to the use of simple interest

132 is inappropriate because no international wrong was

in Duke Energy v. Ecuador
found in that case, only domestic law breaches. The application of compound
interest is thus proper from the date the denial of justice crystallized (C V, (1488,
495-500; C VI, (505-512; Tr. II at 91:15-23, 1075:24-1076:19; HC4 p. 104; HCS

pp. 52-53; C VII, 135; C VIII, 9 73-75).

Navigant thus calculated interest using annual compound interest at a rate of
11.41%, equal to Ecuador’s cost of capital (C V, 491). Under Navigant’s
independent damage analysis, applying this method produces a total of

US$ 1,605,220,794 (C V, 1492; C VI, 1477).

The Claimants criticize the Respondent’s expert report on damages. The
methodology and approach is similar to that used by Navigant, but a number of
issues remain. Three of these issues are general and affect several of the claims.
First, contrary to what is stated by the Respondent’s experts, Navigant’s analysis
already does take into account the incremental costs that would have been
incurred had TexPet been allowed to sell the over-contributed crude on the
international market. These costs were already paid by TexPet in the normal
course of delivering the oil to Ecuador and the proper outcome would have been
a credit against TexPet’s future domestic contribution obligations. There were no

excess costs beyond these to speak of (C VI, {{[481-483; Tr. II at 1069:2-18).

Second, the Claimants argue that damage awards are to be computed on a pre-tax

basis. The Claimants summarize their main argument as follows:

Income taxes are an act of government that bear no relation to a denial of
justice claim. Had this claim been brought in a case between two private
parties, no tax issue would arise. The fact that the Government of Ecuador is
a party to this case does not change the fact that tax liability is an irrelevant
issue. Respondent is unable to provide a single legal authority to the
contrary.

(C VI, 1490)

'? Duke Energy, supra note 51.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 228

507.

508.

509.

In support of their argument, the Claimants cite CSOB v. Slovak Republic, where
the tribunal stated as much: “[i]ncome taxes are an act of government ... that are
out of the parties’ control and are unrelated to the obligation of one party to fully
compensate the other party for the harm done.” The tribunal added that taxes are
“consequential to the compensation and do not affect its determination.”!*
Similarly, the Iran-US Claims Tribunal considers that taxes “do not arise out of
the ‘same contract, transaction, or occurrence’” as the arbitrated claim, and are
therefore outside the scope of their decisions on damages'™ (C VI, 991489-493;
Tr. II at 91:24-92:9, 1069:19-1070:7, 1071:3-20; HC4 p. 105; HCS pp. 42-43;
C VIL, 1980, 120; C XIII, 5-6).

The Claimants further argue that taking account of eventual taxes in determining
damages also runs counter to the practice of domestic courts, including U.S.
courts, and pre-judgment interest is also generally exempt from tax. The
Respondent should also not be able to claim the benefit of tax revenues on
compensation resulting from its internationally illegal acts. Finally, even under
Ecuadorian law, the Claimants submit that the old tax rate would not apply
because no taxable event occurred in that time and, in any event, amounts paid
out as damages are not subject to income tax (C VI, {{[493-499; Tr. II at 92:10-
23, 1070:19-1071:2; HC4 p. 106; C VII, (81; C XI, 2-8; C XIII, 2-4).

The Claimants also note that, according to the principle of full reparation under
Ecuadorian law, the Ecuadorian courts would not have deducted taxes from their
judgments in the underlying cases. The judgment in the Refinancing Agreement
case (Case 983-03), which did not deduct taxes, confirms this point. The
Respondent’s damages experts did not subtract taxes in their assessment of that
case either. The Claimants assert that no authority has been submitted by any
Party or their respective experts in which an Ecuadorian court has subtracted
taxes from a judgment in a case involving the Government or otherwise.

Moreover, the Ecuadorian Government never requested that tax offsets be

'53 Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka A.S. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4), Award
(Dec. 29, 2004), para. 367 [hereinafter CSOB].

' Sedco, Inc. and Iran Marine Industrial Co., et al., Award No. 419-128/129-2 (30 Mar. 1989),
reprinted in 21 Iran-U.S. C.T.R. 3, para. 33.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 229

510.

S11.

applied in any of the underlying cases. Therefore, on that basis alone, the
Claimants aver that the Ecuadorian courts would not and could not have deducted
taxes from any damages awarded (Tr. II at 1070:8-18; HCS p. 41; C VIL, ({[83-
86; C VIII, 76-79).

Alternatively, the Claimants assert that income from an arbitral award does not
accrue until that award has been recognized and enforced. As such, the current
corporate tax rate in Ecuador, which is significantly lower, would be applicable
rather than the old rate (C VI, {[496-497; Tr. II at 1072:20-1073:5; HCS p. 47;
C VII, {187, 128). Even under the old taxation rules, however, this income would
not be directly related to hydrocarbon exploration and production and therefore
would also benefit from a lower rate of tax than the “Unified Income Tax”
asserted by the Respondent (Tr. II at 1071:21-1072:18; C VII, {88). For the
Claimants, the mere fact that the categorization of the revenue from an award is
debatable, and that a domestic taxing authority might disagree with the
Tribunal’s orders with respect to taxation issues, highlights the fact that these
issues are not properly dealt with in this arbitration but in tax proceedings in the
jurisdiction or jurisdictions in which such taxes are owed (C VII, 122-127).
Aside from these arguments against the deduction of taxes from any amount
awarded, however, the Claimants “commit to pay[ing] any taxes on an award that
are legally due in the appropriate jurisdiction, when and where they are due”

(C VIL, 120).

The third general issue addressed by the Claimants with respect to the
Respondent’s expert report is the alleged errors made by Navigant in calculating
interest. First, the Claimants dispute the Respondent’s contention that, under
Ecuadorian law, interest only runs from the date of filing of a claim in court and
not the date on which the damage arose. The Claimants argue that interest begins
upon breach and that Article 1573 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code, cited by the
Respondent, only stipulates the time when a claim for damages becomes ripe, not
when interest begins to accrue. Moreover, the Claimants argue that, due to the
express stipulation that Ecuador was to calculate and pay the appropriate price
for the crude oil requested on a quarterly basis, the Respondent was in default by

operation of law, causing interest to accrue from the time of the breach. The

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 230

512.

513.

Claimants also assert that Article 2200 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code, cited by the
Respondent, is irrelevant since it only relates to payments made in error under
quasi-contracts (C VI, (501; Tr. II at 87:24-90:24, 1073:15-1075:23; HC4 pp. 99-
102; HCS pp. 48-51; C VII, (190-96, 136).

With respect to the rate of interest, the Claimants argue that the Tasa Activa is
also the correct rate to apply to interest during the period in which it applied
under Ecuadorian law. This was specifically found in Duke Energy v. Ecuador'*>
(C VI, {502-503). The Claimants also dispute that applying Ecuador’s cost of
sovereign debt for the period after the crystallization of the denial of justice

compensates Claimants for risk which they did not incur:

The [Respondent’s] Damage Experts argue that it is inappropriate to use
Ecuador’s cost of debt because it contains a country-specific risk premium
which Claimants ultimately would not bear if they received a favorable
award. But as Navigant explains, this argument misses the point. The GOE’s
Damage Experts effectively are arguing that one should ignore the ex-ante
risks that a claimant bears of non-payment simply because an award is
issued. But the risk of non-collection still exists even after an award is
rendered. If the GOE’s Damage Experts were correct in their economic
analysis of ex-ante risk, creditors would never be entitled to receive
anything more than a risk-free rate of interest.

(C VI, 4504)

Ecuador’s sovereign cost of debt therefore more accurately reflects the risks of
being “unwilling lenders” to Ecuador during this period and until eventual

enforcement of an award (Tr. II at 90:25-91:14; HC4 p. 103; C VIII, (170-72).

The Claimants further dispute the errors in calculations that the Respondent’s
experts claim Navigant committed. What refinery a given product was exported
from is irrelevant (C VI, (517). The blending of diesel with the residual oil to
produce Fuel Oil No. 4 and No. 6 does not change the calculation of the crude oil
equivalent used and exported (C VI, {518). The ten-year statute of limitations
also does not change anything because prescription was suspended as of the

administrative filing on October 14, 1991 (C VI, {{[519-520). Lastly, the

°5 Duke Energy, supra note 51 at para. 452.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 231

514.

515.

516.

517.

difference in price between Fuel Oil No. 4 and 6 was taken into account by using

a weighted average of all exported products (C VI, (521).

Specific to the Amazonas Refinery cases (Cases 7-92 and 153-93), the Claimants
state that Navigant accounted for residual oil transferred to the Esmeraldas
Refinery. They also reject the idea that a lower price should be used for the
residual oil as compared to higher grade crude oil when Ecuador actually
obtained the higher crude oil price when it exported the residual oil. Yet, even if
this adjustment were made, the difference calculated according to Navigant

would be only US$ 7,900,926 (C VI, 1522-524).

Specific to the Imported Products claim (Case 154-93), contrary to what is
alleged, Navigant did adjust the Transfer Prices for the retail margins. This
automatically occurred when using the same proportional change as for the
Public Sale Prices. The Claimants repeat in relation to this case that prescription
was suspended as of the administrative filing and is thus irrelevant (C VI, {{[525-

527).

Additionally, the Claimants also contend that their damages extend to other direct
harms that are a direct result of the delay. These include the “wasted” costs of
litigating the cases before the Ecuadorian courts as well as the costs of this
arbitration, including attorney’s fees and the Tribunal’s fees and expenses (C VII,

4147).

On a final note, the Claimants address the fear of double-recovery by the
Claimants, should a judgment issue in the Ecuadorian courts as well as an award

in this arbitration for the same amount:

If the Ecuadorian courts find in favor of TexPet in one or more of the four
remaining cases after all appeals have been exhausted and before this
Tribunal renders an award, Claimants will promptly notify this Tribunal, and
upon full payment of the amount due by Ecuador to TexPet as ordered by
the Ecuadorian court, Claimants will make the necessary adjustments to
their damage model in this arbitration in order to avoid double recovery.

Alternatively, if this Tribunal renders an award in favor of Claimants for the
full amount sought, then upon receipt by Claimants of payment by Ecuador
of the full amount, Claimants will promptly withdraw TexPet’s remaining
claims from the Ecuadorian judiciary.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 232

518.

519.

520.

2.

(C VII, (9156-157)

Arguments by the Respondent

The Respondent accuses the Claimants of making the erroneous assumption that
the damages “under a denial of justice theory would automatically be equal to
TexPet’s claimed (but unadjudicated) damages in the underlying actions.” The

Respondent cites a passage of Freeman on point:

On the other hand, there may be two possible sources of damage
contributing to the injuries suffered by a foreigner. This will always be the
case where the alien meets with a denial of justice in his attempt to repair an
original act of misconduct attributable to another organ of the State; that is
to say, an injurious act for which the State itself is internationally
responsible. These two sources of damage should, in accuracy, be kept
distinct if confusion is to be avoided in estimating the measure of reparation
to be awarded in the special case of a denial of justice. The temptation to
commingle the two indifferently and to compute the total damages which are
traceable to the State’s multiple acts of misconduct as a whole, if not
resisted, will completely obscure the extent to which the State is made
answerable on each of two separate accounts.'*°

(R V, $623)

The Tribunal must instead base its conclusions on damages, should there be any,
on a critical analysis of the merits of the underlying cases and the damages that
would have resulted from their proper adjudication (R V, {{[614-624; R VI,
1662-664).

The Respondent argues that Mr. Borja’s analyses performed as the Claimants’
expert in the Ecuadorian courts cases suffered from a lack of independence and
were premised on incorrect legal assumptions. Furthermore, they were performed
in answer to “questions [that] were leading, compound, and/or intended to elicit a
predetermined response.” The Respondent asserts that the Tribunal is entitled to
decide for itself how independent and reliable Mr. Borja’s analyses were and asks
the Tribunal to accord them little, if any, weight. Similarly, the court-appointed
experts’ opinions should also be given little weight, particularly where they were

based on assumptions provided by counsel or where they opined on issues of law

186 FREEMAN, supra note 15 at p. 575.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 233

521.

522.

523.

524.

and contract interpretation. The Respondent further rejects the idea that because
it failed to challenge the expert reports in the Ecuadorian courts they have
become irrefutable under Ecuadorian law. The court, under Ecuadorian law,
always retains the power to independently examine and assess the probative

value of that report (R V, $91625-636; R VII, 9147-148; R VIII, $61).

In answer to the valuations carried out by Navigant for the Claimants, the
Respondent’s own team of experts reassessed the damages in the case, using two
different scenarios. Under the first scenario, the experts took into account the
Respondent’s counsel’s opinions on the lack of legal justification for TexPet’s
claims in the underlying cases. In the second scenario, the Respondent’s experts
accepted, on a hypothetical basis, 100% liability on behalf of Ecuador in each
case as argued by the Claimants (R V, (1637-639).

Under the first scenario, unsurprisingly, the experts found that damages were
nonexistent or zero, with the exception of the Refinancing Agreement claim
(Case 983-03). In that case, the experts determined that, if TexPet were to lose its
appeal, there would be no damages. However, if TexPet were to prevail on
appeal, they would be entitled only to the amount of damages stated in their
original complaint. This second result was premised on the Respondent counsel’s
opinion that “(i) Ecuadorian law does not authorize the accrual of interest on
interest, and (ii) the amount in question corresponds to interest on a principal
amount that has been fully paid, and thus no interest can be assessed over that

amount” (R V, {{[640-645).

Under the second scenario, the Respondent’s experts performed their own
calculations using the same basic method as Navigant’s analyses, while
correcting for certain alleged quantitative and methodological errors. Their total
estimate for damages, assuming 100% liability, is still only 12 percent of the total

calculated by Navigant (R V, 1646).

With respect to the Esmeraldas Refinery cases (Cases 23-91 and 152-93), the
Respondent describes its experts’ criticisms of Navigant’s methodology as

follows:

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 234

525.

526.

527.

The Valuation Experts identified statistical deficiencies in Claimants’
assessment of (a) the volume of Fuel Oil No. 6 exported by the Esmeraldas
refinery, and (b) the volume of crude oil supplied by TexPet. Specifically,
the statistics published by the Central Bank of Ecuador and by PetroEcuador
dispositively show that the actual volume of exports of Fuel Oil No. 6 by the
Esmeraldas refinery is substantially lower than that computed in Claimants’
calculations (which are based on countrywide statistics that also include
exports by the La Libertad refinery, which seldom processed TexPet crude).
Additionally, Claimants arbitrarily treat all residual products (including Fuel
Oil No. 4 and natural gasoline) as Fuel Oil No. 6 — which has a higher
value than other residual products. By doing this, Claimants have artificially
increased the value of the “exportable products,” and thus have also
increased the volume of their crude equivalent.

(R V, 1650; R VI, 773-778)

Adjusting for these errors, Respondent’s experts arrive at a new calculation of

US$113,744,587.

The Respondent also points out that the Claimants have failed to adjust for
taxation of the revenues TexPet would have had to pay from the exportation of
allegedly over-contributed barrels. Those revenues would have been subject to
tax at a rate of 87.31%, given particular taxes on hydrocarbons. Adjusting for
taxes, the resulting damages would be only US$22,814,132 (R V, 9647-652;
R VI, (778-779).

For the Amazonas Refinery cases (Cases 7-92 and 153-93), the Respondent

describes the errors committed by Navigant as follows:

The Valuation Experts observed that Claimants inflated their assessment of
damages by including in their calculations the total volume of residue re-
injected into the pipeline by the Amazonas refinery instead of the volume of
residue actually exported. In this regard the Valuation Experts explain that
part of the crude oil transported in the pipeline was diverted to the
Esmeraldas and La Libertad refineries, and the remainder was transported to
the Balao station for storage and export. The Valuation Experts have
computed the volume of residue effectively exported in their calculations.

Further, Claimants fail to account for the lower value of the residue at issue
in these claims, which was graded at 14° to 15° API and priced at 24 percent
of the value of the 25° to 29° API crude oil from the Oriente region (the
geographical concession area covered by the 1973 Agreement).

(R V, 1654-655; R VI, 1766-770)

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 235

528.

529.

530.

531.

532.

533.

The Respondent adjusts again for taxation obligations omitted by the Claimants
and arrives at a new calculation of US$2,011,794 in direct damages before

interest (R V, 9653-658; R VI, (771-772).

For the Imported Products claim (Case 154-93), the Respondent’s experts
assumed true the Claimants’ general case with one exception:
According to [Respondent] counsel’s advice, Claimants’ proposed
methodology, for accounting for the “Transfer Prices” as income has no
legal basis in Ecuadorian law or in the relevant agreements. The Valuation

Experts also point out that such method cannot be justified from an
economic perspective either.

(R V, 1659; R VI, {{780-782)

Also, the Respondent asserts that there is no legal or contractual reason to
“update” the set Transfer Prices through the artificial method proposed by
Navigant (R VI, (1783-786). Factoring in tax liability once again, the resulting
damages are evaluated at US$402,913 (R V, 1659-661).

The Force Majeure claim (Case 8-92) was also reevaluated by Respondent’s
experts. Here, the only difference in calculation was subjecting the claim to the
aforementioned 87.31% tax rate, producing a claim of US$1,588,491 (R V, 1663-
664; R VI, (1787-788).

Finally, the assessment for the Refinancing Agreement case (Case 983-03) does
not differ under this second scenario as compared to the first scenario (R V, 1666;

R VI, (789-791).

The Respondent also contests the Claimants’ calculations of interest on their
claims. The Respondent summarizes the multiple errors committed by the

Claimants as,

setting inappropriate starting dates for the accrual of interest; arbitrarily
selecting different interest rates applicable to the same obligation at different
times; improperly applying to U.S. dollar-denominated claims interest rates
designed for Ecuadorian sucres-denominated obligations; improperly and
arbitrarily factoring risk into their interest rate calculations; and improperly
compounding interest, which is prohibited by Ecuadorian law.

(R V, 667)

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 236

534.

535.

536.

The Respondent contends that it is inappropriate to use the Tasa Activa
Referencial rate for the period of 1995-2004 as the Claimants do. This is because
this rate “is designed specifically for obligations denominated in Sucres
(Ecuador’s former currency). As such, the [Tasa Activa Referencial rate] has
built-in factors to account for Ecuador’s inflation, devaluation expectations for
the local currency, the extent of the sovereign debt, and the country’s fiscal and
monetary policies [all of which do not] affect claims denominated in U.S.
dollars.” Similarly, the Respondent rejects the use of the “arbitrary interest rate
chosen by Claimants’ financial experts” for the period from 2004 onwards.
Absent subjection to any of the above risks and any uncertainty about the claim,
there is no reason to use any rate higher than a risk-free rate such as the New
York preferential rate. At most, TexPet’s historic cost of debt should be used,
which would compensate fully for the opportunity cost of not having possession
of the allegedly lost profits (R V, 1667-672; R VI, 1709-713; Tr. II at 1199:12-
1200:14; R VII, 130-131).

The Respondent notes that international tribunals have used a variety of methods
to determine the appropriate interest rate, but that “[t]he most important factor in
determining interest rates is that they be reasonable and fair.” The Respondent
cites Siemens v. Argentina," as an example where the tribunal rejected adopting
the corporate rate of borrowing and instead determined the interest rate according
to the reasonable expectations of what would have been earned had the claim
been paid. In this case, the Respondent argues that only a simple rate of interest,
that excludes risk factors and is applied from the date of filing of the claims, can

be reasonable in the circumstances (R V, {{[673-674).

According to the Respondent, the Claimants are not entitled under Ecuadorian
law to interest accrued prior to the filing of their claims. When a contract does
not provide for interest on overdue amounts, a party does not become liable for
interest until that party is put into default by the service of a complaint or the
expiry of an express term for payment. Yet, the 1973 Agreement did not provide

for interest or fix an express term for payment. The Ministry requested crude

'57 Siemens, supra note 45 at para. 396.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 237

537.

538.

539.

“when it deem[ed] it necessary” and payments were made on an informal,
monthly basis. Presumptions under Ecuadorian law thus deem Ecuador to have
acted in good faith while holding any monies from any alleged over-contribution
of TexPet’s until the service of a complaint and no interest is owed for periods
prior to the commencement of court actions (R V, {[676-678; R VI, {{[702-708;
Tr. IL at 1201:9-1202:9; R VIII, (53-56).

Furthermore, the Claimants are not entitled to compound interest. According to
the Respondent, compound interest is prohibited by Ecuadorian law, which is
admitted to govern the 1973 and 1977 Agreements. Applying the same BIT at
issue here, the tribunal in Duke Energy v. Ecuador recently rejected the
application of compound interest, also noting that “although increasingly
common in ICSID practice, the award of compound interest is not a principle of
international law.”'** The Respondent cites a number of further international
decisions that awarded only simple interest on the basis of a domestic law
prohibition of compound interest or the lack of support for compound interest in
international law. According to the Respondent, except in exceptional cases
usually involving claims of expropriation, simple interest continues to be the
norm (R V, (679-683; R VI, [[714-721; Tr. If at 159:2-8, 1200:15-1201:8;
R VIL, (4132-136; R VIII, (74).

Additionally, according to their previous arguments, prescription is only
interrupted as of the filing date of the claims and a two-year prescription period is
applicable to the claims. Limiting damages to only the two-year period prior to
filing alone reduces Navigant’s estimate of damages to only US$ 61,311,709
(R VI, (1722-724; Tr. II at 1202:10-16; HRS p.151).

The Claimants have also failed to take into account various incremental costs that
would have resulted, such as freight, storage, and loading costs, if the Claimants
were to have exported the crude oil themselves. Contrary to the Claimants’
assertions, these costs were not included in the Domestic Price and must be

deducted here (R VI, (1725-727).

88 Duke Energy, supra note 51 at para. 473.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 238

540.

541.

Finally, the Respondent responds to the Claimants’ arguments to the effect that
damages should not account for Ecuadorian tax obligations. The unified tax the
Respondent refers to was not a general corporate income tax. Unlike a corporate
income tax, it was deducted at the source on a shipment-by-shipment basis rather
than paid at year-end. The unified tax represented a harmonization of all
applicable taxes and royalties. The 1973 Agreement, in fact, provided in
Clause 33.1 that the contractors “‘agree[d] to pay to the State all taxes, charges,
contributions and other obligations of a general nature established in the Tax
Laws of the country.” Clause 33.4 of the 1973 Agreement further stated that such
taxes on profits under the 1973 Agreement were to be treated separately from all
other tax liabilities. TexPet’s tax obligations were thus also contractual
obligations. There is no doubt thus that, had the Claimants received the amounts
they allege to be owed by virtue of the 1973 Agreement, they would have
immediately and automatically incurred a tax liability of exactly 87.31% of those
revenues. Just like other incremental expenses associated with oil production, the
amount comprising the hydrocarbon tax would simply not have been received by
TexPet even if it was allowed to export the allegedly over-contributed crude oil it
now claims (R VI, (728-731; Tr. II at 630:10-636:13, 1184:12-1186:6, 1189:18-
1198:10; HR pp. 179-184; R VII, (128, 163-166; R VIII, {{[46-49, 52).

In this arbitration, the Respondent states that any proper assessment of damages
“require[s] deducting from any additional TexPet revenues the associated,
uncollected unified tax liability that it would have incurred but for the alleged
breach of contract.” The standard of “full reparation” under international law
requires restoring the Claimants to the situation that would have prevailed had
the denial of justice not occurred. It is clear that, had the Respondent performed
the 1973 Agreement as the Claimants argue it should have been, taxes would
have been deducted with TexPet’s full knowledge and consent. The Respondent

p40

cites cases such as Liamco v. Libya'® and Kuwait v. Aminoil’”” as examples of

where a tribunal deducted taxes and other consequential liabilities from an award

‘8° Libyan American Oil Company v. The Libyan Arab Republic, Award, (Apr. 12, 1977), p. 157.

© Government of the State of Kuwait v. American Independent Oil Co. (AMINOIL), Final Award,
21 LL.M. 976 (1982).

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 239

542.

543.

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits

on damages. Such is also the practice of the Iran-US Claims Tribunal, such as in
the Blount Bros. case'"' where a regular tax withholding was applied as a set off.
The CSOB case, !#? on the other hand, is not instructive because that decision
merely rejected the idea that the tribunal’s award should be adjusted to take into
account subsequent changes in the tax regime. That decision was also predicated
on the inability of the tribunal to calculate taxes with any certainty as a result of
lacunae in the record before it. Given the 1973 Agreement provisions and
practices under that agreement, the deduction of taxes also complies with the
Parties’ legitimate expectations and there no uncertainty about the amount of the
tax liability. Moreover, no Ecuadorian court would have failed to take the tax
situation into account in its judgment. In the end, to render an award that does not
deduct taxes would in effect bestow upon the Claimants an enormous windfall
profit that they would not have enjoyed even if their entire theory of the case
were otherwise adopted (R VI, (1732-765; Tr. II at 156:21-158:17; R VII, (q123-
128, 163-166; R VIII, (71-73; R XI, {{[7-8).

The Respondent also refutes several arguments raised by the Claimants. First, the
Respondent contends that the practice of domestic courts is not uniform and cites
U.S. cases where the court has deducted taxes. Second, the treatment of the
Refinancing Agreement case by the courts or the Respondent’s experts is
irrelevant since this was investment income, not proceeds from oil sales subject

to the unified tax (R VIII, (950-51; R XI, (92-6).

Alternatively, the Respondent asks the Tribunal to stipulate that a first part of any
Award (12.69%) would be payable directly to TexPet and a second part
(87.31%), corresponding to the tax liability, would be payable to the Ecuadorian
Servicio de Rentas Internas (SRI) in trust for TexPet to satisfy its tax obligations.
The Respondent affirms that the SRI has already agreed to fulfill this role. This
would also avoid any concerns about potential double taxation. Nevertheless, the
Respondent represents that there will be no further taxes imposed on the net

amount awarded and no penalties or interest on late tax payment will be assessed.

441 Blount Brothers Corp. v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, et al., Award No. 216-53-1 (6 Mar. 1986),
pp. 77-78, reprinted in 10 Iran-U.S. C.T.R. 95.

' CSOB, supra note 133.

240

544.

545.

546.

In order to further assure that a net amount could be awarded without risks of
further taxation, the Respondent also invites the Tribunal to include a proviso in
its Award that Supplemental Awards may be issued if any taxes were collected
by Ecuador on the net amount of the Award (R VII, (167-168; Tr. II at 1198:11-
1199:11).

The Respondent further counters the claim for “wasted legal costs” in litigating
before the Ecuadorian courts, arguing that the Claimants would have incurred
these costs even in the absence of the alleged denial of justice. In any event, no

evidence of those costs has been put forward (R VIII, (80).

Finally, the Respondent raises concerns about double recovery. In the claims still
pending before the courts, it is possible that “favorable decisions [will be]
rendered at approximately the same time, or [that] one forum renders a decision
before ‘receipt by Claimants of payment by Ecuador of the full amount’ awarded
previously by the other forum. In both cases, Claimants would hold two

enforceable decisions for the same claims” (R VIII, 184-85).

3. The Tribunal

When conceiving of the wrong as the failure of the Ecuadorian courts to adjudge
TexPet’s claims as presented to them, the starting point for the Tribunal’s
analysis must be TexPet’s damages claims as they were presented before these
courts. The Tribunal notes the Respondent’s contention that, under Ecuadorian
law, the Ecuadorian courts retained discretion to independently examine and
assess the probative value of expert evidence and could have rejected or revised
the calculations made by TexPet’s expert, Mr. Borja, or the court-appointed
expert. However, the Parties do not appear to have significantly disagreed in the
Ecuadorian court proceedings on the number of barrels of crude oil in question or
amount of compensation due if TexPet were to succeed on the merits of its
claims. Indeed, the Claimants have pointed out that Mr. Borja’s calculations were
further confirmed in many cases by Ecuador’s expert and the court-appointed
expert. Therefore, in light of the Tribunal’s findings in favor of the Claimants on

liability with respect to the underlying cases, the original direct damages assessed

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 241

547.

548.

after judicial inspection in the Ecuadorian courts are thus taken as the appropriate
starting point for the Tribunal’s assessment of the quantum of damages. These
are accepted as the principal amounts on which interest is calculated except to the
extent that Navigant, in its calculations on behalf of the Claimants in this
arbitration, has revised these claims downwards. Applying this method, the

following principal amounts of damages are obtained:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Claim name / Ecuadorian Case No. Direct Damages
23-91
Esmeraldas Refinery cases $98,767,529
152-93 $186,219,549
7-92
Amazonas Refinery cases $18,691,955
153-93 $2,785,204
Imported Products case 154-93
$35,780,606
Force Majeure case 8-92 §12313302
TOTAL

 

On these principal amounts, the Tribunal must apply the interest that it deems
appropriate for the periods before and after the breach of Article II(7). The matter

of taxes must also be addressed. The Tribunal deals with these issues in turn.

On the issue of interest during the relevant time period that these cases were
before the Ecuadorian courts, the Parties agree that Ecuadorian law determines
issues of interest to be applied up until the date any breach of international law
was completed. The Parties also agree that Ecuadorian law does not allow for
compound interest under the circumstances. The Parties, however, disagree as to
whether, according to Ecuadorian law, interest accrues as of the date of the

breach of the respective agreements in the underlying cases or only as of the

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 242

549.

filing of their claims. The Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s argument that,
under Ecuadorian law, a party must be put into legal default (either by a judicial
demand or an express time period for payment) before interest may begin to
accrue. The Claimants’ suggestion that the provision requiring quarterly accounts
provides an express time period for payment does not in the Tribunal’s
estimation satisfy the above requirement for default, particularly in light of the
Parties’ practice. Therefore, interest for this period should accrue as of the time
of filing of TexPet’s cases in the Ecuadorian courts, the Claimants not having
shown sufficiently that a proper judicial demand was made prior to this date.
Therefore, in keeping with the Tribunal’s prior decision that the violation of
Article II(7) of the BIT was complete as of Notice of Arbitration, simple interest
according to Ecuadorian law is applicable from the date of filing in each case
until the date of the Notice of Arbitration, December 21, 2006. The issue of

interest after this date will be considered separately below.

As to the rate of interest to be applied during the period governed by domestic
law, the Tribunal finds that this should be the New York Prime Rate. When
conceiving of the wrong as the failure of the Ecuadorian courts to adjudge
TexPet’s claims as presented to them, the Claimants’ damages should be assessed
as they were claimed in those courts. No evidence was drawn to the Tribunal’s
attention showing that TexPet claimed the application of the Tasa Activa
Referencial in the Ecuadorian courts. Meanwhile, TexPet’s expert in those
proceedings, Mr. Borja, used the New York Prime Rate in the calculations put
forward in several cases. While this does not appear to totally constrain the
Ecuadorian courts in their decision on interest, it suggests that TexPet did not
justify the application of the higher interest rate before the Ecuadorian courts. In
any event, as the Respondent argues, the Tasa Activa Referencial includes
compensation for currency and other risks affecting sucres-denominated debts.
As TexPet’s claims were denominated in U.S. dollars, the Claimants need not be
compensated for these risks. Moreover, even if TexPet were to have for some
reason received the amount of its claim converted into sucres, it is reasonable to
assume that this amount would have promptly been converted back into U.S.

dollars. Therefore, the Tribunal determines that the New York Prime Rate is

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 243

applicable for this time period. Applying simple interest to the principal amounts
at the New York Prime Rate from the date of filing of the claims to the date of

the Notice of Arbitration, December 21, 2006, produces the following sums:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Simple interest at
New York Prime
Rate
Claim name / Ecuadorian Case No. Date Filed Direct Damages (from date of filing
until Notice of
Arbitration,
December 21, 2006)
23-91 17-12-1991 $98,767,529.00 $103,664,148.73
Refinery Cases
° 152-93 10-12-1993
$186,219,549.00 $172,788, 153.66
Amazonas 792 154-1992 $18,691,955.00 $19,241,726.93
Refinery Cases 153-93 14-12-1993
" “ $2,785,204.00 $2,520,597.24
Imported
Products Case 154-93 14-12-1993
$35,780,606.00 $33,172,438.36
Force Majeure 3-92 15-4-1992
Case $12,313,302.00 $12,676,694.90
TOTAL $354,558,145.00. $344,063,759.84
550. This calculation produces a total sum of US$ 698,621,904.84 as at 21 December

551.

2006.

The Tribunal notes the Parties’ respective arguments regarding the relevance of
the tax laws that would have been applicable to amounts received by TexPet
under the 1973 and 1977 Agreements had Ecuador not breached the BIT through
the unreasonable delays in its administration of justice. In regard to the
assessment of damages, the Tribunal is guided by the principle that the Claimants
must be made whole; they must receive an award that compensates for what they
lost as a result of the Respondent’s breach of Article II(7) of the BIT. To
calculate the damage suffered by the Claimants, the Tribunal starts from the
principal sums that an honest, impartial, and independent Ecuadorian judge

would have found owing in each of TexPet’s cases, plus what they would have

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 244

 

552.

553.

554.

found as simple interest. The Tribunal has determined that the latter runs from
the date of filing of each case until the Notice of Arbitration was filed on
December 21, 2006 (as calculated in [549-550 above). The Tribunal further
accepts that an Ecuadorian domestic court would not have deducted taxes from

its judgment.

This is not the end of the Tribunal’s enquiry, however. In the absence of a BIT
breach by Ecuador, the Claimants may not have kept the entire amount as being
equivalent to their loss. To calculate the Claimants’ real loss, that amount must
be reduced if such would have been required by any applicable Ecuadorian tax
laws. Were the Tribunal not to take such tax laws into account, it would run the
risk of overstating the loss suffered by the Claimants, such that the Claimants
would be overcompensated. Put differently, the loss suffered by the Claimants is
the amount plus interest it should have been awarded by the Ecuadorian judges
net of amounts due under any applicable Ecuadorian tax laws. When quantifying
and assessing damages, the Tribunal cannot award more than the amount that

Claimants ultimately would have obtained.

The Tribunal wishes to make clear that the issue of taxes in this case goes to the
calculation of the quantum of the Claimants’ loss. The consideration of taxes
does not constitute a de facto taxation by Ecuador of the Tribunal’s award. As to
the eventual tax treatment by Ecuador of a Final Award by this Tribunal, the
Tribunal notes Ecuador’s representation that no further taxes will be imposed by
it on an Award that takes into account the tax that would have been payable by
the Claimants if no breach had occurred (see {543 above) and that no penalties or
interest on late tax payment will be assessed. In light of this representation, the
Tribunal considers it unnecessary to address the Respondent’s proposal that the
Tribunal include a proviso in this Award that Supplemental Awards may be
issued in the event of any taxes being collected by Ecuador on the amounts to be

paid to the Claimants.

The Tribunal, nonetheless, heeds the Claimants’ warning that the issue of taxes
may be more complex than at first appears. Therefore, the final determination of

the quantum of damages to be awarded is to be dealt with through a procedure

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 245

555.

556.

557.

that the Tribunal will set out in a separate order. It is to be noted that the purpose
of that procedure is to establish the quantum of the Claimants’ loss taking into
account applicable Ecuadorian tax laws. The purpose is not to establish the
amount of tax that would be assessed by Ecuadorian authorities today on an

arbitral award.

Regarding the pre-award interest to be applied by the Tribunal as of the
completion of the breach of Article II(7) of the BIT for undue delay, that is as of
the date of the Notice of Arbitration, December 21, 2006, the Tribunal
determines that compound interest applies, in accordance with the prevailing
practice of international tribunals. The Tribunal further determines that the
appropriate rate of interest to apply during this period is the New York Prime
Rate. The guiding principle in the determination of pre-award interest is that what
should be charged is not the amount of the Respondent’s enrichment as a result
of its non-payment, nor the actual cost incurred by the Claimant as a result of
non-payment, but rather the lost investment income the Claimants otherwise
could have realized had the claim been paid in a timely manner. The Tribunal is
thus persuaded that Ecuador’s sovereign cost of debt includes compensation for
certain investment risks that were not and are not being taken by the Claimants
on the sum of any award. Similarly, the Respondent’s argument that the
Claimants’ cost of debt should be used is also rejected, as it does not reflect the
return that could have been achieved through a normal risk-free investment

vehicle.

The Claimants’ claim for “wasted legal costs” is rejected. As the Respondent
notes, the majority if not all of these costs would have been incurred in any event,
regardless of the delay in the issuance of a judgment. The Tribunal thus
determines that the Claimants have not proved the causal link between these

damages and the breach of Article II(7) of the BIT.

Lastly, the Tribunal, having noted the Respondent’s concern that the Claimants
should not be entitled to double recovery for the same harm, through proceedings
before this Tribunal and before the local courts, and noting the Claimants’

express undertaking to prevent such an outcome (C VII, (156-7), concludes that

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 246

there is no danger of double recovery. Therefore, the Tribunal decides that the
Claimants’ recovery should not be reduced based on the uncertain possibility of a
favorable outcome in the national court proceedings, noting that in any case,
international law and decisions as well as domestic court procedures offer

numerous mechanisms for preventing the possibility of double recovery.

(The Decisions and Signatures of the Tribunal appear on the following separate
pages of this Award)

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 247

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits

248

L

Decisions

FOR THE FOREGOING REASONS, the Tribunal renders the following decisions:

From the Interim Award of December 1, 2008, the Tribunal recalls the

following decisions:

1. The Respondent’s jurisdictional objections are denied.

2. The Tribunal has jurisdiction concerning the claims as
formulated by the Claimants in their second Post Hearing Brief

dated August 12, 2008, in paragraph 116.
The Respondent has breached Article II(7) of the BIT through the undue
delay of the Ecuadorian courts in deciding TexPet’s seven court cases

and is liable for the damages to the Claimants resulting therefrom.

The Claimants have not committed an abuse of process and are not

estopped from bringing the present claim against the Respondent.

In view of the Tribunal’s decision in section 2 above regarding the
breach of Article II(7) of the BIT, and given that the relief sought by
Claimants with respect to its additional claims does not go beyond that
sought pursuant to the claim regarding Article II(7), the Tribunal need
not decide the Claimants’ claims regarding other breaches of the BIT or

customary international law.

As a result of the Tribunal’s decision in section 2 above that the
Respondent has breached Article II(7) of the BIT, the Respondent is
liable for damages caused to Claimants by that breach. The amount of
such damages will be decided by the Tribunal with the help of a

procedure set out in a separate Procedural Order of the Tribunal to

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 249

determine what taxes, if any, would have been due to the Respondent if

no breach of Article II(7) of the BIT had occurred.

The Respondent is liable for pre-award compound interest at the New
York Prime Rate (annual) on the final amount to be paid by Respondent
according to section 5 above, from December 22, 2006 until the date that

this sum becomes payable by Respondent.

The Respondent shall be liable for post-award compound interest at the
New York Prime Rate (annual) on the amount awarded by the Tribunal,
from the date that the Tribunal orders payment by the Respondent until

the date payment is made.

The decision regarding the costs of arbitration is deferred to a later stage

of these proceedings.

All other claims are dismissed.

Place of Arbitration: The Hague, The Netherlands
Date of this Award: March 30, 2010

Signatures of the Tribunal:

Vhellns  Preant— \ ss

The Hon. Charles N. Brower Prof. Albert Jan van den Berg }

v cha i rA
Prof. Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel
Chairman

UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial Award on the Merits 250

Appendix 1: Table of TexPet’s Cases before Ecuadorian Courts

 

TEXPET V. GOVERNMENT OF ECUADOR
[1] CASE No. 23-91 —- ESMERALDAS REFINERY CLAIM 1

 

 

 

 

 

Subject Matter Relief Sought Short summary of grounds for relief | Summary of main defenses Procedural History Dispositive section of any court decision | Summary of the grounds of such court
sought rendered, if any decision, if any

[1-a] Restitution of the TexPet claimed a breach of the 1973 and Respondent stated that Claimants’ claim December 17, 1991: Tex Pet filed the case | Decision of January 29, 2007, {7 [CEX- Decision of January 29, 2007 [CEX-282,

Esmeraldas over-contributed 1977 Agreements, as well as violations of | refers not to barrels of oil, but rather to before the President of the Supreme Court | 282, Tab 76]: “Based on the above and Tab 76]: The Subrogate President of the

Refinery barrels, or, as a various articles of the Ecuadorian Civil residue left over from the refining process. | of Ecuador [CEX-282, Tab 4]. following the equity standard set forth in| Supreme Court denied TexPet’s claim on

Claim 1 subsidiary remedy, | Code and Hydrocarbons Law (e.g., IR V, p. 207, (9450-451, pp. 226-28, Section 1009 of the Code of Civil the ground that the right of action had

First instance

TexPet’s alleged
over-contribution
of 9,605,180
barrels of oil for
domestic
consumption for
which it was paid
the lower
domestic market
price rather than
the international
market price.
After the judicial
inspection the
amount of barrels
was revised to
3,572,070

[C I, pp. 13-14,
4938-39; C V, p.
30, 66-73].

 

Claimants sought
“the difference in
price between the
reduced Domestic
Market Price that
[TexPet] had
received and the
international market
price at the time,”
which TexPet
estimated at
204,184,570 US
Dollars.

ICI, pp. 13-14, 1938-
39; C V, pp. 26-34,
478, CEX-282, Tab
4).

 

Articles 1561, 1562, 1576, 1580, 1747,
1811 of the Code Civil, as well as Articles
2 and 30 of the Hydrocarbons Law) [C I,
p. 13, 138; CV, p. 30, 165].

From July 1, 1981, through December 31,
1983, TexPet claimed to have over-
contributed 9,605,180 barrels of crude oil
to the Esmeraldas refinery for domestic
consumption, for which it was paid only
the domestic price. According to
Claimants, the Government used these
barrels to produce fuel oil for export,
rather than for domestic consumption [C I,
pp. 13-14, 938-40; C V, pp. 30-34, (9166-
77).

Pursuant to Clause 20.2 of the 1973
Agreement, the Government had to pay
TexPet the prevailing international prices
for the equivalent barrels of crude used to
create such export products [C I, pp. 13-
14, $38; C V, pp. 26-27, [58-63 and pp.
30-34, 4966-77].

Concerning the court’s decision to dismiss
the case, TexPet considered that the
general ten-year statute of limitations
applied [C I, p. 26, {82}.

 

491500-503].

Nothing in Ecuadorian law or in the 1973
Contract addressed the residue issue or
entitled TexPet to restitution of the residue
left over from the process of refining the
crude oil supplied for domestic
consumption, or to receive its value in
dollars [R I, p. 33, (101; R V, p. 231,
4516, pp. 236-39].

The volume of crude oil received by the
Esmeraldas refinery was necessary to
satisfy the consumption needs of the
country and, having been already paid for
by the State, any resulting residue
belonged to the Republic to dispose of as
it wished [R V, p. 227, {9]501-503, p. 228,
4505).

Thus, the Esmeraldas refinery did not
export crude oil contributed for domestic
consumption but simply mixed the residue
with other hydrocarbon fractions to create
“Fuel Oil No. 6,” and, since there was
only limited demand for Fuel Oil No. 6 in
the country, the resulting excess was
exported [R I, p. 34, 105; R VI, p. 267].

Thus, (i) TexPet supplied crude for
domestic consumption only pursuant to
Clause 19.2 of the 1973 Agreement and
never was required to “supply... an
additional quantity of crude [necessary to
manufacture derivatives for export]” under
Clause 19.3 of the 1973 Agreement, and
(ii) TexPet was never entitled to anything
more than the domestic price provided for
by Clause 20.1 of the 1973 Agreement for
its contributions of “[its] proportionate
part of whatever quantity of crude oil may
be necessary for the production of
derivatives for the internal consumption of
the country” [R V, pp. 232-36, 91519-
526].

According to the Respondent, the 1977
Agreement provides the only basis for
Claimants’ damages calculations and (i) it
was not in force at the relevant periods of
time, and (ii) lacked the requisite formalities
to amend the 1973 Agreement [R I, p. 34,
4106; R V, pp. 220-26, 1488-498].

 

October 6, 1993: TexPet files a letter
requesting the President's opinion
concerning the fact that his son

was the Minister of Energy and Mines
(conflict of interest motion) [CEX-282,
Tab 31].

 

March 4, 1994: TexPet files a motion for
recusal against the President of the
Supreme Court on the grounds of delay
(failure to decide the conflict of interest
motion). The motion for recusal was tried
in a separate court docket, numbered 1-94
[R-766].

June 8, 1994: Court Order from the
Subrogate President of the Supreme Court
recusing the President of the Court from
the case. The Subrogate President
acknowledges jurisdiction to hear the case
[CEX-282, Tab 33].

 

 

July 11, 1994: TexPet files a letter with
the Subrogate President requesting him to
proceed with the production of evidence,
given that the President of the Supreme
Court was recused and had lost
jurisdiction to hear the case [CEX- 282,
Tab 32].

August 31, 1994: Subrogate President of
the Supreme Court acknowledges the
recusal decision, declares that the
President of the Supreme Court has lost
jurisdiction to hear the case, takes notice
of the lawsuit and orders the production of
evidence [CEX-282, Tab 34].

   

 

July 1995: The evidentiary phase of the
case was closed [Court Acknowledgment
of Receipt of the Experts Reports and
Grants a 6-day Extension for Both Parties
to Submit their Comments, July 18, 1995,
CEX-282, Tab 62, Letter from TexPet to
the Court Requesting an Extension to
Submit Comments to the Expert Report,
CEX-282, Tab 63, TexPet’s Comments to
Expert Reports, CEX-282, Tab 64].

February 16, 1998: Letter from TexPet to
the Court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-315].

 

Procedure, and considering that no
further issues need to be analyzed here, as
well as the other defenses raised by the
Respondent, the defense of the
applicability of the statute of limitations is
hereby admitted and the statement of
claim dismissed.”

 

lapsed. The court applied Article 2422 of
Ecuador’s Civil Code. Article 2422
concerns a special two-year statute of
limitations for actions brought by
suppliers for the price of retail sales.

 

  

s the period between
July 1, 1981 and December 31, 1983 (...).
and service of process was served on
March 13, 1992, (...). As of such date the
action had been barred by operation of the
statute of limitations pursuant to Article
2422(1) of the Codification of the Civil
Code (...) as the cause of action is based
on Claimant's obligation to supply crude
oil to the State (...) and based on the
Agreement (...). Such provision of the
Civil Code sets forth a two-year statute of
limitations period for claims by suppliers.
The Agreement under analysis is a
hydrocarbon exploration and exploitation
contract; however, said agreement creates
obligations of a varied nature, including
the one set forth above. Furthermore, it
would not be equitable to expect that for
all the mentioned obligations, even the
obligation to supply, the 10-year statute of
limitations typical of ordinary actions be
applied.”

 

 

Page A1

 

TEXPET V. GOVERNMENT OF ECUADOR
[1] CASE No. 23-91 —- ESMERALDAS REFINERY CLAIM 1

 

Subject Matter

Relief Sought

Short summary of grounds for relief
sought

Summary of main defenses

Procedural History

Dispositive section of any court decision
rendered, if any

Summary of the grounds of such court
decision, if any

 

In addition, TexPet miscalculated the
quantity of crude oil to which they had a
claim [R VI, pp. 382-383, 1773-777].

Respondent noted that a plaintiff in
Ecuador has an affirmative duty to move
the case forward [R I, p. 28, $84].

Respondent also argued that the case was
barred based on the applicable statute of
limitations [R I, p. 30, {92].

January 1, 2000: Letter from TexPet to the
President of the Supreme Court asking it
to decide the case [CEX-282, Tab 65].

May 9, 2002: The Minister of Natural
Resources and Energy filed a request with
the President of the Court seeking that the
claim be dismissed for lack of prosecution
[CEX-282, Tab 66].

May 27, 2002: Letter from TexPet to the
President of the Supreme Court asking it
to decide the case [CEX-282, Tab 67].

December 13, 2002: Subrogate President
of the Supreme Court dismisses the
motion to dismiss the claim for lack of
prosecution. First auto para sentencia
issued by the Subrogate President of the
Supreme Court [CEX-282, Tab 68]: “The
petition for abandonment is hereby denied
as inadmissible. And as established, the
case shall be set for judgment.”

 

  

August 25, 2003: Letter from TexPet to
the President of the Supreme Court asking
it to decide the case [CEX-282, Tab 69].

January 29, 2004: Second auto para
sentencia issued by the President of the
Supreme Court [CEX-282, Tab 71].

 

November 22, 2005: Letter from TexPet to
the President of the Supreme Court asking
it to decide the case [CEX-282, Tab 74].

 

 

August 21, 2006: Letter from TexPet to
the Subrogate President of the Supreme
Court asking him to decide the case [CEX-
316].

January 29, 2007: The Subrogate President
of the Supreme Court dismissed the case
by applying a special statute of limitations
for retail sales [CEX-282, Tab 76].

 

 

[1-b]
Esmeraldas
Refinery
Claim 1

Appellate Court

 

 

 

 

February 9, 2007: TexPet appealed the
decision of January 29, 2007 to the
Appellate Court [ Court Order
Acknowledging TexPet’s Appeal, CEX-
282, Tab 81].

March 7, 2008: The Appellate Court
upheld the President's initial ruling
[Spanish version only, CEX-282, Tab 96].

 

March 11, 2008: TexPet asked the

 

 

Decision of March 7, 2008 [CEX-282, Tab
96]: “Por lo expuesto esta primera Sala de
lo Civil y Mercantil de la Corte Suprema
de Justicia, ADMINISTRANDO JUSTICIA
EN NOMBRE DE LA REPUBLICA Y POR
AUTORIDAD DE LA LEY confirma, en
todas sus partes, la sentencia venida en
grado”

 

 

On March 7, 2008: The Appellate Court
upheld the Subrogate President's initial
ruling concerning the application of
Article 2422.

 

 

 

Page A2

 

TEXPET V. GOVERNMENT OF ECUADOR
[1] CASE No. 23-91 —- ESMERALDAS REFINERY CLAIM 1

 

 

 

Subject Matter Relief Sought Short summary of grounds for relief | Summary of main defenses Procedural History Dispositive section of any court decision | Summary of the grounds of such court
sought rendered, if any decision, if any

Appellate Court to clarify its decision

dated January 29, 2007 [Spanish version

only, CEX-446].

April 1, 2008: The Court denied TexPet’s

request for clarification [Spanish version

only CEX-447].
[1-c] __ __ __ April 4, 2008: TexPet filed a cassation Decision of May 14, 2008 [CEX-449]: On May 14, 2008: The cassation appeal is
Esmeraldas appeal before the First Civil and “En la especie TEXACO PETROLEUM rejected by the court which established
Refinery Mercantile Chamber of the Supreme Court | COMPANY, presenta recurso de casacion | that under the law of cassation, TexPet
Claim 1 [Spanish version only, CEX-448]. contra una sentencia dictada por una Sala | was not entitled to file a cassation appeal

Cassation appeal

May 14, 2008: The Chamber rejected the
cassation appeal [Spanish version only,
CEX-449].

Especializada de la Corte Suprema de
Justicia, situacién no prevista por el
legislador, por lo que no se cumple con el
requisito de procedencia determinado en
el articulo 2 de la Codificacién de la Ley
de Casacién, puesto que ‘no son casables
las sentencias de instancia dictadas por la
propia Corte Suprema de Justicia, y que el
recurso se ha establecido contra las
resoluciones de los érganos
jurisdiccionales de inferior grado’(LA
CASACION CIVIL EN EL ECUADOR,
Dr. Santiago Andrade Ubidia, Andrade &
Asociados, Fondo Editorial, Ira edicién,
Quito, 2005, pag. 70). Por lo expuesto, sin
ser necesario pronunciamiento alguno
sobre los restantes requisitos del recurso
bajo analisis, la Primera Sala de lo Civil y
Mercantil de la Corte Suprema de
Justicia, RECHAZA el recurso de
casacién interpuesto por Rodrigo Perez
Pallares, en calidad de mandatario de
TEXACO PETROLEUM COMPANY,
debiendo las partes sujetarse a lo
ordenado en sentencia.”

 

 

for a judgment of a specialized chamber of
the Supreme Court.

 

 

[1-d]
Esmeraldas
Refinery
Claim 1

Fact appeal

 

 

Claimant ibmission of May 16, 2008
[CEX-450]: The Chamber did not apply a
legal norm but a doctrinal opinion.
Moreover, according to TexPet, the former
Article 192 of the Ecuadorian Constitution
provided: “no se sacrificard la justicia por
la sola omisién de formalidades.”

 

 

May 16, 2008: TexPet filed a fact appeal
before the First Civil and Mercantile
Chamber of the Supreme Court [Spanish
version only, CEX- 450].

  

 

June 9, 2008: Fact appeal dismissed (end
of the proceedings) [Spanish version only,
CEX-451].

 

 

Decision of June 9, 2008 [CEX-451]:
“Tanto el texto legal antes citado, cuanto
el precedente jurisprudencial referido no
constituye un mero formalismo vacio de
contenido, sino la observancia de los
principios rectores del proceso, en
especial el de legalidad que rige al
proceso civil, cuyas normas son de orden
piiblico. —Por las consideraciones que
anteceden, la Primera Sala de lo Civil y
Mercantil de la Corte Suprema de
Justicia, RECHAZA el recurso de hecho
interpuesto en la presente causa.”

 

  

 

Legal grounds cited by the court [CEX-
451]:

Articulo 9 de la Codificacién de la Ley de
Casaci6n: “Si se denegare el tramite del
recurso, podré la parte recurrente, en el
término de tres dias, interponer el recurso de
hecho. Interpuesto ante el juez u érgano
judicial respectivo, este sin calificarlo, elevara
todo el expediente a la Corte Suprema de
Justicia. La denegacién del tramite del
recurso deberd ser fundamentada.”

 

Articulo 2 de la Ley de Casacién:
“PROCEDENCIA- El recurso de casacién
procede contra las sentencias y los autos que
pongan fin a los procesos de conocimiento,
dictados por las cortes superiores, por los
tribunales distritales de lo fiscal y de lo
contencioso administrative.”

 

 

Page A3

 

TEXPET V. GOVERNMENT OF ECUADOR
[2] CAsE No. 152-93 —- ESMERALDAS REFINERY CLAIM 2

 

 

 

 

 

Subject Matter Relief Sought Short summary of grounds for relief | Summary of main defenses Procedural History Dispositive section of any court decision | Summary of the grounds of such court
sought rendered, if any decision, if any

[2] Restitution of the As in the first Esmeraldas Refinery Claim, | The main defenses raised in this case are December 10, 1993: TexPet filed this case | None None

Esmeraldas over-contributed TexPet claimed a breach of the 1973 and identical to those raised in Case No. 23- before the President of the Superior Court

Refinery barrels, or, as a 1977 Agreements, as well as violations of | 91, i.e., Esmeraldas Refinery Claim 1. of Quito [CEX-285, Tab 3].

Claim 2 sul ary remedy, various articles of the Ecuadorian Civil

First Instance

TexPet’s alleged
over-contribution
of 14,898,610
barrels of oil for
domestic
consumption.
After the judicial
inspection the
number of barrels
was revised to
15,149,371

ICI, pp. 14-15,
4914 1-42; C V,
p.35, {80].

 

 

their cash-equivalent
value at the
international market
price, which at the
time of the complaint
TexPet estimated at
300,157,933 US
Dollars, plus interest
ICI, p. 14, 941; CV,
pp. 35-38, {§]80-90;
CEX-285, Tab 3]

 

Code and Hydrocarbons Law (e.¢.,
Articles 1561, 1562, 1576, 1580, 1747,
1811 of the Code Civil, as well as Articles
2 and 30 of the Hydrocarbons Law) [C I,
p. 14, 441; CV, p. 34, 179]

From January 1, 1984, through June 6,
1992, TexPet claimed to have over-
contributed 14,898,610 barrels of crude oil
to the Esmeraldas refinery for domestic
consumption, for which it was paid only
the domestic price. The Government used
these barrels to produce fuel oil for export,
rather than for domestic consumption [C I,
pp. 14-15, §{41-43; C V, p.36-37, §985-
86]

Pursuant to Clause 20.2 of the 1973
Agreement, the Government had to pay
TexPet the prevailing international prices
for the equivalent barrels of crude used to
create such exports products [C I, pp. 14-
15, 941-43; C V, pp. 26-27, 58-63, pp.
36-37, 4185-86 ]

 

 

Mid- 1996: The evidentiary phase of the
case was completed [Claimants’ Appendix
to the Post-Hearing Brief on Jurisdiction,
p. Il].

August 20, 1998: Letter from TexPet to
the Court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-285, Tab 113].

January 7, 2000: Letter from TexPet to the
Court asking it to decide the case [CEX-
285, Tab 114].

May 22, 2002: The President of the court
dismissed the abandonment motion and
issued an auto para sentencia [CEX-285,
Tab 117]: “The motion filed by the
defendant for the abandonment of the case
is hereby denied as inadmissible. (...) it is
hereby ordered that the case be remanded
for judgment (...).”

August 25, 2003: Letter from TexPet to
the Court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-285, Tab 118].

November 14, 2005: Letter from TexPet to
the Court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-285, Tab 120].

 

February 1, 2007: Letter from TexPet to
the Court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-285, Tab 121].

January 15, 2008: Letter from TexPet to
the Court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-319].

 

 

 

 

Page A4

 

TEXPET V. GOVERNMENT OF ECUADOR
[3] CASE No. 7-92 - AMAZONAS REFINERY CLAIM 1

 

 

 

Subject Matter Relief Sought Short summary of grounds for relief | Summary of main defenses Procedural History Dispositive section of any court decision | Summary of the grounds of such court
sought rendered, if any decision, if any

[3-a] Restitution of the As in the Esmeraladas Refinery Claims, Respondent stated that Claimants’ claim April 15, 1992: TexPet filed Case 7-92 Decision of April 9, 2007 [CEX-283, Tab | Decision of April 9, 2007 [CEX-283, Tab

Amazonas over-contributed TexPet claimed a breach of the 1973 referred not to barrels of oil, but rather to before the President of the Supreme Court | 59]: “From the date on which the last 59]: The Subrogate President of the

Refinery barrels, or, as a Agreement, as well as violations of residue left over from the refining process. | [CEX-283, Tab 3]. measure was adopted or the last request | Supreme Court declared Case 7-92

Claim 1 various articles of the Ecuadorian Civil According to the Respondent, there is no was submitted by the claimant (January 7, | abandoned and dismissed TexPet’s claim.

First Instance

TexPet’s alleged
over-contribution
of 1,561,981
barrels of oil for
domestic
consumption for
which it was paid
the lower
domestic market
price rather than
the international
market price
ICI, p. 16].

 

subsidiary remedy,
Claii s sought
“the difference in
price between the
reduced Domestic
Market Price that
[TexPet] had
received and the
international market
price at the time,”
which TexPet
estimated at
23,429,715 US
Dollars, plus interest
ICI, p. 16, 447; CV,
p41, 4102].

 

 

Code and Hydrocarbons Law (e.¢.,
Articles 1505, 1561 and 1562 of the Civil
Code; Article 2 of the Hydrocarbons Law)
ICI, p. 15, 445; C V, p. 40, 194].

Between August 1987 and August 1991,
TexPet delivered 4,268,301 barrels of
crude oil to the Amazonas refinery for
Ecuadorian domestic consumption for
which it received domestic market prices
ICI, p. 16, 1946-47; C V, p.40, 195].

 

After the crude oil was refined, the
Government exported 1,561,981 barrels of
the remaining oil at the international
market price via the Trans-Ecuadorian
pipeline. The amounts of residual oil re-
injected into the pipeline yielded a very
small degradation of the original crude oil
and there was no impact on the ultimate
export price. But the Government did not
pay the international market price for the
crude oil that it used to produce the
residual oil, although the 1973 Agreement
requires the Government to pay TexPet
international prices for all oil contributions
that were not used to satisfy domestic
consumption [C I, p. 16, {[45-47; CV.

p. 38-41, (991-102) .

Concerning the court’s decision to dismiss
the case, TexPet considered that the court
retroactively applied an inapplicable
provision of the Code of Civil Procedure
(Article 388 of the codification - Article
210 of the Organic Law of the Judicial
Function). According to Claimants,
Article 388 was not incorporated into the
Code of Civil Procedure until July 2005.
Moreover, the court itself was responsible
for delaying the proceedings through its
own actions and omissions, especially its
refusal to schedule the judicial inspection
IC I, pp. 26-27, 183; CV, pp. 149-150,
9351-354].

  

 

possible alternative use for such residue
and the Amazonas refinery had to re-inject
the residual output into the Trans-
Ecuadorian pipeline, where it was mixed
with other crude oil [R I, pp. 32-33, 19198-
99; R VI, pp. 380-381, §§[769-770].

The same principles explained with
respect to the two Esmeraldas claims
apply equally to the Amazonas claims.

Nothing in Ecuadorian law or in the 1973
Contract addressed the residue issue or
entitled TexPet to restitution of the residue
left over from the process of refining the
crude oil supplied for domestic
consumption, or to receive its value in
dollars [R I, p. 33, (101; R V, p. 231,
4516).

The volume of crude oil received by the
Amazonas refinery was necessary to
satisfy the consumption needs of the
country, and, having been paid for by the
State, any resulting residue belonged to
the Republic to dispose of as it wished [R
V, p. 229, $91509-510].

Thus, (i) TexPet supplied crude for
domestic consumption only pursuant to
Clause 19.2 of the 1973 Agreement and
never was required to “supply... an
additional quantity of crude [necessary to
manufacture derivatives for export]” under
Clause 19.3 of the 1973 Agreement, and
(ii) TexPet was never entitled to anything
more than the domestic price provided for
by Clause 20.1 of the 1973 Agreement for
its contributions of “[its] proportionate
part of whatever quantity of crude oil may
be necessary for the production of
derivatives for the internal consumption of
the country” [R V, pp.232-36, 519-526].

Furthermore, TexPet computed incorrectly
the equivalent quantity of crude oil for
which they should be reimbursed [R VI,
pp. 378-380, [766-768], and requested
reimbursement for the residue as if that
residue were crude oil [R VI, pp. 380-381,
9769-770].

 

May 11, 1993: The court set the initial
date for the judicial inspection (but the
experts have never been officially
appointed) [see Court Order requesting
both experts to appear in Court on
Tuesday, May 11, 1993, CEX-283, Tab
17].

July 19, 1993: Letter from TexPet to the

President of the Supreme Court asking it
to set a new date for the experts to accept
their appointment [CEX-283, Tab 34].

October 6, 1993: TexPet files a letter
requesting the President's opinion
concerning the fact that his son

was the Minister of Energy and Mines
(conflict of interest motion) [CEX-283,
Tab 35].

 

March 4, 1994: TexPet files a motion for
recusal against the President of the
Supreme Court on the grounds of delay
(failure to decide the conflict of interest
motion) [R-768].

 

May 6, 1994: Court Order from the
Subrogate President of the Supreme Court
recusing the President of the Court from
the case. The Subrogate President
acknowledges jurisdiction to hear the case
[CEX- 283, Tab 37].

July 11, 1994: TexPet files a letter with
the Subrogate President requesting him to
set a new date for the experts to accept
their appointment [CEX 283, Tab 34].

August 15, 1995: Letter from TexPet to
the President of the Supreme Court asking
it to set a new date for the experts to
accept their appointment [CEX-283, Tab
38].

August 20, 1998: Letter from TexPet to
the President of the Supreme Court asking
it to hear the case [CEX-283, Tab 39].

January 7, 2000: Letter from TexPet to the
President of the Supreme Court asking it
to proceed with the case “as appropriate”

 

2000), to the date on which the motion for
abandonment of action was filed by the
Minister of Energy and Mines (May 9,
2002), a term of two years, four months
and two days elapsed. Article 397(2) of the
Code of Civil Procedure, Article 388 of
the Codification, reads literally, ‘unless
otherwise provided by the law, the
Supreme Court, districts courts and higher
courts of justice shall declare
abandonment of action, at the request of
one of the parties or upon their own
motion, any cases abandoned for two
years from the date on which the last
measure is adopted or the date on which
the last request is made by any of the
parties.’ The case is thus declared
abandoned and shall be archived.”

 

The court based its decision on Article 388
of the codification for the Code of Civil
Procedure [Article 210 of the Organic Law
of the Judicial Function, published on
November 25, 1997], which, according to
the claimants, took effect in July 2005.
That rule provides that unless another law
provides otherwise, a case pending in the
Supreme Court, the Superior Courts, or the
Districts Tribunals will be declared
abandoned when two years have elapsed
since the last action or written petition by
any of the parties.

 

  

 

 

Page AS

 

TEXPET V. GOVERNMENT OF ECUADOR
[3] CASE No. 7-92 — AMAZONAS REFINERY CLAIM 1

 

Subject Matter

Relief Sought

Short summary of grounds for relief
sought

Summary of main defenses

Procedural History

Dispositive section of any court decision
rendered, if any

Summary of the grounds of such court
decision, if any

 

 

 

 

 

Concerning the Ecuadorian court decision
to dismiss the case, Respondent indicated
that (i) the case was properly dismissed
under prevailing Ecuadorian law, and (ii)
the delays incurred in this case were
attributable to TexPet's negligence and
mismanagement of its case [R I, p. 30,
q189-91].

 

[CEX-283, Tab 40].

May 27, 2002: Letter from TexPet to the
President of the Supreme Court asking it
to proceed with the case “as appropriate”
[CEX-283, Tab 42].

October 31, 2002: President of the
Supreme Court takes notice of the lawsuit,
acknowledges recusal decision and
submits the case file to the Subrogate
President so that he proceeds with the case
[CEX-283, Tab 43].

 

October 24, 2003: The Supreme Court
Secretary submits the file to the Subrogate
President of the Supreme Court [CEX-
283, Tab 44].

 

August 25, 2003: Letter from TexPet to
the President of the Supreme Court asking
it to proceed with the case “as
appropriate” [CEX-283, Tab 45].

November 22, 2005: Letter from TexPet to
the President of the Supreme Court asking
it to proceed with the case “as
appropriate” [CEX-283, Tab 48].

 

February 1, 2007: Letter from TexPet to
the Subrogate President of the Supreme
Court asking it to proceed with the case
“as appropriate” [CEX-283, Tab 49].

March 14, 2007: Letter from the Ministry
of Energy and Mines to the Subrogate
President of the Supreme Court requesting
that the case be declared abandoned [CEX-
283, Tab 55].

 

March 26, 2007: Letter from TexPet to the
Subrogate President of the Supreme Court
opposing the abandonment motion [CEX-
283, Tab 58].

 

April 9, 2007: The Subrogate President of
the Supreme Court declared Case 7-92
abandoned and dismissed TexPet’s claim
[CEX-283, Tab 59].

 

 

 

 

Page A6

 

TEXPET V. GOVERNMENT OF ECUADOR
[3] CASE No. 7-92 — AMAZONAS REFINERY CLAIM 1

 

 

 

Subject Matter Relief Sought Short summary of grounds for relief | Summary of main defenses Procedural History Dispositive section of any court decision | Summary of the grounds of such court
sought rendered, if any decision, if any

[3-b] _ TexPet filed an appeal on April 25,2007, | __ April 25, 2007: TexPet appealed this Decision of May 20, 2008 [CEX-452]: “As | On May 20, 2008: The First Civil and

Amazonas given that the President's ruling of April decision before the First Civil and provided in the article added after Article | Mercantile Chamber of the Supreme Court

Refinery 9, 2007, had “inflicted on [TexPet] Mercantile Chamber of the Supreme Court | 210 of the Organic Law of the Judicial of Justice rejected TexPet’s appeal and

Claim 1 irreparable harm and [were] not in line [see Court Order acknowledging TexPet’s | Function [Article 388 of the Codification confirmed the Subrogate President’s

- with the rule of law” [see Letter from appeal, CEX-283, Tab 66]. cited above], the declaration of abandonment decision because the

Appeal TexPet to the President of the Supreme abandonment whether ex officio or upon | provision applied by the President of the
Court, April 25, 2007, CEX-283, Tab 65]. May 20, 2008: This Chamber rejected parties petition by operation of law, when | Supreme Court was “superior” to those

First Civil and TexPet’s appeal [CEX-452]. abandoned for a two-year term, counted __| cited by TexPet.

Mercantile TexPet claimed that Article 388 of the from the last proceeding carried out or

Chamber of the codification could not be applied because ‘from the last petition made by any of the

Supreme Court

the court had to apply two other provisions
of the Civil Procedure Code that also
regulate abandonment (Article 395 and
397). According to TexPet, the terms in
the said provisions had not lapsed
[Decision of May 20, 2008, CEX-452].

parties, is justified. This provision is
superior to those of the Civil Procedure
Code, since it is contained in an Organic
Law. Therefore, it is not lawful to revoke
the writ whereby the President of the
Supreme Court of Justice declares
abandoned the process, precisely applying
the mentioned provisions, (...), there has
been more time lapsed than that indicated
in the law for said declaration.

In view of the above considerations, this
Chamber confirms the abandonment writ
in question.”

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

  

 

[3-c] _ TexPet claimed that the Appeal Chamber | __ May 27, 2008: TexPet filed a cassation Decision of June 24, 2008 [Spanish On June 24, 2008: The cassation appeal is
Amazonas wrongly interpreted Article 210 of the appeal before the First Civil and version only, CEX-454]: “En la especie, el | rejected by the court which established
Refinery Organic Law of the Judicial Function Mercantile Chamber of the Supreme Court | auto definitivo por el cual se recurre via that TexPet was not entitled to file a
Claim 1 (Article 388 of the Codification) [CEX- [CEX-453]. casacién no retine los requisitos de cassation appeal.
- 453]. procedibilidad establecidos en la ley de la
Cassation June 24, 2008: This Chamber rejected materia, puesto que de ellos se deduce
TexPet’s cassation appeal [CEX-454 ]. claramente que no es posible presentar

recurso de casacién de las resoluciones de

la propia Corte Suprema de Justicia. Por

lo expuesto se rechaza el recurso de

casacin presentado por el Dr. Rodrigo

Pérez Pallares, en su calidad de

apoderado de Texaco Petroleum

Company.”
[3-d] — TexPet claimed that it was entitled to filea | __ June 30, 2008: TexPet filed a fact appeal Decision of July 16, 2008 [CEX-456]: Legal grounds cited by the court [CEX-
Amazonas cassation appeal because its request was before the First Civil and Mercantile “Tanto el texto legal antes citado, cuanto | 456}: Articulo 9 de la Codificacién de la
Refinery related to a review of the lawfulness of the Chamber of the Supreme Court [CEX- el precedente jurisprudencial referido no | Ley de Casacién: “Si se denegare el
Claim 1 prior decision dated May 20, 2008 [CEX- 455). constituye un mero formalismo vacio de trdmite del recurso, podré la parte

Fact appeal

 

 

455].

Moreover, according to TexPet, the former
Article 192 of the Ecuadorian Constitution
provided: “no se sacrificard la justicia por
la sola omisién de formalidades” [CEX-
455).

 

 

July 16, 2008: This Chamber rejected
TexPet’s fact appeal (end of proceedings)
[CEX-456].

 

contenido, sino la observancia de los
principios rectores del proceso, en
especial el de legalidad que rige al
proceso civil, cuyas normas son de orden
piiblico. —Por las consideraciones que
anteceden, la Primera Sala de lo Civil y
Mercantil de la Corte Suprema de
Justicia, RECHAZA el recurso de hecho
interpuesto en la presente causa.”

 

recurrente, en el término de tres dias,
interponer el recurso de hecho.
Interpuesto ante el juez u 6rgano judicial
respectivo, este sin calificarlo, elevara
todo el expediente a la Corte Suprema de
Justicia. La denegacién del tramite del
recurso deberé ser fundamentada.”
Articulo 2 de la Ley de Casacién: “El
recurso de casaci6n procede contra las
sentencias y los autos que pongan fin a los
procesos de conocimiento, dictados por
las cortes superiores, por los tribunales
distritales de lo fiscal y de lo contencioso
administrativo”.

 

 

Page A7

 

TEXPET V. GOVERNMENT OF ECUADOR
[4] CASE No. 153-93— AMAZONAS REFINERY CLAIM 2

 

 

 

 

 

  

Subject Matter Relief Sought Short summary of grounds for relief | Summary of main defenses Procedural History Dispositive section of any court decision | Summary of the grounds of such court
sought rendered, if any decision, if any

[4] Restitution of the TexPet claimed a breach of the 1973 The main defenses raised in this case are December 14, 1993: TexPet filed Case Decision of July 14, 2009 [R-1034]: “In (11 of the decision: “Clause 15.3 of the

A ; ibuted t, as well as viol of identical to those raised in case 7-92, i.e. | 153-93 before the President of the view of all of the above, the President of — | August 6, 1973 agreement deals with gas

Refinery barrels, or, as various articles of the Ecuadorian Civil Amazonas Refinery Claim 1. Superior Court of Quito [CEX-286, the Provincial Court of Pichincha, and provides that “Any gas surplus which

Claim 2 subsidiary remedy, Code and Hydrocarbons Law [C I, p. 15, Tab 4]. ADMINISTERING JUSTICE ON BEHALF | is not used by CEPE or the contractors

First Instance

TexPet’s alleged
over-contribution
of 259,975
barrels of oil for
domestic
consumption.
After the judicial
inspections the
number of barrels
was revised to
259,973

ICI, p. 17, 150;
CV, p. 42,
qg102-3, 110,
115].

 

their cash-equivalent
value at the
international market
price, which at the
time of the complaint
TexPet estimated to
be 2,599,750 US
Dollars, plus interest.
This amount was
revised after the
judicial inspections
to 2,843,302.18 US
Dollars.

ICI, p. 17, $50; CV,
pp.42-3, 91104, 110,
114].

 

445; C V, p. 42, 104].

From September 1991 until June 1992, the
Government continued its conduct of
injecting barrels of oil belonging to
TexPet into the Trans-Ecuadorian pipeline
for export. The amounts of residual oil re-
injected into the pipeline yielded a very
small degradation of the original crude oil
and there was no impact on the ultimate
export price. But the Government did not
pay the international market price for the
crude oil that it used to produce the
residual oil, although the 1973 Agreement
requires the Government to pay TexPet
international prices for all oil contributions
that were not used to satisfy domestic
consumption [C I, p. 17, {[50-52; CV.
p-38-39, 9191-92 and pp. 42-46, §9[105-
118].

 

 

By October 31, 1996: All experts reports
had been submitted [CEX-286, Tab 62 and
Tab 63].

August 20, 1998: Letter from TexPet to
the court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-286, Tab 65].

October 12, 1998: First auto para
sentencia issued by the President of the
Superior Court of Quito [CEX-286,
Tab 65].

 

 

January 7, 2000: Letter from TexPet to the
court asking it to decide the case [CEX-
286, Tab 66].

May 22, 2002: Second auto para
sentencia issued by the President of the
Superior Court of Quito [CEX-286,

Tab 68]: “The motion filed by the
respondent for the abandonment of the
case is hereby denied as inadmissible. As
requested by the claimant, it is hereby
ordered that the case be remanded for
judgment (...).”

August 25, 2003: Letter from TexPet to
the court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-286, Tab 69].

November 14, 2005: Letter from TexPet to
the court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-286, Tab 71].

 

February 1, 2007: Letter from TexPet to
the court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-286, Tab 72].

January 15, 2008: Letter from TexPet to
the Court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-320].

July 14, 2009: The President of the
Superior Court of Justice of Quito
dismissed TexPet’s claim [R-1034].

 

OF THE SOVEREIGN PEOPLE OF
ECUADOR AND BY THE AUTHORITY
OF THE CONSTITUTION AND THE
LAWS OF THE REPUBLIC, upholds the
objection of improper legal action and
dismisses the complaint brought by
Texaco Petroleum Company against the
Government of Ecuador. No award of
court costs or legal fees.”

 

and cannot be injected, recirculated or
reinjected in the relevant gas fields shall
be subject to special agreements.” This
agreement does not contain any clause
requiring the Government of Ecuador to
pay or compensate for or reach special
agreements regarding the residual crude
resulting from the crude oil refining
process aimed at producing oil
derivatives, and this does not exist
because he who acquires the essence of a
thing also acquires the incidentals thereof,
the essence being the crude oil and the
incidentals the residual or reduced crude.
Otherwise, the State would be paying
twice for the crude, once upon receiving it
for delivery to the Amazonas refinery, and
again when being charged, as is the case
now, for the barrels of residue, whether or
not reinjected into the SOTE trans-
Ecuadorian pipeline.”

 

 

Page A8

 

TEXPET V. GOVERNMENT OF ECUADOR
[5] CASE No. 154-93 - IMPORTED PRODUCTS CLAIMS

 

 

 

 

Subject Matter Relief Sought Short summary of grounds for relief | Summary of main defenses Procedural History Dispositive section of any court decision | Summary of the grounds of such court
sought rendered, if any decision, if any

[5] Restitution of the TexPet alleged that the Government According to the Respondent, there is no December 14, 1993: TexPet filed Case Decision of September 10, 2009 [R-1054]: | {11 of the decision: “Jn the Agreement

Imported over-contributed breached the 1973 Agreement and related | provision in Ecuadorian law that required 154-93 before the President of the “By virtue of the above, the President of dated August 6, 1973, clause 15.3, related

Products Claims

First Instance

Government's
alleged failure to
properly account
in its Operating
Account
(“OPAH”) for the
cash equivalent
of the volumes of
derivative
products that
were imported
into Ecuador
from abroad in
order to help
satisfy domestic
consumption
ICI, p. 18].

 

3,713,157 barrels of
crude oil or, as
subsidiary remedy,
their cash-equivalent
value at the
international market
price calculated to be
14,584,312 US
Dollars, plus interest,
at the time of the
complaint. After the
judicial inspections,
the number of barrels
was revised to
3,067,983, and the
amount of US
Dollars was revised
to 43,371,993.44
ICI, p. 18, $53; CV,
p.47,50 121, 133].

 

provisions of Ecuadorian Law [C V, p.46-
47, 4120).

Under Decree 1258 of 1973, the OPAH is
required to record and account, as
revenues or income, the amounts paid by
the refineries for the imported derivatives
(Article 1(b)) and the amounts received for
exports of crude oil by the Government in
order to import derivatives to satisfy
domestic consumption (Article 1(c)) [C V,
p.47-48, 9123-124].

Thus, the Ecuadorian refineries were
required to pay for the imported products.
But, in fact, CEPE/PE (which operated the
refineries) failed to deposit any such
payments in the OPAH. As a matter of
fact, the OPAH’s revenues were
artificially decreased and the Government
requested additional volumes of
Compensation Crude from TexPet in order
for the OPAH to fully fund its importation
of additional derivative products [C I, pp.
18-19, 9153-56; C V, p.48-51, 125-136;
C VI, pp. 40-43, {9188-95].

TexPet claimed that the Government's
failure to properly account for the actual
cost of imported derivatives in the OPAH
caused TexPet to over-contribute
3,713,157 barrels of crude oil at the
domestic price [C I, p. 18, 9153 and 57].

 

the Government to account in its
Operating Account for the cash equivalent
of the volumes of derivative products
imported to satisfy domestic consumption
IR I, pp. 35-36, [109-111].

Moreover, crude delivery requirements
were set based on actual refining and
consumption projections, not on the basis
of the OPAH account balance. Then, an
imbalance of its account could not have
affected the requisitions of TexPet’s crude
oil [R V, pp. 257-258, 583].

In addition, TexPet was never forced to
contribute additional crude oil not destined
for the internal market. Any contribution
of crude oil required to finance an
imbalance in the OPAH account would, by
definition, be destined for the internal
market [R I, p. 36, 112].

Thus, the refineries did not receive
imports and had no obligation to make
payments to OPAH account under Decree
1258/73 [R V, pp. 385-386, 1782].

According to Respondent, even if the State
had not complied with Decree 1258, that
decree afforded TexPet no rights. It
instead constituted an internal accounting
procedure on behalf of the Republic.
TexPet’s obligations were instead
governed by the 1973 Agreement. An
alleged failure to satisfy Decree 1258 does
not constitute a breach of the 1973
Agreement, especially where the Decree
and the Contract do not cross reference the
other.

 

Superior Court of Quito [CEX-287,
Tab 80].

July 8, 1997: The evidence phase was
completed, and the court issued an auto
para sentencia (CEX-287 tab 106]
[Claimants’ Appendix to the Post-Hearing
Brief on Jurisdiction, p. 13].

October 8, 1997: The court issued a
second auto para sentencia declaring that
the case was ready for judgment [CEX-
287, Tab 173].

 

December 9, 1998: TexPet submitted its
final argument [CEX-287 tab 176].

January 7, 2000: Letter from TexPet to the
Court asking it to decide the case [CEX-
287, Tab 177]

May 21, 2002: The court issued a third
auto para sentencia denying the Ministry
of Energy and Mines’ request to declare
the case abandoned [CEX-287, Tab 179].

August 25, 2003: Letter from TexPet to
the Court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-287, Tab 180].

November 14, 2005: Letter from TexPet to
the Court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-287, Tab 182].

 

February 1, 2007: Letter from TexPet to
the Court Asking it to Decide the Case
[CEX-287, Tab 183]

January 15, 2008: Letter from TexPet to
the Court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-321].

September 10, 2009: The Court dismissed
TexPet’s claim [R-1054].

 

the Provincial Court of Pichincha, IN
THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE IN
THE NAME OF THE SOVEREIGN
PEOPLE OF ECUADOR, AND BY THE
AUTHORITY GRANTED UNDER THE
CONSTITUTION AND THE LAWS OF
THE REPUBLIC, in the admission of the
objection filed by the defendant claiming
the inadmissibility of the action, hereby
dismisses the claim filed by Texaco
Petroleum Company against the
Ecuadorian State. No legal costs or fees
are to be regulated.”

 

to gas, establishes that: ‘The excess gas
that is not utilized by CEPE or the
contractors and which cannot be injected,
recirculated or reinjected in the respective
field shall be subject to special
agreements.’ In the abovementioned
agreement, there is no clause obligating
the Ecuadorian State to pay more than the
price calculated as indicated above
(clause 20.1 = Art. 72 of the
Hydrocarbons Law) and especially not the
price on the international market; or to
reach special agreements, on the
compensation crude oil used as stated
under clause 19.1.”

 

 

Page AQ

 

TEXPET V. GOVERNMENT OF ECUADOR
[6] CASE No. 8-92 - EARTHQUAKE/FORCE MAJEURE CLAIM

 

 

 

 

Subject Matter Relief Sought Short summary of grounds for relief | Summary of main defenses Procedural History Dispositive section of any court decision | Summary of the grounds of such court
sought rendered, if any decision, if any

[6-a] Restitution of According to Claimants, the Government | TexPet’s claim runs afoul of its obligation | April 15, 1992: TexPet files this case Decision of October 2, 2006 [CEX-284, Decision of October 2, 2006: The

Earthquake/Force | 1,429,266 barrels of | breached the 1973 Agreement (e.g., to contribute for domestic consumption before the President of the Supreme Court | Tab 58]: “/t follows from the record set by | Subrogate President of the Supreme Court

Majeure Claim
First instance

TexPet’s alleged
over-contribution
of barrels of oil for
domestic
consumption
during the force
majeure period
ICI, pp. 20-21].

 

crude-oil that TexPet
over-contributed as a
result of the
Government's
overstatement of
TexPet’s domestic
consumption
obligations during
the force majeure
period, or as a
subsidiary remedy,
the payment of the
cash-equivalent value
of those barrels at the
international market
price calculated to be
12,313,302 US
Dollars, plus interest,
at the time of the
complaint. After the
judicial inspections,
the number of barrels
remained the same,
and the amount of
US Dollars was
revised to 12,313,302
ICL, p. 21, 1163-64;
CV, p.54, 150].

 

Clauses 19.1 and 20), Articles 1505, 1561,
1662, and 1563 of the Civil Code, and
Article 30 of the Hydrocarbons Law [C V,
pp. 52-53, 142].

On March 5, 1987, Ecuador suffered an
earthquake, which destroyed several
kilometers of the Trans-Ecuadorian
pipeline. TexPet was unable to produce
and transport crude oil during the six
months following the earthquake but
continued to deliver for domestic
consumption not only its required
proportion, but 100% of its production,
plus all of its stored oil. Once the pipeline
was restored, the Government required
TexPet to deliver an additional 1,429,266
barrels as compensation crude at the
domestic market price, in order to
compensate for the crude oil not
delivered. According to Claimants, under
the 1973 Agreement, TexPet had the
obligation to contribute for domestic
consumption in proportion to its share of
the total oil production of Ecuador. But
there was no production as a consequence
of the earthquake [C I, pp. 20-21, 9[59-
62; C V, p.51-54, 9137-149]. According
to Claimants, under Ecuadorian law, force
majeure eliminates a party’s duty to
perform its contractual obligations during
the force majeure period. Thus, Ecuador
was not entitled to require retroactive
contributions [C VI, pp. 46-47, §§102-
105].

Concerning the court’s decision to dismiss
the case, TexPet considered, as it did in
other cases, that the court improperly
applied Article 388 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, a two-year gap-filler
abandonment provision in the Code of
Civil Procedure (found both at Article 388
of the 2005 re-codification and Article
210 of the Organic Law of the Judicial
Function, which state that they only apply
“unless otherwise provided by law”),
instead of the three-year rule in Article
386, which concerns first-instance
proceedings governed by the Code of
Civil Procedure. In addition, to the extent
that Respondent relies on the 2-year rule
added to the Code of Civil Procedure in

 

“any volume of crude oil that were
necessary”, “whenever deemed necessary”
pursuant to Article 31 of the
Hydrocarbons Law and Clause 19 of the
1973 agreement. This was an absolute
obligation imposed upon TexPet [R I, p.
37, (113; R V, pp. 261-263, $91593-596].

Moreover, under Ecuadorian Law, the
doctrine of force majeure releases a debtor
from liability due to delay in performing
the contractual obligation, but does not
eliminate the obligation itself or relieve
the obligor from fulfilling its obligations
once the force majeure event concludes.
(Article 1574 of the Civil Code) [R V, pp.
263-264, 91598-600;, R VI, pp. 324-25,
1647-648].

Moreover, according to Respondent,
TexPet consented to the contribution of
compensation crude delivered after the
‘force majeure period [R V, pp. 264-265,
1601-602].

Concerning the Ecuadorian court decision
to dismiss the case, Respondent indicated
that a plaintiff in Ecuador has an
affirmative duty to move the case forward
IR I, p. 28, 184]. Therefore, according to
Respondent's Statement of Defense, the
dismissal in case No. 8-92 is attributable
to TexPet’s own miscalculations [R I, p.
30, 89-91]. However, the Second
Commercial Chamber of the Supreme
Court overturned the President's ruling
(see Procedural History).

 

[CEX-284, Tab 4].

October 6, 1993: TexPet files a letter
requesting the President's opinion
concerning the fact that his son

was the Minister of Energy and Mines
(conflict of interest motion) [CEX- 284,
Tab 24].

March 4, 1994: TexPet files a motion for
recusal against the President of the
Supreme Court on the grounds of delay
(failure to decide the conflict of interest
motion) [R-767].

 

June 8, 1994: Court Order from the
Subrogate President of the Supreme Court
recusing the President of the Court from
the case. The Subrogate President
acknowledges jurisdiction to hear the case
[CEX- 284, Tab 25].

July 11, 1994: TexPet files a letter with
the Subrogate President requesting him to
set a new date for the experts to accept
their appointment [CEX- 284, Tab 26].

December 13, 1994: Court Order from the
Subrogate President appointing experts
and ordering them to appear in Court to
accept their appointments. Court Order
confirming that Experts appeared in Court
to accept their appointments [CEX- 284,
Tab 27].

By March 1995: The experts appointed by
TexPet and the Government had
submitted their reports [see Letter from
TexPet to the Court with comments to
expert reports dated March 2, 1995, CEX-
284, Tab 38].

May 2, 1995: Letter from TexPet to the
President of the Supreme Court asking it
to decide the case [CEX-284, Tab 39].

July 18, 1995: First auto para sentencia
issued by the Subrogate President of the
Supreme Court [CEX-284, Tab 40]:
“Given the stage and nature of the
proceedings, it is hereby ordered that the
case file be remanded for judgment.”

 

the Acting Clerk of the Supreme Court of
Justice (...) that since the last measure
carried out or the last request made by the
plaintiff company, on January 7, 2000,
until the filing of the request for dismissal
for want of prosecution by the Minister of
Energy and Mines on May 9, 2002, two
years, four months and two days have
elapsed. Article 397(2) of the Code of
Civil Procedure (Article 388 of the
Codification), provides that, ‘unless
otherwise provided by the law, the
Supreme Court, districts courts and higher
courts of justice shall declare
abandonment of action, at the request of
one of the parties or upon their own
motion, any cases abandoned for two
years from the date on which the last
measure is adopted or the date on which
the last request is made by any of the
parties.’ There being no further
considerations, the case is hereby
declared abandoned. Be it ordered and
notified.”

 

declared Case 8-92 abandoned. The court
cited the same grounds as in Case 7-92
(Application of Article 388 of the
codification for the Code of Civil
Procedure - Article 210 of the Organic
Law of the Judicial Function). That rule
provides that unless another law provides
otherwise, a case pending in the Supreme
Court, the Superior Courts, or the District
Tribunals will be declared abandoned
when two years have elapsed since the last
action or written petition by any of the
parties. The President of the Supreme
Court indicated that two years, four
months and two days had lapsed since the
filing of the request.

 

 

Page A 10

 

 

TEXPET V. GOVERNMENT OF ECUADOR
[6] CASE No. 8-92 - EARTHQUAKE/FORCE MAJEURE CLAIM

 

Subject Matter

Relief Sought

Short summary of grounds for relief
sought

Summary of main defenses

Procedural History

Dispositive section of any court decision
rendered, if any

Summary of the grounds of such court
decision, if any

 

2005, Claimants assert that the rule was
applied retroactively. Article 388 was not
incorporated into the Code of Civil
Procedure until July 2005 [C I, pp. 26-27,
83; C VI, pp. 149-150, 9935 1-354].

Moreover, the court itself was responsible
for delaying the proceedings through its
own actions and omissions, especially its
refusal to decide the case after the
issuance of an auto para sentencia in
1995 [C VI pp. 43-44, 9996-97].

  

August 22, 1995: Letter from TexPet to the
President of the Supreme Court submitting
final arguments and asking the Court to
decide the case [CEX-284, Tab 41].

February 16, 1998: Letter from TexPet to
the President of the Supreme Court asking
it to decide the case [CEX-284, Tab 42].

January 7, 2000: Letter from TexPet to the
President of the Supreme Court asking it
to decide the case [CEX-284, Tab 43].

May 9, 2002: Letter to the President of the
Supreme Court requesting that the case be
declared abandoned [CEX-284, Tab 44].

May 27, 2002: Letter from TexPet to the
President of the Supreme Court asking it
to decide the case [CEX-284, Tab 45].

August 25, 2003: Letter from TexPet to
the President of the Supreme Court asking
it to decide the case [CEX-284, Tab 46].

November 22, 2005: Letter from TexPet
to the Subrogate President of the Supreme
Court asking it to decide the case [CEX-
284, Tab 49].

 

August 21, 2006: Letter from TexPet to
the President of the Supreme Court asking
it to decide the case [CEX-284, Tab 50].

September 27, 2006: Letter from TexPet
to the President of the Supreme Court
requesting the rejection of Respondent's
petition to declare the case abandoned
[CEX-284, Tab 57].

October 2, 2006: The Subrogate President
of the Supreme Court dismissed this case
as abandoned [CEX-284, Tab 58].

 

January 23, 2008: Letter from TexPet to
the court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-318].

 

 

[6-b]
Earthquake/Force
Majeure Claim

First appeal

 

 

As described above, TexPet
that the court improperly applied Article
388, a two-year gap-filler abandonment
provision in the Code of Civil Procedure
(found both at Article 388 of the 2005 re-
codification and Article 210 of the
Organic Law of the Judicial Function,
which states that it only applies “unless

 

‘ding to s of
Defense, the dismissal in case No. 8-92 is
attributable to TexPet’s own
miscalculations [R I, p. 30, 89-91].

 

January 22, 2008: The Second Division in
Civil and Commercial Matters of the
Supreme Court overturned the President's
ruling [CEX-284, Tab 76].

January 23, 2008: Letter from TexPet to
the court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-318].

 

Decision of January 22, 2008 [CEX-284,
Tab 76]: 13: “The Supreme Court of
Justice has laid out the uniform principle
that dismissal for want a prosecution is
inadmissible where the delay in deciding a
case is attributable to the court, a
principle which is also grounded on the
due process guarantee set forth in Article

  

 

Decision of January 22, 2008: According
to the Second Commercial Chamber of
the Supreme Court, Article 388 is not
applicable because the court had already
issued an auto para sentencia.

 

 

Page A 14

 

TEXPET V. GOVERNMENT OF ECUADOR
[6] CASE No. 8-92 - EARTHQUAKE/FORCE MAJEURE CLAIM

 

 

 

 

 

 

Subject Matter Relief Sought Short summary of grounds for relief | Summary of main defenses Procedural History Dispositive section of any court decision | Summary of the grounds of such court
sought rendered, if any decision, if any
otherwise provided by law”), instead of 24(17) of the Political Constitution of the
the three-year rule in Article 386, which Republic of Ecuador, under which any
concerns first-instance proceedings person shall have the right of access to the
governed by the Code of Civil Procedure. courts and to have its rights and interests
In addition, to the extent that Respondent protected in an effective, impartial and
relies on the 2-year rule added to the Code expeditious manner, provided that in no
of Civil Procedure in 2005, Claimants case shall be a person be deprived of such
assert that the rule was applied protection.”
retroactively. Article 388 was not 4: “This Division noted that by means of
incorporated into the Code of Civil the ruling rendered on July 18, 1995, at
Procedure until July 2005 [C I, pp. 26-27, 10 AM, (...), the Chief Justice of the
83; C VI, pp. 149-150, 9935 1-354]. Supreme Court declared that the case was

ready for judgment and expressly ordered
that ‘the case be remanded for judgment.”
Consequently, despite the fact that more
than two years have elapsed from the date
of the plaintiff's filing of the request for
judgment on January 7, 2000, and the
{filing by the Ministry of Energy and Mines
of its pleading on May 9, 2002, it is also
true that the failure to move the case
forward is attributable to neither party, in
light of the ruling made by the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court (...).
Therefore, this Division accepts the
appeal filed by the plaintiff company and
overturns the decisions rendered on
October 2, 2006, at 9:50 PM and on
December 18, 2006, at 10 AM, by the
Acting Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court.”

[6-c] —_ As it argued in its other cases, TexPet _—_ July 1, 2008: The President of the Decision of July 1, 2008 [CEX-440]: “In Decision of July 1, 2008 [CEX-440]: The

Earthquake/Force considered that the general ten-year Supreme Court dismissed the case again view of the foregoing, in compliance with | court applied Article 2422 of Ecuador's

Majeure Claim

Remand of the case
to the President of
the Supreme Court
after the reversal
of its first decision

statute applied.

[CEX-440].

the equitable principle embodied in
Section 1009 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, there being no further matters
to analyze or defenses as raised by the
defendant to address, administering
justice on behalf of the Republic, in
exercise of the powers granted by law, the

 

Civil Code. Article 2422 provides for a
special two-year statute of limitations for
actions brought by suppliers for the price
of retail sales (See also case 23-91).

 

 

on appeal statute of limitations defense is hereby

accepted and the statement of claim is

therefore dismissed.” (See also case 23-91

for more details)
[6-d] __ _ __ July 2, 2008: TexPet appealed the _ _
Earthquake/Force Subrogate President’ s decision before the

Majeure Claim

Second appeal

 

 

 

 

Civil Chamber of the Supreme Court (still
pending) [CEX 457].

 

 

 

 

Page A 12

 

TEXPET V. PETROECUADOR
[7] CASE No. 983-03 — REFINANCING AGREEMENT CLAIM

 

 

 

Subject Matter Relief Sought Short summary of grounds for relief | Summary of main defenses Procedural History Dispositive section of any court decision | Summary of the grounds of such court
sought rendered, if any decision, if any

[7-a] Payment of the TexPet claimed that the Government had PetroEcuador contended that it was not April 15, 1992: TexPet filed Case 6-92 (to | Decision of February 26, 2007: “For the Decision of February 26, 2007: The First

Refinancing interest due under the | breached Article 2.3 of the 1986 obligated to pay interest on its late become 983-03) before the President of purposes of administration of justice on Civil Court of Pichincha recognized that

Agreement 1986 Refinancing Refinancing Agreement and various payment during the force majeure period | the Supreme Court [CEX-288, Tab 7]. behalf of the Republic and in exercise of _ | the Government had breached the

Claim Agreement [C I, p. articles of Ecuador’s Civil Code (e.g., IR V, p. 267, 1609]. the powers granted by law, the statement | Refinancing Agreement.

First instance

Breach of a
Refinancing
Agreement.

 

22).

 

Articles 1561, 1562, 1563, 1567(1), and
1575) [C V, p. 55, 154].

TexPet also claimed that the
Government's obligation to pay the
interest could not be suspended because of
a force majeure event (the earthquake),
since the main obligation (the payment of
principal) was not suspended [C I, p. 26,
467).

They also claimed that under Article 30 of
the Civil Code, financial obligations may
not be delayed or excused by force
majeure when there is no direct link
between the obligation and the force
majeure event [C I, p. 22, 167; C V, p. 55,
q54].

 

According to Claimants, on September 30,
1986, the Government admittedly owed
TexPet 41,316,033.98 US Dollars for oil
that TexPet provided the Government. On
November 25, 1986, TexPet and CEPE/PE
entered into a Refinancing Agreement,
which required CEPE/PE to pay its debt in
18 monthly installments, beginning on
December 31, 1986. The Government was
systemically late in all of its payments.
Article 2.3 of the Refinancing Agreement
required CEPE/PE to pay interest at the
New York Prime Rate beginning on the
first day of any delay. On August 24,
1989, TexPet and CEPE/PE formed a
Commission that concluded that the
Government owed interest for its delayed
payments in the amount of 1,522,552.54
US Dollars [C I, pp. 26-27, {166 and 69; C
V, pp. 55-56, $15 1-157].

 

 

By March 1995: The evidentiary phase
had ended [see Letter from TexPet to the
court submitting comments to Expert
reports, March 21, 1995, CEX-288, Tab
53].

August 20, 1998: Letter from TexPet to
the court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-288, Tab 54].

January 7, 2000: Letter from TexPet to the
court asking it to decide the case [CEX-
288, Tab 55].

May 27, 2002: Letter from TexPet to the
court asking it to decide the case [CEX-
288, Tab 57].

August 25, 2003: Letter from TexPet to
the court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-288, Tab 58].

October 15, 2003: The Subrogate
President of the Supreme Court decided
that it had no jurisdiction to hear the case.
According to this decision, Law No. 77,
amending the Law on State
Modernization, published on April 3,
1988, provides that cases relating to
disputes arising from contracts signed by
the state or other governmental agencies
shall be decided upon by higher courts.
Consequently, the President of the
Supreme Court sent the file to the First
Civil Court of Pichincha as Case 983-03
[CEX-288, Tab 59].

 

November 14, 2005: Letter from TexPet to
the First Civil Court of Pichincha asking it
to decide the case [Cex-322].

 

February 2, 2007: Letter from TexPet to
the court asking it to decide the case
[CEX-288, Tab 64].

February 6, 2007: The court issued an auto
para sentencia [CEX-288, Tab 65].

February 26, 2007: The court ruled in
favor of TexPet [CEX-288, Tab 66]

 

of claim is accepted, and the defenses
raised by the respondent are dismissed
due to the lack of conclusive evidence, and
the respondent (...) is hereby required to
pay to the legal representative of Texaco
Petroleum Company the amount of 1,522,
552.54 US Dollars, as agreed to by
contract, which is the outstanding amount
of the late charge.”

 

 

 

Page A 13

 

TEXPET V. PETROECUADOR
[7] CASE No. 983-03 — REFINANCING AGREEMENT CLAIM

 

Subject Matter

Relief Sought

Short summary of grounds for relief
sought

Summary of main defenses

Procedural History

Dispositive section of any court decision
rendered, if any

Summary of the grounds of such court
decision, if any

 

 

[7-b]
Refinancing
Agreement
Claim

Appeal

Breach of a
Refinancing
Agreement.

 

 

TexPet appealed because the court
improperly ordered the judgment to be
paid to the “legal representative” of
TexPet, rather than to TexPet itself [C I, p.
23, (70).

 

PetroEcuador has contended that the judge
sitting in the First Civil Court of Pichincha
did not have jurisdiction over the case
because, under the 1971 Hydrocarbons
Law, the Minister of Energy and Mines is
the Special Hydrocarbons Judge with

jurisdiction to hear and decide all
s which may arise as a result
of the application of the Hydrocarbons
Law [R V, p. 267, 608].

 

PetroEcuador has also contended that it
was not obligated to pay interest on its late
payment during the force majeure period
IR V, p. 267, 1609].

 

March 1, 2007 and March 12, 2007: The
Government and TexPet appealed the
decision dated February 26, 2007 [see
Letter from PetroEcuador to the court
appealing the judgment, March 1, 2007,
CEX-288, Tab 69, and Letter from TexPet
to the court appealing the judgment,
March 12, 2007, CEX-288, Tab 73].

 

 

 

 

 

Page A 14

