COWWNNADUUARWWHNEB

URRWWNNE

Sand Hearing Transcript.txt
72
O3BFREPA
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK

REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR,
Petitioner,
Vv. 09 cv 9958 (LBS)

CHEVRON CORPORATION and TEXACO
PETROLEUM COMPANY,

Respondent.

DANIEL CARLOS LUSITANDE
YAIGUAJE, et al,

Plaintiffs,
Vv. 10 cv 316 (LBS)

CHEVRON CORPORATION and TEXACO
PETROLEUM COMPANY,

Defendants.

New York, N.Y.
March 10, 2010
2:15 p.m.

Before:
HON. LEONARD B. SAND,

District Judge
APPEARANCES

WINSTON & STRAWN LLP

Attorney for Petitioner Republic of Ecuador
C. MacNEIL MITCHELL
ERIC W. BLOOM

ALVARO GALINDO C.
Attorney for Petitioner Republic of Ecuador

GIBSON, DUNN & CRUTCHER LLP

Attorneys for Respondent
RANDY MASTRO
SCOTT EDELMAN

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
73
O3BFREPA
APPEARANCES (Cont'd)

KING & SPAULDING

Attorneys for Respondents
EDWARD G. KEHOE

R. HEWITT PATE
Attorney for Respondent

Page 1

OUAWNE

Sand Hearing Transcript.txt
EMERY CELLI BRINCKERHOFF & ABADY LLP
Attorneys for Plaintiffs
JONATHAN S. ABADY
STEVEN DANZIGER
ILANN M. MAAZEL
O. ANDREW F. WILSON
ELORA MUKHERJEE
000

(Case called)

(In open court)

THE COURT: Good morning. You may proceed.

. ABADY: Good morning, your Honor. Jonathan Abady
for the plaintiffs. Thanks for hearing us this morning.

he first critical point that I want to emphasize to
the court. is that we represent the plaintiff, residents and
farmers of the Amazon basin community there that are affected
by the defendants' practices. We are not the Republic of
Ecuador. we have different interests, different claims,
different rights and different ptanding. We are not, contrary
to their allegations, stalking horses for the Republic.

when we commenced this suit in 1993, the Republic
filed an amicus brief in opposition to our case. I think there
is some irony, therefore, that we are the third party to
address the Court in these proceedings, because the promises

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
74
O3BFREPA
that are at the core of this case were promises that were made
to us, and they were also not biliteral promises. They were
promises and representations that were made to the Court.
These are our claims, our rights, our lawsuit.

THE COURT: And your position is that because you are
not presently a party to the arbitration, the arbitration
cannot go forward.

MR. ABADY: Yes.

THE COURT: Now, let me ask a few questions, if I may.
Do you wish to intervene in the arbitration?

ABADY: Absolutely not. We are invested over 17
years, seven years of trial in Ecuador.

THE COURT: I know that.

MR. ABADY: So the answer is no, we do not seek to
intervene in that proceeding.

THE COURT: Is your position, then, that Chevron
cannot pursue arbitration pursuant to the treaty because you're
not a party?

MR. ABADY: We are seeking an injunction to enjoin
Chevron from pursuing the arbitration insofar as it violates
the express repeated, unequivocal, unambiguous promises that it
made to this Court that this case was going to be adjudicated
in Ecuador subject to 5304

— COURT: I heard that argument, and I think you
heard the colloquy yesterday.
SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
75
O3BFREPA

MR. ABADY: Yes.

THE COURT: So we don't have to --

MR. ABADY: Your Honor --

THE COURT: Let me just finish. I'll give you a half
an_hour and I'll try to remain silent, but I think it's more
helpful to understand what it is that's on the Court's mind.

Page 2

RPOCMNDUAWNE

BR

Sand Hearing Transcript.txt

There's a treaty between the United States and
Brazil --

MR. ABADY: Ecuador.

THE COURT: Ecuador. That treaty confers rights to
arbitration. The express purpose of the treaty, message sent
to the Senate with the treaty, was that it would encourage
investment in Ecuador and the United States by assuring the
investors that there would be an independent, neutral tribunal
which would protect the investors against imposition unlawfully
of liability. Now, what is there which would enable you, your
clients, to defeat the rights of the parties to that
arbitration?

MR. ABADY: Several points I would offer the Court in
response to that question. One is that I think the real
purposes of the treaty if you examine the language in the
treaty itself and the legislative history behind it, is to
provide investors a forum and a dispute resolution process so
that they are not trapped in a situation where they are being
sued in a foreign jurisdiction with no recourse.

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
76
O3BFREPA

That_is not the case here. This is a case where the
defendants selected Ecuador as the place and the Court approved
a very specific paradigm --

THE COURT: We spent I think a considerable amount of
time yesterday on whether Chevron is bound by the terms of its
representation in furtherance of its then motion for dismissal
based on forum non_conveniens. Now, since that time, Chevron
contends that the litigation in Ecuador, the litigation brought
by your clients, has been conducted in such a manner as to
deprive it of due process. Has that claim been waived?

MR. ABADY: It has not been waived specifically. It
has been reserved through a very specific mechanism as part of
the forum non conveniens dismissal in this case. They have
waived the right to litigate those claims in the BIT, and
there's an express --

THE COURT: Waive it by doing what?

MR. ABADY: By agreeing to submit to jurisdiction in
Ecuador under very circumscribed circumstances. And what I
would say to your Honor is --

THE COURT: And the circumscribed -- and have they
waived the right to invoke the treaty because of events which
have occurred subsequent to the dismissal of the suit in this
Court?

MR. ABADY: They have not waived their rights in toto
to go to the BIT to pursue an arbitration. There are many

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
77
O3BFREPA
issues that they could theoretically conceivably go to the BIT
on, but they are precluded and they are foreclosed from going
to the BIT to litigate certain issues, and they have an express
reservation --

THE COURT: Now, let me cut you off, please. I cited
yesterday the unanimous holdings in many cases that so long as
there is a single arbitrable issue, a stay of arbitration will
not be granted. Obviously, before the arbitrators, assuming
there is no stay, Ecuador will contend that there are various
procedural defects in Chevron's claims for relief, and the
Court is not passing on any of those except considering the

Page 3

Sand Hearing Transcript.txt
question whether the claim it has made that the litigation has
been conducted in a manner which is inconsistent with due
process. I think it's paragraphs 5 to 65. That, then, is the
beginning and end of the story.

MR. ABADY: well, if you'll permit me an opportunity,
your Honor, to respond to that.

THE COURT: Go ahead. Yes.

MR. ABADY: I don't believe that is the beginning and
end. I believe that the beginning and end of this dispute
originates from a slightly different place. But let me just
briefly address your concern, which is the concern as to what
Chevron is able to do with its due process complaints, its
complaints about what is happening in Ecuador, and emphasize to
the Court that they foresaw that possibility during the forum

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
78
O3BFREPA
non conveniens dismissal. It was an express discussion between
the parties and the Court. 5304(a)(1) specifically reserves
exactly that protection for them and that was the first thing
your Honor mentioned in the morning yesterday when you came in.
It says, quote, "A foreign judgment is not conclusive if the
judgment_was rendered under a system which does not provide
impartial tribunals or procedures compatible with the
requirements of due process of law."

THE COURT: Yes.

MR. ABADY: Everybody knew what was taking place in
2002. They specifically reserved their option. It's a
forward-looking provision. Everybody realized that this could
be a concern, and they expressly said we're going to satisfy
any judgment subject to this provision. It gives them the
exact forum to litigate exactly these issues. So the provision
is there. They elected it, and it was Court-ordered, and the
Court relied on it. And that the defendants can get up here
and suggest that they didn't make those representations and
they weren't relied on by the Court is belied by the record and
I'm going to show you your Honor how.

But first I want _to say where I really think this case
originates and what I really think the touchstone and starting
point should be. This is a case unlike any other. It isa
case of first impression. It is sui generis. There are four
components that make this case different than all of the other

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
79
O3BFREPA
cases that have been discussed.

The first is that the defendants are purporting to
adjudicate the plaintiff's claims in a forum where the
plaintiffs cannot participate. Fundamental massive due process
violation.

THE COURT: Now, plaintiff cannot participate. But
you say you are not interested in intervening.

MR. ABADY: We're prevented --

THE COURT: Are you interested in filing an amicus
brief?

MR. ABADY: We --

THE COURT: why don't you let me finish?

MR ABADY: I'm sorry, your Honor

HE COURT: You can seek to intervene. I have no idea
what the procedural rules of that panel, the tribunal, is. You
can file an amicus brief. I presume that the objections to the

Page 4

Sand Hearing Transcript.txt
relief being sought by Chevron will be the subject of argument
before the panel, that Ecuador will take the position that that
relief is not available to them and so on. All that I think
the essential question which I have to decide is, is there a
single claim advanced in the petition for arbitration which is
arbitrable.

MR. ABADY: And, your Honor, if you'll allow me.

THE COURT: Yes.

MR. ABADY: I don't think that is the governing law

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
80
O3BFREPA
for controlling this particular dispute. And if you'll just
let me articulate why I think that is the case.

THE COURT: Go ahead.

MR. ABADY: The short answer to your question is no,
we do not_want to intervene in that proceeding, but more
importantly, as a matter of law, we cannot intervene in that
proceeding. And if that proceeding goes forward, because we
have no standing whatsoever to be involved, we're not a party
to that treaty, they will not allow it. And, more importantly
we don't want to, because we have spent 17 years litigating
this case, including seven years in Ecuador with a trial that's
now produced more than 200,000 pages of testimony where there
are more than 100 judicial field inspections of th
contaminated site, where there have been dozens of expert
reports, where there has been ample due process given.

But let me just --

THE COURT: Your position is there's ample due
process. And Chevron's position, which it details in those 40
paragraphs, are the things which have occurred which in its
view deprive it of due process.

MR. ABADY: YeS, your Honor.

THE COURT: Go ahead.

MR. ABADY: And under the circumstances of this
particular case, those complaints, those concerns, have a
specified, agreed-upon, judicially-approved mechanism under

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS,
(212) 805-0300
81
O3BFREPA
5304 to be resolved. It's not to commence an arbitration at
the eleventh hour after seventeen years of litigation after
there's been no judgment in Ecuador. It doesn't empower them.
Their rights under the treaty do not give them a license to
abrogate their clear promises to the parties and to the Court.
And what_I think governs this dispute, as I was indicating
previously, and what directs the Court to a slightly different
body of law is the fact that this attempt is being made to
adjudicate our claims in_a forum where we cannot be present.

The second is, is that there is no arbitration
agreement between the plaintiffs and Chevron to litigate the
environmental claims in the B

The third distinguishing factor here is the repeated
promises that were made to litigate environmental claims in
Ecuador, and the fourth distinguishing feature is that on
reliance of that judicially-mandated forum non conveniens
dismissal, we have spent 17 years, seven of which in Ecuador,
doing this ina particular way, and we are in what should be
the final stages of this litigation.

what is the import of these distinctions? Let me just
suggest to the Court what I believe the import of these

Page 5

Sand Hearing Transcript.txt
distinctions are. It means that all of the charts and all of
the graphs that Mr. Mastro brought in and all of the law that
he cited and all the arguments he made are irrelevant. They
are inapposite. No U.S. Court has ever permitted a party tS do

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.

(212) 805-0300
82

O3BFREPA
what the defendants are seeking to do here. That is extinguish
almost two decades of litigation by referring the matter to an
arbitration where the plaintiffs can't be present after they
promised that they were going to litigate the case in Ecuador,
and the parties have invested almost seven years of litigation
in Ecuador. There's no case that stands for that proposition.

THE COURT: May I interrupt --

MR. ABADY: Let me just finish one point first.

THE COURT: No, let me go first

MR. ABADY: I'm sorry.

THE COURT: Let's assume -- I have no view on it, but
let's assume that the 40 specific allegations of Chevron as to
why the lawsuit in which your clients are plaintiffs were
conducted in a manner which deprives it of due process. would
that negate the validity of any judgment rendered in the
litigation to which your clients are parties?

MR. ABADY: I think it would threaten, it would
threaten very seriously and provide the defendants an improper
opportunity to collaterally attack a judgment that they agreed
would be adjudicated and rendered in Ecuador, subject only
to --

THE COURT: Chevron is saying that the government of
Ecuador, which is a party to the case, has acted in an improper
fashion, has arrested its lawyers, have made statements which
impair the independence and integrity of the Court and so on

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
83
O3BFREPA
and so forth. Yes? I don't understand why anything which
Chevron has done or agreed to prior to these events precludes
it from invoking its treaty rights.

MR. ABADY: I have at least two responses to that.

The first one is possibly going to irritate the Court, because
I will repeat that there is an express provision that is
forward-looking, that anticipates and contemplates the very
issues that you are describing. And under the unique
circumstances of this Court, in a forum non conveniens
dismissal, where the Second Circuit said you cannot dismiss
this case unconditionally, they must submit to jurisdiction,
and as that issue evolved between the Second Circuit and the
district court, there was an express agreement that they would
adjudicate these claims in Ecuador subject only to 5304.
There's no prejudice to them because 5304 gives them the forum
and a venue post judgment to have their discussion and their
arguments about each one of those issues.

THE COURT: And what is going to happen in the
interval of time between the rendition of a judgment,
presumably in your client's favor, and proceedings under 5304?
what is going to happen?

ABADY: First of all, there is no demonstration
that there's even any prejudice to Chevron at this point.
There's no judgment that has been rendered.

E COURT: well, wait a minute. wait a minute. Are
SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
Page 6

NB

Sand Hearing Transcript.txt
(212) 805-0300
84
O3BFREPA
you saying that there would be no adverse consequences to
Chevron on the rendition of a judgment for billions and
billions of dollars against it? Is that what you' re saying?
It's a ludicrous position, but is that what you're advancing?

MR. ABADY: NO, your Honor.

THE COURT: Are you willing to stipulate that you will
take no efforts to enforce the judgment until Chevron, the
arbitration is completed?

ABADY: No, your Honor. We would not and cannot
do that.

THE COURT: Why can you not?

MR. ABADY: Because Chevron, the defendants have
agreed that those concerns would be --

THE COURT: Please answer my question. Are you
willing to agree that no efforts will be made to enforce any
judgment that you receive in the ongoing litigation unless and
until Chevron, proceeding expeditiously, either arbitrates or
seeks other relief?

MR. ABADY: I don't believe we can make that
stipulation, Judge, for the following reason, and I think this
gets to the second part of my answer, which is really an
examination and an analysis of the claims in the notice of
petition. what are they seeking to do in this notice of
petition in this arbitration? If it were a matter disconnected
to adjudication of the environmental claims in Ecuador, we

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
85
O3BFREPA
would have no process. They're free to have an international
BIT arbitration on many issues, but they cannot relitigate
after 17_years and after seven years of trial in Ecuador, they
can't relitigate those claims. And if you look at the claims
in the arbitration, in the notice of arbitration, it becomes
clear what this is.

THE COURT: I'm saying, I guess probably for the 20th
time in the past two days, that I am not determining the
validity of all of their claims. I am not determining whether
their claims would justify the relief they are seeking. I am
not passing on that. I will say again I am focusing on whether
there is a single claim which is arbitrable. And that claim is
that the government of Ecuador, a party to the treaty, has
acted with respect to the lawsuit in such a way which would
constitute a deprivation of due process.

MR. ABADY: And my answer to you, your Honor, with
tremendous and sincere respect is that our view, and I want to
look at the claims with you based on the ones that you've
raised --

THE COURT: I've looked at one claim. Please, don't
look at all of the claims. I think there are claims here for
relief which I think I categorized as imaginative. Let's
assume that at the hearing, at the arbitration, Chevron
convinced the tribunal that the allegations contained in
paragraphs 25 to 65, or whatever the number is, are all true

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
86
O3BFREPA
and had the consequence of rendering any judgment issued by
that Court as being a deprivation of due process
Page 7

NOURWNE

Sand Hearing Transcript.txt
. ABADY: A deprivation of due process claim, the
complaints about the judiciary that you are referring to, are
not arbitrable claims.

THE COURT: Because?

MR. ABADY: Because there has been an express
reservation for litigation of those claims in a particular way,
and if you look at the notice of arbitration, there are really
two classes of claims. There are claims that go to attempting
to extinguish the environment claims in the Lago Agrio case and
there are a series of due process claims that you're alluding
to, and all of the due process claims relate, your Honor, to
the environmental claims.

THE COURT: The petition for arbitration. Yes.

MR. ABADY: What I suggest to your Honor is an
examination of the notice of arbitration and the claims and the
relief, which I think should be read together, but the claims
themselves divide into two categories; claims that address and
attempt to extinguish and litigate the environmental claims of
the Lago Agrio/Aguinda case which they are foreclosed from and
these allegedly due process claims, which all relate back to
issues involving the Lago Agrio litigation.

So what are they? They are attempts to achieve a
collateral attack on the very litigation that they have

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
87
O3BFREPA
committed to and that the Court has said you must resolve in
Ecuador. If you look at the claims in the petition --

THE COURT: You've done that. Okay? we're going
around.

MR. ABADY: Okay. So that is, I think, the answer
that is mandated by the particular agreement that was mandated
by the Second Circuit and by this Court, and so what I was
saying previously, your Honor, was this is a sui generis case.
It is a case unlike any other. The fact that it's a sui
generis case and that it's unlike any other doesn't mean that
there isn't a controlling body of law. But I will point out to
the Court that there is one case from this courthouse that is
very similar and that is Farmanfarmaian v. Gulf Oil, where
Judge Carter of this Court dismissed the case on forum non
conveniens grounds with certain representations just_as
occurred here and Judge Carter said he envisioned, although it
didn't happen in that case, if the party that achieved and won
the forum non conveniens dismissal made certain representations
that were necessary to that forum non conveniens dismissal and
then disavowed those representations and tried to extricate
itself from what had been agreed to, that that conduct would be
worthy of contempt because it's a violation of the agreements
and the representations that allow the forum non conveniens
dismissal. That is the case that's closest to what's happening

ere
SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
88
O3BFREPA

There is a controlling body of law, your Honor, that I
suggest to you resolves this case. Mr. Mastro issued a
challenge yesterday and said can you find one case that
supports the relief that the plaintiffs are requesting? I can
give you a half dozen and a whole body of Supreme Court
jurisprudence and jurisprudence from this Court that entitles
us clearly to summary judgment on our claim, and I am referring

Page 8

sand Hearing Transcript. txt
to the Supreme Court's decisions in AT&T Technologies v. CWA,
First Options of Chicago and Howsam v. Dean witter and the
circuit's decision in John Hancock v. Wilson and Smith v.
Enron. All those cases collectively stand for four fundamental
propositions. They reaffirm four principles that require in
our view a granting of summary judgment. Those cases stand for
the four propositions of, one, that arbitration agreements --
and this gets to the other question that I think you were
concerned with yesterday. One, arbitration agreements are a
product of contract. Two, that the gateway or threshold
question of arbitrability is a judicial determination,
undisputed the gateway question of arbitrability is the Court's
determination. Third, that the definition of arbitrability is
whether, according to the Supreme Court and the Second Circuit,
whether the parties have clearly and unmistakably submitted
their dispute for arbitration.

The language in Howsam which astonishingly is a case
they cite in their brief says the question whether the parties
SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.

(212) 805-0300
89
O3BFREPA
have submitted a dispute to arbitration i.e., of arbitrability
is one for judicial determination unless the parties clearly
and unmistakably provide otherwise.
COURT: None of them dealt with treaties, though?

MR. ABADY: No.

THE COURT: There's been no case in which a Court has
stayed a proceeding pursuant to the treaty?

MR. ABADY: Not that I'm aware of. And that's why I
say this case is sui generis. But this principle, it seems to
me, is indisputable and clearly applies. And I would suggest
to you that the case you cited yesterday, your Honor, from the
First Department, 2009, Zachario v. Manios, is completely
consistent. You quoted a portion of the opinion that said,
quote, although some relief requested in the arbitration
including specific performance and an accounting appears to
fall outside the narrow arbitration clause, that alone is not_a
basis to stay the arbitration. An application for a stay will
not be granted even though the relief sought is broader than
the arbitrator can grant if the fashioning of the same relief
on the issues sought to be arbitrated remains within the
arbitrator's power.

This is a case where there's an arbitration agreement.
There's another paragraph of that decision, your Honor, the
first two paragraphs , which say, quote, exactly like the
Supreme Court's holdings and exactly like the law in this

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
90
O3BFREPA
circuit, that says whether a dispute is arbitrable is generally
an issue for the Court to decide unless the parties have
clearly and unmistakably provided otherwise. Here, since the
parties’ agreement contains a narrow provision, this particular
issue has to be reserved for the Court in the first instance.
There can be no dispute. There is no arbitration agreement
between the plaintiffs and Chevron to have this dispute
litigated in the BIT. Under clear Supreme Court case law --

THE COURT: The arbitration agreement is between
Chevron and Ecuador.

IR. ABADY: Exactly. There is no such agreement, and
that's why I said the plaintiff: Ss position and the plaintiff! s
Page 9

Sand Hearing Transcript. txt
standing and the plaintiff's rights are completely different
than the Republic of Ecuador's. We're not the Republic of
Ecuador. And what's sui generis about this case, what is a
fundamental offense to notions of due process is they are
attempting to adjudicate our claims in a proceeding where we
can't participate and significantly under Supreme Court
precedent in a situation where there's indisputably
agreement. Because it's unmistakable and clear that we did not
agree to submit this dispute to arbitration, the Supreme Court
requires that the Court make the threshold determination that
this is not arbitrable and the language in Howsam says where
that exists, where there's a threshold question of
arbitrability which is different than all the questions your
SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, Cc.
(212) 805-0300
91
O3BFREPA
Honor was posing yesterday about waiver and other defenses that
can be reserved for the arbitration, where there's a threshold
question of arbitrability, the Court has to make that
determination and it_is not permitted to go to arbitration if
the parties didn't clearly and unmistakably submit the claim
for arbitration. All the cases that have been cited are cases
where there's an arbitration agreement between the parties.
There is no agreement between the parties. The plaintiffs
could never have agreed t

THE COURT: Chevron alleges that the Ecuadorian
government and the plaintiffs have acted in concert in the
respects spelled out in those paragraphs to which I keep
referring.

MR. ABADY: And that's why I said, your Honor, I mean,
it is offensive for them to so suggest. They say, quote, in
their_opening, in one of their briefs on this issue that the
Republic of Ecuador instigated this litigation. That's an
absolute mischaracterization of the facts. The Republic of
Ecuador didn't instigate this litigation. This litigation was
started in 1993. The Republic of Ecuador filed an amicus brief
against the plaintiffs in this action. Is there some symmetry
between the relief the Republic is seeking in this proceeding
and what we are seeking? Yes. That doesn't mean that we're
colluding. That doesn't diminish the extent to which we have a
different basis for standing, a different series of claims and

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
92
O3BEREPA
different rights. Our standing and our rights are grounded in
well-recognized, clearly-established principles of estoppel.
They made representations, the defendants, to the Court and to
us, that these claims were going to be litigated under a
certain regimen. They are now violating those promises
clearly

THE COURT: Based entirely on subsequent events, the
events spelled out in those paragraphs.

MR. ABADY: Of course. And they foresaw that that was
a possibility. It wasn't as if -- these were big boys. These
are some of the biggest law firms in the world that are
representing them. They all saw this issue coming and they
have a specific reservation for exactly this issue.

The notice of arbitration, your Honor, I suggest to
you is a wolf in sheep's clothing. The sheep's clothing are
characterizing this as an international law claim, when in fact
what it is is an attempt to extinguish and devour the Lago

Page 10

Sand Hearing Transcript.txt
Agric litigation. And if you look at both the claims for
relief, the ones that you are referring to, and the relief
being requested, which is a declaration of no liability, a
release from all responsibility for the environmental claims,
and if you look at the claims themselves, even the ones that
ostensibly sound in due process or are complaints about the
Ecuadorian judiciary, they all go back to complaints against
the Lago Agrio litigation.

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.

(212) 805-0300
93

O3BFREPA

This is the only arbitration, your Honor, just as a
point of fact, this is the only arbitration that Chevron is
commencing right now and they're claiming because the process
in Ecuador is corrupt. For ten years they argued vociferously
and ferociously that this was the right forum. They're now
citing the CPI, corruption perception index, as an example of
why the forum is bad. They're involved with no less than five
other countries right now where the CPI is lower than it is_in
Ecuador, including Chad, venezuela, Cambodia. They're in all
those litigations.

This entire arbitration should be appreciated and seen
for what it really is. It is a collateral attack on the Lago
Agrio litigation, the Aguinda litigation which they committed
to resolve in a very specific way. And if you look at the
representations that they made during the course of this
litigation, it is absolutely, abundantly clear what they were
doing, that they knew what they were doing and that they were
reserving the concerns and complaints that you're identifying
now for 5304.

Let me just suggest to the Court that the record is
replete with their representations that they, that they are
agreeing to 5304 as the vehicle to resolve this. Exhibits 5,
15, 7, 6, 8 and 28 all contain representations orally, under
oath during hearings, verified interrogatory answers and
multiple filings in the courts. Judge Rakoff said in his

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
94
O3BFREPA
opinion at page 539, the agreement to subject these defendants
to jurisdiction in Ecuador was unambiguous and in writing. And
what I'm suggesting to the Court is they are not subjecting
themselves to jurisdiction. They are violating that promise
because they are seek to go adjudicate the very same claims
that are the subject of this ongoing proceeding in another
forum. It's a direct violation. This Court is empowered under
Howsam and its progeny to determine the threshold issue of
arbitrability and disallow them from disavowing and abrogating
the promises that they made to this Court.

n order to understand how egregious it is that they
could come in here and suggest that they didn't make those
representations, you have to look at the actual chronology.
The first dismissal in this case was by Judge Rakoff. It was
unconditional. The Second Circuit reversed him and said you
cannot do this unconditionally. On remand, Texaco, anxious to
get the dismissal on forum non conveniens grounds, came in and
said we will submit to jurisdiction. The plaintiffs then said
we have a concern that you are not going to abide by an
judgment rendered in this jurisdiction. we didn't want to be
there. They wanted to be there. And Texaco came back in
multiple filings in responses to interrogatories and in briefs

Page 1

Sand Hearing Transcript.txt
before the Second Circuit and said we are going to satisfy any
judgment subject only to the provisions of 5

One example, Exhibit 8 --
SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
95

O3BFREPA

THE COURT: Which says?

MR. ABAD’ which says --

THE COURT: They reserved under that, and the first
provision of that is the defense that the proceedings which led
to the judgment were not in --

MR. ABADY: Yes, your Honor. And I think you need to
see the specificity with which they made the representation.

HE COURT: So that the issue of whether or not the
judgment was or not enforceable or was the product of a
deprivation of due rights, has been preserved and the question
is whether those rights which Chevron specifically reserved can
be brought in the arbitration?

MR. ABADY: Yes, your Honor. And you framed the
question yesterday. I would frame it slightly differently.

THE COURT: Yes?

MR. ABADY: You framed the question what is the most
suitable -- it's not a question of whether Chevron has the
right to_make these complaints about the Ecuadorian judiciary,
it's really a question of what the most suitable forum is.
would suggest respectfully to the court it's not really a
question of what is most suitable, it is what is part of the
record, what has been mandated as a result of course of
dealings here between the district court and the Second Circuit
Court of Appeals which issued a decision saying this.

And what Texaco said in response, Exhibit 8 to the

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300

  

96
O3BFREPA
Bloom declaration, a filing by Chevron/Texaco, under the
heading, Texaco has_not decided to contest any possible
negative ruling. Plaintiffs misstate Texaco's position on
satisfying adverse judgments, if any, that might be entered by
courts in Ecuador or approved in plaintiff's favor. They state
that Texaco, quote, has decided to contest any possible
negative ruling of the Ecuadorian Court. This is not Texaco's
position. Rather, Texaco has agreed to satisfy any judgments
in plaintiff's favor reserving its rights to contest their
validity only in the limited circumstances, only in the limited
circumstances permitted by New York's recognition of Foreign
Country and Judgments Act.

t's a promise and a warrant that was made at least
five times in formal interrogatory responses, in filings to the
Court, and Mr. Mastro suggested to you yesterday that the Court
didn't rely on that. That is an abject misrepresentation.

Judge Rakoff in his decision at 142 Supp. 2nd at pages 539 and
550 said Texaco has now agreed to submit in writin
unambiguously to jurisdiction in Ecuador and in footnote five,
on page 550 of his decision, he specifically references
appendix 18 which contains Chevron's warranty that they are
going to respect any judgment subject only to the provisions
and they're going to satisfy any judgment subject only to the
provisions.
And then, and then Chevron Texaco submits a brief to
SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, Cc.
(212) 805-0300
Page 12

WNR

Sand Hearing Transcript.txt 9
7
O3BFREPA
the Second Circuit Court of Appeals and they make the same
representation to the Court and they make a reference to
specific portions of the record, specifically 3A4291 to 5002
which again are the agreements where they warrant and represent
that they're going to satisfy any judgment subject only to
what's available to them in 5304. That is the law of this
case. Those are the promises that they made. That is what we
relied upon. They're judicially estopped because of
representations to the Court.
IE COURT: How did you rely on it?

MR. ABADY: We relied on it, your Honor, by litigating
this case in Ecuador for seven years at a dramatic and extreme
cost. The Republic is not a party to that. There are private
lawyers out there that have been working seven years on the
trial and 17 years in total on this litigation. The idea that
it's a sham proceeding is ridiculous.

I'll use one demonstrative example. Mr. Mastro had
several. Here on the table is a five-volume study that was
produced and report that was produced in this litigation for
one contaminated site. There are 100 -- there are over 100
contaminated sites. And so during the course of a seven-year
trial there are 100 sites, over 100 sites with that level of
detail, that quantum of evidence that_has been produced. That
is what they are seeking to avoid by launching this BIT
arbitration which I again emphasize to the Court is a wolf in

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
98
O3BFREPA
sheep's clothing.

If you look at the actual arbitration, it is not an
adjudication or an attempt to adjudicate international claims.
Everything is related to the Lago Agrio case. Even the due
process claims all get back to complaints about things that
happened during this proceeding. This Court must, I believe,
under Howsam enforce the promises that were made. They are
judicially estopped, they are equitably estopped and they are
collaterally estopped because they're now seeking on collateral
estoppel avoid their agreement to subject themselves to
jurisdiction on this dispute.

THE COURT: I think I understand your position.
Anything further?

MR. ABADY: Thank you for hearing me, your Honor. The
only thing I would say in closing is that in addition to the
legal arguments, I do think we should be mindful of the human
dimension behind this case. This is a 17-year litigation with
people who have been dramatically affected. They are entitled
not just to their day in court, their weeks in court, they are
entitled to some final resolution. Chevron and the defendants
are not entitled at this point to go back on the promises that
they made and delay this litigation forever.

IE COURT: Thank you.

MR. MASTRO: Your Honor, I_ promise to be

uncharacteristically brief, if you'll just give me five
SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
99
O3BFREPA
minutes, your Honor.
IE COURT: Five minutes. I'm looking at the clock.

You have five minutes.

Page 13

ONAUAWNE

Sand Hearing Transcript.txt

MR. MASTRO: Your Honor, I want to follow up,

Mr. Abady got very impassioned said some things about me. I'm
not going to respond to those, your Honor. But I am going to
say_there is a human dynamic here, your Honor, a very real one,
including for the Chevron attorneys who are facing bogus
criminal charges because of what the Republic of Ecuador is
doing right now.

Your Honor, let me put this in some perspective,
because we heard both Mr. Abady just_say and then we heard
yesterday the Republic of Ecuador's lawyers say as if speaking
off the same script that this is an attempt to relitigate the
environmental case. Your Honor knows better. And I know it
gets confusing sometimes with these counsel. Mr. Abady was

ast here in the 1990s before Judge Rakoff representing the
Republic of Ecuador, not these individual plaintiffs. But,
your Honor, we're not seeking to relitigate the environmental
case. Our clients are seeking to arbitrate their rights under
international law against the Republic of Ecuador to ensure due
process and fair treatment, because of the acts of the Republic
of Ecuador most recently that have denied them their treaty
rights and the other commitments that the Republic of Ecuador
made. And, your Honor, therefore, what comes out of this, what
SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
100

O3BFREPA

comes out of this is yes, they've litigated, those individuals,
their environmental claims. But as your Honor knows, there are
sweeping releases and indemnifications that the Republic of
Ecuador gave to TexPet and Texaco in '95 and '98 after TexPet
actually spent millions to remediate. And, your Honor, that's
at the core of what's going on here.

we are holding the Republic of Ecuador to its
obligations, its obligations to take responsibility for what
happened there, its obligations to live up to its past
agreements, it's obligations to indemnity and just as
importantly its obligations to remediate.

IE COURT: TI have to interrupt you to emphasize
again. I am not looking to issues relating to the contractual
obligations of Ecuador. It will be, assuming that the stay is
denied, it will be an issue which the arbitrability of which
will be determined by the tribunal itself, assuming a stay is

enie

MR. MASTRO: Understood, your Honor, understood. I
just wanted to make the point, your Honor, that our clients are
actually here trying to hold the Republic of Ecuador
responsible for not only ultimately that they are going to be
responsible to pay for any judgment, but also to remediate. I
would have expected the plaintiffs to be here supporting us
because we're actually here seeking to make sure that there
will be payment by the Republic of Ecuador, that there will be

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
101
O3BFREPA
remediation finally by the Republic of Ecuador. I'm surprised
that they come in here attacking our clients when the fact of
the matter is, they should be suing the Republic of Ecuador.
That's the party that's run the consortium for the past few
decades. That's the one that's made $70 billion off those
drilling activities. Yet for some reason those plaintiffs
won't go near the Republic.
This is exactly why, your Honor, all these questions
Page 14

Sand Hearing Transcript.txt
should be going to_arbitration. Howsam_is right on point.
Howsam says that all of these procedural defenses are to go to
the arbitrators to decide, especially when the parties under an
international treaty chose the UNCITRAL rules to do that.
Finally, your Honor, the notion that Texaco somehow
would have waived the implicit due process protections in the
future and could only litigate under 5304 in the future for
enforcement, your Honor, it makes an absurdity of that.
Because, your Honor, as your Honor knows, it's Hornbook law
that under the restatement of conflicts and under the
restatement of foreign judgments, and I will give your Honor
the cites, they'll go anywhere in the world they want to --
enforce, and wherever they go, when they seek to enforce that
multibillion dollar judgment and as one of their attorneys has
been guoted jin the press as saying wreak havoc on Chevron, the
law of the forum where they go is going to control the
enforcement. It's not going to be respect of some alleged
SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
102
O3BFREPA
promise made in the past. The forum state's laws control.
Your Honor, that is exactly why this is a red herring issue.
It's a red herring issue because the fact of the matter is no
one was waiving their implicit due process rights in the
future, and that's why we need the arbitration, your Honor,
because we need a neutral and fair forum. And I thank your
Honor for all of the consideration.
THE COURT: Anything further?
Mr. MITCHELL: Your Honor, may I have five minutes,
and you can clock me.
THE COURT: Yes. I'm looking at the clock
Mr. MITCHELL: One of your Honor's questions has been
are we trying to indicate a preference for seeking a 5304
versus an arbitration as if it' sa choice between the two of
them and we've responded no, we're not seeking a choice, we're
trying to enforce the only one that's operable. A hard
question that you could ask the Chevron attorneys, and_you've
asked a share of good hard ones for us, which we actually
appreciate, is are they trying to use both. If they invoke
arbitration under the treaty, are they now saying okay, we'll
give up our 5304 opportunity, because we agree with the judge,
it was just a question of which one of these two. we'll give
up that opportunity. If your Honor asks them that question, I
will make a bet in open court that they will not say oh, yes,
we're willing to give up Section 5304 defense. One point.
SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
103
O3BFREPA
Secondly, it's come out time and time again the true
nature, we talked about it yesterday, remedies and I'm no
going to go into that again. Chevron is no longer an investor
in Ecuador. It no longer has any business in Ecuador. It'
defending a lawsuit, but it has no business. It now brings” an
action and tries to bring an action to arbitration to clean up
the Ecuadorian judiciary. Are they some good government group?
THE COURT: I think your five minutes is up.
Mr. MITCHELL: Okay. Thank you, your Honor.
THE COURT: The Court will take a ten-minute recess.
MR. MASTRO: Thank you, your Honor
(Recess).
THE COURT: Be seated. The Court is about to render
Page 15

Sand Hearing Transcript.txt
its judgment and order on the various motions that are pending
before it. I want to state at the outset that I would
appreciate it if a transcript of yesterday and today could be
completed as soon as possible, and I direct that a copy of the
hearing and the order and judgment which I'm about to render be
sent to the arbitrators, because it is very important that
there be a clear understanding of what I am deciding and what I
am not deciding, leaving various matters for determination by
the tribunal.

As background, Chevron and Texaco, hereinafter
referred to as Chevron, has commenced an arbitration proceeding
before a tribunal pursuant to the treaty between the United

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
104
O3BFREPA
States and Ecuador. Ecuador has filed a motion to stay the
arbitration and Chevron has moved to dismiss that motion. The
three judges to hear the arbitration have been designated and
the parties have designated their representatives before the
arbitration panel.

We assume that this Court has a power to grant a stay,
recognizing that there is a split between the judges of this
Court whether it has the power to stay an arbitration event.
Judge Scheindlin in Ghassavin v. Hemation, 2008 wL 3982885,
(S.D.N.Y. 2009), has held that there is no federal authorit to
stay an arbitration. Judge Preska, writing in Oppenheimer
Company, Inc. v. Deutsche Bank AG, 2009 WL 4884158, (S.D.N.Y.
2008) has expressed the view that Judge Scheindlin's case is
an, quote, “outlier,” close quote.

As I have Said, the Court will assume for purposes of
this argument that the Court has the power to stay an
arbitration under certain circumstances. Numerous cases have
held that there's a strong presumption in favor of arbitration.
we believe that this is particularly true where the arbitration
is pursuant to an international treaty, here a treaty between
Ecuador and the United States. The explicitly stated purposes
of the treaty were to encourage investment by Americans in
Ecuador and Ecuadorians in the United States by assuring
investors that an independent, neutral tribunal exists to
arbitrate claims here that Ecuador is seeking to impose

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
105
O3BFREPA
liability unlawfully. It is Chevron's claims that this is what
Ecuador is now in the process of doing. Thus a motion to a
stay here strikes at the core purpose of the treaty between
Ecuador and the United States.

Turning, then, to the merits of this particular
motion, and assuming, as I've said, without deciding that I do
have authority under New York law to stay arbitration, even
assuming that authority, New York law dictates that, quote, "A
Court will not stay arbitration ... unless the entire
controversy is non-arbitrable. If there is at least one
arbitrable issue, arbitration should proceed." The quote is
from National Grains Mutual Insurance Co. v. Vitebskaya,
Misc.3d 774, 776, N.Y.S.2d 220 (N.Y. Sup. 2003).

The New York Court of Appeals has held that, quote,
"an application for a stay will not be granted ... even though
the relief sought is broader than the arbitrator can grant, if
the fashioning of some relief on the issues sought to be
arbitrated remains within the arbitrator's power. Silverman

Page 16

Sand Hearing Transcript.txt
Benmor Coats, Inc., 61 N.Y.2d 299, 309, 473 N.Y.S.2d 774,
461 N.E.2d 1261 (1984).

without passing on the merits of all the waiver and
estoppel arguments put forward, the Court finds that there is
at least one arbitrable issue presented in Chevron's BIT
arbitration petition. Some of the claims in the petition were
neither waived through litigation nor could have been waived

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
106
O3BFREPA
through any representation made to this Court. Examples
include Chevron's claim that two Chevron lawyers were
inappropriately criminally indicted and sanctioned, which
appears at paragraphs 50 and 56 of the petition, and Chevron's
claims this entitles it to, quote, "moral damages," close
quote, as a result of President Correa and the Ecuadorian
government's public campaign against Chevron and its attorneys.

The petition contains at paragraphs 2 through 65 the
specific grounds asserted by Chevron why a judgment rendered
against it pursuant to the litigation now pending in the
Ecuadorian Court would not be one rendered in accordance with
due process. Accordingly, a stay of arbitration is
inappropriate and is hereby denied, and it is for the
arbitrable panel to decide which claims are properly before it
and which | claims for relief are properly before it.

I emphasize, although I've said it repeatedly, that I
am returning only the arbitrability of the due process claim,
and I am expressing no opinion with respect to any other claim
or with respect to any claim for relief. Those matters are for
the arbitrators.

There are also significant issues that have been
raised concerning the timing of proceedings before the
arbitrators, specifically, whether the arbitration can commence
prior to the rendering of a decision in the suit now pending,
and that is one of the many, many issues for the arbitration

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
107
O3BFREPA
panel to determine, giving consideration to the interests of
the parties in matters of timing, which seems to be a great
concern.

The motion for a stay -- the motion to dismiss the
motion for a stay is granted. I deny as well the application
made by Ecuador for summary judgment, and the application for a
preliminary injunction. The motion by the -- pronounce the
name for me, of the plaintiffs?

MR. ABADY: Yaijuaje.

THE COURT: Yaiguaje plaintiffs motion for summary
judgment . is denied. Plaintiffs has advised the Court that they

ave no interest in having their views made known to the
arbitration panel either by intervening or appearing as an
amicus, or any other way having their views known, but their
views are fully stated in the transcript of the proceedings
this morning, a copy of which I've directed be furnished to the
arbitration panel.

with respect to the proceedings for discovery in, is
it Georgia? what state is that in?

MR. BLOOM: Denver and Georgia.

THE COURT: In Georgia. The judge who issued the
subpoena provided in his order ample opportunities for the
parties to object and so there is no need for this Court to

Page 17

Sand Hearing Transcript.txt
issue any stay: And the Court so orders.
Anything further?
SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300
108
O3BFREPA

MR. MASTRO: Your Honor, just one point of
clarification. we had also moved to dismiss the Yaiguaje
plaintiffs' complaint. Your Honor addressed the denial of
their summary judgment motion.

THE COURT: Yes.

MR. MASTRO: But I just wanted to make sure the record
was clear on your Honor's ruling on our motion to also dismiss
the Yaiguaje plaintiffs' complaint.

IE COURT: Yes, it's granted.

MR. MASTRO: Thank you, your Honor.

THE COURT: Thank you all.

(Adjourned)

SOUTHERN DISTRICT REPORTERS, P.C.
(212) 805-0300

Page 18

