PCA CASE NO. 2009-23

IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION BEFORE A TRIBUNAL CONSTITUTED
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE TREATY BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA AND THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR CONCERNING THE
ENCOURAGEMENT AND RECIPROCAL PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS,
SIGNED 27 AUGUST 1993 (THE “TREATY”) AND THE UNCITRAL
ARBITRATION RULES 1976

BETWEEN: —

1. CHEVRON CORPORATION (“Chevron”)
2. TEXACO PETROLEUM COMPANY (“TexPet”)
(both of the United States of America)
The First and Second Claimants

- and -

THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR

The Respondent

 

First Partial Award on Track I

dated 17 September 2013

 

The Arbitration Tribunal:
Dr Horacio A. Grigera Naén;
Professor Vaughan Lowe;
V.V. Veeder (President)

Administrative Secretary: Martin Doe

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PART A: The Arbitration — Track I
Introduction
Procedure
Written Pleadings
Written Testimony
The November Hearing
Track IT

PART B: The Principal Documents
Introduction
(i) The 1995 Settlement Agreement
(ii) The 1996 Municipal and Provincial Releases
(iii) The 1998 Final Release

PART C: The Parties’ Respective Cases
Introduction
The Claimants’ Case
The Claimants’ Claimed Relief
The Respondent's Case

The Respondent's Claimed Relief

PART D: The Tribunal’s Analyses and Decisions
I: Introduction — Legal Interpretation
(i) The Relevant Rules

(ii) The Expert Testimony

04
04
04
05
05
07
08

09
09
09
13
14

16
16
16
20
23
26

28
28
28
29

(iii) Analysis — Legal Interpretation
Article 9.3

The Release

Article 5

Article 9.4

Legal Ambiguity

Decisions — Legal Interpretation

II: Introduction — Legal Effect

(i) Analysis — Legal Effect

(ii) Article 19-2

(iii) Decisions — Legal Effect

PART E: The Operative Part

APPENDIX 1: The 1995 Settlement Agreement (Spanish original version)

32
33
33
35
36
37
37
37
38
40
43

45

PART A: THE ARBITRATION — TRACK I

Introduction: This Partial Award addresses the Parties’ dispute concerning the legal
interpretation and legal effect of the 1995 Settlement Agreement made between the
Second Claimant (“TexPet”) and the Respondent as its signatory parties, to which the
First Claimant (“Chevron”) was not a signatory Party. For ease of reference, a full
copy of the 1995 Settlement Agreement in its original Spanish version is appended to
and forms part of this Partial Award (Appendix 1). Given the original language of this
Partial Award, for convenience only, references are made below to its English

translation, save where otherwise indicated.

Given the status of this Partial Award as the fifth award made in these arbitration
proceedings, it serves no purpose here re-stating the formal parts set out in the
Tribunal’s earlier awards; and for simplicity’s sake, the Tribunal here incorporates by
reference Part I of its Third Interim Award on Jurisdiction and Admissibility dated 21

February 2012.

Procedure: In summary, applying a ‘prima facie’ standard appropriate to issues of
jurisdiction, the Tribunal decided in that Third Interim Award that the Claimants’
interpretation of the 1995 Settlement Agreement, albeit strongly disputed by the
Respondent, was at least “serious”; but the Tribunal did not otherwise there finally
decide on the interpretation or effect of the 1995 Settlement Agreement one way or
the other. Instead the Tribunal decided, given that both were mixed questions relevant
to the Respondent’s disputed jurisdictional objections under Article VI(1)(a) of the
BIT and to the merits of Chevron’s disputed claims, to join the Respondent’s
jurisdictional objection to the merits of those claims under Article 21(4) of the

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

Subsequently, by its Procedural Order No 10 dated 9 April 2012, the Tribunal divided
the merits of the Parties’ dispute into two parts, entitled “Track I” and “Track II”.
Track I was to comprise preliminary legal issues arising from the 1995 Settlement

Agreement, limited to its legal interpretation and legal effect as alleged by the

4

Claimants and disputed by the Respondent, including (in particular) whether or not
Chevron is a “Releasee” under the 1995 Settlement Agreement and Article IV of the
1998 Final Release: Paragraphs 2 & 3 of the Procedural Order.

Given the complexities of the Parties’ overall dispute and its developing nature as this
arbitration continues, the Tribunal also recognised in Procedural Order No 10 that it
might not be possible or appropriate to decide these preliminary issues in full, thereby
requiring the Tribunal to defer one or more decisions to Track II. Even in that event,
however, the Tribunal recognised that time and expense would not necessarily be
duplicated or wasted for the Parties or the Tribunal. As explained below, the Tribunal
has decided that it is not appropriate in Track I to decide in full the legal effect of the
1995 Settlement Agreement, applying the legal interpretation here decided by the

Tribunal.

Written Pleadings: Pursuant to the Tribunal’s procedural orders, the Parties submitted
the following written pleadings relevant to Track I (the first two pre-dating Procedural

Order No 10):

(i) | The Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits dated 6 September 2010;

(ii) The Claimants’ Supplemental Memorial on the Merits dated 20 March 2012;
(iii) The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial dated 3 July 2012;

(iv) The Claimants’ Reply Memorial dated 29 August 2012; and

(v) The Respondent’s Rejoinder dated 26 October 2012.

Whilst the Parties have submitted during these proceedings other written pleadings
touching upon issues decided in this Partial Award, the Tribunal considers that their
respective written cases for Track I can fairly be taken for present purposes from the

five pleadings listed above.

Written Testimony: The Claimants submitted the following written expert testimony

relevant to Track I:

(i) The first expert report of Dr Enrique Barros (undated);

(ii)

(iii)
(iv)
(v)

(vi)
(vii)

The first and second expert reports of Dr César Coronel Jones dated 3
September 2010;

The first expert report of Professor Angel R. Oquendo dated 2 September 2010;
The first expert report of Dr Gustavo Romero Ponce dated 3 September 2010;
The second expert report of Dr Enrique Barros dated 27 August 2012;

The third expert report of Dr César Coronel Jones dated 28 August 2012;

The expert report of Professor William T. Allen dated 27 August 2012;

(viii) The second expert report of Professor Angel R. Oquendo dated 28 August 2012;

(ix)
(x)

(xi)
(xii)

The second expert report of Dr Gustavo Romero Ponce dated 27 August 2012;
The third expert report of Dr Enrique Barros dated 19 November 2012;

The fourth expert report of Dr Enrique Barros dated 19 November 2012; and
The fourth expert report of Dr César Coronel Jones dated19 November 2012.

The Claimants submitted the following written factual testimony relevant to Track I:

(i)
(ii)
(iii)

The witness statement of Mr Frank G. Soler dated 27 August 2010;
The first witness statement of Dr Ricardo Reis Veiga dated 27 August 2012; and

The second witness statement of Dr Ricardo Reis Veiga dated 28 August 2012.

The Respondent submitted the following written expert testimony relevant to Track I:

(i)

(ii)
(iii)

iv)
)

(i)

(vii)

The first expert report of Professor Roberto Salgado Valdez dated 1 October
2010;

The first expert report of Professor Genaro Eguiguren dated 2 July 2012;

The second expert report of Professor Roberto Salgado Valdez dated 2 July
2012;

The first expert report of Professor Gilles Le Chatelier dated 2 July 2012;

The third expert report of Professor Roberto Salgado Valdez dated 26 October
2012;

The second expert report of Professor Genaro Eguiguren dated 26 October
2012; and

The second expert report of Professor Gilles Le Chatelier dated 25 October
2012;

The Respondent submitted the following written factual testimony relevant to Track I:

(i) | The witness statement of Mr Giovanni Elicio Mario Rosania Schiavone dated

24 October 2012.

Pursuant to the Tribunal’s orders, the Parties also submitted the following joint expert

reports:

(i) The joint expert report dated 6 August 2012 of Dr Enrique Barros, Dr César
Coronel Jones and Professor Roberto Salgado Valdez;

(ii) The joint expert report dated 7 August 2012 of Dr Enrique Barros, Dr César
Coronel Jones, Professor Genaro Eguiguren, Professor Angel R. Oquendo and
Dr Gustavo Romero Ponce; and

(iii) The joint expert report dated 7 August 2012 of Professor Gilles Le Chatelier and
Professor Angel R. Oquendo.

The November Hearing: The issues under Track I were argued by the Parties at the
oral hearing in London held over three days from 26 to 28 November 2013, with the
assistance of English and Spanish interpreters and recorded in the form of both
English and Spanish transcripts (the “November Hearing”). The references below are
made to the English version of the November Hearing’s verbatim transcript, as

follows: D1.10 signifies the first day, at page 10.

The Claimants and the Respondent were represented respectively at the November
Hearing by those persons listed in the verbatim transcript; and it serves no purpose
here listing these persons by name, save as follows: for the Claimants, opening oral
submissions were made Mr Hewitt Pate [D1.8], Professor Crawford [D1.12] and
Doak Bishop Esq [D1.33]; for the Respondent opening oral submissions were made
by Attorney-General Garcia Carrion [D1.60] and Professor Douglas [D1.64]; for the
Claimants, closing oral submissions were made by Mr Hewitt Pate [D3.471],
Professor Crawford [D3.491 & D3.545] and Doak Bishop Esq [D3.522]; and for the
Respondent, closing oral submissions were made by Luis Gonzales Esq [D3.555],

Tomas Leonard Esq [D3.573] and Eric W. Bloom Esq [D3.594].

The Claimants tendered three oral witnesses at the November Hearing: (i) Dr Ricardo
Reis Vega [D2.244x, 247xx & 283xxx]; (ii) Professor Angel P. Oquendo [D2.298x,
299xx & 376xxx]; and (iii) Dr Gustavo Romero Ponce [D2.381 & 383xx]. The
Respondent tendered two oral witnesses at the November Hearing: (i) Mr Giovanni
Elicio Mario Rosania Schiavone [D1.96x, 104xx & 147 xxx]; and (ii) Professor
Genaro Eguiguren [D1.155x, 173xx & 219xxx].

Track IT: At as the date of this Partial Award, the Parties are completing their written
pleadings in Track II, to be achieved by 29 November 2013, with the oral hearing in
Track II fixed to start on 13 January 2014.

20.

PART B: THE PRINCIPAL DOCUMENTS

Introduction: It is necessary at the outset to describe briefly the three principal sets of
contractual documentation to which further reference is made below: (i) the 1995
Settlement Agreement, (ii) the 1996 Municipal and Provincial Releases; and (iii) the

1998 Final Release.

(i) The 1995 Settlement Agreement: On 4 May 1995, the Respondent acting by its
Ministry of Energy and Mining (here for convenience called “the Ministry”) and
PetroEcuador as “one Party” and TexPet as “the other party” initialed and signed a
written agreement entitled “Contract for Implementing of Environmental, Remedial
Work and Release from Obligations, Liability and Claims”, for ease of reference

described in these arbitration proceedings as the “1995 Settlement Agreement”.

The 1995 Settlement Agreement was made on the Ministry’s headed note-paper with
the Respondent’s coat-of-arms; and it was signed for that Ministry by the Minister of
Energy and Mines. It was also signed by a senior officer of PetroEcuador and two
representatives of TexPet (now, but not then, indirectly owned by Chevron), one of

whom was Dr Ricardo Reis Vega, a factual witness in Track I.

The 1995 Settlement Agreement provided in the final two paragraphs of its preamble
that TexPet agreed to undertake the “Environmental Remedial Work in consideration
for being released and discharged of all its legal and contractual obligations and
liability for Environmental Impact arising out of the Consortium’s operations.” By
Article 1.3, the term “Environmental Impact” included: “[a]ny solid, liquid, or
gaseous substance present or released into the environment in such concentration or
condition, the presence or release of which causes, or has the potential to cause harm

to human health or the environment.”

As contemplated in the earlier 1994 MOU between the same signatory parties (which
was to be substituted and become void by Article 9.6 and the last paragraph of Annex
“A” of the 1995 Settlement Agreement), the 1995 Settlement Agreement, subject to

its terms: (i) released TexPet from the Respondent’s and PetroEcuador’s claims based

9

21.

22.

upon Environmental Impact (except for claims related to TexPet’s performance of the
Scope of Work); and (ii) provided that TexPet would be released from all remaining
environmental liability upon completion of the remediation obligations described in

that Scope of Work.

Article 1.12 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement defined such release, as follows: “The
release, under the provisions of Article V of this Contract, of all legal and contractual
obligations and liability, towards the Government and Petroecuador, for the
Environmental Impact arising from the Operations of the Consortium, including any
claims that the Government and Petroecuador have, or may have against Texpet,
arising out of the Consortium Agreements.” The term “Operations of the Consortium”
was defined as “Those oil exploration and production operations carried out under the

Consortium Agreement”, i.e. the 1973 Concession Agreement (ibid).

Article 5.1 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement (“Article V”) in turn provided (inter

alia):

“On the execution date of this Contract [i.e. 4 May 1995], and in consideration of
Texpet’s agreement to perform the Environmental Remedial Work in accordance with
the Scope of Work set out in Annex A, and the Remedial Action Plan, the
Government and Petroecuador shall hereby release, acquit and forever discharge
Texpet, Texaco Petroleum Company, Compajiia Texaco de Petrdleos del Ecuador,
S.A., Texaco Inc., and all their respective agents, servants, employees, officers,
directors, legal representatives, insurers, attorneys, indemnitors, guarantors, heirs,
administrators, executors, beneficiaries, successors, predecessors, principals and
subsidiaries (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Releasees’) of all the Government’s and
Petroecuador’s claims against the Releasees for Environmental Impact arising from
the Operations of the Consortium, except for those related to the obligations
contracted hereunder for the performance by Texpet of the Scope of Work (Annex A)

The Tribunal has here emphasised the wording critical to the Parties’ disputed

interpretation of the 1995 Settlement Agreement, to which the Tribunal necessarily

returns below. The Government’s “claims” were addressed in Article 5.2.

10

23.

24.

Article 5.2 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement provided:

“The Government and Petroecuador intend claims to mean any and all claims, rights
to Claims, debts, liens, common or civil law or equitable causes of actions and

Ities, whether s ding in contract or tort, c itutional, statutory, or regulatory
causes of action and penalties (including, but not limited to, causes of action under
Article 19-2 of the Political Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador, Decree No. 1459
of 1971, Decree No. 925 of 1973, the Water Act, R.O. 233 of 1973, ORO No. 530 of
1974, Decree No. 374 of 1976, Decree No. 101 of 1982, or Decree No. 2144 of 1989,
or any other applicable law or regulation of the Republic of Ecuador), costs, lawsuits,
settlements and attorneys’ fees (past, present, future, known or unknown), that the
Government or Petroecuador have, or ever may have against each Releasee for or in
any way related to contamination, that have or ever may arise in the future, directly
or indirectly arising out of Operations of the Consortium, including but not limited to
consequences of all types of injury that the Government or Petroecuador may allege
concerning persons, properties, business, reputations, and all other types of injuries
that may be measured in money, including but not limited to, trespass, nuisance,
negligence, strict liability, breach of warranty, or any other theory or potential theory
of recovery.”

The Tribunal has here again emphasised the wording most critical to the Parties’

disputed interpretation of the 1995 Settlement Agreement.

The reference in Article 5.2 to Article 19-2 of the Ecuadorian Constitution (being the
1978 Constitution effective in 1979 and, as later amended, in force in 1995) signified
a cause of action available to the Respondent under Title II, Section 1 (On the Rights
of People/Individuals') whereby the Ecuadorian State guaranteed to each person, inter
alia (in English translation): “... the right to live in an environment that is free from
contamination. It is the duty of the State to ensure that this right is not negatively
affected and to foster the preservation of nature ...”. The fuller text of Article 19-2 in
Spanish provides: “Sin perjuicio de otros derechos necesarios para el pleno
desenvolvimiento moral y material que se deriva de la persona, el Estado le garantiza:
.... El derecho de vivir en un medio ambiente libre de contaminacion. Es deber del
Estado velar por que este derecho no sea afectado y tutelar la preservacién de la
naturaleza. La ley establecera las restricciones al ejercicio de determinados derechos 0

libertades para proteger el medio ambiente”. The reference to Decree No. 374 of 1976

' The Claimants translate the Spanish term “las personas” as “people” or “persons” [D3.523]; and the
Respondent as “individuals” and “persons” [D1.74 & D3.580]. In the Tribunal’s view, these
differences in English translation are not material to its decisions in this Partial Award.

11

25.

26.

27.

signified a cause of action available to the Respondent on the prevention and control
of pollution. The reference to the Water Act of 1973 and Decree No. 2144 of 1989
signified causes of action available to the Respondent in regard to water resources and
water contamination. The reference to ORO No 530 signified the Regulations for the

Exploration and Exploration of Hydrocarbons of 9 April 1974.

The references to “the Government” in Articles 1.12 and 5 of the 1995 Settlement
Agreement, rather than the Ministry, is explained by the facts that the 1973
Concession Agreement was made between (inter alios) TexPet and the Respondent’s
Government (albeit acting by the Ministry) and that, as appears from the 1995
Settlement Agreement, the release was directed, in substantial part, to settling claims
arising from that 1973 Concession Agreement (including its section 46). Moreover,
Article 9.1 of 1995 Settlement Agreement as regards notices thereunder identified the
Ministry as representing the Government. In any event, the Ministry, forming part of
the Government, acted for the Government in concluding the 1995 Settlement
Agreement and, constitutionally, the Respondent is therefore to be treated under

Ecuadorian law as a signatory party to the 1995 Settlement Agreement.

Article 9.3 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement contained a “Whole Contract”

provision: namely:

“This Contract contains all the terms and conditions agreed upon by the Parties hereto
with respect to the Environmental Remedial Work and to all matters which in any
way may affect said Environmental Remedial Work. No other agreements, oral or
otherwise, regarding this Contract, shall be deemed to exist or to bind the Parties
hereto.”

Article 9.4 curtailed any benefit for “a third party”, namely (under the Parties’

different English translations from the Spanish version)”:

The Claimants: “This Contract shall not be construed to confer any benefit on any
third party not a Party to this Contract, nor shall it provide any rights to such third
party to enforce its provisions.”

As noted, the first English translation is advanced by the Claimants [D1.57-58]; and the second is
advanced by the Respondent [D3.575]. In the Tribunal’s view, these differences are not material to its
decisions in this Partial Award.

12

28.

29.

30.

The Respondent: “This Contract shall not be construed to confer benefits on third
parties who are not a part of this Contract, nor shall it provide rights to third parties to
enforce its provisions.”

The term “third party” or “third parties” was not defined in the 1995 Settlement

Agreement.

Annex “A” to the 1995 Settlement Agreement contained the Scope of the
Environmental Remedial and Mitigation Work and Socio-Economic Compensation to
be undertaken by TexPet. It was separately signed by the signatory parties. Section
VILC of Annex “A” provided:

“C. Negotiations with the Municipalities of Lago Agrio (Nueva Loja), Shushufindi,
Joya de los Sachas and Francisco de Orellana (Coca).

Without prejudice to that agreed in this Scope of Remedial Work and in the
Memorandum of Understanding of December 14, 1994, Texpet pledges to continue
negotiations with the aforementioned Municipalities, in order to establish the
participation of Texpet in the performance of the work based on projects on drinking
water and/or construction of sewers and latrines in the corresponding canton seats.
The results of such negotiations shall be independent from the current Scope and the
Contract for Implementing the Environmental Remedial Work and Release of
Obligations to be executed by the parties, nor shall they affect the performance of
such Scope and Contract.

The work that cannot be covered with the funds arising from the negotiations with
Texpet shall be supplemented pursuant to Art. 3 of Executive Decree 675 of April 15,
1993, published in Registro Oficial No.174 of the 22nd of the same month and year.”

The 1995 Settlement Agreement contained no express provision for applicable law(s),
dispute settlement or forum selection. It is nonetheless common ground between the
Parties (together with their respective expert witnesses) that Ecuadorian law applies to
its interpretation and effect, that agreed approach being here confirmed by the
Tribunal for the purpose of these arbitration proceedings under Article 33 of the

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

(ii) The 1996 Municipal and Provincial Releases: As provided by Annex “A” to the
1995 Settlement Agreement (cited above), TexPet subsequently settled disputes with

the four municipalities of the Oriente Region (Sushufindi, Francisco de Orellana

13

31.

32.

33.

(Coca), Lago Agrio and Joya de los Sachas), under written agreements made with
these municipalities, as also the Province of Sucumbios and the Napo consortium of
municipalities (herein, for ease of reference, collectively called the “Municipal and
Provincial Releases”). Under these six settlements, four of which were approved by
the Ecuadorian courts owing to their nature as litigious disputes, TexPet, together with
non-signatory parties (as explained below), were released from liability to these
municipalities for the Consortium’s activities in the area of the concession. The
Respondent, including its Ministry, were not signatory parties to these 1996
Municipal and Provincial Releases, which were of course all made after the 1995
Settlement Agreement. (The 1995 Settlement Agreement was not approved by any

Ecuadorian court, not then having a litigious nature between its signatory parties).

The Municipal and Provincial Releases provided (inter alia) for a release in somewhat
different terms from Article 5.1 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement. For example, the
fifth provision of the Release of 2 May 1996 made by the Province of Sucumbios
extended to (as here translated into English): “ .... Texaco Petroleum Company,
Texas Petroleum Company, Compajiia Texaco de Petrdleos del Ecuador, S.A., Texaco
Inc., and any other affiliate, subsidiary or other related companies, and all their agents,
employees, executives, directors, legal representatives, insurers, lawyers, guarantors,

heirs, administrators, contractors, subcontractors, successors or predecessors ....”

(iii) The 1998 Final Release: On 30 September 1998, pursuant to the 1995 Settlement
Agreement, the Respondent (acting by its Minister of Energy and Mines),
PetroEcuador, PetroProduccion and TexPet executed the Acta Final, certifying that
TexPet had performed all its obligations under the 1995 Settlement Agreement and, in
accordance with its terms, releasing TexPet from (as specified) any environmental

liability arising from the Consortium’s operations.

Article IV of the Final Release provided (inter alia) as follows, in English translation:

“., The Government and PetroEcuador proceed to release, absolve and discharge
TexPet, Texas Petroleum Company, Compafiia Texaco de Petréleos del Ecuador,
S.A., Texaco Inc., and all their respective agents, servants, employees, officers,
directors, legal representatives, insurers, attorneys, indemnitors, guarantors, heirs,
administrators, executors, beneficiaries, successors, predecessors, principals and

14

subsidiaries forever, from any liability and claims by the Government of the Republic
of Ecuador, PetroEcuador and its Affiliates, for items related to the obligations
assumed by TexPet in the aforementioned Contract [the 1995 Settlement Agreement]

The Tribunal notes that the critical contractual wording at issue in Article 5.1 of the
1995 Settlement Agreement is materially the same in Article IV of the Final Release;
and, accordingly, the issues relating to the latter’s interpretation and effect are here

treated as the same issues relating to the 1995 Settlement Agreement.

15

34.

35.

36.

37.

PART C: THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE CASES

Introduction: In the Tribunal’s view, as explained later in this Partial Award, the
Parties’ disputed interpretation turns upon a few crucial Spanish words in Article 5 of
the 1995 Settlement Agreement to be construed under the relevant rules of Ecuadorian
law on contractual interpretation. Although the materials submitted by the Parties are
voluminous, the essential issues of legal interpretation, whilst perhaps difficult, are

relatively short and uncomplicated.

Given also the limited approach taken by the Tribunal in this Partial Award as to the
legal effect of that interpretation under Ecuadorian law, it is unnecessary here to
summarise in full the Parties’ respective cases relating to Track I. In particular, as
explained further below, the Tribunal does not here decide the full legal effect of the
1995 Settlement Agreement (with the 1998 Final Release) as claimed in the Parties’

respective claims for relief, as set out below later in this Part C.

The Tribunal has nonetheless considered the Parties’ submissions and claimed relief
at length; and the omission here of any reference to any part of such cases should not
be taken as signifying otherwise. However, apart from issues and relief already
reserved to Track II and given that part of the issues under Track I are here deferred to
Track II by decision of the Tribunal, any part of such case not here addressed should
not be taken as having been implicitly decided by the Tribunal one way or the other in

this Partial Award.

The Claimants’ Case: In summary, the Claimants contend that, under Ecuadorian law,
Chevron is a “Releasee” under Article 5.1 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement and is
also not an excluded “third party” beneficiary under Article 9.4 prevented from
exercising its contractual rights in full as a Releasee, directly by itself or indirectly
through TexPet. The Claimants submit that Chevron, following the ‘reverse triangular
merger’ with Texaco Inc. (“Texaco) between 15 October 2000 and 1 November 2001,
became TexPet’s indirect owner, controller and ultimate parent company, thereby
falling within the meaning of the Spanish term “principales” listed for release in

Article 5.1 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement. The Claimants emphasise that the

16

38.

39.

40.

contrary argument is made by the Respondent for the very first time in these

arbitration proceedings.

The Claimants assert that Chevron, Texaco and TexPet were and remain separate and
distinct corporations; and that, whilst Chevron is not the “successor-in-interest” with
regard to any of liabilities of Texaco or TexPet, Chevron submits that the context of
the term “principales” in Article 5.1 shows an objective intent under Ecuadorian law
to release future parent corporations (such as Chevron) and does not signify only a
principal in a principal-agent relationship. The Claimants invoke three particular

points in support of their case.

First, a “holistic” reading of Article 5.1 reveals the Parties’ objective intent to release
parent corporations because the long and broad list of 22 categories of Releasees
establishes an intent to release broadly all individuals and companies which might
ever be alleged to be responsible for the conduct of TexPet, necessarily including a
future parent company of TexPet. Conversely, with such an extensive list (including
expressly TexPet’s existing parent company, Texaco), there is no evidence from this

contractual wording of any intent to exclude any future parent company as a Releasee.

Second, when coupled with “subsidiarias” in Article 5.1, the common legal and
business language use of “principales” signifies a parent company. As submitted in

paragraph 222 of the Claimants’ Reply Memorial - Track I:

“A grammatical analysis of the phrase principales y subsidiarias is revealing of their
meaning and use. Linguistically, the terms principales y subsidiarias, as used in
Article 5.1, are attributive nouns - that is, they are adjectives acting as nouns in this
instance. This linguistic phenomenon, known as the “attributive noun” or
“nominalization of the adjective” (in Spanish, “sustantivacion del adjetivo”), occurs
when the noun that the adjective complements is not included in the sentence, causing
the adjective to become the noun in the phrase by taking the place of the missing
noun. In this case, principales y subsidiarias is short form for las companias
principales y subsidiarias (principal and subsidiary companies). The parties omitted
the word “companies,” thereby transforming principales y subsidiarias into nouns.
The phenomenon of the attributive noun occurs frequently in the Spanish language,
and its use is well documented [citation omitted]. It also occurs frequently in English
[citation omitted]. For instance, the word subsidiary is an attributive noun for the full
phrase subsidiary corporation [citation omitted]. The fact that the Spanish
subsidiarias is in the feminine gender (which coordinates with companias
[companies] corporaciones (corporations), sociedades (companies or societies),

17

entidades (entities), or empresas (enterprises) - all feminine nouns) further supports
this reading [citation omitted]. This analysis is important because, as shown below
[paragraphs 220ff], in the Spanish legal and business contexts, principales and
subsidiarias are often used as nouns and adjectives, always maintaining their core
meaning.”

41. The Claimants therefore reject as inapposite the Respondent’s reliance upon the

Ecuadorian Commercial Code which defines “principales” as a_ principal

corresponding to agency; and they refer to the supporting expert testimony of Dr

Coronel and Dr Barros to such effect. Given the common use of the term

“principales” to mean a parent company when paired with the term “subsidiarias”, the

Claimants submit that it would be implausible that, in drafting Article 5.1, there was

any objective intention to displace its ordinary meaning with a narrow technical

meaning drawn from the law of agency.

42. Third, the context of the word “principales” within the 1995 Settlement Agreement

shows an objective intention to mean parent corporations; and, under Ecuadorian law,

the interpretation of a contractual term is to be made in its contractual context, as

provided by Article 1580 of the Civil Code. Such contractual context here comprises

(paragraph 229, ibid):

“@
(ii)

(iii)
(iv)

(v)

The pairing of principales with subsidarias (as in principales y subsidiarias)
shows the intent to use them as correlatives;

The term principales is not coupled with agentes, which appears at the opposite
end of the long list of Releasees (there are 15 categories of releasees separating
them), which evidences an intent not to give principales a meaning within the
agency context;

Article 1.12 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement shows an overall intent to cover
all persons related to TexPet;

The Settlement Agreement’s express naming of Texaco Inc. and its successors
evidences an intent to cover all present and future owners and parent companies
that enter the corporate structure; and

A harmonious and good-faith interpretation militates against an interpretation
that covers only current affiliate companies in the corporate ownership
structure, but excludes future companies.”

 

43. The Claimants contend that the 1996 Municipal and Provincial Releases are relevant,

under Ecuadorian law, to the interpretation of the 1995 Settlement Agreement

because, with the 1998 Final Release, they all form part of the same overall

transaction with mutual cross-references. Under the different wording of those 1996

18

44.

4S.

46.

Releases, Chevron would manifestly benefit from a release as TexPet’s parent
company; and accordingly the Claimants submit that this contractual documentation
evidences a common intention in related transactions to release a future parent
company of TexPet in the absence of any objective evidence indicating any contrary

intention.

The Claimants also contend that Article 9.4 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement does
not preclude unnamed non-signatory “Releasees” from enforcing their contractual
rights against the Respondent affirmatively. A Releasee is not a third party to the 1995
Settlement Agreement, but a party to or part of such Agreement, as the Respondent
had originally conceded in Paragraph 134 of its Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction. With
such contractual rights, so the Claimants contend, there is nothing in the 1995
Settlement Agreement to indicate that these rights can only be exercised by any
Releasee defensively and not offensively, by way of a claim for damages, declaratory

relief or specific performance against the Respondent.

As to the legal effect of their interpretation, it is the Claimants’ case that the causes of
action expressly described in Article 5.2 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement and for
which Chevron is released as a Releasee include all “collective” or “diffuse”
environmental rights exerciseable only by the Respondent in the general public
interest “on behalf of the community” (which were therefore capable of settlement
and release by the Respondent under the 1995 Settlement Agreement), as distinct
from causes of action available to private individuals making claims for their own
personal harm caused by environmental pollution (which were not compromised
under the 1995 Settlement Agreement). The Claimants’ case relies (inter alia) upon

the expert testimony of Dr Barros, Dr Coronel and Professor Oquendo.

The Claimants acknowledge that the 1995 Settlement Agreement was not intended to
bar and does not bar any environmental claims by individuals for personal harm
suffered by those individuals, including other so-called “cow claims”. At the time
when the 1995 Settlement Agreement was made, whilst collective and diffuse rights
existed under Ecuadorian law, according to the Claimants, no private individual
without a claim for personal harm had legal standing to bring any environmental

claim (for remediation or damages) in respect of such collective or diffuse rights. As

19

47.

48.

explained by Counsel for Chevron in its closing oral submissions: “... I don’t think it
has to do with the nature of the right itself, because the right did exist [in 1995]. The
right was there. It’s that the right could be exercised by the Government on behalf of
the people to protect the people but there wasn’t a direct action by the people to
enforce that” and “... before the EMA in 1999 [i.e. the 1999 Environmental
Management Act], the Aguinda plaintiffs did not have standing to vindicate the
diffuse rights of the community. That was left to the Government, the Government

had that power and that standing” [D3.529 & 541].

The Claimants contend that the Lago Agrio Litigation, in contrast to the earlier
Aguinda Litigation in New York, concerns environmental claims for collective or
diffuse rights for unidentified persons which are precluded by the release in the 1995
Settlement Agreement, as a matter of res judicata and collateral estoppel under
Ecuadorian law applicable to settlements (Article 2362 of the Civil Code® and/or by
analogy of law under Article 18 of the Civil Code); and that none of these claims are
made by private individuals for their own personal harm, in contrast to the claims by
identifiable persons made in the Aguinda Litigation in New York which involved only

individual rights, with claims in respect of personal harm.

The Claimants’ Claimed Relief: As regards the formal relief claimed by the Claimants
in regard to the 1995 Settlement Agreement, it is necessary to recite in full Paragraph

272 of the Claimants Reply Memorial — Track I, as follows:

“272. Accordingly, Claimants request a Partial Award that effectively protects
Claimants’ rights, and reverses (as far as possible) the harmful effects of Ecuador’s
breaches of the Settlement Agreements [i.e. the 1995 Settlement Agreement and 1998
Final Release] and its international-law obligations. To achieve this result, Claimants
respectfully submit the following list of requests, from which the Tribunal can fashion
a combination of declaratory, injunctive, and monetary relief in protection of
Claimants’ rights [footnote here omitted].

A. Specific Performance

1. Order that Ecuador specifically perform the Settlement Agreements.

> Article 2362 of the Civil Code in its original Spanish provides as follows: “La transaccion surte el
efecto de cosa juzgada en tltima instancia; pero podra pedirse la declaracién de nulidad o la
rescision, en conformidad a los articulos precedentes”.

20

B. Declaratory Relief
(i) Scope of the Settlement Agreements

1. Declare that both Claimants are “Releasees” under the Settlement Agreements, and
were released from all diffuse environmental claims arising from TexPet’s operations
in Ecuador; and

2. Declare that the claims pleaded in the Lago Agrio Litigation (and upon which the
Lago Agrio Judgment is based) are the same diffuse environmental claims settled and
released in the Settlement Agreements.

(ii) Legal Effect of the Settlement Agreements

1. Declare that Claimants have no liability or responsibility for satisfying the Lago
Agrio Judgment because they were fully released for all such claims by the Settlement
Agreements;

2. Declare that the claims pleaded in the Lago Agrio Litigation (and upon which the
Lago Agrio Judgment were based) are barred by res judicata and collateral estoppel;

3. Declare that under the Settlement Agreements, Claimants have no further liability
or responsibility for diffuse environmental claims in Ecuador for Environmental
Impact arising out of the Consortium’s operations, or for performing any further
environmental remediation;

4. Declare that Ecuador (through its various branches of Government) has breached
the Settlement Agreements, inter alia, by refusing to specifically perform the
Settlement Agreements, by refusing to ensure Claimants’ enjoyment of their releases
and their right to be free of litigation, by refusing to dismiss the Lago Agrio Plaintiffs’
claims, by refusing to indemnify Chevron for the Lago Agrio Plaintiffs’ claims, by
seeking to comply with this Tribunal’s Interim Awards;

5. Declare that Ecuador’s actions have breached the U.S.-Ecuador BIT, including its
obligations to afford fair and equitable treatment, full protection and security,
effective means of enforcing rights, and to observe obligations it entered into under
the overall investment agreements;

6. Declare that enforcement of the Lago Agrio Judgment within or without Ecuador
would be inconsistent with Ecuador’s obligations under the Settlement Agreements,
the BIT and international law;

7. Declare that the Lago Agrio Judgment is a nullity as a matter of international law;

and

21

8. Declare that: (i) the Judgment is not final, enforceable, or conclusive under
Ecuadorian and international law, and thus, is not subject to recognition and
enforcement within or without Ecuador; (ii) any enforcement of the Judgment would
place Ecuador in violation of its international-law obligations; (iii) the Judgment
violates international public policy and natural justice, and as a matter of international
comity and public policy, the Judgment should not be recognized and enforced.

C. Injunctive Relief

1. Order Ecuador to use all measures necessary to comply with its obligations under
the Settlement Agreements to release Claimants (and to ensure that Claimants may
effectively enjoy the benefits of such releases) from any liability or responsibility for
the Lago Agrio Judgment in Ecuador or in any other country;

2. Order Ecuador to use all measures necessary to prevent the Lago Agrio Judgment
from becoming final, conclusive, or enforceable in Ecuador or in any other country;

3. Order Ecuador to use all measures necessary to stay or enjoin enforcement of the
Lago Agrio Judgment, including enjoining the Lago Agrio Plaintiffs from obtaining
any related attachments, levies, or other enforcement devices in Ecuador or in any
other country;

4. Order Ecuador to use all measures necessary to revoke and nullify the Judgment;

5. Order Ecuador to make a written representation to any court in which the Lago
Agrio Plaintiffs attempt to recognize and enforce the Lago Agrio Judgment that: (i)
the claims that formed the basis of the Judgment were released by the Government;
(ii) the Lago Agrio Court had no personal or subject-matter jurisdiction over Chevron;
(iii) the Judgment is a legal nullity; (iv) the Judgment is not final, enforceable, or
conclusive under Ecuadorian and international law, and thus, is not subject to
recognition and enforcement within or without Ecuador; (v) any enforcement of the
Judgment would place Ecuador in violation of its international-law obligations; (vi)
the Judgment violates international public policy and natural justice; (vii) any
enforcement proceedings should be stayed pending the Tribunal’s final award in this
arbitration; and (viii) as a matter of international comity and public policy, the
Judgment should not be recognized and enforced; and

6. Order that, in the event that any court orders the recognition or enforcement of the
Lago Agrio Judgment, Ecuador must satisfy the Judgment directly.

D. Damages, Costs and Attorneys’ Fees

1. Award Claimants full indemnification and damages against Ecuador in connection
with the Lago Agrio Judgment, including a specific obligation by Ecuador to pay
Claimants the sum of money awarded in the Judgment;

2. Award Claimants any sums of money that the Lago Agrio Plaintiffs or others

collect against Claimants or their affiliates in connection with enforcing the Judgment
in any forum, with such sums to be paid by Respondent;

22

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

3. Award all costs and attorneys’ fees incurred by Claimants in (i) defending the Lago
Agrio Litigation, (ii) pursuing this arbitration, (iii) opposing the efforts by Ecuador
and the Lago Agrio Plaintiffs to stay this arbitration through litigation in the United
States; and (iv) preparing for and defending against enforcement actions brought by
the Lago Agrio Plaintiffs. These amounts will be quantified at the time and in the
manner ordered by this Tribunal;

4. Award both pre- and post-award interest (compounded quarterly) until the date of
payment; and

5. Award such other and further relief that the Tribunal deems just and proper,
including any specific relief appropriate to wipe out all consequences of Respondent’s
breaches of the Settlement Agreements and its violations of its obligations under the
Interim Awards, the BIT and international law.”

The Tribunal has here recited such relief in full, although it exceeds in part the issues
intended to be addressed in Track I under the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No 10. The
Tribunal has also taken note of the Claimants’ written requests for relief submitted by

their Counsel at the November Hearing made in materially similar terms [D1.31].

The Respondent’s Case: In summary, the Respondent denies that under Ecuadorian
law Chevron is a “Releasee” under Article 5.1 or otherwise entitled to take advantage
of the 1995 Settlement Agreement, to which it is an excluded “third party” under
Article 9.4. Further, even if Chevron were a Releasee, the 1995 Settlement Agreement
creates under Ecuadorian law no res judicata effect (nor any collateral estoppel) upon

any of the plaintiffs’ claims in the Lago Agrio Litigation.

As already noted, the Respondent takes issue with the Claimants’ interpretation of
Article 5.1 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement. The Respondent submits that the
Claimants’ characterisation of Chevron as TexPet’s “principal” within the list of
“Releasees” is misplaced because it is based only upon Chevron’s indirect
shareholding in TexPet, rather than on any relationship of principal and agent between

Chevron and TexPet, as required by the contractual wording.

As to agency, the Respondent contends that Chevron has consistently denied any
agency relationship with TexPet. The Respondent further contends that, even if there
were any agency relationship between Chevron and TexPet following the merger

between Texaco and Chevron, there could have been no agency relationship in

23

53.

54.

55.

relation to TexPet’s operations which caused environmental damage since those

operations had ended in 1992, some nine years before that merger.

The Respondent contends that Chevron cannot therefore be a “Releasee” under
Article 5.1 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement because it is not there specified by
name and the relevant evidence does not establish any intention to derogate from the
plain meaning of the contractual terms, to be interpreted under Ecuadorian law. Under
Ecuadorian law, the word “principales” refers only to the principal in the ordinary

principal-agent representative relationship, thereby excluding Chevron.

As to the Claimants’ arguments based on the comprehensive nature of the list of
Releasees in Article 5.1, the Respondent relies upon the Latin maxim ‘inclusio unius
est exclusio alterius’ as a canon of construction under Ecuadorian law. The
Respondent rejects the relevance of the 1996 Municipal and Provincial Releases as an
aid to interpreting the Article 5.1 because the Respondent did not agree such a release
in Article 5.1, which is differently worded and made between different signatory
parties; and, in any event, such materials are excluded from consideration by virtue of
Article 9.3 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement. As to the Claimants’ linguistic
arguments, the Respondent contends that the Spanish word “matriz” means parent
company and that “principales” is not its substitute as an attributive noun; and in any
event, if all parent companies had been intended to be released, that the Spanish term
“Jas compaiiias” would have been used in Article 5.1. As to contractual context, the
Respondent submits that there is no context in which the adjective “principales”,
without being further defined, could ever serve to release all future parent companies
in a contract governed by Ecuadoran law. Lastly, in the event of any ambiguity in the
interpretation of Article 5.1, the Respondent contends that such ambiguity must be
resolved in favour of the Respondent as the obligor under Article 1582 of the

Ecuadorian Civil Code, as supported by the expert testimony of Professor Salgado.

Even if Chevron were a Releasee within Article 5.1, the Respondent contends that
Article 9.4 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement expressly prohibits any person other
than the signatory parties from exercising the right, offensively, to bring a claim under
the terms of the 1995 Settlement Agreement. Under its corrected translation (the

second set out in Paragraph 27 above), whilst the Respondent accepts that a non-

24

56.

57.

58.

signatory Releasee is “part of’ the 1995 Settlement Agreement, the Respondent
submits that such a Releasee is nonetheless a third party and, as such, acquires no
rights to enforce the provisions of the 1995 Settlement Agreement, as also supported

by the expert testimony of Professor Salgado.

This disability is not cured, according to the Respondent, by TexPet as a signatory
party and the Second Claimant in these arbitration proceedings because TexPet has no
standing to bring any contractual claim for breach of the 1995 Settlement Agreement.
Under Article 1465 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code,* TexPet was free to contract in
favour of a third person, but only that third person can sue for itself under that
contract and accordingly TexPet cannot bring any claim in these proceedings for the
benefit of Chevron under the 1995 Settlement Agreement; nor can TexPet bring any

claim thereunder for itself not being a party to the Lago Agrio Litigation.

Whether or not Chevron is a Releasee, it is the Respondent’s further case that, in
agreeing the releases in Article 15.2, the Respondent was not acting in any
representational capacity exercising “diffuse” or “collective rights” on behalf of
Ecuadorian individuals but acting only in its capacity as a co-contractual party to the
1973 Concession Agreement. As regards the former, Counsel for the Respondent
explained in its closing oral submissions: “There was no law in 1995 that recognized
diffuse rights. The concept of collective rights was introduced in Ecuadorian
legislation for the first time in the 1998 Constitution, or the constitutional reform of
1998, and the concept of diffuse interest was defined for the first time in 1999, one

year later in the Environmental Management Act referred to as EMA” [D3.579-580].

Further, as the laws of Ecuador stood in 1995, the Respondent submits that it had no
power to represent the Ecuadorian people in regard to their individual rights and that
individuals could bring personal claims and recover damages under Article 19-2 of

the Ecuadorian Constitution, referring to (inter alia) the court decisions in the

+ Article 1465 of the Civil Code in its original Spanish provides as follows: “Cualquiera puede
estipular a favor de una tercera persona, aunque no tenga derecho para representarla; pero sélo esa

tercera persona podra de dar lo ; y mientras no intervenga su

 

expresa o

tacita, es revocable el contrato por la sola voluntad de las partes que concurrieron a él. Constituyen
aceptacion tacita los actos que sélo hubieran podido ejecutarse en virtud del contrato”.

25

59.

60.

Gutiérrez case of 29 September 1993 and, albeit after 1995, the Delfina Torres case of
19 March 2003.° As regards diffuse rights existing under Article 19-2 at the time of
the 1995 Settlement Agreement, the Respondent contends that “collective” or
“diffuse” environmental rights did not exist under Ecuadorian law until 1998/1999,
after the 1995 Settlement Agreement and 1998 Final Release [D1.158ffx &
D1.187ffxx].

Accordingly, the Respondent contends that the 1995 Settlement Agreement was not
intended to bar and could not create any bar under Ecuadorian law to individuals later
bringing claims for environmental remediation (after 1999), both as individual claims
for personal harm and also as claims for “diffuse” or “collective rights” under Article
19-2 or any of the other provisions of Ecuadorian law listed in Article 5.2. The
Respondent relies (inter alia) upon the expert testimony of Professors Eguiguren and

Professor Le Chatelier.

The Respondent's Claimed Relief: It is likewise necessary to set out in full below the
relief requested by the Respondent in Track I, as pleaded in Paragraph 192 of its

Rejoinder on the Merits — Track I (here with added paragraph numbers):

“192. Based on the foregoing, the Republic respectfully requests that the Tribunal
issue an Award that:

(ji Denies all the relief and each remedy requested by Claimants in relation to
Track 1, including the relief and remedies requested in Paragraph 272 of
Claimants’ Reply on the Merits [recited above];

(ii) Declares that Chevron is not a “Releasee” under the 1995 Settlement
Agreement and therefore has no basis to assert claims under Article VI(1)(a)
of the Treaty;

(iii) | Dismisses Chevron’s claims under the 1995 Settlement Agreement and the
1998 Final Release on the merits, should the Tribunal find that Chevron has
standing in this Arbitration as a matter of jurisdiction;

(iv) Declares that TexPet does not have standing to assert claims under the 1995
Settlement Agreement as a matter of Ecuadorian law;

(v) Dismisses TexPet’s claims under the 1995 Settlement Agreement and the 1998
Final Release on the merits;

> The Angel Gutiérrez case of 29 September 1993, Quito, Judicial Gazette, Year XCIV, Series XVI,
No 1, p 11 [RLA-285]; and the Delfina Torres case of 19 March 2003, Quito,, File 229, Official
Register 43 [RLA-286].

26

61.

(vi)
(vii)

(viii)

(ix)

(x)

(xi)
(xii)

Declares specifically that the Respondent has not breached the 1995
Settlement Agreement or the 1998 Final Release;

Dismisses all of Claimants’ claims as they relate to the 1996 Local Settlements
[i.e. the 1996 Municipal and Provincial Releases], both as a matter of
jurisdiction and on the merits;

Declares further that the Respondent is under no obligation to indemnify,
protect, defend or otherwise hold Claimants harmless against claims by, or
judgments or other relief obtained by, third parties including the claims filed
by the Lago Agrio Plaintiffs, the Lago Agrio Judgment, and the enforcement
thereof;

Declares that the 1995 Settlement Agreement has no effect on third parties,
and specifically, that the release of liability contained therein does not extend
to rights and claims potentially held by third parties or could otherwise bar
third-party claims arising from the environmental impact;

Declares that the Lago Agrio Litigation was not barred by res judicata or
collateral estoppel;

Awards Respondent all costs and attorneys’ fees incurred by Respondent in
connection with this phase of the proceedings; and that

Awards Respondent any further relief that the Tribunal deems just and
proper.”

As the Respondent recognised at the time of the November Hearing, this requested

relief, pleaded in direct response to the Claimants’ requested relief extending beyond

the issues under Track I, itself extends in part beyond Track I.

27

PART D: THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSES AND DECISIONS

62. I Introduction — Legal Interpretation: As already indicated above, the Tribunal
considers that the relevant issues of contractual interpretation under the 1995
Settlement Agreement are, ultimately, relatively short and uncomplicated. The
Tribunal sets out below the relevant Ecuadorian rules on contractual interpretation,
followed by an analysis of the testimony by the Parties’ expert witnesses relevant to
the issues of contractual interpretation, before analyzing and deciding upon its own

interpretation of the 1995 Settlement Agreement.

63. (i) The Relevant Rules: The Parties agree that the 1995 Settlement Agreement should
be interpreted in the light of Ecuadorian law as at the time when it was executed
[D3.507 & D3.577]. The Parties also referred to the joint expert report of Dr Enrique
Barros, Dr César Coronel and Professor Roberto Salgado of 6 August 2012 which
contains a helpful summary of the Ecuadorian legal rules of contractual interpretation
relevant to the 1995 Settlement Agreement, as agreed by these Parties’ three expert
witnesses. The Tribunal is content to adopt and apply these rules for the purpose of

this Partial Award, as follows (here translated from the original Spanish):

“(i) For purposes of interpreting the aforementioned contract signed in Ecuador,
Ecuadorian laws are the applicable laws.

(ii) The laws in effect when the agreement was executed must also be understood to
be incorporated into the contract (Article 7, number eighteen, Civil Code).

(iii) The Ecuadorian rules for interpreting the contract are those established in Title
XIII of the Fourth Book of the Civil Code, Articles 1576 — 1582.

(iv) The relevant rules ... are essentially the following:

[a] No matter how general the terms of a contract are, they will apply only to
the matter which the parties have contracted about (Article 1577).!

® Article 7 of the Civil Code provides in its original Spanish, in relevant part: “La ley no dispone sino
para lo venidero: no tiene efecto retroactivo; y en conflicto de una ley posterior con otra anterior, se
observaran las reglas siguientes: .... En todo contrato se entenderan incorporadas las leyes vigentes
al tiempo de su celebracion”.

 

28

[b] The meaning in which an article can produce some effect must take
precedence over that in which it cannot produce any effect at all (Article
1578).

[c] In those cases where there is no contrary intent, the interpretation that best
squares with the nature of the contract must be adhered to (Article 1579)."°!

[d] The articles of a contract will be interpreted in light of the others, according
to each the meaning that best suits the contract as a whole (Article 1580,
first subsection).!""!

[e] If none of the above rules of interpretation are applicable, ambiguous
articles will be interpreted in favor of the obligor. But the ambiguous
articles that have been drafted or dictated by one of the parties, whether
obligee or obligor, will be interpreted against that party, provided that the
ambiguity stems from a lack of an explanation that that party should have
provided.!!!”

64. (ii) The Expert Testimony: The Tribunal here addresses (in summary) the expert
testimony on the contractual meaning of the word “principales” under Ecuadorian law

in Article 5.1 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement.

65. The written reports of the Claimants’ expert witnesses, principally the Second Expert
Report of Dr Barros (the “Barros Report”) and the Second Expert Report of Dr
Coronel (the “Coronel Report”), support the Claimants’ case that “principales” means

a parent company in Article 5.1. Since Chevron is a legal person indirectly controlling

 

T Article 1577 of the Civil Code in its original Spanish provides as follows: “Por generales que sean
los términos de un contrato, sélo se aplicaran a la materia sobre que se ha contratado”.

8 Article 1578 of the Civil Code in its original Spanish provides as follows: “E/ sentido en que una
clausula puede surtir algun efecto deberd preferirse a aquél en que no sea capaz de surtir efecto
alguno”.

° Article 1579 of the Civil Code in its original Spanish provides as follows: “En los casos en que no
apareciere voluntad contraria, debera estarse a la interpretacion que mas bien cuadre la naturaleza
del contrato. Las clausulas de uso comun se presumen aunque no se expresen’”’.

© Article 1580 of the Civil Code in its original Spanish provides as follows: “Las cldusulas de un
contrato se interpretardn unas por otras, dandose a cada una el sentido que mejor convenga al
contrato en su totalidad. Podran también interpretarse por las de otro contrato entre las mismas
partes y sobre la misma materia. O por la aplicacién practica que hayan hecho de ella ambas partes,
o una de las partes con aprobacion de la otra’.

"| Article 1582 of the Civil Code in its original Spanish provides as follows: “No pudiendo aplicarse
ninguna de las reglas precedentes de interpretaci6n, se interpretardn las clausulas ambiguas a favor
del deudor. Pero las clausulas ambiguas que hayan sido extendidas o dictadas por una de las partes,
sea acreedora o deudora, se interpretaran contra ella, siempre que la ambigiiedad provenga de la
falta de una explicacion que haya debido darse por ella”.

29

66.

67.

68.

and owning TexPet and is therefore to be regarded as a parent company, these two
expert witnesses conclude that Chevron is a Releasee under Article 5.1 of the 1995

Settlement Agreement (and also Article IV of the Final Release).

The Barros Report (paragraphs 23 to 35) places special emphasis on the fact that the
terms “principales y subsidiarias” are used jointly in the same phrase in Article 5.1,
lines 8-9, of the 1995 Settlement Agreement. Dr Barros takes the view that in such a
context “principales” refers not to any principal-agent relationship under agency law,
but to the parent or controlling company/subsidiary relationship from the perspective

of company law.

Amongst other factors, Dr Barros indicates that: (a) if the parties had wished to use
the term “principales” within the context of an agency relationship, they would have
mentioned it together with the terms “agentes” or “mandatarios” found at line 6 of
Article 5.1, which was not the case (paragraph 26 of the Barros Report); and (b) a
harmonious interpretation (paragraph 31 of the Barros Report) and a good faith
interpretation (paragraph 33 of the Barros Report) of the 1995 Settlement Agreement
and its Article 5.1 militate against construing the release as only covering companies
or persons in the ownership structure (including TexPet), as such structure then was
and not also companies or persons that come into that same structure at a later date
(after 1995). Dr Barros points out that a contrary interpretation of Article 5.1 would
mean that officers in charge of TexPet when the release was agreed would be covered
as Releasees but not its future officers who could be still held liable (paragraph 29);

and that such an interpretation would not make any sense.

This contextual interpretation is supported by the Coronel Report. Dr Coronel
expresses the view that, through the linkage between the words “principales” and
“subsidiarias”, Article 5.1 should be interpreted to mean that companies above and
below those there mentioned by name are covered as Releasees, thereby including

Chevron (paragraph 19). In this respect, Dr Coronel also refers specifically to the

30

69.

70.

provisions of the Civil Code: Article 1465, Article 1562,'? Article 1576, Article 1578
and Article 1580 (Coronel Report, paragraphs 11-15).

By relying upon Articles 1576 and 1580 of the Civil Code, Dr Coronel concludes that
a joint reading of the definition of the release in Articles 1.12 and 5.1 of the 1995
Settlement Agreement confirms the signatory parties’ intention not only to release
TexPet but also “all persons and entities related to TexPet” (Coronel Report,
paragraph 20). He testifies that Article 1.12 broadly extends the release to both legal
and contractual obligations and responsibility to the Government and PetroEcuador
resulting from the Consortium’s Operations and relating to the environment (not
limited to TexPet), and that the broad listing of related entities covered by Article 5.1
evinces an intention to extend the release broadly to companies, entities and persons

not expressly mentioned or identified by name in Article 5.1.

In particular, Dr Coronel concludes as regards Article 5.1 that: (a) the release covers
Texaco, which was then the indirect controlling and owning parent of TexPet, which
means that it should also extend to companies becoming in the future the indirect
controlling and owning parent of TexPet; and (b) the reference to “successors”
indicates that entities not expressly listed by name in its text could still benefit from
the release. Dr Coronel states that when the 1995 Settlement Agreement was executed
it was impossible to know or even to predict that Chevron (or any other person or
company) would become the controlling and/or owning parent of TexPet. Since the
highest parent corporation at that time was expressly covered by the release (i.e.
Texaco), a logical approach to this provision requires its meaning to cover within the
release any future company replacing Texaco as TexPet’s parent (Coronel Report,
paragraph 20). In that sense (and only in that sense), according to Dr Coronel,
Chevron is a “successor” of Texaco; i.e., Texaco was replaced with Chevron as an

indirect controlling shareholder and parent of TexPet.

'2 Article 1562 of the Civil Code in its original Spanish provides as follows: “Los contratos deben
ejecutarse de buena fe, y por consiguiente obligan, no sdlo a lo que en ellos se expresa, sino a todas
las cosas que emanan precisamente de la naturaleza de la obligacion, o que, por la ley o la
costumbre, pertenecen a ella”.

31

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

Neither Dr Barros Report nor Dr Coronel Report denies that the term “principales”,
outside the specific context in which such term is used in Article 5.1 but within the
context of an agency relationship, can mean a principal or “mandante”. In this
connection, as earlier noted in its Third Interim Award (paragraph 4.48), the Tribunal
records that that the Diccionario de la Real Academia Espafiola defines “principal” as
follows: (i) 19" Edition (1970): “For. El que da poder a otro para que lo represente,
poderdante”; and (ii) 22" (last) Edition (2001): “Der. Poderdante”. In other words,
within a technical legal context (this is what the references For. or Der. stand for)

“principal” means: who grants a power of attorney in fact).

The Tribunal notes that examples in which such term has been used differently in the
technical context of Ecuadorian corporate law (Barros Report, paragraph 25) are
exceptional, as shown in the reports of the Respondent’s expert witness, Professor

Roberto Salgado Valdez, in particular his first report (the “Salgado Report”).

However, the Salgado Report does not go much beyond pointing out the technical
legal meaning of the term “principal”; and, in the Tribunal’s view, there is no
compelling argument refuting the contextual interpretation advanced in the Barros and
Coronel Reports. Professor Salgado limits himself to denying that interpretation (e.g.
paragraph 20 of the Salgado Report), without addressing the analysis advanced in the
Coronel and Barros Reports. Professor Salgado’s subsequent testimony does not

materially alter the position.

(iii) The Tribunal’s Analysis as to Legal Interpretation: The Tribunal considers that it
falls within its task to interpret for itself the contractual wording applying the relevant
rules under Ecuadorian law and not merely to adopt the conclusions reached by any
one or more of the Parties’ expert witnesses. Moreover, the Tribunal notes that there
may be differences in approach taken by certain of these expert witnesses and the

cases advanced by the Parties presenting them as expert witnesses.

As with all issues of contractual interpretation, it is necessary to start with the actual
wording at issue, as here expressly required by Article 33(3) of the UNCITRAL

Arbitration Rules. Moreover, in the Tribunal’s view, that contractual wording, being

32

76.

77.

78.

agreed by all three signatories, is by far the best objective evidence of their common

intentions under Ecuadorian law.

Article 9.3: The Tribunal first takes account of the whole agreement provision in
Article 9.3 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement. Its terms are unambiguous (recited in
Part B above, in English translation). For these reasons, in regard to the interpretation
of the 1995 Settlement Agreement, the Tribunal derives no material assistance from
Dr Veiga’s testimony or from the terms of the release contained in any of the 1996

Municipal and Provincial Releases, as invoked by the Claimants.

The Release: From the 1995 Settlement Agreement itself, the Tribunal notes that it
takes the form of a bipartite and not a tripartite agreement, notwithstanding its three
signatories. Its signatories are the same signatory parties to the 1973 Concession
Agreement (as modified with PetroEcuador’s novation in 1976) and the 1994 MOU.
In the Tribunal’s view, it is clear from this background (as expressly set out in its
preamble and terms) that the 1995 Settlement Agreement (with the 1998 Final
Release) was intended to address “forever” all possible environmental claims by the
Respondent and PetroEcuador on the one side against TexPet on the other side which
had arisen or could conceivably arise from the Consortium’s operations under the
1973 Concession Agreement in the Oriente region of Ecuador, together with the other

nine agreements listed in its Annex B.

Given the nature of environmental claims, these claims could not be limited to
contractual claims against TexPet but extended to all “legal” claims, thereby including
non-contractual claims, as described in the preamble’s last paragraph: “ ... Texpet
agrees to undertake such Environmental Remedial Work in consideration for being
released and discharged of all its legal and contractual obligations and liability for
Environmental Impact arising out of the Consortium’s operations; ...”. Further,
Article 1.12 defines the release in Article 5 as extending to “all legal and contractual
obligations and liability, towards the Government and Petroecuador ...”.; and Article
5.2 addresses “any and all claims, rights to claims, debts, liens, common or civil law
or equitable causes of actions and penalties, whether sounding in contract or tort,
constitutional, statutory, or regulatory causes of action and penalties ....”. Whilst the

Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s submission that the 1995 Settlement Agreement

33

79.

80.

81.

addressed for the most part contractual claims against TexPet, its object was not
limited to contractual claims by the Respondent and Petro-Ecuador as co-contractors,
but included expressly non-contractual claims by the Respondent in its other

capacities with non-contractual rights and remedies.

The Tribunal notes that there is nothing in the express wording of the 1995 Settlement
Agreement which contains any ‘hold harmless’ provision, indemnity or duty to defend
by the Respondent or PetroEcuador in the event that TexPet was sued for any legal
obligation or liability for Environmental Impact arising from the Consortium’s
operations. The release assumes that all claims falling within the scope of the release
could only be made by the Respondent (with or without PetroEcuador), thereby
making such provisions inapplicable to a non-contractual claim made by a third
person in its own right. Moreover, there is a significant difference between a release
and an indemnity for a State: the former is usually quantifiable at the time of the
release and may cost the State little or nothing, whereas the latter, lying in the future
and dependent upon a third person’s claim, is usually unquantifiable and potentially

costly to the State.

At the time of the 1995 Settlement Agreement, TexPet was facing separate claims
from the Municipalities, four of which had brought legal proceedings against TexPet
in Ecuador. The 1995 Settlement Agreement provided no relief to TexPet in regard to
such claims. To the contrary, Annex A required TexPet to negotiate settlements with
these Municipalities (which it did in the form of the 1996 Municipal and Provincial
Releases, as recited above). The 1995 Settlement Agreement also makes no mention
of the Aguinda Litigation then pending in New York, to which the Respondent was
not a party.

From the express terms of the 1995 Settlement Agreement, therefore, the Tribunal
concludes that the release for any non-contractual claim made by the Respondent was
applicable to claims in which the Respondent was asserting its own rights (in one or
more of its capacities) and not to claims made by other third persons acting
independently of the Respondent and asserting rights separate and different from the

rights of the Respondent.

34

82.

83.

84.

85.

Article 5: Under Article 5.1, TexPet and its then parent company (Texaco) were
expressly named as “Releasees” in the 1995 Settlement Agreement. The Tribunal
considers that the description of “all” the subsequent categories of unnamed Releasees
was generally intended to be as broad as was then conceived to be possible, covering
both all existing and future persons associated with TexPet who might conceivably be
the subject of any environmental claim by the Respondent and PetroEcuador. That
general intent, however, must yield to the specific contractual wording agreed by the

signatory parties.

It is common ground between the Parties that the crucial wording appears in Article
5.1 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement: “principales y subsidiarias”. The Parties’
respective arguments have been summarised above, as also the conclusions reached
by the Parties’ respective expert witnesses. It is ultimately a short point, in the
Tribunal’s view; and it is therefore unnecessary for the Tribunal here to belabour it

unduly.

In brief, the Tribunal accepts the grammatical, contextual and common-sense
approach to this wording proposed by the Claimants and their two expert witnesses,
Dr Barros and Dr Coronel; and it does not accept the approach taken by the
Respondent and its expert witness, Professor Salgado, based on the application of
Ecuadorian law on agency. The Tribunal also considers that if the issue had arisen at
the time the 1995 Settlement Agreement was being signed, both sides would have
reacted similarly, to the effect that the wording “principales y subsidiarias” was an
obvious shorthand term, requiring no additional wording, for “las compajfiias
principales y subsidiarias”; and that neither side would have suggested then that their

chosen wording referred to a principal-agent relationship.

In the Tribunal’s view, the Respondent’s interpretation, as now advanced in this
arbitration, would have been and remains materially inapposite, ineffective and
inconsistent under the rules for contractual interpretation under Ecuadorian law listed
in Paragraph 63(iv)(a)-(d) above. Moreover, with such a general intention attributable
to the signatory parties to compromise such extensive classes of claims against such
broad categories of potential defendants, with Texaco expressly included as TexPet’s

existing parent, it would be an extreme oddity if the signatory parties had intended,

35

86.

87.

88.

89.

without the clearest wording, to exclude a future parent of TexPet because
any future parent of TexPet (after Texaco) was the most obvious potential defendant
with the deepest pockets. The Tribunal decides that there is no such objective

intention evident from the terms of the 1995 Settlement Agreement.

Accordingly, for these reasons, the Tribunal decides that Chevron is a “Releasee”
under Article 5.1 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement and Article IV of the Final
Release. It follows from the Tribunal’s decision that Chevron is contractually privy to
the 1995 Settlement Agreement; in other words Chevron is “party”, albeit not a

signatory party such as TexPet.

Article 9.4: The next issue of interpretation arises from Article 9.4 of the 1995
Settlement Agreement, invoked by the Respondent. In the Tribunal’s view, this issue
raises also a short point of contractual interpretation. For ease of reference, the
Tribunal here sets out the Spanish text of Article 9.4, with the two relevant phrases
highlighted: “No se debera inferir que este Contrato conferira beneficios a terceros
que no sean parte de este Contrato, ni tampoco que proporcionara derechos a terceros
para hacer cumplir sus provisiones”. (The Parties’ rival English translations of this

Spanish text are set out above in Part B, paragraph 27).

The Tribunal decides that the wording of Article 9.4 addresses “third parties” who are
not parties or part of the 1995 Settlement Agreement. That much is readily apparent
from the first phrase in the Spanish version and indeed in both Parties’ English
disputed translations. The issue only arises from the second phrase in Article 9.4
which, so the Respondent contends, addresses more generally third parties, here
including third parties which are also party to or part of the 1995 Settlement

Agreement described in the first phrase of Article 9.4.

In the Tribunal’s view, the second shorter phrase is intended as an abbreviated form of
the first phrase. In other words, both phrases address third parties which are not party
to or part of the 1995 Settlement Agreement. The Tribunal arrives at this
interpretation as a matter of grammar, semantics and contextual consistency, but also,
above all, as a matter of common sense and effectiveness under the rules for

contractual interpretation under Ecuadorian law listed in Paragraph 63(iv)(a)-(d)

36

90.

91.

92.

above. It would make no sense whatever to attribute to the signatory parties a
common intent to include a person as a Releasee with ostensible contractual rights
under Article 5 but then to exclude that same person from any benefit to enforce those
rights under Article 9.4. If such an absurd result had been intended by the signatory
parties, it would take much clearer wording than is expressed in Article 9.4; and, in
the Tribunal’s view, such wording is significantly absent to establish any such

intention.

Legal Ambiguity: In the Tribunal’s view, although highly disputed between the Parties
at great length, the terms of Articles 1.12, 5.1, 5.2, 9.3 and 9.4 are ultimately not
legally ambiguous under Ecuadorian law. The mere fact that the interpretation of a
contractual term is disputed by parties and subjected to their exhaustive submissions
and materials does not make it ambiguous. Accordingly the Tribunal does not invoke
the rule of contractual interpretation relevant to ambiguity under Ecuadorian law

listed in Paragraph 63(iv)(e) above, including Article 1582 of the Civil Code.'*

Decisions — Interpretation: Accordingly, for these reasons, the Tribunal decides that
Chevron, as a party to and “part of” the 1995 Settlement Agreement, can enforce its
contractual rights under Article 5 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement as an unnamed
Releasee (as also under Article IV of the Final Release), in the same way and to the
same extent as TexPet as a signatory party and named Releasee. Moreover, the
Tribunal decides that Chevron and TexPet can exercise those rights both defensively
and offensively, as claimant or respondent in legal or arbitration proceedings seeking
in both any appropriate relief under Ecuadorian law. In the Tribunal’s view, nothing
in the 1995 Settlement Agreement supports the contention that the manner in which

those rights may be exercised is limited, as submitted by the Respondent.

II Introduction - Legal Effect: The Tribunal has here experienced several problems in

deciding in full the respective submissions made by the Parties as to the legal effect of

'S Article 1582 of the Civil Code provides that, if none of its preceding rules of interpretation apply,
ambiguous clauses shall be interpreted in a favour of the obligor. (In Spanish: “No pudiendo aplicarse
ninguna de las reglas precedentes de interpretaci6n, se interpretardn las clausulas ambiguas a favor
del deudor. Pero las clausulas ambiguas que hayan sido extendidas o dictadas por una de las partes,
sea acreedora o deudora, se interpretaran contra ella, siempre que la ambigiiedad provenga de la
falta de una explicacion que haya debido darse por ella’).

37

93.

94.

the 1995 Settlement Agreement. Quite apart from the Parties’ attempts to introduce
into Track I submissions already reserved for Track II, the Tribunal considers that
other parts of the Parties’ submissions overlap significantly with issues falling under
Track II and that still other parts originally intended for Track I can now only be
decided by the Tribunal with Track II, particularly in the light of the Parties’ written
pleadings in Track II (which are still incomplete as at the date of this Partial Award).
As Counsel for the Respondent rightly cautioned the Tribunal in its closing oral
submissions at the November Hearing, there could be a risk of procedural unfairness
if the Tribunal decided too much under Track I when one or more Parties were still

pleading their full cases in Track II, particularly the Respondent [D3.625-626].

For these reasons, the Tribunal declines to decide in this Partial Award under Track I:
(i) whether or not the Respondent has breached Article 5 of the 1995 Settlement
Agreement and Article IV of the Final Release; and, if so, precisely what remedies are
available to Chevron and/or TexPet against the Respondent in respect of any such
breach (i.e. damages, declaratory relief or specific performance); (ii) whether or not
the claims pleaded by the Lago Agrio Plaintiffs rest upon individual rights, as distinct
from “collective” or “diffuse” rights (in whole or in part) and whether or not those
claims are materially similar to the claims made by the Aguinda Plaintiffs in New
York; and (iii) the specific effect of any changes in Ecuadorian law taking place after
the execution of the 1995 Settlement Agreement and the 1998 Final Release,
including the interpretation and application of the 1999 Environmental Management
Act. These issues are hereby reserved to further decisions by the Tribunal in a later

award; and none are decided by the Tribunal in this Partial Award.

(i) Analysis — Legal Effect: Nonetheless, there are certain other issues which the
Tribunal can here fairly decide as to the legal effect of its interpretation of Article 5 of
the 1995 Settlement Agreement, as regards Chevron and the Respondent, as at the
time of its execution by the signatory parties. (The positions of TexPet and
PetroEcuador, whilst not ignored, can here be set aside for present purposes; and, as
already indicated, no separate consideration is here required as regards Article IV of

the 1998 Final Release).

38

95.

96.

97.

First, the Tribunal decides that the release granted to Chevron by the Respondent
under Article 5 covers claims made by the Respondent (with or without
PetroEcuador). As worded, the release does not extend to any claims made by third
persons in respect of their own individual rights separate from the Respondent under
Ecuadorian or other laws. In the Tribunal’s view, this factor is not materially disputed
by the Parties. The Claimants recognise that the release does not affect such
individual rights, both for personal harm claimed by an individual and also the

personal claims made by the identifiable Aguinda Plaintiffs in New York.

Second, the Tribunal decides that the release in Article 5 by the Respondent does not
amount, from its own wording and under Ecuadorian law, to a settlement with a
general “erga omnes” effect as res judicata upon any claims made by third persons in
respect of their own individual rights separate from the Respondent under Ecuadorian
or other laws. Under Ecuadorian law, in order to settle a claim, a person must have the
ability to dispose of that claim; and the Respondent had no right to dispose of such an
individual claim by a third person: Articles 2349 and 2354 of the Civil Code.'* This
issue is different from and not to be confused with the next issue regarding the
capacity of the Respondent in regard to “diffuse” or “collective” rights at the time of

the 1995 Settlement Agreement.

The words “diffuse” and collective” do not appear in the 1995 Settlement Agreement.
However, as recorded in Paragraph 63 above, the Parties’ expert witnesses agree that
the laws of Ecuador when the 1995 Settlement Agreement was executed are
incorporated into the Settlement Agreement pursuant to Article 7, number eighteen, of
the Civil Code.'* In their joint expert report dated 7 August 2012, Professors Le
Chatelier and Oquendo agreed the following legal definition of diffuse rights:

“Diffuse rights are indivisible entitlements that pertain to the community as a whole,

'4 Article 2349 of the Civil Code provides that the only person who can settle a claim is the person
who is able to dispose of the objects covered by the settlement (In Spanish: “No puede transigir sino
la persona capaz de disponer de los objetos comprendidos en la transaccién’). Article 2354 of the
Civil Code provides that a settlement regarding the rights of others is not valid (In Spanish : “No vale
la transaccion sobre derechos ajenos 0 sobre derechos que no existen”).

'S Article 7 of the Civil Code provides, in relevant part: “La Jey no dispone sino para lo venidero: no
tiene efecto retroactivo; y en conflicto de una ley posterior con otra anterior, se observaran las reglas

siguientes:

... En todo contrato se entenderdn incorporadas las leyes vigentes al tiempo de su

 

celebracion”.

39

98.

99.

100.

such as the community’s collective right to live in a healthy and uncontaminated
environment ...”. Although these two experts cite as references (inter alia) Ecuadorian
laws subsequent to 1995 (including the 1999 Environmental Management Act), the
Tribunal considers that this agreed definition is equally appropriate at the time when
the 1995 Settlement Agreement was made as regards Ecuadorian law incorporated
into the 1995 Settlement Agreement. For present purposes, the Tribunal sees no
material distinction between the terms “diffuse” and “collective” rights, here

preferring to use the former term only.

(ii) Article 19-2: This issue of diffuse rights concerns, above all, the nature of the
legal rights expressed in Article 19-2 of the Ecuadorian Constitution in force when the
1995 Settlement Agreement was made by the signatory parties. That constitutional
provision is expressly cited in Article 5.2 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement, as well
as incorporated under Ecuadorian rules of contractual interpretation (for its relevant

Spanish text and English translation, see Part B above).

Although Article 19-2 is not framed in terms that explicitly confer any right of action,
it is common ground between the Parties that it did confer a right to a pollution-free
environment guaranteed by “the State”. Constitutionally, the “State” in Article 19-2 is
of course the Respondent. Although there is no record (as at 1995) of the Respondent
ever itself resorting to legal proceedings to make an environmental claim against any
person pursuant to Article 19-2, it is clear from the wording of Article 5.2 of the 1995
Settlement Agreement that such a possibility was objectively considered to exist by its
signatory parties (including the Respondent), however remote the likelihood of it
occurring in practice. Moreover, the Respondent’s expert witness, Professor
Eguiguren, acknowledged in his oral testimony at the November Hearing that the
Respondent could make such a claim in 1995 [D1.208-209]. Hence, the Tribunal
concludes that Article 5 was intended to preclude the Respondent from itself making
any claim against a Releasee (now including Chevron) under Article 19-2 of the

Constitution (or its subsequent constitutional equivalent).

On the other hand, as decided above, the contractual wording also records an intention
by the signatory parties not to affect claims made separately by other third persons

with their own individual rights; nor could it affect those separate third-person rights

40

as a matter of Ecuadorian law: see Article 2363 of the Civil Code.'° The Tribunal
therefore concludes that, as at 1995, such an individual claiming damages for personal
harm remained free to do so, notwithstanding the Respondent’s release in Article 5,
even where that person invoked Article 19-2 of the Constitution in support of an
individual claim for damages in respect of personal harm (actual or threatened)
separate from the Respondent. The Tribunal notes the decision in the Gutiérrez case
of 29 September 1993 where the individual plaintiff was awarded damages against the
defendant pig farmer for personal harm to him, his wife and their property based (inter

alia) upon a claim under Article 19-2 of the Constitution.'”

101. However, the issue is not whether such an individual could make such a claim in
respect of his or her personal harm, but rather whether such an individual could make
a claim in respect of harm arising out of the alleged violation of a diffuse right under
Article 19-2 of the Constitution without claiming to have suffered any personal harm.
The Tribunal considers that, as at 1995, such a claim by such an individual was not
possible under Ecuadorian law, that cause of action being confined under Article 19-2
to the Respondent alone. It is here helpful to set out the rival approaches taken by the
Parties’ respective expert witnesses, as largely recorded in their joint expert report

dated 7 August 2012.

102. In summary, the Claimants’ experts (Dr Barros, Dr Coronel, Professor Oquendo and
Dr Romero) testified that the constitutional right under Article 19-2 was a diffuse and
indivisible right because the owner of that right was the entire community of
Ecuadorian citizens (not individuals or groups of individuals); the Ecuadorian
Government asserted this right for the benefit of the entire community of Ecuadorian
citizens in the 1995 Settlement Agreement, in the exercise of the Respondent’s duty to
vindicate the right of its citizens to live in an environment free from contamination

and to foster the preservation of nature; and, accordingly, the 1995 Settlement

'© Article 2363 of the Civil Code provides that a settlement shall only be effective as between the

parties to such settlement (In Spanish: “La transaccion no surte efecto sino entre los contratantes. Si
son muchos los principales interesados en el negocio sobre el cual se transige, la transaccién
consentida por uno de ellos, no perjudica ni aprovecha los otros; salvo, empero, los efectos de la
novacion, en el caso de solidaridad’). Article 297 of the Code of Civil Procedure requires the
common identity of (i) parties, (ii) causa petendi (as to facts and legal basis); and (iii) object.

'7 The Angel Gutiérrez case of 29 September 1993 (ibid).

41

103.

104.

105.

Agreement (with the Final Release) extinguished any possible environmental claim
against the Releasees arising from the alleged violation of this diffuse right under

Article 19-2, whether made by the Respondent or any third person.

In summary, the Respondent’s expert witnesses (Professor Eguiguren, supported by
Professor Le Chatelier), whilst acknowledging that a diffuse right was indivisible,
testified that, in order to settle any right, the settling party must have the capacity to
dispose of that right under Ecuadorian law; the Ecuadorian Government acted in the
1995 Settlement Agreement to settle only its own rights arising from the 1973
Concession Agreement; the Government did not have any capacity: (i) to dispose of
the rights of individuals or (ii) to represent individuals for the purpose of settling in
their name rights conferred upon them by Ecuadorian law, including rights under
Article 19-2 of the Constitution; and for this purpose the nature of the right is
irrelevant (ie. whether diffuse or otherwise) because a settlement, according to
Ecuadorian law, can affect only the parties to that settlement and cannot affect the

rights of third persons.

As already noted above, the first of these propositions concerning ‘individual’ rights
is common ground between the Parties’ expert witnesses and is not disputed by the
Claimants. It is the second proposition concerning Article 19-2 which divides the

Parties’ expert witnesses.

From the materials adduced by the Parties and their expert witnesses in these
arbitration proceedings, the Tribunal concludes that the diffuse and indivisible right
under Article 19-2 of the Constitution was the same before and after the 1995
Settlement Agreement. In particular, Professor Eguiguren testified at the November

Hearing that “... the right remains the same. The right to live in a healthy
environment is the same of [in] 1995. In reality, since 1983, when it was introduced in
the Ecuadorian Constitution, it’s the same of [in] 1998 and 2008 ....” [D1.199]. What
changed under Ecuadorian law after 1995 was the legal standing of a private
individual to bring a claim under Article 19-2 asserting a diffuse constitutional right
(not being a claim in respect of that individual’s personal harm). That new legal

standing was subsequently confirmed by the 1999 Environmental Management Act.

42

106.

107.

108.

In the Tribunal’s view, under Ecuadorian law as at the time when the 1995 Settlement
Agreement was executed (i.e. before the 1999 Act), only the Respondent could bring
a diffuse claim under Article 19-2 to safeguard the right of citizens to live in an
environment free from contamination. At that time, no other person could bring such a
claim. No instance of the Respondent bringing or settling such a claim (other than this
case) and no decisive provision of Ecuadorian law was brought to the attention of the
Tribunal. Nonetheless, it must follow from the circumstances prevailing in 1995 that
the Respondent, and only the Respondent, had the legal capacity to make and settle a
diffuse claim under Article 19-2. If the Respondent could not make and then settle a
diffuse claim under Article 19-2, no-one else could. The Tribunal is therefore
persuaded by the analysis submitted by the Claimants’ expert witnesses on this point,
namely that in 1995 the Respondent (acting by its Government) could settle a diffuse
claim under Article 19-2 “forever” against the Releasees; and that accordingly no such

diffuse claim could be made in the future against any Releasee.

After 1995, the Tribunal considers that the same situation prevailed: the right to make
an environmental claim based upon the diffuse right under Article 19-2 against the
Releasees remained settled “forever”. The new factor, confirmed by the 1999
Environmental Management Act, that one or more private individuals now had
standing to bring a claim asserting diffuse rights could not revive the diffuse right
under Article 19-2 which had already been extinguished by the 1995 Settlement
Agreement. It is not juridically possible for a person to exercise a right which no
longer exists, even if, were that right to remain in existence, that person has newly
acquired the right to exercise it. As agreed by the Parties’ experts, that diffuse right
under Article 19-2 was “indivisible”: it was either settled in full or not at all. The
Tribunal has rejected the latter possibility; and it decides upon the former. It rejects
entirely the third possibility that the same diffuse right in Article 19-2 can exist in
separate parts, to be exercised by multiple claimants at different times with successive
diffuse claims, thereby making any effective final settlement or adjudication of such

claims illusory.

(iii) Decisions - Legal Effect: Accordingly, for these reasons, the Tribunal concludes
that, under Ecuadorian law, Article 5 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement and Article

IV of the Final Release preclude any claim by the Respondent against any Releasee

43

109.

110.

invoking the diffuse constitutional right under Article 19-2 of the Constitution, but
that these releases also preclude any third person making a claim against a Releasee
invoking the same diffuse constitutional right under Article 19-2, not being a separate

and different claim for personal harm (whether actual or threatened).

It will be noted that the Tribunal has not considered the other statutory provisions
listed in Article 5.2 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement, particularly the Decree No.
374, the Water Act of 1973 and Decree No. 2144. The Tribunal has heard much less
about these provisions so far; and it is therefore reluctant to make any final decisions
in their regard before satisfying itself that there are no material differences between
the nature of the legal rights under these provisions and the rights under Article 19-2.
The Tribunal will if necessary request further submissions from the Parties on this

point.

Lastly, the Tribunal has not here decided the nature and scope of popular actions
under Articles 990 and 2236 of the Civil Code. From the Parties’ expert witness
reports, there appears to be common ground that a claimant could not bring any
environmental claim as a popular action without (inter alia) claiming actual or
threatened personal harm. The Tribunal has again heard much less about these popular
actions (both before and after the 1995 Settlement Agreement); and, whilst it seems at
present that these actions are unlikely to be decisive one way or the other in this case,
the Tribunal again prefers to defer its decision for the time being. Similarly, the
Tribunal will if necessary request further submissions from the Parties on these

popular actions.

44

111.

112.

PART E: THE OPERATIVE PART

This Partial Award, although separately signed by the Tribunal’s members on

three signing pages, constitutes a “Partial Award” signed by the three

arbitrators under Article 32 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal finally decides and awards as follows

in Track I of these arbitration proceedings:

qd)

2)

G)

The First Claimant (“Chevron”) and the Second Claimant (“TexPet”) are
both “Releasees” under Article 5.1 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement and
Article IV of the 1998 Final Release;

As such a Releasee, a party to and also part of the 1995 Settlement
Agreement, the First Claimant can invoke its contractual rights thereunder
in regard to the release in Article 5.1 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement and
Article ITV of the 1998 Final Release as fully as the Second Claimant as a

signatory party and named Releasee;

The scope of the releases in Article 5 of the 1995 Settlement Agreement and
Article ITV of the 1998 Final Release made by the Respondent to the First
and Second Claimants does not extend to any environmental claim made by
an individual for personal harm in respect of that individual’s rights
separate and different from the Respondent; but it does have legal effect
under Ecuadorian law precluding any “diffuse” claim against the First and
Second Claimants under Article 19-2 of the Constitution made by the
Respondent and also made by any individual not claiming personal harm

(actual or threatened); and

45

(4) Save as aforesaid, the Tribunal does not here decide (one way or the other)
any part of the formal relief claimed by the Parties respectively in regard to
Track I, reserving to itself its full powers and discretion to do so in one or

more later awards.

PLACE OF ARBITRATION: THE HAGUE, THE NETHERLANDS

DATE; 17 SEPTEMBER 2013
THE TRIBUNAL:
Dr Horacio A. Grigera Nan:

Professor Vaughan Lowe;

V.V. Veeder (President:) Fir Ma ola. has -

_

46

(4) Save as aforesaid, the Tribunal does not here decide (one way or the other)
any part of the formal relief claimed by the Parties respectively in regard to
Track I, reserving to itself its full powers and discretion to do so in one or

more later awards.

PLACE OF ARBITRATION: THE HAGUE, THE NETHERLANDS

DATE: 17 SEPTEMBER 2013

THE TRIBUNAL:

Dr Horacio A. Grigera Naén

 

Professor Vaughan Lowe;

V.V. Veeder (President:) A. Maat, Hos

_

46

(4) Save as aforesaid, the Tribunal does not here decide (one way or the other)
any part of the formal relief claimed by the Parties respectively in regard to
Track I, reserving to itself its full powers and discretion to do so in one or

more later awards.
PLACE OF ARBITRATION: THE HAGUE, THE NETHERLANDS
DATE: 17 SEPTEMBER 2013

THE TRIBUNAL:

Dr Horacio A. Grigera Naén:¢ >
4 _ .

Professor Vaughan Lowe; Le powtoe

V.V. Veeder (President:) Jar. Marte, ese

_

APPENDIX 1
THE 1995 Settlement Agreement

(Spanish original version)

 

+k

 

From : TEXACD QUITO 593-2-5§8612 may 0s. zase 11:27 AM Pe2
+ >

 

8 Lcuapay
as y tena Phlg sMazombor

! ouador Remediation
“VP-OUICA UBL. ECUADOR File. XLALD.i te
10 DE ENERGIA ¥ MURAD

 

te.

CONTRATO PARA LA EJECUCION DE
TRABAIOS DE REP ARS CION SEO OAMBTENTAL yi
C] SP E

 

ESTE CONTRATO para la Ejecucién de Trabajos de Reparacién Ambiental y Liberacién de
Obligaciones, Responsabilidades y Demandas, se cclebra entre el Gobierno ‘del Ecuador,
representado por el Ministro de Energia y Minas, Dr. Galo Abril Ojeda, al que se denominard
"el Gobierno", y la Empresa Estatal Petréleos def Ecuador, PETROECUADOR, represemada
por su Presidente Ejecutivo, Dr. Federico Vintimilla, a la que se denominard
“PETROECUADOR’, por una parte; y por otra, Texaco Petroleum Company, una Corporacién
de Delaware, con oficinas en la Ave. 6 de Diciembre 2816 y James Orton, Quito, Ecuador,
representada por su Vicepresideme, Sr. Ricardo Reis ea y su Representante Legal, Dr.

Rudrigo Pérez Pallarcs, a 1a que se denominaré “TEXP!

CONSIDERANDO que, Texas Petroleum Company fi fi ra contrato de concesién de derechos
de i e1 5 de marzo de 1964 y,

Para la y

Por el mismo instrumento, con aprobacién del Gebenn dicho contrato fue transferido a Ia
Compaffa Texaco de Petréleos del Ecuador, C. A. y a Gulf Ecuatoriana de Petrdéleo, S.A.,
contrato que fue registrado en el Ministerio de Minas el 14 de marzo del mismo aiio;

CONSIDERANDO que, 1a Compafifa Texaco de Petréleos de) Ecuador, C,A. y Gulf
Ecuatoriana de Petrdleo S.A. firmaron un contrato ampliatorio y modificatorio con el Gobierno.
tl 27 de junio de 1969, el mismo que fue registrado en el Ministerio de Industrias y Comercio

el 30 de junio del mismo afio;

CONSIDERANDO que, con la i6n del yf Minit

No. 844 del 20 de diciembre de 1965, im Cont Perolera Panes, Cc. “ yla Compafifa
Petrolera Aguarico. S.A., para de
Midrocasten es por sietic del teuipa efectuado por Minas y Peswleoe del Beuader, Sociedad
Anénima;

CONSIDERANDO que, las Compafifas Petrolcra Pastaza, C.A. y Petrolera Aguarico, $.A.,
firmaron un contrato ampliatorio y modificatorio con el Gobierno el 27 de junio de 1969, el
raismo que se registré en ¢l Ministerio de Industrias y Comercio cl} 30 de junio del mismo aio;
CONSIDERANDO que, ja Compajfila Texaco de Petréleos del Ecuador, y Golf
Hcuatoriana de Petréleo S.A., a las cuales sucedieron finalmente TEXPET y PTROREUADOR
(de aqui en adelante denominadas “Consorcio"), firmaron un Acuerdo de Operacién Conjunta
con TEXPET cl 1 de enero de 1965, que cubre la operacién de las instalaciones del Consorcio
(de aquf en adelante denominado "Convenio Napo"): 2

PAS

we

 

11.9, 2850 11:27 AM

From} TEXACO QUITO 593-7 “68612 tee. G9. oer
#1 ccusvon WA 3100,

a V cena pays amazomitor

AEPNUEA DEL ECUADUR
SVR DE ENERGIA ¥ MIAS

Pagina 2

CONSIDERANDO que, !a unificacién de los contratos y/o 1a duracién de los misinos, asf como
la sit c de la iva de Jas di: cra para
la de las obli para el de la Industria Petrolera
Ecuatoriana, como Io establece el Decreto Supremo No, 516 de mayo 11 de 1973;

CONSIDERANDO que, el Gobierno, dando cumplimiento a las provisiones del Decreto
Supremo No. 516/73, autoriz6 Ja unificaci6n, reemplazo y modificacién de los contratos
firmados con anterioridad con la Compaiifa Texaco Petréleos del Ecuador, C.A., con Guif
Ecuatoriana de Petréleo, S.A., y sus respectivas compayilas afiliadas, Compafifa Petrolera
Pastaza C.A., y Compaiiia Aguarico, S.A., en un solo contrato para la exploraci6a y explotacién
de hidrocarburos, el mismo que se firmé cl 6 de agosto de 1973 por y entre e] Gobierno,
TEXPET y Ecuadorian Gulf Oil Company (a la que s¢ denominaré “Gulf*), el mismo que fue
debidamente aprobado por el Decreto Supremo 925, del 4 de agosto de 1973 (al que se le
denominaré ¢! “Contrato de 1973");

CONSIDERANDO que, ta Corporacién Estatal Petrolera Ecuatoriana (CEPE), hoy
PETROECUADOR, adquirié el 6 de junio de 1974 un 12.5% de participaci6n indivisible de los
derechos y obligaciones de TEXPET y un 12.5% de participacién indivisible de los derechos

y obligaciones de Gulf, en el contato de 1973 y convenios y acuerdos relacionados;

CONSIDERANDO que. CEPE, que fue reemplazada por PETROECUADOR, adquirié el 27
de mayo de 1977, los intereses, derechos y obligaciones Indivisibles restantes de Gulf en el
contrato de 1973, y convenios y acuerdos relacionados;

CEPE adquirié c] 100% de propiedad del Oleoducto Transecuatoriano

CONSIDERANDO que,
‘nico operadar del mismo el 1

el 1 de marzo de 1986 y PETROECUADOR se convirtié cn el
de octubre de 1989:

CONSIDERANDO que, PETROECUADOR cjercié sus derechos cstipulados en el Convenio
Napo y reemplaz6 a TEXPET como operadora del Consorcio cl 1 de julio de 1990;
CONSIDERANDO que, él contrato de 1973 expiré el 6 de junio de 1992 y el Gobierno,
PETROECUADOR y TEXPET han emprendido negociaciones para determinar el Impacto
Ambiental potencial resultante de las operaciones del Consorcio en Ia Regién Oricntal del

Heuador,

Mos

‘+ From  TEXACD QUITO S33-2-"S8612 Mav @9,285@ 11:27 AN Pea

ACUADAR ha £100.
Fs y'SEm8 Pars buatOmco"

AEPVBLICA DEL ECUADOR
ZALASYRRIO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS

Pégina 3

CONSIDERANDO que. como se describe en este Centrato, TEXPET, el Gobierno y

PETROECUADOR han determinado y convenido en ¢l alcance del Trabajo de Reparacién

Ambiental a ser realizado por TEXPET para descargo de todas sus obligaciones legales y
les y sus resp por el Impacto Ambit de las det

Consorcio;

CONSIDERANDO quc, TEXPET conviene en emprender dicho Trabajo de Reparacién

pene en consideracién a que seré liberada y descargada de todas sus eee Cae

y por el Impacio

ak

Consoreios
EN VIRTUD DE LO CUAL, las partes conviencn en Io siguicnte:

ARTICULO}
DEEINICIONES

1.1 Convenios de} Consorcio.- Aquellos acuerdos relacionados con Ia exploracién y
produccién, transporte y manejo del petréleo de Consorcio listados en el Anexo B de
documento,

este
1.2 Qperaciones del Consorcio,- Aquellas ‘operaciones de exploracién y produccién de
petréleo Ievadas a cabo de acuerdo con los convenios de} Consorcio.
Impacto Ambiental.- Cualquier substancia sdlida, Iiquida o gaseosa presenic o liberada
en cl ambiente a (al concentracién o condicién, cuya presencia o Hberacién causa o tiene
el poder de causar dafio a 1a salud de los humanos o al medioambiente,

1.4 Contratista.- La Compasifa seleccionada por TEXPET para realizar el Trabajo de
Reparacién Ambiental de una lista de contratistas internacionales de servicios
ambientales, aprobada por ef Ministerio de Energia y Minas a nombre del Gobierno y
PETROECUADOR mediante el Memorandum 00S-SMA-95 de 7 de febrero de 1995,
suscrito por el Subsecretario de Medioambiente, de acuerdo con este Contratu,

 

From : TEXACO QUITO 593-2 “68612 Mae @9, 2050 11:27 AM Pes

f

PEFUBLICA DEL ECUADOR
MINISTEKIO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS

1 Fouscce ma YOD,
(8 v Sena puis amazon

Pigina 4

Arbitro Técnico Independiente.- La entidad seleccionada por las Partes de una lista de~
especialistas Internacionales de servicios amblentales, aprobada por ol Ministerto de
Energia y Minas a nombre del Gobierno y PETROECUADOR, mediante el Officio # 066-
95-DINAMA-SMA-951125 de 28 de abril de 1995, para resolver cualesquiera disputas
con respecto a sj el Trabajo de Reparacién ‘Ambiental, en la forma en que se Jo haya
realizado, conticne o no un Cambio Sustancial al Alcance def Trabajo establecido en el
Anexo A, complementado en el Plan de Accién de Reparacién. Esta resolucién sera
definitiva y obligatoria para Jas partes.

1.6 Plan de AcciGn de ReparaciGn.- EJ plan detallado Para realizar cl Trabajo de Reparacién

por Ia Contratista luego de fa

de Servicios y aprobado por TEXPET y el Ministerio de Paces y Minas a nombre dei
Gobierno y PETROECUADOR, que ser4 complementario al Alcance de! Trabajo adjunto

como Anexo A

we
au

Akance del Trabajo.- Et alcance def conjunto de trabajos y accioncs para la reparaciéa

convenido entre las partes y establecido en el Anexo A que se requiere para

y liberar a TEXPET, frente al Gobierno y PETROECUADOR, de todas Jas obligaciones

legales y consractuales, y de Ia responsabilidad del Impacto Ambiental resultante de las
jones del Consorcio.

1.8 Trabajo de Reparacién Ambiental.- Todos los trabajos y acciones a cargo de TEXPET,
su Contratista 0 los subcontratistas de éste, que deberdn ser ejecutados de acuerdo con
el Alcance del Trabajo establecido en el Anexo A y el Plan de Accién de Reparacién y
bajo los términos de este Contrato,
1.9 — Contrato de Servicios.- El comtrato entre TEXPET y la Contratista que fija los términos
y condiciones para Ia preparacién del Plan de Accién de Reparacién y 1a realizacién del
Trabajo de Reparacién Ambiental contemplado en este Contrato.
Notificacién de Cambio Sustancial.- Notificacién a TEXPET por parte del Ministerio
de Energfa y Minas a nombre del Gobierno y PETROECUADOR, sefialando Ia opinién
del Ministerio en el sentido de que el trabajo de Reparaci6n Ambiental, en Ja forma que
ha sido realizado, contiene un Cambio Sustanclal a Jo estipulado cn ci Alcance ded
Trabajo establecido en el Anexo A, complementado por ef Plan de Accién de

Reparacidn.

rh
poss
~

rom : TEXACD GUITO 593-2-"68612 Mav @9.2858 11:27 AM Pee

(RL ECUADOR Ha 2109,
€2 V 5ene pats auAzomice®

FA

#EPIBLICA DEL. SCUADOR
MINISTERIO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS

Pégina S

4
* 1,11 Cambio Sustancial.- Una desviacién significativa del Alcance del Trabajo establecido
en ef Anexo A, complementado por el Plan de Accién de Reparacién, resuitante de
acciones u omisiones en Ia ejecucién por parte de Ja Contratista de! Trabajo de
Reparact6n Ambiental, y que causare que este Trabajo de Reparacién Ambiental no
cumpla con Io fijado en el Alcance del Trabajo y en el Plan de Accién de Reparacién.

1.12 Liberaci6n.- La liberacién, bajo las provisiones del Articulo V de este Contrato, de
todas las obligaciones legales y contractuales y de la responsabilidad, frente al Gobierno

y PETROECUADOR, por Impacto Ambiental resultante de las Operaciones del
incluyendo cualesquiera demandas que tengan o puedan tener tanto cl

Consorcio,
Gobierno como PETROECUADOR contra TEXPET, como resultado de los Convenios
del Consorcio.
ARTICULO JI
ALCANCE DEL TRABAJO

Las partes convienen en que el Trabajo de Reparacién Ambiental en el Area del Consorcio que
se requiere para satisfacer y liberar de obligaciones a TEXPET bajo Jos Convenios del
Consorcio, debe concordar con el Alcance del Trabajo descrito en ei Anexo A, a
complementarse en el Plan de Accién de Reparacién, a ser preparado por Ja Contratista

seleccionada por TEXPET, seguin fo aprobado por las Partes.

ABTICULO WT
REALIZACION DEL TRABAJO

3.1 TEXPET deberd emprender el Trabajo de Reparacion Ambiental, a su solo costo y bajo
su sola y exclusiva responsabilidad. Si TEXPET asi lo desca, podré realizar el reste

de Reparacién Ambiental a través de una Contratista calificada y seleccionada por
TEXPET, de Ia lista de compafifas aprobadas por el Ministerio de Janergfa y Mine a a
G nombre del Gobierno y PETROBCUADOR, mediante e] Memorandum 005-SMA-95 de
L . 7 de febrero de 1995, suscrito por el Subsecretario de Medioambiente, sin que esta
ZN ¢ uprobacign Sa a eae ieee rene col

ed del Trabajo de Reparacié: que, cate i
i

 

From : TEXACO QUITO 593-2-"8612

aerveci

 

May 99.2858 11:27 AM Per

"HL 2CUADOR Ha 100.
AS SERA pais AuAZOMICE

 

A DEL ECUAOGR

MUUSTERID DE ENERGIA Y MINAS

aa

 

3.2

3.3 (a)

3.3 (b)

Pagina 6

compromete a efectuar. E1 Pian de Reparacién Ambiental debe ser realizado de acuerdo
con el Alcance del Trabajo, leyes y reglamentos ambientales vigentes en el Ecuador a
la fecha de la firma del presente Contato, especialmente las Regulaciones Ambientales
para las Actividades Hidrocarburlferas (Acuerdo Ministerial No. 621 de 1992) y, como
complemento a ellas, las précticas y los estfndares internacionales actualmente vigentes
para Ja industria pewrolera, especialmente los consignados en Ia "Gufa Operacional de la
Industria Petrolera en Selvas Tropicales” del Foro E&P, de abril de 1991 y la “Gufa para
el Manejo de Desechos de Exploraci6n y Produccién (E&P)", de septiembre de 1993.

En el caso de que TEXPET decida ejecutar el Trabajo de Reparaci6a Ambiental a través
de una Contratlsta, TEXPET celebraré con dicha Contratista un Contrato de Servicios
para Ia realizacién de] Plan de Reparacién Ambicntal. Una vez que se haya firmado el
Contrato de Servicios entre TEXPET y la Contratista, Ja Contratista debera a
Plan de Acci6n de Reparaci6n para su revision y aceptaci6n por parte de TEXPET y el
Ministerio de Fnergfa y Minas a nombre del Gobierno y de PETROBCUADOR. Esta
aceptacién del Ministerio de Energia y Minas a nombre del Gobierno y
PETROECUADOR o su objecién, total o parcial, del Plan de Accién de Reparacién
deberin ser hechos en un plazo no mayor a quince (15) dias hébiles, coniados a partir
de la fecha de su presentaci6n al Ministerio de Energia y Minas. En caso de objecién
total o parcial, Jas partes negociarén de bucna fé la resolucién de esas discrepancias en
un término de otros quince (15) dias hébiles.

El Gobiemo y PETROECUADOR conviencn en penmitir al personal de la
Contratista, a sus subcontratistas, el acceso a los sitios donde se
realizar4 el Trabajo de Reparacién Ambiental, durante un perfodo razonable de
tiempo, que le permita preparar el Pian de Accién de Reparacién y levar a cabo
el Trabajo de Reparacién Ambiental.

Tanto el Gobierno como PETROECUADOR y sus subsidiarias harfn los mejores
esfuerzos para que sus propias operaciones no interfieran en lo posible con la
pjecucién del Trabajo de R i ibiental, de d con ef Alcance
del Trabajo establecido en el Anexo A y cl Plan de Acciém de Reparacién.
PETROECUADOR deberé proveer a TEXPET, a sa Contratista o a los
subcontratistas de éste, cuando fuere necesatio y en medida de las
isponi i6n adecuada, apoyo
logistico y seguridad de su personal, equipo y materiales empleados para la
ejecucién del Trabajo de Reparacién Ambiental que TEXPET se compromete a

realizar.

 

. From : TEXACO QUITO 593-2-"68612 Ma 89.2858 11:27 AM Pes

EL EEHANON ha ZC.
€3 7 5Ene pars auazowes:
MEPUBLACA DEL xCUADOR
MnusTERIO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS
Pégina 7

4 3.3 (©) Los proyectas de compensacién socioeconémica previsios en el Alcance del
Trabajo establecida en el Anexo A serén financiados por TEXPET segun lo
acordado en dicho Alcance del Trabajo, y sin que TEXPET tenga responsabilidad

alguna por la ejecucién de dichos proyectos.

ARTICULO IV,
CERTIFICACION Y ACEPTACION DEL TRABAJO

TEXPET debe asegurarse que el Trabajo de Reparacién
acuerdo con e} Alcance del Trabajo, a complementarse en el Plan de Accién de Reparacién
aprobado por las Panes.

4.1 Una vez que se haya completado e] Trabajo de Reparacién Ambiental en cada sitio,
TEXPET deberé notificar, de inmediato y por escrito, al Ministerio de Energla y Minas
que seré el tinico receptor a nombre del Gobiemo y PETROBCUADOR, que su
obligacién de evar a cabo cl Trabajo de Reparacién Ambiental ha sido satisfecha, bajo
Jos términos de cste Contrato. El} Ministerio tendré quince (15) dfas calendario contados
a partir de Ja fecha cn que se haya efectuado Ia indicada notificacién para inspeccionar
¢] Trabajo de Reparacién Ambiental en el sitio y para notificar a TEXPET de
Cambio Sustancial con respecto al Alcance del Trabajo o Plan de Accién de Reparacién
Ambiental. Si no se hace ninguna notificacién de Cambio sustancial durante e! indicado
ae se consideraré que el Gobierno y PETROECUADOR han aceptado que cl
Trabajo de Reparacién Ambiental ha sido ejecutado bajo los términos de este Contrato.
Con Ia aceptacién del Trabajo de Reparacién Ambicntal por parte del Ministerio a
nombre del Gobierno y PETROECUADOR. TEXPET habrd satisfecho sus obligaciones
con respecto a aquel sitio y la Wberacidn establecida en el Ariiculo V de este Contrato
se hard efectiva.

4.2 Encl caso de que el Ministerio notifique a TEXPET su opinién cn ef sentido de que se

ha dado lugar un Cambio Sustancial en ese sitlo, TEXPET y el Ministerio tienen quince
(15) dfas calendario contados a partir de la fecha de !a notificacién de Sustancial
para negociar en buena fe Ja resolucién de {a disputa. Si fas Partes no Megan a un
acuerdo dentro de ese término, cada Parte tendr& cinco (5) dias calendario para remitir
su posicién por escrito al Arbitro Técnico Independiente para su resolucién.

 

 

we

Mav @9.2858 11:27 Am Pes

From : TEXACO QUITO S93-2-"58612

“EL FCUADDA Ha S1DO,
5 ¥ Sma Pals attaZOnico™

REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR
MINISTERIO DE ENERGIA ¥ MINAS

 

Pégina 8

ARTICULO ¥
LIBERACION DE LAS DEMANDAS

A la fecha de suscripcién de este Contrato y en consideracién al acuerdo de TEXPET

de realizar ef Trabajo de Reparacién Ambiental de acuerdo con el Alcance del Trabajo

establecido en e) Anexo A y el Plan de Accién de Reparacién Ambiental, el Gobierno

y PETROECUADOR liberarfn, absolverin y descargaran para siempre a TEXPET,

Texas Petroleum Company, Compafifa Texaco de Petréleos de] Ecuador S.A., Texaco

Inc., y a todos sus respectivos agentes, sirvicntes, empleados, funcionarios, directores,
legales, abogados, garantes,

y
subsidiarias (a las que se denominarf "Las Exoneradas*) de cualquier otra demanda del
Gobierno y PETROECUADOR en contra de Las Exoneradas por Impacto Ambiental,
resultante de las Operaciones del Consorciv, a excepcién de aquelias reJacionadas con
las obligaciones contrafdas en este Contrato para Ja ejecucién por TEXPET del Alcance
del Trabajo (Anexo A), las cuales serén liberadas conforme se vaya ejecutando el
Trabajo de Reparacién Ambiental a satisfaccién del Gobiemo y PETROECUADOR, de
conformidad con las cldusulas 5.3 y 5.4 de este Contrato. El! Gobierno y
PETROECUADOR en que sus d:
disputadas y que TEXPET niega cualquier responsabilidad sobre cstas demandas.
Adicionalmente, e] Gobiemo y PETROECUADOR convienen en que esta Liberacién de
Demandas y compromisus no seré nunca ofrecida o admitida como evidencia contra
TEXPET o interpretada como confesién o admisién de responsabilidad en cualquier

Juicio o procedimiento legal.

El Gobierno y PETROECUADOR entienden por demandas cualquiera y todas las
demandas, derechos de demandas, deudas, embargos, acciones y multas por causas de
orden comin, de derecho civil ° de equidad. basadas cn contratos o hechos oanen
causas de accién y
no limit4ndose a causas de acci6n bajo el Articulo 19-2) de Ia Constitucién Politica de de
Ja Repiblica del Ecuador, Decreto No. 1459 de 1971. Decreto No. 925 de 1973, Ia Ley
de Aguas, R.O. 233 de 1973, ORD No. 530 de 1974, Decreto No. 374 de1976, Decreto
No. 101 de 1982 0 Decreto No. 2144 de 1989. o cualquier otra Icy o regulacién de Is
Republica del Ecuador que sea pertinente), costos, juicios. Iiquidaciones, y honorarios
de abogados (pasados, presentes, futuros, conocidos 0 desconocidos), que el Gobierno
o PETROECUADOR tengan o puedan tener en contra de cada liberacion relacionados
de alguna manera con la contaminacién, que cxista o pucda surgir. directa o
indirectamente, de las Operaciones del Consorcio, incluyendo, pero no tno lirnitindose, »

consecvencias de todos los tipos de dafios que el Gobierno o PETROECUADOR

f

 

. From: TEXACO QUITO S33-2-"<e612 Mav 99.2058 11:27 An Pia

 

“EL ccus0NR
SV SERA Paid amar

 

AMSLICR DAL ccuan at
siiiees LMIO DE ENEMGIA ¥ MAAS

ws

Mo Pégina 9

Ppodieran alegar con respecto a las personas, propiedad, negocios, reputaciones, y todos

los otros tipos de perjuicios que se puedan medir en términos de dinero, incluyendo, pero

no a 5B
incumplimiento de garantia, o cualquier teoria o tcorfa potencial de recuperac’

5.3

estricta,
ibn.

Con respecto al Trabajo de Reparaci6n Ambiental a ser ejecutado de acuerdo con el
Alcance de} Trabajo establecido en el Anexo A, a complementarse con cl Plan de Accién

de Reparacién, ta Liberacién para cada sitio se hard efectiva inmediatamente y de forma
definitiva, bajo:

a)

b)

c)

la aceptacién del Ministerio de Energfa y Minas a nombre del Gobierno y de
PETROECUADOR, segiin el Articulo 4.1 de este Contrato, de la notificaci6n de
TEXPET de que el Trabajo de Reparacién Ambiemal requerido para un sitio ha
sido completado en su totalidad de acuerdo con el Alcance de! Trabajo y el Plan

de Accién de Reparacién aprobado; 0

Ja determinacién del Arbitro Técnico Independiente de que e} Trabajo de

Reparacién Ambiental, segdn el Articulo 4.2 de este Contrato, requerido para un

sitio ha sido completado en su totalidad de acuerdo con el Alcance del Trabajo,

ne Plan de Acci6n de Reparacién aprobado y que no ha existido ningdin Cambio
istancial; o

Ta ejecucién por parte de TEXPET o de su Contratista 0 de los subcontratistas de
€ste, a costo de TEXPET, de todos los trabajos requeridos para que el Trabajo
de Reparacién Ambiental sea complementado en su totalidad de acuerdo con el
Alcance del Trabajo establecido en el) Anexo A y el Plan de Accién de
Reparacién aprobado por Jas partes, en el caso de que el dictamen del Arbitro

 

Técnico I total 0 las que el
Ministerio de Energia y Minas haya formulado a la ejecucién del Trabajo de
Reparacién Ambiental realizado por TEXPET, su Contratista o los subcontratistas

de éste en un sitio que haya sido objeto de una notificacién expedids por
TEXPET,

 

From : TEXACD QUITO S93-2-"S8612

 

JILDUCA BEI LCKADUR
MIMISLERIO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS

Pagina 10

4 5.4 La Siberacién de Jas responsabilidades de TEXPET respecto a los Proyectos de
Compensacién Socioeconémica contemplados en el Alcance del Trabajo establecido en
el Anexo A, scré efectiva, de forma inmediata y definitiva, en el momento en que
TEXPET efecnie los respectivos desembojsos, hecho que se produciré a la ‘probaciéa
por parte del Ministerio de Energia y Minas de! Plan de Accién de Reparacién.

ARTICULO VI
TERMINACION

6.1 Una vez que se haya firmado el Convenio de Prestaci6n de Servicios, TEXPET puede
dar por terminado este Contrato sin tener Ia obligacién de realizar cl Plan de Reparacién

Ambiental en el caso de que:

a) el Ministerio de Energia y Minas a nombre del Gobierno y PETROECUADOR

fio apruebe el] Plan de Accién de Reparacién; o

el Gobierno se rehuse a aceptar la certificacién de TEXPET de que el Trabajo de
ha remitido

Reparacién Ambiental ha sido completado en un sitio, una vez que se
la disputa al Arbitco Técnico Independiente y se ha encontrado que el Trabajo ha

sido Nevado a cabo adec:

b)

ARTICULO VII
SEGUROS

TEXPET y PETROECUADOR deben obtener y mantener vigentes s¢guros que los peas
contra cualquier pérdida de ta del Trabajo de
cualquier otra actividad realizada bajo los términos y condiciones de este Contraio. Cada 1 a

+, { de las dos citadas Partes deberd nombrar a la otra como coasegurada en su péliza de seguros y
uf proporcionardé a la otra parte copias de dichas pélizas.

 

From

 

8.1

8.2

 

Mar 99.2058 11:27 AM Pi2

3 TEXACD QUITO 553-2 ~48612

1th 360,
aazomnco"

 

ZI

DedalCA DEL acdAOun
2 DE ENERGIA Y MWNAS

Pégina 11

ARTICULO VII
FUERZA MAYOR

Ninguna de las partes seré responsable por demoras o incumplimiento de los términos
de este Contrato siempre y cuando el incumplimicnto se deba a Fuerza Mayor. Para los
efectos de cste Contrato Ia “Fuerza Mayor" comprende eventos 0 circunstancias mds allé
del contro! razonable de la Parte, que prevenga o impida fa debida realizacién de este
Contrato y que a pesar de sus esfuerzos fa Parte no pucde evitar, incluyendo caso
fortuito, terremotos, incendios, inundaciones, o elementos de mala conducta,
insurrecci6n, revueltas, huelgas, paros, boicots, motines, disturblos laborales, i

piiblico, guerra (declarada o no declarada), cumplimiento de cualquier ley o regulacién,
o cualquier causa fuera del control de cualquicra de las partes, similar o no a las causas

aqu{ enumeradas.

La Parte que no pueda realizar e} trabajo debido a Fuerza Mayor, inmediatamente deberd
notificar por escrito a Ja otra Parte sobre las circunstancias que constituyan la Fuerza
Mayor y su alcance, y deberé ser excusada de Ja realizacién o puntual realizacién de tales
obligaciones si las condiciones de Fuerza Mayor continfan. La Parte afectada por la
Fuerza Mayor deberd hacer todo el esfuerzo posible para minimizar sus efectos y deberf
reiniciar los wabajos tan pronto como sea posible, una vez que las circunstancies de Ia
Fuerza Mayor hayan sido climinadas. Bajo ninguna circunstancia, ninguna de las Partes
deberé ser responsable por lucro cesante, o dafios especiales, indirectos o consiguientes,
resultantes de cualquier demora causada por un evento de Fuerza Mayor.

ARTICULO IX
MISCELANEOS
= Todas las notificaciones requeridss 0 permitidas bajo este Contrato

Notificaciones
deberdn enviarse por escrito y ser entregadas durante horas hébiles de trabajo, en persona
0 por correo, por cualquier medio electrénico de transmisi6n de comunicacién escrita

 

Mav @9.2058 11:27 AM Piz

From : .TEXACD QUITO 593-2-"68612
“RL cepaoon Ha a
UY SER6 Pats awazonico™

niPupuCA DEL ECUADOR
MISTERIO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS

Pagina 12

ish y dirigidas a las .

~~

que proporci én de recibo de
Partes, como se deacibe a continuacién:

 

Santa Prisca 223 y Manvel Larrea, Quito

Direccién:

Seftor Ministro de Energia y Minas

Atencién:
cc; Subsecretario de Medioambiente

PETROECUADOR:
Direccién: —Alpallana y 6 de Diciembre, Quito

Atenci6n: Presidente Ejecutivo

ce: Jefe de la Unidad de Proteccién Ambiental
TEXPET:
Direccién:

Atencién: Dr. Rodrigo Pérez P.
cc: Sr, E. O, Wakefield

Ave. 6 de Diciembre 2816 y James Orton. Quito

9.2 Representante de Texaco.- TEXPET deberd designar por escrito a una o mas personas
que representen a TEXPET en Jo relacionado con cl Trabajo de Reparacién Ambicntal,
que deberd realizarse de acuerdo con este Contrato.

9.3 Contrato Completo.- Este Contrato contiene tous los términos y condiciones acordados
por las Partes con respecto al Trahajo de Reparacién Ambiental y con todos los asuntos
que de alguna manera puedan afectar dicho Trabajo de Reparacién Ambiental, No se
considerard la existencia de ningdn otro conveniv. verbal o de otra indole. en relacién
con este Contrato o que comprometan a las Partes,

9.¢ — Beneficios para Terceros.- No se deberd inferir que este Contrato conferira beneficios
@ ferceros que no sean parte de este Contrato. ni tampoco que proporcionard derec!

a tercerus para hacer cumplir sus provisiones.

  

+k

From : TEXACD GUITO S93-2-"sa612 Ma 3.2058 11:27 AM Pia

“th ECUADOR HA HOD *
es v otha Pare naAzOMCO"

 

REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR
MINISTERIO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS

Pégina 13

9.5  Subtftulos.- Se utilizarin dnicamente Lp eran OS eer Ie ro
limitar4n o describirin Ja intencién de ningtin Articulo o especificacin de este Contrato.

9.6  Sustitucién - Este contrato sustituye y deja sin efecto el Memorando de Entendimiento
suscrito por las partes el 14 de diciembre de 1994, en concordancia con lo estipulado en
el dltimo parrafo del Alcance del Trabajo de Reparacién Ambiental suscrito por Ins
partes cl 23 de marzo de 1995.

EN VIRTUD DE LO CUAL, las PARTES firman este Contrato en Quito, a Ga NAY 1995

Dad

Dr. Galo Abril Ojeda ©
MINISTRO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS

Dr. Rodrigo Pérez Pailares
REPRESENTANTE LEGAL DE
TEXACO PETROLEUM COMPANY

 

Mar. 89. 11:27 AN Pis
Texrco Quito Ss3-2-"68612 . . ae
“EL ECUADGR Ha S100,
en ¥ Guna Pais amazomrecer

From :

AEPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR
“{INISTERIO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS

“ANEXO "A"

ALCANCE DEL TRABAJO
DE REPARACION AMBIENTAL

De conformidad con las cléusulas |.a), Il y V del Memorando da
Entendimiento entre el Estado Ecuatoriano, Petroecuador y Texaco
ido el 14 de di de 1994, las

(Texpet),
partes han acordado eatablecer ef siguiente Alcance de! Trabajo de
Reparaclén Ambiental y Mitigacién y Compensaciones

Socloeconémicas;
1. Clesre de Placinas en tae Locaciones de Pozos
Jas en

Serén
las locaciones da Pe oF Jantiguo Consorclo ipearsecciadsre

Texaco, a la fecha def 30 de junio de 1980 y que se encuentran
Identificadas en ef inventario Oficial (Anexo 1). Dicho

taponamlento consisiiré en to algulente:

1. $e hard la recuperacién del crudo, el mismo que sera
entregado en el lugar @ Petroscuador para su uso
posterior, sin que Texpet tonga responsabilidad alguna
respecto al destino y ulilizacién de ese crudo.

2 crudo que no se incorporare a@ la produccién nacional
serd tratado y entregado al Ministerio de Obras Pabiicas
a través de Potroscuador, el que seré usado en las vias
de la Amazonia en tos sectores de afectacién,

El crudo que no pudiere ser recuperado serd tratado en

EI
ta propia placina o ex-situ.
Teda el agua residual ser4 iguaimente tratada y

ak

8. Cuando ef caso fo amerite, se taponara la piscina con
tierra, de forma de evitar la eroslén.

6. Una vez taponada ta piscina se_-procedaré. a la
revegstacién del area taponada. 2

  

From 2 ‘TEXACD QUITO S93-2-S68612 Ma. @9. 2858 11:27 AN Pig
“tu tcus00n Ha B00.
ev Sama Pals amAZORICO™

AEPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR
MINISTERIO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS
Pagina 2

7. Si ena realizacién de los trabajos de remediacién se
encontraren otras plscinas relacionadas con los sitios
de perforacién basados en ol Inventario Oficial (Anexo
1), pero fuera de aquellos clitios, y que sean de

bilidad del
Texaco a la fecha def 30 he Junio de 1890, serin
Incluidas en los trabajos a efectuarse.

uh. istach de ci

Se deben realizar modificaciones a las descargas de aguas do
produccién en nueve estaciones de produccién que son:
Aguarico, Atacap!, Yuca, Auca Sur, Lago Agrio Norte,
Shushufind! Sur, Shushufindl! Sur Oeste, Guanta y Cononaco;
y en cuatro locaciones de pozos en las que se descargaba
agua de produccién, que son: Auca Sur 1, Dureno 1, Culebra
1 y Yulobra 1, 2 fin de que las descargas cumplan con las
limitaciones de calidad del agua existentes en Regulacionas
Medioambientales Ecuatorianas actuales (Acuerdo Ministerial
No. 621 y Decreto Ejecutive 1802). Las modificaciones deberin
inclulr extensién de ta desembocadura en cuerpos de o-
mas des que pir con las It

donds no sea posible la extensién de ia desembocadura am
manantiales de recension Eee grandes veces cuando sca

 

definitiva, las aguas de i duecion enel ‘subsuclo,

La revisién de la operacién de las plecinas de aguas de

Produccién y su capeeieed debe Inctulr mejoras y
{ajom.,

untones ‘inferiores en fas iste jas de entrada para las aguas do
del

 

de

desnatado, ete.).
La tecnologia sera basada en [a clausule Il del Memorando de

Entendimiento.

ill. Instalaciones Abandonadas

Las Instalaciones de! antiguo Consorclo que han sido
abandonadas con anterioridad al 30 de junio.de.1590 y que
constan en el Anexo 2, deberan ser pxamina

de tas 16 t

   
 

de fa evaluacién,

os

mae @9.205@ 11:27 AM Pi?

From : TEXACO GUITO S93-2-"S8612 :
- “EL ECUADOR MA B00.
8 ¥ Gama Pais amazomico”

MEPUELICA DEL ICDADOR
ERIO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS
MINISTERIO DE E) Pagina 3

 

 
   

 

 

 

 

iv. Jo: im
La contaminacién de suelos por nieces presente en las
del de las
operaciones anteriores al 30 de junto. ‘de 1990, debe ser
remediada, Los suelos contaminados como resultado de las
operaciones posteriores a! 30 de junio de 1990, no seran
reparados como parte de este trabajo. La restauracién de los
suelos contaminados se cefird a la Iimpleza de:
1. Derrames de fluidos producidos
2. Aquellos asoclados con los pozos, de confarmidad con
Anexo 3.
3. de tang! de
compensacién y de lavado
4 86D Pi por ib:
aquellos provenientes de desagues y sumideros
6. De con
fosas de estaciones de producclény aquellos Soueriee
en tuberias secundarias.
Nota: alacla Ml del de
V.  Reslembra

Tanto en los sitios de perforacién (Anexo 1) como en fas
Instalaclones abandonadas (Anexo 2) se resembraré el suelo
con vegetacién propia del lugar y utilizando la técnica
aproplada, .

Nota: Ref la ala Vdel

 

as

Mau, @9, 2058 11:27 FM pis

From : TEXACO QUITO S93-27-$68612
. “Et ErvaboR MA SiD0.
‘EY SEM Pars AMATONICO’
ASPUBLICA CEL ECUADOR
MINISTERIO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS
Pagina 4

Vi. Diques de Contencién
16 ar de tos

Se diques de
de 15 tan en el

Ituados en fas
Anexo 4, conforme al Acta de entrega-Recepelén del Antiguo
Consorclo PETROECUADOR-TEXACO, aplicando [a clausula fil

del Memorando de Entendimiento.

Vil. Compensaciones Socloeconémicas

Por pedido del Ministerio de Energia y Minas y de
Petroecuador, las partes han acordado sustitulr los proyectos
de Cc que
Identificados en el ilamado "Borrador Final-Propuesta
Reparacién Ambiental” a qua hace referencia ta Cldvauia i w
)) dal Memorando de Entendimliento

(Alcanes de! Trabajo)
firmado el 14 de diclembre de 1994, por fos siguientes:

A. Recursos Naturales
Texpet estableceré un fondo de US$ 1'000.000 para
Proyectos a ser ejecutados por las Jones

indigenas y camposzinas (FOISE y FCUNAE), bajo la
y Minas

coordinacién del Ministerio de

(Subsocretaria del Medio Ambiente) y Petroecuador
(Unidad de Proteccién Ambiental). Este fonde serd
entregado a nombre del Ministerio de Energia y Minas,

ef cual fo administraré de conformidad con lo

establecido en la presente cléusula.

Este fondo seré utilizado para ta rehabilitacién de las

zonas afectadas estableciendo conjuntamente con ta
de de

los recuracs naturales: renovables, y su ejecucién re

are duction y y.

     

Mav 99.2059 11:27 AM Pas

From : TEXAOO QUITO 593-2-"68612
“al ECuADOR ma BDO.
© fea Pam amatonice

AEPUsLICA Bet ECUADOR
MINISTERIO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS Pagina 5

8. = Infraestructura Comunitaria
Texpet financiaré los proyectos que a continuacién se
8.1 Se construiré cuatro Centros Educacionales

Matrices (CEM) y cuatro Olspensarios Médicos
adyacentes, con apoyo logistico de dos
ambulancias fluviales en total, y una avioneta que
estarin ubleados en los lugares a ser
determinados por el Ministerio de Energia y Minas
en coordinacién con los Ministerios de Educacion
y de Salud y del Fondo de tas Naclones Unidas
para la Infancia (UNICEF).

Nota: La Avioneta se entregardé a la Misién Capuchina de
Francisco de Orellana, (Coca) bajo su responsabilidad,
sin que Texpet tenga obligacién ni responsabilidad
alguna raspecto al uso y operacién de Ia aeronave.

B.2 Entrenamiento y material didéctico para
programas de educacién ambiental, a través de
UNICEF y de acuerdo al Memorando de
Entendimiento y pata promotores de salud.

En ef orden padagdgico, al proyecto tlene ef propésito
le el ilo de fa \

Desde el punto de vista de desarrollo comunitario, ol
Proyecto de los CEMS se centra en los aspectos
algulentes:

1 Entregar mensajes educativos adicionales a los
miembros de la comunidad sobre aspectos de
salud, madia ambiente, mejoramiento de la
produccién, nutricién de los nifios, entre o| 7

  

From : TEXACD QUITO 533-2-“68612

Mav. 29,2058 11:27 AN

‘REPUBLICA DEL ECVADOR
MINISTERIO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS
Pagina 6

2. Contribulr a mejorar las condiciones de salud en
fa poblacién de mayor rlesgo: nifios y nifas,
adolescentses de ambos sexcs y mujeres
embarazadas.

3. Apoyar actividades para ef mejoramiento del
estado nutriclonal en menores de 6 afios y en
mujeres embarazadas.

Ademés de financiar la construcclén de los cuatros
CEMS y los cuatro dispensarios médicos y la compra de
las dos ambulancias fluviales y una avioneta, Texpot
suministraré a UNICEF fos fondos necesarics pars la
normal operacién de estos CEMS (a establecarse con

La ejecucién total de este proyecto estaré a cargo de
UNICEF, en coordinacién con los Ministerios de Energia

y Minas, Educaclén y Salud.
Negoclaciones con las Muntcipaiidades de Lago Aagrio
(Nueva Lola), Shushufind!, Joya de los Sachas y
Francisco de Orellana (Coca),

Sin perjuicio de fo acordado en el presente Alcance de
Mamorando de

Trabajo de reparacién ambiental y en el
Ertandimlontc dal 14 de diciembre de 1554, Teapet su

compramete a continuar las negociaciones con las
ds iba a

arrii
establecer la participacién de Texpet en la de
obras en base a proyectos de agua potable y/o
ién para las

y P
cabeceras cantonafes. Los resultados de estas
9 seran del
Al y del C de é yde
Liberacién de Obilgaciones que suscribiran fa:
nt afectaran la ejecucién de dichos Alcance

P2o

"tL ecuason Ha
0 Y bans oun anatomece

   

wk

May.09,2058 11:27 AA P21
Fe $93-2-568612
From i, TEXACO QUITO cay Sine Pit suabomcer

REPUBLICA DIL ECUABOR

MINISTERIO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS
Pagina 7

Los trabajos que no pudieren ser cublertos con los
fondos resultantes de Jas negociaclones con Texpet
seran complementados mediante (a aplicacién del Art. 3
de! Decreto Ejecutivo 675 de 18 de abril de 1993,
publicado en el Registro Oficial No. 174 del 22 do los

mismos mes y afio.

Las partas deci: que ai fi a
14 da diciembre de 1994 seguird sted hasta Ja fecha en que se
suscriba el Contrato para la Ejecucién del Trabajo de Reparacién

Ambiental y Liberacién de Obilgaciones a que se reflere fa Clausula
Queda también entendide que Texpet

Vi de dicho Memorando.
Iniclaré la ejecucién del presente Alcance del Trabajo de Reparacién
Ambiental {uego de Ia firma del referido Contrato.

_aceptan las eatiputaciones que
a Trabajo en Quito, a

  
  

Para constancla de que las Parte:
anteceden, firman el presente

Dr. Gato Abrit Sdotico pilla-Gaté
MINISTRO DE ENERGIA Y MINGS7'?2RRSIDENTEEJECUTIVO, OE

     
  

 

 

‘ 2 &
Or. Rodrigo Pérez Pallares Dr. Ricardo Rels Vel
REPRESENTANTE LEGAL DE VICEPRESIDENTE Di co
TEXACO PETROLEUM COMPANY PETROLEUM COMPANY

we

From ?+ TEXACO QUITO 5S3-2-"68612

P8t ecuacon,
ENERGIA Y MINAS

AnPUBLiCA
MINISTERIO Dg

 

11:27 AM P22
Mav. @9, 205
u cad Pag en 28S.
hv seme Pare aceazoy
‘

 

mens

From i+ TEXROD QUITO 553-2-"68612

* REPUBLICA DEL scUADDA
* MINISTERIO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS

aE EEEESEEEEEEELE

 

- 99.2058 14t2Z7 AM PAS
Ma-- 89. ev SSmA eats dunia

ANDO 1
Pégina2

at

3

Me- 99.2050 11:27 AM

fr
p

From : ‘TEXACD QUITO S93-2 768612 scussoa
-
OV orns ony

AEPUBLICA DEL SCUABOR
MINIBTERIO DE ENERGIA ¥ MINAB

te. |
ANEXO 2
INSTALACIONES ABANDONADAS

SHUSHUFINDI-168
SHUSHUFINDI-34
SHUSHUFIND! 37

INDI-39
SHUSHUPINDI-65
VISTA-1

 

 

wk

. From :, TEXACD QUITO 593~2-S68612 Me.89.2858 11:27 AN P2s

“@. souabon wa B00.
ESV SERA PALS amaTORICE

ALPUBLICA OSL ECVACOR
MINISTERIO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS

ANEXO 3

LISTA DE SITIOS DE PERFORACION
PARA LA REPARACION DE SUELOS
CONTAMINADOS CON HIDROCARBUROS

ac-+
AaG-6
AG+4

 

Ma 09,2059 11:27 A FS
Orie tore

From :+TEXACD QUITO S93-2-"68512
. N

7" + MEPVSLICA 5eL EcuASCA
“MINISTERIO DE: ENERGIA Y MINAS:

ANEXO 4
LISTA DE SITIOS PARA CONSTRUCCION ate DIQUES
PARA TANQUES DE CONTENCI

ae

SACHA NORTE 1 (POZO 36)
CULEBRA 1
AUCA SUR

  

May.09, 2858 11:27 AM Pa?

From 5, TEXACO QUITO 593-2-68612

“EL ECUADOR Ha 5100,
ASV SERa Pais auazoMicor

w@PURUICA BEL ECUAbOR
MITISTERIO DE ENERGIA Y MINAS

ah

“-. ANEXO "B"

ACUERDOS O CONVENIOS RELACIONADOS CON LA
EXPLORACION, PRODUCCION, TRANSPORTE Y
MANEJO DEL PETROLEO DEL CONSORCIO

Contrato de concesién de derechos para la exploracién y explowcién de
rascsits Geaea Testa Paticoatal Compang/V(el Gaukcris Get eestor al's a" stara a 1964

y, por el mismo instrumento, con aprobacidn del Gobierno, este contrato fue transferido a
la Compajiia Texaco de Petréleos del Ecuador, C.A. LO apr ea
contrato que fue registrado en el Ministerio de Minas el 14 de Marzo de 1964.

Conzrato ampliatorio y modificatorio firmado entre Texaco de Petréjeos del Ecuador, C.A.
y Gulf Ecuatoriana de Petréleo S.A. y Gulf Ecuadorian de Petréleo S.A., con e] Gobierno
el 27 de Junio de 1969, ef mismo que fue registrado en el Ministerio de Minas el 30 de
Junio de 1969.

Resolucién Ministerial No. 844 del 20 de Diciembre de 1965, mediante Ja cual la Compaiifa
Petrolera Pastaza C.A. y la Compafifa Petrolera Aguarico, S.A., obtuvieron una concesién
para ta exploracién y explotacién de hidrocarburos por medio del traspaso efectuado por
Minas y Petréleos del Ecuador, Sociedad Anénima.

Contrato ampliatorio y modificatorio suscrito entre el Gobierno Nacional y las 's
Petrolera Pastaza, C.A. y Petrolera Aguarico, S.A., el 27 de Junio de 1969, el mismo que
se registré en el Ministerio de Minas ef 30 de Junio de 1969.

Contrato suscrito el 6 de Agosto de 1973 entre el Gobierno del Ecuador y las compafifas
Texaco Petroleum Company y Ecuadorian Gulf Oi] Company, para la exploracién y
explotacién de hidrocarburos en las entonces provincias del Napo y Pastaza.

Actas suscritas e] 14 de Junio de 1974 entre e! Gobierno del Ecuador, la Corporacién Estatal
Petrolera Ecuatoriana, CEPE, y las compafifas Texaco Petroleum Company y Ecuadorian
Gulf Oil Company, por medio de las cuales CEPE hizo efectiva Ia opcién de participacién
en el 25% de los derechos y acciones prevista en la Cléusula 52 del Contrato del 6 de
Agosto de 1973. om

From : TEXACO QUITO S53-2-S68612 May. WY, dupe lkeer ret tow

a

4
8
3
r
3

5
A
8
8

<
5

ARPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR
MINISTERIO DE ENERGIA ¥ MINAS

ww

Co rea I I ae pe tere
compafifas Ecuadorian Gulf Oil

Estata] Petrolera Ecuatoriana, CEPE, y las
cane por medio del cual se hace efectiva la transferencia a favor de CEPE del 37.5%
de los derechos y acciones en el Contrato del 6 de Agosto de 1973 que posefa esta compafifa

8. as J ON ae er eV eee oe
Agreement* suscrito entre las compafifas Texaco Petréleos del Ecuador C.A. y Gulf
Ecuatoriana de Petréleos S.A.

9. Acta de E
Rav acl onmen Taal peslsn [onkan| Dogon ears tesTaetorans Ing. Ernesto Grijalva Haro,
Gerente General de Petrotransporte; Dr. Rodrigo Pérez Pallares, Representante de Texaco
Petroleum Company y el Ing. Carlos Loor, Director Nacional de Hidrocarburos, Encargado.

10. See ee ee ee Rahat suscrita el iro.
de Julio de 1990, a las OOOO, entre los sefiores: Dr. Juan M. Quevedo, Mandatario de
Texaco Petroleum Company; Sr. Wilson Pfstor Morris, Gerente General, Encargado de

Petroamazonas; y, el Ing. Fernando Albuja, Director Nacional de Hidrocarburos.

gw

iano y de su Op én, suscrita el

