DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

WRIT OF SUMMONS

This day, two thousand ten, at the
request of the Republic of Ecuador, having its seat in Quito Ecuador and
represented by the Procuraduria General del Estado Republica del Ecuador,
Robles 731 y Av. Amazonas, Quito, Ecuador ("Ecuador") and represented by
Mr G.W. van der Bend, Mr R. Schellaars en Mr Y.O. Jansen, who have their
offices at Claude Debussylaan 80, 1082 MD Amsterdam, and who will act as
advocates and at whose offices domicile is elected,

have |
[space for Bailiff's info]
SUMMONED:

a. Chevron Corporation (USA) ("Chevron"), foreign legal entity that does
not have a known office address in The Netherlands but does have a
known address at 6001 Bollinger Canyon Road, San Ramon, CA,
94583, USA.

Whilst issuing this writ of summons, | have performed service of process
in accordance with the Hague Service Convention of 15 November 1965
(“Hague Service Convention") in conjunction with article 55(1) of the
DCCP and article 7(8) of the Implementation Act for the Hague Service
Convention, and acted as follows:

1. | have served the writ at the office of the public prosecutor at the
District Court in The Hague, at which location | issued two copies
of the writ for the benefit of Chevron
Q handed to:

M8771939/1/20475578 1/52

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

Q left in a sealed envelope on which the legally prescribed
information is recorded because no person was present that
| could legally serve the writ of summons.

2. | have requested the official mentioned under (1) to hand over or, if
such is not possible, serve, both copies of the writ and a
translation thereof in accordance with articles 3 up to and including
6 of the Hague Service Convention in accordance with the law of
the state in which Respondent's address for service of process is
located.

3. | have also sent a copy of the writ and a translation thereof per
registered mail to the aforementioned address of Chevron.

4. For the purpose of service of process re. this writ to Chevron at the
abovementioned address in the USA, an mount of US$ 95,00 has
been prepaid on 2 July 2010 to Process Forwarding International
(‘PFI’) by credit card, which prepayment is evidenced through a
confirmation of payment that is included as Annex 1.

b. Texaco Petroleum Company ("TexPet"), a US corporate entity under the
laws of the State of Delaware with legal personality that does not have a
known office address in The Netherlands but does have a known
address at 6001 Bollinger Canyon Road, San Ramon, CA, 94583.
TexPet and Chevron will be referenced below together as
“Respondents” or “Chevron”.

[same as Chevron]
ro
appear in a court session at Wednesday nine February two thousand eleven
(09-02-2011) in the morning at 10.00h (the "Docket Session") not in person,
but represented by an advocate, and held by the District Court in The Hague,

at the Paleis van Justitie aan de Prins Clauslaan 60, 2595 AJ Den Haag,

ON NOTICE OF:

M8771939/1/20475578 2153

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

The fact that if respondents do not appear at the Docket Session or a date set
by the District Court for a Docket Session in the prescribed manner (i.e.
represented by an advocate), and if the time limits and service of process
formalities have been complied with, the District Court will render judgement
by default, unless the claims appear to be illegitimate or unfounded at first
sight, as well as that

if at least one of the respondents appears in the manner prescribed (i.e.
represented by an advocate) in the proceedings, and the time limits and
service of process formalities have been complied with in respect of
respondents that have not appeared, default will be entered against the non-
appearing respondents and default will be entered in so far as the non-
appearing respondent is concerned and the proceedings will be continued
between Ecuador and the respondent that has appeared, subsequent to which
a judgement will be entered with respect to all respondents and that will be
considered to be a judgement in a defended action,

IN ORDER TO:
respond to the following claims by Ecuador:

Introduction

Introductory remarks

1. In these proceedings Ecuador claims the setting aside of two arbitral
awards. This concerns an arbitral interim award of 1 December 2008
(the “Interim Award” and Exhibit E-1) and an arbitral partial final
award of 30 March 2010 (the “Partial Award” and Exhibit E-2).' This
second award — and such is determinative for the applicable
limitation periods — has been deposited with the registrar of the
District Court in The Hague on 8 April 2010. The competence of the
District Court in The Hague thus follows from article 1064(2) DCCP.

‘ article 1064 lid 4 DCCP governs the simultaneous claim to set aside the Partial
Award and the Interim Award.

M8771939/1/20475578 3/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

2. In accordance with the applicable UNCITRAL arbitration rules, the
Arbitral Tribunal has determined The Hague as place of arbitration.
Given that The Hague is the place of arbitration, Article 1073 DCCP.
provides that the Netherlands Arbitration Act is applicable (see
Interim Award, page 25 under 2.4).

3. TexPet is a wholly-owned indirect subsidiary of Chevron. Below,
Ecuador will refer to Respondents together as “Chevron”. In so far as
other defined terms are concerned, Ecuador will strive to use terms
defined by the Arbitral Tribunal in the Interim Award and the Partial
Award.

4. Ecuador will submit the full arbitration file in electronic form in these
proceedings at the Docket Session (Exhibit E-3). In addition thereto,
Ecuador will submit parts of the arbitration file that are of particular
interest to these setting aside proceedings and to which reference is
made in this writ also in hardcopy. The latter will be done in the form
of separate exhibits with the sequence of numbered references used
in the expose below.

Particular characteristics of BITs

5. This case is unique. This is the first occasion for a Dutch court to
consider investor-state arbitral proceedings that have been
conducted on the basis of a bilateral investment treaty. In practice,
these treaties are better known under the English reference of
Bilateral Investment Treaty (“BIT”). The BIT that is at issue in these
proceedings is (Exhibit E-4):

Treaty Between the United States of America and the Republic of
Ecuador Concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of
Investment of August 27, 1993.

6. BITs are treaties that are intended to offer protection to investments.
At this moment, more than 2,500 of these treaties are in force.

7. The recitals to the BIT between Ecuador and the US make reference
to (inter alia) the following considerations to enter into the treaty:

M8771939/1/20475578 4/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

Desiring to promote greater economic cooperation between them, with
respect to investment by nationals and companies of one Party in the
territory of the other Party;

Recognizing that agreement upon the treatment to be accorded such
investment will stimulate the flow of private capital and the economic
development of the Parties;

From these recitals one can conclude that the BIT is not
retrospective but prospective in nature and aimed at furthering the
making of new investments by foreign entities in the host country.
Such is also clear on the basis of the articles of the BIT itself and, in
particular, article XII(1) of the BIT in which it is provided that the BIT:

(...) shall apply to investments existing at the time of entry into force as
well as to investments made or acquired thereafter.

The present BIT has entered into force on 11 May 1997.

The BIT in question in these proceedings is the first BIT between
Ecuador and the US. Prior to the conception thereto, investments by
US investors in Ecuador were not afforded specific protection under
a BIT.

BITs do have some specific characteristics from an arbitration law
perspective. In a BIT arbitration, the competence of the arbitral
tribunal is not based on an arbitration agreement entered into
between claimant and respondent. Instead, arbitrators must derive
their competence from the BIT and the agreement to arbitrate is
taken to have been encompassed in the BIT. The ambit of this
agreement and, consequently, the scope of competence for
arbitrators is determined on the basis of the provisions of the BIT.

Factual background

12.

Chevron has invested at the beginning of the 1960s in oil exploration
and production in Ecuador. At that moment, there was not yet a BIT
in force and investments by foreigners in Ecuador were not granted
any particular protection on the basis of a BIT. Nevertheless,
Chevron has decided to invest in Ecuador and has profited
therefrom.

M8771939/1/20475578 5/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

Chevron has structured its activities in Ecuador on the basis of two
agreements that are referenced by parties and the arbitral tribunal as
the "1973 Agreement" (Exhibit E-5) and the "1977 Agreement"
(Exhibit E-6).

At the beginning of the 1990s, Chevron has decided to leave
Ecuador. In view thereof Chevron has decided to discontinue its
activities in Ecuador and unwind the 1973 Agreement and the1977
Agreement. This has resulted in the entry into force of a Settlement
Agreement and Release between Ecuador and Chevron on 17
November 1995 ("1995 Global Settlement" and Exhibit E-7) in
which parties concluded that the investment made by Chevron had
finally discontinued on 6 June 1992. In articles 2.1 and 2.2 of the
1995 Global Settlement Agreement this is phrased as follows:

2.1 On August 6, 1973, a contract for the exploration and exploitation of
hydrocarbons was executed between the Ecuadorian State and the
companies TEXACO PETROLEUM COMPANY and ECUADORIAN
GULFOIL COMPANY, which contract was authorized by Decree No.
925 dated August 4, 1973, published in the Official Register No. 377 on
August 16, 1973.

2.2 Said contract ended, on account of the expiration of the period of time
granted, on June 6, 1992.

This means, essentially, that on 6 June 1992 the investment by
Chevron had finally ended — i.e. 4 years and 11 months prior to the
entry into force of the BIT. In the1995 Global Settlement — which was
entered into 1 year and 6 months prior to the entry into force of the
BIT- this was again confirmed.

Chevron’s only remaining interest in Ecuador at that time were seven
lawsuits ("claims") that Chevron had brought in seven distinct
lawsuits it had filed in the Ecuadorian courts. Chevron has brought
these proceedings in the period between December 1991 and
December 1993. These claims ("claims") embodied in these lawsuits
form the basis of the dispute in the present BIT-arbitration.

Chevron has adopted the position that Ecuador is liable to it in view
of denial of justice arising from undue delay in the processing of
these seven lawsuits in the Ecuadorian courts. For this purpose,

M8771939/1/20475578 6/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

Chevron has brought a BIT-arbitration on the basis of Article VI in
conjunction with Article XII(1) of the BIT and in accordance with the
UNCITRAL Rules of Arbitration.

18. In these BIT-proceedings, Charles N. Brower, a US Judge, the Dutch
professor and advocate Albert Jan van den Berg, and the German
professor Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel were appointed as arbitrators and
constitute the arbitral tribunal.

19. In the Interim Award, the Arbitral Tribunal has held that it is
competent to decide upon Chevron’s claims. In the Partial Award, the
Arbitral Tribunal has held that Ecuador is guilty of denial of justice as
a result of undue delay because proceedings in the Ecuadorian
courts have not resulted in an award soon enough. Subsequently,
the arbitral tribunal has also held in the Partial Award that Ecuador is
thus liable to pay damages to Chevron.

20. The Arbitral Tribunal has provisionally set the damages at 100% of
the sum that Chevron has claimed before the Ecuadorian courts.
While doing so, the Arbitral Tribunal completely ignored a number of
judgments issued by the Ecuadorian courts during the final stage of
the arbitral proceedings. The Arbitral Tribunal also did not consider it
necessary to apply any reduction due to the inherent uncertainty
regarding the outcome of the proceedings before the Ecuadorian
courts had undue delay not been an issue. In stead, the Arbitral
Tribunal found it was capable of determining in stead of the
Ecuadorian courts what an "honest, independent and impartial
Ecuadorian judge" should have awarded. Pursuant to the Partial
Award, the Arbitral Tribunal has in principle assessed the damages
at USD 354,558,145.00 excluding applicable interest.2 The Arbitral
Tribunal has determined that this amount, including interest,
amounts to USD 698,621,904.84 on 21 December 2006.°

21. The Arbitral Tribunal has not yet decided to award this provisional
amount. In accordance with the agreements between the parties that
were in force at the relevant time, Chevron would never have been

2 See paragraph 546 of the Partial Award (Exhibit E-2).
° See paragraph 550 of the Partial Award (Exhibit E-2).

M8771939/1/20475578 7153

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

able to directly and fully take receipt of the mentioned amount of
USD 354,558,145 and not even so if the corresponding sums would
have in fact been awarded to Chevron by the Ecuadorian courts. In
such case, the sums should have been paid into a withholding
account at the Ecuadorian central bank and would, in accordance
with the applicable rules, have resulted in a payment of 12.69% of
the total sums to Chevron, the rest being applied under the special
law creating a Unified Tax on Hydrocarbon Revenue. Consequently,
Ecuador has argued that Chevron may only claim payment of
12.69% of the total amount of USD 698,621 ,904.84, which results in
a sum of USD 88,655,119.72. The Arbitral Tribunal is still to render
an award on this issue.

22. As noted, the Arbitral Tribunal has held in the Interim Award that
Ecuador is liable for denial of justice as a result of undue delay
caused due to the fact that the Ecuadorian courts have failed to
timely issue judgements in the seven proceedings. This is the only
ground for liability that the Arbitral Tribunal has held to be at issue.
The other grounds advanced by Chevron have not been accepted by
the Arbitral Tribunal.

(i) The Arbitral Tribunal has not held that the judgements of the
Ecuadorian courts are manifestly unjust decisions. In paragraph
275 of the Partial Award, the Arbitral Tribunal explicitly states
that "further consideration of the Claimants’ allegations of denial
of justice by undue delay or manifestly unjust decisions is
unnecessary".*

Neither has the Arbitral Tribunal held that the awards of the
Ecuadorian courts are the result of lack of independence or
prejudice. °

(ii

Interest in and relevance of these setting aside proceedings

23. Setting aside actions are only brought on rare occasions because
parties typically consider themselves bound to comply with an
arbitral award. This, however, does not in any form reduce the notion

4 See also paragraph 385 of the Partial Award (Exhibit E-2).
5 See also paragraph 382 of the Partial Award (Exhibit E-2).

M8771939/1/20475578 8/53

24.

25.

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

that a court demanded to set aside an arbitral award has an
independent responsibility to take if serious concerns exist with
respect to an arbitral award, as set out in article 1065(1) DCCP. In
such cases, the courts dealing with a set aside action can and
should intervene by setting aside the arbitral award. Such is at issue
in this case.

One of the pivotal points in these proceedings is that the Arbitral
Tribunal has accepted jurisdiction and confirmed its competence
notwithstanding that the investment made by Chevron under the
1973 Agreement at the time of entry into force of the BIT had already
ended and that Chevron had already discontinued its activities in
Ecuador and had left Ecuador. This followed from the fact that the
Arbitral Tribunal has adopted a circular argument i.e. that the
investment by Chevron must be held to have continued and still be in
existence notwithstanding the discontinuation thereof, due to the
presumed claims of Chevron which should therefore be considered
as an “investment” in the sense of article 1(1)(a) BIT. Ecuador has,
however, never agreed to a BIT with a scope as found by the Arbitral
Tribunal and has not agreed either to introduce additional protection
to former investments made by foreigners who have already stopped
being active in Ecuador. Consequently, no valid and enforceable
agreement to arbitrate is present.

The fact that the required arbitration agreement is absent is highly
important and particularly so now that the Interim Award and the
Partial Award thus constitute a violation of the sovereignty of the
Ecuadorian state. This consideration is of paramount importance due
to the fact that the acceptability of BITs in developing economies is
subject to debate. Consequently, this goes to the continued
existence of BITs. In light hereof, it is imperative that the court now
addressed to set aside the arbitral awards precisely determines the
scope of the arbitration agreement as contained in the BIT and sets
aside the arbitral awards because the Arbitral Tribunal has
overstepped these limitations. Should the Arbitral Tribunal be
permitted to venture beyond the scope of application of the BIT, this
would undermine the requisite trust in the system of BITs. The

M8771939/1/20475578 9/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

setting aside as demanded by Ecuador thus serves the arbitration
practice and the continued existence of protections under BITs.

26. This last statement is further supported by the fact that the arbitral
awards do in fact suffer from further gross defects that are
unacceptable to Ecuador as a sovereign state and its citizens.

27. During the course of the arbitral proceedings, Ecuador has
consistently and repeatedly made the point that it does not recognise
the competence of the arbitral tribunal and noted that the manner in
which the tribunal has exercised its mandate is unacceptable
(Exhibit E-8). In the following paragraphs, Ecuador will further
develop and substantiate the grounds for setting aside that it
advances in these proceedings. From this it will become apparent
that and why the claims made by Ecuador do meet the tests set by
the Dutch Supreme Court in its recent awards in IMS/Modsaf-IR,°
Nannini/SFT Bank’ and Kers/Rijpma® and that, consequently, both
the Interim Award and the Partial Award must be set aside.

28. The essence of the arguments made is as follows:

(i) Firstly, in the Interim Award, the Arbitral Tribunal has
illegitimately concluded that it is competent (i.e. has
jurisdiction), whilst a valid arbitration agreement is absent and
Ecuador cannot be held to have agreed to the resolution of
the present disputes through arbitration. The Arbitral Tribunal
incorrectly bases its competence on the provisions of the BIT
by an incorrect interpretation thereof and by accepting that
some awards by other arbitral tribunals in wholly unrelated
matters, concluded in very different factual circumstances,
and under other treaties with different provisions necessitate
this interpretation of the.

(ii) Secondly, the Arbitral Tribunal has repeatedly breached its
mandate by failing to consider essential defences advanced
by Ecuador and also on a more general level failed to meet

® HR 17 January 2003, NJ 2004, 384.

7 HR 9 January 2004, NJ 2005, 190.
5 HR 22 December 2006, NJ 2008, 4.

M8771939/1/20475578 10/53

29.

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

the requisite minimum standards for the fulfilment of its
mandate. It is inconceivable that the Arbitral Tribunal holds
that Ecuadorian law is applicable and that for a decision on
the quantum the outcome of Ecuadorian cases is
determinative, but at the same time refuses to address
judgements rendered in these very same Ecuadorian
proceedings. This is evidently wrong and even harder to
comprehend because the Arbitral Tribunal’s findings make
clear (a) that the Ecuadorian judgements at issue cannot be
held to be erroneous, (b) the arbitral tribunal has not held that
the Ecuadorian judges were not impartial or prejudiced and
(c) there is also no other reason to conclude that something is
wrong with the Ecuadorian judgements.

The magnitude of the violation of mandate is at first reading
shrouded by the elegant wording used by the Arbitral Tribunal, the
length of the awards due to the copying of the parties’ submissions
and the inclusion of large sections that have become commonplace
in BIT arbitrations and that are predominantly intended to make an
award setting aside-proof.

This point is illustrated by the fact that a full 133 pages of the Partial
Award and 73 pages of the Interim Award are used to copy-paste the
parties’ arguments as submitted. A mere 38 pages of the Partial
Award and 19 of the Interim Award are devoted to the actual
reasoning of the Arbitral Tribunal’s decisions. In other words only
15% of the Partial Award and 13% of the Interim Award. It is thus
quite unacceptable that exactly these parts of the awards are
deficient to an extent that mandates setting aside of the awards.

Insurmountable objections are attached to the crucial considerations
of the arbitral awards and, therefore, the awards cannot be upheld.

Chevron may argue that the Arbitral Tribunal has not merely afforded
the utmost attention and care to its awards by reference to the length
thereof. No doubt, Chevron will also note that the Arbitral Tribunal
was composed of three eminent arbitrators with stellar reputations in
the arbitration community. This is all not relevant. The size of the
arbitral awards does not compensate for the fundamental flaws

M8771939/1/20475578 11/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

contained therein and that must lead to setting aside. Furthermore,
the reputation of the members of the arbitral tribunal does not do
away with the fact that they have erroneously found that the BIT
does provide them with jurisdiction and that they have also breached
their mandate in other forms. Regrettably, even arbitrators with a
grand reputation who demand considerable respect in the arbitration
community do make grave errors. This has happened before in
respect of the present Arbitral Tribunal. Ecuador notes in that regard
that the arbitrator nominated by Chevron, Charles N. Brower, has
recently been successfully challenged in another arbitration against
Ecuador at the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague on the
basis of a finding of lack of impartiality toward Ecuador as a party
due to expressions in the media about Ecuador (Exhibit E-9)

[T]he challenge against the Hon. Charles N. Brower as arbitrator in the
above-referenced matter for the reason that, from the point of view of a
reasonable third person having knowledge of the relevant facts, the
comments made by Judge Brower in an interview published in the
August 2009 edition of The Metropolitan Corporate Counsel constitute
circumstances that give rise to justifiable doubts as to Judge Brower's
impartiality or independence [is hereby sustained].

Ground 1: Absence of a valid arbitration agreement

30.

31.

The Interim Award and — in this instance consequently — also the
Partial Award has to be set aside for lack of a valid arbitration
agreement.

Article 1065 (1)(a) DCCP provides the legal basis for this challenge.
The test by the Dutch courts is full in the sense that there is no
reason to adopt judicial restraint in this respect. It falls to the court
dealing with a set aside action to — if so requested — and on the basis
of all available information form his own and independent view on
whether or not the requisite arbitration agreement is present and if
the arbitral tribunal is able to derive jurisdiction therefrom. The Dutch
setting aside court has the final say on the competence of the
Arbitral Tribunal. In this case a thorough and careful review is
particularly at issue given that the essential question that demands
an answer is whether or not the Arbitral Tribunal has rightly

M8771939/1/20475578 12/53

32.

33.

DE BRAUW

BLACKSTONE

WESTBROEK

concluded that the Ecuadorian state has relinquished its sovereignty.
Ecuador has argued in the arbitral proceedings that such is not the
case and maintains that position in these proceedings in the Dutch
courts.

The Arbitral Tribunal has wrongfully accepted jurisdiction in the
Interim Award. As will be set out below, this conclusion is based on a
number of crucial considerations that all prove to be based on errors:

(i)

(i)

(iii)

(iv)

In the first place, the Arbitral Tribunal acts on the basis of the
false starting point that the objective of the BIT and the wording
thereof impose the Arbitral Tribunal’s interpretation. A closer
examination reveals that this is wrong.

In the second place, the Arbitral Tribunal erroneously acts on the
premises that two arbitral awards rendered by different arbitral
tribunals in different cases with another set of relevant facts
provide persuasive arguments for the interpretation given by the
Arbitral Tribunal to the BIT. The Arbitral Tribunal fails to
appreciate that the facts crucial to the outcome of the arbitral
awards in these other cases are not present in the Ecuador /
Chevron matter.

In the third place, the Arbitral Tribunal wrongfully adopts the
point of view that the wording of the North American Free Trade
Agreement ("NAFTA"), another treaty entered into by different
parties, is similar to the BIT’s wording and, consequently, the
BIT should be interpreted in a manner equal to the interpretation
given to relevant parts of the NAFTA.

In the fourth place, it is clear that this is also a breach of
mandate because Ecuador has defended itself by reference to
the argument that the provisions in the NAFTA and the BIT are
different on essential points.

In all, the conclusion cannot be escaped that the decision of the
Arbitral Tribunal on its jurisdiction is erroneous and cannot stand and
that the conclusion should now be drawn that the BIT does not
provide jurisdiction to render an award on an investment that had
already ended at the time the BIT entered into force, and whilst the

M8771939/1/20475578

13/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

investor had discontinued his activities in Ecuador, removed all its
assets and operational personnel, and had left Ecuador.

Erroneous interpretation of the condition "associated with an
investment" in article I(1)(a)(iii) BIT

34. The Arbitral Tribunal has accepted jurisdiction on the basis of an
erroneous interpretation of the BIT, in particular article I(1)(a)(iii) of
the BIT and the condition contained therein that a claim can only be

regarded as

investment".

an investment if such claim is "associated with an
The first part of the Arbitral Tribunal’s reasoning that is

at issue is contained in paragraph 179 t/m 184 of the Interim Award:

179.

180.

M8771939/1/20475578

The Tribunal finds it useful to start by repeating the BIT’s
definition of “investment,” found in Article I(1)(a):
“investment” means every kind of investment in the territory of
one Party owned or controlled directly or indirectly by
nationals or companies of the other Party, such as equity,
debt, and service and investment contracts; and includes:

(i) tangible and intangible property, including rights, such as
mortgages, liens and pledges;

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a
company or interests in the assets thereof;

(iii) a claim to money or a claim to performance having
economic value, and associated with an investment;

(iv) intellectual property which includes, inter alia, rights
relating to: [...]

(v) any right conferred by law or contract, and any licenses
and permits pursuant to law;

The Tribunal must first determine whether the Claimants hold
an investment that falls within the above definition.

The Respondent does not and cannot reasonably deny that
the Claimants had what would be considered to be an
investment in Ecuador in their oil exploration and extraction
activities ranging from the 1960s to the early 1990s. Nor can
the Respondent deny that all the necessary characteristics
were present in this investment. The Respondent disputes
instead that the Claimants’ lawsuits in Ecuadorian courts
cannot, on their own, be considered to be an “investment”
under the BIT. The Tribunal, however, agrees with the

14/53

182.

183

184.

M8771939/1/20475578

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

Claimants that in the present situation, which is similar to that
in Mondev (...), these lawsuits concern the liquidation and
settlement of claims relating to the investment and, therefore,
form part of that investment.

The Claimants highlighted in their submissions that the
definition of “investment” in the BIT is a broad one that covers
“every kind of investment.” Beyond being broad in its general
terms, the definition enumerates a myriad of forms of
investment that are covered. It first specifies that it covers
investment forms “such as equity, debt, and service and
investment contracts.” It then gives a further non-exhaustive
list of forms that an investment may take. The list covers,
among other things, multiple further incorporeal assets and
speaks of a variety of rights, claims, and interests that an
investor may hold in them. In addition, Article 1(3) of the BIT
provides that “[aJny alteration of the form in which assets are
invested or reinvested shall not affect their character as
investment.”

The Claimants have also highlighted that Article 1I(3)(b) of the
BIT protects investments from “arbitrary or discriminatory
measures” with respect to their “management, operation,
maintenance, use, enjoyment, acquisition, expansion or
disposal.” They also point to the further guarantee in Article
II(7) of “effective means of asserting claims and enforcing
rights with respect to investment.”

Taken together, the above-mentioned provisions indicate to
the Tribunal that once an investment is established, the BIT
intends to close any possible gaps in the protection of that
investment as it proceeds in time and potentially changes
form. Once an investment is established, it continues to exist
and be protected until its ultimate “disposal” has been
completed — that is, until it has been wound up.

The Claimants’ investments were largely liquidated when they
transferred their ownership in the concession to PetroEcuador
and upon the conclusion of various Settlement Agreements
with Ecuador. Yet, those investments were and are not yet
fully wound up because of ongoing claims for money arising
directly out of their oil extraction and production activities
under their contracts with Ecuador and its state-owned oil

15/53

35.

36.

37.

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

company. These claims were excluded from any of the
Settlement Agreements (R II, para. 169; C Il, para. 40). The
Claimants continue to hold subsisting interests in their original
investment, but in a different form. Thus, the Claimants’
investments have not ceased to exist: their lawsuits continued
their original investment through the entry into force of the
BIT and to the date of commencement of this arbitration.

The Arbitral Tribunal’s reasoning in these paragraphs is circular. It
follows unmistakably from article 1(1)(a)(iii) of the BIT that a claim as
such cannot be an investment upon which the Arbitral Tribunal can
base jurisdiction. This is the reason why article I(1)(a)(iii) BIT sets
the condition that a claim (vorderingsrecht) , to qualify for BIT
coverage, must be a claim “associated with an investment". This
condition becomes empty if the Arbitral Tribunal takes as a starting
point that a claim in and by itself is sufficient to find that a claim is
"associated with an investment". If this would be accepted, claims
are consequently upgraded to investments whilst article (1)(a)(iii) BIT
makes exactly the point that claims as such are not investments.

The Arbitral Tribunal has advanced several arguments to support its
circular reasoning and that presuppose that the proposed
interpretation is the only and thus right way to read article 1(1)(a)(iii)
of the BIT. Closer examination reveals that the arguments used by
the Arbitral Tribunal are all wrong and not persuasive. Ecuador wil
address these arguments in the following paragraphs 38-56.

Whilst using all these arguments, the Arbitral Tribunal fails to
appreciate that article I(1)(a)(iii) BIT can and should be interpreted
differently and in a manner that fits better with the wording of the BIT
and has also considerably more logic to it. After all, it is not a
reasonable conclusion that Ecuador should be taken to have
accepted the competence of the arbitral tribunal with respect to an
investment that ended in a regular manner 4 years and 11 months
prior to the entry into force of the BIT, whilst the investor had also
discontinued his activities in Ecuador and had taken its assets and
personnel out of the country for good. In contrast to the tribunal’s
findings, neither the wording of Article 1(1)(a)(iii) BIT, nor the

M8771939/1/20475578 16/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

objectives of the BIT nor any other reason demands this
interpretation.

The open ended wording of the introduction to article I(1)(a) BIT does not

justify an equally liberal interpretation of the condition “associated with an
investment”

38. In paragraph 181 of the Interim Award, the Arbitral Tribunal takes the
erroneous starting point that the use of rather wide wording of
“investment” in the opening of article I(1)(a) BIT and the following
non-exclusive list of investments demand that article I(1)(a)(iii) BIT
should receive an equally liberal interpretation. This reasoning is not
conclusive and not logical. The open ended wording in the opening
of article I(1) BIT and the list of investments in article I(1)(a) BIT
indicate that the draftsmen of the BIT have intended to provide for a
wide, but not infinite, category of investments. This does not,
however warrant the conclusion that all parts of article I(1)(a) BIT
must subsequently receive a liberal interpretation, even those that
have not been drafted in an open ended manner. In particular, the
notion “associated with an investment’, that has obviously been
intended as a condition limiting the scope of application of the BIT,
does not evidently qualify for a wide interpretation that also
encompasses former investments. This applies a fortiori because the
interpretation of the clear ratione temporis limitation in article XII(1)
BIT being that the investment with which the “claim” is “associated”
must still be in existence at the time of entry into force of the BIT
cannot be reconciled therewith. In contrast to the Arbitral Tribunal’s
assertions, such an interpretation of the BIT does by no means
logically follow from the use of widely interpretable wording in the
opening of article I(1)(a) of the BIT.

Article 1I(3)(b) and article II(7) BIT do not demand a liberal interpretation of
article 1(1)(a)(iii) and thus a restrictive interpretation of the condition
"associated with an investment"

39. In paragraph 192 of the Interim Award, the Arbitral Tribunal holds
that articles 1I(3)(b) BIT and II(7) BIT demands that article I(1)(a)(iii)
BIT receives a liberal interpretation. In doing so, the Arbitral Tribunal
suggests that these provisions require that the condition "associated

M8771939/1/20475578 17/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

with an investment" must be interpreted in such manner that it also
includes former investments that have discontinued prior to the entry
into force of the BIT. This reasoning again fails to comply with the
demands of language or logic. The provisions noted by the Arbitral
Tribunal govern the scope of application of the BIT to investments.
They are, however, not determinative for answering the question of
what an investment is under the BIT and to which investments the
BIT applies.

Ecuador's interpretation that would hold that the notion of "investment" in
the wording “associated with an investment" should be understood as an
investment that is still in existence at the time of entry into force of the BIT
does by no means result in the definition of "investment" in article I(1)(a) BIT
being circular or baseless

40.

41,

In paragraph 192, the Arbitral Tribunal assumes that the definition of
"investment" in article |(1)(a) BIT would be circular and without
meaning if the notion of "investment" in the wording "associated with
an investment" would be understood as an investment that is still in
existence at the time of entry into force of the BIT, as submitted by
Ecuador:

The Tribunal does not agree that the further mention of the term
‘investment’ within the definition itself should be understood as
providing for a recursive definition. Instead, the further mention of the
term should be taken to refer to the plain meaning of the word. This is
shown by the opening phrase “investment’ means every kind of
investment ... such as [certain kinds of investment] ... and includes
[other kinds of investment.” A recursive approach to the opening use
of “every kind of investment” would, in the Tribunal’s view, render the
definition circular and meaningless. Meanwhile, the use of the plain
meaning of the word “investment” provides a basis with which to
supplement the non-exclusive list of covered investments, particularly
as regards new kinds of investment that may arise in the future.

This assumption is incorrect and based on a misconception. If one
follows Ecuador's interpretation, this does in fact hardly make the
category of investments covered by article |(1)(a)(iii) BIT less
inclusive. The only difference is that investments that have
discontinued prior to the entry into force of the BIT do pass the

M8771939/1/20475578 18/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

hurdle of having to be "associated with an investment" and that
claims relating to that limited category of investments do not qualify
for additional protection under the BIT. In so far as these claims are
concerned, all will remain as it was and the protection will be
afforded that was in place prior to the entry into force of the BIT. No
more and no less. This does, by no means, make the definition of
"investment" circular or lacking substance. A proper review does in
fact show that this interpretation is logical indeed. It is only logical
that investments that have been made and discontinued prior to the
entry into force of the BIT do not retrospectively qualify for additional
protection of the BIT. Consequently, the same should apply to claims
with respect to such discontinued investments.

42. The Arbitral Tribunal further suggests that its interpretation pursuant
to which a former investment that has discontinued prior to the entry
into force of the BIT passes the condition of having to be "associated
with an investment" forms a basis "to supplement the non-exclusive
list of covered investments, particularly as regards new kinds of
investment that may arise in the future". This inference also fails to
meet the demands of language or logic. The Arbitral Tribunal itself
has concluded that the opening words of article I(1)(a) BIT are
liberal, whilst that provision also includes a non-limited list of
investments. Consequently, the definition of "investment" provides
ample basis for coverage of new forms of investments that may arise
in the future. Ecuador's interpretation does by no means limit this. It
is at any rate hard to follow the conclusion that an interpretation
pursuant to which former investments that have ended prior to the
entry into force of the BIT can, exclusively, have a negative impact
on the application of the definition to future investments.

The objectives of the BIT do not demand that the interpretation of the
Arbitral Tribunal is followed

43. The Arbitral Tribunal does not make explicit statements on the
objectives of the BIT. Nevertheless, it is important to consider that
the purpose of the BIT, as ascertained from its preamble, does not
demand that the condition “associated with an investment’ receives
such a liberal interpretation to also let it include former investments
that have discontinued prior to the entry into force of the BIT. This

M8771939/1/20475578 19/53

DE BRA

UW

BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

objective of the BIT is also served by following the interpretation
advanced by Ecuador. It is at any rate not reasonable to assume that
the objective of promoting foreign investment is not reached if a
limited category of investments — i.e. investments made and
discontinued prior to the entry into force of the BIT due the departure
of Ecuador by an investor are not afforded the newly introduced and
additional protection of a BIT. The BIT is aimed at the protection of
existing and new investments, as is clear from article XII BIT. This
does not necessitate that former investments are also retrospectively
protected.

If it would have been intended that the condition "associated with an
investment" would be intended to exclude only commercial claims, the
parties to the BIT would have provided this and would have confirmed it and
would have written it down

44,

The Arbitral Tribunal fails to appreciate that, if the parties to the BIT
had intended to exclude commercial claims by including the condition
"associated with an investment”, they would have written that down
and used alternative wording to express that point. This reasoning is
supported by the fact that other treaties, such as NAFTA, have made
general practice of such wording. Ecuador has put this as follows in
the arbitral proceedings: °

Of course, if this truly was the only purpose of Article I(1)(a)(iii)'s
limitation the State Parties would have used very different language.
For example, Article I(1)(a)(iii) could have referred to “claims for money
that are not associated solely with trade transactions,” which is akin to
a provision the Claimants’ own Government agreed to employ in
NAFTA. Instead, they chose terms requiring a relationship between the
claims and something else that constitutes an investment.

° See paragraph 152 of Ecuador's first Post-Hearing Brief of 22 July 2008. (Exhibit
E-10). See also paragraph 20 of Ecuador's second Post-Hearing Brief of 12 August
2008 (Exhibit E-11).

M8771939/1/20475578

20/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

The so-called Clinton transmittal message does not demand that the Arbitral
Tribunal’s reasoning is followed

45. It appears from paragraph 164 of the Interim Award that Chevron has
argued that the so-called Clinton transmittal message supports the
interpretation accepted by the Arbitral Tribunal. In this transmittal
message, used to submit the BIT to the US Senate, former President
Clinton indicates that the sentence "associated with an investment"
is aimed to exclude claims that are purely of a commercial nature.
The transmittal letter does, however, not exclude the possibility that
the ambit of the condition is wider and thus also results in claims
relating to investments as made by Chevron prior to the entry into
force of the BIT and discontinued prior to the entry into force of the
BIT falling outside the scope of the BIT. The mere fact that former
President Clinton has not explicitly included this category does not
necessarily lead to the interpretation of the Arbitral Tribunal.

46. Ecuador has stated the following in this respect in the arbitral
proceedings:’®

More importantly, the transmittal letter does not even state, as
Claimants erroneously assert, that the exclusion of purely commercial
transactions was the sole purpose of the provision. Instead, the simple
declarative statement cited merely notes that an effect of the provision
is to exclude coverage of claims to money based upon purely
commercial transactions, a conclusion which is in no way inconsistent
with other effects or with broader purposes. For example, there can be
little dispute that claims to money related solely to personal injury
claims would also be excluded by the express terms of Article
1(1)(a)(iii)’s limitation, demonstrating that the reference in the
transmittal letter could not have been an expression of the provision’s
sole purpose. [...]

Article 1(1)(a)(iii) BIT should be read and interpreted in combination with

article XII(1) BIT

47. The Arbitral Tribunal has failed to appreciate that article I(1)(a)(iii)
BIT must be read and interpreted in combination with article XII(i)

See paragraph 153-154 of Ecuador's first Post-Hearing Brief (Exhibit E-10). See
also paragraph 16-20 of Ecuador’s second Post-Hearing Brief (Exhibit E-11).

M8771939/1/20475578 21/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

BIT and that, consequently, the condition "associated with an
investment’ in article 1(1)(a)(iii) BIT should be interpreted in such
manner that it only includes claims associated with investments that
are still in existence at the time of entry into force of the BIT. The
Arbitral Tribunal has failed to appreciate this, on the one hand by
expressly rejecting this interpretation in paragraph 192 of the Interim
Award under the suggestion that this interpretation would render the
definition of "investment" circular and baseless and on the other
hand by using its own circular reasoning in paragraphs179 t/m 184 of
the Interim Award to argue that Chevron’s investment is still in
existence notwithstanding the fact that it has been discontinued prior
to the entry into force of the BIT as was confirmed in the 1995 Global
Settlement Agreement. In paragraphs 188 and 189 of the Interim
Award, the Arbitral Tribunal has noted the following:

188. The relevant portion of Article XII(1) states that the BIT “shall apply to
investments existing at the time of entry into force as well as to
investments made or acquired thereafter.” Article XII(1) of the BIT
has to be applied in the sense of Article 28 of the VCLT: in addition to
investments made or acquired after entry into force, it expressly
provides for application to “investments existing at the time of entry
into force.” That can only mean that investments made before entry
are covered if they still existed at the time of entry into force.

How long the investment may have existed before the entry into force
is in fact irrelevant. Therefore, in spite of the general rule of non-
retroactivity, the Tribunal may apply the BIT to a pre-existing
investment such as the Claimants’ lawsuits in the present case.

189. The Tribunal has already found that the Claimants’ lawsuits are an
“investment” under the BIT. Consequently, and in view of the
language of Article XII(1), the Tribunal finds that the Claimants’
investments were “existing at the time of entry into force” of the BIT.

48. These considerations are deficient in an equal manner as discussed
in paragraphs 38 — 44 of this writ. Ecuador has noted the following in
respect thereof in the arbitral proceedings:"'

"See paragraph 150 and 155-156 of Ecuador's first Post-Hearing Brief (Exhibit E-
10). See also paragraph 9-15 and 140-141 of Ecuador's second Post-Hearing Brief
(Exhibit E-11).

M8771939/1/20475578 22/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

150. However, the “investment” with which claims to money or
performance must be associated under Article I(1)(a)(iii) must be an
investment existing on or after May 11, 1997. Article XII of the Treaty
specifies that the entire Treaty applies only to those investments that
exist at the time of entry into force of the Treaty or which are made or
acquired thereafter. The definition set forth in Article I(1)(a) of the
Treaty is itself an application of the Treaty. To consider as an
“investment” claims to money or performance associated with an
investment that ceased to exist before the Treaty’s entry into force
would therefore be inconsistent with Article XII(1).

155. Claimants’ strained gloss on the purpose of the limitation also ignores
the clear object and purpose of the Treaty as a whole, the object and
purpose that is relevant under Article 31 of the Vienna Convention.
That object and purpose is to protect only those “investments”
existing on or after the BIT’s entry into force. According to Article
XII(1), the Treaty, as a whole, including all of its terms, applies only to
“investments” which exist on or after May 11, 1997. Interpreting the
treaty to cover residual claims to money associated with investments
that had expired prior to the Treaty would not give effect to that object
and purpose. Reading Article I(1)(a)(iii) to cover such claims would
undermine the entire prospective nature of the investments sought to
be protected by the Treaty. It could not have been the intent of the
treaty Parties to exclude coverage to investments that had expired
before the BIT but extend such coverage to mere claims to money
deriving from such expired investments.

156. Given the prospective nature of the BIT, if the term “investment” in
Article 1(1)(a)(iii) truly was meant to escape the limitation of Article
XII(1), then Article 1(1)(a)(iii) would have expressly included even
claims to money that are associated with “investments made at any
time” or “made prior to the entry into force of the Treaty.” It is
completely arbitrary to suggest that Article XII applies to one part of
Article I(1)(a)(iii), but not the other. This is evident when one
considers the effect it would have were such interpretation to be
applied to the rest of the BIT. The term “investment” is referenced
over fifty times in the BIT. Claimants’ interpret the term “investment”
in Article 1(1)(a)(iii) to be retrospective so as to encompass
investments made at any point in time, even if they have expired
before the BIT. There is no principled way to avoid applying
Claimants’ strained interpretation to the term “investment” each of the
fifty times it appears in the BIT. But doing so would clearly result in a

M8771939/1/20475578 23/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

BIT that is retrospective in the investments it addresses, which is the
exact opposite intent expressed by the plain language of Article
XII(1). All references in the treaty to the term “investment” should
have a consistent meaning, i.e. “investment” can only mean those
investment existing on or after the BIT’s entry into force. To adopt the
interpretation of the term “investment” in Article | (1)(a)(iii) urged by
Claimants would effect a dramatic, random and completely
unauthorized expansion of the entire scope of the BIT.

Relevant precedents supporting the tribunal’s reasoning are absent

49. It appears from the reasoning of the Interim Award that the Arbitral
Tribunal erroneously concludes that its interpretation of the BIT is
necessitated by cases decided by two other arbitral tribunals in the
following matters:

(i) | Mondev International Ltd. v. the United States (“Mondev”)”
which was a NAFTA claim dealt with by an ICSID" tribunal; and

(ii) Jan de Nul v. Dredging International (“Jan de Nul”)'*. This was
also an ICS!D-tribunal.

50. The incorrect basis for the Arbitral Tribunal’s conclusion is most

evident in paragraph 193 of the Interim Award in which the arbitral
tribunal notes:

This approach resolves the concern expressed in Mondev and Jan de Nul
that an investor whose investment was definitively expropriated would hold a
claim to compensation but would technically no longer hold any existing
“investment”.

51. In this paragraph, the Arbitral Tribunal mistakenly takes the view that
the same issue is at issue in the present case as was at issue in the
Mondev and Jan de Nul matters. This is not so. In contrast to the
Mondev and Jan de Nul matters, expropriation is not at all at issue in

12 Mondev International Ltd. v. United States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2,
Award (Oct. 11, 2002); 42 I.L.M. p. 85 (2003).

'S International Centre for the Settlement of Disputes.

"4 Jan de Nul N.V. and Dredging International N.V. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID
Case No. ARB04/13, Decision on Jurisdiction (16 Juni 2006).

M8771939/1/20475578 24/53

DE BRAUW

BLACKSTONE

WESTBROEK

the present matter. Chevron has made its own and independent
choice to discontinue its activities in Ecuador and to leave Ecuador.
Furthermore, its investment has ended well before the entry into
force of the BIT in a regular manner, as confirmed in the 1995 Global
Settlement Agreement. The facts upon which Mondev and Jan de
Nul were decided are incomparable to the present matter and the
decisions in those cases are not relevant precedents let alone
precedents that demand that the Arbitral Tribunal interprets the BIT
in the manner that it has.

The concern "that an investor whose investment was definitively
expropriated would hold a claim to compensation but would technically no
longer hold any existing “investment" is not at issue in this matter

52. In its considerations re. Mondev, the Arbitral Tribunal fails to deal
with arguments raised by Ecuador in, inter alia, paragraph 160 and
178-194 of its first Post-Hearing Brief of 22 July 2008. Ecuador has
argued that Mondev did not at all deal with the question of whether
an investment that had ended in a regular manner prior to the entry
into force of a BIT can be the basis of jurisdiction."® In Mondev,
completely different matters were at issue. The Arbitral Tribunal in
Mondev had to deal with an investment that had been discontinued
by an expropriation of the respondent state on the eve of the entry
into force of the NAFTA." The arbitral tribunal had to deal with the
resulting claim that pertained to expropriation. The arbitral tribunal in
Mondev had thus been asked to decide upon a claim for
expropriation. In that case one of the central themes was the fear
that a state party to NAFTA could get rid of its obligations under
NAFTA and do away with additional means of protection introduced
under the NAFTA by simply expropriating the investment shortly
before the entry into force of the NAFTA." Such an issue is not at
stake in the present matter at all. As noted in paragraphs 14-15 of

'® See paragraph 182-184 of Ecuador's first Post-Hearing Brief (Exhibit E-10). See
also paragraph 37 of Ecuador's second Post-Hearing Brief (Exhibit E-11).

‘8 See paragraph 185-192 of Ecuador's first Post-Hearing Brief (Exhibit E-10). See
also paragraph 40-43 of Ecuador’s second Post-Hearing Brief (Exhibit E-11).

‘’ See paragraph 186 en 187 of Ecuador's first Post-Hearing Brief (Exhibit E-10).
See also paragraph 41-42 of Ecuador's second Post-Hearing Brief (Exhibit E-11).

M8771939/1/20475578 25/53

DE BRAUW

BLACKSTONE

WESTBROEK

this writ, this writ is concerned with an investment that has
discontinued in a regular manner well before the entry into force of
the BIT, as is confirmed in the 1995 Global Settlement Agreement. In
contrast to the Mondev-matter, the parties have negotiated on an
equal footing on the discontinuation of the investment. Chevron has
never stated and the Arbitral Tribunal has never found that the entry
into of the 1995 Global Settlement Agreement is questionable. In this
respect, Mondev is different on a crucial point when compared to the
case now at issue.

In Jan de Nul the question was not at issue whether the investment was still
in existence at the time of entry into force of the BIT

53.

54.

Jan de Nul can also not qualify as a relevant precedent for the
present matter and the Arbitral Tribunal has wrongly adopted the
starting point that this award supports its interpretation of the BIT. In
Jan de Nul, the tribunal did not at all have to deal with the issue of
whether an investment was still in existence at the time of entry into
force of the relevant BIT. Egypt did not raise such a defence and the
tribunal in Jan de Nul did not address that question. In paragraph
183 of its first Post-Hearing Brief Ecuador notes the following in this
respect:"®

“Egypt did not object to jurisdiction based upon the fact that the
investment did not exist on the date of entry into force of the 2002 BIT,
so the tribunal did not have occasion to address the precise issue
present here. (The failure of Egypt to object on this ground is not
surprising given that, unlike Article XII (1) of the Ecuador-U.S. BIT, the
2002 Egypt-U.S. BIT did not expressly require an investment to be in
existence as of its effective date, and the fact that the investment did
exist during the life of the predecessor 1977 Egypt-U.S. BIT.”

In Jan de Nul, the only question at issue was whether or not the BIT
did require an investment to be in existence at the time the alleged
claim arose. The arbitral tribunal in Jan de Nul held the following in
that respect:

*® Paragraph 183 of Ecuador's first Post-Hearing Brief (Exhibit E-10). See also
paragraph 34 of Ecuador's second Post-Hearing Brief (Exhibit E-11).

M8771939/1/20475578

26/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

134. The Respondent objects to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal under the
2002 BIT on the ground that, assuming the dispute arose on 22 May
2003, the Claimants’ investment no longer existed. It is the
Respondent's contention that a dispute is covered by a treaty only if
the investment was present in the territory of the State at the time
when the dispute arose.

135. The Tribunal disagrees. As the Claimants stressed, not only is it
stated “nowhere [...] that the investment should still be in existence
when the dispute arises” but also and more importantly, “should this
be the case the entire logic of investment protection treaties would
be defeated”. [...]

136. For the same reasons, the Tribunal rejects the Respondent's
ic that in the absence of an it on 22
May 2003, the current dispute could not be in relation to an
investment within the meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention."

 

55. These considerations relate to a very different issue than in the
present matter. Whether or not the investment of Chevron was still in
existence at the time its alleged claims arose is not at all issue in the
Ecuador/Chevron matter. The Arbitral Tribunal has also not been
requested to decide upon that issue. In the Ecuador/Chevron matter,
the only question to be answered is whether or not the investment by
Chevron was still in existence at the time of entry into force of the
BIT. That this is a condition under the BIT cannot be doubted on the
basis of article 1(1)(a)(iii) in conjunction with article XII(1) BIT:

"This Treaty (...) shall apply to investments existing at the time of entry
into force as well as to investments made or acquired thereafter."

That Chevron’s investment had ended on 6 June 1992, can also not
reasonably be the subject of debate in view of article 2.2 of the1995
Global Settlement Agreement (Exhibit E-7):

2.2 Said contract ended, on account of the expiration of the period of
time granted, on June 6, 1992.

*® Jan de Nul N.V. and Dredging International N.V. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID
Case No. ARB04/13, Decision on Jurisdiction (16 juni 2006), paragraaf 134-136.

M8771939/1/20475578 27/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

56. Consequently, it is clear that Jan de Nul does not qualify as a
reasonable precedent either, let alone a precedent that demands the
interpretation given by the Arbitral Tribunal to the BIT presently at
issue.

The present matter is unique and earlier arbitral case law is thus not
relevant at all

57. The Arbitral Tribunal has thus based its interpretation of the BIT,
erroneously, upon the assumption that previously rendered arbitral
awards support its views and that those awards were based on a
similar set of facts. In doing so, the Arbitral Tribunal has failed to
appreciate that the present matter is unique and thus demands its
own, independent, assessment. No earlier arbitral tribunal has had to
decide upon its jurisdiction in a case in which the investment had
ended in a regular manner and in which the investor had
discontinued its activities in the host state and had left that host state
prior to the entry into force of the BIT.

Failure to appreciate differences between the relevant provisions in
the BIT and the NAFTA

58. The Arbitral Tribunal fails to appreciate that essential aspects of
article I(1)(a)(iii) BIT differ from article 1139(j) NAFTA and that the
BIT has a far more limited ambit in so far as claims are concerned
that qualify under the definition of an “investment”. In paragraph 193
of the Interim Award, the Arbitral Tribunal has explicitly considered
that the wording of these two provisions is “similar”.

59. This consideration is evidently wrong. In article I(1)(a)(iii) BIT, it is
determined that a “claim to money or to performance” has to be
“associated with an investment”. Such “investment” must, in turn, fall
within the scope of the BIT, inter alia by — as per article XI(1) —
remain in existence at he time of entry into force of the BIT. Article
1139(j) NAFTA is very different. Article 1139(j) NAFTA defines an
investment as “claims to money” that are of the same type as
examples given in subparagraphs (a)-(h) of this article. In order for a
“claim to money” to qualify as an investment under the BIT, it must
be “associated with an investment” (and, furthermore, still be in

M8771939/1/20475578 28/53

60.

61.

DE BRA

UW

BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

existence at the time of entry into force of the BIT), whilst such
condition does not apply to the notion of investment in article 1139(j)
NAFTA.

Ecuador has argued that, in the first place, the wording of the
provisions of NAFTA cannot be compared to the text of the BIT.
Consequently, the notion of investment under the NAFTA cannot be
put on an equal footing as the definition of an investment in the BIT.
Ecuador has noted the following in this respect in the arbitral
proceedings:”°

The special definition of “claims to money” as investments in Article
1139(j) of NAFTA is distinctly different from the description of the
claims to money that can qualify as investments under in Article
1(1)(a)(iii). Article 1139(j) of NAFTA defines an “investment” as “claims
to money” that “involve the kinds of interests set out in subparagraphs
(a) through (h).” Thus the reference can properly be read to refer the
genus of the interests listed and not to specific interests that
themselves constitute investments covered by NAFTA because,
pursuant to Note 39, they existed on the effective date of NAFTA. In
other words, the interests with which claims to money must be involved
under NAFTA in order for those claims to constitute investments are
unaffected by Note 39 as long as they are of the same type as one or
another of the interests listed in subparagraphs (a) through (h) of
Article 1139. By contrast, Article I(1)(a)(iii) of the Treaty defines an
“investment” as “a claim to money . . . associated with an investment.”
And because Article XII(1) restricts the application of the Treaty to
existing and future “investments,” it is not enough that the investment
be of a type described in Article I(1)(a); it must constitute an
investment within the application of that provision as limited by Article
XI(1). [.-.].

By holding that the wording of article I(1)(a)(iii) BIT and article
1139(j) NAFTA are "similar", the Arbitral Tribunal fully disregards
Ecuador’s objections. By failing to address this essential defence but
instead thereof and without analysis concluding that the wording of

?° See paragraph 160 of Ecuador's first Post-Hearing Brief (Exhibit E-10). See also

paragraph 178 t/m 194 of Ecuador's first Post-Hearing Brief and paragraph 166-167
of Ecuador's Memorial on Jurisdictional Objections of 30 January 2008 (Exhibit E-

12).

M8771939/1/20475578

29/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

article I(1)(a)(iii) BIT and article 1139(j) NAFTA are "similar", the
arbitral tribunal has breached its mandate (see further on breach of
mandate in paragraph 73 and further of this writ of summons).

Erroneous interpretation of “claims” and “rights” in article 1(1)(a)(v)
BIT

62. The interpretation given by the Arbitral Tribunal to Article I(1)(a)(v)
BIT also fails to stand up to logic. Arbiters erroneously fail to address
Ecuador’s assertion that the correct definition of “rights” does not
equal “claims” for the purposes of the definition of “investment”: 7"

Respondent also demonstrated in its Memorial on Jurisdiction that, in
any event, Claimants’ breach of contract claims do not qualify as a
“right” under Article I(1)(a)(v).212 The term “right” must be read in the
context of Article I(1)(a)(v) and the Treaty as whole. In that respect,
according to the rule of ejusdem generis, general words that precede
special or more specific words are limited to the category indicated by
the special words. In Article I(1)(a)(v), the terms “any right conferred by
law or contract” precedes the terms “and any licenses and permits
pursuant to law.” In proper context the word “right” can only mean the
right to do something as opposed to the right to receive something
which is covered by Article I(1)(a)(iii). Thus, an investment under
Article I(1)(a)(v) would include the right to engage in some form of
investment activity, such as the right to conduct oil operations,
pursuant to a concession contract or pursuant to a government-issued
license or permit. It cannot include a right to receive money or
performance, which, as Claimants admit, is what their claims seek.213
(Indeed, this is the only interpretation that preserves the effectiveness
of Article 1(1)(a)(iii).)

63. Ecuador's interpretation is also in line with the text of article 1(1)(a)(v)
BIT:”

1. For the purposes of this Treaty,

?! See paragraph 167 of Ecuador's first Post-Hearing Brief (Exhibit E-10). See also
paragraph 172- 185 of Ecuador's Memorial on Jurisdictional Objections (Exhibit
E-12).

2 See article I(1)(a) BIT (Exhibit E-4).

M8771939/1/20475578 30/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

(a) "investment" means every kind of investment in the territory of
One Party owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or
companies of the other Party, such as equity, debt, and service and
investment contracts; and includes:

(i) tangible and intangible property, including rights. such as
mortgages, liens and pledges:

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a
company or interests in the assets thereof;

(iii) a claim to money or a claim to performance having
economic value, and associated with an investment;

(iv) intellectual property which includes, inter alia, rights
relating to:

literary and artistic works, including sound
recordings;

inventions in all fields of human endeavor;
industrial designs;
semiconductor mask works;

trade secrets, know-how. and confidential business
information; and

trademarks, service marks, and trade names; and

(v) any right conferred by law or contract, and any licenses and
permits pursuant to law;?

64. However, in paragraph 195 of the Interim Award the Arbitral Tribunal
adopts a wholly different line of reasoning that is not conclusive:

The non-restrictive meaning of “rights” becomes even clearer when the
structure of Article I(1)(a)(v) is contrasted to the wording of the other
categories of investment. Article I(1)(a)(i) starts by stating that it covers
the category of tangible and intangible property. It then proceeds to
specify that this coverage “includ[es] rights, such as mortgages, liens
and pledges.” Similarly, Article I(1)(iv) begins with the general category
of intellectual property and then specifies that this category “includes,
inter alia, rights relating to” a number of specific types of intellectual
property. Article I(1)(ii) covers “a company or shares of stock or other
interests in a company or interests in the assets thereof.” In all the

?8 See article I(1)(a) BIT (Exhibit E-4).

M8771939/1/20475578 31/53

65.

66.

67.

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

above cases, the category to which the “rights” or “interests” must
pertain is clearly stated prior to the use of the term. In light of the
above, the contrary formulation of Article I(1)(v) whereby the BIT
covers “any right conferred by law or contract, and any licenses and
permits pursuant to law” (emphasis added) suggests that the “rights
conferred by law or contract” are a general category unto themselves,
not to be limited by the subsequent language of “licenses and permits.”

The examples given in paragraph 195 of the Interim Award seem to
prove the opposite from what the Arbitral Tribunal has found. All
examples demonstrate that the notion of “rights” is never used as
synonymous with “claims” or “claims to money” and should thus be
distinguished therefrom.

Furthermore, in paragraph 194 of the Interim Award the Arbitral
Tribunal wrongfully concludes that article II(7) BIT could pertain to
the limits of its jurisdiction under article I(1)(a)(v) BIT:

As for Article I(1)(a)(v) “rights pursuant to law or contract,” the Tribunal
considers that, in isolation, the rights spoken of in this provision might
be construed according to canons of interpretation to be limited to
‘licenses and permits” and rights analogous to those. The context and
purpose of the BIT, however, do not support this interpretation. The
word “rights” is used in a broader and more general sense in various
other provisions of the BIT. As mentioned above, the BIT intends a
broad coverage, using language that is inclusive. This is evident, for
example, in Article II(7)’s guarantee of “effective means of asserting
claims and enforcing rights with respect to investment.”

The Arbitral Tribunal thus fails to appreciate that the concept of an
“investment” under the BIT is carefully delineated in article 1(1)(a). In
article II(7) of the BIT provision is made for the protection granted if
and when it has been decided that an investment is present. The
scope of that protection, however, is not determinative for the
interpretation of the concept of an “investment” and is thus not
conclusive for a decision on jurisdiction. Having so broadly construed
“claims” and “rights” the Arbitral Tribunal essentially considers
anything except a purely commercial claim as a predicate for being
associated with an investment.

M8771939/1/20475578 32/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

The erroneous interpretation of the condition "associated with an
investment" in article I(1)(a)(iii) BIT gives rise to wrong decisions that
built thereon

68. In its findings in paragraph 211 and 212 of the Interim Award that the
1973 Agreement and the 1977 Agreement should be considered to
qualify as investments under the BIT, the Arbitral Tribunal relies
upon its circular reasoning in paragraphs 179 t/m 184 of the Interim
Award. The Arbitral Tribunal notes:

Furthermore, according to its conclusions regarding the existence of
the Claimants’ investment above, the lawsuits based on the 1973 and
1977 Agreements are within the definition of “investment” in Article
1(1)(a) of the BIT in general and categories (iii) and (v) of the non-
exclusive listing in particular. The Concession Agreements, being the
agreements from which that “investment” arose, must be considered to
be ‘investment agreements.”

69. The Arbitral Tribunal adopts the same approach to its findings on the
intertemporal scope of the BIT by expressly basing this on its own
circular reasoning in paragraphs 174-184 of the Interim Award:”°

As discussed in the section dealing with “investment” (Section J.III.3
above), Article XII(1) of the BIT makes an exception to the principle of
non-retroactivity in accordance to Article 28 VCLT. Under Article XII(1),
the present BIT applies as long as there are “investments existing at
the time of entry into force.” The BIT’s temporal restrictions refer to
“investments” and not disputes. Thus, the BIT covers any dispute as
long as it is a dispute arising out of or relating to “investments existing
at the time of entry into force.”

70. In respect of these considerations of the Arbitral Tribunal, the same
objections hold as have been referenced in paragraphs 38-61 of this
writ of summons.

4 See paragraph 211 of the Interim Award (Exhibit E-1)
2° See paragraph 265 and 264-267 of the Interim Award (Exhibit E-1).

M8771939/1/20475578 33/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

Absence of an arbitration agreement for the Partial Award

71. In respect of the Partial Award the above argument in respect of the
Interim Award holds mutatis mutandis. Given that the agreement to
arbitrate is absent, the basis for the Arbitral Tribunal’s Partial Award
also fails.

72. Consequently, the Partial Award should be set aside on the grounds
presented and explained above. To the extent necessary, Ecuador
hereby requests that the grounds stated be considered repeated and
incorporated as regards the Partial Award.

Ground 2: The Arbitral Tribunal has breached its mandate and failed to
provide reasons for essential parts thereof

73. The second ground on which Ecuador bases its claims for setting
aside of the Interim Award and the Partial Award follows from a
breach of the Arbitral Tribunal’s mandate (article 1065(1) sub (c)
DCCP) for failing to decide upon essential defences raised by
Ecuador and exceeded its mandate. In connection therewith, a
breach of its duty to provide reasons occurs at occasions where the
Arbitral Tribunal fails to indicate at all why such essential defences
are not decided upon (article 1065(1) sub (d) DCCP) which
constitutes a separate and additional ground for setting aside the
Interim Award and the Partial Award.

74. Ecuador is perfectly aware of the fact that only serious breaches of
mandate may provide a basis for setting aside under Netherlands
arbitration law. Such serious breach is at issue in this case due to:

- onthe basis of the breach of mandate established in paragraph
61 under Ground 1, above; but also

- _ the combined effect of the breaches of mandate as set out
hereinafter; and

- onthe basis of each individual breach of mandate set out below.

Failure to address essential defence regarding the Arbitral Tribunal’s
competence

M8771939/1/20475578 34/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

75. The Arbitral Tribunal completely ignored the defence brought forward
by Ecuador that the wording of article I(1)(a)(iii) BIT and article
1139(j) NAFTA is fundamentally different. By failing to address this
essential defence, but instead thereof and without analysis
concluding that the wording of article 1(1)(a)(iii) BIT and article 1139(j)
NAFTA are "similar", the arbitral tribunal has breached its mandate.

Failure to address two judgements of the regular Ecuadorian courts
and the defences raised by Ecuador on the basis thereof

76. The breach of mandate exists in the first place in the fact that the
Arbitral Tribunal has failed to decide upon essential defences raised
by Ecuador. At first impression, this does not easily seem to be the
case given the length of both arbitral awards. The essential defences
concerned have, however, only been briefly noted but have not been
decided upon at all, which is both inexplicable and unacceptable.

77. The Arbitral Tribunal is obliged to deal with essential defences and to
decide upon such essential defences. If the arbitral tribunal — as is
presently the case — suffices with copy pasting an essential defence
and fails to decide upon such essential defence, this results in a
breach of mandate by the arbitral tribunal and thus in setting aside of
the arbitral award on the basis of article 1065(1)(c) DCCP.”°

78. It follows from the HR 30 March 1973 (Kaapshoeve/Swinkels),”” HR
30 December 1977 (De Ploeg/Kruse)* and HR 7 April 1995
(N./Mobius B.V.)*° judgements of the Dutch Supreme Court that an
arbitral award must, in respect of an essential defence include
reasoning that:

“establishes with a reasonable degree of certainty that the defence has
been considered”

as well as
© See also, recently, G.J. Meijer 2010. T&C Rv., art. 1065, note 4(i).
?7 HR 30 March 1973, NJ 1973, 226.

° HR 30 December 1977, NJ 1978, 449.
227HRTZ April 1995, NJ 1997, 21 with reference under 3.3 to ECHR case law.

M8771939/1/20475578 35/53

79.

80.

81.

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

“on which ground it has been rejected.”

Ecuador has raised essential defences against Chevron’s claims on
the basis of judgements rendered by the Ecuadorian courts. This
concerns two judgements. The first was rendered on 14 July 2009 in
the so-called Amazonas Refinery case (Exhibit E-13). A second
judgement was issued on 10 September 2009 in the so-called
Imported Products case (Exhibit E-14). The judgements were
rendered at the final stage of the arbitral proceedings. Ecuador has
immediately submitted these judgements into the record of the
arbitral proceedings as evidence and the Arbitral Tribunal has
expressly accepted them as such, after Chevron had protested
against their submittal. This is demonstrated by paragraph 102, 112,
113, 114, 116 and 117 of the Partial Award.

On the basis of these two judgements, Ecuador has advanced
essential defences pertaining to matters of causation and damages.
The Arbitral Tribunal did signal these defences by paraphrasing them
in paragraphs 149, 153, 436, 437 and 465 of the Partial Award, but
subsequently failed to address these defences in its reasoning of the
Partial Award. In paragraph 438-454 of the Partial Award the Arbitral
Tribunal completely ignores the defences raised by Ecuador and fails
to even mention the judgment in the Amazonas refinery case. The
same applies to the Imported Products case. This judgement is
noted in paragraph 465 of the Partial Award, but subsequently not
decided upon in paragraphs 467-472 in which the Arbitral Tribunal
deals with this part of the case.

Given that the Arbitral Tribunal has confirmed in paragraph 272 and
273 of the Partial Award that these two Ecuadorian judgements
affect the outcome of the case, makes the fact that these judgements
as well as Ecuador's defences based thereon have been ignored all
the more incomprehensible. In paragraph 273 the Arbitral Tribunal
finds:

“The decisions by the Ecuadorian courts after the completion of the
breach of Article II(7) can only thus affect the questions of causation
and damages that flow from that breach.”

M8771939/1/20475578 36/53

82.

83.

84.

DE BRAUW

BLACKSTONE

WESTBROEK

Ignoring the judgements in the Amazonas Refinery case and the
Imported Products case results in a breach of mandate by the
Arbitral Tribunal. Given that the Arbitral Tribunal has not provided
any reasoning at all for rejecting the essential defences, this also
results in a breach of its obligation to provide reasons (Article
1065(1)(d) DCCP).

Failure to acknowledge the essence of the defence regarding Joss
of chance and exceeding the mandate

Considered together with the Arbitral Tribunal’s failure to address the
Amazonas refinery and Imported products cases, it is important to
note that the Arbitral Tribunal failed to acknowledge the essence of
Ecuador's defence regarding the principle of loss of chance, which
has lead the Arbitral Tribunal to venture outside the scope of its
mandate.

In contrast to Ecuador’s assertions, the Arbitral Tribunal has held
that it will not act on the basis of the loss of chance doctrine in the
assessment of damages. In paragraph 378-382 the Arbitral Tribunal

finds:

378.

379.

The above considerations also lead the Tribunal to reject the
Respondent's “loss of chance” argument. Given that the Parties
agree with Paulsson’s assertion that “[t]he goal of reparations in
international law is to restore the victim of a breach to the position it
would have enjoyed if the infraction had not occurred,” the Tribunal
must determine what TexPet should have received in judgments
issued by the Ecuadorian courts. No matter what their estimation of
the merits of the claims, it is clear that the Ecuadorian courts would
not have applied a discount factor based on the doctrine of “loss of
chance” when issuing a judgment.

Furthermore, the uncertainty involved in the litigation process that is
noted by the Respondent is taken into account in determining the
standard of review. As noted above, if the alleged breach were based
on a manifestly unjust judgment rendered by the Ecuadorian court,
the Tribunal might apply deference to the court's decision and
evaluate it in terms of what is “juridically possible” in the Ecuadorian
legal system. However, in the context of other standards such as
undue delay under Article II(7), no such deference is owed. As

M8771939/1/20475578

37/53

85.

380.

381.

382.

DE BRAUW

BLACKSTONE

WESTBROEK

Paulsson’s opinion in this arbitration has stated, the Ecuadorian
courts have “already had their chance [to decide the cases] and have
failed to do so.”128 It thus falls to the Tribunal to step into the shoes
of the Ecuadorian courts and decide the merits of the cases as it
determines a fair and impartial judge in Ecuador would have decided
the matter.

The Tribunal finds that Paulsson’s treatise is consistent with this
view. The passages cited by the Respondent only appear to stand for
the proposition that simply proving the breach does not automatically
entitle a claimant to get the amount of his original claim, but that he
must prove the merit of that underlying claim.

Moreover, the Respondent cannot simultaneously maintain both (1)
that a claimant be required to prove that it would more likely than not
have prevailed in the domestic courts and (2) that a claim be
discounted to reflect the probability of success. To apply both
propositions would lead to an approach that would necessarily and
systematically undercompensate claimants in cases that allege
misconduct by a State’s judiciary. Indeed, the inconsistency of these
two arguments is highlighted when the Respondent asks the Tribunal
to apply 14% as the appropriate discount factor (R VI, 688). To
accept 14% as the probability of Claimants’ success in their cases
would logically mean that the Claimants have not sustained their
burden to show that they would more likely than not have prevailed in
the Ecuadorian courts.

Finally, the “loss of chance” principle does not have wide acceptance
across legal systems such that it can be considered a “general
principle of law recognized by civilized nations.” At most it can be
said that the “loss of chance” principle is applied in exceptional
situations where there exists a “harm whose existence cannot be
disputed but which it is difficult to quantify,”129 (sic) as noted in the
commentary to the UNIDROIT Principles cited by the Respondent. In
this case the Tribunal finds no exceptional difficulties in coming to a
conclusion as to what should have occurred but for the breach of the
BIT and what damages result therefrom. The Tribunal therefore
declines to apply the “loss of chance”

In doing so, the Arbitral Tribunal misses the essence of the loss of
chance doctrine and Ecuador's defence based thereon. This
contrasts sharply with the fact that Chevron’s expert, Jan Paulsson,

M8771939/1/20475578

38/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

does appreciate this very well and accepts this doctrine as starting
point. In his standard work “Denial of Justice” of 2005 Paulsson
argues the following, as has also been quoted by Ecuador:

“It seems difficult to justify the conclusion that the prejudice to a
claimant who was prevented from having his grievance heard should
be deemed equal to whatever relief he had initially seen fit to ask. In
establishing an amount so that it corresponds to what the international
tribunal feels was the true loss, it may be necessary to evaluate the
probabilities of the outcome if the local system had proceeded in
accordance with its laws but without violating international law.”

86. In the arbitral proceedings, Paulsson has not rejected this reasoning.
In a legal opinion that he has submitted for the benefit of Chevron in
the arbitral proceedings, Paulsson merely sought to assist Chevron
by noting in respect of this key observation in his standard work that
itis a "tentative view’:*'

“In my book, Denial of Justice in International Law, | expressed the
tentative view that [...]”

87. However, Jan Paulsson subsequently does not distance himself from
the view he has defended as an independent scholar. In stead, he
merely argues that in this specific matter a different approach might
be more suitable because application of the loss of chance principle
would be practically impossible “without engaging in speculation”:**

“The first sentence seems unlikely to be controversial. As to the
interrogation of the second sentence, having carefully considered the
facts and arguments in the case at hand, | perceive that an attempt to
quantify the probability of the Claimants’ success in the underlying
disputes, if the local system had operated in a way that did not
contravene international law, might be practically impossible without
engaging in a speculation. | believe the traditional principles of
remedies in international law provide a simpler and more satisfactory
approach to assessing the quantum of compensation.”

*° See Jan Paulsson, Denial of Justice under International Law (Cambridge
University Press, 2005), pp. 225-227. See also Ecuador's Counter Memorial of
22 September 2008, paragraph 696 (Exhibit E-15).

* Jan Paulsson, Opinion for Chevron, par. 145 (Exhibit E-16).

M8771939/1/20475578 39/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

88. Paulsson did all this on 21 November 2008 when he signed his legal
opinion for Chevron and thus about 1 year prior to the issuance of
the judgements in the Amazonas Refinery and Imported Products
cases.

89. The uncertainty noted by Paulsson in his Legal Opinion:

“(...) |perceive that an attempt to quantify the probability of the
Claimants’ success in the underlying disputes, if the local system had
operated in a way that did not contravene international law, might be
practically impossible without engaging in a speculation”

which is inherent to any application of the principle of loss of chance
was thus no longer present when the Partial Award was rendered after
judgement was rendered in the Amazonas Refinery and Imported
Products cases. At that time, there was no longer any reason to
speculate on the decision of the Ecuadorian courts, as done by the
Arbitral Tribunal in the Partial Award.

90. It cannot also be maintained, as done by the Arbitral Tribunal in
paragraph 382 of the Partial Award, that the /oss of chance doctrine
is no longer valid. Only before the judgements in the Amazonas
Refinery and Imported Products cases were rendered did Chevron’s
expert argue that the lost chance would be hard to determine without
engaging in speculation. None of the parties has argued that the loss
of chance approach is wrong in the abstract. The arbitral tribunal has
thus also ventured outside the scope of the dispute set by the parties
and has also for that reason breached its mandate. This constitutes
a separate ground for setting aside, in addition to the failure to
decide upon an essential defence (also as per article 1065(1)(c)
DCCP).

Arbitrators erred by stepping into the shoes of the Ecuadorian
judiciary

91. In conjunction with the failure to address the judgements by the
Ecuadorian judges and the defences raised by Ecuador regarding,
the Arbitral Tribunal has decided to step into the shoes of the

 

* Jan Paulsson, Opinion for Chevron, par. 146 (Exhibit E-16).

M8771939/1/20475578 40/53

92.

93.

94.

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

Ecuadorian judges by substituting their judgements by its own and
thus without paying any consideration to the opinion of the
Ecuadorian courts. In paragraph 387 of the Partial Award, the
Arbitral Tribunal holds the following:

“With respect to the issue of prescription, the Tribunal does not
express an opinion on whether Judge Troya’s rulings in Cases 23-91
and 8-92 are ‘juridically possible” within the Ecuadorian legal system.
Instead, as explained

above, the applicable standard of review requires the Tribunal to step
into the shoes of an honest, independent, and impartial Ecuadorian
judge and review de novo the issue of prescription. Under this standard,
the Tribunal concludes that the default prescription period should have
applied and therefore that the Claimants’ cases should not have been
dismissed.”

It is all the more incomprehensible for the Arbitral Tribunal to adopt
the role of an Ecuadorian Court because the Arbitral Tribunal in
paragraph 247 of the Partial Award has held that it lacks the
authority to do so:

“The Tribunal thus finds that it may directly examine individual cases
under Article |I(7), while keeping in mind that the threshold of
“effectiveness” stipulated by the provision requires that a measure of
deference must be afforded to the ic justice system; the

Tribunal is not empowered by this provision to act as a court of appeal
reviewing every individual alleged failure of the local judicial system de
novo.” (underscore by counsel to Ecuador).

Consequently, the two recent judgments in the Amazonas Refinery
and the Imported Products cases are, also according to the Arbitral
Tribunal itself, directly relevant to the outcome of the case and
should have been considered by the Arbitral Tribunal in connection
therewith.

Another but similar mistake is made in paragraph 387 of the Partial
Award, where the Arbitral Tribunal refuses to judge whether the
judgment of Judge Troya regarding limitation in the cases 23-91 and
8-92 is “‘juridically possible” within the Ecuadorian legal system”:

M8771939/1/20475578 41/53

95.

96.

97.

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

“With respect to the issue of prescription, the Tribunal does not
express an opinion on whether Judge Troya’s rulings in Cases 23-91
and 8-92 are “juridically UNCITRAL Chevron-Texaco v. Ecuador Partial
Award on the Merits possible” within the Ecuadorian legal system.
Instead, as explained above, the applicable standard of review requires
the Tribunal to step into the shoes of an honest, independent, and
impartial Ecuadorian judge and review de novo the issue of prescription.
Under this standard, the Tribunal concludes that the default
prescription period should have applied and therefore that the
Claimants’ cases should not have been dismissed. The Tribunal does
not agree with the complex reasoning necessary to reach the
conclusion that a special prescription period, normally applicable only
to retail sales, applies in these cases instead of the default period. This
reasoning, reflected in Judge Troya’s decisions, relies on equity and is
not supported by the arguments put forward by the Parties in the
Ecuadorian courts. The Tribunal thus concludes that the correct
approach would have been and is simply to apply the default
prescription period in the absence of any applicable special
prescription period.

This makes clear that the Arbitral Tribunal has no reservations
whatsoever in making a full autonomous reassessment of cases
which lie before Ecuadorian courts for judgement and that the
Arbitral Tribunal a priori sets aside these Ecuadorian judgements
without any form of justification.

Absence of an objective reason to ignore the Ecuadorian
judgements

The foregoing is all the more poignant since the Arbitral Tribunal only
found that there was denial of justice because of_undue delay, but
did not find that the judgements rendered by the Ecuadorian courts
were manifestly unjust decisions nor that these judgements were a
product of any type of bias or prejudice.

The former is best expressed in paragraph 385 of the Partial Award:

“These issues were argued by the Parties in relation to denial of justice
by manifestly unjust decision (see (...) above), an issue which the
Tribunal need not decide in light of its conclusions regarding the
breach of Article II(7) of the BIT.”

M8771939/1/20475578 42/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

98. The latter is clearly evidenced by paragraph 332 of the Partial
Award:

“In light of the above finding that the remedies presented by Ecuador
did not rise to the level where their exhaustion is required under the
standard of Article II(7), there is no need to pass judgment generally
upon the independence or lack thereof of Ecuador’s judiciary, and the
Tribunal refrains from doing so.”

99. Therefore, in these arbitral proceedings, it should be assumed that
the Ecuadorian courts are independent and that there are no
substantive objections to the judgements rendered in the Amazonas
Refinery and Imported products cases. This makes it
incomprehensible that the Arbitral Tribunal simply ignored these
judgements and did not form an opinion as to the chances of the
Ecuadorian courts finding (without undue delay) in favour of
Chevron, while applying the /oss of chance doctrine.

100. The Arbitral Tribunal also confirms that the Ecuadorian case law,
including these two judgements, is also not disqualified or otherwise
rejected because the judgements were rendered after the date at
which undue delay was found to have occurred. The Arbitral Tribunal
has rightly held that such judgements are relevant and remain
relevant with respect to causation and the assessment of damages.
In paragraph 273 of the Partial Award they hold:

“The decisions issued by the Ecuadorian courts after the completion of
the breach of Article II(7) can only thus affect the questions of
causation and damages that flow from that breach.

101.

In paragraph 377 of the Partial Award the Arbitral Tribunal repeats
this by stating:

“The Tribunal’s task, given a completed breach for undue delay, is to
evaluate the merits of the underlying cases and decide upon them as it
believes and honest, independent, and impartial Ecuadorian court
should have. In doing so, the Tribunal may take into account a
judgment issued after the critical date as evidence of how a

h ical honest, and impartial Ec court would
have decided. However, the Tribunal owes that judgment no
deference. The Tribunal must weigh it against other evidence before

 

M8771939/1/20475578 43/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

the Tribunal as to how the court should have decided and come to its
own conclusion on the matter

102. It is also at this occasion that the Arbitral Tribunal confirms that the
judgements in the Amazonas Refinery and the Imported Products
cases are relevant. Consequently, the Partial Award cannot stand,
given that, in light of the above, the Arbitral Tribunal has neither
addressed these two judgements nor has it made clear why these
judgements can be disregarded.

103. The applicable standard is repeated by the Arbitral Tribunal in
paragraph 496 of the Partial Award in respect of one other
Ecuadorian judgement in the Refinancing Agreement case. This
judgement, which was in favour of Chevron, is taken into account by
the Arbitral Tribunal in paragraph 497 of the Partial Award. The
Arbitral Tribunal should have done the same in respect of the
Amazonas Refinery and the Imported Products cases. After all, these
judgements directly answer the question what:

“an honest, independent, and impartial Ecuadorian judge, applying
Ecuadorian law, would have done”.

104. In other words, the Arbitral Tribunal itself considers that these
judgments still carry weight and in particular re. causality and
damages. The failure to comply herewith constitutes a serious defect
for Ecuador as a sovereign state that also constitutes a breach of
mandate by the Arbitral Tribunal in the sense of article 1065(1)(c)
DCCP.

The defence that Chevron has unconditionally accepted lengthy delays
and can thus not invoke this as a basis for a finding of undue delay
has been ignored

105. In the arbitral proceedings, Ecuador has argued that the arguments
put forward by Chevron in the Aguinda litigation to prevent that case
from being judged in a US court now prevent acceptance of the
argument that the delay in the seven Ecuadorian procedures
constitute undue delay. In the Aguinda case Chevron argued that as
class action brought by Ecuadorian victims of Chevron’s actions
should not be brought in the US, but in Ecuador because the

M8771939/1/20475578 44/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

Ecuadorian courts perform adequately. Chevron took this view
because Ecuadorian claimants submitted in the US that a lot was left
to be desired in respect of the performance of the Ecuadorian
judiciary, in particular due to considerable delays. At the time, the
Ecuadorian courts were dealing with “a twenty-year backlog of
cases”. Chevron won this argument and has therefore successfully
argued in the US that it should not be forced to appear and litigate in
US courts since Ecuador offers the forum conveniens in which it
holds trust and confidence, in spite of the delays that occur in
Ecuadorian procedures. Against this background, Ecuador has
argued in the arbitral proceedings that Chevron cannot maintain that
delays in the seven Ecuadorian proceedings constitute undue delay.

106. In paragraph 342 of the Partial Award, the Arbitral Tribunal
summarizes this line of argument as follows:

“The respondent further assets that there is no way to construe these
statements as being consistent with the Claimant's current positin.
When the Claimants took this position in the Aguinda litigation, they
were on notice of a twenty-year backlog of cases in the Ecuadorian
courts at the time, as specifically highlighted in an opposing affidavit:

{T]he administration of justice in Ecuador is extremely inefficient
[... A]t least twenty years will be needed to eliminate the
volumes of cases accumulated. This growth of the number of
cases in the hands of each judge, makes the administration of
justice an extremely slow process.’

The Claimants’ statements in Aguinda were also made without
qualification and span a significant time period in which the Claimants
now allege their cases were “singled out.” In fact, the seven cases
underlying the present claims were ific cited by the Claimant:
as evide of the fairness of Ecuadorian courts (...). The R

further notes that these representations were necessary in order to
prevail on forum non conveniens such that, during the pendency of
these cases, the Claimants “could have withdrawn — and likely had a
duty to withdraw [their] motions to dismiss” if their position on the
Ecuadorian courts had changed (...). According to the Respondent, the
statements, while made by Texaco, can also be attributed to Chevron
since it acquired Texaco before the conclusion of these cases and is
claiming in this arbitration through its subsidiary (...). Thus, the

M8771939/1/20475578 45/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

Claimants cannot contend that their previous statements do not apply
to the present situation. (underscore, counsel to Ecuador)

107. From the rest of the Partial Award it can be deducted that the Arbitral
tribunal does mention this defence by Ecuador, but subsequently
fails to address it, thereby in fact ignoring it. In paragraph 270 of the
Partial Award the Arbitral Tribunal sets out why it finds there was
undue delay at the time the Notice of Arbitration was filed on 21
December 2006:

Taking into account the totality of the circumstances that the Tribunal
deems relevant, the Tribunal ultimately concludes that a breach of
Article |I(7) of the BIT was completed by reason of undue delay at the
date of the Claimants’ Notice of Arbitration, December 21, 2006. At
that time, the Claimants’ cases had been pending in the Ecuadorian
courts for 13 to 15 years. Six of these cases had never seen any
decision. The last of the cases, Case 8-92, had recently been
dismissed for abandonment, but that decision would soon be
overturned and leave the case again pending at first instance. At that
time, the political turmoil of 2004-2005 had passed and a re-constituted
Supreme Court had been in place for over a year since November
2005. More than four years had also passed since the close of the
Aguinda litigation. As such, the Tribunal concludes that this date
constitutes the critical date upon which the breach of Article II(7) was
completed.

108. Thus, the Arbitral tribunal accepts there is undue delay in a situation
where the actual delay is less than Chevron argued in the Aguinda
litigation was not serious enough to question the conclusion that the
Ecuadorian system is fair and efficient. The Arbitral Tribunal thereby
in no manner shows it has taken Ecuador's defence into
consideration. Also, from the findings of the Tribunal it is all but clear
why Ecuador's arguments were rejected.

109. The considerations of the Arbitral Tribunal in paragraphs 348-354 of
the Partial Award also fail to make clear in any way that the Arbitral
tribunal considered this essential defence by Ecuador and on which
grounds this defence has been rejected. In particular, the reference
made to the alleged problems in 2004 cannot constitute such
motivation. These events after all are not related to the “twenty-year
backlog of cases” and its subsequent delays. Furthermore, the

M8771939/1/20475578 46/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

Arbitral Tribunal did not base its finding that there was undue delay
at the time the Notice of Arbitration was filed on 21 December 2006
on these events. It is incomprehensible that these events can now
lead to the conclusion that Chevron no longer needs to accept the
long and prevalent delays.

Failure to apply customary international law

110. The Tribunal misinterprets article II(7) BIT in paragraphs 241-244 of
the Partial Award, reasoning that the provision introduces “an
independent, specific treaty obligation” and that it provides “a distinct
and potentially less-demanding test (...) as compared to denial of
justice under customary international law”. \t then goes on refusing
to apply customary international law in paragraph 275 of the Partial
Award, reasoning:

Accordingly, in view of the Tribunal’s decision that Article II(7) of the
BIT constitutes a lex specialis with greater specificity than the
customary law standard of denial of justice and that a breach of
Article II(7) for undue delay was complete by the date of the Notice
of Arbitration, prior to the issuance of any relevant decision by the
Ecuadorian courts, further consideration of the Claimants’
allegations of denial of justice by undue delay or manifestly unjust
decisions is unnecessary. Any additional breach of the BIT or — in
view of Article VI(1)(a) — of customary international law is not
relevant unless it leads to further damages. As will be seen in the
later considerations of the Tribunal regarding causation and
damages, the Parties have not claimed and indeed there is no
evidence that additional damages have been caused by the alleged
breaches of other BIT provisions or of customary international law.
Accordingly, as the award of damages in respect of the breach of
Article II(7) encompasses any compensation owed with regard to
the remaining BIT and custom-based claims, those claims need no
longer be decided.

111. This finding signifies that the Tribunal failed to do exactly what it was
obligated to do — assuming for the sake of the argument at this point
that the Tribunal has jurisdiction on the basis of the BIT at all, which
Ecuador disputes — i.e. to apply customary international law. This
failure constitutes another breach of the Tribunals mandate, which

M8771939/1/20475578 47/53

112.

113.

114.

DE BRA

UW

BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

again is sufficient ground to set aside the Partial Award on the basis
of article 1065(1)(c.) DCCP.

In fact, the Tribunal itself confirms in paragraph 159 of the Partial
Award that its mandate entails the application of “the substantive
provisions of the BIT and any relevant provisions of other sources of
international law” but subsequently fails to perform this task.

It transpires from the Tribunal’s reasoning that the Tribunal assumed
there was no need to apply customary international law, since it had
already established undue delay on the basis of a violation of article
Il(7) BIT. However, this does not alter the fact that the Tribunal failed
to apply customary international law as is evidenced by its very own
reasoning and has thus breached its mandate. The Tribunal’s
findings on the basis of article II(7) are based on a misinterpretation
of this provision and therefore cannot be used to justify the failure to
apply customary international law.

The incorrect interpretation of article II(7) BIT becomes clear if the
Tribunal’s reasoning is reviewed in detail. The tribunal found that
article II(7) BIT would introduce “distinct” and “less-demanding test”
on the basis of the following reasoning in paragraph 241 — 244
Partial Award:

241. The Tribunal recalls the text of Article II(7) of the BIT:

Each Party shall provide effective means of asserting claims
and enforcing rights with respect to investment, investment
agreements, and investment authorizations.

BIT provisions such as this one are relatively rare. They appear only
in U.S. BITs, the Energy Charter Treaty, and a handful of other
BITs. Only three cases considering such provisions have been
brought to the attention of this Tribunal, those of Petrobart v. Kyrgyz
Republic, Amto v. Ukraine, Duke Energy v. Ecuador.

242. The obligations created by Article II(7) overlap significantly with the
prohibition of denial of justice under customary international law.
The provision appears to be directed at many of the same potential
wrongs as denial of justice. The Tribunal thus agrees with the idea,
expressed in Duke Energy v. Ecuador, that Article II(7), to some

M8771939/1/20475578

48/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

extent, “seeks to implement and form part of the more general
guarantee against denial of justice.”74 Article II(7), however,
appears in the BIT as an independent, specific treaty obligation and
does not make any explicit reference to denial of justice or
customary international law. The Tribunal thus finds that Article
II(7), setting out an “effective means” standard, constitutes a lex
specialis and not a mere restatement of the law on denial of justice.
Indeed, the latter intent could have been easily expressed through
the inclusion of explicit language to that effect or by using language
corresponding to the prevailing standard for denial of justice at the
time of drafting. The Tribunal notes that this interpretation accords
with the approach taken in Amto v. Ukraine, another case that is
cited by the Respondent, which considered the identically worded
provision found at Article 10(12) of the Energy Charter Treaty.

243. The lex specialis nature of Article II(7) is also confirmed by its origin
and purpose. According to Vandevelde, such “judicial access”
provisions arose in U.S. treaty practice at a time when
disagreement existed among publicists about the content of the
right of access to the courts of the host state, “thus making treaty
protection desirable.” Article II(7) was thus created as an
independent treaty standard to address a lack of clarity in the
customary international law regarding denial of justice. Vandevelde
further notes that this provision was later deleted from the U.S.
Model BIT when U.S. drafters deemed that other BIT provisions and
customary international law provided adequate protection and that a
separate treaty obligation was no longer necessary, as is shown by
the reference to “effective means” in the preamble and the express
reference to denial of justice in the formulation of the fair and
equitable treatment standard.

244. In view of the above considerations and the language of Article

II(7), the Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that a distinct and
ly Ie ing test is ic under this provision as

compared to denial of justice under customary international law.
The test for establishing a denial of justice sets, as the Respondent
has argued, a high threshold. While the standard is objective and
does not require an overt showing of bad faith, it nevertheless
requires the demonstration of “a particularly serious shortcoming”
and egregious conduct that “shocks, or at least surprises, a sense
of judicial propriety”. By contrast, under Article II(7), a failure of
domestic courts to enforce rights “effectively” will constitute a

 

M8771939/1/20475578 49/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

violation of Article II(7), which may not always be sufficient to find a
denial of justice under customary international law. Given the
related genesis of the two standards, the interpretation and
application of Article II(7) is informed by the law on denial of justice.
However, the Tribunal emphasizes that its role is to interpret and
apply Article II(7) as it appears in the present BIT.

115. The Tribunal’s reasoning is incorrect for a number of reasons.

116. First, the Tribunal wrongly assumes that article II(7) BIT can only be
understood as a mere restatement of the law on denial of justice
according to customary international law if this intent would have
been expressed "through the inclusion of explicit language to that
effect or by using language by using language corresponding to the
prevailing standard of denial of justice at the time of drafting”. In fact
logic demands the opposite. If it would have been the parties’
intention to introduce a standard different from that of customary
international law and if it would have been their intention to bind
Ecuador to more stringent obligations than those applicable pursuant
to customary international law, they would have expressed so in the
language of the BIT. The fact is that they did not do so.

117. Second, the origin and purpose do not support the tribunal’s
interpretation either. To the contrary. The fact that article Il(7) BIT
was deleted from the model BIT “when U.S. drafters deemed that
other BIT provisions and customary international law provided
adequate protection and that a separate treaty obligation was no
longer necessary” evidences that the provision was apparently not
meant to impose more stringent obligations on the state parties than
those applicable pursuant to customary international law. If the
opposite would have been true — as erroneously suggested by the
Tribunal — the US drafters would have had ample reason to maintain
the provision in light of the additional, more stringent obligations.

Duty to substantiate

118. Above, Ecuador has made extensive reference to the arguments
raised by Chevron and has also anticipated upon the defences that

M8771939/1/20475578 50/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

are likely to be raised by Chevron in proceedings in the Dutch courts.
That defence will no doubt include the following:

(i) Ecuador will be alleged to have erroneously stated that an
eminent arbitral tribunal has made serious errors. Ecuador,
however, has considered its position and has provided good
grounds for raising those arguments.

Chevron will argue that Ecuador has submitted a de facto
appeal. This is not at issue given that Ecuador does not demand
a review of the merits of the case. However, an important
impetus for Ecuador bringing these proceedings is a desire to
address what it sees as an injustice and also to act in the
interest of the Ecuadorian people to remedy a breach of its
sovereignty. Ecuador takes the view that it is both entitled and
obliged to submit the present claims, also in view of the
enormous financial interest at stake for its population.

Ecuador will be alleged to have failed to acknowledge the effect
of the design and reasoning of the arbitral awards. This is not
the case. It is evident that the arbitral awards have been drafted
by experienced arbitrators, who have included extensive
standard phraseology that has become commonplace in BIT-
arbitrations and also employed other techniques to prevent their
awards from being challenged in setting-aside proceedings. This
does not alter the fact that those parts of the Interim Award and
the Partial Award that form the crucial decisions in this case
contain fundamental errors that must result in the setting aside
of these awards.

(ii

(ii

Evidence

119. Ecuador submits the exhibits mentioned in this writ of summons to
support its claims.

120. To the extent Chevron challenges any other assertions made by
Ecuador and the Court finds that the burden of proof lies with
Ecuador, Ecuador offers to submit proof of such contentions.

M8771939/1/20475578 51/53

DE BRAUW
BLACKSTONE
WESTBROEK

121. The exhibits mentioned in this writ of summons will be submitted at
the first docket session.

ON GROUNDS OF WHICH CLAIMANT DEMANDS

That the District Court, by judgement, and to the extent possible
provisionally enforceable:

a. Set aside the Interim Award of 1 December 2008 in the arbitral
proceedings under the UNCITRAL arbitration rules between Ecuador as
respondent and Chevron as claimant,

b. Set aside the Partial Award of 30 March 2010 in the arbitral proceedings
under the UNCITRAL arbitration rules between Ecuador as respondent
and Chevron as claimant ; and

c. | Order Chevron to pay the costs of the legal proceedings, subject to
statutory interest (article 6:119 DCC) from fourteen days upon rendering
of judgement.

[signature bailiff]

[costs of service]

[Counsel that deals with matter]

Deze zaak wordt behandeld door Mr G.W. van der Bend, Mr R. Schellaars en
Mr Y.O. Jansen, De Brauw Blackstone Westbroek N.V., Postbus 75084, 1070
AB Amsterdam, T +31 20 577 1658, F +31 20 577 1775, E
bommel.vanderbend@debrauw.com.

M8771939/1/20475578 52/53

