INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF
INVESTMENT DISPUTES

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN
CITY ORIENTE LIMITED
Claimant
v.

THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
and
EMPRESA ESTATAL PETROLEOS DEL ECUADOR
(Petroecuador)

Respondents

(ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21)

DECISION ON REVOCATION OF PROVISIONAL MEASURES
AND OTHER PROCEDURAL MATTERS

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Juan Fernéndez-Armesto, President
Dr. Horacio A. Grigera Na6én, Arbitrator
Dr. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C., Arbitrator
Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Gonzalo Flores

For Claimant: For Respondents:

Alejandro Ponce Martinez Republic of Ecuador

Ana Belén Posso, Daniela Roman and Empresa Estatal Petrdéleos del

Dr. Carlos Manosalvas Ecuador (Petroecuador)

Quevedo & Ponce Attn. Lic. Guillermo Aguilar-
Quito, Ecuador Alvarez and Mr. Eric Ordway
and Weil Gotshal & Manges LLP
Messrs. R. Doak Bishop, Craig S. Miles and Roberto New York, NY

Aguirre Luzi and

and Ms. Isabel Fernandez de la Cuesta Gonzalez Wladimir Garcia Vinueza,

King & Spalding LLP Wilson Narvaez Vicuiia,
Houston, TX Gabriel Morales Villagémez and
and Maria Angélica Martinez

Ms. Margrete Stevens Petroecuador’s Legal Department
King & Spalding LLP Quito, Ecuador

Washington, D.C.
Date of dispatch: May 13, 2008

I. Procedural Issues

1. On November 19, 2007, the Arbitral Tribunal unanimously resolved to order
the following provisional measures pursuant to Article 47 of the ICSID
Convention [hereinafter, the “Provisional Measures”:

“1 The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos
del Ecuador [Petroecuador] shall refrain from

- Instituting or prosecuting, if already in place, any judicial
proceeding or action of any nature whatsoever against or involving
City Oriente Limited and/or its officers or employees and arising
from or in connection with the Contract of March 29, 1995, and/or
the effects of the application of Law No. 2006-42, the Law
Amending the Hydrocarbon Law, to that Contract;

- Demanding that City Oriente Limited pay any amounts as a result
of the application of Law No. 2006-42, the Law Amending the
Hydrocarbon Law, to the Contract of March 29, 1995;

- Engaging in, starting or persisting in any other conduct that may
directly or indirectly affect or alter the legal situation agreed upon
under the Contract of March 29, 1995, as thereby agreed upon and
executed by the parties.

2. These provisional measures shall remain in full force and effect
unless and until modified or revoked by the Tribunal or until the
rendering of the final award.

3. The Tribunal’s communication of October 24, 2007, is hereby
invalidated.

4. The Tribunal preserves for later resolution its decision on the
costs arising from this proceeding.”

2. The Provisional Measures ordered that a procedural hearing be held [the “First
Session”], the Agenda of which could include, at the request of either party, a
motion to amend or revoke such Provisional Measures.

3. Thereafter, through a letter dated November 27, 2007, Claimant informed the
Tribunal of certain events occurred following the passing of the Provisional
Measures, which—in Claimant’s opinion—entailed a violation of such
Measures.

4. Thus, Claimant requested that the Tribunal order the State’s Attorney General
to communicate the Provisional Measures to all Government Authorities.

' See the Decision dated November 19, 2007 for an account of procedural developments prior to the
passing of the Provisional Measures.

The Tribunal notified that request to Respondents, establishing that any
allegations in connection therewith were to be submitted by November 30,
2007. Respondents objected to the contents of Claimant's letter through letter
dated November 30, 2007, and argued that the term established by the
Tribunal to present further allegations was insufficient, and reserved
themselves the right to present those allegations at a later date. In response to
Respondents’ request, the Tribunal extended the term until December 5.

Within the new term, by letter dated December 4, 2007, Respondents alleged
that notice of the Provisional Measures had been served on both the Chief
Justice of the Second Division of the Supreme Court of Justice and the
Ecuadorian Prosecutor, and once again denied the contents of Claimant’s
letter.

By a communication sent to the parties on December 20, 2007, the Tribunal
convened the parties to the First Session, provided for in rule 13(1) of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules, to be held on January 11, 2008, at the seat of the
Centre in Washington D.C., as previously communicated in the Provisional
Measures. Moreover, it informed the parties of the provisional agenda of that
session and urged them to cooperate to come to an agreement on certain
procedural aspects.

In response to the invitation to the First Session made in the Provisional
Measures, Respondents requested that the amendment or revocation of the
Provisional Measures be incorporated into the Provisional Agenda.

In turn, on December 27, 2007, Claimant informed the Tribunal of the
procedural arrangements agreed upon regarding the schedule, the non-
separation of the decision on jurisdiction and the decision on the merits, and
the method for the filing of written submissions. The agreements were later
ratified by Respondents. Additionally, the parties requested that the date of the
First Session be postponed.

By a communication dated January 7, 2007, the Tribunal acknowledged the
agreements reached by the parties and set the hearing for March 6, 2008.

Through a letter dated January 11, 2008, Respondents informed that the parties
had agreed on a specific schedule for the filing of pleadings related to a
potential revocation of the Provisional Measures. Moreover, they requested
that the Tribunal render a decision on whether to uphold or, if applicable,
revoke the Provisional Measures based solely on the parties’ submissions on
the issue, without an audience, and asked Claimant to express their view on
the matter. By letter dated January 22, 2008, Claimant stated that it had no
objections to such proposal.

In response to the request made by the Tribunal through letter dated January 7,
2008, the parties informed the Tribunal of the agreements reached on all items
on the provisional agenda communicated to the parties on December 20, 2007,
except for two items, namely:

— Fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal (item 2 on the
Provisional Agenda);
— Place of the Proceeding (item 13 on the Provisional Agenda.)

Accordingly, through a communication dated February 21, 2008, the Arbitral
Tribunal resolved as follows:

- Tocancel the hearing scheduled for March 6, 2008; and

- To open a simultaneous proceeding until March 3, 2008, for the parties to

file their written submissions regarding the two procedural issues pending
agreement.

Pursuant to the schedule agreed upon, on February 1, 2008, Respondents filed

their Request for Revocation of the Provisional Measures [hereinafter,
“Request for Revocation.”] Likewise, on February 22, 2008, Claimant filed its
Reply to the Request for Revocation of the Provisional Measures [hereinafter,
“Reply to the Request.”]

Finally, the parties timely filed their written submissions on the two procedural

issues pending agreement.

As a result, this decision has a threefold purpose:

- first, to rule on the Request for Revocation of the Provisional Measures

filed by Respondents (II);

- second, to determine the rules applicable to the fees and expenses of the

members of the Tribunal (III); and

- finally, to set the place where the proceeding is to be held (IV).

IL. Request for Revocation of the Provisional Measures

1. Introduction

17. Before embarking on an in-depth analysis of the request for revocation of the

Provisional Measures, we will provide a brief outline of the most significant
facts underlying this claim in order to set the framework of the dispute:

- On March 29, 1995, City Oriente, Ecuador and Petroecuador entered into a

Contract subject to the laws of Ecuador, and the parties agreed that any
controversy arising in connection therewith was to be settled by way of
arbitration before the ICSID;

- On October 10, 2006, City Oriente filed a request for arbitration with
ICSID demanding that Ecuador and Petroecuador be ordered to perform
the Contract pursuant to Section 1505 of the Civil Code [the “Civil Code”]
which, in Claimant’s opinion, grants such relief. Moreover, City Oriente
reserved its right to a potential claim for damages, if necessary;

- City Oriente’s main argument is that the Contract was regularly performed

20.

as agreed, since its execution in 1995 until the enactment of Law No. 2006-
42 on April 25, 2006. Under that Law, regulated by Decree No. 1672 dated
July 11, 2006, Petroecuador demanded that City Oriente make an
additional payment that was not originally provided for in the Contract, in
an amount in excess of USD37 million’; and Claimant has refused to make
such payment;

- Then, Petroecuador filed an administrative claim requiring that the
termination of the Contract be declared due to City Oriente’s failure to pay
the amounts owed under Law No. 2006-42;

- On October 17, 2007, the Ecuadorian Prosecutor ordered that a criminal
investigation be opened against Messrs. Ford, Yépez and Paez, executives
of City Oriente, on alleged charges of embezzlement due—precisely—to
the failure to pay the additional amounts owed by Claimant as a result of
the application of the newly enacted law;

- On October 18, 2007, the State's General Attorney's Office filed a
complaint with the Prosecutor of Pichincha alleging that City Oriente’s
failure to pay the amounts owed under Law 2006-42 constituted a crime.

In light of these events, on November 19, 2007, the Arbitral Tribunal ordered
the Provisional Measures pursuant to Article 47 of the ICSID Convention. On
February 1, 2008, Respondents requested that the Provisional Measures be
overturned and Claimant objected to such request in its Reply dated February
22.

In their submission, Respondents based their request on three major
arguments: first, that the Provisional Measures seek to protect an inexistent
right; second, that they are not necessary to prevent irreparable harm; and
finally, that the decision on provisional measures entails a ruling on the merits.
Each of these lines of argumentation is addressed individually below.

Before addressing each of the arguments raised by Respondent, it must be
noted that this decision relates to the Provisional Measures, not to the merits
of the case. Thus, the party requesting the measure need only prove that its
claim has the appearance of good right, fumus boni iuris, or, in other words,
the petitioner must prove that the rights invoked are plausible. Accordingly,
the Tribunal’s decision is merely provisional and is subject to revocation at
any time; moreover, the passing of such measures does not at all impact the
decision on the merits to be eventually rendered once the proceedings have
been fully substantiated.

2. The Provisional Measures Seek to Protect an Inexistent Right

21.

(i) Ecuador and Petroecuador argue that no demand for performance of the
Contract has been filed under Ecuadorian Law, and that the Arbitral Tribunal
cannot interfere with the application of Law No. 2006-42. Claimant
mistakenly cites Section 1505 of the Civil Code, related to performance, but
this section does not apply to the case under analysis, for administrative
contracts are not subject to implied termination provisions nor do the rights
granted by such provisions in private law apply to such contracts. The alleged

> According to a letter sent by Petroecuador dated January 15, 2008, the debt amounted to USD
37,730,481; Cf. Exhibit 1 to the Reply to the Request filed by City Oriente.

22.

23.

24.

25.

breach by the State could only give rise to a claim for damages, and would
never result in Ecuador being subject to any prohibition.

(ii) Respondents further allege that City Oriente is not entitled to the rendering
of an award annulling the termination provided for under this Law.
Termination is a public power of the Ecuadorian State, recognized by both the
Hydrocarbon Law and by Clause 21 of the Contract. It is an extraordinary
power for self-protection, by virtue of which the contracts entered into by the
State are subjected to a regime different from the one applicable to contracts
entered into by private parties. The State may protect itself in certain
conditions without need of seeking judicial protection. Thus, the termination
exceeds the scope of this arbitration, and the Arbitral Tribunal cannot order its
stay.

(iii) Furthermore, Respondents argue that Law No. 2006-42 sets forth a new
duty to pay an additional amount of money which does not result from the
Contract but from the Law, pursuant to Section 1453 of the Civil Code. No
Judicial Court -let alone an Arbitral Tribunal—can stay the effects of a law
enacted by the Ecuadorian Congress.

(iv) Ecuador and Petroecuador finally argue that there is no general,
autonomous and abstract principle to prevent the aggravation of the dispute
that would automatically justify the passing of provisional measures. If there
is no substantive right to be protected, the principle of non-aggravation does
not warrant the passing of provisional measures. In any case, since the only
remedy available to Claimant would be a potential damage award, the increase
of such damages could never constitute sufficient grounds for the passing of
the Provisional Measures.

This summarizes the arguments submitted by Respondents. The Tribunal will
now analyze each of the four lines of argumentation individually.

(i) Ecuadorian Law does Not Provide for Demand for Specific Performance

26.

27.

First, Respondents argue that City Oriente demands “specific performance” of
the Contract, and that there is no legal basis underpinning such claim in
Ecuadorian Law.

In effect, City Oriente does not demand “specific performance” of the
Contract, but merely its “performance.”* This is more than a mere semantic
distinction. Claimant is not requesting that the Arbitral Tribunal force
Respondents to perform the Contract, which clearly exceeds the power of any
arbitrator. In these arbitration proceedings, City Oriente is only asserting a
claim for contract performance. In other words, all it asks is that Respondents
be ordered to fulfill the commitments undertaken under the applicable
contract, and an arbitrator does have the power to issue such an order. Later, if
the party ordered to perform the contract refuses to comply with such order, a
different issue will arise in connection with the recognition and enforcement
of the arbitration award; this issue exceeds the claims made by the parties to

> Cf. Request for Arbitration, at 17.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

this arbitration proceedings and the jurisdiction of this Arbitral Tribunal.’

Thus, City Oriente requests that Ecuador and Petroecuador be ordered to fulfill
their duties, and seeks to base this claim on Section 1561 and 1505 of the Civil
Code, which provide as follows:

Section 1561:

“Any contract duly executed constitutes law for the parties and
may only be voided by mutual consent or on legal grounds.”

Section 1505:

“Any bilateral contract is subject to an implied termination
provision upon default by one of the parties. In that event, the non-
breaching party may demand, at its discretion, termination or
performance of the contract, with a claim for damages.”

According to Claimant, it clearly arises from interpreting the sections above
that, in the event of default of a bilateral contract, the party in bonis (“the non-
breaching party,” in the terms of Section 1505 Civil Code) may choose
(“demand, at its discretion”) between two alternatives: to demand performance
or to terminate the contract, apart from a claim for damages. City Oriente
explains that the Ecuadorian State is attempting to amend the Contract
unilaterally in violation to the provisions set out in Section 1561 Civil Code,
and that, faced with this violation, it has chosen the first alternative provided
by Section 1505 Civil Code — a demand for performance of the Contract.

In response to Claimant's arguments, Respondents have based their defense on
two basic arguments:

- that Section 1505 of the Civil Code does not apply to this case because
administrative contracts are not subject to any such implied termination
provision; and

- the alleged default on the part of the State could only give rise to a claim
for damages.

The first argument is untenable, for it rests on a misinterpretation of
Claimant’s request: City Oriente has not opted for the right to termination
provided for under Section 1505 of the Civil Code, also known as implied
termination provision in Civil Law. Conversely, it has chosen to demand
performance of the Contract. Thus, the issue whether a contractor party to an
administrative contract subject to Ecuadorian Law may or may not terminate
the contract in the event of default on the part of the State is completely
irrelevant for the purposes of this arbitration.

The second argument underpinning Respondents’ defense is that oil
production administrative contracts are not subject to Ecuadorian Civil Law
other than by way of exception; thus, upon default by the State, contractor
cannot demand performance of contractual duties, and the only remedy at its

* Cf. Article 54 of the Convention and Schreuer’s Comment: “The ICSID Convention”, Cambridge
2001, page 1110 er seq.

disposal is a claim for damages.

Expert Opinion by Dr. Andrade Ubidia

33. Respondents have cited no Ecuadorian Laws, doctrine or jurisprudence in
support of their arguments, but only the opinion of a lawyer, Dr. Andrade
Ubidia.’ In this opinion, which the Tribunal has found to be undated, Dr.
Andrade Ubidia bases his analysis on the assumption that the administrative
contract subject matter of his opinion has already expired due to an
administrative sanction. Based on this assumption, he concludes that the
Contract is “fatally concluded; and it would be futile to seek performance or
termination thereof.”

34. The expert refers to facts which are completely different to those that gave rise
to these arbitration proceedings, where the case is precisely the opposite: this
Contract has not expired, but is still in force (despite the expiration
proceedings commenced by the State), and the contractor requests that the
State be ordered to fulfill the duties undertaken under such contract. The
opinion of Dr. Andrade Ubidia does not contribute to proving the allegations
made by Respondents that the sole remedy available to a contractor upon
default by the State under Ecuadorian Administrative Law is a claim for
damages, and that it has no right to demand performance.

35. In response to Dr. Andrade Ubidia’s expert opinion, Claimant has offered a
series of judicial decisions which—in its opinion—would prove that the
principles set forth in the Civil Code apply to Contracts entered into by the
State,” so that the action for performance provided for under Section 1505 of
the Civil Code may also be asserted in this type of contracts.

 

36. Among the Decisions cited, there is one related to facts similar to those
analyzed in these arbitration proceedings: Tecco v. IEOS, Supreme Court of
Justice, Fourth Division, July 25, 1983.7

Tecco vy. IEOS

37. Tecco Cia. Ltda. [““Tecco”] was a construction company that had entered into
an administrative contract with the Ecuadorian Body of Sanitation Works
[“IEOS,” for its Spanish acronym] for the construction of a dam on the Pajan
River. Upon commencement of construction works, the IEOS refused to make
the down payment required under the contract. Faced with IEOS default,
Tecco commenced judicial proceedings requesting that the IEOS be ordered to
perform the contract and to make the down payment required thereunder, and
a court declaration that the 18-month period would commence upon such
payment and an order to commence the works. The lower court dismissed the
defenses raised by the IEOS, admitted plaintiff's claims and ordered the IEOS
to perform the contract. The Supreme Court of Justice upheld the lower court
decision on appeal, arguing as follows:

* Document RA 7.
© Reply to the Request for Revocation, § 71.
7038.

38.

“Five: Sections 1582 [now 1561] and 1532 [now 1505] of the Civil
Code provide that any contract properly executed constitutes law to
the parties thereto, and may only be voided by mutual consent or
on legal grounds. These sections further provide that all bilateral
contracts contain an implied termination provision upon default by
one of the parties. In such event, the non-breaching party may
demand, at its discretion, termination or performance of the
contract, with a claim for damages. In the case under analysis, to
date, the contract has not been voided, and plaintiff has chosen to
demand performance. Thus, it is entitled to a down payment, which
payment shall accrue interest at a rate of 14% from the date of
service of the complaint; and the term for construction shall begin
upon payment of such amount and upon issuance of an order
instructing that works be commenced.”

Thus, there is at least one decision of an Ecuadorian High Court where
Sections 1561 and 1505 of the Civil Code were applied to a contract entered
into by and between a private person and a public body, where the Court
admitted Plaintiff's claim and ordered the public entity to perform its
contractual duties. Now well, the Arbitral Tribunal passes no judgment as to
whether this Decision constitutes case law, whether it reflects a consistent and
uniform position in Ecuadorian Law or whether it applies to this case.

Occidental Petroleum v. Ecuador

39.

40.

Al.

Respondents also cite an arbitration decision rendered in another ICSID case
in support of their argument that an ICSID Tribunal lacks the power to order a
public entity to comply with an administrative contract, namely, the decision
on Provisional Measures in the case between Occidental Petroleum and the
Republic of Ecuador.® In this decision, the Arbitral Tribunal came to the
following conclusion:

“Tt is well established that where a State has, in the exercise of its
sovereign powers, put an end to a contract or a license, or any other
foreign investor’s entitlement, specific performance must be
deemed legally impossible.”

The Occidental Petroleum case differs greatly from these proceedings.

(a) In the Occidental Petroleum case, on May 15, 2006, the Ministry of Energy
and Mines entered a Caducidad Decree (Expiration Order) ordering the
termination of the participation contract entered into between the parties on
May 21, 1999. In response to such measure, Occidental Petroleum filed a
request for arbitration with the ICSID, seeking (among other things) an order
to declare null and void the Caducidad Decree. The case is precisely the
opposite in these proceedings: on October 10, 2006, City Oriente filed a
Request for Arbitration arguing that the counterparty had defaulted upon the
contract by demanding payment of additional amounts under Law No. 2006-
42 and demanding performance with the contractual commitments undertaken.
It was not until later that Petroecuador requested the issuance of an Expiration
Order based on the same events that had led City Oriente to file this

* Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of
Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/01); Decision on Provisional Measures dated August 17, 2007; RA 4.
° Decision on Provisional Measures cited in Note 8, { 79.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

46.

arbitration: non-payment of the additional amounts demanded under Law No.
2006-42.

(b) There is a second difference, of a legal nature: the Occidental Petroleum
case is governed by the BIT between the US and the Republic of Ecuador; "°
while at the current stage of these proceedings, the Arbitral Tribunal must
examine a request for provisional measures in the framework of a case where
Claimant demands that Respondents be ordered to perform a Contract subject
to Ecuadorian Law.

The differences between both arbitrations are material. The Occidental
Petroleum Tribunal has concluded that in arbitration proceedings subject to
international law a claimant cannot demand performance of a contract
previously terminated by the State by virtue of its sovereign powers.
Nonetheless, this conclusion may not be directly extended to contract
arbitration such as these proceedings, which, moreover, were commenced
before the expiration order.

In this regard, the Republic of Ecuador has argued in a submission filed to
defend its position in Occidental Petroleum that Claimant cannot demand
performance of the contract terminated through an expiration order, because
the contract may only be terminated through a judicial complaint [recurso de
plena jurisdiccién] before the Ecuadorian Courts.'' The recognition of the
existence of this remedy by the Republic itself, added to the decision of the
Supreme Court of Justice in the Tecco case mentioned above!” would seem to
indicate—at least initially—that, under certain circumstances, under
Ecuadorian Law a Court may order the performance of administrative
contracts at the request of one of the parties.

To sum up: at this stage, the sole decision to be made by the Arbitral Tribunal
is whether the party requesting the provisional measures, City Oriente, has
been able to prove fumus boni iuris, an appearance of good right. Weighing
and analyzing the evidence offered by the parties so far, and without
advancing a decision on the merits, the Arbitral Tribunal does not discard the
conclusion that under Ecuadorian Law a contractor may demand that the
public entity it contracted with be ordered to fulfill its commitments.

For Claimants have proven the appearance of such right, pursuant to Article 47
of the Convention the Arbitral Tribunal may order any Provisional Measures it
deems necessary to protect such right. Thus, the Tribunal dismisses
Respondents’ Request that the Provisional Measures be revoked on these
grounds.

(ii) The Expiration Order Cannot be Stayed

47.

Second, Respondents argue that City Oriente is not entitled to an award
staying the expiration order issued pursuant to Ecuadorian Law and ratified in

!° Decision on Provisional Measures cited in Note 8, { 2.

in Requesting that the administrative termination order be declared null and void; cf. { 46 of the
Decision on Provisional Measures cited in note 8.

2 CF. 36 supra.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

Clause 21 of the Contract. The expiration order would then exceed the scope
of these arbitration proceedings and the Arbitral Tribunal would not have
jurisdiction to order the stay thereof.

It is undisputed that Clause 21 of the Contract expressly provides that an
expiration order issued by the Ministry of Energy and Mines [now the
Ministry of Mines and Oil] on the grounds and through the procedure
established in the Hydrocarbon Law would terminate the Contract.

The termination procedure set forth in the Hydrocarbon Law and in Clause 21
of the Contract is one of the mechanisms for self-protection awarded by the
legal regime to the Public Administration, as correctly asserted by
Respondents. Under Ecuadorian Law, congress and the courts have admitted
that public entities have a right to terminate an administrative contract
unilaterally—either through the implied termination provision established in
the Civil Code'* or through the special procedures provided for under Specific
Laws. It is undisputed that the termination procedure provided for under the
Hydrocarbon Law belongs in this last category.

Now well, the Contract also contains Clause 20.3, which provides as follows:
“the parties commit themselves to submit controversies or disagreements
related to or resulting from this Contract to the jurisdiction of the International
Center for the Settlement of Investment Disagreements (ICSID);” and the
same Clause 20.3.5 goes on to add that the filing of a request for arbitration
shall not cause the suspension of the Contract, but the Contract will continue
to be regularly performed. Finally, Clause 21.4 sets forth that arbitration will
be the method of choice to decree the termination of the Contract, without
prejudice to an expiration order by the State itself (pursuant to the
Hydrocarbon Law.)

Thus, clauses 20.3 and 21 of the Contract raise a difficult issue concerning the
relationship between these arbitration proceedings and the administrative
expiration proceedings, considering that the parties have provided scarce
allegations. At this stage in the proceedings, the Arbitral Tribunal does not
need to decide whether expiration proceedings must be commenced seeking
termination of the Contract once the other party has already filed a request for
arbitration demanding performance thereof in a case where the factual
background of both proceedings is exactly the same. The Tribunal must
resolve upon another issue: the Tribunal must determine whether it must order
a stay of the expiration proceedings in order to protect the rights that City
Oriente apparently has.

The Tribunal has already established, prima facie, that under Ecuadorian Law
a contractor has the right to demand the public entity with which it contracted
to perform the duties undertaken in the contract; in the specific case of City
Oriente, it is so demanding through this arbitration. This right would be
impaired if, during these arbitration proceedings, Respondents may commence

'S For example, see the Decision Narvdez Camacho c. INECEL, Case 3168, Official Gazette of the

Administrative Court, No. 10, 1991, at 129 et seg. RA 18.
'* Cf. Art. 47 of the Convention.

expiration proceedings and terminate the Contract unilaterally. Were the
Tribunal to allow such a course of events, any hypothetical final award in
favor of Claimant ordering performance of the Contract would be impossible
to execute, for the Contract would no longer be in existence, and City Oriente
would have already been forced to surrender all of its assets to the State and
would no longer be in charge of hydrocarbon exploitation.'®

53. Let us now analyze the opposite scenario: if the Tribunal finally renders a final
award in favor of Respondents, thus dismissing City Oriente’s claims, there
would be no obstacles hindering the enforcement of such decision.
Respondents would then be free to resume the expiration proceedings
forthwith, terminate the Contract and take over City Oriente's assets.

54. Upon weighing the interests at stake, the Arbitral Tribunal must choose to
protect the possibility of enforcing a hypothetical award favorable to
Claimant, even at the cost of temporarily depriving Respondents’ of their
contractual right to self-protection. Thus, given that Claimant has already
commenced arbitration proceedings demanding performance of the Contract,
Claimant has a right to request that Respondents refrain from performing any
act that may lead to early termination of the Contract. Given that Claimant has
proven an appearance of good right, Article 47 of the Convention empowers
the Arbitral Tribunal to order any Provisional Measures required to protect
such right. Accordingly, the Tribunal thus rejects Respondents’ Request that
the Provisional Measures be revoked on these grounds.

(iii) The Effects of a Law Enacted by the Congress of Ecuador cannot be Stayed

55. Third, Respondents argue that Law No. 2006-42 imposes a duty on Claimant
to make additional payments, which duty arises from the Law rather than from
the Contract (pursuant to Section 1480 of the Civil Code.)!® No Judicial
Court—and especially not an Arbitral Tribunal—may stay the effects of a law
enacted by the Congress of Ecuador.

56. In their Request for Revocation, Respondents cite!” paragraph 43 of the
Decision on Provisional Measures, where the Tribunal stated as follows:

“The Tribunal is very much aware that the Law was passed by the
Legislative Branch of the State of Ecuador in exercise of its
legitimate and undisputed national sovereignty and that, later on,
the Ecuadorian Constitutional Tribunal issued the Resolution of
August 22, 2006, declaring that such enactment does not entail a
violation of the Constitution. It is the duty and right of the branches
of the Ecuadorian government to enact such laws as they may
deem appropriate in furtherance of common good for Ecuador, and
the Tribunal cannot and does not wish to interfere in such law-
making task. The Tribunal’s role in this case is limited to disposing

'5 Clause 21.2. of the Contract and Section 75 of the Hydrocarbon Law.

'© Section 1480 of the Civil Code: “Duties are created by an actual meeting of the minds of two people or
more, such as a contract or agreement; by a voluntary act on the part of the party liable, such as upon
acceptance of an inheritance or legacy and almost any unilateral act; or by an event that causes harm or
damage to another person, as is the case with crimes and torts; and may arise from the law or from the
family tie between parents and children.”

" See | 36.

57.

58.

59.

of any disputes arising in connection with the Contract.”

The Arbitral Tribunal assertively ratifies the conclusion above. An arbitrator
lacks any power whatsoever to impair Ecuador’s law-making rights or to
overturn the laws enacted by the Congress of Ecuador, and the Tribunal has
never intended to do so—let alone order such a thing. As clearly stated in
paragraph 43, in fine, of its Decision,'* “[t]he Tribunal’s role in this case is
limited to disposing of any disputes arising in connection with the Contract.”
And this is precisely the case: the Provisional Measures ordered by the
Arbitral Tribunal are not directed to stay the effects of a law enacted by the
legislative branch of Ecuador, but any compulsory or coercive measure or act
on the part of Petroecuador or Ecuador interfering with duties arising from the
Contract, including Claimant’s right to demand performance thereof.

City Oriente has a right that the status quo ante be maintained for as long as
these arbitration proceedings are pending, and that the Contract continues to
be regularly performed as agreed by the parties (as expressly required by
Clause 20.3.5 of the Contract) and it also has a right that Petroecuador and
Ecuador refrain from adopting any unilateral compulsory or coercive measure
impairing contractual balance. The Arbitral Tribunal wishes to reiterate that its
decision to preserve the status quo does not imply any judgment as to which
position will prevail in the final award. If Respondents’ position finally
prevails and it is determined that the Law effectively imposes additional duties
on City Oriente, the Tribunal may then issue an award ordering payment of
any amounts accrued during these proceedings.

In the meantime, given that there is a right that the status quo ante be
maintained, Article 47 of the Convention provides authorization to the Arbitral
Tribunal to order any Provisional Measures required for the protection of such
right. Thus, the Tribunal dismisses Respondents’ Request that the Provisional
Measures be revoked on these grounds.

(iv) The Principle of Non-aggravation of the Dispute does not Ipso Jure Warrant the

 

61.

62.

Finally, Ecuador and Petroecuador point out that there is no general,
autonomous, abstract right to the non-aggravation of the dispute warranting,
ipso jure, the passing of provisional measures. Where there is no substantive
right requiring protection, the principle of non-aggravation does not justify the
adoption of provisional measures. Moreover, given that Claimant would only
be entitled to damages, the aggravation of such damages does not constitute
grounds for ordering provisional measures.

With all due respect, the Arbitral Tribunal does not agree with Respondents’
argumentation.

(a) First, the Tribunal disagrees because it has concluded, prima facie, that
under Ecuadorian law the concessionaire has a right to demand contract
performance upon default by the State; and this is precisely what City Oriente
is seeking through these arbitration proceedings. Without the Provisional

'8 Phrase immediately following the text cited by Respondents.

Measures, Respondents may coercively collect amounts that were not required
under the Contract, or even declare the expiration of the Contract. That would
not result in the aggravation of the dispute, but it would put an end to
Claimant’s right to demand performance of the Contract, and any potential
award in its favor would be thus impossible to enforce and illusory.

63. (b) Second, the Arbitral Tribunal agrees with Respondents’ argument to the
effect that any increase in potential damages does not generally constitute
basis for ordering provisional measures.'? That having been said, the Tribunal
disagrees with Respondents in that City Oriente’s sole remedy would be
damages.

64. Faced with the alleged default by the other party, City Oriente could have
demanded enforcement of the implied termination provision established in
Section 1505 of the Civil Code, and then seek a ratification of the termination
of the contract, plus any applicable damages, by way of arbitration. In that
case, Respondents would have been right: Claimant would, at best, have a
right to restitution and damages, and the Tribunal would have applied the
principle that a possible aggravation of a debt does not generally warrant the
ordering of provisional measures.

65. However, in effect, City Oriente did not choose termination, but the other
alternative available under the Civil Code: it chose an action for performance;
it requested that the other party be ordered to perform its contractual duties. It
is precisely in this kind of action that provisional measures play their most
important role, for they prevent one party from performing any unilateral act
that may affect the status quo ante in its own benefit, or that may turn it
impossible to perform a hypothetical future award.

66. Thus, since there is appearance of a good right, the protection of which is
sought by this arbitration, Article 47 of the Convention provides authorization
to the Arbitral Tribunal to order any Provisional Measures required to protect
such right. Thus, the Tribunal dismisses Respondents’ Request that the
Provisional Measures be revoked on these grounds.

3. The Provisional Measures are Not Necessary to Prevent Irreparable Harm

67. The first argument raised by Respondents, which the Arbitral Tribunal
analyzed in the chapter above, was based on the allegation that Claimants did
not have any right requiring protection. The second argument was based on
the fact that Provisional Measures may only be granted to prevent irreparable
harm, while Ecuador and Petroecuador argue that there is no such possibility
in the case under analysis.

   

 

(i) Arguments of the Parties

68. Respondents’ arguments may be summarized as follows: the Provisional
Measures ordered pursuant to Article 47 of the Convention and Rule 39 of the

'° The Decision on Provisional Measures in the Occidental Petroleum case, cited in note 8 supra cites that
principle in { 97: “Provisional measures are not designed to merely mitigate the final amount of damages.
Indeed, if they were so intended, provisional measures would be available to claimant in almost every
case.”

69.

Arbitration Rules are only justified in cases of urgency and to prevent
irreparable harm. Conversely, requests for measures must be rejected when the
alleged breach may be compensated through the payment of damages.
Moreover, Respondents argue that City Oriente is not entitled to demand
performance, and that the sole remedy available to it is a claim for damages.
Law No. 2006-42 imposes a duty to pay an amount of money. Any alleged
breach of the Contract due to non-payment of such amount would result in a
new debt.

In response to these allegations made by Respondents, City Oriente has argued
that neither Article 47 of the Convention nor Rule 39 of the Rules contain a
requirement that the provisional measures be ordered to prevent irreparable
harm; and that that requirement is thus inapplicable. City Oriente adds that,
even if there were such a requirement, it is met in this case, because if it were
to make the additional payments required under the new law, City Oriente
would be forced out of business, incurring losses of almost USD 23 for every
barrel of produced oil.

(ii) Analysis of the Arbitral Tribunal

70.

71.

72.

First, the Tribunal has verified that neither Article 47 of the Convention nor
Rule 39 of the Arbitration Rules require that provisional measures be ordered
only as a means to prevent irreparable harm. The only requirement arising
from the wording of Rule 39 is the traditional urgency requirement; this
requirement was analyzed by the Arbitral Tribunal in paragraphs 67 et seg. of
the Decision dated November 19, 2007, and the Tribunal concluded that it has
effectively been fulfilled.

 

  

In the cited Decision, the Tribunal concluded that the urgency requirement had
been met because it deemed that “the passing of the provisional measures is
indeed urgent, precisely to keep the enforced collection or termination
proceedings from being started, as this operates as a pressuring mechanism,
aggravates and extends the dispute and, by itself, impairs the rights which
Claimant seeks to protect through this arbitration.””° If anything, fulfillment of
that requirement is even firmer now, since the expiration proceedings are
progressing and Petroecuador has continued to serve demands for payment.

Now, is there a second requirement to be fulfilled stating that provisional
measures must be necessary to prevent irreparable harm? Rule 39 only refers
to “circumstances that require such measures”. It is the opinion of the Tribunal
that this wording requires only that provisional measures must not be ordered
lightly, but only as a last resort, after careful consideration of the interests at
stake, weighing the harm spared the petitioner and the damage inflicted on the
other party. It is not so essential that provisional measures be necessary to
prevent irreparable harm, but that the harm spared the petitioner by such
measures must be significant and that it exceed greatly the damage caused to
the party affected thereby.”!

?° Cf. Decision on Provisional Measures dated November 19, 2007, { 69.

*" Cf. Article 17 A 1 c) UNCITRAL Model Law: “Harm not adequately reparable by an award of damages
is likely to result if the measure is not ordered, and such harm substantially outweighs the harm that is
likely to result to the party against whom the measure is directed if the measure is granted.”

73. In ordering the provisional measures when it did and in upholding them in this
decision, the Tribunal has always attempted to so weigh the interests at
stake.”

74. We must remember the basis of the proceedings: the main relief sought by
Claimant is the performance of the Contract, and after careful consideration of
the allegations presented by the parties so far, the Arbitral Tribunal prima
facie considers that this claim is admissible under Ecuadorian Law. In
response to this petition, Respondents proceeded as follows:

- Petroecuador has repeatedly claimed that City Oriente make an additional
payment not originally required under the Contract for an amount in excess
of USD 37 million; City Oriente’s returns for 2007 amounted to USD
16,971,089;

- Petroecuador and Ecuador have commenced an administrative proceedings
which could result in an expiration order carrying the termination of the
Contract;

- The Ecuadorian Prosecutor and the State General Attorney’s Office
brought criminal charges against Messrs. Ford, Yépez and Paez, executives
of City Oriente, on alleged charges of embezzlement due—precisely—to
the failure to pay the additional amounts owed by Claimant as a result of
the application of the newly enacted law;

75. In light of the foregoing, to adequately weigh the interests at stake, the
Tribunal must analyze two potential scenarios where the interests of the
parties would be affected: (a) first, the Tribunal resolves to revoke the
Provisional Measures and the final award on the Merits is favorable to City
Oriente; (b) second, the Tribunal resolves to maintain the Provisional
Measures and Respondents’ position prevails in the merits stage.

76. (a) In the first case, if the Provisional Measures are revoked, the expiration
proceedings would go on with a high risk that the Contract may be finally
terminated by an administrative declaration unilaterally adopted by the State.
Moreover, Petroecuador would become entitled forthwith to demand that City
Oriente pay an amount of money not originally required under the Contract
that doubles the total return earned in FY 2007. In this case, if these
proceedings result in a final award granting the relief sought by Claimant, the
decision would be impossible to perform, for the Contract would have already
been terminated. Besides, the amounts claimed by Respondents are so high
that there is a risk that the early payment of such amounts may jeopardize the
company's economic feasibility.

77. (b) In the second case, where the Provisional Measures are maintained and the
final award favors Respondents, Petroecuador would be entitled to demand

 

The Arbitral Tribunal in the Occidental Petroleum Case seems to have based its decision
on the same grounds (note 8 supra), {| 93: “...the Tribunal notes that provisional measures may not
be awarded for the protection of the rights of one party where such provisional measures would
cause irreparable harm to the rights of the other party.”

Also, cf. [54 supra.
3 Table prepared by Mr. Esteban P6lit, Administrative Financial Manager of City Oriente, presented at
the Hearing and updated in 1 159 et seq. of the Reply to the Request.

 

payment of the additional amounts owed under Law No. 2006-42, plus
applicable interest and the State would then be authorized to resume the
expiration proceedings stayed by order of this Tribunal. The damage suffered
due to the delay in payment would be compensated by payment of interest,
City Oriente's creditworthiness would remain unaffected because its
investments, concessions, and assets located on Ecuadorian territory would
continue to exist, thus guaranteeing enforcement of the final award, and the
expiration proceedings could advance regularly (and would only have been
delayed.)

78. In this state of affairs, the Arbitral Tribunal's sole remedy is to ratify the
Provisional Measures previously ordered, for having weighed the interests at
stake, it is the opinion of this Tribunal that such measures prevent serious—
and even irreparable—damage to the petitioner at the cost of lesser and
reparable damage caused to Respondents.

(iii) Precedents Cited

79. This decision having been made, the Tribunal must now cite certain awards
and decisions entered in other cases concerning similar facts, cited by
Respondents in their submission.

80. The first decision mentioned is Procedural Order No. 3 issued in the ICSID

arbitration in Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine.” This case was an investment case
where Claimant demanded compensation for a violation of the Lithuania-
Ukraine BIT. Following a first request for provisional measures granted by the
tribunal, Claimant requested that the tribunal issue a new order staying a
criminal proceeding against an executive commenced before the request for
arbitration, revoking the seizure of certain assets and suspending an
investigation carried out by the District Attorney. The tribunal rejected this
request, arguing that for a provisional measure to be granted under Article 47
of the Convention, it must be necessary and urgent. And it is only considered
necessary if “there is a threat or possibility of irreparable harm to the rights
invoked.” Upon analyzing the facts of the case, the Tokios Tokelés tribunal
found that the second provisional measures requested failed to fulfill the above
requirements.

81. The decision is irrelevant for the purposes of this arbitration.

82. First, it appears to be an isolated decision, and no other case has been cited
where an ICSID Arbitral Tribunal has embraced the interpretation of Article
47 of the Convention proposed in Procedural Order No. 3 of the Tokio Tokelés
case.

83. Second, the Tokios Tokelés Tribunal itself had previously granted in OP.
Number 1”° a first request for provisional measures filed by Claimant, and in

> ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18, Procedural Order No. 3 dated January 18, 2005.

°5 8, citing as precedent the Dissenting Opinion of Jiménez de Aréchaga in the case Aegean Sea
Continental Shelf of the International Court of Justice of 1976.

°° Not cited by Respondents, dated July 1, 2003; between Procedural Order Number 1 and Procedural
Order Number 3 the President was replaced.

84.

85.

86.

87.

that Procedural Order No. 1, the tribunal made no reference whatsoever to any
hypothetical requirement of irreparable harm and ordered the stay of any
judicial procedure liable to affect the final award or aggravate the existing
dispute.

Moreover, in the Tokios Tokelés decision, the Tribunal cited the ICJ decision
in the Aegean Sea Continental Shelf case, in 1976, of doubtful application to
this arbitration due to the factual and legal background of such case, the
deciding body and the date, very remote.

Regardless of the weight that may be given to the decision adopted in
Procedural Order No. 3 in the Tokios Tokelés case from a strictly legal
standpoint, it is still irrelevant for the purposes of this arbitration for reasons
that are purely factual; if the Provisional Measures are not maintained, the
damage sustained by Claimant could be irreparable, and the performance of
the award would become illusory. Since the requirement established in the
Tokios Tokelés case has been met in this case, there is no need for the Tribunal
to analyze whether there is such a legal requirement.

Respondents also cite decisions entered in Occidental Petroleum?’ and
Plama®® ICSID cases in support of their argument that mere monetary
damages do not constitute irreparable harm. Once again, there is no need for
the Arbitral Tribunal to render an opinion on these decisions, because both
cases present a material difference with the case under analysis: these are
investment arbitrations, where the sole relief sought by Claimants is damages.
The facts of this case are completely different, because what City Oriente
seeks through this arbitration is contractual performance. The conclusions in
Occidental Petroleum and Plama are completely immaterial for the purposes
of this decision.

All in all, the precedents cited by Respondents do not affect the conclusions
reached by this Tribunal.

4. The Decision on Provisional Measures Rules Fully on the Request for
Arbitration

88.

The third and last argument raised by Respondents to object to the Provisional
Measures is that a complaint cannot be settled on a provisional basis. Any
request for provisional measures seeking early recognition and ratification of
the same rights constituting the merits of the case must necessarily be rejected.
In the opinion of Ecuador and Petroecuador, since the Provisional Measures
were ordered Claimant would be trying this case with the benefit of an
anticipated victory. The Measures would imply an undue interference with the
exercise of the powers of a Sovereign State on its natural resources, and would
cause Ecuador to sustain irreparable harm in violation of Article 47 of the
Convention, which forces the Arbitral Tribunal to preserve “the respective
rights of either party.”

27 Cf. Note 8, supra
°8 Plama Consortium Limited c. Bulgaria, CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision of September 6, 2005.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

With all due respect, the Arbitral Tribunal disagrees with the arguments
presented by Respondents.

First, the Tribunal would like to state once again” its respect for the sovereign
powers of the Republic of Ecuador and the right to dispose of its natural
resources pursuant to any laws deemed appropriate by the branches of
government of Ecuador. The Provisional Measures do not interfere with the
exercise of those powers. Conversely, their sole effect is to order that natural
resources be exploited pursuant to a Contract executed by Ecuador's Branches
of Government, considering it a valid and effective tool to regulate its natural
resources for as long as a decision is pending on the impact of a new law. If
Respondents consider that City Oriente owes them certain amounts, this
arbitration is the perfect forum to make such claim.

Second, the Tribunal wishes to remind the parties that the Provisional
Measures do not entail a prejudgment on the merits, and do not at all
constitute an “anticipated victory” on the part of Claimant, as alleged by
Respondents.

Third, the Provisional Measures ordered by Tribunal do not entail any ruling
on the Request for Arbitration. City Oriente, Ecuador and Petroecuador
entered into a Contract and performed it regularly as agreed by the parties.
Following the enactment of Law No. 2006-42, Petroecuador sought to collect
certain additional amounts not required under the original Contract. Faced
with these attempts, City Oriente decided to file this request for arbitration and
demand performance of the contract plus any applicable damages. The sole
purpose of the Provisional Measures is to maintain the status quo ante while a
decision is pending on this proceeding and while the Tribunal determines who
is right under Ecuadorian Law, chosen by mutual agreement of the parties as
applicable laws.

The Provisional Measures in no way grant the demand for Contract
performance which constitutes the claim of City Oriente in this arbitration. In
fact, the granting of such demand would translate into an award ordering that
the Contract must continue to be performed pursuant to its original terms
notwithstanding the enactment of Law No. 2006-42. The Provisional
Measures lack that scope; they are not based on the analysis of the impact of
Law No. 2006-42 on the duties of the parties; they merely establish that,
provisionally, pending a decision on this proceeding, Claimants must refrain
from aggravating the dispute or unilaterally modifying the status quo ante,
which—it must be reiterated—is the one resulting from the terms and
conditions freely established by the parties.

Finally, for the reasons explained in the chapter above, the Arbitral Tribunal
considers that the maintenance of the Provisional Measures does not cause
irreparable harm to Respondents, while their revocation may cause such harm
to City Oriente.

In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal thus resolves to reject Respondents’

?° As previously established in [ 43 of the Decision dated November 19, 2007.

96.

Request that the Provisional Measures be revoked on these grounds.

To sum up, having analyzed the different arguments presented by Respondents
in support of their request for revocation of the Provisional Measures, the
Arbitral Tribunal has come to the conclusion that as of today, and based on the
legal and factual arguments presented by the parties, the request previously
mentioned must be rejected. The decisions on Provisional Measures do not
constitute res judicata, so that the Provisional Measures ratified hereby may
be amended, expanded or revoked at the request of either party at a later stage
of the proceedings.

III. Regime of Fees and Expenses of the Members of the Tribunal

97.

98.

99.

Through the communication dated February 21, 2008, the Arbitral Tribunal
asked the parties to make simultaneous submissions containing their
argumentation related to the fees and expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal by
March 3, 2008, and both parties complied with such request.

The regime of fees and expenses of the Tribunal is regulated in Clause 20.3.7
of the Contract, which provides as follows:

“The expenses incurred in this arbitration shall be borne by the
Party ordered to pay by the arbitration commission in its decision;
the foregoing notwithstanding, each Party shall pay the fees of the
arbitrator designated by it or by the one appointed at its direction,
regardless of the outcome of the arbitration. The fees of the
chairman of the arbitration commission shall be divided equally
between the parties and paid by them. Any anticipated expenses
required to be incurred during the arbitration proceedings shall be
paid on a provisional basis by the Party that requested the
arbitration.”

Regulation 14(3)(d) of ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulations, in
turn, sets forth the following rule concerning the advance payments the parties
are required to make during the proceedings:

“(3) In order to enable the Centre to make the payments provided
for in paragraph (2), as well as to incur other direct expenses in
connection with a proceeding (other than expenses covered by
Regulation 15):

(d) in connection with every conciliation proceeding, and in
connection with every arbitration proceeding unless a different
division is provided for in the Arbitration Rules or is decided by
the parties or the Tribunal, each party shall pay one half of each
advance or supplemental charge, without prejudice to the final
decision on the payment of the cost of an arbitration proceeding to
be made by the Tribunal pursuant to Article 61(2) of the
Convention.

*° Cf. Contract, Clause 20.3.7.

100. Claimant suggests a narrow interpretation of Clause 20.3.7 of the Contract.
This clause refers to any “anticipated expenses required to be incurred during
the arbitration” and provides that such expenses shall be borne fully by
claimant. In the opinion of City Oriente, this type of expenses regulated in the
arbitration clause would only include the expenses effectively incurred in
connection with the procedures, but would not include the fees paid to the
ICSID or the expenses incurred by the arbitrators, which expenses must be
borne equally by both parties.

101. Claimant then argues that Regulations 14(3)(a), (c) and (d) of the Regulations
make a distinction between two different types of expenses: initial expenses,
which are required by the Secretary-General at the commencement of the
proceeding, and supplementary anticipated expenses, required when the
former have been exhausted. In Claimant’s opinion, the “anticipated expenses
incurred during the arbitration” referenced in Clause 20.3.7 of the Contract
would only cover the former. These should be contributed in full by Claimant,
while supplementary expenses should be borne pursuant to the general
principle established in Regulation 14(3)(d), that is, equally by both parties.

102. In turn, Respondents do not agree with City Oriente on the scope of the
meaning of the phrase “advance expenses incurred during the arbitration”
established in Clause 20.3.7 of the Contract. In Respondents’ opinion, these
expenses would cover all the expenses resulting from the procedure, without
limitation (expenses and fees of the Arbitral Tribunal, ICSID fees, expert fees
and witnesses, hearing expenses) and without any distinction on whether they
are initial or supplementary. All of these expenses must be paid fully by
Claimant.

103. Respondents further argue that they have already made an advance payment in
the amount of USD 100,000. They request that that amount be allocated to the
fees and expenses of arbitrator Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C., appointed by
Respondents, and to 50% of the fees of the Chairman, but that it not be applied
to support any other expenses. This allocation would be appropriate because
Clause 20.3.7 of the Contract sets forth that each party shall be liable for
payment of the fees and expenses of the arbitrator appointed by such party, as
well as for 50% of the fees of the Chairman of the Tribunal.

104. The Arbitral Tribunal considers that any analysis must start with an
examination of the Centre's Administrative and Financial Regulations adopted
by the parties under the arbitration clause included in the Contract. Regulation
14(3)(d) provides that, as a general rule, both initial and supplementary
expenses must be borne equally by both parties. However, the rule also
authorizes the parties to modify the expense distribution scheme, and this is
precisely what happened in this case. Under Clause 20.3.7. of the Contract, the
parties agreed that “any anticipated expenses required to be incurred during
the arbitration proceedings shall be paid on a provisional basis by the Party
that requested the arbitration.” It is thus clear that the parties intended to
exclude the solution established by Regulation 14(3)(d) of the ICSID
Regulations and replace it with the new rule set forth in Clause 20.3.7 of the
Contract.

105. There is absolutely no reason warranting such a narrow interpretation of the
contract clause, limiting its scope of application. The parties agreed to
establish a regime to fund advance expenses different from the one provided
by the Regulations. Given such intention, there is no indication that the parties
intended that that special regime would apply only to certain advance
expenses to the exclusion of others. Pursuant to Section 1603 of the Civil
Code, “if the intent of the parties to the contract is sufficiently clear, such
intention shall prevail over the literal wording.” Thus, the reference to
“anticipated expenses” contained in Clause 20.3.7 of the Contract must be
understood to include all the expenses covered by Regulation 14(3) of the
Administrative and Financial Regulations, regardless of whether they are
labeled as anticipated expenses, supplementary payments or additional
advance payments.

106. That having been said, the Tribunal concludes that, pursuant to the express
agreement between the parties, Claimant shall pay all anticipated expenses,
whether initial or supplementary, required during the arbitration proceeding.

107. This decision shall only apply to anticipated expenses. The final allocation of
arbitration costs and expenses shall be ordered in the final award, pursuant to
the provisions set out in Clause 20.3.7 of the Contract, the Convention, the
Arbitration Rules and the Regulations. At that time, the Arbitral Tribunal shall
also decide the allocation of advance payments already made by Respondents.
In the meantime, these payments shall be allocated, as required by
Respondents,*! to the payment of fees and expenses of the arbitrator appointed
by Respondents and 50% of the fees of the Chairman.

IV. Place of the Proceedings

108. Like it did in connection with the regime applicable to fees and expenses,
through communication dated February 21, 2008, the Arbitral Tribunal invited
the parties to file simultaneous submissions in connection with the place of the
arbitration proceedings by March 3, 2008, and both parties filed their
submissions within the stated term.

109. The place of the proceedings is governed both by Clause 20.3.3 of the Contract
and by Regulation 26 of the Administrative and Financial Regulations, by
Rule 13(3) of the Arbitration Rules and by Article 63(b) of the Convention.

Clause 20.3.3 of the Contracts provides as follows:

“The arbitrage will be installed and performed in the city of Quito
notwithstanding the arbitration committee’s right to move
wherever is necessary to perform its duties.”

In turn, Regulation 26 provides as follows:

“Place of Proceedings
(1) The Secretary-General shall make arrangements for the holding
of conciliation and arbitration proceedings at the seat of the Centre

or shall, at the request of the parties and as provided in Article 63

*! Submission dated March 3, 2008, at 2.

of the Convention, make or supervise arrangements if proceedings
are held elsewhere.

(2) The Secretary-General shall assist a Commission or Tribunal, at
its request, in visiting any place connected with a dispute or in
conducting inquiries there.”

In turn, Rule 13(3) of the Arbitration Rules provides as follows:

“Sessions of the Tribunal

(3) The Tribunal shall meet at the seat of the Centre or at such
other place as may have been agreed by the parties in accordance
with Article 63 of the Convention. If the parties agree that the
proceeding shall be held at a place other than the Centre or an
institution with which the Centre has made the necessary
arrangements, they shall consult with the Secretary-General and
request the approval of the Tribunal. Failing such approval, the
Tribunal shall meet at the seat of the Centre.”

Finally, Article 63 of the Convention provides as follows:

“Conciliation and arbitration proceedings may be held, if the
parties so agree, (a) at the seat of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration or of any other appropriate institution, whether private
or public, with which the Centre may make arrangements for that
purpose; or (b) at any other place approved by the Commission or
Tribunal after consultation with the Secretary-General.”

110. Claimant alleges that under Clause 20.3.3 of the Contract, the parties
established Quito exclusively as “the place of preference for the proceeding to
take place”, leaving it at the discretion of the Arbitral Tribunal to decide on
the final place for the proceedings. In this line of reasoning, Claimant
considers that this is the reason for the inclusion of the wording stating
“notwithstanding the arbitration committee’s right to move wherever is
necessary to perform its duties.”

111. Claimant does not object to the designation of Quito as place of the
proceedings; it points out, however, that Quito may lack the minimum safety
conditions to protect the attendants to a hearing, and that the regular course of
the proceedings may be affected by potential social and media pressure due to
the strong political essence of the arbitration.

112. In turn, Respondents believe that, since the Contract contains a clause that
expressly establishes that the proceeding is to be held in Quito, this implies
that the parties have exercised the right conferred by Regulation 26 of the
Regulations, Rule 13 of the Arbitration Rules and Article 63 of the
Convention. Respondents further argue that there is no obstacle preventing
the parties from establishing the territory of the Respondent State as place of
the proceeding in exercise of such power, and cite Professor Shreuer in
support of such argument: “But there are also clauses in contracts providing
that ICSID arbitration proceedings are to be held in the host state. This was the
case in Mobil Oil v. New Zealand. In that case the majority of the Tribunal’s

sessions were held in Auckland, New Zealand.”*”

113. In line of the foregoing, Respondents request the Arbitral Tribunal to consult
with the Secretary-General of the ICSID regarding the possibility of
designating Quito as place of the proceedings, pursuant to Article 63 of the
Convention, to guarantee the application in Quito of the immunity regime all
ICSID arbitrations are subject to, which request had already been
communicated by Respondents to the Arbitral Tribunal in writing on February
19, 2008. They further argue that there should be no problem hindering the
designation of Quito as place of the proceedings, since similar ICSID
arbitrations have previously been carried out with seat in Ecuador.

114. In light of the arguments presented by the parties, the Arbitral Tribunal now
considers that its decision on this procedural aspect calls for a definition of the
scope of Clause 20.3.3 and a clarification of ICSID general rules.

115. ICSID rules establish that the place of the arbitration proceedings must be
determined pursuant to the following order:

- Preferably, the place of the arbitration proceedings shall be the seat of the
Centre (Article 62 of the Convention);

Without prejudice to this general principle, the parties have the right to
agree that the proceeding be held in a different place, which may be the
seat of the Permanent Court of Arbitration or of any other appropriate
institution, whether private or, Public, with which the Centre may make
arrangements for that purpose;* 4 (Article 63(a) of the Convention); and

- Additionally, the parties may establish any other place for the proceedings,
provided that such decision must be subject to the approval of the Arbitral
Tribunal after consultation of the Secretary-General (Article 63(b) of the
Convention).

116. The Arbitral Tribunal understands that when the parties exercised the right
conferred upon them by ICSID regulations and established, in the contract,
that “The arbitrage will be installed and performed in the city of Quito,” they
intended to establish that Quito was to be the place of the proceedings, in the
terms of ICSID regulations. This fulfills the requirement established in Article
63 of the Convention, first paragraph, which requires the agreement of the
parties to choose a place for the proceeding other than the seat of the Centre
(“if the parties so agree”). There is no obstacle preventing that such consent be
given in advance, in a contract clause.*>

117. The second requirement established in Article 63 of the Convention is yet to
be fulfilled. Given that there is no ICSID office in Quito and that the Centre
has not entered into any agreement with any public or private Ecuadorian

2 Ct. Respondents’ Letter dated February 19, 2008, page 2.

* For example, they cite Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (ICSID
Case No. ARB/O1/10) among others, Cf. Respondents’ Letter dated March 3, 2008.
* The Centre has agreements of this kind with Cairo, Kuala Lumpur, Melbourne, Singapore and Sidney,
but not with Quito.
* In the same regard, see Schreuer, op. cit. note 4, at 1252.

institution, it is not possible to apply paragraph (a) in this case. Under
paragraph (b) the proceeding may be performed in any other place, provided
two conditions are fulfilled: (i) a consultation with the Secretary-General; and
(ii) approval by the Arbitral Tribunal.

118. The consultation to the Secretary-General and the approval of the Tribunal are
required on a case-by-case basis, every time a hearing must be held and
attended by the parties, because it is possible for the same arbitration
proceeding to develop in different places.*° At present, the procedural calendar
is incomplete: the parties have only agreed on the exchange of Memorial,
Counter-Memorial, Reply and Rejoinder—which process will only be
completed on November 11, 2008. There is no specific provision regarding the
celebration and agenda of the next hearing.

119. The Arbitration Tribunal thus requests both parties to state, in their Reply and
Rejoinder, respectively (i) whether they deem it necessary to hold a hearing; (ii) if
they so deem it, to propose the general structure for development and list the people
that must be called to such hearing; (iii) to state the place where the hearing is to be
held, in their opinion.

120. If Claimant, in the Reply, or Respondents, in the Rejoinder, should request that
the hearing be held in Quito, the Arbitration Tribunal would proceed forthwith to
consult the Secretary-General to make a decision pursuant to Rule 13(3) of the
Arbitration Rules.

For the Tribunal
[Signature]
Dr. Juan Fernandez-Armesto

Chairman of the Tribunal

5° Cf. Schreuer, op. cit. note 4, at 1247.

