INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

CITY ORIENTE LIMITED
Claimant
v.

THE REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
and
EMPRESA ESTATAL PETROLEOS DEL ECUADOR
(Petroecuador)
Respondents

(ICSID Case No. ARB/06/21)

DECISION ON PROVISIONAL MEASURES

Members of the Tribunal Prof. Juan
Ferndndez-Armesto, President
Dr. Horacio A. Grigera Na6én, Arbitrator
Prof. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C.,
Arbitrator

Secretary of the
Tribunal Mr.
Gonzalo Flores

For Claimant: For Respondents:

City Oriente Limited
Republic of Ecuador
Attn. Dr. Alejandro Ponce Martinez and
Attn. Dr. José Xavier Garaicoa Ortiz
Dra. Ana Belén Posso
State Attorney General’s Office
Quevedo & Ponce
State Attorney General’s Office
Quito, Ecuador
Quito, Ecuador
and
and
Attn. R. Doak Bishop,
Empresa Estatal Petrdleos del Ecuador
Craig S. Miles and Roberto Aguirre Luzi
(Petroecuador)
King & Spalding LLP
Attn. Dr. Marcelo Reyes Lopez,
Houston, TX
Wilson Narvaéez Vicufia, Gabriel Morales
Villag6mez, Maria Angélica Martinez
Guerrero and René de Mora Moncayo
Petroecuador’s Legal Department
Quito, Ecuador
Date of dispatch: November 19, 2007

I. Background The

Request for Arbitration

1.

4.

On October 10, 2006, City Oriente Limited, the Claimant in these proceedings, filed a
request for arbitration with ICSID against the Republic of Ecuador and Empresa
Estatal de Petréleos del Ecuador. The parties will be hereinafter referred to as “City
Oriente,” “Ecuador,” and “Petroecuador.”

In its request for arbitration, Claimant stated that, on March 29, 1995, it had entered
into a Hydrocarbons Production Share Contract recorded on a notarial instrument and
attested to by Notary Public No. | in and for the city of Quito, Dr. Jorge Machado
Cevallos, by and between Claimant and the State of Ecuador, acting through
Petroecuador. The Contract was signed by the then Constitutional President of
Ecuador, Ing. Sixto Duran Ballén, as an honor witness. The purpose of the Contract
was the exploration and production of hydrocarbons in the so-called “Oil Block No.
27,” located in the Province of Sucumbios; pursuant to clause 22.2., the parties
became subject to the laws of Ecuador.

Once executed, the Contract was performed by the parties in compliance with the
terms thereof until April 25, 2006, when Law 2006-42, the Law Amending the
Hydrocarbon Law, came into full force and effect. Pursuant thereto, Section 44 of the
Hydrocarbon Law came to read as follows:

“On account of hydrocarbon field exploration and production, the State
shall receive no less than the following revenue: initial premiums,
surface rights, royalties, compensation payments, contributions through
compensation works, a share of extra revenue from oil sales prices; on
account of transportation, it shall receive a share of the tariffs.”
[Unofficial translation.]

Furthermore, Law No. 2006-42 added an additional provision to the Hydrocarbon
Law, as follows:

“Section ... State’s share of unexpected or non-negotiated extra revenue

from oil sales prices. Irrespective of the volume of their crude oil share,
contractors holding hydrocarbon exploration and production contracts
in force with the State of Ecuador subject to the provisions hereof shall,
if the actual monthly average FOB sales price for Ecuadorian crude oil
exceeds the monthly average sales price in force as of the date of
execution of the contract —stated in constant currency as of the month of
its calculation— pay to the State at least 50% of the extraordinary
revenue received as a result of the difference between said prices. For
the purposes of this section, extraordinary revenue shall mean the
above-described price difference multiplied by the number of barrels
produced. The price of oil as of the date of the contract to be used as
reference to calculate such difference shall be adjusted by the
Consumer Price Index of the United States of America, as published by
the Central Bank of Ecuador.” (Unofficial translation.]

 

According to Claimant, by means of Law No. 2006-42 Ecuador tried to unilaterally
modify the Contract (thereby affecting, among others, clauses 5.3.2, 8.1 and 10), in
conflict with the express provisions of said Contract and the pacta sunt servanda
principle, as the contents of the contract may not be amended unless upon mutual

9.

consent by the parties.

City Oriente further argues that Petroecuador has demanded that it pay the relevant
State share of the so-called extra revenue from oil sales prices under Law No. 2006-
42, payment of such extra revenue not being provided for in the Contract. Such
demand for payment apparently amounts to an attempt to unilaterally amend the
Contract, in conflict with the express provisions thereof, therefore entailing a breach
of the Contract.

In the face of such a breach, pursuant to Section 1505 of the Ecuadorian Civil Code
[“C.C.”] - the provisions of which apply where so agreed by the parties — the party in
bonis may choose between contract performance or contract termination, with a claim
for damages in either case. Claimant opted to demand performance, reserving its right
to a potential claim for damages. According to City Oriente, such claim entails
respondents’ undertaking to refrain from instituting proceedings for an administrative
declaration of Contract termination or adopting measures impairing regular Contract
performance.

The Contract contains an ICSID arbitration clause. Specifically, clause 20.3 provides
as follows:

“\..as of the date in which the Agreement on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and other States’ Nationals (the
“Agreement”), subscribed by the Republic of Ecuador, as Member
State of the International Reconstruction and Development Bank, on
January fifteen (15), nineteen eight six (1,986), Official Registration
number three hundred eighty six (386) on March three (3), nineteen
eight six (1,986), is ratified by the Ecuadorian National Congress, the
parties commit themselves to submit controversies or disagreements
related to or resulting from this Contract to the jurisdiction of the
International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disagreements
(ICSID) for their solution according to the provisions of such
Agreement...”

City Oriente initiated this arbitration based on the above-transcribed arbitration
agreement.

City Oriente’s first request for provisional measures

10. On October 9, 2007, Claimant filed its first request petitioning the adoption of

provisional measures under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention [“Convention”.] The
requested provisional measures consisted in an order that Respondents refrain from
prosecuting the enforced collection of any present or future amounts disputed in this
arbitration, and that they refrain from initiating a proceeding for the administrative
declaration of termination of the concession on account of non-payment of said
moneys pending the final arbitral award. Such request was supplemented with a
further document filed the next day, on October 10.

The Tribunal’s response

ll.

On the same day, the Tribunal invited Ecuador and Petroecuador to submit their
position in connection with the request for provisional measures by October 25, 2007.
The next day, October 11, the Tribunal transmitted a new document to the parties,

scheduling a hearing to be held on November 8 and 9 in Washington, D.C., to deal,
among other issues, with the provisional measures and the procedural aspects of the
arbitration.

City Oriente’s second request

12. One day later, on October 11, Claimant filed a new submission repeating its request
that the Tribunal order the provisional measures “immediately, since Respondent's
recent attitude entails serious danger to ... City Oriente” [unofficial translation].
Specifically, City Oriente argued that the State Attorney General had announced the
filing of a criminal complaint with the Ecuadorian Prosecutor’s Office against City
Oriente’s representatives and managers. For evidentiary purposes, City Oriente filed
two media articles reporting on the fact that the Attorney General’s Office would file
enforcement actions and complaints with the Prosecutor’s Office in connection with
non-payment of the extra oil revenue.

The Tribunal’s first communication to the parties

13. On October 16, the Tribunal transmitted a communication to both parties, stating as
follows:

... after considering and deliberating on said letters, the Tribunal has
decided to request that, pending a decision by the Tribunal on the
provisional measures requested by Claimant through its letter of
October 9, 2007, both parties refrain from engaging in any conduct —
including, without limitation, any act, resolution or decision— that may
directly or indirectly affect or modify the legal situation existing as of
such date between the parties under the Contract dated March 29,
1995, particularly in connection with the effectiveness or administrative
termination of said Contract or the enforced collection of any moneys.

 

If either party intends to take any measure that may violate the
provisions set forth herein, prior notice must be served to the Tribunal,
granting enough time so that the Tribunal may proceed as
appropriate.” [Unofficial translation.]

Ecuador’s first submission

14. On October 19, acting on behalf of Ecuador, the State Attorney General’s Office filed
its first submission, arguing that it was currently in the process of selecting an
international law firm to defend the interests of both Respondents. Accordingly, it
requested that the deadline set for Respondents to respond to the request for
provisional measures be extended from October 25, 2007 to January 15, 2008, and
that the hearing set for November 8 and 9 be rescheduled to January 17 and 18, 2008.
In said submission, the State Attorney’s Office did not object to the hearings being
held in Washington, D.C.

City Oriente’s third request

15. On October 22, 2007, Claimant filed a new submission reporting that Respondents
had failed to abide by the Tribunal’s decision of October 16, as two criminal
complaints had been filed against City Oriente’s executives:

(a) The first complaint had been filed by national Representative Géngora Zambrano
with the Ecuadorian Prosecutor against former Minister of Energy and Mines Ing.
Ivan Rodriguez Ramos and three executives of City Oriente (Messrs. Ford, Yépez and
Paez Cruz) on October 17, on charges of embezzlement allegedly perpetrated as a
result of City Oriente’s failure to pay the State’s share of the extra revenue from
hydrocarbon, as required by Law No. 2006-42; as evidence, Claimant provided a copy
of the complaint, stamped by the Attorney General’s Office.

(b) The second complaint had been submitted a day later, on October 18, by the
Representative of the State Attorney General with the Ecuadorian Prosecutor for the
District of Pichincha, as evidenced by the Press Release of October 2007, issued by
the State Attorney General’s Office and published on the Office’s web page, which
document was also produced by Claimant. In this case, the complaint was filed only
against City Oriente’s executives on allegations that City Oriente had refused to make
several payments provided for in Law No. 2006-42, which refusal led other
contractors to take a similar position. Apparently, said company had expressly
acknowledged its decision not to pay the extra revenue provided for in the
aforementioned Law through its October 10, 2006 letter to the ICSID’s Secretary-
General in the course of these proceedings.

Next, City Oriente argued that, one day later, on October 19, Petroecuador’s
Executive President sent an official letter to Claimant, accompanied by commercial
invoice No. 000011, for USD 28,023,363,
on account of moneys allegedly owing under Law No. 2006-42. In such official letter,
Petroecuador “respectfully [demands that City Oriente] immediately settle said
amounts, ith ding any pr dings” (unofficial translation]

The Tribunal’s second communication to the parties

19.

On October 24, 2007, the Tribunal transmitted a second communication to the parties
whereby, after acknowledging Claimant’s submission of October 22, it stated as
follows:

“\.. The Tribunal has verified that, as per the website of Ecuador’s
State Attorney General's Office as online on October 18, 2007
(attached as Exhibit 3 to Claimant’s letter of October 22), the State
Attorney General requested the Pichincha District Prosecutor to start a
preliminary investigation in order to determine whether City Oriente
Limited’s refusal to make payment of the amounts provided for in the
Law Amending the Hydrocarbon Law entails an unlawful act. In any
event, the Tribunal has verified that, by means of the letter of October
19, 2007 (attached as Exhibit 7 to Claimant’s letter of October 22),
Petroecuador did officially notify City Oriente Limited of the issue of
Invoice No. 000011 for USD 28,023,363, on account of the application
of the Law Amending the Hydrocarbon Law, demanding that it
immediately settle such amount notwithstanding any pending
proceeding. It is the Tribunal’s view that said actions may undermine
the effectiveness of the provisional relief requested by Claimant, thereby
depriving Claimant of its lawful right to have its interests effectively
protected. Accordingly, the Tribunal hereby orders that, pending a
ruling on the provisional measures requested by City Oriente Limited,
the Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador
(Petroecuador) refrain from:

Instituting or prosecuting any judicial action of any nature against City
Oriente Limited or its officers or employees arising from or in
connection with the Contract of March 29, 1995, and/or enforcing the
application of the Law Amending the Hydrocarbon Law to said
Contract;

Demanding that City Oriente Limited make payment of any amount as a
result of the application of the Law Amending the Hydrocarbon Law to
the Contract;

Engaging in any other conduct that may directly or indirectly affect or
alter the legal situation existing under the Contract of March 29, 1995,
as thereby agreed upon and executed by the parties.

This letter shall become ineffective upon the Tribunal’s ruling on the
provisional measures requested by Claimant.” [Unofficial translation.]

20. Through that same communication, the Tribunal denied Respondents’ request for a
deadline extension for the submission of their arguments in connection with the
request for provisional measures. Given the urgent and serious nature of Claimant’s
factual allegations, it was the Tribunal’s view that such period could not be extended.

Ecuador’s second submission and Petroecuador’s first submission

21. On October 24, the State Attorney General’s Office acknowledged the orders issued
by the Tribunal that same day, “and will raise any objections within its purview,”
[unofficial translation], without prejudice to the general duty to comply with and
enforce the law. In any event, the State Attorney General “reserves its right to further
elaborate on the circumstances surrounding the proceeding during the conference
call” [unofficial translation] organized by the Tribunal to be held on October 31.

 

22. On October 29, Petroecuador filed its first submission in this arbitration, explaining
the passing of Law No. 2006-42, laying emphasis on the fact that said Law did not in
the least affect the Production contract in place with City Oriente, “since there is no
contract clause providing for a State’s share of the extra revenue from production in
excess of the limit set in each contract as of the date of execution; therefore, it is
evident that such issue is at the sovereign discretion of the State of Ecuador, which, in
exercise of its powers, defined the general parameters for application in the national
territory; this is even more evidently so as the contracts remained unchanged and in
full performance by the oil companies” [unofficial translation].

23. Lastly, Ecuador invoked its national sovereignty and argued that “anywhere in the
world, a national or foreign citizen who commits a crime that qualifies as such and
for which a sentence is defined will obviously be imposed the relevant sentence by the
appropriate court, due process observed and after being afforded an opportunity to
defend themselves, without this entailing an impairment of City Oriente’s rights, as it
seeks to establish, misleading the members of the Tribunal” [unofficial translation.]

City Oriente’s fourth and fifth submissions

24. On October 25, City Oriente notified the Tribunal that, on that same day, it had
received notices sent by the Ecuadorian Prosecutor to company executives Ford, Paez
and Yépez. They were thereby requested to appear before the Ecuadorian Prosecutor,

25.

The c

26.

27.

28.

29.

in the company of legal counsel, “in order to take their not-sworn statement providing
a free version of the facts in connection with the alleged embezzlement, as a result of
the complaint filed by representative Luis Laxner Gongora Zambrano” [unofficial
translation] on November 1, 5 and 7, 2007.

Lastly, on October 31, Claimant filed a new submission replying to Respondents’
allegations set forth in their submissions of October 24 and 29.

onference call

A conference call was held on October 31, 2007 between legal counsel for City
Oriente, the Attorney General and attorneys from the State Attorney General’s Office,
acting on behalf of Ecuador, and Petroecuador’s legal counsel, as well as the Tribunal
and the Secretary. During said conference call the participants discussed the request
for provisional measures and the development of the proceedings. Claimant requested
that the hearing to discuss the provisional measures and the procedural aspects of the
arbitration be held on November 8 and 9, as scheduled, given the urgent nature of its
request, as further aggravated by the criminal complaints filed against the company’s
executives. On the other hand, Respondents requested that the hearing be pushed back
to January or February 2008, claiming that they needed extra time to select and hire
an international law firm to represent them.

Also on October 31, after hearing the parties, the Tribunal rendered a decision

- Allowing Respondents’ request, pushing back the procedural hearing to January
11, 2008 in order that Respondents may hire legal counsel;

- Given the urgent nature of the request for provisional measures filed by Claimant,
and in the light of the provisions of Rule 39 (2) of the Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings [the “Rules”], maintaining the date of the hearing on
provisional measures, to be held on November 9, 2007 in Washington, D.C.;

- In preparation for such hearing, the Tribunal ordered that, no later than November
8, Ecuador file a written submission providing a detailed description of any
actions taken that were covered by the Tribunal’s decision of October 24, 2007,
including, without limitation, any criminal actions filed;

- Lastly, the Tribunal stated it was willing to suspend the November 9 hearing and
the filing of the submission provided for in the preceding paragraph provided,
however, that, before November 6, Ecuador submitted a statement undertaking to
abide by the Tribunal’s order of October 24, 2007 in strict compliance with the
terms thereof; such obligation would remain fully effective pending the Tribunal’s
ruling on the requested provisional measures.

Ecuador did not file its statement of commitment by November 6. Ecuador also failed
to file, by November 8, the submission providing a detailed description of any actions
taken.

Meanwhile, on November 5, ICSID’s Secretary-General gave notice to the parties of
the specific arrangements made in connection with the hearing to be held on
November 9 at the World Bank’s offices in Washington, D.C.

Respondents’ submissions of November 9

30.

31.

32.

In the evening of November 8, 2007, a letter was received from the State Attorney
General’s Office giving notice of “its decision not to appear in Washington D.C. on
November 9” [unofficial translation]. The Attorney General’s Office argued that
clause 20.3.3 of the Contract expressly defines the city of Quito as the place of any
arbitration proceedings.

Furthermore, Ecuador argued that the urgency claimed by City Oriente is not such, as
the State has taken no measure whatsoever against it that entails an alteration to its
Block 27 operations. Moreover, a proceeding for administrative termination takes
over one year. Ecuador intends to engage in a renegotiation of the contracts currently
in place and, should this not be feasible, to observe and abide by existing contracts
subject to the applicable laws and regulations. The fact that Petroecuador sent an
invoice is not an extraordinary occurrence but, rather, a new instance of repeated
conduct and, as such, it does not create urgency. As regards the criminal proceeding
instituted on the initiative of Mr. Gongora, such filing cannot be deemed an act of the
State, as the complaint was filed by him in his personal capacity. Lastly, Ecuador
suggests that the Tribunal has overstepped its powers under the Convention and the
Rules, as it cannot pass provisional measures as interim measures adopted prior to
final measures, as no such measures exist. Neither may the Tribunal order provisional
measures without previously affording the parties the opportunity to raise
observations.

A document from Petroecuador was also received on November 9, 2007, whereby
Petroecuador insisted on its request for a rescheduling of the hearing on provisional
measures to February 2008, allowing that entity the time allegedly required to select
and hire a law firm. However, it noted that it objected to Claimant’s request, as the
provisional measures were allegedly only intended to avoid payment of its obligations
to the State of Ecuador. As evidence, it provided an Aide-Mémoire delivered by City
Oriente on October 29, whereby, according to Petroecuador, City Oriente allegedly
acknowledged its debt outstanding to the State under Law No. 2006-42. Lastly,
Respondent argued that the urgent nature of City Oriente’s request to the Tribunal is
unfounded and at odds with the actual facts. The Tribunal’s excessive diligence in
dealing with one of the parties allegedly pushed Petroecuador into a position “of
complete defenselessness” (unofficial translation].

The November 9, 2007 hearing

33.

34.

35.

36.

At 9:00 a.m. on November 9, 2007, Claimant’s legal counsel, as well as the members
of the Tribunal and the Secretary’s Office, appeared at the Washington offices of the
World Bank. No representative of the Republic of Ecuador or Petroecuador appeared
thereat. At 9:45 a.m., the President started the hearing, a stenographic transcript of
which was recorded. A copy of the transcript was provided to each party, including
Respondents, on November 13, 2007.

First, the President asked the Secretary to let the record reflect the manner in and
times on which Respondents had been called to the hearing. Next, the President asked
City Oriente to state whether the hearing should be held in the absence of
Respondents, and whether it agreed that it be held at the ICSID seat in Washington,
D.C.; City Oriente answered both questions in the affirmative.

Then, the Tribunal allowed Claimant its turn to submit its arguments on the request
for provisional measures.

City Oriente started by reporting that, two days earlier, on November 7,

37.

38.

39.

40.

Petroecuador’s Executive president had requested the Minister of Mines and Oil to
start the procedure for an administrative declaration of termination of the production
Contract for oil Block No. 27, on the grounds of the company’s constant refusal to
settle the amounts due to the State of Ecuador after the enactment of Law No. 2006-
42. As evidence of its allegations, it submitted a copy of Press Release No. 180,
issued by Petroecuador itself and published on its website, publicly announcing such
decision. Claimant also stated that the State’s share of oil companies’ extra revenue
under Law No. 2006-42 had recently been raised to 99%. Claimant went on to claim
that City Oriente officers Messrs. Ford, Paez and Yépez, who had been personally
charged in the criminal actions in Ecuador, had to leave the country for fear of being
arrested, and had been in the U.S. for three weeks now. They did not dare to return to
Quito as they had been scheduled to appear before the Prosecutor on November 19,
21 and 23, 2007. City Oriente also stated that, because of the other contracting party’s
breaches, in 2006 it had to suspend its investment plan for Block 27.

After explaining the applicable law, Claimant ended by asking the Tribunal to order
the provisional measures in the same terms as under its October 24, 2007 decision.

Following Claimant’s presentation, the Tribunal asked, among other questions,
whether, should the provisional measures requested against Ecuador and Petroecuador
be passed and observed and complied with, City Oriente would be willing to reinstate
its investment plan for Block 27. In responding to such question, City Oriente stated
as follows:

“In the event that the provisional measured passed by the Tribunal
should allow our operations to be resumed, as we expect, then City
Oriente would most certainly be willing to continue to perform the
Contract regularly as it has done so far. That is precisely City Oriente’s
goal, to have the Contract complied with and performed until its
expiration in 2021. There will certainly be an aspect that might present
problems in Contract performance, such as maintaining its financing or
recovering the financing in place before the measures were adopted by
the Government of Ecuador. However, City Oriente’s intention and
goal is most certainly to perform the Contract. And, should the
measures remain in place until an award is rendered, then it is certainly
willing to do so.” (Unofficial translation.]

II. Legal analysis

The dispute underlying this arbitration is strictly contractual in nature. On March 29,
1995, City Oriente, Ecuador and Petroecuador entered into a Contract governed by the
laws of Ecuador; the parties thereby agreed that any disputes would be settled through
ICSID arbitration. In its claim on the merits, Claimant has asked that the Contract be
performed, pursuant to Section 1505 of the C.C., reserving its right to claim for
damages, if necessary.

Basically, City Oriente has argued that the Contract was regularly performed as
agreed since its execution in 1995 until the enactment of Law No. 2006-42. As a
result of the application of said Law, Petroecuador demanded that City Oriente make
an additional payment that was not originally provided for in the Contract, in an
amount in excess of USD 28 million, pursuant to said Law 2006-42. The fact that
such additional payment was actually demanded has been evidenced by means of an
invoice! sent by Petroecuador to City Oriente on October 18, 2007, whereby the

' Exhibit 7, attached to City Oriente’s submission of October 22, 2007.

41.

42.

43.

45.

former claimed payment of USD 28,023,383, on account of:

“APPLICATION OF THE LAW AMENDING THE HYDROCARBON
LAW, No. 2006-42, PUBLISHED IN SUPPLEMENTARY OFFICIAL
GAZETTE No. 257 OF APRIL 25, 2006, AND THE REGULATIONS
SUBSTITUTING SAID LAW’S REGULATIONS AND PASSED BY
MEANS OF DECREE No. 672, PUBLISHED IN THE SECOND
SUPPLEMENTARY OFFICIAL GAZETTE No. 312, OF JULY 13, 2006,
FOR THE PERIOD APRIL 2006 - AGOSTO 2007.” (Unofficial
translation.]

Petroecuador has not brought into question the genuine nature of the invoice or the
demand for payment attached to it.

Supplementing its claim on the merits, City Oriente has asked that the Tribunal order
these provisional measures in order that the status quo ante, i.e. the legal situation in
place prior to the institution of this arbitration, be maintained pending a final award
conclusively ending the proceeding.

The issue of provisional or precautionary measures presents a difficult situation to any
Tribunal: on the one hand, granting such measures may be necessary in order to keep
the dispute from becoming even worse or to keep Claimant’s rights from being
impaired and Claimant from being thus deprived of the effective judicial protection to
which it is entitled; on the other hand, however, a provisional measure is passed
before the Tribunal has had the chance to conduct an in-depth analysis of the
arguments on the merits and might be viewed as a preliminary overview of the final
award. Therefore, the Tribunal would like the record to reflect that a potential
granting of the provisional measures sought by Claimant does not in any wait entail a
prejudgment of Claimant’s case on the merits, in general, or specifically on the
possible effects of Law No. 2006-42 in connection with the Contract. The Tribunal is
very much aware that the Law was passed by the Legislative Branch of the State of
Ecuador in exercise of its legitimate and undisputed national sovereignty and that,
later on, the Ecuadorian Constitutional Tribunal issued the Resolution of August 22,
2006, declaring that such enactment does not entail a violation of the Constitution. It
is the duty and right of the branches of the Ecuadorian government to enact such laws
as they may deem appropriate in furtherance of common good for Ecuador, and the
Tribunal cannot and does not wish to interfere in such law-making task. The
Tribunal’s role in this case is limited to disposing of any disputes arising in
connection with the Contract.

In order to decide on Claimant’s request, the Tribunal shall take the following steps:
(1) it will first analyze its own jurisdiction to pass the requested measures, as well as
the scope of its decision, (2) next to analyze whether the requirements that need to be
met in order for the request to be granted have actually been satisfied, taking proper
consideration of Respondents’ allegations.

The Tribunal’s jurisdiction to order provisional measures and the scope of said
measures

The subject of provisional measures is dealt with both in the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States and in
the Arbitration Rules. Because it was so agreed by the parties in clause 20.3.1 of the
Contract, the applicable rules are those contained in document “/JCSID 15”, published

46.

47.

48.

49.

52.

by the Centre on January 1985.”
Article 47 of the Convention provides as follows:

“Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it considers
that the circumstances so require, recommend any provisional
measures which should be taken to preserve the respective rights of
either party.”

Moreover, Rule 39 (1) provides as follows:

“At any time during the proceeding a party may request that
provisional measures for the preservation of its rights be recommended
by the Tribunal. The request shall specify the rights to be preserved, the
measures the recommendation of which is requested, and the
circumstances that require such measures.”

The Contract contains no provision whatsoever prohibiting the adoption of
provisional measures. Accordingly, it seems a quite clear fact that the Tribunal is
empowered to recommend provisional measures.

In its November 7, 2007 submission, Petroecuador expressly reserved its right to
challenge the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal. So far,
neither Respondent has done so formally; however, it is true that, pursuant to Rule 41
(1), Respondents are allowed to raise objections to jurisdiction until the expiration of
the deadline for filing their memorial.

Irrespective of Respondents’ right, which is still valid, to raise an objection to
jurisdiction at some point in the future, the fact remains that, at least on a prima facie
basis and without prejudging its decision, it is the Tribunal’s view that, should such
an objection be raised, the Tribunal has jurisdiction to make this decision. It should be
noted that ICSID’s Secretary-General registered City Oriente’s request for arbitration,
upon the required conclusion (pursuant to Article 36 (3) of the Convention) that the
dispute is not manifestly outside of the Centre’s jurisdiction. The Tribunal has
verified that the Contract, the existence or validity of which has not been brought into
question by either party, contains the parties’ submission to ICSID arbitration in
clause 20.3.°

 

Another preliminary issue has to do with the binding nature —or otherwise— of any
measures potentially ordered by the Tribunal. The questions in this regard arises from
the fact that, in accordance with Article 47 of the Convention and Rule 39 (3) of the
Rules, the Tribunal is allowed to “recommend” such provisional measures as it may
deem appropriate, even though other provisions of said legal instruments use the word
“order” to refer to binding decisions.

The distinction, however, is more apparent than it is real, since Rule 39 (1) itself does,

? Such agreement between the parties prevails over the rule contained in Article 44 of the
Convention, as expressly provided for in the latter provision.

> Under clause 20.3, effective submission to ICSID arbitration is made conditional upon the
Convention —which

Ecuador had already signed on January 15, 1986- having been ratified by the Congress of Ecuador.
According to Claimant’s statements, such ratification took place on February 7, 2001 by virtue of
Congress resolution No. R-22-053.

in its Spanish version, mentions the “dictacién” [ordering] of the provisional
measures, which demonstrates that, as far as the Rules are concerned, such words are
used interchangeably. Even disregarding such semantic discussion, a teleological
interpretation of both provisions leads to the conclusion that the provisional measures
recommended are necessarily binding. The Tribunal may only order such measures if
their adoption is necessary to preserve the rights of the parties and guarantee that the
award will fulfill its purpose of providing effective judicial protection. Such goals
may only be reached if the measures are binding, and they share the exact same
binding nature as the final arbitral award. Therefore, it is the Tribunal’s conclusion
that the word “recommend” is equal in value to the word “order.”

In any event, whatever the meaning ascribed to such words, a failure to comply with
orders given to Respondents by the Tribunal in accordance with Article 47 of the
Convention will entail a violation of Article 26 thereof, and engage Respondents’
liability.

2. The requirements to be met for the ordering of provisional measures

54.

The requirements that the Tribunal can take into consideration in ordering provisional
measures are (A) that the adoption of such measures be necessary to preserve
petitioner’s rights, (B) that their ordering be urgent, and (C) that each party has been
afforded an opportunity to raise observations. All three requirements will be analyzed
next, taking into consideration the arguments raised by Respondents against the
granting of the measures.

(A) Preservation of petitioner’s rights

55.

Both Article 47 of the Convention and Rule 39(1) of the Rules require that the
provisional measures be necessary to preserve the rights of the requesting party,
without providing any further explanations on the subject. This notwithstanding, the
works drafted in preparation for the Convention stated that the purpose of the
provisional measures needed to be to preserve the status quo as between the parties
pending a final award by the Tribunal. In other words, it is the Tribunal’s view that
Article 47 of the Convention provides authorization for the passing of provisional
measures prohibiting any action that affects the disputed rights, aggravates the
dispute, frustrates the effectiveness of the award or entails having either party take
justice into their own hands. Where there is an agreement in place between the parties
that has so far defined the framework of their mutual obligations, then the rights to be
preserved are, precisely, those that were thereby agreed upon.

City Oriente is requesting that the Tribunal order provisional measures to maintain the
status quo existing prior to the enactment of Law No. 2006-42, which it describes as a
situation of compliance with the rights and obligations arising from the Contract,
pursuant to the terms thereof.

In the opinion of this Tribunal, the provisional measures requested by Claimant are
necessary to preserve Claimant’s rights and the claims it has asserted in this
arbitration. Indeed, City Oriente is seeking to have the Contract performed pursuant to
its original terms and conditions. Ecuador and Petroecuador consider that the rights
and obligations arising from the Contract have not been affected or modified as a
result of the application of Law No. 2006-42, which is to be fully enforced.
Respondents may or may not be right —an issue for the merits of the case on which the
Tribunal cannot and should not rule at this stage in the proceedings. However,
pending a decision on this dispute, the principle that neither party may aggravate or

extend the dispute or take justice into their own hands prevails. Consequently,
Ecuador and Petroecuador are required to continue to comply with the obligations
voluntarily undertaken through the Contract, as it was executed, and they are required
to refrain from declaring its termination or otherwise modifying its content.

Claimant has identified four actions by Ecuador and Petroecuador which, in
Claimant’s opinion, alter the status quo and need to be suspended.

The demand for payment

59.

The request for admit

60.

The first such action is a demand for the payment of over USD 28 million, made by
Petroecuador through the issue of the invoice dated October 19, 2007, which was
already discussed above. In the Tribunal’s view, Respondents are required to refrain
from demanding settlement of such payment or any other amount accrued not on
account of the application of the original terms and conditions of the Contract but,
rather, of Law No. 2006-42. Respondents may obviously file a counterclaim and,
should they succeed, the Tribunal will render an award ordering City Oriente to make
payment of all such amounts, which award may be enforced by execution of any of
City Oriente’s rights and assets in Ecuador. However, in the meantime, the status quo
must be maintained and the principles that the dispute is not to be aggravated and of
pacta sunt servanda must prevail.

 

trative termination

The second action complained of is Petroecuador’s filing of a request for the
administrative declaration of termination of the Contract, through its official letter to
the Minister of Mines and Oil, based on the company’s continued refusal to make
payment of the amounts due on account of the application of Law No. 2006-42. Such
termination proceeding needs to be stayed since, pursuant to the Contract, all disputes
between the parties are to be settled through arbitration. Should Respondents consider
that there are grounds warranting termination of the Contract due to the breach of City
Oriente’s obligations, then such claim must be raised and ruled on in this arbitration.

The criminal investigation by the Ecuadorian General Prosecutor

61.

62.

63.

The third action is the opening of a criminal investigation by the Ecuadorian General
Prosecutor against Messrs. Ford, Yépez and Paez, based on a complaint filed by
congressional Representative Géngora Zambrano.

Before looking further into this subject, the Tribunal notes that it has great respect for
the Ecuadorian Judiciary and that it acknowledges Ecuador’s sovereign right to
prosecute and punish crimes of all kinds perpetrated in its territory. However, it is the
Tribunal’s view that such undisputed right of the Republic of Ecuador should not be
used as a means to coactively secure payment of the amounts allegedly owed by City
Oriente pursuant to Law No. 2006-42, since this would entail a violation of the
principle that neither party may aggravate or extend the dispute or take justice into
their own hands.

This is precisely the case with the criminal investigation opened by the Ecuadorian
General Prosecutor. According to the complaint itself, the alleged crime —
embezzlement— was precisely perpetrated through the non-payment of the amounts

64.

accrued on account of the application of the new Law.* Such being the case, it is the
Tribunal’s view that Ecuador is required to pass such measures as may be required in
order for the General Prosecutor, a member of Ecuador's Judiciary and, accordingly,
an officer for which the Republic of Ecuador is responsible, to stay any proceedings
and actions stemming from the criminal investigation underway that may affect
Claimant or Claimant’s officers or employees or may require them to make an
appearance.

In its submission of November 8, 2007, Ecuador insisted that the complaint filed by
Representative Géngora Zambrano may not be viewed as an act of the State, as it was
filed by such person on a personal capacity. The Tribunal agrees with Ecuador on
this. Neither the complaint filed by Géngora nor a complaint filed by any other citizen
may be attributed to the Republic of Ecuador. However, what should actually be
viewed as an act of the State, for which Ecuador is accountable, is the institution of a
criminal proceeding by the Prosecutor’s Office based on such complaint.

The complaint filed with the Prosecutor for the District of Pichincha

65.

66.

(B)

67.

68.

69.

The fourth action complained of is the criminal complaint filed by the State Attorney
General’s Office with the Ecuadorian Prosecutor for the District of Pichincha.
According to the statements in the complaint,’ the crime consists in City Oriente’s
non-payment of the sums due as a result of the application of Law No. 2006-42. The
complaint even makes express reference to certain statements made by City Oriente in
this arbitration.

For the reasons set forth in the above paragraphs, it is the view of this Tribunal that
Ecuador is required to take such measures as may be necessary in order that the
Ecuadorian Prosecutor's Office will not pursue any procedures or make any inquiries
that may affect Claimant or Claimant's officers or employees, or which may require
them to make an appearance, throughout the full force and effect of this provisional
measure.

Urgency

Neither the Convention nor the Rules make express reference to the urgency
requirement in order that the Tribunal may order provisional measures; however, it
seems evident that provisional measures are only appropriate if it is impossible to wait
for a specific issue to be settled at the merits stage.

In its submission of November 8, 2007, Ecuador argued that there is no urgency in
adopting the measures requested by City Oriente. The termination procedure entails
the performance of certain administrative steps; experience has it that a termination
proceeding takes over one year. Petroecuador's sending of the invoice is not an
extraordinary occurrence but, rather, a new instance of conduct that has been repeated
ever since the enactment of Law No. 2006-42. The sending of the latest invoice does
not, therefore, create urgency.

 

The Tribunal cannot agree with Ecuador on its arguments in this regard. The letter
which Petroecuador attached to its latest invoice differs from all previous letters, as it
includes a demand for payment “notwithstanding any pending proceeding.” It is thus
an attempt to change the pre-existing status quo. The same is true of the institution of

4 Exhibit 1, attached to Claimant’s submission of October 22, 2007.
> Exhibit 2, attached to Claimant’s submission of October 22, 2007.

(©)

70.

71.

72.

the proceeding for administrative termination. In the Tribunal’s opinion, the passing
of the provisional measures is indeed urgent, precisely to keep the enforced collection
or termination proceedings from being started, as this operates as a pressuring
mechanism, aggravates and extends the dispute and, by itself, impairs the rights which
Claimant seeks to protect through this arbitration. Furthermore, where, as is the case
here, the issue is to protect the jurisdictional powers of the tribunal and the integrity
of the arbitration and the final award, then the urgency requirement is met by the very
own nature of the issue.

Time for raising observations

Pursuant to Rule 39(4), the Tribunal “shall only recommend provisional measures, or
modify or revoke its recommendations, after giving each party an opportunity of
presenting its observations.” It should be noted that such provision does not require
that each party has actually submitted its observations, but that it has been afforded an
opportunity to do so — where, provided that such opportunity has been afforded, a
party has failed to do so or has partially done so, the Tribunal will have met the
regulatory requirement and there is no obstacle to the ordering of provisional
measures.

Before analyzing Respondents’ arguments on this subject, a brief outline of the facts
is in order, starting by the steps taken by the Tribunal:

- Through the document dated October 10, 2007, the Tribunal invited Ecuador
and Petroecuador to submit their position on the request for provisional
measures by October 25;

- Through the document dated October 11, 2007, the Tribunal called Respondents
to a first hearing to discuss the requested provisional measures, to be held in
Washington, D.C. on November 8 and 9; such call was repeated through the
notices of October 31 and of November 5 and 8, 2007, each of which stated that
the hearing would be held at the ICSID offices in Washington, D.C.;

- Through the document of October 31, 2007, the Tribunal asked Ecuador and
Petroecuador to file, no later than November 8, 2007, a submission providing a
detailed description of any actions taken that were covered by the Tribunal’s
decision of October 24;

- A conference call was held on October 31, 2007; the State Attorney General and
legal counsel for Petroecuador participated and had a voice in such conference
call.

The reaction of Ecuador and Petroecuador to the steps taken by the Tribunal was as
follows:

- Ecuador filed its first submission on October 19, 2007, requesting a deadline
extension; it filed its second submission on October 24, acknowledging the
orders issued by the Tribunal on October 24, and stating its intention to comply,
as well as asserting allegations based on Section 119 of Ecuador’s Constitution;

- Petroecuador filed its first submission on October 29, 2007, containing several
allegations in connection with the inapplicability of the claims raised by
Claimant;

73.

- On November 8, 2007, a few hours before the start of the hearing scheduled for
November 9, Ecuador filed a second submission stating that it would not attend
the hearing on the grounds that such hearing was actually to be held in Quito,
pursuant to the provisions of clause 20.3.3 of the Contract; said submission
included several different additional arguments in support of a denial of the
provisional measures requested by Claimant, accompanied by such
documentary evidence as Ecuador deemed relevant;

- On the day of the hearing, Petroecuador filed its second submission, also
accompanied by d y evidence, sti that the sted
provisional measures be denied, and arguing that it was “in a position of
complete defenselessness;”

- Neither Ecuador nor Petroecuador attended the hearing of November 9, 2007.

Basically, two are the issues raised by Respondents to which the Tribunal must
respond: the first one is whether the hearing of November 9, 2007 should have been
held in Quito, and the second one is whether Ecuador and Petroecuador were in a
position of defenselessness.

The place of the hearing

74.

75.

76.

It is a true fact that, as noted by Ecuador in its submission of November 9, 2007 and
previously indicated during the conference call of October 31, clause 20.3.3 of the
Contract starts as follows: “The arbitrage will be installed and performed in the city
of Quito.” However, the same clause goes on to state “notwithstanding the arbitration
committee’s [i.e. the Tribunal’s] right to move wherever is necessary to perform its
duties.” Accordingly, clause 20.3.3 allows the Tribunal broad discretion to take
procedural steps at any other location it may deem necessary.

Irrespective of the express language of clause 20.3.3 of the Contract, such clause
needs to be interpreted in connection with the Convention and the Rules, since the
parties subjected themselves to said instruments in the arbitration agreement. The
Convention addresses the “Place of Proceedings” in Chapter VII, specifically Articles
62 and 63:

“Article 62

Conciliation and arbitration proceedings shall be held at the seat of the
Centre except as hereinafter provided.

“Article 63

Conciliation and arbitration proceedings may be held, if the parties so
agree:

(a) at the seat of the Permanent Court of Arbitration or of any other
appropriate institution, whether private or public, with which the
Centre may make arrangements for that purpose; or

(b) at any other place approved by the Commission or Tribunal after
consultation with the Secretary-General.”

Moreover, Regulation 26 (1) of the ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulations

77.

78.

79.

provides as follows:

“Regulation 26 Place of Proceedings

(1) The Secretary-General shall make arrangements for the holding of
conciliation and arbitration proceedings at the seat of the Centre or
shall, at the request of the parties and as provided in Article 63 of the
Convention, make or supervise arrangements if proceedings are held
elsewhere.”

The above-transcribed provisions lead to the conclusion that, as a general rule, ICSID
arbitration is held at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C., unless the
requirements laid down in Article 63 of the Convention are met —the satisfaction of
which was not demonstrated by Ecuador.

Accordingly, it is the Tribunal’s view that the hearing of November 9 was correctly
organized and held at the seat of ICSID in Washington, D.C. That said, the Tribunal
notes that it does not object to the performance of future procedural steps in Quito,
provided that the requirements prescribed in the Convention are satisfied.

Lastly, the Tribunal notes that the call to the Washington hearing was issued on
October 11, 2007, virtually one month before the date scheduled for the hearing. The
call was repeated on several occasions, in spite of which neither Ecuador nor
Petroecuador did at any time object to the place of proceedings set by the Tribunal. It
was only a few hours before the scheduled time of the hearing that Respondent first
objected to the selected place. An objection raised so late, at a time when both
Claimant and the members of the Tribunal had already traveled to Washington, D.C.,
is to be dismissed as it is evidently untimely.

Respondents’ alleged defenselessness

80.

81.

Petroecuador has argued that, by actually holding the November 9, 2007 hearing, the
Tribunal pushed Respondents into a “position of complete defenselessness.”
According to Petroecuador, the reason for this is that neither Respondent was afforded
enough time to select an international law firm to defend their rights in this
arbitration.

The Tribunal understands and respects Ecuador and Petroecuador's desire to have
legal counsel adequately representing them in this arbitration. That said, the Tribunal
notes that the request for arbitration was filed on October 10, 2006, and Ecuador and
Petroecuador have thus had almost one year to appoint legal counsel. Furthermore,
the law applicable to the merits of the case is the law of Ecuador and, accordingly, the
State Attorney General’s Office and Petroecuador’s internal counsel, made up of
highly qualified attorneys who are experts in Ecuadorian law, should have sufficient
technical knowledge to adequately defend Respondents’ interests. That said, in a
gesture of deference to the problems mentioned by Ecuador, the Tribunal has stated
that it is willing to postpone the procedural hearing to January 11, 2008. However, the
Tribunal considers that no such extension may be granted in connection with the
provisional measures. By their very own nature, such measures are urgent. Rule 39(2)
requires that “the Tribunal shall give priority to the consideration of a request” for
provisional measures. It is only in breach of this provision that the Tribunal could
have possibly postponed the November 9 hearing.

Summing up

82.

The Tribunal considers that it has afforded Respondents the opportunity to present
their observations to the request for provisional measures as required under Rule
39(4). Respondents have actually filed their respective submissions containing their
allegations, accompanied by such evidence as they deemed relevant. The Tribunal has
carefully analyzed the arguments set forth in such submissions and has replied to
them in this decision. There has been no violation of due process or any step that may
have caused Respondents to become defenseless.

3. Ordering of provisional measures

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

Consequently, the Tribunal has come to the conclusion that City Oriente’s request for
provisional measures must be granted, as it meets the requirements laid down in the
Convention and the Centre's Arbitration Rules: the measures are necessary to preserve
Claimant’s rights, their passing is urgent and they are recommended once each party
has been afforded sufficient opportunity to raise observations.

In rendering this decision, the Tribunal has taken careful consideration of Claimant’s
promise to reinstate its investment plan, as stated in paragraph 38 above, provided that
Respondents have previously effectively and continuously complied with the
provisional measures hereby ordered.

 

  

Even though they were afforded sufficient opportunity to raise observations, which
they did in fact do in writing, it is a fact that Respondents chose not to appear at the
November 9 hearing, to which they had been repeatedly called. The Tribunal regrets
Respondents’ decision and does not intend for Respondents’ failure to appear to
deprive them of their lawful right to submit arguments on an equal footing with
Claimant, and as extensively as possible. By their very own nature, provisional
measures may be modified or revoked at any time. The Tribunal has scheduled a new
procedural hearing for January 11, 2008. Should either party and, specifically, either
Respondent, request that the agenda for such hearing be extended to include the
modification or revocation of the provisional measures, the Tribunal will be willing to
do so.

At the hearing, Claimant requested that the costs arising in connection with these
ancillary proceedings be borne by Respondents. It is the Tribunal’s view that this is
not the appropriate stage for such a decision to be made, and it will therefore postpone
such decision until the rendering of the final award.

III. Case Law

The Tribunal has arrived at this decision by carrying out an independent analysis,
applying and interpreting the Contract, the Convention and the Arbitration Rules. In
its arguments, Claimant made reference to a number of awards and decisions rendered
in other cases in which the tribunals were faced with similar situations. The Tribunal
finds it appropriate to check its own conclusions against those reached in such cases,
as consistency across different awards will increase legal predictability and certainty.
However, the Tribunal notes that the decisions of ICSID or other Tribunals are not
binding and that each case needs to be analyzed in the light of its own circumstances.

Claimant has brought up the early decision of the International Court of Justice in The

89.

90.

Ol.

92.

Electricity Company of Sofia — Belgium v. Bulgaria.° Both the facts and the decision
are actually closely connected to the instant case.

The dispute between the parties concerned certain amounts which the Sofia Electricity
Company allegedly owed to the Municipality of Sofia. While the arbitration was
pending, the Municipality of Sofia started enforced collection of the amounts owed.
Belgium, which was the claimant in that case, requested that the Court issue
provisional measures, staying such enforced collection. The hearing was scheduled to
be held on December 4, 1939. Bulgaria did not appear, on account of the declaration
of World War IL. The Court did hold the hearing nevertheless and, next, a provisional
measure was granted, ordering Bulgaria to take all measures required in order not to
impair the rights asserted by Belgium and not to aggravate or extend the dispute
pending before the Court.

A similar conclusion was arrived at in the “Decision on Provisional Measures” in the
ICSID case of Victor Pey Casado and Fundacion Presidente Allende v. The Republic
of Chile.’ In such decision, the Tribunal “invit{ed] the parties to strictly observe the
general legal principle under which either party to a lawsuit is required to make sure
to prevent any action that might entail prejudgment of the rights of the other party at
the time of enforcement of the arbitral award on the merits, and to prevent any action
of any nature whatsoever which might aggravate or extend the dispute pending before
the tribunal” (unofficial translation].

The possibility that a provisional measure issued in the course of an ICSID arbitration
will extend to proceedings and decisions by the judiciary of the respondent State was
accepted in Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, A.S. v The Republic of Slovakia,* in
which the Tribunal recommended that a bankruptcy proceeding pending in Slovakia
be stayed, insofar as it interfered in the dispute submitted to arbitration.

The conclusion by the Tribunal in the instant case that, for the purposes of Article 47
of the Convention, the words “order” and “recommend” are used interchangeably has
been supported in, at least, two earlier decisions. In Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. the
Kingdom of Spain’ the Tribunal interpreted the textual language and the purpose of
said article and arrived at the conclusion that “the word ‘recommend’ [is] of similar
value as the word ‘order.”’ A similar conclusion was established in the Tribunal's
decision in Victor Pey Casado, which has already been mentioned above. In its
arguments, the Tribunal relied not only on the interpretation of Article 47 of the
Convention but also on the International Court of Justice’s decision in LaGrand —
Germany y. U.S.A.."" Article 41 of the Statute of the Court allows the Court to
“indicate” provisional measures. In LaGrand, the Court held that, in spite of the
specific verb used, provisional measures indicated in accordance with said article are
binding.

° PCI, Ser. A/B, No. 79, 1939.

TICSID Case No. ARB/98/2

* ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Procedural Order No. 4.
° ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Procedural Order No.2.
'° raGrand Case (F.RG. v. U.S.), 2001 LC.J.

IV. Decision

Therefore, the Tribunal unanimously decides to adopt the following provisional
measures pursuant to Article 47 of the ICSID Convention:

1. The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petrdleos del Ecuador
(Petroecuador) shall refrain from

- Instituting or prosecuting, if already in place, any judicial proceeding or
action of any nature whatsoever against or involving City Oriente Limited
and/or its officers or employees and arising from or in connection with the
Contract of March 29, 1995 and/or the effects of the application of Law
No. 2006-42, the Law Amending the Hydrocarbon Law, to said Contract;

Demanding that City Oriente Limited pay any amounts as a result of the
application of Law No. 2006-42, the Law Amending the Hydrocarbon
Law, to the Contract of March 29, 1995;

Engaging in, starting or persisting in any other conduct that may directly or
indirectly affect or alter the legal situation agreed upon under the Contract
of March 29, 1995, as thereby agreed upon and executed by the parties.

2. These provisional measures shall remain in full force and effect unless and
until modified or revoked by the Tribunal or until the rendering of the final
award.

3. The Tribunal’s communication of October 24, 2007 is hereby invalidated.

4. The Tribunal preserves for later resolution its decision on the costs arising
from this ancillary proceeding.

[Signed]
Juan Fernandez-Armesto
President of the Tribunal

[Signed] [Signed]
Horario A. Grigera Naén J. Christopher Thomas QC
Arbitrator Arbitrator

