INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between

CMC Muratori Cementisti CMC Di Ravenna SOC. Coop.;
CMC Muratori Cementisti CMC Di Ravenna SOC. Coop. A.R.L. Maputo
Branch; and CMC Africa Austral, LDA

Claimants

and

REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/17/23

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Mr. John M. Townsend, President of the Tribunal
Mr. J. Brian Casey, Arbitrator
Mr. Peter Rees QC, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Ella Rosenberg

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 24 October 2019

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE PARTIES

Representing the Claimants:

Mr. Alan Del Rio

Mr. Donal Larkin

LDR Consultants

6 Islington Avenue

Sandycove

Dublin, Ireland

Tel.: +44 78 5724 1907

Emails: alan.delrio@Idrconsultants.ie
donal.larkin @ ldrconsultants.ie

Mr. Luis Gonzélez Garcia

Matrix Chambers

Gray’s Inn

London WC1R 5LN

London, United Kingdom

Tel.: +44 20 7404 3447

Fax: +44 20 7404 3448

Email: luisgonzalez @ matrixlaw.co.uk

Representing the Respondent:

Mr. Juan C. Basombrio Esq.
Ms. Erica Chen Esq.
Dorsey & Whitney LLP
Plaza Tower

600 Anton Boulevard

Costa Mesa, CA 92626
United States of America
Tel.: +1 714 800 1405

Fax.: +1 714 800 1499
Emails: basombrio.juan@dorsey.com
chen.erica@dorsey.com

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Representatives of the Parties ii
Table of Contents iii
Table of Abbreviations vii
I. INTRODUCTION 1
Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 3
A. Registration of Request 3
B. Constitution of Tribunal and First Meeting with the Parties 4
C. Written Submissions and Bifurcation Request 5
D. Further Written Submissions and Pre-Hearing Conferences .............cccceecee teense 7
E. Ruling on Gridella’s Witness S 16
F. Hearing on Jurisdiction and the Merits .........0.0cccccses cece eeeeseeeeesseteeeeeteeseeseeeeeeneeeee 16
G. Post-Hearing Submissions on Jurisdiction and Costs... eects eeeeeeneneeeeee 17
H. Closing of the Proceeding 19
I. | FACTUAL BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE.........:c:cscesesesseesesseesesssesnseeeseeneeseese 19
A. The Rehabilitation of Mozambique’s Infrastructure.........0..ccccccceeseee eee eseeeeeeneneeeeee 19
B. The Lot 3 Project: Alto Molécué - Rio Ligomha.........c. cies eee tees eeeeeeneeeneee 20
C. The Lot 3 Contract 21
D. Performance of the Lot 3 Contract 25
E. Compensation negotiations before 2010.00.00... cece cece eeeeeeeseeeseeteteteteeeseeeeeeeeeeeee 27
1. The Engineer’s Determination & IPC 27.......ccccceecseseseseeee cece eseeeseeneeeeeeeeceeenees 27
2. CMC’s Efforts to Increase the Amount Awarded by the Engineer ...........00 ee 30
3. ANE’s 30 October 2009 Settlement Offer.
4. Political Developments in Mozambique ............c.cccccee eee eeeeeeeeseteseeeteteteeeeeeeeeees 40
F. Compensation negotiations from 2010 to 2016.0... cece eeeeeeneeetetetetetseeeeneneeneieee 4l
G. CMC’s Letter Pursuant to Article 9(3) of the BIT 0... .ccececeeeseeeeseeeeeeseseeeeeeeeneeeeaeeeee 53
IV. JURISDICTION 54
A. The Requirement of Article 1 of the BIT that the Claimants Be Investors with an

Investment in Mozambique 55

1. The Respondent’s Objections 55

 

a. The Claimants are not “investors”

 

 

 

 

b. The Claimants have no “investment” in Mozambique .............0c cece 55

2. The Claimants’ Response S7
a. All of the Claimants are “investors” .........0.c.cccceccscssesssseeteseeeseeseseeseseeseseeneseeneseenes s7

b. The Claimants had an “investment” in Mozambique ...........0.00cccccseeeeeeees S7

3. The Tribunal’s Decision 59
a. The Claimants were “investors” within the meaning of the BIT... 59

b. The Claimants had an “investment” within the meaning of the BIT ............0.... 60

B. The requirements of Article 25 ICSID Convention ........c.cccceeeeeeesesee eset eseeeeeeeeeeeee 61
1. The Respondent’s Objections 61
2. The Claimants’ Response 65
3. The Tribunal’s Decision 68

 

a. The Claimants had an “investment” within the meaning of the ICSID Convention

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

68
b. The Claimants were “Nationals of another Contracting State” within the meaning
of the ICSID Convention 71
C. Have the Claimants made treaty claims or purely contractual claims? «0.0.0.0... 72
1. The Respondent’s Objections 72
2. The Claimants’ Response 76
3. The Tribunal’s Decision 80
D. Cotonou Convention Arbitration 81
1. The Respondent’s Objections 81
2. The Claimants’ Response 92
3. The Tribunal’s Decision 98
a. The Cotonou Convention does not supersede the BIT .......... cece 98

b. The Cotonou Convention’s arbitration provisions do not conflict with those of the

 

 

BIT 102

c. The Lot 3 Contract does not require arbitration of this dispute under the Cotonou
Arbitration Rule: 105
E. The ECJ’s Achmea Judgment 107

 

1. The Respondent’s Objection 107

2. The Claimants’ Response 115
3. The Tribunal’s Decision 122

a. The Achmea objection was timely. 122

 

b. The ECJ’s Achmea Decision does not deprive this Tribunal of jurisdiction... 123

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MERITS 132
. The existence of a settlement agreement «0.0.0.0... cece eee ee eeeereeeeneeeeeteteteteeeeenenes 133
1. The Claimants’ Claim 135
2. The Respondent’s Defense 140
3. The Tribunal’s Decision 146
. Article 2(3) of the BIT: Did Mozambique Treat the Claimants Justly and Fairly?........ 155
1. The Claimants’ Claim 155
a. Arbitrary, inconsistent, and contradictory CONdUCt.......... ceteris 156
b. Frustrating the Claimants’ legitimate expectations...........0.00c cece eee 158
c. Acting in bad faith 159

d. Not acting with sufficient transparency ..
e. Coercion 159
2. The Respondent’s Defense 160
3. The Tribunal’s Decision 162
a. Bad faith 163
b. Transparency 165
c. Coercion 166

 

. Article 2(3) of the BIT: Did Mozambique Impair the Claimants’ Investments by

 

 

Unjustified or Discriminatory Measures? ..........:.ccccceeeceseeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeneeeeetenenenes 166
1. The Claimants’ Claim 166
2. The Respondent’s Defense 167
3. The Tribunal’s Decision 167

 

. Article 2(4) of the BIT: Did Mozambique Fail to Create And Maintain a Legal
Framework Apt to Guarantee the Claimants the Continuity of Legal Treatment of All
Undertakings Assumed? 168
1. The Claimants’ Claim 168
2. The Respondent’s Defense 169

VI.
VIL
VIL.

3. The Tribunal’s Decision

 

. Does the MEN Clause Allow Claimants to Import An Umbrella Clause From the

Switzerland-Mozambique BIT?

 

1. The Claimants’ Claim

 

2. The Respondent’s Defense

 

3. The Tribunal’s Decision

 

. Are the Claimants’ Claims Timely? ..0...0.0c. cece eee eeeeeeeseeeseeteeeesteeeteseeeneeeeneeeee

1. The Respondent’s Objection

2. The Claimants’ Response

 

3. The Tribunal’s Decision

 

. Summary of the Tribunal’s Decisions on the Merits 0.0.0.0... ccna

DAMAGES

 

COSTS

 

AWARD

 

169

169
169
170
171
171
171
173
174
175
175
177
180

ANE

BIT

C-[number]

CL-[number]

CM

CMC or the Claimants

CMC Africa Austral

CMC Maputo

CMC Ravenna

COA

Cotonou Convention

Cotonou Arbitration Rules

CRB

CRMJ

DEN

EC]

TABLE OF ABBREVIATIONS

Administracdo Nacional de Estradas, the national roads
administration of Mozambique

Agreement between the Government of the Italian Republic and
the Government of the Republic of Mozambique on the Promotion
and Reciprocal Protection of Investments dated 14 December 1998
Claimants’ Exhibit [number]

Claimants’ Legal Authority [number]

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits, 19 March 2018

The Claimants collectively

Claimant CMC Africa Austral, LDA, a wholly owned subsidiary
of CMC Ravenna incorporated under the laws of Mozambique

Claimant CMC Ravenna S.C.R.L. Maputo Branch, a branch of
CMC Ravenna registered in Mozambique

Claimant Cooperativa Muratori & Cementisti -CMC Di Ravenna
Societa Cooperativa, incorporated under the laws of Italy

Claimants’ Comments to the Respondent’s Observations
Concerning the Achmea Decision, 18 March 2019

Partnership Agreement between the members of the African,
Caribbean and Pacific Group of States, of the one part, and the
European Community and its Member States, of the other part,
signed in Cotonou on 23 June 2000

Arbitration rules adopted by decision of the Council of Ministers at
the first meeting following the signing of the Cotonou Convention

Claimants’ Response to Bifurcation, 3 August 2018

Claimants’ Reply on the Merits and Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction, 4 February 2019

Direcgao de Estradas Nacionais, the Engineer/Supervisor on the
Lot 3 Project

European Court of Justice

EDF
Engineer
EU

Joint Declaration

Lot 3 Contract

Lot 3 Project

Ministry
R-[number]
RA or Amended Request

RCM

European Development Fund

DEN, the Engineer/Supervisor of the Lot 3 Project

European Union

Declaration of 22 EU Member States of 15 January 2019 on the
Legal Consequences of the Achmea Judgment and on Investment
Protection

Public Works Contract No 307/DEN/04 for the Lot 3 Project

Road Rehabilitation project between Namacurra and the Ligonha
River, Lot 3, Section E

The Ministry of Public Works and Housing of Mozambique
Respondent’s Exhibit [number]
Claimants’ Amended Request for Arbitration, 23 June 2017

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 2 November 2018

Revised Cotonou Convention Cotonou Convention as revised on 25 June 2005 and on 22 June

RL-[number]

ROA

ROJ

RRA
RRB
RRJ
RRM

Tr. [date]

VCLT

2010
Respondent’s Legal Authority [number]

Respondent’s Observations Regarding the European Court of
Justice’s Achmea Decision, 31 January 2019

Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction and Memorial in Support
Thereof, 20 July 2018

Respondent’s Reply on Achmea Observations, 1 April 2019
Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation, 20 July 2018
Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, 1 April 2019
Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, 1 April 2019
Transcript of hearing on date given [date]

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 23 May 1969

viii

1

INTRODUCTION

This arbitration was commenced by a Request for Arbitration against the Republic of
Mozambique dated 8 May 2017 in accordance with the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States dated 18 March 1965
(the “ICSID Convention”) and the Agreement Between the Government of the Italian
Republic and the Government of the Republic of Mozambique on the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments dated 14 December 1998 (the “BIT”). The
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) registered the

Request on 14 July 2017.
The Claimants are three companies (together referred to as the “Claimants” or “CMC”)!:

a. Cooperativa Muratori & Cementisti - CMC Di Ravenna Societa Cooperativa
(“CMC Ravenna’), a company incorporated under the laws of Italy with its head

office in Ravenna, Italy;

b. CMC Ravenna S.C.R.L. Maputo Branch (“CMC Maputo”), a branch of CMC

Ravenna registered in Mozambique; and

c. CMC Africa Austral, LDA (“CMC Africa Austral”), a wholly owned subsidiary of
CMC Ravenna incorporated under the laws of Mozambique with its head office in

Maputo, Mozambique.
The Respondent is the Republic of Mozambique (the “Respondent” or “Mozambique”).

This dispute arises out of the participation by the Claimants in a project to reconstruct a
portion of the principal north-south highway in Mozambique. The Claimants entered into

a contract with Mozambique’s national roads administration, Administracdo Nacional de

Only CMC Maputo and CMC Africa Austral were named as claimants in the Request for Arbitration. CMC
Ravenna, the company of which CMC Maputo is a branch, was added as a claimant in the Amended Request for
Arbitration.

Estradas (“ANE”), financed by the European Development Fund (the “EDF”), to

rehabilitate approximately 106 kilometers of that highway designated as “Lot 3.”

The Claimants completed the work on the Lot 3 portion of the highway in 2007, and entered
into a period of discussions with ANE and the project engineer (the “Engineer”) concerning

certain elements of additional compensation they asserted to be due to them for that work.

The Engineer’s determination of the amounts due to the Claimants was issued in May of
2009. Unhappy with certain of the Engineer’s conclusions, the Claimants entered into
discussions with ANE to seek additional compensation. ANE ultimately made an offer on
30 October 2009 to settle the Claimants’ claims for EUR 8,220,888, to which the Claimants
responded in a letter dated 2 November 2009. The Claimants characterize their 2
November 2009 letter as an acceptance of ANE’s offer. The Respondent characterizes that
letter as a counteroffer that ANE did not accept, as a result of which ANE’s settlement

offer expired.

To the extent the amount offered in ANE’s letter of 30 October 2009 exceeded the amount
awarded by the Engineer, it was never paid to the Claimants, although demands,

discussions, and correspondence on the subject continued from 2010 well into 2016.

The Claimants commenced this arbitration in 2017, asserting that the conduct of ANE and
the Government of Mozambique with respect to the failure to pay the amount offered by
ANE in its letter of 30 October 2009 breached a number of the obligations to investors
from Italy that Mozambique agreed to in the BIT. The Respondent contends that this
Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to consider those claims, and that the claims are in any event

without merit.

This Award first describes the procedural history of this arbitration, and then describes in
more detail the factual background out of which the Claimants’ claims arise. Next, it
considers each of the Respondent’s objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, and concludes
that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider those claims. Finally, the Award examines
each of the Claimants’ claims on the merits, and finds no liability to the Claimants on the

part of the Respondent for any of those claimed breaches of the BIT.

IL.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY
A. Registration of Request

On 10 May 2017, ICSID received a Request for Arbitration dated 8 May 2017 from CMC
Maputo and CMC Africa Austral against Mozambique (the “Request”).

On 26 May 2017, ICSID sent a letter to CMC Maputo and CMC Africa Austral asking for

further information and clarifications (the “First Set of Questions”).

By letter of 16 June 2017, CMC Maputo and CMC Africa Austral answered the First Set
of Questions and further indicated that they intended to file an Amended Request for

Arbitration adding CMC Ravenna as a party.

On 20 June 2017, ICSID sent a letter to CMC Maputo and CMC Africa Austral noting their
intention to file an amended request for arbitration and stating that, once the Amended
Request for Arbitration was received, the Secretary-General would complete her review

and decide whether to register the Request.

On 23 June 2017, ICSID received an Amended Request for Arbitration adding CMC

Ravenna as a requesting party and making other changes to the Request.

On 26 June 2017, ICSID sent a letter to the Claimants asking for further information and
clarification on CMC’s investments and date of consent to arbitration (the “Second Set of
Questions”), as well as for a confirmation that the Amended Request was meant to be read

in conjunction with their letter of 16 June 2017.

By letter of 28 June 2017, ICSID asked for further information and clarification (the “Third

Set of Questions”) from the Claimants.

By letter of 6 July 2017, the Claimants answered the Second Set of Questions and
confirmed that the Amended Request should be read in conjunction with their letter of

16 June 2017.

By letter of 7 July 2017, the Claimants answered the Third Set of Questions.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

On 14 July 2017, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Amended Request in
accordance with Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and notified the Parties of the
registration. In the Notice of Registration, the Secretary-General invited the Parties to
proceed to constitute an arbitral tribunal as soon as possible in accordance with Rule 7(d)
of ICSID’s Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration

Proceedings.

B. Constitution of Tribunal and First Meeting with the Parties

By letter of 17 July 2017, the Claimants appointed Mr. Peter Rees QC, a national of the

United Kingdom, as arbitrator in this case.

By letter of 3 August 2017, the Respondent appointed Mr. J. Brian Casey, a national of
Canada, as arbitrator in this case and proposed a method of constitution for the arbitral

tribunal.

On 9 August 2017, the Claimants agreed to the method of constitution proposed by the
Respondent. According to the Parties’ agreement, the arbitral tribunal should consist of
three arbitrators, one appointed by each party, with the co-arbitrators jointly appointing the

President, after consultation with the Parties.

On 1 October 2017, the co-arbitrators, after consulting with the Parties, agreed to appoint

Mr. John M. Townsend, a national of the United States, as President of the arbitral tribunal.

On 4 October 2017, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID
Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules”), notified the Parties
that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was
constituted on that date. Ms. Ella Rosenberg, ICSID Legal Counsel, was designated to

serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 13(1), the Tribunal held a first session with the

Parties on 29 November 2017 by conference call.

Following the first session, on 8 December 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order

No. 1 on procedural matters. Procedural Order No. 1 provides, inter alia, that the applicable

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

Arbitration Rules would be the ICSID Arbitration Rules in effect from 10 April 2006, that
the procedural language would be English, and that the place of proceeding would be
Washington, D.C., USA. Annex A to Procedural Order No. | sets out a schedule for the
proceeding and includes a briefing schedule, including a schedule for submissions on the

Respondent’s request for bifurcation.

Cc. Written Submissions and Bifurcation Request

On 19 March 2018, the Claimants submitted their Memorial on the Merits (“CM”), together
with exhibits C-1 through C-49, legal authorities CL-1 through CL-41, as well as the
witness statements of Messrs. Claudio Guerra, Fulvio Boiani, Nerio Gridella, Simon

Palmer, and Enrico Alicandri.
From March to May 2018, the Parties exchanged requests for documents.

On 2 May 2018, the Respondent submitted to the Tribunal a Redfern Schedule setting forth
the Parties’ positions, agreements, and disagreements concerning 121 requests for

documents made to the Claimants by the Respondent.

On 22 May 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, containing its rulings as to

each request submitted to it.

On 20 July 2018, the Respondent submitted its Request for Bifurcation (“RRB”), and
Objections to Jurisdiction and Memorial in Support Thereof (“ROJ”), together with
exhibits R-1 through R-8, legal authorities RL-1 through RL-29, as well as the witness

statement of Mr. Fernando Manhica.

On 1 August 2018, the Tribunal made a proposal to appoint Mr. Stijn Winters as an
Assistant to the President and invited the Parties to be prepared to discuss the proposal at

the hearing on bifurcation scheduled for 10 August 2018.

On 3 August 2018, the Claimants submitted their Response to Bifurcation (“CRB”),
together with legal authorities CL-42 through CL-48.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

On August 10, 2018, the Tribunal held a hearing on the application for bifurcation at the

offices of the World Bank in Washington D.C. The following persons attended the hearing:

Members of the Tribunal:

Mr. John M. Townsend President

Mr. J. Brian Casey Arbitrator

Mr. Peter Rees QC Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat:

Ms. Ella Rosenberg Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Anna Devine Paralegal

For the Claimants:
Mr. Luis Gonzalez Garcia Matrix Chambers
Mr. Alan Del Rio LDR Consultants

For the Respondent:
Mr. Juan Basombrio Dorsey & Whitney LLP
Ms. Erica Chen Dorsey & Whitney LLP

Court Reporter:
Mr. David Kasdan Worldwide Reporting LLP

At the hearing on bifurcation, with the agreement of the Parties, Mr. Stijn Winters was

designated to serve as Assistant to the President of the Tribunal.

After hearing oral arguments from both Parties, the Tribunal deliberated and informed the
Parties that it had decided not to bifurcate the proceeding. The Tribunal put a short

statement of its reasons on the record of the hearing.

After having heard the Tribunal’s decision on bifurcation, the Respondent requested that
the Tribunal bifurcate only the jurisdictional objection based on the Cotonou Convention.
The Claimants opposed the Respondent’s request. After deliberating, the Tribunal denied

the Respondent’s request.

On 15 August 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3, confirming its decision
to deny the application for bifurcation as originally made and as modified by the

Respondent at the hearing.

39.

40.

Al.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

D. Further Written Submissions and Pre-Hearing Conferences

On 2 November 2018, the Respondent submitted its Counter-Memorial on the Merits
(“RCM”), together with exhibits R-9 through R-11 and legal authorities RL-30 through
RL-35, as well as the witness statements of Ms. Teresa Filomena Muenda and Mr. Cecilio

Maria da Conceigaéo Grachane.

On 6 and 7 December 2018, both Parties submitted Redfern Schedules setting forth their
positions, agreements and disagreements concerning their respective requests for

documents related to the merits.

On 19 December 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 containing the

Tribunal’s rulings as to the Parties’ respective document requests on the merits.

On 31 January 2019, the Respondent submitted its Observations Regarding the European
Court of Justice’s Achmea Decision (“ROA”), together with exhibits R-12 through R-14
and legal authorities RL-36 through RL-42, raising an additional objection to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. The Respondent requested that this submission be accepted into the record and

proposed a schedule for the Parties to submit briefs on the issue.

On 3 February 2019, the Tribunal invited the Claimants to submit their views on the
Respondent’s proposed briefing schedule by 6 February 2019 and informed the Parties that
this issue would be discussed during the previously scheduled 8 February 2019 pre-hearing

telephone conference.

On 4 February 2019, the Claimants submitted their Reply on the Merits and Counter-
Memorial on Jurisdiction (“CRMJ”), together with exhibits C-50 through C-56 and legal

authorities CL-49 through CL-60, as well as the legal opinion of Mr. Tomas Timbane.

By a letter of 6 February 2019, the Claimants objected to the Respondent’s Achmea
Observations, arguing that (i) introducing new allegations on issues of
jurisdiction/admissibility seven months after the Memorial on Jurisdiction constitutes an

abuse of process; (ii) the Respondent must have been aware of the Achmea Decision at the

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

time of the filing of its Memorial on Jurisdiction; and (iii) the Achmea issue has no

relevance to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

On 8 February 2019, the Tribunal held a pre-hearing organizational meeting with the
Parties by telephone conference. It was agreed during the call that a second pre-hearing

telephone conference would be held on 11 April 2019.

On 15 February 2019, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5 concerning the
organization of the hearing and addressing Respondent’s Achmea Observations. The
Tribunal ruled that the Respondent’s Achmea Observations should be admitted into the
record. It invited the Claimants to respond to these Observations by 18 March 2019, and
informed the Respondent that it could reply to the Claimants’ response in its previously

scheduled 1 April 2019 submission.

On 18 March 2019, the Claimants submitted their Comments to the Respondent’s
Observations Concerning the Achmea Decision (“COA”), together with legal authorities

CL-61 through CL-65.

On 1 April 2019, the Respondent submitted its Rejoinder on the Merits, Reply on
Jurisdiction and Reply on Achmea Observations (““RRM,” “RRJ,” “RRA”), together with
legal authorities RL-43 through RL-45, as well as the second witness statements of Ms.

Muenda and Mr. Grachane.

On 9 April 2019, the Claimants requested leave to introduce a copy of the award on the
merits in RREEF Infrastructure (G.P.) Limited and RREEF Pan-European Infrastructure
Two Lux S.a r.l. v. Kingdom of Spain, CSID Case No. ARB/13/30 (“Award on the Merits
in RREEF y. Spain”). On the same date, the Tribunal invited the Respondent to indicate
whether it intended to oppose this request by 10 April 2019, and informed the Parties that,
if the Respondent objected to this request, both Parties should be prepared to address the

matter during the second pre-hearing telephone conference on 11 April 2019.

By email of 10 April 2019, the Respondent (i) opposed the introduction of the Award on
the Merits in RREEF v. Spain into the record; and (ii) requested leave to introduce the

Amicus Brief filed by the European Commission in the Micula v. The Government of

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

Romania, U.S. District Court, District of Columbia, Case No. 1:17-cv-02332-APM
pending before the United States District Court of Columbia (“Amicus Brief of the

European Union in Micula v. Romania’).

Later on 10 April 2019, the Tribunal informed the Parties that both applications to submit

additional documents would be discussed during the second pre-hearing conference call.

On 11 April 2019, the Claimants submitted fourteen amended translations. The Respondent

objected to Claimants’ submission of the amended translations on the same date.

Also on 11 April 2019, the Tribunal held a second pre-hearing organizational meeting with

the Parties by telephone conference.

During the conference call, the Tribunal granted the Claimants’ request for leave to submit
into the record a copy of the Award on the Merits in RREEF v. Spain, and the Respondent’s

request to submit the Amicus Brief of the European Union in Micula v. Romania.

Also during the conference call, the Claimants informed the Tribunal and the Respondent
that Mr. Gridella might not be able to appear at the hearing because he had commenced
employment with a new employer after giving his witness statement, and had so far been
unable to obtain permission from his new employer to attend the hearing. In response to
this, the Respondent stated that if Mr. Gridella did not appear, it might apply to strike
Mr. Gridella’s witness statement. After some discussions, and an inquiry from the Tribunal
as to whether the Respondent would be willing to help resolve the difficulty, the Tribunal

stated that it would issue further instructions following the conference call.

Also on 11 April 2019, after the conference call, the Claimants sought leave to introduce
two new documents into the record: the Declaration of the Representative of the
Government of Hungary of 16 January 2019 on the Legal Consequences of the Judgment
of the Court of Justice in Achmea and on Investment Protection in the European Union and
a similar declaration by five other EU member states. The Respondent requested until 15

April 2019 to provide its observations on the Claimants’ request.

58.

59.

60.

61.

On 12 April 2019, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 6, concerning the organization
of the hearing. The Tribunal (i) ordered the Claimants to provide the Respondent with red-
lined or similar versions of the new translations, showing how they differ from the
translations previously submitted; and (ii) granted the Respondent’s request to respond to

the Claimants’ application to submit two additional documents into the record.

On the issue of Mr. Gridella’s attendance as a witness at the hearing, the Tribunal directed

as follows in Procedural Order No. 6:

a) The Claimants shall inform the Tribunal and the Respondent, no
later than April 22, 2019, whether they have been able to arrange for
Mr. Gridella to attend the hearing.

b) If Mr. Gridella does not attend the hearing, the Respondent may
make an application to the Tribunal concerning what consequence,
if any, should follow from Mr. Gridella’s failure to attend. Such
application is to be made orally, during the time period reserved for
Mr. Gridella’s testimony in paragraph 7 below, and the Claimants
will be given an opportunity to respond to such application at that
time. Both parties should expect questions from the Tribunal in this
connection.

On 14 April 2019, the Claimants requested permission to add Mr. Enrico Alicandri to its
witness list in view of the uncertainty surrounding the attendance of Mr. Gridella at the

hearing. By email of the same date the Respondent objected to the Claimants’ request.

In a second email of the same date, the Respondent wrote to the Tribunal:

What we have here is an obvious prior failure by the Claimants’
counsel to secure Mr. Gridella’s commitment to appear at the
hearing, not any allegedly “new” concern by Mr. Gridella. [...] If
Mr. Gridella does not appear to testify at the hearing, both of Mr.
Gridella’s witness statements, and all references in the memorials to
him, must be stricken from the record.

Second, Respondent strongly objects to the request by the Claimants
to now call their own witness. The Tribunal will recall that, during
the first pre-hearing conference, the Claimants objected when the
Respondent sought to call its own witness to testify at the hearing.
Claimants said that this was not allowed under the Procedural
Orders — that a party cannot call its own witness to testify. As a
result, the Respondent did not call its own witness and this

10

agreement was reflected in the list of witnesses jointly provided by
the parties. Respondent has not called Mr. Alicandri to testify, he
was not included in the jointly-agreed list of witnesses for the
hearing agenda, and therefore the Claimants cannot unilaterally call
him as a witness because they have previously taken the position
that a party cannot call its own witnesses and the Respondent
accepted that position to its prejudice.

Mr. Alicandri also has not provided a witness statement on the new
issues on which the Claimants now seek to call him, and therefore
that also would render his testimony improper, because the
Respondent would lack prior knowledge of his testimony which
creates a Due Process problem. A witness cannot testify on new
matters, and therefore there is nothing that he could say at the
hearing, if the Respondent does not want to call him to testify. In
addition, he clearly cannot testify about Mr. Gridella’s alleged
“concerns,” because that is inadmissible hearsay.

Further, the Tribunal’s most recent procedural order indicates that it
will decide the motion to strike Mr. Gridella’s witness statements
after it hears argument on the motion at the hearing. Therefore, there
will be uncertainty when the hearing starts as to whether Mr.
Gridella’s witness statements will even be considered. If Mr.
Gridella’s witness statements remain part of the record, that renders
the Claimants’ current request moot. This alone has introduced
sufficient uncertainty into the opening statements — the Respondent
does not believe that there can be any reference to Mr. Gridella’s
witness statements in the opening statement if he is not present to
testify, but we will not have a ruling from the Tribunal when the
hearing starts. It is very difficult to prepare for a merits hearing not
knowing whether the testimony of a key witness like Mr. Gridella
will be part of the record or not — this is a very serious problem
caused by the Claimants. The preferred approach would have been
that the witness statements of Mr. Gridella are stricken prior to the
start of the hearing, as they should be.

The addition of Mr. Alicandri would create further difficulties, and
forces the parties to have to argue in the alternative in a totally
unworkable way. Again, these problems are all the creation of the
Claimants’ prior failure to secure Mr. Gridella’s attendance at the
hearing, and the addition of Mr. Alicandri would simply complicate
things further. Any sympathy that the Tribunal may have initially
had for the Claimants’ own predicament, should be disregarded
given the misrepresentations about Mr. Gridella’s employment
status. At this late stage in the proceedings, and certainly during the
hearing, the Respondent cannot be left guessing which Claimants’

62.

63.

64.

witness will be considered by the Tribunal. How can the
Respondent prepare for a hearing under those circumstances?

Therefore, the Tribunal must stay the course with the decision it has
made in the most recent procedural order — it will hear the motion to
strike Mr. Gridella’s testimony at the hearing, and it must deny the
Claimants’ request to unilaterally call Mr. Alicandri because that is
not allowed as previously argued by the Claimants themselves and
because the Respondent cannot be left guessing regarding what new
testimony Mr. Alicandri will provide.

In the alternative, if the Tribunal is inclined to depart from the
procedural orders and allow the Claimants to unilaterally call Mr.
Alicandri (which the Tribunal should not do), then it must be on the
strict condition that Mr. Gridella’s two witness statements, and all
references in the memorials to them, are stricken from the record
immediately — that is, now before the hearing. Respondent must
have clarity as to what evidence is going to be part of the record at
the hearing. Due process demands that.

On 16 April 2019, the Respondent objected to the Claimants’ introduction of two additional

documents into the record.

On 17 April 2019, the Claimants (i) clarified Mr. Gridella’s employment status and
explained that, at the time when Mr. Gridella signed his second witness statement, he had
just begun his new employment and was not aware of the new employer’s concerns; (ii)
argued that Mr. Alicandri would only testify on new issues and that there was no suggestion
that he would provide testimony on matters already on the record; and (iii) submitted the

red-lined versions of the amended translations they had previously submitted.

On 17 April 2019, the Respondent submitted the following response to the Claimants’
message of 17 April 2019:

Respondent objects to the entire content of Mr. Del Rio’s email
referring to Mr. Gridella’s asserted reasons for not appearing at the
hearing, except for the admission by Claimants’ counsel that they
misrepresented to the Tribunal during the prehearing conference that
Mr. Gridella was unemployed when he signed the two witness
statements. The rest of the details are entirely “hearsay.” Mr.
Gridella has not testified to any of those assertions, including his
purported reasons for refusing to testify at the hearing. The hearsay
evidence is improperly being presented by the Claimant’s counsel.

Respondent will not have an opportunity to cross-examine Mr.
Gridella about said hearsay evidence, and therefore it is inadmissible
and cannot be included in the record.

With respect to Mr. Alicandri, he would be providing new testimony
at the hearing that the Respondent and this Tribunal have never seen
in a witness statement. In his initial email, Mr. Del Rio stated that
Mr. Alicandri would “speak about the non-attendance of Mr.
Gridella.” That is new evidence and is also hearsay evidence. Mr.
Alicandri also cannot speak to substantive issues that he has not
testified about before. He cannot testify about what Mr. Gridella
has testified. Claimants’ cannot substitute witnesses to cover Mr.
Gridella’s absence — that is exactly what they want to do with Mr.
Alicandri and it would be highly improper. Allowing Mr. Alicandri
to testify as to new matters would be a serious violation of the
Respondent’s due process rights, because the Respondent does not
know what he is going to say. There are no surprise witnesses in
international arbitration. Claimants’ counsel also fails completely
to address the point that they are contradicting themselves.
Claimants do not dispute that they had previously taken the position
that a party cannot call its own witness to testify under the
procedural orders. Respondent therefore also did not do so, when
the parties agreed on the list of witnesses. Claimants are now
estopped from taking a contrary position. Therefore, Mr. Alicandri
cannot be called by the Claimants.

Mr. Gridella is the only witness of the Claimants who has asserted
that there was a settlement agreement. Therefore, it is critical that
the Respondent have the right to cross-examine him. If Mr. Gridella
does not appear at the hearing, and his witness statements are
stricken as they must be, the Claimants have no witness to dispute
the Respondent’s position that there was no settlement agreement.
In sum, the Claimants cannot prove their case. Claimants should
seriously consider whether they want to go forward with this
hearing, which will result in significant expense. Claimants will not
be the first party that had to abandon a case because it could not
secure the cooperation of its key witness. Respondent reminds that
Claimants that it has requested that, as part of the Tribunal’s award
if it finds for the Respondent, that the Tribunal order reimbursement
by the Claimants of all fees and costs incurred by the Respondent in
these proceedings.

Mr. Gridella has not testified to any of those assertions, including
his purported reasons for refusing to testify at the hearing. The
hearsay evidence is improperly being presented by the Claimant’s
counsel. Respondent will not have an opportunity to cross-examine

65.

66.

67.

68.

Mr. Gridella about said hearsay evidence, and therefore it is
inadmissible and cannot be included in the record.

By email of 17 April 2019, the Claimants objected to the Respondent’s allegations and

requested leave to submit a second witness statement by Mr. Alicandri.

On the same date, the Respondent objected to the Claimants’ request. The Respondent also

requested that the new translations submitted by the Claimants be stricken from the record.
The Parties exchanged further observations on these matters by email on 18 April 2019.

On 18 April 2019, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 7 which included the

following rulings:

Witness Statement of Mr. Gridella

11) [...] Mr. Gridella’s two witness statements will remain part of
the record, and [...] may be discussed by both parties in their
opening statements. However, the Tribunal reserves for
determination in its award the question of what weight, if any,
should be given to Mr. Gridella’s witness statements, or any part of
them. The parties are free to present their arguments on that subject
in their opening statements at the hearing, in their closing arguments
at the hearing, or in their post-hearing briefs, as each party may elect.

Testimony of Mr. Alicandri

14) No new witness statement of Mr. Alicandri is needed or will be
accepted.

Additional Submissions

16) Upon consideration of the Respondent’s objection, the two
additional declarations made by E.U. member states are accepted
into the record of this arbitration.

Amended Translations

18) The Tribunal prefers accurate translations to inaccurate
translations. Based on the Claimants’ representation in their email
to the Secretary of April 11, 2019 that these are “small
amendments,” and in the absence of any showing by the
Respondent that the amendments would result in the translations
being inaccurate or in prejudice to the Respondent, the amended
translations are accepted into the record.

14

69.

70.

71.

72.

723.

On 22 April 2019, the Respondent submitted its Objections to Procedural Order No. 7 and
Motion for Reconsideration (“Motion for Reconsideration”), together with exhibits R-15

and R-16 and legal authorities RL-47 through RL-60.

On 23 April 2019, the Claimants and the Respondent commented on the Respondent’s
Motion for Reconsideration by exchange of emails. The Claimants stated that they would
hold off on making comments on the Respondent’s Motion for Reconsideration until
instructed to do so by the Tribunal. The Respondent noted that the deadline for the
Claimants to confirm whether Mr. Gridella would appear to testify was 22 April 2019, and

in the absence of such notification, assumed that Mr. Gridella would not appear.
By email of 23 April 2019, the Tribunal informed the Parties that:

1. Having heard nothing from the Claimants about the attendance
of Mr. Gridella at the hearing by the April 22 deadline set in
P.O. No. 6, the Tribunal assumes that he will not be attending the
hearing.

2. The Tribunal has received the Respondent’s Objections to

P.O. No. 7 and Motion for Reconsideration dated April 22. The

Tribunal would like to receive a response from the Claimants, but

understands that it may be difficult for the Claimants to provide one

before the Hearing commences. We would be grateful if the

Claimants would advise us when they will be able to respond.”
On 24 April 2019, the Claimants informed the Tribunal that (i) despite the Claimants’ best
efforts, Mr. Gridella would not be attending the hearing; (ii) the Claimants would not be in
a position to prepare a detailed response to the Respondent’s Motion for Reconsideration
before the hearing; and (iii) that the Respondent has had every opportunity and has
extensively argued its motion to strike Mr. Gridella’s evidence. The Claimants requested

that the Tribunal deny the Respondent’s motion to reconsider Procedural Order No. 7.

By email of the same day, the Respondent commented on the Claimants’ response.

Tribunal’s email to the Parties dated 23 April 2019.

74.

75.

76.

E. Ruling on Gridella’s Witness Statement

At the outset of the Hearing, the Tribunal heard the Parties’ arguments on the Respondent’ s
Motion for Reconsideration of Procedural Order No. 7 and their views as to the
consequences that should attach to Mr. Gridella’s absence. After a short recess, the

Tribunal rendered its decision on the motion orally, stating:

We have considered the arguments heard this morning and

presented in writing in the motion itself and the subsequent e-mails.

We conclude that we do not change Procedural Order 7. So we will

be most interested in the Parties’ thoughts as this hearing proceeds

concerning what weight, from full weight to none, or any point in

between, should be given to Mr. Gridella’s witness statement.*
While Mr. Gridella’s witness statements were admitted as part of the record, the Tribunal
found in the course of deliberations that it was not necessary to rely on those statements as
support for any ruling made by the Tribunal. Mr. Gridella’s statements are cited as a source
for some portions of the Factual Background section of this Award, but no substantive

finding on a controverted matter is made solely on the basis of those statements.

KF. Hearing on Jurisdiction and the Merits

A hearing on Jurisdiction and the Merits was held at the offices of the World Bank in
Washington, D.C. from 29 April 2019 to 1 May 2019 (the “Hearing”). The following

people were present at the Hearing:

Members of the Tribunal:

Mr. John M. Townsend President
Mr. J. Brian Casey Arbitrator
Mr. Peter Rees QC Arbitrator

Assistant to the President

Mr. Stijn Winters Assistant to the President
ICSID Secretariat:

Ms. Ella Rosenberg Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Maria-Rosa Rinne Paralegal

Tr. 29 April 2019, p. 44, 1. 12-20.

77.

78.

For the Claimants:
Counsel

Mr. Luis Gonzalez Garcia
Mr. Alan Del Rio

Expert

Mr. Tomas Timbane
Witness

Mr. Enrico Alicandri
Party representative
Ms. Valentina Casasola

For the Respondent:

Counsel

Mr. Juan Basombrio

Ms. Erica Chen

Expert

Ms. Teresa Filomena Muenda
Witness

Cecilio Maria da Conceigéo Grachane

Party representatives
Angelo Vasco Matusse
Ismael Faruc Nurmahomed

Court Reporter:
Ms. Laurie Carlisle

Matrix Chambers
LDR Consultants

TTA Advogados
CMC

CMC

Dorsey & Whitney LLP
Dorsey & Whitney LLP

Attorney, Mozambique

Former General Director of the National
Road Administration (ANE), Mozambique

Deputy Attorney General, Mozambique

National Road Administration (ANE),
Mozambique

Carlisle Reporting

The Parties presented opening statements, following which the following witnesses and

experts were examined:

On behalf of the Claimants:
Mr. Enrico Alicandri
Mr. Tomas Timbane

On behalf of the Respondent:
Mr. Cecilio Maria da Conceig&éo Grachane

Ms. Teresa Filomena Muenda

CMC
TTA Advogados

Former General Director of National Road
Administration (ANE), Mozambique
Attorney, Mozambique

G. Post-Hearing Submissions on Jurisdiction and Costs

The Parties agreed at the Hearing that no post-hearing submission on the merits would be

needed.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

After the Hearing, on 8 May 2019, the Tribunal invited the Parties to comment on the
relevance to the Respondent’s jurisdictional objections of the Opinion of the European
Court of Justice of 30 April 2019 on CETA (Opinion 1/17 of the Court) (“Opinion 1/17”)*
and the new decision of the arbitral tribunal in Eskosol S.p.A. in Liquidazione v. the Italian
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/15/50) on Italy’s Request for Immediate Termination and
Italy’s Jurisdictional Objection based on Inapplicability of the Energy Charter Treaty to
Intra-EU Disputes dated 7 May 2019 (“Award in Eskosol v. Italy” or “Eskosol’”).°

On 22 May 2019, the Claimants submitted their Comments on Opinion 1/17 and the Award
in Eskosol v. Italy and Respondent submitted its Observations on Eskosol and Opinion

1/17.

The Parties filed their submissions on costs on 29 May 2019. The Claimants submitted no

comment to the Respondent’s cost application.

On 7 June 2019, the Respondent submitted to the Secretary a document entitled

“Respondent’s Opposition to Claimants’ Statement of Costs.”

On 12 June 2019, the Claimants sent an email to the Secretary asking that the Respondent’s
Opposition “should not be admitted into the record, because it does not represent an
opposition to the claimants’ costs, but is instead an attempt by the Respondent to present a
post-hearing submission to the Tribunal in relation to its arguments on jurisdiction and
merits.” On the same day, the Respondent sent a response to the Secretary. By e-mail of
13 June 2019, the Secretary informed the Parties that the Tribunal would consider these
objections to the costs submissions in the Award, and that no further submissions

concerning costs would be accepted.

Opinion 1/17 of the Court of Justice of the European Union (“ECJ”) of 30 April 2019 (RL-62).

Eskosol S.p.A. in Liquidazione v. the Italian Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/15/50, Decision on Italy’s Request
for Immediate Termination and Italy’s Jurisdictional Objection Based on Inapplicability of the Energy Charter
Treaty to Intra-EU Disputes (7 May 2019) (RL-61).

84.

Il.

85.

86.

87.

H. Closing of the Proceeding

The proceeding was closed pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 38(1) on 24 September
2019.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE
A. The Rehabilitation of Mozambique’s Infrastructure

The responsibility for public works and infrastructure in Mozambique falls within the
purview of Mozambique’s Ministry of Public Works and Housing (the “Ministry”). The
Ministry delegates responsibility for the development and maintenance of the road network
to ANE. The Director General of ANE is appointed by the Minister of Public Works and
Housing. The Claimants argue that, as “an instrumentality, emanation and/or representative
of the State,” ANE’s conduct can be attributed to the Respondent for the purposes of the
BIT.°

The Claimants quote a 1992 World Bank report as saying that Mozambique’s road network
had “deteriorated to the point where nearly 40% is in poor or bad condition, creating major
obstacles to the movement of agricultural products to the ports, markets and processing
centers.”” They also quote a 2006 European Union report that similarly found the country’s

transport infrastructure to be in dire need of improvement.*

Mozambique’s main road is the Estrada Nacional | or “N1,” which runs from Maputo in
the south to Pemba in the north. At some point before April 2004, the Government decided

to rehabilitate the 374.85 km stretch of the N1 between Namacurra and Rio Ligonha, and

began to refer to that effort as the “Namacurra — Rio Ligonha Project.”

RA, UL.
C-20, 14.
C-22, p. 17.

CM, 99124-36.

88.

89.

90.

10

mn

To make the Namacurra — Rio Ligonha Project more manageable, Mozambique divided it

into three “Lots,” as follows: 10

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Lot Section Extension
A ‘Namacurra — Malei 28.153 Km

1 B Malei — Mocuba 53.047 Km
Cc Mocuba — Nampevo 70.450 Km

Total Lot 1 151.750 Km

2 D Nampevo - Alto Molécué 117.180 km
3 E Alto Molécué - Rio Ligonha 106.020 km
Total Lot 3 374.85 km

 

 

 

 

 

 

This dispute arises primarily out of the rehabilitation of Lot 3, Section E, which consisted
of a 106.020 km stretch of the N1 between Alto Molocué and the Ligonha River (the “Lot
3 Project”).

B. The Lot 3 Project: Alto Molécué - Rio Ligonha

The Respondent arranged to receive financing for the Lot 3 Project from the European
Development Fund.'! This financing had implications for the legal framework within
which Mozambique entered into contracts for the Lot 3 Project, because of a treaty called
the Partnership Agreement between the members of the African, Caribbean and Pacific
Group of States, of the one part, and the European Community and its Member States, of
the other part (the “Cotonou Convention”), signed in Cotonou on 23 June 2000, and
amended in 2005 and 2010. According to the Respondent, as will be developed in more

detail below, “any disputes related to transnational contracts financed by the European

CM, 131.

C-25, pp. 1-2.

91.

92.

93.

Development Bank must be arbitrated under the Arbitration Rules of the Cotonou

Convention.”!?

ANE awarded the construction contracts for each of the Namacurra — Rio Ligonha Project
Lots in a public tender process launched on 10 April 2004. The tendering parties had to
submit a bid specifying how they would complete the project and who would be the key
people involved in it. Each bid had to include a “Bill of Quantities, Method Statements and
other forms setting out the experience of the [bidders], CVs of key personnel, an equipment
list, forms showing that the [bidders] were not involved in litigation, their financial

capacity, a bid bond and any other forms necessary for completing a compliant tender.” 3

Several companies tendered for the Lot 3 Project. The tender evaluation committee
recommended awarding Lot 3 to the Claimants even though it had received a lower bid
from another company, because the lowest bidder was also the lowest bidder on Lot 1 and
could not take on both projects. The Lot 3 Project was awarded to the Claimants in January

2005.4

Cc. The Lot 3 Contract

The contract for Lot 3 — Public Works Contract No 307/DEN/04 for Road Rehabilitation
between Namacurra and the Ligonha River, Lot 3 (the “Lot 3 Contract”) — was signed on
16 March 2005. The signatories to the Lot 3 Contract are the Ministry, represented by ANE,
and “C.M.C. A.A.,” a corporation with its address in Maputo, Mozambique. “C.M.C.
A.A.” would appear to be the Claimant CMC Africa Austral. The Special Conditions of
the Lot 3 Contract identify Claimant CMC Maputo as the “Empreiteiro” (‘Contractor’),

although CMC Maputo is not a signatory to the contract. !>

ROJ, 3; See Part IV.D of this Award.
Witness Statement of S. Palmer, (18.
First Witness Statement of C. Grachane, (7; Witness Statement of S. Palmer, (20.

C-25.

94.

95.

96.

97.

CMC Africa Austral had been formed in 2000 or 2001.'° The Claimants explain that CMC
Maputo was often used as a cosigner or backer in order to supplement a bid by CMC Africa
Austral, because CMC Africa Austral did not have the experience required to bid for large
public works projects on its own.'? This may have been the case with the Lot 3 Project,
because the EDF requires bidders to meet certain experience requirements, although only
CMC Africa Austral appears as a signatory on the Lot 3 Contract. According to Mr.
Gridella, the invoices for the Lot 3 Contract were issued by CMC Africa Austral, but the
CMC tenders had been prepared by CMC Maputo. '*

The original value of the Lot 3 Contract was EUR 26,201,593.79, including VAT. 9 The
Lot 3 Contract was “[e]ndorsed for financing by the Chief of the Delegation of the
European Commission to Mozambique” on 14 March 2005, two days before the Lot 3

Contract was signed.”

The Lot 3 Contract comprised the contract itself, the “General Conditions for Projects
Financed by the EDF (‘General Conditions’),” and the Special Conditions.”! Article 2 of
the Special Conditions provides that the Lot 3 Contract is governed by Mozambique law.

The language of the contract is Portuguese.

Article 48.1 of the General Conditions specifies that, “[u]nless otherwise stipulated in the
Special Conditions, and except as provided in Article 48.4, the Contract shall be at fixed
prices which shall not be revised.” Article 49.1 of the Special Conditions states that “[t]he
Contract is a unit price contract.” Article 49.1(b)(i) of the General Conditions specifies
that “the amount due under the Contract shall be calculated by applying the unit rates to

the quantities actually executed for the respective items, in accordance with the Contract.”

Witness Statement of S. Palmer, {25 states 2001; Witness Statement of N. Gridella, {20 states 2000.

Witness Statement of S. Palmer, (25; Witness Statement of N. Gridella, 420.
Witness Statement of N. Gridella, (20-21. See para. 75, above.

CM, 138.

C-25.

C-25, Article 2.

98.

99.

100.

The Respondent asserts that, by agreeing to a “unit price contract,” the Parties expressly

chose not to enter into a “cost-plus contract.”

Article 1 of the Special Conditions provides that the Engineer/Supervisor on the project
would be Direcgado de Estradas Nacionais (“DEN” or the “Engineer”). DEN was
represented on the Lot 3 Project by Mr. Nicholas O. Dwyer.”* Article 5.1 of the General
Conditions states that, “[t]he Supervisor shall carry out the duties specified in the Contract.
Except as expressly stated in the Contract, the Supervisor shall not have authority to relieve

the Contractor of any of his obligations under the Contract.”

Article 55 of the General Conditions, “Claims for Additional Payment,” provides that the
Contractor shall give the Engineer notice of any claim for additional payment. Article 55.2

provides that:

55.2 When the Supervisor has received the full and detailed

particulars of the Contractor’s claim that he requires, he shall,

without prejudice to Article 21.4 after due consultation with the

Contracting Authority and, where appropriate, the Contractor,

determine whether the Contractor is entitled to additional payment

and notify the parties accordingly.
Article 68 of the General Conditions provides for the “Settlement of Disputes.” Article 68.1
requires the Contracting Authority (the Ministry, represented by ANE) and the Contractor
(CMC Africa Austral according to the Contract, CMC Maputo according to the Special
Conditions) to make an effort to settle amicably “disputes relating to the Contract which
may arise between them.” Article 68.2 provides that “[t]he Special Conditions shall

prescribe: a) the procedure for the amicable settlement of disputes; [...]” Article 68.5 then

provides that:

RCM, {16; Article 49.1(c) of the General Conditions states that, “[f]or cost-plus contracts, the amount due under
the Contract shall be determined on the basis of actual costs with an agreed addition for overheads and profit.”
(C-25).

CM, 438.

68.5 In the absence of an amicable settlement or settlement by
conciliation within the maximum Time Limits specified, the dispute
shall:

a) in the case of a national contract, be settled in accordance
with the national legislation of the State of the Contracting
Authority; and

b) in the case of a transnational Contract, be settled, either:

i) if the Parties to the Contract so agree, in accordance with
the national legislation of the State of the Contracting
Authority or its established international practices; or

ii) by arbitration in accordance with the procedural rules
adopted in accordance with the [Cotonou] Convention.”*

101. Article 68 of the Special Conditions elaborates on the procedures for the “Settlement of
Disputes.” That Article first addresses amicable settlement procedures, and then provides

in Article 68.3 that:

68.3 The parties may agree that the procedures for the conciliation
referred by article 68.3 of General Conditions of Contract are the
same of [sic] the Sub clause 5 of “Procedural Rules on Conciliation
and Arbitration of contracts financed by European development
Found” [sic] adopted by Decision No 3/90 ACP-CEE Council of
Ministers dated 29 March 1990 (Official Journal No L 382/95 on
31.12.90).

[J

The intervention of the European Communities agency in the
amicable settlement may be made by the delegation of the European
agency in Mozambique or by the Departments of the Head offices
of the European Communities agency, in accordance with the
agreements made by the parties and the agency.

102. Article 68.5 of the Special Conditions then provides that arbitration of a “transnational

Contract” pursuant to Article 68.5(b)(ii) of General Conditions will be conducted pursuant

24.25 (emphasis added).

103.

104.

105.

106.

to “the abovementioned Procedural Rules on Conciliation and Arbitration.”?> Those

“Procedural Rules” are the Cotonou Arbitration Rules.

On 1 November 2005, Addendum No. | to the Lot 3 Contract was signed to include the
construction of a bridge over the Ligonha River. This Addendum was worth EUR
1,603,637.44, including VAT.7°
On 23 November 2007, Addendum No. 2 was signed to include changes to the total price
of the Lot 3 Contract as a result of variations ordered by the Engineer, additional works,
and an extension of the time within which the Lot 3 Contract was to be performed until
8 August 2007. The revised total price of the Lot 3 Contract was EUR 29,769,760.53
including VAT. 2”
D. Performance of the Lot 3 Contract
The Claimants started work on the Lot 3 Project on 1 May 2005.7* The Claimants state that
they invested heavily in the Project.?°
On 30 April 2007, the Claimants concluded their original works.*° The additional work on
the Lot 3 Project was substantially completed in or around November 2007.7! Some “snags
and additional repairs” were completed in 2008.*?

c-25.

CM, 741.

CM, 942.

CM, 140.

Witness Statement of N. Gridella, (22.

CM, 942.

CM, 448; Witness Statement of N. Gridella, (31; See Witness Statement of F. Boiani, {19-20 (“at the time of
my departure from the Site in September 2007, the works were all but complete. [...] A large portion of the road

was open to traffic when I left the Site in September 2007.”).

Witness Statement of N. Gridella, (31.

107.

108.

On 25 March 2009, CMC Maputo accepted as an additional assignment responsibility for
the completion of the Lot 2 Project, undertaking to perform the remaining obligations of
the prior contractor. The Claimants state that the Lot 2 Project was transferred to them
because they had performed excellently on the Lot 3 Project.** The Respondent asserts that
nothing indicates that the Claimants’ performance on the Lot 2 Project was in any way

contingent on a particular outcome of disputes about Lot 3 claims.**

On 14 July 2011, ANE issued a Final Acceptance Certificate for Lot 3, in accordance with
Article 62 of the General Conditions. *° Article 62 provides that:

62.1 Upon the expiration of the Maintenance Period, or where there
is more than one such period, upon the expiration of the latest
period, and when all defects or damage have been rectified, the
Supervisor shall issue to the Contractor a Final Acceptance
Certificate and a copy thereof to the Contracting Authority stating
the date on which the Contractor completed his obligations under
the Contract to the Supervisor’s satisfaction. The Final Acceptance
Certificate shall be given by the Supervisor within 30 days after the
expiration of the above stated period, or as soon thereafter as any
Works as instructed, pursuant to Article 61, have been completed to
the satisfaction of the Supervisor.

62.2 The Works shall not be considered as completed until a Final
Acceptance Certificate shall have been signed by the Supervisor and
delivered to the Contracting Authority, with a copy to the
Contractor.

62.3 Notwithstanding the issue of the Final Acceptance Certificate,
the Contractor and the Contracting Authority shall remain liable for
the fulfillment of any obligation incurred under the Contract prior to
the issue of the Final Acceptance Certificate, which remains
unperformed at the time such Final Acceptance Certificate is issued.
The nature and extent of any such obligation shall be determined by
reference to the provisions of the Contract.*©

CM, 150; C-7; Witness Statement of S. Palmer, 22.

RCM, 26; First Witness Statement of C. Grachane, 14.

109.

110.

111.

40

The Final Acceptance Certificate states that “the Engineer certifies that the Contractor,
CMC di Ravenna Soc. Coop. Arl, completed his obligations under the Contract, with effect
from 24 March 2011.”37

Claimants allege that they have a number of claims against ANE that arose out of problems
with the Lot 3 Project, involving additional works, delays, and disruption of the work
process,** but they have not quantified those claims except as described below. The
Respondent argues that the Claimants have submitted no documentation of these claims,
which allegedly arose between 2005 and 2009. In addition, it points out that the Claimants
do not seek to establish their entitlement to relief for these alleged contract claims under

the Lot 3 Contract.*?

E. Compensation negotiations before 2010

1. The Engineer’s Determination & IPC 27
On 11 May 2009, ANE sent the Claimants the “Final Decision of the Engineer” pursuant
to Article 55.2 of the General Conditions on twenty claims that the Claimants had asserted
with regard to Lot 3.40 The Claimants valued those claims at EUR 12,759,498.18.4! The
Engineer determined that CMC was entitled to EUR 2,440,925.00.7

In the table attached to his Final Decision as Annex II, the Engineer lists the twenty claims
asserted by the Contractor, the amount claimed for each, and the amounts awarded by the

Engineer. The table below excerpts from Annex II relevant entries concerning the four

C5.
CM, 9944-50.
RCM, 427.
C-28.

Id., Annex IL.

Id.

112.

claims for which the Engineer awarded an amount, plus a fifth amount accompanied by the

“Observation” “CMC/NOD agree.”

 

 

 

Claim No. Subject of || Amount Revision/Recommendation
Claim Claimed by the | of the Engineer
Contractor
2 Delayed 470,512.79 65,295
access for
diversion
construction
5 Increase of | 6,783,895.86%4 1,432,983

quantity of
cut to spoil

 

 

 

 

10 Unforeseen | 45,725.85 18,033
days off

Unnumbered | Unforeseen 9,017
days off /
“CMC/NO
D agree”

14 Additional 1,750,570.08 915,597
borrow pits

Totals 12,759,498.18 | 2,440,925

 

(all claims)

 

 

 

 

 

The Engineer awarded nothing for the remaining 16 claims of the Contractor.

The Respondent describes the Engineer’s decision as “appropriate.”“° The Claimants were
not pleased with that decision, however, and on 15 May 2009 sent ANE a letter taking issue

with the Engineer’s decision. The letter stated:

After a careful analysis of the contents attached to your letter, we
regret to inform you that the sponsors offered do not cover the

C-28 (Claimants’ amended translation). The original Portuguese version of C-28, Annex II, gives the same
description for this item as for line 10 directly above it (“Tolerancia de ponto nao prevista”). “NOD” appears to
be the initials of the Engineer’s representative Nicholas O. Dwyer.

The Claimants’ Amended Translation of C-28 mistakenly typed ‘6,783,895.66,’ which differs from the original
document in Portuguese; the Tribunal has conformed this table to the figures in the Portuguese original.

The Claimants’ Amended Translation of C-28 mistakenly typed ‘45,725.65,’ which differs from the original
document in Portuguese; the Tribunal has conformed this table to the figures in the Portuguese original.

RCM, 132-34.

additional costs actually incurred at the time for the execution of the
Contract.

We request that your position be reviewed and that the costs and
financial charges actually incurred by us be recognized.

We reiterate that it is our firm intention to reach a friendly
agreement, but we emphasize that if such agreement is not reached,
we intend to initiate the legal procedures established in the Contract
and in the law governing it.

Wealso pointed out that in the negotiations related to the assignment
of Lot 2, our Company was always very clear that our availability to
complete the work was strictly linked to the satisfactory resolution
about Lot 3[...]*”

113. ANE responded on 7 July 2009, stating:

With reference to your above letter.

We draw your attention to the fact that this is a “unit price” contract,
not a “cost plus fee” contract. We consider that the amounts included
in Engineer’s determination represent a correct evaluation of
extension of time and additional payments in relation to your claims.

We take note that you reserved your rights in relation with the
Engineer’s determination; however, we invite you to submit a
request of payment for the amounts included in this determination.**

114. On 24 July 2009, the Claimants replied to the 7 July 2009 letter by sending ANE an interim

payment certificate (“IPC 27”) for the sum awarded by the Engineer. In their letter, the

Claimants stated that:

We herein enclose the interim payment application No.27 of 23 July
2009 according to your letter with Ref:203/DAC/DIPRO/09 of
07.07.09, for your appreciation and approval.

Once again we reiterate that it is our intention to reach a friendly
agreement to recognize the costs and financial fees actually borne

47-29 (Claimants’ amended translation). “Sponsors” appears to be a mistranslation of the Portuguese “montantes,”

which the Tribunal translates as “amounts.”

 

48 C-30 (Claimants’ amended translation); First Witness Statement of C. Grachane, {[11.

29

115.

116.

117.

by us for the execution of the construction Works and, if that does
not happen, activate the legal proceedings indicated in the Contract
and in the law governing it.”

On 10 August 2009, the Claimants sent ANE an invoice for the “costs of extra work” in
the amount of EUR 2,440,925.00 plus VAT, the same amount recommended in the
Engineer’s decision and requested in IPC 27.°° ANE authorized payment of that amount

on 15 October 2009.*!

In September of 2009, ANE issued a Final Project Report on Lot 3.°? The Engineer’s

representative’s name, as well as ANE’s, appears on the cover page. That report states:

3.7 Claims

The contractor filed claims and measurement items in the amount of
12,498.18 [sic] Euros (that means 53% of the original contract
value).

The Engineer found that the contractor was entitled to 2,440,925
Euros for claims and 105,524.09 Euros for measurements (see
chapter 6.3 below).**

Sections 6.3.1-6.3.22 of the Final Project Report describe the Claimants’ claims and the

Engineer’s decision on each claim.**

2. CMC’s Efforts to Increase the Amount Awarded by the Engineer
Notwithstanding the issuance of IPC 27, the Claimants remained dissatisfied with the
Engineer’s decision on their claims. At the same time that the Claimants considered

themselves undercompensated for their work on Lot 3, ANE had asked the Claimants to

C-31 (Claimants’ amended translation).
C-32; RCM, 939.
C-4, Annex 2; Tr. 1 May 2019, pp. 459-60.

R-10. The Respondent introduced only a partial English translation of Exhibit R-10, which is Exhibit R-10b. The
Portuguese original is Exhibit R-10a.

RCM, {40; R-10b.

Id.

30

118.

119.

58

56

37

undertake the completion of work on Lot 2, on which the original contractor’s performance

had been unsatisfactory.

On 6 October 2009, the Claimants sent a letter to ANE reiterating their disagreement with
the Expert’s determination and reminding ANE that the Claimants had agreed to complete
Lot 2 on the understanding that their Lot 3 claims would be addressed. The letter stated
that “[t]his ‘impass’ situation in which we are faced with at the moment, rises doubts on
the opportunity to continue the works on Lot 2, due to the clear disadvantageous condition
linked to the prolonged absence of resolution to the problems referring to Lot 3.” The
Claimants also asked that “we hereby request that our claim for compensation be assessed
in the moulds of our relationship, which for the last 20 years has guaranteed very high

levels of mutual loyalty, respect, esteem and consideration.”*>

Two Annexes were attached to the Claimants’ 6 October 2009 letter: Annex 1 was a
chronology of preceding events; while Annex 2 (reproduced at the end of this paragraph)
contained a summary of six claims for a total amount (including EUR 1,500,000.00 of
interest) of EUR 13,315,000.00. Annex 2 (which is not numbered to correspond to the
numbering of Annex II to the Engineer’s Final Decision) included two items, numbers 2
and 4 (numbers 2 and 5 respectively in the Engineer’s decision), for which the Engineer’s
Final Decision had awarded partial compensation (although the amount requested for an
increase in “cut to spoil” was increased on 6 October), and four items, numbers 1, 3, 5 and
6 (numbers 3, 9, 6 and 8 respectively in the Engineer’s decision), for which the Engineer
had awarded nothing.*° The letter contains no explanation for why the 6 October 2009

letter addressed only six of the 20 claims listed in the Engineer’s Final Determination.*”

C-33.
C-33 (Claimants’ amended translation).

Compare C-28 (Claimants’ amended translation) with C-33 (Claimants’ amended translation).

31

ANNEX 02°8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Description Claimed Letter CMC no.
1 | Borrow pits demining - increase of borrow | 167,000 117L/CMCRL/FB/tl
pit quantity due to technical reasons 221L/CMCRL/FB/tl
2 | Delay of payment by the Contracting 470,000 144L/CMCRL/FB/t1
Authority of compensations
3 | Late issuance of documentation required 1,400,000 210L/CMCRL/FB/t1
for the importation of materials and parts 318L/CMCRL/FB/t1
by the Contracting Authority
4 | Exaggerate increase of cut to spoil 9,500,000 267L/CMCRL/FB/t1
465L/CMCRL/FB/tl
5 | Chipping rescreening 83,000 269L/CMCRL/FB/tl
6 | Disruption due to lack of/ late payment 195,000 314L/CMCRL/FB/t1
7 | Interests on the above mentioned amounts | 1,500,000 (estimated)
TOTAL | 13,315,000
120. According to the Respondent, the 6 October 2009 letter shows that the Claimants had not
identified any substantive error in the Engineer’s determination. Instead, the Respondent
argues that the Claimants tried to pressure ANE into increasing the price for the completed
Lot 3 Project by threatening to stop working on the ongoing Lot 2 Project. The Respondent
points out that the Claimants requested that the dispute be resolved in 20 days, failing which
they would “have no choice but to act on what has been previously been mentioned, and
appeal to the Arbitration Court to solve the issue.”*?
121. On 12 October 2009, ANE sent the Claimants “Final Certificate 27,” corresponding to

58

59

60

IPC 27. On 14 October 2009, the Claimants responded, stating:

This letter serves as a confirmation that we are not in agreement with
the amounts indicated in the Certificate #27 (Final Account)
presented by the supervisor’s representative, on the 20 July 2009
and only received by us — see email on the 12 October 2009. There
is a discrepancy of approximately 8,257,785.96 € between our
amounts and those of the Supervisor’s Representative and this is

C-33 (Claimants’ amended translation).
RCM, {44-46; C-33.

CM, 159.

 

made up of the measured works as well as the claims that were
already presented in November 2005.

[J

Thus, our acceptance to payment for the indicated amount as being

due according to the Certificate #27 shall in no manner be

interpreted as an acceptance from our side.®!
The Claimants’ 14 October 2009 letter does not explain how they calculated the EUR
8,257,785.96 “discrepancy,” nor did they do so during the hearing on the merits.°?

122. According to the Respondent, ANE processed IPC 27 for payment to CMC Africa Austral

123.

124.

on or about 15 October 2009, although payment does not appear to have actually been

transmitted until sometime later.“

3. ANE’s 30 October 2009 Settlement Offer

The Respondent asserts that the “threats” in the Claimants’ 6 October 2009 letter to
discontinue work on the Lot 2 Project and their request to consider extra-contractual
circumstances, such as the Parties’ long working relationship, moved ANE General

Director Mr. Nelson Nunes to reassess the Claimants’ position.

On 20 October 2009, Mr. Nunes sent a letter to the Minister of Public Works, stating, in

pertinent part:

1. CMC completed in November 2007, the rehabilitation of Lot III
between Alto Molocue and Rio Ligonha having initated in may [sic]
2005, integral part of of the Namacurra - Rio Ligonha project
funded by the European Union.

10. After various correspondence exchanges, the Contractor with his
last letter sent on the 16.10.09 reiterates the respective claims and

C-34.

Tr. | May 2019, pp. 474-476.

RCM, 41.

Tr. | May 2019, pp. 485-486.

RCM, 47; see First Witness Statement of C. Grachane, {{[13-15.

33

threatens to lodge an appeal in the arbitration court to manage the
resolution of the problem.

11. The Contractor does not demand immediate payment of the
outstanding amounts but accepts that, once the debt is acknowledged
by ANE, the disbursement shall be effected throughout the year of
2010.

12. The performance considered during the last 20 years, the
revealed capacity to respond whenever it was requested and the
quality of the Works executed make CMC one of the best
Contractors that have operated (and operate) within the Country.

13. In view of the above and having considered the verifications that
were effected in the claims presented, we hereby propose you, the
following actions to permanently solve the problem:

a. Negotiate with the contractor a reasonable compensation
proposal considering the proposal put forward in annex 2;

b. To advance with the schedule proposal in the payment of the
amounts to be reached in the negotiations.®

125. Annex 2 to Mr. Nunes’ letter to the Minister is a table (reproduced following this

paragraph) which lists eleven items “Requested by Builder,”® in addition to interest.

 

 

 

 

 

DESCRIPTION Amount (Euros) Amount assessed (Euros)
Requested by Builder | Recommended by ANE
Work/Claims Approved works
1 | Demining of borrow pits, 167,133 167,133 0.00
increase of borrow pits due
to technical reasons
2 | Delay on payment 470,513 - 300,000
compensations by the
Employer
3 | Employers delay in 1,393,193 - 550,000
documentation issue
necessary to import

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

There is no letter in the record dated 16 October 2009. The reference appears to be to the Claimants’ letter of 6
October 2009.

C-12 (Claimants’ amended translation).

68 C-12, Annex 2 (Claimants’ amended translation).

 

materials and parts

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4 | Unreasonable increase of 6,783,896 250,000 4,250,000
cut to spoil

5 | Unforeseen days off 45,726 -

6 | Disruption due to lack/ 195,396 100,000 -
delay in payments

7 | Increase in the number of 1,750,570 700,000 =
quarries

8 | Revision of price labour 584,429 300,000 150,000
costs
Hard rock excavation 123,755 - 123,755

10 | Additional cement for 81,286 - -
stabilization

11 | Various works after 2,456,157 1,480,000 =

provisional acceptance of
Works not certified by the

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Engineer
SUBTOTAL 14,052,053 2,997,133 | 5,373,755
12 | Interest on amounts above 1,750,000 0.00
indicated (approximate
calculation)
TOTAL 15,802,053 | 2,997,133 | 5,373,755
GENERAL TOTAL EVALUATED FOR THE 8,370,888

 

 

 

 

NEGOTIATIONS

 

126. Many of the items listed in Annex 2 to Mr. Nunes’ letter to the Minister are the same as or
similar to one or more of the twenty claims asserted by the Contractor listed in Annex II of
the Final Decision of the Engineer (C-28). Indeed, the claim amounts are identical. The
items listed in Mr. Nunes’ letter are also similar to one or more of the six items listed in
Annex 2 to the Claimants’ letter to ANE of 6 October 2009, as shown in the table below.
There is no entry in the Engineer’s Final Decision or in the letter of 6 October 2009

corresponding to item 11 in Mr. Nunes’ table. This is perhaps understandable in view of

© Item 3 in Annex 2 to Mr. Nunes’ letter (C-12) is the sum of items 4 and 9 in Annex II to the Engineer’s Final

Decision (C-28).

the wording of that item: “[v]arious works after provisional acceptance of Works not

certified by the Engineer.”””

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Annex II to Engineer’s Final Claimants’ Annex 2 to Mr. Nunes’ letter to
Decision of 11 May 2009 Letter of 6 the Minister of 20 October 2009
(C-28) October 2009 (C-12)
(C-33)
Item numbers and] Item numbers _| Item numbers Item numbers Item numbers
amounts claimed | and amounts and amounts and amounts and amounts
awarded claimed claimed recommended
1:0 1:0
2: 470,512.79 2: 65,295 2: 470,000 2: 470,513 2: 300,000
3: 167,133 3:0 1: 167,000 1: 167,133 1: 167,133
4: 21,417.60 4:0 (See no. 3) (See no. 3)
5: 6,783,895.66 | 5: 1,432,983 4: 9,500,000 4: 6,783,896 4: 4,500,000
6: 83,366,46 6:0 5: 83,000
7: 57,311.13 7:0
8: 195,396 8:0 6: 195,000 6: 195,396 6: 100,000
9: 1,371,775.50 | 9:0 3: 1,400,000 3: 1,393,193"! 3: 550,000
10: 45,725.85 10: 18,033 5: 45,726 5: 0
Unnumbered:
9,017
11: 161,408.62 11:0
12: 190,795.82 12:0
13: 54,701.3 13:0
14: 1,750,570.08 | 14: 915,597 7: 1,750,570 7: 700,000
15: 584,428.95 15:0 8: 584,429 8: 450,000
16: 123,754.95 16:0 9: 123,755 9: 123,755
17: 81,285.59 17:0 10: 81,286 10: 0
18: 19,628.51 18:0
19: 84,266.92 19:0

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 C-12, Annex 2.

7 Ttem 3 in Annex 2 to Mr. Nunes’ letter (C-12) is the sum of items 4 and 9 in Annex II to the Engineer’s Final

Decision (C-28).

 

20: 512,123.25 20:0

 

11: 2,456,157 11: 1,480,000

 

 

Total: Total: Total: Total: Total:
12,759,498.18 2,440,925 11,815,000 14,052,053 8,370,888

(without interest) | (without interest)

 

 

 

 

 

 

127. The last line of Annex 2 to Mr. Nunes’ letter to the Minister reads, “general total evaluated

for the negotiations 8,370,888." 72

128. The Minister of Public Works made a handwritten endorsement, dated 29 October 2009,
on Mr. Nunes’ letter of 20 October 2009. That endorsement reads: “dispatch seen I agree
with the proposed actions.””? The endorsement was sent back to Mr. Nunes on 2 November
2009 under cover of a letter from the Minister’s Head of Office,” but it must have been
communicated informally before that, in view of the offer made by Mr. Nunes to CMC

Ravenna on 30 October 2009.7

129. On 30 October 2009, Mr. Nunes, on behalf of ANE, sent CMC Ravenna a letter making

the following offer:

On the basis of what above mentioned, ANE hereby proposes to
CMC Ravenna the agreement on Euro 8,220,888 against Euro
15.802.053, covering all the additional costs and financial charges
incurred during the execution of the Construction Contract,
according to the enclosed table.

In accordance with what agreed and negotiated, the payments of the
amount subject of the agreement may be made in installations during
the year 2010.

We request to the Contractor CMC Ravenna, in case of agreement
on what above mentioned, to provide a written confirmation of the

2 C-12, Annex 2.

B C-12.
Id.
B C2.

130.

acceptance of the above described conditions within the maximum

time limit of 7 days from the receipt of the present letter.”°

The table attached to ANE’s letter of 30 October 2009 broke down the offer of

EUR 8,220,888 as shown in the reproduction of that table following this paragraph. The

amounts offered, listed as requested and line by line, are identical to the Annex 2 submitted
by Mr. Nunes to the Minister on 20 October 2009 (C-12) except that the 30 October 2009
offer letter omits the EUR 150,000 shown on line 8 of the 20 October 2009 table as one of

the figures for “revision of price labour costs” and on line 8 of the 30 October 2009 table

as “ROP cost of labour.”””

ROAD REHABILITATION NAMACURRA- RIO LIGONHA

LOT 3: ALTO MOLOCUE - RIO LIGONHA
SUMMARY OF SUBMITTED CLAIMS

 

Amount (Euros)

Evaluated amount (Euros)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Description requested by the Recommended by ANE
Contractor
approved work approved
Demining of borrow pits.
Increase of borrow pits due to 167,133.00 167,133.00 0.00
hnical reason
Delay on payment of
compensation to local people by 470,512.79 0.00
Contracting Authorit 300,000.00
Delay on submission of the
required documentation by the
Contracting Authority for
custom cl material 1,393,193 0.00 550,000.00
sail of quantities of cut to 6,783,895.86 250,000.00 | 4,250,000.00
Unexpected Additional 45,725.85 0.00 0.00
holidays
Disruption due to delay on 195,396.00 100,000.00 0.00
payments
Increase of borrow pits 1,750,570.08 700,000.00 0.00
ROP cost of labour 584,428.95 300,000.00 0.00

 

C-2 (Claimants’ amended translation).

38

Compare C-12 with C-2. See para. 126 above. As explained at para.119 above, the amounts claimed do not
correspond precisely with the amounts claimed in Claimants’ 6 October 2009 letter (C-33).

 

131.

132.

133.

8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9 Hard excavation 123,754.95 0.00 123,755.00
19 _ | Increase of cement for 81,285.59 0.00 0.00
stabilization
11 Extra works post TOC 2,456,157 1,480,000.00
SUB TOTAL 14,052,053 2,997,133.00 5,223,755.00
Interest on above amounts 1,750,000 0.00 0.00
12 (rough calculation)
TOTAL 15,802,053" 2,997,133.00 5,223,755.00
RECOMMENDED TOTAL AMOUNT 8,220,888.00

 

We acknowledge receipt of your letter Ref. 036/DG/2009, that we

appreciate.

We agree with your proposal to set the amount of Euro
8.220.888 clarifying that is additional to the amount already

On 2 November 2009, Claimants responded to the 30 October offer, stating:

certified and processed for the payment with IPC no. 27.”

It is common ground between the Parties that Mr. Nunes’ letter of 30 October 2009

constituted an offer of settlement, and both Parties’ experts on the law of Mozambique

treated it as such.*? The Parties differ vigorously about the nature and effect of the

Claimants’ 2 November 2009 response to that letter. The Parties’ disagreement focuses on

whether the phrase “additional to the amount already certified and processed for the

payment with IPC no. 27” clarifies the offer or proposes a change to the terms of the offer.

The Claimants argue that the letter of 2 November 2009 accepted the Respondent’s

settlement offer of 30 October 2009, and thus created a valid and binding contract under

Mozambican law.*!

The Claimants’ Amended Translation of C-2 mistakenly put the figure “15,802,053” in the cell above that which
it occupies in the original document in Portuguese. The Tribunal has conformed this table to the original

document.

C-3 (Claimants’ amended translation) (emphasis added).

RCM, 150-51; CM, 63; Second Witness Statement of Ms. Muenda, 1; Legal Opinion of Mr. Timbane, (31.

CM, 71.

 

134.

135.

136.

The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ 2 November 2009 letter varied the terms
offered and thus constituted a counteroffer, rather than an acceptance of the offer.®? The
Respondent further states that it never agreed to that counteroffer, and thus that no
agreement was reached.** The Respondent also points out that it entered into the Lot 3
Contract with CMC Africa Austral, but that CMC Africa Austral was not a party to the

alleged settlement agreement.**

4, Political Developments in Mozambique

On 28 October 2009, presidential, legislative, and provincial assembly elections took place
in Mozambique.*> The Claimants assert that the Respondent’s conduct towards them
changed, especially as regards the dispute over compensation for the Lot 3 Project, as a

result of political appointments made following the presidential election.*°

In the election, the incumbent President Armando Emilio Guebuza of the FRELIMO party
won with more than 75% of the votes. In January 2010, Felicio Zacarias, the Minister of
Public Works who on 29 October 2009 had approved the proposal to make a settlement
offer to CMC,®” was replaced by Cadmiel Muthemba.** In March 2010, Mr. Muthemba
appointed Elias Paulo to replace Nelson Nunes as the General Director of ANE. Cecilio

Grachane succeeded Mr. Paulo as General Director of ANE in 2011.

RCM, 52-54.
RCM, {{[56-57.
RCM, {58.

CM, {68.

CM, 167-70, 241.
C-35.

CM, 69.

CM, 470.

40

137.

138.

139.

F. Compensation negotiations from 2010 to 2016

On 13 January 2010, shortly after the new Minister of Public Works was appointed, the
Claimants sent ANE a letter enclosing two invoices for “Approved Additional Works.”°°
These invoices were expressed in Mozambican Meticais (MT), but each included, under
“description,” a statement of the amount in euros to which the amount invoiced in MT
corresponded. The euro amounts on the two invoices corresponded to the subtotals for
“approved work” and “approved claims” shown on the table attached to the letter of 30
October 2009, with EUR 2,997,133.00 shown as the “[a]mount of additional work
approved” on Invoice No. E0105-28 and EUR 5,223,755.00"! shown as the “[a]mount of
approved claims” on Invoice No. E0105-29. The two sums totaled EUR 8,220,888.°7

Mr. Gridella’s first witness statement contains the following statements about these

invoices:

48. I submitted two invoices to ANE in January 2010. To the best of
my recollection invoicing would have been delayed to have it
brought into the 2010 financial year.

49. As the Claimant was not in receipt of the agreed settlement
monies I requested a meeting with Nelson Nunes [General Director
ANE] in the intervening three months. He had by now left ANE and
was no longer in a position to help in the matter.

50. I believe Nunes left ANE in approximately March 2010. I was

then informed that monies were not available at the moment and that

monies were more readily available at the start or end of each year.”
ANE does not appear to have responded to or commented on these two invoices until the
summer of 2011. As explained in paragraph 144 below, ANE had obtained an “Opinion”

about these invoices from a consultant in June 2011, but did not provide CMC with a copy

C36.

The Claimants’ Translation of C-36 typed this figure as “5,223,775.00” which differs from the original document

in Portuguese. The Tribunal has conformed this quotation to the original document.

22 CM, 473.

°3 Witness Statement of N. Gridella, 948-50. See para. 75 above.

4

140.

141.

4

95

96

C5.

of that Opinion until November 2011. In the meantime, on 14 July 2011, ANE sent the
Claimants a Final Acceptance Certificate in accordance with Article 62 of the General
Conditions, stating that CMC Ravenna had “completed his obligations under the Contract,

with effect from 24 March 2011,” but made no reference to the invoices.**

On 26 July 2011, the Claimants sent a letter to ANE, stating that they had received neither
a “formal notification” nor payment of the invoiced amounts, noting that ANE had stated
in its letter of 30 October 2009 that payments would be made during the year 2010.°>
Claimants further took “the opportunity to inform formally that in case we do not receive

the relevant payments within the 20/08/2011, we will be forced to take the proper actions

to ensure the regularization of the credits on subject.”°°

On 8 August 2011, ANE replied in a letter to the Claimants stating:

We acknowledge receipt of your letter on subject - by which you
request the payment of an amount equal to Euro eight millions and
seven hundred and seventy nine thousand, nine hundred and
eight and thirty eight cents ( Euro 8.779.908,38), related to the
project, and Euro five hundred and thirty thousand (Euro
530.000) for interest due to the overdue payment — which induces
us to provide the following considerations:

1) with reference to our letter no. 036 dated 30/10/2009 - which is
the ground of your requests and by which we were able to reanalyse
the disputed matter - we determine that there are not any grounds to
comply with it as far as:

a) our records show that the financial execution of the contract is
[quiet], and there is not a balance to paid to you

b) the referred amounts mentioned in your letter could be paid only
if you present the reasons and the relevant connections with the
contract

C-37 (Claimants’ amended translation).

Id.

42

142.

7

c) considering the public administration principles, in particular the
legality, the transparency and the justice, the payments without any
basis are illegal. [initialed]

Therefore, whatever decision shall comply with the abovementioned
principles.

2) It shall be mentioned that on your claim, in the amount of Euro
11.242.898.04, was approved the payment of Euro 2.440.925, as
per Engineer’s determination (annex 1), which was duly made.

3)We remind you that the amount of Euro 2.440.925 was
determined on the basis of the above mentioned determination, as
final amount to be paid for your claims (cfr pg. 8/9 and 9/9 of the
annex 1) This fact was duly communicated and accepted, as
demonstrated by the proofs of payments(annex 2).

In these terms, we transmit the issue to your consideration with the
aim to clarify our position; however we are available to provide the
required collaboration.°”

On 9 August 2011, the Claimants replied to ANE’s letter, stating:

We acknowledge receipt you letter ref. 54/AJ/DG/2001, and we
comment as follow.

We agree on the fact that no payment shall be made to the Contractor
if no records are present in your register and accounts.

We agree on the principles of legality, transparency and justice,
which are not just an obligation in our modus operandi, but they are
part of Ethics Code of our company in the development of his
activities.

However, it seems that there are some missing documents
mentioned by ANE in the above letter, meaning correspondence,
minutes of meetings and other documents during 2009, which were
the basis of the issuance of your letter 036/DG/2009 on 30/10/2009.

Such letter represents the final decision resulting from a process,
which at that stage had a different evaluation by ANE.

It does not correspond to the truth that the Engineer’s evaluation,
NOD (before leaving the Project) can be considered a final
determination accepted by us, because the Contract was completed

C-4 Claimants’ amended translation) (emphasis in original).

4B

in 2011 (Final acceptance of the Work), therefore the final account
can be issued only now.

Together with the issuance of the invoice related to the amounts
approved by the Engineer representative and by the Engineer on
April 2009, CMC stated clearly its disagreement in relation to such
amounts, reserving the right to claim the payment of the residual
amounts. This invoice was also used to utilize the outstanding EU
funds while awaiting an amicable settlement of the dispute.

We highlight that, on middle 2009, CMC was requested by ANE to
complete the Lot 2 Works and our position was duly recorded: we
accepted such task only against ANE availability to settle (or
attempt to settle) amicably the situation of Lot 3. On the second half
of 2009, various meetings took place between CMC (nerio gridella),
the general director of ANE, Eng. Nelson Nunes, with the aim to
achieve an agreement after a reevaluation of our claim.

We are confident that a further analysis of our documentation used
for the transaction will achieve the same result of 2009. For these
purposes:

1) we will sent copies of all proper documentation, which can clarify
any doubts in relation to the subject, and

2) we request an urgent meeting with ANE, to be held before the
20/08/2011, date mentioned in our letter 14/DAFO/MC/JC dated
26/07/2011, to analyse and discuss the subject.°*

143. By letter of 11 August 2011, the Claimants transmitted to ANE the documentation referred

to in their letter of 9 August 2011 and again requested a meeting.”

144. On8 November 2011, ANE sent the Claimants a letter stating that, “[w]ith reference to the
disputes related to the above subject [Lot 3 Contract — Request of Payment], we hereby
transmit the opinion of an independent consultant, showing their position in relation to the
said disputes, which remain in respect to the contract.”!°? Enclosed with that letter was an

“Opinion” prepared by the engineering consultancy firm Consultec Consultores

°8 C-38 (Claimants’ amended translation).

C39.
100 C-40 (Claimants’ amended translation).

44

Associados LDA (“Consultec”). Consultec’s Opinion is dated June 2011. While ANE’s
letter of 8 August 2011 appears to have been based largely on the Consultec Opinion, the
Respondent offered no explanation of why ANE had obtained the Opinion as early as June

2011 or of why it had not shared the Opinion earlier than November 2011.!°!
145. | The “Conclusion” of Consultec’s Opinion reads as follows:

V —CONCLUSION

40. The present Contract concluded by a public entity for the
execution of a public work is an administrative contract (see art.
38 of decree 54/2005 dated 13.12)

41. The contractual principles of stability of contracts and financial
equilibrium expressed in the idea of an “honest equivalence of
performance” apply to the administrative contracts.

42. These principles are established, in the case sub judice, by
various contractual provisions, in GCC and Particular Conditions
(see art. 21, 48, 53 and 55). [initialed]

43. On this basis, the reimbursement to the Contractor for
additional cost due to extra works, exceptional risk, inter alia, is
expression of these principles.

44. However the costs due to extra work, in this case, were
considered on the basis of the unit prices without any right of
adjustment because such unit prices did not achieve the 15% of the
Contract price to allow the right of adjustment of those unit prices.

45. On the other hand, the exceptional risks alleged by the
Contractor do not cover neither the errors made by him during the
preparation of the tender, which are foreseeable errors, nor the risks
due to climatic conditions.

46. The right of compensation of the Contractor, based on the
claims submitted to the Engineer, shall have contractual grounds

and not vague considerations for compensation due to good business
relations.

101 Ig,

45

47. As a matter of fact, the last argumentation provided by the
Contractor in his “Request to resolution of pending contractual
issues” is based on the follow:

According to what above mentioned and considering the last
correspondence received on matter, which we appreciate but
disagree, we hereby request that our proposal of compensation will
be evaluated according to our relation, which during 20 years
ensured high standard of reciprocal trustworthiness, respect,
esteem and consideration.

48. These arguments have extra contractual grounds, uncertain and
subjective basis, and they can be enforced only on the basis of a
superior public interest, which we do not know.

49. If ANE wishes express now his doubts about an amount signed
to be paid for the claims, from our point of view, ANE can be always
do that, because the main issue is the public interest involved.

50. The powers of ANE in this subject, related to public interest,
debilitate strongly the resoluteness of his offer according to the
principles regulating the relations between privates. [initialed]

51. However ANE could do that only if he pleads the existence of
defect or arising errors or a contractual interpretation but the concept
of exceptional risks.

52. It is up to ANE, then, the demonstration that such arising defects
or such errors of interpretation, which determined the offer of
8.220.888,00 Euros, will represent an economical advantage of the
Contractor, absolutely undue under the Contract, an actual unjust
enrichment, with prejudice of a public interest, which should be
restored. !?

146. On 14 November 2011, Claimants responded to the Consultec report with a letter stating
that “[w]e maintain our position related to the due payment of 8.2 millions of Euros,
resulting from the settlement of October 2009,” and reiterating their availability to

negotiate. !°

102.40 (Claimants’ amended translation) (emphasis in original).

103 ©-41 (Claimants’ amended translation).

46

147. Several months later — the record contains no explanation of the delay — on 9 May 2012,
the Claimants sent another letter to ANE, this time sending copies to the Minister and Vice

Minister of Public Works. The letter stated:

We make reference to your letter 036/DG/09 dated 30/10/2009, to
our letter 2179/09/CMC/NG dated 2/11/2009 and to our invoices
no.E0105-28 and E0105-29.

After about 2 years and half and following several approach to your
institution regarding the payment of the due amount of 8.220.888
Euro, we continue to record an incomprehensible position from your
side, despite the opinion provided by the independent consultant
appointed by you (Consultec LDA), which states “It is up to ANE,
then, the demonstration that such arising defects or such errors of
interpretation, which determined the offer of 8.220.888, will
represent an economical advantage of the Contractor, absolutely
undue under the Contract, an actual unjust enrichment, with
prejudice of a public interest, which should be restored.

The opinion gives to ANE the onus to proof that such payment is
not due and constitutes an unjust enrichment.

Therefore, on the basis that until now there has not been such

evidence of arising defects or errors of interpretation which

substantiate the lack of payment, and considering that there is no

any other possible process to follow in order to solve this dispute,

we hereby request the payment of the disputed amount within 30

days from the date of reception of this letter, otherwise we will apply

to the competent authorities to be indemnified. !*
The Claimants received no formal response to this letter.!°> Indeed, nothing more appears
to have been communicated between the Claimants and ANE on this subject for more than

two years.

148. In October 2014, Mr. Flipe Nyusi of the FRELIMO party was elected President of
Mozambique. Mr. Carlos Bonete became Minister of Public Works early in 2015, and Mr.
Marco Alexandre Vaz was appointed Director General of ANE in July 2016.' The

04.42 (Claimants’ amended translation) (emphasis in original).
105 CM, 488.
106 CM, 490.

47

Claimants appear to have seen these changes as offering an opportunity to re-open
discussion of the Lot 3 Contract. Mr. Alicandri, who is a member of the Board of Directors

of CMC Africa Austral, states in his Witness Statement:

27. I say that every meeting I was involved in with ANE between
2014 to 2016 incorporated negotiations around the three project
disputes Lichinga -Litunde and Montepuez -Ruaga road projects as
well as the Lot 3 Project. There was never a meeting solely about
the Lot 3 Project and it was only discussed as part of a global
settlement and never at length.

28. It is my understanding that the Lot 3 Project dispute is quite a
sensitive issue to the Government of Mozambique due to the fact
that the matter was not resolved under the stewardship of the
Director of ANE nor under the stewardship of the Minister of Public
Works. This caused the Prime Minister to decide to intervene in an
attempt to facilitate the process and lead it to an amicable settlement.

29. There was constant reluctance from ANE to entertain any
settlement against the Lot 3 Project. The Claimant was specifically
instructed during negotiations to mark the Lot 3 project as zero.
ANE also stated to me during meetings that the settlement offer
letter for the figure of approximately €8.2 Million was never
registered in their offices and related to an already used protocol
number. I asked to see the letter to which this protocol number
related. This was never shown to me.

30. Sometime in 2015 the President of Mozambique became
involved in trying to settle the Claimants’ issues. This occurred due
to the Claimants' position in Mozambique, which it had acquired
from working in the country for such a long period of time.
149. Mr. Alicandri recalls attending the following meetings concerning the three projects that

were the subjects of disputes between CMC and the Government in 2015:

e 18 August 2015: meeting between CMC and “the President of Mozambique at his
office. This meeting lasted for approximately 20 minutes. [Claimants] explained to him
the difficult position that the Claimants now found themselves in and explained to him

about the fifty million euro outstanding to its account.”!©” Mr. Alicandri further states

107 Witness Statement of E. Alicandri, 31.

48

that “[t]o my surprise, during our meeting the President of Mozambique immediately
phoned the Minister of Public Works and tasked him to sort out the issues urgently to
allow the Lichinga and Montepuez Projects to proceed. The President told the Minister
that all the South African, Portuguese and Italian companies were leaving Mozambique
because they were unable to deal with the current Government. The Minister of Public
Works was further told that he had better find a solution, unless his intention was to
work with Chinese contractors only. No action was required from Claimant's

representatives on foot of the meeting.” !°°

e 20 August 2015: meeting between the Claimants and “the Minister for Public Works,
Mr. Atandsio Mugunhe, the Director General of ANE, and Mr. Cecilio Grachane, of
the Road Fund. All three projects in dispute (Lichinga, Montepuez, and Lot 3) were
discussed without any exact amounts been given. The Claimants’ representatives
explained its proposal but there was no response from the Government. I recall that
while waiting to be received by the Minister for that meeting, there was a tense
exchange between Mr. Cecilio Grachane and myself. He informed me that CMC was
just a problem, that I was a guest in his country and he could chase me out of

Mozambique whenever he wanted.”!°

e 21 August 2015: meeting between the Claimants and “ANE's Director General's
assistant Mr. Mahave; ANE's Contract Manager, Mrs. Tania Comiche; CMC AA's

Contract Manager, and Mr. Francisco Pereira.”!!°

e 1 September 2015: meeting between the Claimants and “ANE's Director General, Mr.
A. Mugunhe; ANE's Contract Manager, Mrs. Tania Comiche, ANE's Technical
Director, Mr. Adérito Guilamba, Mr. Paolo Porcelli and CMC AA's Contract Manager
Mr. Pereira. The subject of this meeting was again to discuss settlement of the

Claimants’ outstanding issues on its projects in Mozambique. The Lot 3, Montepuez

08 Td. at (34.
109 Td. at 135.

10 Td. at 136.

49

and Lichinga projects were discussed, but no exact amounts were discussed. The
Claimants explained their settlement proposal. No response was received from those

present at the meeting.”!!!

e 22 September 2015: meeting among “ANE's Director General Mr. A. Mugunhe, ANE's
Contract Manager Mrs. Tania Comiche, ANE's Technical Director, Mr. Adérito
Guilamba, ANE's Director General's assistant Mr. Mahave, CMC AA's Contract

viz

Manager Mr. Pereira and [Mr. Alicandri].

e 26 October 2015: “Mr. Paolo Porcelli and [Mr. Alicandri] met with the Minister of
Public Works in Mozambique, Mr. Carlos Bonnete; ANE's Director General, Mr.
Atandsio Mugunhe; the Road Funds Chairman, Cecilio Grachane, and ANE's Technical
Director Adérito Guilamba. The Minister of Public Works. Mr. Bonnete, tasked Mr.
Atandsio Mugunhe with reaching settlement on the outstanding issues on the
Claimants' projects in Mozambique. After this meeting the Prime Minister got involved

as the Minister of Public Works didn't help to solve the Claimants' issues.”!'

e 17 December 2015: Mr. Alicandri attended a “meeting to discuss settlement of issues
on a number of projects. This meeting was held at the Prime Minister's Cabinet. The
persons present at this meeting were the Prime Minister of Mozambique, Mr. Carlos
do Rosario; the Minister of Public Works of Mozambique, Mr. Carlos Bonnete; the
Director General of ANE, Mr. Atandsio Mugunhe; the Roads Fund Chairman, Cecilio
Grachane; ANE's Technical Director Mr. Adérito Guilamba; CMC AA's Contract
Manager, Mr. Francisco Pereira and [Mr. Alicandri].”!!4 About this meeting, Mr.
Alicandri stated that “I view this meeting as one of the most important meetings which
T attended. The aforementioned meeting was important as not only was it agreed that it

was mutually beneficial to find an amicable settlement on the outstanding issues but

Id. at (37.

Id. at 38.

3 Id. at 939.

Td. at $40.

50

150.

also because a settlement proposal was requested by the Prime Minister of
Mozambique to be provided to the Claimants by ANE and the Minister for Public
Works.”!!5

December 2015 — February 2016: Mr. Alicandri recalls that a number of other meetings
occurred after the 17 December 2015 meeting. He states that “[d]uring these meetings
the Claimants and ANE were encouraged to reconcile their settlement offers to arrive
at a possible joint submission of a settlement amount. I perceived there was constant

resistance on behalf of ANE to any settlement of the issues on its projects.”!!®

February 2016: Mr. Alicandri “attended a meeting in ANE's office. This meeting was
also attended by Mr. Adérito Guilamba and Mr. Atanasio Mugunhe. The Government
never came back with a counter-proposal.” Mr. Alicandri further recalls that from this
meeting onwards, “it was my firm opinion that no settlement could be reached in

relation to the Lot 3 Project or any other projects involving the Claimants.”!!7

September/November 2016: Mr. Alicandri recalls that “Mr. Paolo Porcelli and Mr.
Roberto Macri, the CEO of CMC Muratori Cementisti CMC Di Ravenna Soc. CMC
Coop. had a further meeting with the President of Mozambique. I understand that
during this meeting the Claimants’ issues on its projects in Mozambique were discussed

at a high level, but nothing detailed was discussed.”!!®

On 12 August 2016, the Claimants sent a letter to Mr. Martinho, the Minister of Public
Works, in which they asked that discussions be resumed with “a view to a global

agreement, as agreed on December 2015.”!!? The Respondent notes that the Claimants

Id. at {41.

Id. at {43; CM, 199.

Witness Statement of E. Alicandri, {]44-45.
Td. at {46.

C-47 (Claimants’ amended translation); CM, (101.

have identified no correspondence between their letter of 9 May 2012 and their letter of

12 August 2016. !”°

151. |The Claimants offered as evidence of “an acknowledgement of a debt” by ANE a document
headed “Subject Bill Book” and marked as Exhibit C-49.'?! Exhibit C-49 appears to be a
sheet from an electronic ledger with a “run date” of 25 January 2018 listing four invoices
by date, number, and amount. Two of the invoices listed are the invoices sent by CMC to
ANE on 13 January 2010: Invoice No. E0105-28 for EUR 2,997,133.00 and
Invoice No. E0105-29 for EUR 5,223,755.00.!?? Across the bottom of the ledger page, the
original of which appears to be in Italian, is a handwritten note in Portuguese that reads, in
translation: “It is consistent with our balance as of 31/12/17.” Under that note is an illegible

signature, the date “13/02/18,” and the imprint of an equally illegible circular stamp. !77
152. Counsel for the Respondent criticized Exhibit C-49 at the hearing in the following terms:

There are some serious issues with this exhibit, C49. Number 1,
there's absolutely no authentication for this exhibit anywhere in the
file. [...]

There's no witness that authenticates C49. There's no authentication
of any kind. The only thing there is is there's a reference in a

sentence in the Claimants' Memorial.

[J

[T]his document was created on January 25, 2018. This document
was created by CMC after this arbitration began.

[J

20 RCM, 175.

Tr. 1 May 2019, p. 463, 1. 25 — p. 464, 1. 2; CM 9222. When asked at the Hearing “What evidence in the record,
and specifically what documentary evidence in the record, either establishes or sheds light on whether ANE
intended, when it made its settlement offer in the October 30 letter, to offer 8.2 million including the 2.4
established by the engineer as due to CMC or in addition to that 8.2 million, counsel for the Claimants referred
to Exhibit C-49 and said “this is the evidence.” Tr. 1 May 2019, p. 464, 1. 7.

 

2 C36.

3 C-49 (Claimants’ amended translation).

153.

154.

124

126

127

This document is in Italian. The Government of Mozambique cannot
confirm a debt in a foreign language.

[J

You cannot even read the seal. There's no authentication to who
signed it.!74

G. CMC’s Letter Pursuant to Article 9(3) of the BIT

On 18 August 2016, the Claimants sent ANE a letter which they characterize as putting the

Government on notice of a dispute under Article 9(3) of the BIT.'7> That letter stated:

We refer to letter Ref. 1, by means of which you have submitted the
proposal for the amount of Euro 8,220,888.00 to resolve amicably
the pending claims, and our letter Ref. 2, by means of which we
accept such proposal.

The payment of the amount indicated above should have been done
next, but V Excias never complied with the agreement, which gave
rise to a dispute. !7

Since the year 2009 we have tried several times to contact V Excias
to resolve the matter without any result, and we intend now to make
one more attempt to assert our rights, for which we notify you that
we are our desire to initiate a friendly resolution period of 6 months
from the receipt of this letter, and this will be the last attempt before
advancing with arbitration in the most appropriate forms and terms.

We make the dispute for a purpose which, in the event that this
attempt proves to be unsuccessful, we intend to submit the dispute
for resolution by ICSID, considering that the Governments of Italy
and Mozambique have signed the ICSID Convention and Bilateral
Investment ICSID will have jurisdiction over the dispute. !?”

ANE replied to CMC’s letter on 22 August 2016, stating:

Tr. 1 May 2019, p. 539, 1. 8 — p. 540, 1. 15.
CM, 1165; C-1; C-43.
The Claimants do not explain, in introducing this letter, who or what “V Excias” was. See CM, {102.

C-43 (Claimants’ amended translation).

In accordance with the letter dated 18 August 2016 in epigraph, we
have to mention the following:

1. We note that the issuer does not have the name of the person who
represents it.

2. We note the insistence in claiming the value of 8.220.888,00
Euro.

3. According to points 4 and 5 of our letter No. 568 / DAC / DIPRO
/ 15 dated September 9, 2015, we must inform you that we have not
received any additional information that might be subject to
analysis. !78
155. The next correspondence in the record is the Claimants’ initial Request for Arbitration
dated 10 May 2017.
IV. JURISDICTION
156. The Respondent raises six objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. Those objections
are:

a. That the Claimants are not “investors” as defined in the BIT;

b. That the Claimants do not have an “investment” in Mozambique as required by the

BIT;

c. That the present dispute does not arise out of an “investment” made by a “National

of another Contracting State” as required by Article 25 of the ICSID Convention;
d. That the Claimants’ claims are purely contractual;

e. That, to the extent that the Claimants have a claim, that claim must be submitted to
arbitration under the rules adopted pursuant to the Cotonou Convention, to the

exclusion of an ICSID tribunal; and

128 C_44 (Claimants’ amended translation).

157.

158.

f. That, to the extent that Mozambique may have consented to ICSID arbitration, that
consent was nullified by the decision of the European Court of Justice in Slovak

Republic v. Achmea.

The Tribunal takes up each of these objections in the paragraphs that follow, taking the

first two objections together.

A. The Requirement of Article 1 of the BIT that the Claimants Be Investors with
an Investment in Mozambique

1. The Respondent’s Objections
a. The Claimants are not “investors”
Respondent preliminarily objects that the Claimants have failed to prove that each of them
has made an investment, and thus that each of them is an “investor” as defined by the

BIT.!”? It states that the Claimants, despite repeated document requests, have not produced

evidence showing that each individual Claimant made an investment in Mozambique. !*”

b. The Claimants have no “investment” in Mozambique

The Respondent asserts that the settlement agreement that the Claimants identify as their
investment in Mozambique does not fall within any of the categories of “investment” listed

in Article 1(1)(a-f) of the BIT.'*! Article 1(1) of the BIT states:

The term ‘investment’ shall be construed to mean any investment
effected by a legal or a natural person of a Contracting Party in the
territory of the other Contracting Party, in conformity with the laws
and regulations of the Contracting Parties.

The term “Investment” comprises in particular, but not exclusively:

129 ROJ, (9187-195.

130 ROJ, FL88-190.

51 ROJ, (9176-179.

159.

a) movable and immovable property and the ownership rights in
rem;

b) shares, debentures, equity holdings or any other instruments of
credit, as well as Government and public securities;

c) credits for sums of money or any performance having economic
value connected with an investment, as well as reinvested incomes
and capital gains;

d) copyrights, commercial trade marks, patents, industrial designs,
intellectual and industrial property rights, know-how, trade names
and goodwill connected with an investment;

e) capital expenditures effectively made under licence and
franchising in accordance with the law, including those expenditures
connected with the right to search for, extract and exploit natural
resources;

f) any increases in value of the original investment.

Any modification in the form of the investment does not imply a
change in the nature of the investment thereof. '7?

The Respondent argues that the phrase “any investment” used in Article 1(1) is more

restrictive than the more common “every kind of asset.” !73

The Respondent asserts that the Claimants did not “effect” the alleged settlement
agreement, which — at most — merely memorializes the Parties’ agreement.!** In
response to the Claimants’ argument that the Italian “effetuato” should be translated as
“made,” rather than “effected,”!*> the Respondent argues that, in case of a divergence
between the authentic texts, the Treaty provides that the English text shall prevail. !°°

Cl.

ROJ, 173.

ROJ, 174.

CM, GI 11, n. 116.

ROJ, 175; C-1, last page.

160.

161.

162.

137

138

RRJ, {106 (emphasi:

In response to the Claimants’ argument that the settlement agreement is connected to the
Lot 3 Contract, which they claim is undoubtedly an “investment,” the Respondent points
out that the Claimants have “unequivocally waived the Contract as a basis for jurisdiction
in these proceedings.”!?’ The Respondent refers to the statement in the Claimants’
Memorial that “[t]he Claimants do not invoke a provision of the Contract to assert its treaty
claims, is [sic] not asking the Tribunal to exercise jurisdiction based on the Contract and
does [sic] not submit this claim based on questions of contract law under Mozambique

law.?38

2. The Claimants’ Response
a. All of the Claimants are “investors”

In response to the Respondent’s argument that the Claimants failed to prove that each of
them has made an investment, the Claimants point out that the Respondent has not denied
that either the Lot 3 Contract or the associated road construction works would qualify as a
covered investment. They argue that both CMC Africa Austral and CMC Maputo invested
in this project and are therefore investors. CMC Ravenna also made an investment, and is
thus also an investor, because CMC Maputo is a branch of CMC Ravenna, and because

CMC Ravenna owns 99.99% of the shares in CMC Africa Austral.!°

b. The Claimants had an “investment” in Mozambique

The Claimants argue that the term “any investment effected” in Article 1(1) of the BIT is
very broad and includes rights and claims associated with road construction and
rehabilitation works. They argue that legal rights connected with the underlying investment
qualify as an investment even after the original investment has ceased to exist. The

definition of “investment” is further expanded, in the Claimants’ view, by Article 1 of the

s in original).

 

RRJ, (106; CM, 91169.

89 CRMJ, $91302-309; CM, (9154-155.

163.

164.

165.

E

Protocol to the BIT, which provides that the BIT applies equally to a wide range of

“associated activities.” '4°

The Claimants assert that the settlement agreement “cannot be viewed in isolation from the
investment.”'*! They argue that their investments consist of “[t]he Lot 3 Project
construction works, the additional works, connected activities (such as know-how), the
rights and claims associated with the works (including the settlement agreement) taken

together as a whole.” !4?

The Claimants argue that their investment falls into at least the categories (b) (“‘shares’’),
(c) (“credits for sums of money or any performance having economic value connected with
an investment” and “invested incomes”), and (d) (“know-how, trade names and goodwill”)
of Article 1(1) of the BIT.'*? The Claimants focus on Article 1(1)(c), arguing that “[t]here
can be no question that ANE’s commitment to pay 8.22 million euros to CMC, which
creates a claim to money, is connected with an ‘investment’ expressly covered by Article
1(c) of the Treaty and is an ‘associated activity’ under within [sic] the terms of Article 1 of

the Protocol.” “4

The Claimants argue that they “effected” the settlement agreement within the meaning of
Article 1(1) of the BIT because the word “effetuato” in the authentic Italian version of the
BIT, should be translated as “made,” not “effected.” !4> In response to the Respondent’s
argument that the BIT provides that, in case of divergence between the authentic texts, the

English text must prevail, the Claimants argue that a dictionary definition of “effect” is “to

CRMJ, $91232-233.

CRMJ, (234.

42 CRMJ, 237.

43 CM, (114.

44 CRMJ, 1235 (emphasis in original).

4S CM, {ILI n. 116.

166.

167.

168.

169.

170.

cause to come into being,” and that they have clearly caused their investment—the

Lot 3 Project—to come into being. '*°

3. The Tribunal’s Decision
a. The Claimants were “investors” within the meaning of the BIT

Article 1(2) of the BIT defines an “investor” to mean:

any natural or legal person of a Contracting Party investing in the

territory of the other Contracting Party as well as the foreign

subsidiaries, affiliates and branches controlled by the above natural

and legal persons.
Article 1(4) of the BIT specifies that the “term ‘legal person’, in reference to either
Contracting Party, shall mean any entity having its head office in the territory of such
Contracting Party and recognised by it, such as public institutions, corporations,
partnerships, foundations and associations, regardless of whether their liability is limited

or otherwise.”

It is not disputed that CMC Ravenna is a corporation incorporated under the laws of Italy,
with its head office in Ravenna, Italy. CMC Ravenna is thus an Italian legal person within
the meaning of Article 1(4) of the BIT, and qualifies as an investor if it is investing in

Mozambique.

It is equally not disputed that CMC Maputo is a branch of CMC Ravenna with its place of
business in Mozambique. It is accordingly a foreign branch of CMC Ravenna within the
meaning of Article 1(2) of the BIT, controlled by and treated legally as part of the principal

corporation.

CMC Africa Austral is a wholly owned subsidiary of CMC Ravenna incorporated under
the laws of Mozambique. It is thus a foreign subsidiary of CMC Ravenna, controlled by

that company, and is also an investor under Article 1(2) of the BIT.

46 CRMJ, 299.

171.

172.

173.

174.

1

Since all of the Claimants qualify as “investors,” if they had an investment in Mozambique,

we turn next to whether they had such an investment.

b. The Clai had an “in * within the ing of the BIT

The Claimants argue (inter alia) that the settlement agreement was either itself an
investment in Mozambique, or that it was at the least a “credit for sums of money or any
performance having economic value connected with an investment,” within the meaning

of Article 1(1)(c) of the BIT.

The Tribunal does not, for purposes of ruling on the Respondent’s objection to the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction, need to decide whether the Claimants and the Respondent actually
reached a binding agreement to settle the Claimants’ claims for compensation for their
work on Lot 3. That question goes to the heart of the dispute between the Parties, and is
addressed in the Tribunal’s discussion of the merits. For purposes of jurisdiction, it is
sufficient that the Claimants have advanced a prima facie case that satisfies the
jurisdictional requirements of the BIT and the ICSID Convention.'*? The Tribunal

concludes that it has done so.

It is beyond dispute that the Claimants’ (and specifically CMC Ravenna’s) participation in
the Lot 3 Project constituted an investment in Mozambique. The present dispute does not
arise out of that investment, however, but out of the settlement agreement. The settlement
agreement, if actually agreed to, would represent a “credit for sums of money [...]
connected with an investment,” in that the settlement agreement purported to resolve the

Claimants’ claims for additional payments for their work on the Lot 3 Project.

See Telefonica S.A v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/20, Decision of the Tribunal on Objections:
to Jurisdiction (25 May 2006) at {53 (“In order to determine its jurisdiction, the Tribunal must consider whether
the dispute, as presented by the Claimant, is prima facie, that is on a summary examination, a dispute that falls
generally within the jurisdiction of ICSID and specifically within that of an ICSID tribunal established to decide
a dispute between a Spanish investor and Argentina under the BIT”); see Saipem S.p.A. v. The People’s Republic
of Bangladesh, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05S/07, Decision on Jurisdiction and Recommendation on Provisional
Measures of March 21, 2007 at 85 (the prima facie “test strikes a fair balance between a more demanding
standard which would imply examining the merits at the juri:
rest entirely on the Claimant's characterization of its claims.”); see also Impregilo v. Pakistan, ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/3, Decision on Jurisdiction (22 April 2005) at {[237-253.

 

ictional stage, and a lighter standard which would

60

175.

176.

177.

178.

The Claimants’ claims for money allegedly due under the settlement agreement therefore
come within the definition of “investment” in Article 1(1)(c) of the BIT. Having reached
this conclusion, the Tribunal need not consider the Claimants’ alternative arguments as to

why they had an investment in Mozambique.

B. The requirements of Article 25 ICSID Convention

Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention provides:

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State
(or any constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State
designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing
to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given their consent,
no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

1. The Respondent’s Objections

The Respondent argues that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction, because a settlement
agreement is merely a “legal act” that cannot qualify as an “investment” within the meaning
of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. '** Nor can the Claimants assert any claim based on
an alleged investment in the underlying Lot 3 Contract, according to the Respondent,

because such claims have ceased to exist by virtue of the alleged settlement agreement. '4?

In other words, the Respondent argues that, if a settlement agreement was in fact
concluded, then the Tribunal has no jurisdiction because (a) settlement agreements are not

“investments,” and (b) any claims based on the underlying Lot 3 Contract have been
extinguished. If no settlement agreement was reached, then the Tribunal might have
jurisdiction of a claim based on the Claimants’ investment in the Lot 3 Contract, but that
is not the claim the Claimants are making. The Claimants’ entire case, according to the

Respondent, rests on the alleged non-performance of the alleged settlement agreement. !*°

48 ROJ, GILL.

49 ROJ, G128.

180 ROJ, GILIZ-115.

179. In arguing that the weight of authority establishes that a settlement agreement cannot
qualify as an “investment” under Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, the Respondent

points in particular to the following decisions:

a. GEA Group Aktiengesellschaft v. Ukraine, in which the Tribunal stated:

The Tribunal agrees with Respondent that neither the
Settlement Agreement nor the Repayment Agreement — in
and of themselves — constitute ‘investments’ under Article 1
of the BIT or (if needed) Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention. As legal acts they are not the same as the
investment in Ukraine itself. In particular, (a) the Settlement
Agreement merely established an inventory of undelivered
goods and recorded the difference as a debt owed by Oriana
to KCH; and (b) the Repayment Agreement merely
establishes a means for the repayment by Oriana to KCH of
Oriana’s debts. !5!

The Respondent argues that the GEA Group tribunal “further explained that
the Settlement Agreement and the Repayment Agreement were not
‘investments’ because they involved ‘no contribution to, or relevant
economic activity within, Ukraine.’ Id. at 162. [...] To paraphrase the
GEA Group tribunal, this settlement agreement involved no contribution to,

or relevant economic activity within, Mozambique.” !°?

b. Orascom TMT Investments S.a r.l. v. Algeria, in which the tribunal stated:

In these circumstances, the Claimant cannot bring claims in
this arbitration that OTH decided to settle, as the settlement
clearly resolved the dispute that the Claimant has brought
before this Tribunal. !°3

The Respondent argues that: “[f]or the reasons discussed in Orascom, because the

alleged settlement agreement herein also is allegedly binding, the Claimants can no

GEA Group Aktiengesellschaft v. Ukraine, 1CSID Case No. ARB/08/16, Award (31 March 2011) (RL-18) at
4157; ROS, 119-122.

12 ROJ, PHI21-122.

‘3 Orascom TMT Investments S.a r.l. v. Algeria, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/35, Award (31 May 2017) (RL-19) at
524; ROS, 4124.

longer bring any investment treaty claims pursuant to the underlying Contract or
project, because the settlement extinguished such claims. Thus, even if the
Claimants had made investments in terms of the Contract or project, those claims

have ceased to exist and are inadmissible.” !™4

c. Azpetrol International Holdings B.V., et al. v. Republic of Azerbaijan.'> The
Respondent argues, in reliance on Azpetrol, that “[b]ecause the parties concluded a
binding settlement agreement through the exchange of emails, the tribunal held that
there was no jurisdiction to hear the claim under the ECT and the ICSID
Convention. Jd. at { 2. The tribunal reasoned that there was no ‘legal dispute’
between the claimants and the respondent as required by Article 25(1) of the ICSID
Convention or ‘dispute’ as required by Article 26(1) of the ECT and, consequently,

no jurisdiction to hear the claim. /d. at { 105.”!°°

180. The Respondent argues that the second reason that the Claimants do not have an

“investment” within the meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention is because the
Claimants’ alleged investment does not meet the requirements of the Salini case and other
similar tests.'°7 The Respondent argues that merely fitting within one of the categories of
investments in Article 1(1) of the BIT is insufficient for an asset to qualify as a protected

“investment” for the purposes of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. '**

The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ alleged investment falls short of the Salini

criteria in the following respects:

ROJ, (125.

Azpetrol International Holdings B.V., et al. v. Republic of Azerbaijan, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/15, Award (8
September 2009) (RL-20); ROJ, 126-127.

ROJ, (126.

ROJ, (156-170; see Salini Construttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom of Morocco, ICSID Case No.
ARB/00/4 (“Salini”), Decision on Jurisdiction (23 July 2001) (CL-2) at {52.

ROJ, (160.

162

a.

ROJ, (161.

ROJ, (162.

Contribution of money or other assets of economic value. The Respondent argues
that the Claimants have not contributed anything. On the contrary, they are claiming

approximately 8.2 million euros. !°°

Duration. The Respondent argues that, as nothing has been contributed, there has

also not been a contribution with a certain duration.'©°

Risk. The Respondent argues that the type of risk associated with the alleged
settlement agreement was purely commercial, citing: Postovd Banka, a.s.,
ISTROKAPITAL SE v. The Hellenic Republic (“A commercial risk covers [...] the
tisk that one of the parties might default on its obligations, which risk exists in any
economic relationship”);'°! and Romak S.A. v. The Republic of Uzbekistan, (“All
economic activity entails a certain degree of risk. As such, all contracts — including
contracts that do not constitute an investment — carry the risk of nonperformance.
However, this kind of risk is pure commercial, counterparty risk, or, otherwise
stated, the risk of doing business generally”).'°? The Respondent asserts that the
tisk of possible non-payment of a settlement agreement is an ordinary commercial

risk, not an investment risk. !°

Contribution to Mozambique’s economic development. The Respondent argues
that the settlement agreement did not require the Claimants to perform any

functions or construct any projects in Mozambique. '*

Postovd Banka, a.s., ISTROKAPITAL SE v. The Hellenic Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/13/8, Award, (9 April
2015) (RL-27) at 1369; ROJ, (165.

ROJ, 166; see Romak S.A. v. The Republic of Uzbekistan, PCA Case No. AA280, Award (26 November 2009)
(CL-9) at $229.

ROJ, (167.

ROJ, (169.

2. The Claimants’ Response

In response to the Respondent’s argument that settlement agreements cannot be
“investments,” the Claimants state that it is not their “position that the settlement
agreement—in and of itself—constitutes a separate investment in Mozambique. It is
connected to the Lot 3 Project under the Contract.”!® The settlement agreement is an
“investment” according to the Claimants, because it is connected to and arises from the Lot
3 Project, making it both an “associated activity” under Article 1 of the Protocol of the BIT
and also “any performance having economic value connected with an investment” under

Article 1(1)(c) of the BIT.'

The Claimants further argue that their claim is broader than “just non-payment under the
settlement agreement; it also encompasses more than the conduct of ANE: it involves the
unfair treatment by the highest authorities in the Government against CMC; it engages the

international responsibility of Mozambique under the Treaty.”!®7

In response to the Respondent’s argument that the settlement agreement, if actually
concluded, would have extinguished any claims based on the underlying Lot 3 Contract,
the Claimants argue that the settlement agreement did not extinguish the underlying claims,
because Mozambique failed to honor and repudiated that agreement. Therefore, the
Orascom vy. Algeria and Azpetrol v. Azerbaijan awards cited by the Respondent are

inapposite. '*

In response to the Respondent’s argument that the Claimants do not have an “investment”
within the meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, because the Claimants’ alleged
investment does not meet the requirements of Salini and other related tests, the Claimants
argue that the Salini criteria do not apply and, alternatively, that they meet the Salini

criteria. The Claimants further point out that the Respondent’s argument in this regard is

CRMBJ, 229.
CRMB, 226-234.
CRMB, 222.

CRMBJ, 239.

only focused on the settlement agreement and that it does not dispute that the Lot 3 Project
is an investment within the meaning of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention.'® It is for the
Claimants to categorize their claim, they say, and that claim extends far beyond the issue

of mere non-payment by Mozambique.!””

186. The Claimants point out that the Sa/ini criteria have been criticized in Malaysian Historical
Salvors v Malaysia and Inmaris Perestroika Sailing Maritime Services v Ukraine.'"' They
also argue that the Salini criteria were derived from the first edition of Professor Schreuer’s

Commentary on the ICSID Convention, and that the second edition states: 172

The development in practice from a descriptive list of typical
features towards a set of mandatory legal requirements is
unfortunate. The First Edition of the Commentary cannot serve as
authority for this development.

L..]

 

To the extent that the “Salini test” is applied to determine the
existence of an investment, its criteria should not be seen as distinct
jurisdictional requirements each of which must be met separately. In
fact, tribunals have pointed out repeatedly that the criteria that they
applied were interrelated and should be looked at not in isolation but
in conjunction.!7

187. Alternatively, the Claimants argue that they meet the Salini criteria in the following

respects:

165

CRMIJ, $91292-295.

170 CRMJ, 294.

CM, 129; see Malaysian Historical Salvors v Malaysia, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/10, Decision on the
Application for Annulment (28 February 2009) (CL-7) at {80; see also Inmaris Perestroika Sailing Maritime
Services v Ukraine, ICSID Case No. ARB/O8/8, Decision on Jurisdiction (8 March 2010) (CL-8) at 129.

CM, 127-128.

"3 ©, Schreuer, The ICSID Convention A Commentary, Cambridge (Second edition) at 25.171 (CL-4).

66

188.

a. Contribution of money or other assets of economic value. The Claimants argue that
they made contributions during the Lot 3 Project in the form of know-how, money,

equipment and qualified personnel.!7+

b. Duration. The Claimants point out that the Lot 3 Contract had a duration of 2 years

and that the project was concluded in 2007.!75

c. Risk. The Claimants argue that an element of risk is inherent in construction
projects like the Lot 3 Project, such as delays resulting from weather conditions,

the expropriation of land, and customs barriers of imported materials. '”°

d. Contribution to Mozambique’s economic development. The Claimants argue that a
contribution to the economy and development of the host country is inherent in
public infrastructure works such as the Lot 3 Project. Because it substantially
improving the Rio Ligonha road, the Lot 3 Project had a positive impact on the
economy of Mozambique by, inter alia, improving the efficient transport of goods

and persons. 77

As to the issue of whether CMC Maputo and CMC Africa Austral each qualify as a
“National of another Contracting State” within the meaning of Article 25(2)(b) of the
ICSID Convention (which the Respondent does not dispute), the Claimants argue that both
companies are owned, managed, and controlled by the Italian company CMC Ravenna.!7®
Furthermore, the General Director of CMC Africa Austral is an Italian national who was
seconded from CMC Ravenna and the board of CMC Africa Austral is comprised of Italian

nationals who are also directors of CMC Ravenna. CMC Maputo does not have a separate

CM, 9131-135.
CM, 1143.
CM, 142.
CM, 9136-141.

CM, 159.

189.

190.

board, but instead reports directly to the board of CMC Ravenna, and CMC Maputo and

CMC Africa Austral share the same head office in Maputo.!””

3. The Tribunal’s Decision

a. The Claimants had an “investment” within the meaning of the

ICSID Convention
In order for the Tribunal to accept jurisdiction over the Claimants’ claim, the burden is on
the Claimants to satisfy the Tribunal, not only that each of them is an “investor” as
determined in the preceding section of this Award, but also that they made an “investment,”
both (a) within the meaning given to those terms in the BIT, which defines the framework
of the consent given by the Respondent; and also (b) within the meaning given to those

terms in the ICSID Convention.

Article 25 of the ICSID Convention makes the facilities of ICSID available only to resolve
disputes arising out of a protected investment. As instructed by Article 31 of the VCLT,
Article 25 is to be interpreted according to the “ordinary meaning” of the terms “in their

context and in the light of its object and purpose.” Article 25(1) provides:

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute
arising directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State
[...] and a national of another Contracting State, which the parties
to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre.

The drafters of the ICSID Convention left the term “investment” undefined. One widely
(but not universally) applied analysis of the term “investment” is derived from Salini v.

Morocco, which identified a series of elements that constitute an investment:

The doctrine generally considers that investment infers:
contributions, a certain duration of performance of the contract and
a participation in the risks of the transaction [...] In reading the
Convention’s preamble, one may add the contribution to the
economic development of the host State of the investment as an
additional condition.

"79 Letter from CMC to ICSID dated 16 June 2017 (C-45.A).

68

In reality, these various elements may be interdependent. Thus, the
risks of the transaction may depend on the contributions and the
duration of performance of the contract. As a result, these various
criteria should be assessed globally even if, for the sake of
reasoning, the Tribunal considers them individually here. !8°
191. | The Joy Mining tribunal emphasized the pre-eminence of the ICSID Convention over the

terms of the BIT in jurisdictional terms:

The parties to a dispute cannot by contract or treaty define as

investment, for the purpose of ICSID jurisdiction, something which

does not satisfy the objective requirements of Article 25 of the

Convention. '*!
This so-called “double-keyhole” test, explicitly endorsed by other ICSID tribunals,
requires a claimant to meet the requirements of both the Convention and the BIT in order

for the Tribunal to have jurisdiction over its claim.

192. However, the approach taken by the tribunal in Joy Mining has not been universally
accepted. Some tribunals have ruled that, as the ICSID Convention did not attempt to
define “investment,” this task is left to the parties to delineate in their instruments of
consent, including treaties. The ad hoc annulment committee in Malaysia Historical

Salvors expounded the wisdom of looking primarily to the text of the relevant BIT:

It is those bilateral and multilateral treaties which today are the
engine of ICSID’s effective jurisdiction. To ignore or depreciate the
importance of the jurisdiction they bestow upon ICSID, and rather
to embroider upon questionable interpretations of the term
“investment” as found in Article 25(1) of the Convention, risks
crippling the institution. !**

193. A middle ground between these two approaches has developed. While many tribunals have

felt that “[i]t would go too far,” in the words of the tribunal in SGS v. Paraguay, “to suggest

180 Salini, 52.

Joy Mining Machinery Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/11 (“Joy Mining”) Award
on Jurisdiction, (6 August 2004) (RL-17) at {50.

'82 Malaysian Historical Salvors, SDN, BHD vy. Malaysia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/10 (“Malaysian Historical
Salvors”) Decision on Annulment (16 April 2009) at 73.

69

194.

195.

that any definition of investment agreed by states in a BIT [...] must constitute an

9183

‘investment’ for purposes of Article 25(1), many tribunals have adopted the approach

of defining the relevant question as whether the definition of “investment” in the BIT

“exceeds what is permissible” under the ICSID Convention. '**

In the opinion of the Tribunal, the definition of “investment” in the BIT does not exceed
what is permissible under the ICSID Convention. The Claimants’ claims “for sums of
money or any performance having an economic value” within the meaning of Article 1(c)
of the BIT arise directly out of their investment in the Lot 3 Project. In the view of the
Tribunal, that is sufficient to bring the Claimants’ claims within the jurisdiction of the

Tribunal under both the BIT and the ICSID Convention.

Moreover, to the extent to which it may be necessary or useful to apply the Salini test, that
contribution clearly exposed the Claimants, as foreign investors, to risks posed by the

sovereign power and otherwise as described in Salini itself:

With regard to the risks incurred by the Italian companies, these
flow from the nature of the contract at issue. The Claimants, in their
reply memorial on jurisdiction, gave an exhaustive list of the risks
taken in the performance of the said contract. Notably, among
others, the risk associated with the prerogatives of the Owner
permitting him to prematurely put an end to the contract, to impose
variations within certain limits without changing the manner of
fixing prices; the risk consisting of the potential increase in the cost
of labour in case of modification of Moroccan law; any accident or
damage caused to property during the performance of the works;
those risks relating to problems of coordination possibly arising
from the simultaneous performance of other projects; any
unforeseeable incident that could not be considered as force majeure
and which, therefore, would not give rise to a right to compensation;
and finally those risks related to the absence of any compensation in
case of increase or decrease in volume of the work load not
exceeding 20% of the total contract price. It does not matter in this
respect that these risks were freely taken. It also does not matter that

"83 $GS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of Paraguay, 1CSID Case No. ARB/07/29 (“SGS v.
Paraguay”) Decision on Jurisdiction (12 February 2010) (CL-15) at {93 (emphasis in original).

"See Bureau Veritas v. Republic of Paraguay, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/9 (“Bureau Veritas”) Decision on
Jurisdiction (29 May 2009) (CL-60) at 494.

196.

197.

198.

199.

200.

185

the remuneration of the Contractor was not linked to the exploitation

of the completed work. A construction that stretches out over many

years, for which the total cost cannot be established with certainty

in advance, creates an obvious risk for the Contractor. !8>
In summary, the Tribunal has no difficulty in concluding that the Claimants made an
investment in Mozambique that qualified for protection under Article 25(1) of the ICSID

Convention as well as under Article 1(1) of the BIT.

b. The Claimants were “Nationals of another Contracting State”
within the meaning of the ICSID Convention
All of the Claimants qualify as a “National of another Contracting State” within the

meaning of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention provides that the definition of “National of

another Contracting State” includes:

[A]ny juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting
State other than the State party to the dispute on the date on which
the parties consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or
arbitration and any juridical person which had the nationality of the
Contracting State party to the dispute on that date and which,
because of foreign control, the parties have agreed should be
treated as a national of another Contracting State for the purposes of
this Convention. (emphasis added)

As noted above (at para. 166), Italy and Mozambique agreed in Article 1(2) of the BIT that
the term “investor” would include “any natural or legal person of a Contracting Party
investing in the territory of the other Contracting Party as well as the foreign subsidiaries,

affiliates and branches controlled by the above natural and legal persons.”

It is uncontested that CMC Ravenna is a “juridical person which had the nationality of a

Contracting State other than the State party to the dispute,” namely Italy. It is equally

Salini, (55-56. It was pointed out in Toto Construzioni Generali S.p.A. v. Republic of Lebanon, ICSID Case No.
ARB/O7/12 (“Toto Construzioni Generali”) Decision on Jurisdiction (11 September 2009) (RL-21) at 478, that a
construction contract in which the execution of the works extends over a substantial period of time involves by
definition an element of risk.

201.

202.

203.

18

188

18

uncontested that CMC Africa Austral is a Mozambique subsidiary of CMC Ravenna, and

that CMC Maputo is a branch of CMC Ravenna entirely under its control.

The Tribunal accordingly concludes that CMC Africa Austral (as a subsidiary of CMC
Ravenna) is a juridical person under foreign control (within the meaning of the ICSID
Convention) and that it and CMC Maputo (as a branch of CMC Ravenna) are both entities
that Mozambique and Italy agreed in Article 2 of the BIT should be treated as nationals of
Italy. That condition was accepted by the Claimants when they asserted a claim under the
BIT. All three Claimants are accordingly Italian investors in Mozambique within the

meaning of both the ICSID Convention and the BIT.

Cc. Have the Claimants made treaty claims or purely contractual claims?
1. The Respondent’s Objections

The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ claim is purely contractual, and that purely
contractual claims are outside ICSID jurisdiction. '* It states that “at the core of this dispute
is the purely contractual dispute of whether the Claimants (because the Contract was for
unitary pricing), the EDF (as admitted by Mr. Guerra), or the Respondent must incur the

cost of the alleged additional works.”!8”

The Respondent relies on the following authorities for the proposition that there can be no

ICSID jurisdiction over contractual claims:

a. Toto Costruzioni Generali S.P.A. v. Republic of Lebanon (“Toto Costruzioni
Generali”).'*8 In this arbitration, the Respondent says, Toto “request[ed] the
Tribunal to award US$3,834,454.78 for damages suffered for extra works and
charges due to wrong instructions, misleading information and erroneous

design.” '®° The tribunal held that: “Toto’s claims appear to relate to the standard

ROJ, (129.
ROJ, (137.
Toto Costruzione Generali, Decision on Jurisdiction (11 September 2009) (RL-21); ROS, 139-140.

ROJ, (139.

190

192

1

duties in a construction contract, i.e., an alleged failure by an employer to comply
with his obligations towards the contractor. It does not involve the use of sovereign
authority or ‘puissance publique.’ [...] Consequently, such a claim does not fall

within the scope of Article 2, paragraph 3 of the Treaty.” !°°

b. Abaclat and Others. v. Argentine Republic (“Abaclat v. Argentina”),'°' in which
the tribunal stated:

[A]n arbitral tribunal has no jurisdiction where the claim at
stake is a pure contract claim. [...] A claim is to be
considered a pure contract claim where the Host State, party
to a specific contract, breaches obligations arising by the sole
virtue of such contract. This is not the case where the
equilibrium of the contract and the provisions contained
therein are unilaterally altered by a sovereign act of the Host
State. This applies where the circumstances and/or the
behaviour of the Host State appear to derive from its exercise
of sovereign State power. Whilst the exercise of such power
may have an impact on the contract and its equilibrium, its
origin and nature are totally foreign to the contract. '!°
c. Bureau Veritas, Inspection, Valuation, Assessment and Control BIVAC BV v.
Republic of Paraguay.'> The Respondent asserts that this case is similar to the
present dispute in that it concerned the nonpayment of an allegedly admitted debt.
According to the Respondent, the Bureau Veritas tribunal “conclude[d] that the
conduct that lies at the heart of the dispute, and which has been repeated over time
[...] is the refusal on the part of Paraguay to pay an outstanding debt that is owed
under the Contract.”!°4 The Bureau Veritas tribunal also observed that: “It is

important to recognize that beyond the refusal to pay there are no other acts that the

ROJ, {139; Toto Costruzioni Generali, Decision on Jurisdiction (11 September 2009) (RL-21) at ${121-122.

Abaclat and Others. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/5, Decision on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility (4 August 2011) (RL-22); ROJ, (141.

Id. at (318.

Bureau Veritas, Inspection, Valuation, Assessment and Control BIVAC BV v. Republic of Paraguay, 1CSID Case
No. ARB/07/9, Further Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction (9 October 2012) (RL-23); ROJ, 141-150.

Id. at 4238.

Claimant really seeks to remedy. Whilst Paraguay has not paid a contractual debt
that it has recognized [...] as being owed, the Claimant has not argued that it has
interfered in any other way with the Claimant’s rights under the Contract.” !° The

Bureau Veritas tribunal went on to say that:

There is nothing inherent in the fact that such conduct is
undertaken by a State in its capacity as a contracting party
that might as such endow them with the quality of sovereign
acts such as to catalyse responsibility under an international
treaty obligation relating to fair and equitable treatment.
There has been no reliance by Paraguay on the powers of a
public authority that might not - by analogous means - also
be available to a private person or corporation. Attempts to
mislead, distort, conceal or otherwise confuse a contractual
partner are strategies open to and used by both public and
private persons. !°°

In the Tribunal’s view the facts show ‘mere breach by a State
of a contract with an alien (whose proper law is not
international law)’ and that accordingly no violation of [...]
the BIT arises.!°”

The Respondent asserts that this case is similar to Bureau Veritas, in that the
Respondent did not use its sovereign authority to alter the contractual relationship
unilaterally. The Respondent acted as a private party and acted upon the
determination of an independent consulting firm when it decided that there were no

grounds for additional payments to the Claimants. !°

d. Tulip Real Estate B.V. v. Republic of Turkey,'°? where the tribunal said that “the
determination of whether a claim arises under a BIT involves an inquiry into the

‘essential basis’ or ‘normative source’ of that particular claim. In order to amount

Td. at {240
Id. at (241.
Td. at {276
ROJ, 9149-150.

Tulip Real Estate B.V. v. Republic of Turkey, 1CSID Case No. ARB/11/28, Award (10 March 2014) (RL-24);
ROJ, (150.

204.

205.

206.

200

201

202

203,

204

to a treaty claim, the conduct said to amount to a BIT violation must be capable of
characterisation as sovereign conduct, involving the invocation of puissance
publique. This principle has been affirmed by numerous previous investment

tribunals.”?

The Respondent argues that “‘[w]hy’ the Respondent did not pay under the alleged
settlement agreement is not an ‘act’ — instead, it is the ‘motive’ for the act of nonpayment.

However, the motive must be distinguished from the act or behavior of the State.”2°!

In response to the Claimants’ argument that puissance publique is present here as a result
of the conduct of Mozambican officials in connection with the settlement negotiations, the
Respondent argues that the “Claimants fail to identify what these sovereign acts are and
what specific conduct of Respondent’s government officials amount to a breach of the

BIT.”22

In response to the Claimants’ reliance on the decision of the Vivendi annulment committee
to argue that their claims are investment treaty claims regardless of whether they also

amount to contractual claims,2%

the Respondent argues that Vivendi is distinguishable,
because, in that case, the tribunal identified clear international law claims arising out of a
series of allegations as to the conduct of the state. Since the state’s conduct allegedly
involved measures taken in bad faith, the claims were not mere breach of contract claims.
The Claimants in this case, Respondent says, did not point to sovereign acts that amount to

violations of the BIT.?° Similarly, the Respondent argues that the SGS v. Paraguay

Id. at $354.
ROJ, (153.
RRJ, 123.

Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3 (“Vivendi”) Decision of the Annulment Committee (3 July 2002) (CL-19) at $95; CRMJ, 1247.

RRJ, (114-115.

207.

208.

209.

205

206

207

208,

arbitration is distinguishable, because unlike this case, that arbitration involved breaches

of a treaty."

In response to the Claimants’ argument that this dispute cannot be purely contractual,
because not all parties to this dispute are also parties to either the settlement agreement or

the Lot 3 Contract, the Respondent argues:

Claimants have asserted that each of them has standing to bring the

instant claims that seek to enforce the alleged payment obligations

under the alleged settlement agreement. They cannot now argue that

they do not have privity with the settlement agreement. And second,

the Claimants assert that the case does not deal with the same

matters because the Claimants’ claims do not involve issues of

performance under the Contract. [...] That argument is also

incorrect. The claims overlap because the gravamen of the BIT

claims and contract claims is exactly the same—the alleged

nonpayment under the alleged settlement agreement.7°°
In response to the Claimants’ argument that this dispute cannot have been extinguished by
the settlement agreement because the Respondent failed to comply with that agreement,
the Respondent points out that, if there was a settlement agreement, then it would have
settled the underlying dispute, even if the Respondent had not complied with it. The

Claimants would merely have a breach of contract claim.?°7

2. The Claimants’ Response
The Claimants argue that none of their claims is purely contractual, but that each is a treaty
claim which requires the Tribunal to consider and decide contractual issues.”°* The
Claimants argue that Mozambique has:

e breached the just and fair treatment standard under Article
2(3) of the Treaty;

SGS v. Paraguay, Decision on Jurisdiction (12 February 2010) (CL-15); RRJ, 4116.
RRJ, {126.
RRJ, 138.

CRMBJ, 4244.

210.

211.

212.

209

210

e violated its obligation under Article 2(3) of the Treaty not to
impair investments by unjustified or discretionary [sic]
measures;

e breached its obligation under Article 2(4) of the Treaty by
failing to observe in good faith specific undertakings entered
into with the Claimants; and

e failed to afford the Claimants no less favourable treatment
than afforded to investors and investments of third countries
as required by the Most Favoured Nation clause in Article 3
of the Treaty.?
The Claimants assert that these claims fall within the scope of the BIT and are not limited
to the mere issue of non-payment. They argue that “the violations asserted entail inter alia
the inconsistent, contradictory; arbitrary; lack of transparency and bad faith; unjustified

delays; coercion; a wilful disregard of due process; and unjustified conduct.”?!?

The Claimants concede that a “mere breach of contract—without more—is not sufficient
to trigger the jurisdiction of an international tribunal. The conduct of the host State in
breaching the contract must amount to a violation of a Treaty provision, or in relation to a
mere breach of contract, there must be an element of puissance publique.”?'!' The
Claimants accepted that they “must show that the Respondent’s conduct was unjust or
unfair in breach of Article 2(3) or 2(4) of the Treaty. A breach of either provision is not
subject to showing a breach of contract and something more (according to the Respondent
something ‘beyond the refusal to pay’). However, breaches of contract and even the mere

refusal to pay may well constitute a breach of the Treaty.”?!?

The Claimants rely on the decision of the Vivendi annulment committee, which held:

95. [...] A state may breach a treaty without breaching a contract,
and vice versa, and this is certainly true of these provisions of the

CRMIJ, (254.
CRMIJ, 255.
CRMJ, 261.

CRMJ, 247.

BIT. The point is made clear in Article 3 of the ILC Articles, which
is entitled ‘Characterization of an act of a State as internationally
wrongful’:

The characterization of an act of a State as internationally
wrongful is governed by international law. Such
characterization is not affected by the characterization of the
same act as lawful by internal law.

96. In accordance with this general principle (which is undoubtedly
declaratory of general international law), whether there has been a
breach of the BIT and whether there has been a breach of contract
are different questions. Each of these claims will be determined by
reference to its own proper or applicable law—in the case of the
BIT, by international law; in the case of the Concession Contract,
by the proper law of the contract, in other words, the law of
Tucuméan. [...]?!°

213. For a definition of a “purely contractual” claim, the Claimants rely on the same passage

from Abaclat v. Argentina quoted by the Respondent.”

214. The Claimants also rely on the award in SGS v. Paraguay:

Of course, it is apparent that several of Claimants’ claims under the
Treaty will stem from Respondent’s alleged failure to pay for SGS’s
services under the Contract. That is an action that may (or may not)
also constitute a contractual breach, but we are not called upon to
decide that question as such. We are called upon to decide whether
Respondent’s actions, such as its alleged non-payment, breach the
aforementioned Articles of the Treaty. In doing so, we are in concert
with the well-established jurisprudence regarding the distinction
between contract claims and treaty claims.?>

215. From these authorities, the Claimants distill the following three categories of events over

which this Tribunal could exercise jurisdiction:

e An act/omission of the host State which in and of itself
amounts to a violation of the Treaty.

Vivendi, Decision of the Annulment Committee (3 July 2002) (CL-19) at $95; CRMJ, 1246.
214 See para. 203(b) above.
215 §GS v. Paraguay, Decision on Jurisdiction (12 February 2010) (CL-15) at (130.

78

216.

217.

218.

e An act/omission of the host State which arises out of a
contract, which amounts to a breach of contract, and in
addition amounts to a violation of the Treaty.

e An act/omission of the host State which is purely a breach of
contract, but in breaching the contract the host State has
unilaterally altered the equilibrium of the contract by way of
a sovereign act (puissance publique).?'®
The Claimants contend that all their claims fall within the scope of these three categories.
As an example, they say that “Mozambique’s failure to comply with its undertaking to
CMC—which became legally binding on 2 November 2009—amounts in and of itself to a
breach of Article 2(4) of the BIT. While this conduct may amount to a breach of contract,
in the Claimants’ view, it is also a violation of the Treaty. In addition, the Claimants assert
that the Respondent has, by the conduct of its officials and government entities, unilaterally

altered the equilibrium of the contract by way of sovereign acts.”?!7

Alternatively, the Claimants argue that this cannot be a purely contractual dispute arising
out of either the settlement agreement or the Lot 3 Contract, because not all of the parties
to this dispute are named parties to those agreements. The Claimants cite the award in
Aguas del Tunari v. Bolivia, where the tribunal held that “in order for the separate
document raised by the Respondent to be in conflict with this Tribunal’s exercise of
jurisdiction, that document must both deal with the same matters and parties and contain
mandatory conflicting obligations.” The Claimants further assert that the fact that their
claim relies on the conduct of several parties that are not signatory parties to the contract,
such as the Prime Minister and the Minister of Public Works, clearly shows that their claim

has extra-contractual elements to it.7!

The Claimants disagree that this case is similar to the Bureau Veritas v. Paraguay

arbitration, arguing that the tribunal in that case did exercise jurisdiction over a purely

CRMJ, 263.
CRMJ, 264.

CRM, 9268-274; Aguas del Tunari S.A. v. The Republic of Bolivia, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/3 (“Aguas del

Tunari v. Bolivia”) Decision on Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction (21 October 2005) (RL-13) at 494.

79

219.

220.

221.

contractual claim at an early stage of the proceedings. That tribunal only found that
Paraguay’s failure to pay the investor was merely a breach of contract claim without the
exercise of puissance publique by the host state after written and oral submissions on the
merits were made. The Claimants state that the Bureau Veritas tribunal found that
Paraguay’s decision to discontinue a contract, which was the only basis for the investor’s
claim, “was not a repudiation of any rights under the [cJontract.”?!° The Claimants argue
that the Bureau Veritas arbitration is distinguishable because, “there was no issue of

contradictory, non-transparent, bad faith and inconsistent conduct by the host State.”??°

3. The Tribunal’s Decision

The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, which derives
from the BIT, does not extend to purely contractual disputes. Article 9 of the BIT provides
for arbitration of disputes “which may arise between either Contracting Party and the
investors of the other Contracting Party on investments.” The question presented by this

objection is whether the claims asserted give rise to such a dispute.

Tf, on the other hand, as the Claimants argue, the Claimants’ claims are for breaches of the
BIT arising out of the Claimants’ investment in Mozambique, this Tribunal has jurisdiction
to hear them. The Bayindir tribunal observed that “treaty claims are juridically distinct
from claims for breach of contract, even where they arise out of the same facts,” and “when
the investor has a right under both the contract and the treaty, it has a self-standing right to

pursue the remedy accorded by the treaty.”?7!

The Claimants have asserted multiple claims under the BIT. The Claimants assert claims
for denial of fair and just treatment, for unjustified and discriminatory measures, for failure

to observe specific undertakings in good faith, and for treatment of their investment that is

219 CRMJ, 9275-279.

220 CRMJ, 1279.

21 Bayindir v Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/29 (“Bayindir”) Decision on Jurisdiction (14
November 2005) (CL-11) at 91148, 167. The tribunal in SGS v. Pakistan noted that “the same set of facts can
give rise to different claims grounded on differing legal orders: the municipal and the international legal orders.”
SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/13, Decision
of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction (6 August 2003) at 147.

80

less favorable than that afforded by the Respondent to investments of nationals of third
countries.2?? Whatever merit each of those claims may have, each is stated as a claim

arising under the BIT, not under the settlement agreement or any other contract.

222. The Tribunal finds that the Claimants’ claims all concern disputes “which may arise
between either Contracting Party and the investors of the other Contracting Party on

investments.”?”3

D. Cotonou Convention Arbitration

223. Mozambique and Italy are both parties to the Partnership Agreement between the members
of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States, of the one part, and the European
Community and its Member States, of the other part, commonly known as the Cotonou
Convention.2*+ The Cotonou Convention was signed in Cotonou, Benin on 24 June 2000
as the successor treaty to the earlier Fourth Lomé Convention, and entered into force on 1
April 2003.77 It was amended in 2005 and 2010. ?”° It is not disputed that the Cotonou

Convention, as revised, is currently in force.?27

1. The Respondent’s Objections

224. The Respondent argues that the dispute resolution clause in the Lot 3 Contract, described
below, requires that any dispute between the parties to that contract that is submitted to

international arbitration be conducted pursuant to the arbitration rules referenced in the

222 CRMJ, 1254.

Article 9(1) BIT (C-1). As noted above, whether the Claimants had an investment within the meaning of the BIT
is resolved, for purposes of jurisdiction, by the conclusion that the Claimants have advanced a prima facie case
that satisfies the jurisdictional requirements of the BIT and the ICSID Convention. See para. 173 above.

 

24 RL-2.

25 EU press release 1P/03/467, The Cotonou Agreement enters into force today (1 April 2003),
europa.ew/rapid/press-release_IP-03-467_en.pdf (last visited 9 May 2019).

 

 

26 RL-2.
27 ROJ, 437. The Respondent has submitted two versions of the Cotonou Convention: the Original Cotonou
Convention (R-1) and the Revised Cotonou Convention (R-2). It has taken no position as to which version applies
in this case.

225.

226.

228,

229

230

Cotonou Convention. Under the Cotonou Convention, according to the Respondent, both
treaty claims and pure contract claims are arbitrable, but the use of other arbitration rules
is excluded. According to the Respondent, the present dispute must therefore be arbitrated
pursuant to the rules specified in the Cotonou Convention, to the exclusion of arbitration

under the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules.77*

The Respondent also argues that the Cotonou Convention itself requires that the present
dispute be submitted to arbitration under its rules. The Respondent relies on Article 30 of
Annex IV of the Cotonou Convention, which states:
Any dispute arising between the authorities of an ACP State and a
contractor, supplier or provider of services during the performance
of a contract financed by the Fund shall:
a) in the case of a national contract, be settled in accordance
with the national legislation of the ACP State concerned; and
b) in the case of a transnational contract be settled either:
i) if the Parties to the contract so agree, in accordance
with the national legislation of the ACP State
concerned or its established international practices;
or
ii) by arbitration in accordance with the procedural
tules which will be adopted by decision of the
Council of Ministers at the first meeting following
the signing of this Agreement, upon the
recommendation of the ACP-EC Development
Finance Cooperation Committee.”
The Respondent asserts furthermore that Article 91 of the Original Cotonou Convention
explicitly provides that the Cotonou Convention supersedes the BIT.2*? Article 91 states:
No treaty, convention, agreement or arrangement of any kind
between one or more Member States of the Community and one or
ROI, 2-6.

Original Cotonou Convention (C-1); ROJ, 42.

RRJ, (93-7.

more ACP States may impede the implementation of this
Agreement.??!
227. The resolution of disputes specifically relating to the Lot 3 Contract is governed by Article

68 of the General Conditions. Article 68.1 of the General Conditions states:

The Contracting Authority and the Contractor shall make every
effort to amicably settle disputes relating to the Contract which may
arise between them, or between the Supervisor and the
Contractor.?*
228. The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ claims “relate to” the Lot 3 Contract within the
meaning of Article 68.1 of the General Conditions, because the Claimants are effectively
seeking approximately 8.2 million Euros as compensation for additional work that they

claim they were required to perform on the Lot 3 Project.?*7

229. The terms of Article 30 of Annex IV of the Cotonou Convention concerning the resolution
of disputes between States and contractors working on projects governed by the Cotonou
Convention are closely tracked by Article 68.5 of the General Conditions, which similarly
provides for two alternative methods of resolving disputes relating to the Lot 3 Contract
that cannot be amicably settled. One method applies to “national contracts” (68.5(a)) and

the other to “transnational contracts” (68.5(b)), as follows:

68.5 In the absence of an amicable settlement or the settlement by
conciliation within the maximum Time Limit specified, the dispute
shall:

a) in the case of a national contract, be settled in accordance with
the national legislation of the State of the Contracting Authority; and

b) in the case of a transnational Contract, be settled, either:
i) if the parties to the Contract so agree, in accordance with

the national legislation of the State of the Contracting
Authority or its established international practices; or

31 RL-L.
226.25,
33 RR, G4.

230.

231.

232.

233.

234

23:

234

237

234

234

ii) by arbitration in accordance with the procedural rules

adopted in accordance with the Convention.?*+
The procedural rules adopted in accordance with the Cotonou Convention are the
Procedural Rules on Conciliation and Arbitration of contracts financed by the European
Development Fund as adopted by Decision No L382/95 on 29 March 1990 (the “Cotonou

Arbitration Rules”).?>

The terms “national” and “transnational” are not defined in the Cotonou Convention or in
the General Conditions. The Respondent argues that the Lot 3 Contract is a transnational
contract, on the basis that “transnational” should be read to mean the same thing as
“international.”?*° The Respondent further asserts that the Claimants have acknowledged

that the Lot 3 Contract is an international contract.7°7

Even if the Claimants were to allege that the Lot 3 Contract were a “national contract,” the
Respondent argues, the Tribunal would not have jurisdiction, because disputes about
“national contracts” must be settled “in accordance with the national legislation of the State
of the Contracting Authority.”** In any event, the Respondent contends that the Claimants
cannot argue that the Lot 3 Contract is a “national” contract, because they brought a claim
under a BIT which requires that investors be foreign entities. The Respondent also points
to the Claimants’ concessions that the Lot 3 Contract was awarded after an “international

tender” and that equipment that was used during the Lot 3 Project came from Europe.?*

The Respondent argues that interpreting “transnational,” as used in Article 68.5 of the

General Conditions, to mean “international” would be consistent with Article 28(2)(c) of

Article 68.5 of the General Conditions (C-25) (emphasis added).
Article 68.5(b)(ii) of the Special Conditions.

ROI, {i 43, 60-61.

ROJ, (61, n.11.

ROJ, (61, n.12.

RRJ, 185.

234.

235.

236.

240

24

242

243,

the Revised Cotonou Convention, which states that EU cooperation shall “promote the

management of sustainable development challenges with a transnational dimension.”

Since the Lot 3 Contract was a transnational contract, the Respondent argues, the only
dispute resolution option is Cotonou Convention arbitration as provided in Section
68.5(b)(ii) of the General Conditions. This is because the only alternative — dispute
resolution “in accordance with the national legislation of the State of the Contracting
Authority or its established international practices” under Article 68.5(b)(i) — requires the

agreement of the Parties, and there was no such agreement.”*!

In support of its argument for applying the Cotonou Arbitration Rules, the Respondent
relies on the 2008 EU General Court decision in Centro di educazione sanitaria e
tecnologie appropriate sanitarie (Cestas) v. Commission of the European Communities. In
that case, the General Court stated that “contracts concluded by the applicant within the
framework of projects financed by EDF funds are covered, in case of dispute, by the

procedure laid down in [the Cotonou Arbitration Rules] [...]”?*

Sending the Parties to arbitration pursuant to the Cotonou Arbitration Rules would be
consistent with the BIT, the Respondent argues, because Article 9(3)(d) of the BIT permits
a dispute under the BIT to be submitted to “other international arbitration arrangements,
mechanisms, or instruments,” as an alternative to the ICSID Rules.*“* While Article 9 of
the BIT states that investors may elect among those alternatives “at their choice,””* the
Respondent contends that the Claimants gave up the right to elect any other dispute

resolution mechanism under Article 9(3) of the BIT when they agreed in the Lot 3 Contract

ROJ, 143; RL-2.
ROI, (63.

RL-8, 21; ROJ, 166.
ROI, (185-86.

Article 9(3) BIT (C-1).

237.

238.

245

24

24

249

250

to arbitrate under the Cotonou Arbitration Rules.7*> The Respondent bases this argument

in large part on Article 9(2) of the BIT, which provides:

In case an investor or entity of one of the Contracting Parties have

stipulated an investment agreement in accordance with the relevant

applicable laws in force, the procedure foreseen in such investment

agreements shall apply.”
The Respondent contends that the Lot 3 Contract is such an investment agreement.
Article 68 of the General Conditions is not a mere “forum selection” clause, the
Respondent argues, because it provides that disputes arising out of the Lot 3 Contract are
within the exclusive and compulsory jurisdiction of a tribunal constituted pursuant to the
Cotonou Convention Arbitration Rules.”*” In addition, the Respondent argues that Article
68 is not a mere forum selection clause, because “recourse to Cotonou Convention
arbitration has been mandated by treaty, and it is acknowledged in the parties’ Contract.
Article 30 of [Annex IV of] the Cotonou Convention requires that disputes be settled under

its ADR scheme.””48

The Respondent also points out that Article 68 of the General Conditions, unlike an
ordinary forum selection clause, does not require litigation before national or municipal
courts.”“? This distinction differentiates this case, in the Respondent’s view, from Salini v.
Jordan, in which a BIT provision similar to Article 9(2) of the BIT was at issue. The
Respondent argues that Salini is inapposite because, unlike this case, it concerned what
amounted to a “local” forum selection clause requiring that disputes be resolved by a

national court.?°°

ROI, (185-86.
ROI, (487-88; C-1.
ROJ, (492-97.
RRJ, (34.

RRJ, 1945-49.

RRJ, 154; Salini Construttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.pA. v. Jordan, ICSID Case No. ARB/O2/13 (“Salini v.
Jordan”) Decision on Jurisdiction (9 November 2004) (CL-45).

86

239.

240.

241.

242.

25

The Respondent further argues that the Claimants waived any right they may have had to
ICSID arbitration by agreeing to the terms of the Lot 3 Contract. The Respondent cites the
Decision on Jurisdiction in Aguas del Tunari v. Bolivia, which found that “a clear waiver
of ICSID jurisdiction” would be effective.*°! In the Respondent’s view, “[a]n obligation
deriving from a formal requirement imposed by an international treaty is enough to

constitute a waiver by an investor of its rights to invoke ICSID jurisdiction.”>>*

The Respondent points out that a finding that the Claimants waived ICSID jurisdiction
would not leave them without a forum: “the Cotonou Convention and the Arbitration Rules
promulgated under it are broad enough to encompass the treaty claims that the Claimants

purport to assert under the Italy-MZ BIT.”

The Respondent disagrees with the Claimants that the present dispute arises under the
settlement agreement rather than the Lot 3 Contract. The Respondent argues that, “[e]ven
if the settlement agreement superseded the Contract, the international arbitration clause in
the Contract survives and remains part of the settlement agreement, because arbitration
agreements are independent and severable under accepted international law principles.”?**
The Respondent cites Duke Energy International Peru Investments No. 1, Ltd. v. Republic
of Peru for the proposition that “[t]he separability of an arbitration agreement from the
contract of which it forms part is a general principle of international arbitration law

today.”?5°

In response to the Claimants’ argument that the Respondent failed to assert that the doctrine
of separability exists under Mozambican law, the Respondent cites to the witness statement

of Ms. Muenda and to various arbitral awards in support of its position that arbitral

Aguas del Tunari v. Bolivia, Decision on Respondent's Objections to Jurisdiction (21 October 2005) (RL-13) at

118; ROJ, 496.

252

254

RRJ, 952-61.
RRJ, 166.

ROJ, 498.

285 Duke Energy International Peru Investments No. 1, Ld. v. Republic of Peru, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/28,
Annulment Proceeding (1 March 2011) (RL-14) at {131; ROJ, 198.

87

243.

244.

245.

agreements are separable as a matter of both international and Mozambican law. The
Respondent maintains that “any dispute under a settlement agreement must be resolved
under the alternative dispute settlement mechanism of the Contract by virtue of

incorporation of the arbitration clause.”?°°

The Respondent argues that Italy and Mozambique agreed that investors must arbitrate
pursuant to the Arbitration Rules of the Cotonou Convention when the contract is financed
by the EDF.?*’ Article 30 of Annex IV of the Original Cotonou Convention states that it
applies to “any dispute arising between the authorities of an ACP State and a contractor,
supplier or provider of services during the performance of a contract financed by the Fund
(EDF],”?>* and that those disputes “shall” be settled pursuant to the Cotonou Convention
dispute resolution mechanism.”°? The Respondent argues that all these requirements are

met here.?°°

The Respondent bases two arguments on Article 30 of Annex IV of the Cotonou
Convention. The first is that the dispute resolution provision in the Cotonou Convention
applies to this dispute. The second is that the Cotonou Convention supersedes and
precludes application of the BIT. Because of the similarity between Article 30 of the
Cotonou Convention and Article 68 of the General Conditions, most arguments concerning
the scope of the arbitration provision in the Lot 3 Contract apply mutatis mutandis to the

arbitration provision in the Cotonou Convention.

The Respondent contends that this dispute arose “during the performance” of the Lot 3
Contract, as that phrase is used in Article 30 of Annex IV of the Cotonou Convention,
because the 30 October 2009 settlement offer specifies that the proposed payment “cover[s]

all the additional costs and financial charges incurred during the execution of the

RRJ, (27.
ROI, 493.
R-1; ROJ, $59.
ROJ, q71.

ROJ, q71.

246.

247.

248.

261

262

26:

Construction Contract.”?°! In addition, the Respondent continues, this dispute arose during
the performance of the Lot 3 Project, because it arose while the Parties were negotiating
payment and, in the context of construction contracts, “payment” is part of

“performance.”?°?

The Respondent further argues that the Claimants have failed to cite to a provision in the
Lot 3 Contract that limits the scope of the arbitration clause in the Cotonou Convention to
disputes arising during the performance of that Contract. Also, nothing in the Arbitration
Rules of the Cotonou Convention limits its scope to disputes arising during performance.
Instead, Article 1 of the Arbitration Rules refers to disputes “relating to a contract.” The
Respondent asserts that this dispute “relates” to the Lot 3 Contract, because the alleged

settlement agreement relates back to the Lot 3 Contract.”

In response to the Claimants’ argument that this dispute does not arise out of a contract that
was financed by the EDF, because the settlement agreement was to be paid by
Mozambique, the Respondent argues that the dispute ultimately arises out of the Lot 3
Contract, which is clearly “financed” by the EDF.*™ In addition, the Respondent argues
that the Claimants have conceded that the EDF would have paid the settlement agreement.
It points out that the Claimants’ CFO in Mozambique, Mr. Guerra, testified that the EDF

is responsible for invoices whereas Mozambique is responsible for taxes.”

In response to the Claimants’ argument that the Cotonou Convention does not supersede
the BIT, because the Cotonou Convention is not a “successive treat[y] relating to the same

266

subject-matter” for the purposes of Article 30 of the Vienna Convention,~°° the Respondent

argues that the Cotonou Convention and the BIT do relate to the same subject-matter,

ROI, 74-75.
RRJ, (919-20.
RRJ, (17-18.

RRJ, 1923-26.

265 Tr 1 May 2019, p. 567, 1. 10-16; Witness Statement of Guerra, {19.

CRMBJ, 4202.

because the Cotonou Convention deals with investor protection, and the investor-
protection terms of the Cotonou Convention and the Cotonou Arbitration Rules are broad

enough to encompass the Claimants’ BIT claims.7°

249. The Respondent further points out that the Cotonou Arbitration Rules were originally
adopted pursuant to the Lomé Convention, the predecessor of the Cotonou Convention. In
2002, the ACP-EC Council of Ministers adopted Decision No. 2/2002 to extend the
application of the arbitration rules to the Cotonou Convention.”°* The Preamble to that

decision states, inter alia,

(3) Article 30 of Annex IV of the Cotonou Agreement provides that
any dispute arising between the authorities of an ACP State and a
contractor, supplier or provider of services during the performance
of a transnational contract financed by the European Development
Fund shall be settled by arbitration in accordance with the
procedural rules to be adopted by decision of the ACP-EC Council
of Ministers upon the recommendation of the ACP-EC
Development Finance Cooperation Committee.

(4) Provision should be made for applying the general regulations,
the general conditions and the rules governing the conciliation and
arbitration procedure referred to in the previous recitals to contracts
financed from the resources of the ninth European Development
Fund and any future Fund.

250. Article 4 of Decision No. 2/2002 states:
Disputes regarding contracts financed from the resources of the
European Development Fund which, under the general regulations
and general conditions governing such contracts, must be settled in

accordance with the conciliation and arbitration procedure for the
said contracts, shall be settled in accordance with the procedure

261 RRJ, 4977-78.
268 RL-7.
29 Id.

90

adopted by Decision No 3/90 of the ACP-EC Council of Ministers
of 29 March 1990.7”

251. The Respondent argues that this Tribunal cannot simply become a Cotonou Convention
tribunal, because i) ICSID cannot administer a dispute under the Cotonou Arbitration
Rules, and ii) this Tribunal does not and cannot comply with the Cotonou Arbitration
Rules, which require that all arbitrators be citizens of a member state.?7!

252. In response to the Claimants’ reliance on Article 12(1) of the BIT, which provides that,
where a matter is governed by multiple international agreements, the most favorable
provision shall be applied, the Respondent replies that an MEN provision like Article 12(1)
“cannot apply to procedural obligations or override the intent of the parties.””* The

273

Respondent cites Salini v. Jordan,”'” where, it says, the tribunal held that the MFN clause

of the Italy-Jordan BIT did not apply to dispute settlement clauses: “[i]n the event that, as
in this case, the dispute is between a foreign investor and an entity of the Jordanian State,
the contractual disputes between them must, in accordance with Article 9(2), be settled

under the procedure set forth in the investment agreement. The Tribunal has no jurisdiction

to entertain them.”?”4

210 Id. The Respondent also argues that the Cotonou Arbitration Rules in and of themselves require this dispute to be
referred to arbitration under those rules.?” Article 1 of those Arbitration Rules states: “Disputes relating to a
contract financed by the European Development Fund (EDF) which, pursuant to the provisions of the general
conditions and the special conditions governing the contract, may be settled by conciliation or by arbitration shall
be settled in accordance with these procedural rules.” ROJ, (982, 84.

 

271 ROS, 4106.
22 RRI, 476.
23 CL-45, (119.

24 RRI, 476.

2. The Claimants’ Response

253. The Claimants argue that the Lot 3 Contract merely contains a forum selection clause and

that no forum selection clause can deprive an investor of its right under a BIT to resolve a

treaty claim.?”>

254. The Claimants argue that, even if Article 68 of the General Conditions contained an

exclusive jurisdiction clause, that provision would be a forum selection clause which could
not prevent them from bringing a BIT claim under the ICSID Convention.?” The
Claimants rely on the following authorities for the proposition that forum selection clauses

do not preclude ICSID jurisdiction:

a. Lanco International Inc. v. Argentine Republic.?" The Claimants state that in the
Lanco case, “the respondent relied on an exclusive jurisdiction clause in a
concession agreement and argued that ‘as regard any dispute that may arise under
that contract recourse must be had to the Federal Contentious-Administrative
Tribunals of the City of Buenos Aires, which is the jurisdiction freely agreed upon
by the parties after the entry into force of the ARGENTINA-U:S. Treaty.’ The
tribunal rejected this objection and upheld the investor’s right under the BIT to opt

for ICSID arbitration.”?”8

b. Garanti Koza v Turkmenistan,*” in which the tribunal stated that “[t]he fact that

the Contract provides for resolution of disputes arising under the Contract in the

CRMJ, (154.
CRMJ, 1166-175.

Lanco International Inc. v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/97/6 (“Lanco”) Preliminary Decision on
Jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal (8 December 1998) (CL-55) at 7.

CRMIJ, (166.
Garanti Koza LLP v Turkmenistan, (CSID Case No. ARB/11/20, Award (19 December 2016) (CL-51) at $245.

92

255.

280

282

284

285

In resp

Arbitration Court of Turkmenistan does not deprive this Tribunal of jurisdiction

over claims pleaded and arising under the BIT.”?*”

Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine
Republic,”*' in which the tribunal stated that, “[w]here ‘the fundamental basis of
the claim’ is a treaty laying down an independent standard by which the conduct of
the parties is to be judged, the existence of an exclusive jurisdiction clause in a
contract between the claimant and the respondent state or one of its subdivisions

cannot operate as a bar to the application of the treaty standard.”?°?

Siemens AG v Republic of Argentina.**> The Claimants argue that “[t]he tribunal in
Siemens v Argentina agreed with the Vivendi ad-hoc Committee that an exclusive
jurisdiction clause in a contract ‘does not preclude an international tribunal’ from

considering the merits of a treaty cause of action.”?**

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A v Paraguay.”*> The Claimants assert that
“in SGS v. Paraguay, in answer to the question of whether a contractual forum
selection clause could divest an ICSID tribunal of jurisdiction over claims for
breach of treaty, the tribunal held that the answer was ‘undoubtedly negative’ and

that the contractual clause could be ‘readily disposed of.’”?°°

onse to the Respondent’s argument that the Lot 3 Contract is a “transnational”

contract within the meaning of Article 68.5 of the General Conditions, the Claimants argue

CRMJ, (167.

Vivendi, Decision of the Annulment Committee (3 July 2002) (CL-19) at {101 (emphasis added).

CRMJ, 1168-169.

Siemens AG v Republic of Argentina, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/8, Decision on Jurisdiction (3 August 2004) (CL-

14) at (180.

CRMJ, {170.

SGS v Paraguay, Decision on Jurisdiction (12 February 2010) (CL-15) at (138.

CRMJ, {170.

256.

28

288,

281

290

that it is not clear what “national” and “transnational” mean within the context of the Lot 3
Contract and the Cotonou Convention. They point out that the Lot 3 Contract was signed
by CMC Africa Austral, a Mozambican corporation, and that “it is difficult to see how the
Respondent can conclude so easily that the Contract is ‘transnational.’” However, the
Claimants do not go so far as to take the position that the contract is “national” within the

meaning of the Lot 3 Contract and the Cotonou Convention.?*”

The Claimants argue that Article 68 of the General Conditions only applies to contractual
disputes arising during the performance of a contract that is financed by the EDF.
Article 68 of the General Conditions would not apply to this dispute, the Claimants argue,
because (a) it is not a contractual dispute, but rather an investment dispute governed by
international law; (b) the dispute did not arise out of the performance of the Lot 3 Contract;

and (c) the settlement agreement was not financed by the EDF.”**

a. Contractual. The Claimants point out that Article 68.1 of the General Conditions
provides that Article 68 only applies to “disputes relating to the contract.” This
contractual dispute settlement mechanism would therefore not be applicable to

these BIT claims.”*

b. Performance. The Claimants argue that the express terms of the Lot 3 Contract
clearly show that disputes only fall under the Cotonou Convention when they arise
out of the performance of a contract financed by the EDF. They point to Article 30
of Annex IV of the Revised Cotonou Convention which states “Any dispute arising
[...] during the performance of as contract financed by the multi-annual financial
framework of cooperation under this Agreement.” The Claimants state that the
performance of the Contract was completed in November 2007 and that, by March

2009, the Engineer confirmed that he was working on the issuance of the final

CRMB, 9210-211.
CRMB, 156-163.
CRMB, 157-158.

CRMB, 159-160.

257.

258.

certificate. This means that the performance of the Lot 3 contract was completed
before the events that gave rise to this dispute occurred, i.e. the 30 November 2009
settlement offer and the non-transparent and arbitrary conduct that crystalized in

August 2011.79!

c. Financed. The Claimants argue that the settlement does not arise out of works that
were financed by the EDF, because the settled claims were for additional works

that were to be paid for by Mozambique, not the EDF.”

In response to the Respondent’s contention that the arbitration provision survived the
contract to become part of the settlement agreement because it is separable, the Claimants
argue that that the separability of an arbitration clause is to be decided by domestic law,
not international law, and that the Respondent has failed to establish the existence of the

principle of separability under Mozambican law.?°>

In response to the Respondent’s argument that the arbitral procedure in the Cotonou
Convention applies pursuant to Article 9(2) of the BIT, because the Parties stipulated as
much in the Lot 3 Contract, the Claimants argue that “this provision means that merely
contractual breaches of contract or good faith technical discussions regarding the scope of
contractual obligations are to be settled in conformity with the dispute resolution clause of
the ‘investment agreement.’ But it does not mean that a dispute settlement clause under a
contract will affect the jurisdiction of an international tribunal to consider breaches of the
Treaty and international law.”?** For this proposition, the Claimants rely on Salini v.
Jordan, where the tribunal, in applying a BIT provision very similar to Article 9(2) of the
Italy-Mozambique BIT, held that “the dispute settlement procedures provided for in the

Contract could only cover claims based on breaches of the Contract. Those procedures

CRMB, {i[161-162.
CRMJ, 162.
CRMJ, {i164-165; RRJ, (27.

CRMB, 174.

259.

260.

261.

296

cannot cover claims based on breaches of the BIT (including breaches of those provisions

of the BIT guaranteeing fulfilment of contracts signed with foreign investors).”””

The Claimants respond to the Respondent’s assertion that they waived ICSID jurisdiction
by pointing out that Article 68 of the General Conditions is a boilerplate provision that
does not evidence the “specific intention” to effect a “clear waiver of ICSID jurisdiction”

that the award cited by the Respondent requires.”°°

The Claimants disagree with the Respondent’s argument that Article 30 of Annex IV of
the Cotonou Convention itself requires that this dispute be arbitrated pursuant to the
Cotonou Arbitration Rules. They argue that their claims do not involve the performance of
a contract financed by the EDF, because the settlement agreement was entered into two

years after the conclusion of the construction works in November 2007.7”

The Claimants further argue that the Cotonou Convention allows the Parties to settle
disputes “in accordance with the national legislation of the ACP State concerned or its
established international practices.”?°* This includes the arbitration procedures set out in
BITs.””? The Claimants assert that the Respondent conceded that “Article 30 provides two
choices to the investor and the Contracting State between: (a) if the investor and the
Contracting State so agree, by recourse to national legislation, or to the Contracting States’
‘established international practices,’ which could include the procedures in any existing

BITs.”3°°

Salini v. Jordan, Decision on Jurisdiction (9 November 2004) (CL-45) at 496.
CRMJ, 9184-196.

CRMJ, 1156-163.

Article 30 of Annex IV of the original Cotonou Convention (RL-); see Article 68.5(b)(i) of the General

Conditions.

CRMJ, $91207-209.

300 ROJ, $45; CRMJ, (208.

262.

263.

264.

265.

301

302

305

306

The Claimants point out that the Cotonou Arbitration Rules provide that an arbitral tribunal
is to apply municipal law and require that all domestic administrative procedures be
exhausted before a claim is submitted. They take the position that this is further evidence
that the Parties could not have agreed to settle BIT claims pursuant to the Cotonou

Arbitration Rules.*°!

The Claimants disagree with the Respondent’s reading of the EU General Court decision
in Centro di educazione sanitaria e tecnologie appropriate sanitarie (Cestas) v.
Commission of the European Communities. They argue that the EU Court does not hold
that the Cotonou Convention precludes a non-Cotonou Convention tribunal from
exercising jurisdiction and that, in any case, the arbitration procedures in the Cotonou

Convention only apply to contractual disputes.*°?

In response to the Respondent’s argument that the Cotonou Convention supersedes the
BIT, the Claimants argue that the Cotonou Convention cannot require that BIT claims be
resolved pursuant to its arbitration rules, because it is not an investor protection treaty and
does not contain substantive investor protections.*°* They argue that the BIT is clearly lex
specialis in relation to the much broader Cotonou Convention, and that the two treaties do

not relate to the same subject matter within the meaning of Article 30 VCLT.**

The Claimants argue that Article 91 of the Cotonou Convention is irrelevant.>° They rely
on Article 12 of the BIT to argue that, in case of a treaty conflict, the most favorable dispute

settlement provision should apply. *°° Article 12 of the BIT states:

CRM4B, {{{[213-216.

CRMJ, 217.

CRMJ, §91198-199.

CRMJ, (202.

Article 91 of the original Cotonou Convention provides that “No treaty, convention, agreement or arrangement
of any kind between one or more Member States of the Community and one or more ACP States may impede the
implementation of this Agreement.” (RL-1); CRMJ, 4202.

Cl.

266.

267.

307

If a matter is governed both by this Agreement and by another
international agreement to which both Contracting Parties are
signatories, or by general international law provisions, the most
favourable provisions shall be applied in either Contracting Party to
the investors of the other Contracting Party.*°”

3. The Tribunal’s Decision

The determination of whether, as the Respondent contends, the Cotonou Convention
operates to cut off the access to ICSID arbitration to which the BIT would otherwise entitle
the Claimants requires, first, an analysis at the level of international treaty law on the effects
of the interplay among the Cotonou Convention, the ICSID Convention, and the BIT
regarding the treaty obligations of the Respondent. It also requires an analysis at the level
of municipal contract law on whether and to what extent the rights of the Claimants, who
are not parties to any of the foregoing treaties, may be constrained by the terms of those

treaties.

a. The Cotonou Convention does not supersede the BIT

The Cotonou Convention was signed on 23 June 2000 and entered into force on 1 April
2003. The BIT was signed on 14 December 1998, and entered into force on 17 November
2003.*°8 The dates of the two treaties are important because of the rule of treaty
construction stated in Article 30 of the VCLT, which provides that, “[a]s between States

parties” to “successive treaties relating to the same subject-matter,” “the earlier treaty

applies only to the extent that its provisions are compatible with those of the later treaty.”°
In determining which treaty is the earlier and which is the later, commentators generally

refer to the date of signature of each treaty.*!°

Article 12 BIT (C-1).

308 CM, 42, n. 1.

309 Art, 30 (1), (2), and (4) VCLT (CL-6).

310

Mark E. Villiger, Commentary on the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (2009), p. 402. (“However,
when establishing the conflict in time, the relevant date is that of the adoption of the respective treaties, not of
their entry into force.”).

268.

269.

The Cotonou Convention would therefore appear to be the later treaty, but the history of
the Cotonou Convention leaves room for dispute. The Cotonou Convention was not written
on a blank slate, but was the last (and current) version of a series of treaties. As the

European Investment Bank explained in a 2003 press release:

Cotonou follows a long tradition of trade and development aid

partnerships between Europe and its former dependent countries,

now grouped in the ACP group of states, under the Yaoundé and

later Lomé Conventions. From 1963 until the beginning of this year

when the Lomé IV convention was replaced with the Cotonou

Agreement, the EIB has channeled over EUR 9 billion into

investment in the ACP countries.*"!
For present purposes, it is unnecessary to look further back than the Lomé Conventions,
the first of which was signed in 1975. It was succeeded by conventions referred to as
Lomé II in 1979, Lomé III in 1984, and Lomé IV in 1989.3!? Lomé IV expired on 29
February 2000. Shortly before that date, the European Commission submitted to the
Council of Ministers a “[p]roposal for a Council Decision regarding the position to be taken
by the Community within the ACP-EC Committee of Ambassadors with a view to
producing a decision on transitional measures to cover the period between the expiry of the
revised fourth ACP-EC Convention [Lomé IV] and the entry into force of the fifth ACP-

EC Convention.”3!3 The “fifth ACP-EC Convention” became known as the Cotonou

Convention after it was signed at Cotonou, Benin on 23 June 2000.

 

European Investment Bank press release, “EIB launches the Cotonou Agreement Investment Facility,”
https://www.eib. Pp 11/2003-055-eib-launches-the-cot inves -facility.htm (last
visited 9 May 2019). The EIB shares responsibility with the European Commission for managing the European
Development Fund.

 

ACP-EEC Convention signed at Lomé on 28 February 1975 (OJ L 25, 30.1.1976, p. 2-40), available at:
http://data.europa.ew/eli/convention/1976/199/oj; Second ACP-EEC Convention signed at Lomé on 31 October
1979 (OJ L 347, 22.12.1980, p. 2-72), available at: http://data.europa.eu/eli/convention/1980/3225/oj; Third
ACP-EEC Convention signed at Lomé on 8 December 1984 (OJ L 86, 31.3.1986, p. 3-208), available at:
http://data.europa.eweli/convention/1986/125/oj; Fourth ACP-EEC Convention signed at Lomé on 15 December
1989 (OJ L 229, 17.8.1991, p. 3-286), available at: http://data.europa.eweli/convention/1991/400/oj.

European Commission, “Proposal for a Council Decision regarding the position to be taken by the Community
within the ACP-EC Committee of dors with a view to prod a decision on i measures to
cover the period between the expiry of the revised fourth ACP-EC Convention and the entry into force of the fifth
ACP-EC_ Convention,” 9 February 2000, Explanatory Memorandum, _ https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?qid=1557433949052&uri=CELEX:52000PC0063(01) (Last visited 9 May 2019).

99

270.

271.

272.

On the date the Cotonou Convention entered into effect 1 April 2003, the European
Commission confirmed the Cotonou Convention’s status as a successor to the Lomé
Conventions and the measures taken to bridge the gap between the two in a press release

that stated:

The successor to the Lomé Conventions, the Cotonou Agreement

has been partly implemented on a provisional basis since August

2000. One important dimension — the financial implementation

provisions — had to be delayed pending ratification by the fifteen EU

Member States. This is now done. The Cotonou philosophy, based

on a more effective political dimension and a higher degree of

flexibility in the provision of aid in order to reward performance and

results, can now be fully implemented.*!*
Since predecessors of many of the provisions of the Cotonou Convention on which the
Respondent relies, such as the provision for arbitrating claims arising out of the
performance of contracts for projects financed by the EDF, occur in the predecessor treaties
to the Cotonou Convention, which were signed before the BIT was signed, there is room
for argument as to which should be considered the later treaty. The Parties did not address
that question, however, and the Tribunal does not need to resolve it, because the issue arises
only if the BIT and the Cotonou Convention relate to “the same subject-matter” and their

provisions are not compatible in that they cannot be applied simultaneously.*!* We

therefore turn to those two questions.

It appears to the Tribunal that the overlap between the subject matters of the BIT and the
Cotonou Convention is very small. The BIT deals entirely with the encouragement and
protections offered by Italy and Mozambique to investors and investments from the other
country. The Cotonou Convention states that it was concluded between “the European
Community, on the one hand,” and “the Group of African, Caribbean and Pacific States

(ACP), on the other,”?!® “in order to promote and expedite the economic, cultural and social

314 European Commission press release IP/03/467, “The Cotonou Agreement enters into force today (1* April 2003),”
europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-03-467_en.pdf (last visited 9 May 2019).

35 Article 30(1), (3), and (4) VCLT (CL-6).

316 RL-2, Preamble.

273.

274.

275.

development of the ACP States, with a view to contributing to peace and security and to

promoting a stable and democratic political environment.”>!”

Both treaties thus seem to include economic development among their objectives, but the
scale and scope of the two is significantly different. The BIT consists of 15 articles on nine
pages, plus a three-page protocol. The Revised Cotonou Convention consists of 100
articles, on 106 pages, plus seven annexes on an additional 67 pages and three protocols
on an additional 12 pages. The table of contents of the Cotonou Convention lists provisions
dealing with the political dimension, institutional provisions, cooperation strategies,
development strategies, economic and trade cooperation, development finance
cooperation, financial cooperation, procedures and management systems, and provisions
for the least developed, landlocked and island states. These topics cover a far wider range

than the investment protection provisions of the BIT.

It is notable in this connection that the Cotonou Convention contains a provision explicitly
encouraging the parties to that convention to enter into bilateral investment treaties.

Article 78 of the Cotonou Convention, entitled “Investment Protection,” provides that:

The ACP States and the Community and its Member States, within
the scope of their respective competencies, affirm the need to
promote and protect either Party’s investments on their respective
territories, and in this context affirm the importance of concluding,
in their mutual interest, investment promotion and protection
agreements which could also provide the basis for insurance and
guarantee schemes.*!®

Article 15(2) of Annex II of the Cotonou Convention similarly provides that “[w]ith a view
to facilitating the negotiation of bilateral agreements on investment promotion and
protection, the Contracting Parties agree to study the main clauses of a model protection

agreement.”?!°

317 RL-2, Art. 1.

318 RL-2, Art. 78(1).

31 RL-2, Annex II, Art. 15(2).

101

276.

277.

278.

279.

It would seem evident that a treaty that affirms the need for and importance of investment
promotion and protection agreements, and in which the Parties undertake to study the main
clauses of such an agreement, is not itself an investment promotion and protection
agreement. The Cotonou Convention and the BIT thus appear to the Tribunal not to deal

with “the same subject-matter.”

Moreover, the provisions of the Cotonou Convention and the BIT are entirely compatible.
The Cotonou Convention affirms the importance of investment promotion and protection
agreements, and the BIT is such an investment promotion and investment agreement.
There is no need to reconcile the two, or to give one prominence over the other, unless

there is some specific conflict between their respective terms.

b. The Cotonou Convention’s arbitration provisions do not conflict
with those of the BIT

The Respondent argues that the arbitration provisions of the Cotonou Convention are in
direct contradiction to those of the BIT. While both provide for arbitration of disputes, the
Cotonou Convention calls for “arbitration in accordance with the procedural rules which
will be adopted by decision of the Council of Ministers at the first meeting following the
signing of this Agreement”,*”° while the BIT offers an investor the choice among ad hoc
arbitration under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, ICSID arbitration, and “other
international arbitration arrangements, mechanisms or instruments adhered to and ratified

by both Contracting Parties.”??!

The Tribunal notes, first, that the terms of the BIT do not preclude arbitration under the
Cotonou Arbitration Rules. Those rules would qualify as “other international arbitration
arrangements, mechanisms, or instruments adhered to and ratified by both Contracting
Parties” under Article 9(3)(d) of the BIT, and both Italy and Mozambique are parties to

both treaties.

20 RL-2, Annex IV, Art. 30(b)(ii).

321

Article 9(3) BIT (C-1).

102

280.

281.

282.

283.

Similarly, the Cotonou Convention provides that a dispute arising out of a “transnational
contract” may be submitted to arbitration under either the Cotonou Arbitration Rules or “if
the Parties to the contract so agree, in accordance with the national legislation of the ACP
State concerned or its established international practices.”*?? It would hardly do violence
to the words of the Cotonou Convention to consider arbitration under the terms of the BIT
to be one of Mozambique’s “established international practices,” and the Respondent

concedes as much.”

In addition, the Tribunal finds no conflict in the subject matters for which each treaty
provides for arbitration. The BIT provides for arbitration of disputes “which may arise
between either Contracting Party and the investors of the other Contracting Party on

investments.”*** The Cotonou Convention provides for arbitration of:

Any dispute arising between the authorities of an ACP State or the

relevant organization or body at regional or intra-ACP level and a

contractor, supplier or provider of services during the performance

of a contract financed by the multiannual financial framework of

cooperation under this Agreement [...]°7>
The present dispute is a dispute between a Contracting Party to the BIT and an investor of
the other Contracting Party having to do with an investment, and thus falls within the
arbitration provisions of the BIT. It is also a dispute between the authorities of an ACP
State and a contractor, as specified in the Cotonou Convention. But these provisions would
conflict only if this dispute arose “during the performance” of a contract financed under

the framework of the Cotonou Convention.

The Claimants argue that the present dispute did not arise “during the performance” of the

Lot 3 Contract. They assert that work under that contract was effectively completed in or

82 RL-2, Annex IV, Art. 30(b)(i).

ROJ, 45.

24 C1, Art. 9(1).

35 RL-2, Annex IV, Art. 30.

103

284.

285.

286.

around November 2007,°°

and that the Engineer submitted his final decision on the work
done on 11 May 2009, showing that performance was complete by that date at the latest.°?”
The documentation concerning performance thus seems to have become complete with
CMC Ravenna’s interim payment application of 24 July 2009 seeking payment of the
amount awarded, although the Final Acceptance Certificate was not issued until
14 July 2011, and that certificate stated that the contractor had completed its obligations
under the contract “with effect from 24 March 2011.”°?8 CMC Ravenna and ANE
continued after 14 July 2011 to argue about what compensation CMC was due for the work
done before that date, but the Tribunal has seen no suggestion that any work on Lot 3 was

performed after May of 2009.

The current dispute cannot have arisen before 30 October 2009, the date of ANE’s offer
letter to CMC Ravenna, by which time performance was completed.*”? Given the
correspondence after that date, the Tribunal concludes that the dispute should be considered
to have arisen on or after 8 August 2011, when ANE sent its letter refusing to make any

further payment for the work on Lot 3.7°°

While the Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that the Claimants’ claims “relate to” the
Lot 3 Contract, in that the Claimants are, in effect, seeking additional compensation for

their work on Lot 3, the dispute did not arise “during the performance” of that contract.

The present dispute arose out of the inability of CMC and ANE to agree on whether any
additional amount was due for CMC’s completed work on the Lot 3 Project. The Tribunal
is unpersuaded by the Respondent’s argument that disputes about payment constitute

performance of a contract.**! Even if payment itself were considered an element of

CM, 48. See para. 106 above.

The engineer’s final decision is part of Exhibit C-28.

38 C31; C-5.

329 C2,

330 C4,

31 RRJ, 19-20.

104

287.

288.

289.

performance, payment of the amounts authorized by ANE had been made by July 2011,

before the dispute arose on or after 8 August 2011.

Since the dispute did not arise during the performance of the Lot 3 Contract, the Cotonou
Convention does not, by its terms, require this dispute to be submitted to arbitration under

the Cotonou Arbitration Rules.

c. The Lot 3 Contract does not require arbitration of this dispute
under the Cotonou Arbitration Rules

Even if the Tribunal found the Cotonou Convention to require Mozambique to submit the
present dispute to arbitration under the Cotonou Arbitration Rules — and the preceding
section explains that it does not — that Convention would not have any direct application to
the Claimants, who are private parties. The Respondent argues that the Claimants are
required to submit the present dispute to arbitration under the Cotonou Arbitration Rules,
because the Claimants, or at least CMC Africa Austral, agreed in the Lot 3 Contract to do

so.

Article 68 of the General Conditions of the Lot 3 Contract requires the Parties to “make
every effort to amicably settle disputes relating to the Contract which may arise between
them.”*** In the absence of such an amicable settlement, a dispute concerning a “national
contract” is to be settled according to Mozambique’s “national legislation,” and a dispute
concerning a “transnational contract” is to be settled either in accordance with that
legislation, or in accordance with Mozambique’s “established international practices,” or

by arbitration under the Cotonou Arbitration Rules.**4

Payment was authorized on 15 October 2009. The record does not show when payment was received, but the
Claimants do not dispute that it was made. See para. 115 above. The Claimants’ letter of 26 July 2011 could have
been expected to have complained if IPC 27 had not been paid by then (C-5).

C-25, General Conditions, Art. 68.1.

54 C-25, General Conditions, Art. 68.5. ICSID arbitration could, of course, be considered an aspect of Mozambique’s

“established international practices.”

105

290.

291.

292.

293.

294.

This Tribunal is not called upon to decide whether the contract to which the present dispute
relates is a “national” or a “transnational” contract, because no aspect of this dispute turns

on the difference.

The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ claims really arise out of the Lot 3 Contract,
and that Article 68 of the General Conditions therefore requires those claims to be asserted
in a different forum. If the Tribunal agreed that the present claims were merely claims for
breach of contract, the Tribunal would agree with the Respondent’s conclusion. But the
Tribunal does not agree that the claims asserted are contract claims, for the reasons

explained above at paragraphs 219-222.

The fact that the Lot 3 Contract provides for resolution of disputes arising under that
contract in either the courts of Mozambique or under the Cotonou Arbitration Rules does
not deprive this Tribunal of jurisdiction over claims pleaded and arising under the BIT. As
the ad hoc committee in Vivendi observed: “A state cannot rely on an exclusive jurisdiction
clause in a contract to avoid the characterisation of its conduct as internationally unlawful

under a treaty.”>75

For the same reason, the Respondent’s argument under Article 9(2) of the BIT is
unavailing. Article 9(2) provides that, “[i]Jn case an investor or entity of one of the
Contracting Parties have stipulated an investment agreement in accordance with the
relevant applicable laws in force, the procedure foreseen in such investment agreement
shall apply.” Assuming for the moment that the Lot 3 Contract is such an “investment
agreement,” the Tribunal has found that the Lot 3 Contract does not by its terms require
the submission of the Claimants’ BIT claims to arbitration under the Cotonou Convention.

There is thus no “procedure foreseen” in that agreement to apply to those claims.

The Claimants in this case have asserted multiple claims that the Respondent has breached
its obligations under the BIT. Specifically, they allege that the Respondent has failed to
treat their investment justly and fairly, in breach of Article 2(3) of the BIT, that they have

been subjected to unjustified or discriminatory measures in breach of the same Article, that

85. Vivendi, Decision on Annulment (3 July 2002) (CL-19) at (103.

106

295.

296.

297.

the Respondent has failed to create and maintain a legal framework apt to guarantee legal
treatment to investors in breach of Article 2(4), and that it has failed to provide most-
favored-nation treatment in breach of Article 3.>°° The Tribunal does not need to decide
that the Claimants can prove those claims in order to find that it has jurisdiction to consider
them; it is sufficient for present purposes for the Tribunal to conclude that, if the claims

can be proven, they fall within its jurisdiction. The Tribunal so concludes.

The Tribunal thus does not consider that the Claimants were obligated to assert their claims
under the BIT in an arbitration conducted under the Cotonou Arbitration Rules, either as a
matter of treaty interpretation or as a matter of contract. Neither the Cotonou Convention
nor the Lot 3 Contract, in the Tribunal’s view, deprive the Claimants of their right under

the BIT to submit the present dispute to ICSID arbitration.

E. The ECJ’s Achmea Judgment
1. The Respondent’s Objection

The Respondent argues that the decision of the European Court of Justice (“ECJ”) in Slovak
Republic v. Achmea**’ has in any event rendered the arbitration clause in the Italy-
Mozambique BIT invalid.*** The Achmea decision addresses whether treaties between EU
member states that provide for investor-state arbitration are compatible with EU law, when:
(a) the tribunal is not a part of the EU’s judicial system; (b) that tribunal may resolve
disputes concerning the application or interpretation of EU law; (c) that tribunal cannot
submit preliminary questions to the ECJ; and (d) its decisions are not sufficiently

reviewable by EU courts.**?

In response to the Claimants’ objection that this issue was not raised in a timely manner,

with its first pleading, the Respondent explains that the Joint Declaration of 22 EU member

336 CM, 4200.

331 Slovak Republic v. Achmea BY (“Achmea”), [2018] 2 C.M.L.R. 40 (RL-37).

ROA.

RL-37.

107

states, including Italy, on the effects of Achmea was only issued on 15 January 2019 (the
“Joint Declaration’). 40 The Respondent asserts that, according to that Declaration, the
reasoning of Achmea also applies to the Energy Charter Treaty, which includes non-EU

member states.*4! The Joint Declaration states:

Furthermore, international agreements concluded by the Union,
including the Energy Charter Treaty, are an integral part of the EU
legal order and must therefore be compatible with the Treaties.
Arbitral tribunals have interpreted the Energy Charter Treaty as also
containing an investor-State arbitration clause applicable between
Member States. Interpreted in such a manner, that clause would be
incompatible with the Treaties and thus would have to be
disapplied.*?

298. The Respondent asserts that, applying the reasoning of the Joint Declaration, the Achmea

342.

344

decision must also apply to BITs between member states (in this case Italy) and non-
member states (in this case Mozambique).*“° It contends that two propositions necessarily

follow:

a. As the Cotonou Convention (to which the EU itself is a party) is an integral part of
EU law, and as Achmea has affirmed the supremacy of EU law over investor-state
arbitration agreements, the arbitration clause in the Italy-Mozambique BIT is void
to the extent that it conflicts with the Cotonou Convention.** In addition, the
arbitration provision in the BIT is void because Italy’s interpretation of Achmea

terminates, because of reciprocity, Mozambique’s obligations.**>

b. The Claimants cannot invoke the arbitration clause in the BIT, according to the

Respondent, because doing so would require an international tribunal to decide on

RL-36.
ROA, 93.
RL-36, p. 2.
ROA, 93.
ROA, 45.

RRA, 3-4.

108

the application of EU law (specifically, the Cotonou Convention) and render an
award which cannot be reviewed by EU courts, neither of which is permitted by

Achmea.**°

299. The Respondent argues that UP and C.D Holding Internationale v. Hungary (“UP and

C.D Holding” ), an ICSID arbitration brought under the France-Hungary BIT, was wrongly
decided. **7 In that case, the respondent argued on the basis of the Achmea decision that the
ICSID tribunal lacked jurisdiction.*#* The tribunal rejected that argument and found that
the Achmea decision had no application to an arbitration under the ICSID Convention. The

tribunal reasoned that:

The Achmea Decision contains no reference to the ICSID
Convention or to ICSID Arbitration. Therefore, and in view of the
above mentioned determinative differences between the Achmea
case and the present one, the Achmea Decision cannot be understood
or interpreted as creating or supporting an argument that, by its
accession to the EU, Hungary was no longer bound by the ICSID
Convention?

300. The Respondent argues that the Achmea decision did reference the ICSID Convention.*°°

The Respondent argues that the BIT in this case is unenforceable, because Achmea prevents
Italy from being bound by the BIT “and, consequently, neither can the Republic of
Mozambique based on lack of reciprocity.”*>! For the proposition that reciprocity mandates
that treaty provisions are applicable only to the extent that and as long as they are
acceptable to both Parties, the Respondent relies on the award in Daimler Financial

Services AG v. Argentine Republic, which stated:

ROA, 6.

UP and C.D Holding Internationale v. Hungary, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/35, Award (9 October 2018) (RL-38);
ROA, {{37-38.

UP and C.D Holding, Award (9 October 2018)(RL-38) at (63.
UP and C.D Holding, Award (9 October 2018)(RL-38) at 1258; ROA, 136 (emphasis in original).
ROA, 37.

ROA, 939; RRA, 4945-50.

109

301.

BITs are reciprocal bilateral treaties negotiated between two
sovereign State parties. The general purpose of BITs is of course
primarily to protect and promote foreign investment; but it is to do
so within the framework acceptable to both of the State parties.
These two aspects must always be held in tension. They are the yin
and yang of bilateral investment treaties and cannot be separated
without doing violence to the will of the states that conclude such
treaties.**?

In support of its argument that the Achmea decision applies to bilateral investment treaties
between EU member states and non-member states like the BIT, the Respondent relies on

the following authorities:

a. An article by John I. Blanck (Attorney Advisor at the United States Department of
State) entitled “Slovak Republic v. Achmea BV: The Death Knell for Intra-EU
BITs?”>>? That article states:

More broadly, the issue raised by the CJEU, that an
investment arbitration might result in the lack of
effectiveness and uniformity of EU law, might occur when
an EU member state is a respondent in any BIT arbitration,
not just pursuant to intra-EU BIT ones. The United States
has nine BITs with EU member states, and if U.S. investors
were to bring claims before an arbitral tribunal pursuant to
any of these BITs, the potential for EU law to be interpreted
or applied also exists.

b. An article by Laurens Ankersmit entitled “Achmea: The Beginning of the End for

ISDS in and with Europe?”*** That article states:

More complex is the question of the future of extra-EU
BITs—those concluded between EU member states and non-
member states. The thrust of the ECJ’s reasoning makes it
clear that arbitration clauses contained in such agreements
are not immune from challenge. Indeed, tribunals under

 

Daimler Financial Services AG v. Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/05/1, Award (22 August 2012) (RL-
43) at $1161; RRA, 146 (emphasis in original).

ASIL, 19 June 2018 (RL-40); ROA, 144 (emphasis in original).

Investment Treaty News, International Institute for Sustainable Development, 24 April 2018 (RL-41); ROA, 945
(emphasis in original).

110

such treaties may very well potentially remove disputes
involving questions of EU law and EU remedies from EU
member state courts. As a result, EU member states may be
required to terminate these agreements, and the
enforceability of awards before EU member state courts is
in doubt.

302. In response to the authorities cited by the Claimants in support of the proposition that the
Achmea decision is not relevant to an international tribunal that is asked to apply

international law, the Respondent argues:
a. Regarding Vattenfall AB and others v. Federal Republic of Germany:*>

In the Joint Declaration, Italy has stated that the Achmea
decision does apply to a treaty involving non-EU Member
States. Vattenfall is outdated and cannot be used to interpret
the Joint Declaration because it predates the Joint
Declaration. Further, for purposes of reciprocity what the
tribunal concluded in Vattenfall is irrelevant. What matters
is the view of the Republic of Italy. [...] Vattenfall is also
inapposite because it did not involve two competing
international treaties between the same parties with
arbitration provisions. In contrast, this dispute involves the
Cotonou Convention and Italy-MZ BIT with competing
arbitration provisions and this Tribunal must decide which
treaty prevails. [...] Further, nothing in Vattenfall
contradicts the conclusion that while Cotonou Convention
arbitration is consistent with the Achmea decision because a
Cotonou Convention tribunal is formed under EU law, an
ICSID tribunal offends Achmea because it is not formed
under EU law [...].°*°

b. Regarding Opinion 1/17 of the Advocate General:*>7
The arguments of the Advocate General do nothing to
change the result in these proceedings. The Advocate

General is not the ECJ. The ECJ opinion prevails on its own
terms. But relevant for purposes of reciprocity, Italy, the

385 Vattenfall AB and others v. Federal Republic of Germany, \CSID Case No. ARB/12/12, (““Vattenfall” ), Decision
on the Achmea Issue (31 August 2018) (CL-62).

386 RRA, 27-29.

387 Opinion 1/17 of the Advocate General (29 January 2019) (CL-63).

1

other Contracting State to the Italy-MZ BIT, has declared in
the Joint Declaration that the Achmea decision does apply to
an international agreement which includes non-EU States
[...] Thus, the Joint Declaration of Italy and twenty-two EU
Member States disputes the Advocate General’s view. The
Advocate General is not a party to the Italy-MZ BIT, and
cannot force Italy to afford reciprocity to Mozambique under
the Italy-MZ BIT.*°*

c. Regarding Greentech Energy Systems A/S, GWM Renewable Energy I S.P.A.,
GWM Renewable Energy II S.P.A. v. The Kingdom of Spain:*?

Greentech, like Vattenfall, predates the Joint Declaration,
and thus is not useful in evaluating the effect of the Joint
Declaration. [...] Italy, and twenty-two other EU Member
States, declared that the Achmea decision applies to treaties
with non-EU Member States despite the Greentech and
Vattenfall, therefore rejecting those decisions.*®

d. Regarding Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain;*°! and UP
and C.D Holding’

Claimants also cite to Masdar v. Spain and UP and C.D v.
Hungary to argue that the Achmea judgment does not apply
to multilateral treaties such as the ECT. [...] Claimants argue
that the considerations are different between relationships
involving EU Member States and those involving a non-EU
Member State and EU Member State. [...] [T]he Joint
Declaration indicates that the Achmea decision may be
applied more broadly to multilateral treaties such as the

RRA, {31 (emphasis in original).

Greentech Energy Systems A/S, GWM Renewable Energy I S.P.A., GWM Renewable Energy Il S.P.A. v. The
Kingdom of Spain, SCC Arbitration (2015/150) (“Greentech”) Final Award (14 November 2018) (CL-64).

RRA, 432.

Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain, 1CSID Case No. ARB/14/1 (“Masdar v. Spain”)
Final Award (16 May 2018) (CL-65).

UP and C.D Holding, Award (9 October 2018) (RL-38).

112

303.

304.

305.

ECT, and thus the reasoning of the cited decisions is
outdated after the Joint Declaration.*

The Respondent further argues that this Tribunal does not have jurisdiction because it is
called upon to decide a question of EU law. It states that:
The Achmea decision held that an EU Member State cannot enter
into an investment treaty whereby issues of EU law are referred for
decision to an international tribunal, instead of an EU court. That is
because EU courts have exclusive jurisdiction to decide issues of
EU law. Before this Tribunal is the issue of whether the arbitration
provisions of the Cotonou Convention govern this dispute. The EU
itself is a party to the Cotonou Convention, and thus the Cotonou
Convention is part of EU law. International agreements entered into
by the EU itself are a part of EU law. [...] Thus, this Tribunal must
determine whether, as a matter of EU law—that is, under the
Cotonou Convention—this dispute must be decided in a Cotonou
Convention arbitration, instead of an ICSID Convention arbitration.
Application of the Italy-MZ BIT in these proceedings does involve
EU law.*
At a minimum, the Respondent argues, the decision in Achmea confirms that the
Claimants’ claims must be arbitrated under the Cotonou Arbitration Rules. In this
connection, the Respondent points to Article 91 of the original Cotonou Convention, which
states:
No treaty, convention, agreement or arrangement of any kind
between one or more Member States of the Community and one or
more ACP States may impede the implementation of this
Agreement.?°
The Respondent argues that this Article has the effect that the arbitration clause in the BIT
cannot impede the application of the arbitration clause in the Cotonou Convention.* The
Respondent concludes that “the Achmea decision mandates, or at least makes preferable,
RRA, (40.
RRA, {19.
RL-1, Article 91.
ROA, {13.

113

306.

the conclusion that the arbitration provisions of the Cotonou Convention are exclusive or
take precedence over the arbitration provisions of the Italy-Mozambique BIT. As a result,
the reasoning in the Achmea decision further confirms the supremacy of Article 9[(1)] of
the Cotonou Convention and, thus, that this Tribunal lacks jurisdiction under the Italy-

Mozambique BIT.”**”

The Tribunal asked the Parties to give their views on the implications of the 7 May 2019
interim decision in the Eskosol v. Italy arbitration and the 30 April 2019 Opinion 1/17 of
the European Court of Justice, both of which became available after the Hearing. The
Eskosol decision held that the Achmea decision did not affect arbitral jurisdiction over an
intra-EU Energy Charter Treaty arbitration. In Opinion 1/17, the ECJ held that the investor-
state dispute resolution clause in the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement
between Canada and the European Union is compatible with EU law. The Respondent

submitted the following observations:
a. Regarding Eskosol v. Italy, the Respondent stated:

4. The Eskosol [...] tribunal derived its jurisdiction
from the ICSID Convention, and there was nothing in the
ECT Treaty, applicable BIT or Achmea decision that
‘deprived’ that tribunal of ICSID Convention jurisdiction. In
sharp contrast, in the case before this Tribunal, the situation
is completely different. [...]

5. Under Article 91, the arbitration provisions of the
Cotonou Convention expressly preempt application of the
arbitration provisions of the Italy-Mozambique BIT [...].
Therefore, this Tribunal lacks any preexisting international
law-based jurisdiction under the ICSID Convention. Here,
Eskosol’s holding that the tribunal cannot be ‘deprived’ of
ICSID Convention jurisdiction is irrelevant and
inapplicable, because this Tribunal did not have ICSID
Convention Jurisdiction in the first place. [...]

10. The Eskosol tribunal also missed the point when it
observed that the Achmea decision cannot “retroactively”
invalidate consent. Eskosol, { 199, RL-61. The point is that,

367 ROA, {19. In the original text, referring to Article 9, which the Tribunal believes was intended as Article 9(1).

114

because Italy did not have authority to enter into the BIT in
the first place, there was never any consent in the first place.
In order words, the purported “consent” is void ab initio.
This is precisely the view that has been presented by the EU
in the amicus brief in the Micula case in the United States.
The European Commission stated its official view that the
Achmea decision applied “with full force to agreements to
resolve disputes by ICSID arbitration.” EU Amicus Brief, p.
13, RL-46. “Here, the arbitration agreement underlying the
[ICSID] Award is void.” (dd. p. 11).3%

b. Regarding Opinion 1/17 of the European Court of Justice, the Respondent stated:

15. Opinion 1/17 is distinguishable because unlike
CETA, Article 91 of the Cotonou Convention mandates
application of its arbitration rules over the provisions of the
Italy-Mozambique BIT permitting ICSID Convention
arbitration, as discussed above. Such a clause was absent in
Eskosol and the Opinion 1/17.

16. In Opinion 1/17, the CJEU considered two factors
regarding whether CETA was compatible with the autonomy
of the EU legal order: CETA did not “confer on the
envisaged tribunals any power to interpret or apply EU law”
and did not establish tribunals that “may issue awards which
have the effect of preventing the EU institutions from
operating in accordance with the EU constitutional
framework.” Opinion 1/17, 119, RL-62.

17. In contrast, here this Tribunal is being asked to
interpret EU law. Moreover, unlike CETA, here there are
also no procedural safeguards in ICSID Convention
arbitration to protect against the risk anticipated in
Achmea.>

2. The Claimants’ Response

307. As a preliminary matter, the Claimants assert that the Respondent’s objections were

untimely, because Rule 41 of the ICSID Rules and Procedural Order No. 1 require

368 Respondent’s Observations to Eskosol and Opinion 1/17, 9{14.5, 10 (emphasis in original). The Tribunal notes
that the argument made by the European Commission in its amicus brief in the Micula case was rejected by the
United States District Court to which that brief was addressed after the close of briefing in this arbitration. See
Micula v. Romania, Case No. 17-cv-02332 (APM), Memorandum Opinion, 11 Sept. 2019 at 19-22.

3 Respondent’s Observations to Eskosol and Opinion 1/17, ${{15-17.

115

jurisdictional objections to be raised in the Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction. The
Achmea objection was not and should for that reason be dismissed.*”” They also argue that,

as the Tribunal was not constituted on the basis of any legal order other than the BIT, it

cannot apply EU law, including the Cotonou Convention, to ascertain its jurisdiction.*”!

308. The Claimants rely on the following authorities on the question whether “EU law (and the

Achmea judgement) is relevant to the question of jurisdiction of international tribunals

under investment treaties”:>”

a. Vattenfall AB and others v. Federal Republic of Germany.*” The tribunal in this
case held that “EU law does not constitute principles of international law which
may be used to derive meaning from Article 26 of the ECT, since it is not general

law applicable as such to the interpretation and application of the arbitration clause

in another treaty such as the ECT.”2”4

b. Opinion 1/17 of the Advocate General of the European Court of Justice.*”> The

Advocate General found that:

110. I would add, in this regard, that, contrary to the situation
in the BIT at issue in the case which gave rise to the
judgment in Achmea, which contained a clause on the
applicable law which could suggest that the arbitration
tribunal concerned had jurisdiction to hear and determine
disputes relating to the interpretation and application of EU
law, the CETA clearly states, as I will have occasion to
expand upon later, that the applicable law before the CETA
Tribunal consists exclusively of the relevant provisions of
that agreement, as interpreted in accordance with
international law. The domestic law of each Party, of which

COA, 113-4.
| COA, {16

2 COA, {II

 

Vattenfall, Decision on the Achmea Issue (31 August 2018) (CL-62) at {133.
4 COA, {IL
5 Opinion 1/17 of the Advocate General of the European Court of Justice (29 January 2019) (CL-63).

116

EU law forms part in the case of the Member States, can be
taken into account by that Tribunal only as a matter of fact,
and the meaning ascribed to domestic law is not binding on
the courts and tribunals or the authorities of the defendant
Party. In addition, unlike in the case of bilateral investment
treaties between Member States such as that at issue in the
case which gave rise to the judgment in Achmea, EU law
does not form part of the international law applicable
between the Parties [EU and Canada].

111. Furthermore, in order to distinguish clearly between the
case of bilateral investment treaties between Member States
and that of investment agreements such as the CETA, the
Court took care in its judgment in Achmea to recall its settled
case-law that ‘an international agreement providing for the
establishment of a court responsible for the interpretation of
its provisions and whose decisions are binding on the
institutions, including the Court of Justice, is not in principle
incompatible with EU law. The competence of the EU in the
field of international relations and its capacity to conclude
international agreements necessarily entail the power to
submit to the decisions of a court which is created or
designated by such agreements as regards the interpretation
and application of their provisions, provided that the
autonomy of the EU and its legal order is respected.

Greentech Energy Systems A/S, GWM Renewable Energy I S.P.A... GWM
Renewable Energy II S.P.A. v. The Kingdom of Spain.*”° The tribunal held that its
“jurisdiction is derived from the express terms of the ECT, a binding treaty under
international law. The Tribunal is not an institution of the European legal order, and

it is not subject to the requirements of this legal order.”>””

© Greentech, Final Award (14 November 2018) (CL-64) at (218.

7 COA, 415.

117

d. Eskosol S.P.A. in Lizuidazione v. Italian Republic.*”. The Claimants argue that, as
the BIT regime and EU law operate independently, the BIT cannot be incompatible

with EU law.*”? The Eskosol tribunal found in this regard that:

Ultimately, the bottom line is that in a case of contradiction,
each legal order remains bound by its own rules, for
purposes of its own judgments. The CJEU’s conclusions
regarding the EU legal order are addressed to EU Member
States and European institutions, and they accordingly may
have no choice but to take steps consistent with the CJEU’s
tuling, including submitting arguments to international
tribunals based on the EU legal order. But the CJEU’s
conclusions derived from EU law do not alter this Tribunal’s
mandate to proceed under the legal order on which its
jurisdiction is founded, namely the ECT. This means that an
international investment tribunal empaneled under the ECT
is not bound by the jurisprudence of the CJEU, just as the
CJEU is not bound by decisions taken by ECT tribunals.*8°

309. The Claimants further take the position that Achmea does not apply to the BIT, which was
concluded between an EU member state (Italy) and a non-member state (Mozambique).
They argue that Achmea involved a dispute about an intra-EU BIT, which specifically
required an arbitral tribunal to take any agreements between the Contracting Parties into

account as applicable law.**! They rely on the following authorities:

a. Masdar Solar & Wind Cooperatief U.A. v. Kingdom of Spain.*** The tribunal in
this case held that “the Achmea Judgment does not take into consideration, and thus
it cannot be applied to, multilateral treaties, such as the ECT, to which the EU itself

is a party.”

Eskosol v. Italy, Decision on Italy’s Request for Immediate Termination and Italy’s Jurisdictional Objection
Based on Inapplicability of the Energy Charter Treaty to Intra-EU Disputes (7 May 2019) (RL-61).

Claimants’ Comments on Opinion 1/17 and Award Eskosol v. Italy, at IV.6.

380 Eskosol v. Italy, Decision on Italy’s Request for Immediate Termination and Italy’s Jurisdictional Objection
Based on Inapplicability of the Energy Charter Treaty to Intra-EU Disputes (7 May 2019) (RL-61) at (184.

381 COA, {18-21
382 Masdar v. Spain, Final Award (16 May 2018) (CL-65) at 1679.

118

b. Opinion 1/17 of the Advocate General of the European Court of Justice.*** The

Advocate General found:

109. Accordingly, since Section F of Chapter 8 of the CETA
is contained in an agreement with a third State, which is
intended to be concluded by the European Union and its
Member States and governs relations between those Parties
and not the mutual relations between Member States, the line
of reasoning developed by the Court in its judgment in
Achmea in the light of Articles 267 and 344 TFEU does not
appear to me to be capable of applying to the ICS. [...]

167. As the Commission rightly states in its observations, the
role of the CETA Tribunal is not to apply internal EU law,
rather merely the provisions of the CETA. That agreement
offers additional protection under international law and
provides for a specific mechanism which allows the
investors of the other Party to rely on that protection. That
being said, it does not, however, restrict the substantive
tights enjoyed by foreign investors under internal EU law.
Nor does it have the effect of limiting the jurisdiction of the
Court or of the courts and tribunals of the Member States to
hear and determine actions brought with a view to ensuring
the observance of such rights as are afforded by internal EU
law.

168. Accordingly, the establishment of the ICS does not
prevent foreign investors from seeking to protect their
investments by bringing proceedings before the courts and
tribunals of the Parties with a view to the domestic law of
those Parties being applied. [...] These are therefore two
complementary legal remedies and not substitutes for one
another.
c. UP and C.D Holding Internationale v. Hungary.*** The tribunal in this case held
that “[its jurisdiction was] based on the ICSID Convention, i.e. a multilateral public

international law treaty for the specific purpose of resolving investment disputes

383 Opinion 1/17 Advocate General of the European Court of Justice (29 January 2019) (CL-63); COA, 123, 24.
38 UP and C.D Holding, Award (9 October 2018) (RL-38); COA, 925.

119

between private parties and a State (here, Hungary) [...] in a public international

law context and not in a national or regional context.”

Eskosol S.P.A. in Lizuidazione v. Italian Republic.*** The Claimants argue that the
tribunal in this case “concluded that the Achmea decision — while perfectly valid
with regard to certain intra-EU BITs from the perspective of the EU legal order —
‘does not disturb the jurisdiction to decide a dispute in the international legal order
under the ECT.’ The Eskosol tribunal recognised ‘the vocabulary used by the CIEU
in its dispositif is an undeniable reference only to bilateral treaties among EU
Member States, not multilateral treaties to which the EU itself gave imprimatur by
virtue of ratification.’ [...] It stated that in the Achmea decision the CJEU ‘refer
only to a bilateral treaty, and cannot be simply presumed to extend [...] to

multilateral treaties involving non-EU Member States.’”**°

Opinion 1/17 of the European Court of Justice.**’ The Claimants point to the ECJ’s

statement that:

[A]n international agreement providing for the creation of a

court responsible for the interpretation of its provisions and

whose decisions are binding on the European Union, is, in

principle, compatible with EU law.***
The Claimants contend that the ECJ expressly limited the application and effect of
the Achmea decision to agreements between EU member states and that such
agreements are only incompatible with EU law if the determination of the tribunal

has an “adverse effect on the autonomy of the EU legal order.” They further argue

Eskosol v. Italy, Decision on Italy’s Request for Immediate Termination and Italy’s Jurisdictional Objection
Based on Inapplicability of the Energy Charter Treaty to Intra-EU Disputes (7 May 2019) (RL-61).

Claimants’ Comments on Opinion 1/17 and Award Eskosol v. Italy, at II.7 (emphasis in original); Eskosol v.
Italy, Decision on Italy’s Request for Immediate Termination and Italy’s Jurisdictional Objection Based on
Inapplicability of the Energy Charter Treaty to Intra-EU Disputes (7 May 2019) (RL-61) at $154, 168-169, 177-

Opinion 1/17 (RL-62).

Claimants’ Comments on Opinion 1/17 and Award Eskosol v. Italy, at 111.3; Opinion 1/17 (RL-62) at {106.

120

that the ECJ held that the jurisdiction of EU courts “does not take precedence over
the jurisdiction of another international court or tribunal established by
international agreement, even in circumstances where that agreement is an integral

part of EU law, and the EU is itself a party.”**° The ECJ said:

It follows from the foregoing that EU law does not preclude
Section F of Chapter Eight of the CETA either from
providing for the creation of a Tribunal, an Appellate
Tribunal and, subsequently, a multilateral investment
Tribunal or from conferring on those Tribunals the
jurisdiction to interpret and apply the provisions of the
agreement having regard to the rules and principles of
international law applicable between the Parties. On the
other hand, since those Tribunals stand outside the EU
judicial system, they cannot have the power to interpret or
apply provisions of EU law other than those of the CETA or
to make awards that might have the effect of preventing the
EU institutions from operating in accordance with the EU
constitutional framework.*”°

310. The Claimants further rely on Opinion 1/17 of the ECJ to support the notions that: (a) “the
fact that the envisaged ISDS mechanism stands outside the EU judicial system does not
mean, in itself, that that mechanism adversely affects the autonomy of the EU legal order,”
and (b) that an international tribunal can take EU law into account as a matter of fact

without doing so.*?!

311. The Claimants draw an analogy between the ECJ’s decision and this arbitration, stating
that “[t]he power of the CETA tribunal to interpret and apply the law ‘is confined to the
provisions of the CETA and that such interpretation or application must be undertaken in
accordance with the rules and principles of international law applicable between the

Parties.’ The same situation pertains in this case. The Tribunal must apply the provisions

Claimants’ Comments on Opinion 1/17 and Award Eskosol v. Italy, at III.4; Opinion 1/17 (RL-62) at [1 16, 117,
127.

39 Claimants’ Comments on Opinion 1/17 and Award Eskosol y. Italy, at II1.5; Opinion 1/17 (RL-62) at (118.

Claimants’ Comments on Opinion 1/17 and Award Eskosol v. Italy, at IV.2; Opinion 1/17 (RL-62) at (4115, 131.

121

312.

313.

314.

of the Italy-Mozambique BIT, and by virtue of paragraph 5(b) of the Protocol to the Treaty,

also ‘the principles of international law recognized by the two Contracting Parties.”

The Claimants further rely on the Eskosol award to argue that Italy’s offer to arbitrate under

the BIT was not void as a result of the Achmea decision. The tribunal in that case stated:

[W]hatever the scope and reach of the Achmea Judgment may be, it
cannot be considered as a matter of international law to
automatically invalidate, for Italy or any under [sic] EU Member
State, either the ECT as a whole or the consent to arbitration
reflected in Article 26 of the ECT. The Tribunal considers that the
principle of legal certainty entitles investors to rely legitimately
upon a State’s written consent to arbitrate disputes, as long as that
consent has not been withdrawn or invalidated through the proper
procedures, including those set forth in the underlying treaty and the
express provisions in the VCLT.**

3. The Tribunal’s Decision
a. The Achmea objection was timely

The Claimants argue, based on ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1), that the Respondent’s
objection to jurisdiction based on the decision of the ECJ in Achmea was untimely, because
it was not one of the objections raised in the Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction on

20 July 2018.

The Claimants are correct that the Respondent’s Achmea objection was not one of the
Respondent’s initial objections to jurisdiction. Indeed, it was not raised until 31 January
2019, almost three months after the submission of the Respondent’s Counter Memorial on
the Merits and six months after the Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction. However, the
Respondent states that it bases this objection not on the original 6 March 2018 decision of

the ECJ in Achmea, but rather on the Joint Declaration of 15 January 2019.°%

Claimants’ Comments on Opinion 1/17 and Award Eskosol v. Italy, at 1V.3; Opinion 1/17 (RL-62) at (122.
Claimants’ Comments on Opinion 1/17 and Award Eskosol v. Italy, at V.1-2; Eskosol v. Italy, Decision on Italy’s
Request for Immediate Termination and Italy’s Jurisdictional Objection Based on Inapplicability of the Energy
Charter Treaty to Intra-EU Disputes (7 May 2019) (RL-61) at (198.

RL-36.

122

315.

316.

317.

318.

The Joint Declaration had not been issued and was thus not known to the Respondent when
the Respondent submitted its Objections to Jurisdiction on 20 July 2018 and its Counter
Memorial on 2 November 2018. The Respondent submitted its Achmea Observations
within two weeks after the Joint Declaration was issued. The Tribunal therefore considers
that the objection raised in the Respondent’s Achmea Observations was “made as early as
possible,” as required by Rule 41(1). The Claimants’ untimeliness objection is

consequently rejected.

b. The ECJ’s Achmea Decision does not deprive this Tribunal of
jurisdiction

This Tribunal is not called upon to comment on the soundness or wisdom of the decision
of the ECJ in Achmea. Our concern with that decision is limited to examining whether one
effect of that decision is, as the Respondent urges, to invalidate the mutual consent of Italy
and Mozambique, expressed in the BIT, to arbitrate disputes about investments with
investors of the other State. The Tribunal concludes that the decision in Achmea has no
such effect on the consent of Mozambique in Article 9 of the BIT to arbitrate the dispute

before us.

The decision of the ECJ in Achmea addresses the status of bilateral investment treaties
concluded between member states of the European Union. The ECJ’s decision in that case

concluded that the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union:

[M]ust be interpreted as precluding a provision in an international
agreement concluded between Member States, such as art.8 of the
[Netherlands-Slovakia] BIT, under which an investor from one of
those Member States may, in the event of a dispute concerning
investments in the other Member State, bring proceedings against
the latter Member State before an arbitral tribunal whose jurisdiction
that Member State has undertaken to accept.*°°

The present arbitration was brought pursuant to the bilateral investment treaty between
Italy, which is a member state of the European Union, and Mozambique, which is not.

While the Achmea Decision of the ECJ found arbitration provisions in intra-EU BITs to be

35 Achmea Decision (RL-37) at 60 (emphasis added).

123

incompatible with the EU treaties, that Decision expresses no view concerning the status
of agreements to arbitrate contained in extra-EU treaties, such as the BIT under which this

arbitration was commenced.

319. The Respondent relies heavily on the Joint Declaration.*°° That Joint Declaration was not

signed by all of the member states of the EU, but it was signed by Italy.**”

320. The focus of the Joint Declaration, however, is firmly on intra-EU investment arbitration,
with a particular emphasis on investment protection under the Energy Charter Treaty. The

Joint Declaration states, in its first declarative paragraph:

By the present declaration, Member States inform investment
arbitration tribunals about the legal consequences of the Achmea
judgment, as set out in this declaration, in all pending intra-EU
investment arbitration proceedings brought either under bilateral
investment treaties concluded between Member States or under the
Energy Charter Treaty.*°*

321. — Inits introduction, the Joint Declaration explains the inclusion of the Energy Charter Treaty

reference:

Arbitral tribunals have interpreted the Energy Charter Treaty as also
containing an investor-State arbitration clause applicable between
Member States. Interpreted in such a manner, that clause would be
incompatible with the Treaties and thus would have to be
disapplied.*°°
322. The Joint Declaration thus concentrates on applying the judgment in Achmea to multilateral
treaties among EU member states that contain investor protection provisions and that

provide for arbitration, such as the ECT, as well as bilateral treaties among member states

36 RL-36.

597 Hungary and a group of five other member states signed two separate declarations expressing different views on
the ECT problem on 16 January 2019.

 

38 RL-36, p. 3 (emphasis added). The Joint Declaration further states: “By the present declaration, Member States
inform the investor community that no new intra-EU investment arbitration proceeding should be initiated.” (RL-
36) at p. 3, and “In light of the Achmea judgment, Member States will terminate all bilateral investment treaties
concluded between them [...]” (RL-36) at p. 4.

39 Id., p. 2 (emphasis added).

124

323.

324.

325.

to the same effect. The Declaration notes that “international agreements concluded by the
Union, including the Energy Charter Treaty, are an integral part of the EU legal order and
must therefore be compatible with the Treaties.”*°° But the BIT is not such a treaty. The
Joint Declaration makes no mention of extra-EU treaties or of arbitration proceedings

conducted pursuant to such treaties.

The Respondent argues that the significance of the Joint Declaration is that it was signed
by Italy and thus reflects the position of Italy. The Respondent argues that the position
taken by Italy in the Joint Declaration is inconsistent with Italy’s continued consent to
arbitration under the BIT. Since, the Respondent argues, the obligations created by the BIT
are reciprocal, if Italy is no longer bound by its consent to arbitrate, then Mozambique can

no longer be bound by its reciprocal consent to arbitrate.4°!

The Tribunal finds this analysis unpersuasive. The Joint Declaration says nothing about
the many extra-EU treaties to which the signatory states are parties. Significantly, in the
view of the Tribunal, Italy has taken no step to denounce or to terminate the BIT. Nor has

Mozambique.

Article 15(1) of the BIT provides that it was to remain effective for ten years from the date
of notification of ratification, which was 17 November 2003.*°? The same Article then
provides that the treaty “shall remain in force for further periods of 5 years thereafter,
unless one of the Contracting Parties withdraws in writing by not later than one year notice
before the expiry date.” No evidence has been put before this Tribunal that either Italy or
Mozambique has ever given notice of withdrawal pursuant to Article 15(1) of the BIT, or
that Italy or Mozambique has taken any other step to terminate its obligations under that

treaty. And even if notice of withdrawal had been given, Article 15(2) of the BIT provides

400 Id.,p.2.

401 RRA, (20.

402 OM, 42, n. 1; C-1.

125

326.

327.

403

that any investment made before expiry of the BIT would be protected for an additional

five years after termination.

Mozambique made an offer to Italian investors in Article 9 of the BIT, consenting to
arbitrate disputes arising out of their investments in Mozambique. Mozambique had not
made any effort to withdraw that offer when the Claimants accepted it by commencing this
arbitration in 2017. An offer to arbitrate the present dispute had thus been made and
accepted before the decision in Achmea was issued or the member states issued their
declaration. A valid and binding agreement to arbitrate has thus been formed. That
agreement is subject to international law, not to EU law. The ICSID Convention provides
that, “[w]hen the parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent
unilaterally.”#°? Neither the Achmea Decision nor the Joint Declaration appears to this
Tribunal to invalidate the consent of the parties to an extra-EU treaty to arbitrate as of the

date when the agreement to arbitrate became binding on both parties.

The Respondent urges that the essence of the Achmea Decision is that tribunals organized
outside of the legal order of the EU, such as the present tribunal, should not interpret or
apply EU law, which that decision makes the exclusive province of courts inside the EU
legal order.* Even if that were a correct reading of the Achmea Decision, however, it
would not appear to this Tribunal to be an obstacle to exercising jurisdiction over the
present dispute. The present dispute involves a claim that Mozambique breached its
obligations under international law, and specifically under the BIT, in relation to its
dealings with the Claimants concerning what the Claimants believe to have been a binding
settlement of a dispute concerning payments allegedly owed to the Claimants for their work

on the Lot 3 Contract. The Lot 3 Contract is a contract under the law of Mozambique,*”

ICSID Convention Article 25(1).

404 ROA, 424.

405

Article 2(1) of the General Conditions provides that “The law of the Contract shall be the law of the State of the
Contracting Authority unless otherwise stated in the Special Conditions.” Article 2 of the Special Conditions
provides that “The applicable law is the Law of Mozambique.” (C-25).

126

328.

329.

330.

406

and nothing in the correspondence alleged to constitute a settlement agreement elects any

different law to govern the settlement.

Indeed, the only element of EU law that is even arguably relevant to the present dispute is
the Cotonou Convention, to which the EU itself is a party, along with its member states.
But the only provisions of the Cotonou Convention alleged to apply to the present dispute
are the dispute resolution provisions contained in Article 30 of Annex IV of that
convention. Those provisions, as already explained,*° require that disputes arising “during
the performance” of a contract financed by the EDF, such as the Lot 3 Contract, must be
arbitrated under the Cotonou Arbitration Rules.“”” The Tribunal has found, as a matter of
fact, that the claims asserted in this proceeding did not arise “during the performance” of
the Lot 3 Contract.*°* These claims therefore fall outside of the reach of Article 30 of

Annex IV of the Cotonou Convention.

Such a finding would not constitute an impermissible interpretation of EU law, even if this
Tribunal were bound by EU law.*°? The ECJ made this clear in its Opinion 1/17,
responding to a request from Belgium for the court’s views on the dispute resolution
mechanism proposed for the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement being
negotiated between the EU and Canada. That opinion was issued on 30 April 2019, during
the hearing on the merits of this arbitration, but the Parties were invited to make
submissions on the significance of that Opinion in post-hearing briefs that were submitted

simultaneously on 22 May 2019.
In Opinion 1/17, the court stated that:

Indeed, with respect to international agreements entered into by the
Union, the jurisdiction of the courts and tribunals specified in
Article 19 TEU to interpret and apply those agreements does not

See para. 282, above.

407 RL-2, Annex IV, Art. 30.

408 See paras. 282-287, above.

409

This Tribunal is inclined to agree with the Eskosol tribunal that it is not bound by EU law, but its conclusion does

not rest on that belief.

127

331.

332.

take precedence over either the jurisdiction of the courts and
tribunals of the non-Member States with which those agreements
were concluded or that of the international courts or tribunals that
are established by such agreements.

Accordingly, while those agreements are an integral part of EU law
and may therefore be the subject of references for a preliminary
ruling [...] they concern no less those non-Member States and may
therefore also be interpreted by the courts and tribunals of those
States. [...]4!°
The Respondent argues that Article 91 of the Cotonou Convention effectively overrides

the arbitration provisions of the BIT. Article 91 provides:

No treaty, convention, agreement or arrangement of any kind

between one or more Member States of the Community and one or

more ACP States may impede the implementation of this

Agreement.*!!
The Tribunal agrees that Article 91 would make it difficult to apply any provision of any
other treaty that would “impede the implementation” of the Cotonou Convention, unless
the other treaty was later in time and dealt with the same subject matter, as provided by
Article 30 VCLT. However, the Tribunal does not believe that any provision of the Italy-
Mozambique BIT impedes the implementation of the Cotonou Convention. The only
provision of the BIT alleged to be inconsistent with the Cotonou Convention is the
provision for arbitration under the ICSID Rules in Article 9 of the BIT, which is argued by
the Respondent to be inconsistent with the portion of Article 30 of Annex IV that provides
for arbitration of disputes under the Cotonou Arbitration Rules. But Article 30 of Annex
IV only applies to disputes arising “during the performance” of a contract financed by the

EDF, and the Tribunal has already explained its conclusion that this is not such a dispute.*!?

The Tribunal also notes that the Cotonou Convention expresses no hostility to bilateral

investment treaties in general. To the contrary, in Article 78 of the Cotonou Convention,

410 Opinion 1/17 (RL-62) at (ffl 16-117.

RL-2.

412 See paras. 282-287, above.

128

333.

334.

the European Community itself and its Member States, together with the ACP states,
affirmed “the need to promote and protect either Party’s investments on their respective
territories, and in this context affirm the importance of concluding, in their mutual interest,

investment promotion and protection agreements [...]”4"3

The absence of hostility to extra-EU bilateral investment treaties is confirmed by
Regulation No. 1219/2012, adopted on 12 December 2012 by the European Parliament and
the Council of the European Union. The Regulation established “transitional arrangements
for bilateral investment agreements between Member States and third countries,”’*!4
observing that EU member states maintained a high number of BITs with third countries
and that such agreements “remain binding on the Member States under public international
law.”*'5 The Regulation’s aim is the “appropriate management” of the conditions for the
continuing existence of those BITs as well as of their relationship with the EU’s investment
policy.*!© Notably, Regulation 1219/2012 acknowledges that BITs with third countries
should be maintained in force “in the interest of Union investors and their investments in
third countries,”*!” but it was nevertheless “necessary to provide for certain arrangements
to ensure that bilateral investment agreements, maintained in force pursuant to [the]
Regulation, remain operational, including as regards dispute settlement, while at the

same time respecting the Union’s exclusive competence.”*!®

The Italy-Mozambique BIT appears to have been one of those “maintained in force
pursuant to [the] Regulation.” According to Article 2 of the Regulation, the EU Member
States had to notify the EU Commission of all BIT’s with third countries signed before

1 December 2009. Article 3 provides that “bilateral investment agreements notified

413° RL-2, Article 78(1).

Regulation (EU) No 1219/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2012, Official
Journal of the European Union of 20 December 2012 (L 351/40).

415 [d., preamble at 4-5.

416 Td. at 5.

417 Td. at 6.

418 Id. at 16 (emphasis added).

129

pursuant to Article 2 of this Regulation may be maintained in force, or enter into force, in
accordance with the TFEU and this Regulation.” Pursuant to Article 4(1), “[e]very 12
months the Commission shall publish in the Official Journal of the European Union a list
of the bilateral investment agreements notified pursuant to Article 2.” The Italy-
Mozambique BIT is included both in the list published on 27 April 20164"? and in the list

published on 11 May 2017,*” three days after this arbitration was initiated.

335. The Achmea Decision has left open a number of issues, including:

a. Whether the decision has any application to extra-EU BITs.*?!

b. Whether the decision is applicable to arbitrations conducted under the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, such as the present arbitration. The arbitration that gave rise to
the Achmea decision was conducted under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, and
had its seat in Germany. The dispute reached the ECJ as the result of a reference
from the German courts, which had been asked to set aside the award. Under the
ICSID Convention, however, no such application to the court at the seat of

arbitration could be made.”

c. Whether the decision extends to multilateral treaties, such as the ECT.

List of the bilateral investment agreements referred to in Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1219/2012 of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2012 establishing transitional arrangements for bilateral
investment agreements between Member States and third countries, Official Journal of the European Union of 27
April 2016, c 149/1, available at: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?qid=1569235854600&uri=CELEX:52016XC0427(03).

#20 List of the bilateral investment agreements referred to in Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1219/2012 of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2012 establishing transitional arrangements for bilateral
investment agreements between Member States and third countries, Official Journal of the European Union of 11
May 2017, c 147/1, available at: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?qid=1569235854600&uri=CELEX:52017XC0511 (04).

John I. Blanck, “Slovak Republic v. Achmea BV: The Death Knell for Intra-EU BITs?” (RL-40); Laurens
Ankersmit, “Achmea: The Beginning of the End for ISDS in and with Europe?” Investment Treaty News,
International Institute for Sustainable Development, 24 April 2018 (RL-41).

22 See, e.g., UP and C.D Holding, Award (9 October 2018) (RL-38); Vattenfall, Decision on the Achmea Issue (31
August 2018) (CL-62).

130,

336.

337.

338.

42

42

These questions are of considerable interest, and each has been argued by the Parties, but

this Tribunal needs to confront only the first one to resolve the dispute before us. 47°

The Achmea Decision explicitly addresses agreements between member states of the EU,
not between member states and non-member states. The Joint Declaration does not
advocate extending the effect of the Achmea Decision to extra-EU BITs, and Opinion 1/17
clearly states that the jurisdiction of EU courts “does not take precedence over” the
jurisdiction of tribunals established by agreements between member states and non-
member states.*24 We do not read the Achmea Decision itself, or the Joint Declaration
containing Italy’s gloss on the Achmea Decision, to express any hostility to the dispute
resolution provisions of treaties between EU member states and non-member states, such
as those in the BIT, or to disturb the acceptance of such treaties embodied in Regulation
1219/2012. The Tribunal is accordingly not persuaded that the Achmea Decision has any
application to BITs between EU member states and non-member states, such as the BIT

under which this arbitration was commenced.

Nor is the Tribunal persuaded that there is any conflict between the provisions of the BIT
and the Cotonou Convention, or any other expression of EU law, that would otherwise

bring the principles of the Achmea Decision into play.

The Tribunal therefore concludes that nothing in the Achmea Decision or in the Joint
Declaration deprives this Tribunal of jurisdiction to decide the present dispute. We
therefore reject the Respondent’s argument that the consent it expressed in the BIT to
arbitration of disputes with Italian investors was invalidated or otherwise affected by that

decision.

The second and third questions are thoroughly and thoughtfully analyzed in the Decision on Italy’s Request for
Immediate Termination and Italy's Jurisdictional Objection Based on Inapplicability of the Energy Charter Treaty
to Intra-EU Disputes in Eskosol v. Italy (7 May 2019) (RL-61).

Opinion 1/17, (116. That opinion notes (at [129) that the “principle of mutual trust, with respect to, inter alia,
compliance with the right to an effective remedy before an independent tribunal, is not applicable in relations

between the Union and a non-Member State.”

131

339.

340.

341.

425

426

427

428

For all of the reasons explained above, the Tribunal finds that it has jurisdiction to address
the merits of the dispute between the Parties, and does so in the following section of this

Award.

MERITS
The Claimants assert that Mozambique has breached its obligations under the following

provisions of the BIT:

425

a. Article 2(3), which requires the just and fair treatment of investments,**° and which

also requires that investments should not be subjected to unjustified or

discriminatory measures.*”°

b. Article 2(4), which requires Mozambique to create and maintain a legal framework

apt to guarantee to investors legal treatment, in good faith, of all undertakings.*?”

c. Article 3, which requires Mozambique to provide Italian investors treatment that is

no less favorable than that accorded by Mozambique to investors of third states.*7°

The Claimants contend that the following actions and failures to act by Mozambique

breached these treaty obligations:

(1) Mozambique’s refusal to honor its undertaking to pay the settlement amount
allegedly agreed;

(2) Mozambique’s unreasonable delay in responding to the Claimants’ requests
for payment of that amount;

(3) Mozambique’s unjustifiable delay in issuing the Certificate of Completion;

(4) Mozambique’s decision to revisit and ignore the settlement agreement,
seeking advice and expressly relying on an opinion which lacks any

CM, 1200.1.
Td., $200.2.

Td., 1200.3.
Id., 273-274.

132

342.

343.

344.

345.

346.

legitimate justification without informing and involving the Claimants in
the process; and

(5) The contradictory, inconsistent and non-transparent conduct of the
Mozambican Government throughout the process which began after the 2
November 2009 letter and continued from January 2010 to November
2011.49

The Respondent denies having breached any of its obligations under the BIT. In addition,
it argues that the Claimants are barred from bringing their claims because the statute of

limitations has expired, and because they unreasonably delayed bringing their claims.

This Award will consider each of the breaches asserted by the Claimants and the
Respondent’s defenses to each, as well as the untimeliness defenses raised by the

Respondent and the Claimants’ reply thereto.

First, however, it addresses the key factual issue presented to the Tribunal: whether a
settlement agreement was concluded between the Parties. The Claimants assert that “[t]his
case is about an obligation assumed by the Respondent to pay to CMC 8.22 million euros

7430

and the unjustifiable repudiation of such commitment, and the Respondent denies that

any agreement to settle the Claimants’ claims was ever reached.**!
A. The existence of a settlement agreement
The Claimants argue that a settlement agreement was formed by their acceptance on

2 November 2009 of the offer made by ANE on 30 October 2009.4

The 30 October 2009 letter to CMC from the Director General of ANE, Mr. Nunes, states

in pertinent part:

On the basis of what above mentioned, ANE hereby proposes to
CMC Ravenna the agreement on Euro 8,220,888 against Euro

CM, 4200.
CM, 416; CRM, 164.
RM, #2.

See para. 350, below.

133

15.802.053, covering all the additional costs and financial charges
incurred during the execution of the Construction Contract,
according to the enclosed table.

In accordance with what agreed and negotiated, the payments of the
amount subject of the agreement may be made in installations during
the year 2010.

We request to the Contractor CMC Ravenna, in case of agreement
on what above mentioned, to provide a written confirmation of the
acceptance of the above described conditions within the maximum
time limit of 7 days from the receipt of the present letter.47

The table attached to the 30 October 2009 offer letter shows how ANE arrived at the figure
of EUR 8,220,888.4*

347. The Claimants’ reply to that letter, dated 2 November 2009, states:

We acknowledge receipt of your letter Ref. 036/DG/2009, that we
appreciate.

We agree with your proposal to set the amount of Euro 8.220.888
clarifying that is additional to the amount already certified and
processed for the payment with IPC no. 27.4°

348. The Parties agree that the 30 October 2009 letter constituted an offer to enter into a

settlement agreement.**° They disagree as to whether the 2 November 2009 letter

constituted an acceptance of that offer.

349. The Parties agree that the law applicable to whether a settlement agreement was formed is

Mozambican law.*?” Both the Claimants’ expert Mr. Timbane and the Respondent’ s expert

C-2 (Claimants’ amended translation).

That table is reproduced at paragraph 130 of this Award.

5 C-3 (Claimants’ amended translation).

CRMJ, 61; RCM, 153.

CRMJ, 65; RCM, 187.

134

Ms. Muenda submitted expert reports and testified at the hearing about the Mozambican

law of offer and acceptance. ***

1. The Claimants’ Claim

350. The Claimants argue that their 2 November 2009 letter created a binding settlement
agreement, and disagree with the Respondent’s argument that the 2 November 2009 letter
contained a counteroffer, which the Respondent did not accept.**? In other words, the
Claimants contend that ANE offered EUR 8,220,888 on top of (in addition to) the amount
certified in IPC 27, while the Respondent contends that the offer included the amount

already certified.
351. Mr. Timbane, the Claimants’ expert on the law of Mozambique, states in his report:

12. Pursuant to Mozambican legislation, a contractual offer has
a binding effect. In this regard, Article 224(1) of the Civil Code
provides that “a contractual declaration that has an offeree becomes
effective as soon as it reaches the offeree’s sphere of influence or
knowledge”.

13. Similarly, the contractual offer has a duration; this means

that its effectiveness is limited in time. This is what results from
Article 228, which provides that:

1. A contractual offer binds the offeror as follows:

a) If the offeror or the parties agree on a fixed time for the
acceptance, the offer made stands until the time limit
expires;

[J

15. Lastly, and now specifically in regard to acceptance, it is
important to bear in mind that “/the] acceptance with additions,
limitations or other modifications amounts to a rejection of the
offer; but if the modification is sufficiently precise, it amounts to a
new offer, if no other meaning results from the declaration” (Article
233 of the Civil Code).

438 Legal Opinon of Mr. Timbane; First and Second Witness Statements of Ms. Muenda.
439 RCM, 154, 56.

135

[J

19. The offer must be complete, firm, and adequate in form, i.e.,
contain all the necessary elements that, with an acceptance, would
make it possible to enter into a contract, demonstrate a clear
intention to enter into a transaction under the conditions mentioned
and, finally, be made in the form required by the contract.

20. The acceptance, differently, “is the declaration by which the
offeree of a contractual offer, or any other person interested in the
public offer, demonstrates its agreement with the respective content.
The acceptance, like the offer, and for similar reasons is a
recipienda declaration [does not require acceptance by the
recipient to be effective]”.

[J

26. Starting by addressing the binding effect of the contractual
offer, case law has put forth that “/the] contracts are entered into by
the acceptance of an offer’ and that “[a] declaration may qualify as
a contractual offer if it encompasses the following characteristics:
if it is complete and precise, definite and adequate in form’.

L..]

 

30. Finally, and regarding the issue of acceptance with
modifications (rejection of the offer or formulation of new offer),
provided for in Article 233 of the Civil Code, we would draw to your
attention the decision of Tribunal da Relagado de Lisboa dated
05.05.2009:

[...] When the recipient, instead of simply accepting an offer,

introduces modifications, ‘the roles reverse: the original
offeror_becomes_the_offeree, and vice-versa. _And_the
circumstances will remain_as such until there is a full

 

meeting of wills, ing until there is an acceptance that
conforms to the offer. Only then will the i ion of the
parties reveal the same ial content in regard to all
the clauses. Only then ends the cycle of formation of the
contract.’. [...]*°

 

 

352. Mr. Timbane concludes that the Claimants’ letter of 2 November 2009 constitutes an

acceptance of the Respondent’s 30 October 2009 offer, creating a binding settlement

+40 Legal Opinion of Mr. Timbane (emphasis in original).

136

agreement. He argues that it cannot have been a counteroffer, because “a counter-offer
(‘new offer’) is only present ‘if the modification is sufficiently precise’ — which is clearly
not the case. [...] CMC states a clarification and in no way suggests any addition,

limitation, or other modification to the offer it had received from ANE.”“4!

353. At the Hearing, the Tribunal asked Mr. Timbane to what extent the Parties’ subjective
intentions and the circumstances both prior to and following the purported agreement can

be taken into account:

MR CASEY: Mr Timbane, just a few questions to help us here.
Under Mozambique law, to what extent are we permitted to look at
the surrounding circumstances in interpreting the offer or proposal?
For example, the documents that may have gone back and forth
between the parties prior to the offer, to what extent can we look at
those, if at all?

MR TIMBANE: There is a principle that exists in Mozambican law
from what I studied. Mozambican law is a civil law based on good
faith. Someone who negotiates with another party has to act in good
faith and have correct behaviour in order to reach a goal.

Looking at that and at article 227 of the civil code, we see that the
behavior of the parties is important to ascertain what we want to
achieve. This is an example that the Mozambican law establishes,
and we can conclude that the behavior of the parties are essential to
what the parties state. It’s a declaration or statement and we can
look at it in, for instance, ANE’s letter as a single document and
there is nothing else to look at but that letter. We have to look at the
surrounding circumstances.*4”

L..]

 

MR CASEY: Another question, general question, about
Mozambique law. When we are looking to interpret the proposal, to
what extent is it admissible to look at or to determine the intention
of the offeror? In other words, can we look at other documents to try
and determine what the intention of the offeror was under
Mozambique law?

+41 Legal Opinion of Mr. Timbane, {39 (emphasis in original).
42 Ty, 30 April 2019 p. 365, 1. 17 —p. 366, 1. 17.

137

MR TIMBANE: That depends on the circumstances. It depends on
the circumstances because the proposal may be made after one
single conversation, a brief conversation. There may even not exist
a conversation. I know that someone sells a given product and I
present a proposal, but there can also be a context. In this concrete
case, we were talking about -- and the proposal states it very clearly
that there were other aspects that had been discussed. There were
negotiations, conversations and so forth, and it is important to make
this assessment, this analysis.

[J

MR REES: Mr Timbane, I just have one further question about what
you can and can't do in Mozambican law to help interpret an offer
and acceptance situation. We've dealt with what happened prior to
the possible formation of a contract. To what extent under
Mozambican law can you look at the conduct of the parties after the
date in which an alleged contract has been made?

MR TIMBANE: The conduct of the parties, in the sequence of that
may be relevant, but from the moment that there is an agreement
between the two parties, after that the parties may have different
behaviour or they may converge in their behaviour, and it is an
agreement and maybe in that you are already looking ahead. The
question was if there are any doubts if there was an agreement or
not, a subsequent behaviour may be important to determine whether
there was an agreement or not, if there were any doubts. I don't have
doubts in this concrete case.

354. The Claimants argue that applying these principles of Mozambican law to this case results

in the conclusion that a binding settlement was agreed to:

CMC’s letter of 2 November 2009 does not introduce any new term.
It is a clear and unqualified expression of assent (“[w]e agree with
your proposal to set the amount of Euro 8.220.888”). The
clarification in relation to IPC 27 does not disqualify the acceptance
and does not amount to a counter-offer because it does not purport
to vary the terms of the offer made by ANE, it merely clarifies
CMC’s understanding of ANE’s offer. Moreover, CMC’s letter of
13 January 2010, by which it enclosed two invoices totaling

+8 Ty, 30 April 2019 p. 367, 1. 19 — p. 368, 1. 14.
+4 Tr. 30 April 2019, p. 368, 1. 17 — p. 369, 1. 12.

138

355.

356.

€8,220,888, further confirms CMC’s acceptance of ANE’s offer and
ANE did not object to CMC’s acceptance. Furthermore, when ANE
first indicated that there was nothing to pay CMC — 20 months after
the event — it relied on abstract “principles” of “public
administration”, but it did not dispute the legally binding nature of
the commitment.“

The Claimants further contend that the Respondent’s counteroffer theory was developed
over the course of this arbitration and had never before been raised by the Mozambican
authorities.44°

At the Hearing, the Tribunal invited the Claimants to specify what documentary evidence
in the record they considered supportive of their position that the Respondent’s 30 October
2009 letter had made an offer of EUR 8,220,888 on top of the EUR 2,440,925 already
awarded to the Claimants in IPC 27. In response, the Claimants pointed to the following
documents:

a. CMC’s letter to ANE of 14 October 2009 in which CMC referred to a “discrepancy
of approximately 8,257,785.96 € between our amounts and those of the
Supervisor’s Representative.”“7

b. Annex 2 to ANE’s letter to CMC dated 8 August 2011, showing that ANE
authorized payment of the amount specified in IPC 27 to the Claimants on 15
October 2009—before ANE made its 30 October 2009 offer.*48

c. Mr. Nunes’ 20 October 2009 letter to the Minister stating that “[t]he Contractor
does not demand immediate payment of the outstanding amounts.” The letter
proposes a settlement offer of EUR 8,370,888, which was approved by the Minister
in a handwritten notation dated 29 October 2009. The Claimants argue that, since
payment of the EUR 2.4 million in IPC 27 had been authorized five days before

CRMJ, 71.
CRMJ, {88.

C-34; Tr. | May 2019, pp. 457, 458.

C-4; Tr. 1 May 2019, pp. 459, 460.

139

357.

4

450

452

454

this letter, these “outstanding amounts” must be additional to that EUR 2.4

million.”

ANE’s 30 October 2009 letter containing an offer to settle for EUR 8,220,888.4°°
The Claimants describe that amount as very close to the “discrepancy” of EUR
8,257,785.96 mentioned in the Claimants’ letter of 14 October 2009. 4! The
Claimants could not reproduce the calculation they made to arrive at the
“discrepancy” of EUR 8,257,785.96, nor could they account for the EUR 36,897.96
difference between that figure and the EUR 8,220,888 offered by ANE.*°

The document headed “Subject Bill Book,” listing two invoices for a total amount
of EUR 8,220,888 containing a handwritten note in Portuguese stating “[i]t is
consistent with our balance as of 31/12/17.” The Claimants argue that this amounts
to an acknowledgement of the amount due to them by “technical officials of

ANE.”*3

Annex II to the Engineer’s Determination of 11 May 2009, read in combination
with the table attached to ANE’s offer letter of 30 October 2009. The Claimants
point out that the amounts awarded by the Engineer for individual claim items and
the amounts offered for those same claim items in ANE’s table, together, are always

less than the amounts originally claimed for those items by the Claimants.***

2. The Respondent’s Defense

The Respondent argues that no settlement agreement was ever reached because there “was

no offer and acceptance, or ‘meeting of the minds,’ on the amount to be paid on the

C-35 (emphasis added); Tr. 1 May 2019, pp. 460, 461.

C-34; Tr. 1 May 2019, p. 463.
Tr. | May 2019, pp. 475, 476; p. 482, 1. 15-18.
3 CM, 4222; C-49; Tr. 1 May 2019, pp. 463, 464.

C-28; C-2; Tr. 1 May 2019, pp. 473, 474.

140

Claimants’ construction claims.” The Respondent asserts that this has consistently been its

position.*°>

358. The Respondent’s expert Ms. Muenda provides the following explanation of the

Mozambican law of offer and acceptance in her report:

1. Under the general principles of Mozambican law, an offer
must be accepted through the same medium and terms in which it
was exactly made, without modifications. An attempt to accept the
offer on different terms instead creates a counter-offer, and this is
understood as a rejection of the original offer.

2. If we consider, arguendo, that ANE’s communication dated
October 30, 2009, ref. 036/DG/2009, is a settlement offer in the
amount of 8,220,888.00 Euros, the Contractor’s answer, dated
November 2, 2009, ref. 2179/09/CMC/NG, stating that it agrees
with ANE’s proposal in the same amount but “with the clarification
that it is an additional amount to the already certified and processed
for payment in the IPC No. 27” is clearly in such terms a statement
which is not an acceptance of the offer.

3. Because the answer given above by CMC does not reflect
the image and content of the offer made by ANE, it cannot be
considered as acceptance, much less it can be said that the
statements of the parties indicate, per se, the formation of a
settlement agreement according to the principles of law embodied
in Mozambican legislation. Instead, the Contractor’s letter dated
November 2, 2009 constitutes a true counter-offer, particularly
given that the Contractor in its answer considered that the 8,220,888
Euros expressed in the offer letter should be additional to the
payment processed through IPC No. 27, referring to the payment on
the claims as determined in the Engineer’s Final Decision of May
11, 2009.4%°

359. Ms. Muenda further testified that correspondence between the Parties and their conduct to
each other can be taken into account when determining whether an agreement was

formed.*°7

455 RCM, 482; C-4; First Witness Statement of C. Grachane, 120, 22.
456 First Witness Statement of Ms. Muenda, {{{[1-3.
457 Tr, 30 April 2019, pp. 388, 389.

141

360. The Respondent asserts that the Parties’ do not disagree about the law, but about its
application to the facts.*** The Respondent points out that the Parties agree that, under
Mozambican law, the test to determine whether an offer was made and accepted is an

objective one, meaning that the subjective intent of the Parties is of no consequence.**?

361. At the Hearing, in response to questions from the Tribunal about a hypothetical posed

initially by the Claimants’ counsel, Ms. Muenda testified as follows:

MR REES: Let me just try this once again. The buyer only wants
red apples. The seller is saying, I offer to sell you ten apples and the
seller intends to give him five red and five green apples. Is that going
to create a contract for the buyer to buy ten red apples? Because the
intention of the seller is different.

MS MUENDA: There is -- there cannot be -- whenever there is an
intention that's different from the other party, there cannot be no
contract, no agreement. In order for an agreement to exist, there
must be agreement on the content in terms of quality and colour,
everything. So in that situation, there would be no contract.

MR REES: Right. So I think the answer to my final question, then,
is obvious. If the seller intends to sell ten red apples but simply says,
I offer you ten apples and the buyer says, I accept your offer of ten
apples clarifying they are red, we have a meeting of minds and a
contract?

MS MUENDA: Correct. The seller is offering ten red apples and the
buyer wants to buy ten red apples.

MR REES: OK. So the question for a court or an arbitral tribunal
seeking to examine whether there is a contract between the parties
is to establish the intent of the seller in those circumstances?

MS MUENDA: If the question posed to the Tribunal is to evaluate
the intention of the seller for a contract, the Tribunal must assess the
intention on both parties, both the party offering and the party
buying. You can't infer anything by looking only one of the parties

458 RRM, 61.

459 RRM, 956; CRMJ, 170.

142

362.

363.

364.

C2.

2 C3.

because a contract is the meeting of the minds of at least two

people.*
The Respondent argues that the Claimants did not “clearly” accept the offer made by ANE
on 30 October 2009 to settle for “Euro 8.220.888 against Euro 15.802.053, covering all the
additional costs and financial charges incurred during the execution of the Construction
Contract, according to the enclosed table.”4°! Rather, the Claimants made a counteroffer
by stating in their 2 November 2009 letter that the settlement offer should be “additional
to the amount already certified and processed for the payment with IPC no. 27.”*°? This,
the Respondent continues, makes the 2 November 2009 letter a counteroffer for a
settlement in a total amount of EUR 10,661,813, as opposed to the “total amount” of

EUR 8,220,888 proposed by ANE.*

For its assertion that the offer of EUR 8,220,888 was not on top of, but rather included the
amount already certified by the engineer, the Respondent notes that the 30 October 2009
offer letter states: “ANE informs you that the dossier presented by the Contractor has been
analyzed again.” This, the Respondent argues, shows that ANE’s offer was based on a re-
evaluation of all of the Claimants’ claims, not just of the residual claim amount that was

not awarded by the Engineer.**

Respondent further argues that a comparison between the amounts awarded by the
Engineer for individual claim items and the corresponding amounts offered by ANE shows
that ANE offered to adjust, not add to, the amount certified by the Engineer. The

Respondent submitted the overview below:*®

Tr. 30 April 2019, p. 409, 1. 13 - p. 410, 1. 24.

* RCM, {[88; C-2; C-3.
RCM, {102; Tr. 1 May 2019, p. 513; C-2.

Respondent’s Demonstrative Exhibit 1; Tr. | May 2019, p. 519.

143

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C-4 (Engineer Report, Annex II) C-2 (ANE Oct. 30, 2009 Letter Table)
Description | Claims | CMC Requested | Engineer Item | CMC Requested Amount Offered by
# Allowed # N!
Delayed 2 470.512,79 65.295 2 | 470.513 300.000,00
access
Cut to spoil | 5 95.66 1.432.983 4 | 6.783.896 4.500.000,00
Unforeseen | 10 85 18.033 5 [45.726 0
days off
[Blank] = 0 9.017 _
Borrow pits | 14 1.750.570,08 915.597 7 [1.750.570 700.000,00
TOTALS 9.050,704,38 2.440.925 9.050.705 5.500.000

 

365. In this overview, the Respondent included all claim items for which the Engineer awarded

additional compensation on the left side, and ANE’s offers for the corresponding claim

items on the right side.4© The total amount offered by ANE in this chart is EUR 5,500,000,

not EUR 8,220,888, because ANE also offered the Claimants EUR 2,720,888 for claims

that were either not considered by the Engineer, or for which the Engineer did not award

additional compensation.

366. The Respondent argues that ANE thus increased the amounts awarded by the Engineer for
claim items 2 and 5, and decreased the amounts awarded by the Engineer for claim items
10 and 14.4°7 The Respondent contends that, because ANE reconsidered claim items that

had already been reviewed by the Engineer, the EUR 5.5 million offered by ANE must

include the EUR 2.4 million that had been certified by the Engineer:**

[I]f you look at the totals, these are the relevant claims because they
are the claims that get you to the 2.4 million, the amount the engineer
said should be paid. What has happened is that in his offer, Mr
Nunes has increased the amount from the 2.4 to the 5.5 on those
same claims. So there's absolutely no doubt that the 2.4 is included
in the 5.5. It's the same claims. It's the same descriptions. To the
penny, it's the same amounts requested by CMC. The only

466 Tr. 1 May 2019, pp. 516, 517; C-28; C-2. Claim “[Blank]” was not included in ANE’s offer letter.

461 Tr. 1 May 2019, pp. 517-519.

468 Tr. 1 May 2019, p. 519.

144

 

367.

368.

369.

469

470

difference is what is obvious on this chart. Mr Nunes has increased
the amount from 2.4 to 5.5.4

The Respondent then goes on to address “how do you get from the 5.5 to the 8.27”4” The

»47l

Respondent says that “there are two things that Nunes does, and submitted an exhibit

at the hearing to illustrate, the relevant portion of which reads as follows:

e (C2 also addresses items numbers 1, 6, 8, 9 and 10, which
correspond to claims numbers 3, 8, 15, 16 and 17. For these
items ANE offered 690.888.

e (C2 also addresses items 3 and 11, which are not included as
claims. For these two items ANE, offers 2.030.000.

¢ Total ANE offer: 5.500.000 + 690.888 + 2.030.000 =
8.220.888.47”
To show that ANE did not intend to pay more than EUR 8,220,888, the Respondent relies
on the text of the 30 October 2009 offer letter, which “proposes to CMC Ravenna the
agreement on Euro 8.220.888 against Euro 15.802.053, covering all the additional costs
and financial charges.” The Respondent contends that, if the amounts offered by ANE were
to be added to the amount certified by the Engineer, the total would exceed the EUR 8.2

million offered.4”?

The Respondent further points out that ANE’s offer stipulated that it expired after seven
days. Because ANE regarded the Claimants’ letter of 2 November 2009 as a counteroffer,
and no other communication was received within the seven-day period, the Respondent

takes the position that no settlement agreement was formed.*”4

Tr. 1 May 2019, pp. 519, 520.

Tr. 1 May 2019, p. 521, 1. 5-6.

41. Tr. 1 May 2019, p. 521, 1. 6-7.

Respondent’s Demonstrative Exhibit 1 (emphasis in original). C-2 is the exhibit number identifying Mr. Nunes’s

letter to CMC of 30 October 2009.

43° Tr. 1 May 2019, pp. 530-533.

RCM, {89; C-2; C-3.

145

370.

371.

372.

476

477

478

3. The Tribunal’s Decision

Whether a settlement agreement was reached is a question to be resolved under
Mozambican law. There is no serious disagreement between the parties concerning the law
of Mozambique on offer and acceptance. Both experts agreed that an offer must be
accepted in the terms in which it was made in order for the offer to result in a binding
agreement.*”> Both experts agreed that a response to an offer that varies its terms amounts
to a rejection of the original offer and makes a new offer, which the party that made the

original offer may accept or reject.*”°

Applying these agreed rules of law to the facts before us, if Claimants’ response of 2
November 200947’ to ANE’s offer letter dated 30 October 2009478 was an unconditional
acceptance of the offer made in that letter, a settlement agreement was formed. If CMC’s
response changed the terms of the offer, then no agreement was reached, because it is
undisputed that ANE never accepted any change to the terms of its offer. Whether or not
ANE and CMC ever reached a settlement agreement therefore turns on whether CMC

accepted ANE’s offer unconditionally or whether it effectively made a counterproposal.

The Tribunal is not able to resolve this question on the basis of testimony concerning the

intentions of the Parties to the exchange of letters in October and November 2009.

First Witness Statementof Ms. Muenda, {1 (“Under the general principles of Mozambican law, an offer must be
accepted through the same medium and terms in which it was exactly made, without modifications.”); Legal
Opinion of Mr. Timbane, §30 (“we would draw to your attention the decision of Tribunal da Relagdo de Lisboa
dated 05.05.2009: [...]When the recipient, instead of simply accepting an offer, introduces modifications, ‘the
roles reverse: the original offeror becomes the offeree, and vice-versa. And the circumstances will remain as such
until there is a full meeting of wills, meaning until there is an acceptance that conforms to the offer. Only then
will the intention of the parties reveal the same substantial content in regard to all the clauses.’”’).

 

Legal Opinion of Mr. Timbane, {15 (“in regard to acceptance, it is important to bear in mind that ‘[the]

with iti imitati or other i i amounts to a rejection of the offer; but if the
modification is sufficiently precise, it amounts to a new offer, if no other meaning results from the declaration’
(Article 233 of the Civil Code).”); First Witness Statement of Ms. Muenda, {1 (“An attempt to accept the offer
on different terms instead creates a counter-offer, and this is understood as a rejection of the original offer.”).

C3.
C2.

146

373.

374.

Mr. Gridella signed the 2 November 2009 letter for CMC and would therefore have first-

hand knowledge. In his Second Witness Statement, Mr. Gridella stated unequivocally that:

CMC’s letter referenced 2179/09/CMC/NG of 2 November 2009

was indeed an acceptance of ANE’s offer of settlement. The letter

of 2 November 2009 was intended to clarify and explain what was

said in the conversations I had with Mr. Nunes. CMC’s acceptance

letter of 2 November 2009 was not a further request by the

Contractor for more money than was offered by ANE.*”
However, Mr. Gridella failed to appear at the hearing, although he had been asked to be
present for cross examination. The Tribunal declines to reach a conclusion on such a
controverted question solely on the basis of the written testimony of a witness who was

called for cross examination but did not appear.

More important, the intention of CMC seems less important on this point than the intention
of ANE - that is, precisely what did ANE’s offer comprise? CMC could well have
understood ANE’s offer to have been for EUR 8,220,888 plus the amounts already paid
and could sincerely have believed it was accepting that offer, although the inclusion in its
acceptance letter of the sentence “clarifying that is additional to the amount already
certified” shows that it believed some clarification to be necessary. But no amount of
“clarification” by the offeree could, unless subsequently agreed to, change what the offeror

intended. We therefore turn to what the offeror intended.

The Respondent’s sole fact witness was Mr. Cecilio Grachane. Mr. Grachane became the
General Director of ANE in January of 2011, and served in that capacity until July of
2013.48° Previously, from 2004 to 2011, Mr. Grachane worked as a plan director and
financial analyst, and also as Secretary of the Roads Council, at the Ministry of Public
Works and Water Resources, of which ANE is a component.**! He was thus not at ANE in

2009, and did not participate in the drafting of ANE’s letter to CMC dated 30 October

4 Second Witness Statement of N. Gridella, 13.1.

480 First Witness Statement of C. Grachane, 2.

481 Tr, 30 April 2019, pp. 233, 234.

147

375.

376.

482

483

484

2009. Nor did Mr. Grachane discuss the content of that letter with Mr. Nunes, who signed
the letter as the Director of ANE, or with Mr. Zacarias, the Minister of Public Works with
whom Mr. Nunes corresponded in October 2009 concerning the settlement proposal.**?
Mr. Grachane thus had no direct, contemporaneous knowledge of the intentions of ANE or

the Ministry vis-a-vis CMC at the time that ANE’s letter was prepared and sent.

Mr. Grachane stated in his witness statement that, as Director of ANE in 2011, he “sent
the correspondence dated August 8, 2011 explaining there was no balance due to the
Contractor; the Contractor did not establish its right to any claimed additional sums; and
more, that the Contractor had already received payment in full for the claims as determined
by the Engineer’s Final Decision, everything having been settled through Invoice 27.”48?

He went on to express his opinion that:

There was no balance due because the parties had never reached a
settlement agreement on the amount and, as noted, ANE had paid
the value of the claims as determined through the contractual claims
process and in the precise terms stated in the final Engineer report.
Although Mr. Nunes sent a proposal dated October 30, 2009, which
was unfounded from my perspective, that proposal was never
accepted by the Contractor because the Contractor sought to receive
the proposed amount as an additional amount to the value of the
claims as shown in Mr. Nunes’ October 30 correspondence. In other
words, the Contractor’s November 2, 2009 response sought payment
of 10.6 million Euros instead of the 8.2 million Euros proposed by
Mr. Nunes. **4

The Tribunal thus had before it Mr. Gridella’s untested written statement that CMC
considered its letter of 2 November 2009 to be an acceptance of the offer made in ANE’s
letter of 30 October 2009, and Mr. Grachane’s after-the-fact statement that ANE
considered CMC’s letter to be an unacceptable counteroffer. While the testimony of these
two witnesses reflects the current positions of each side in this arbitration, and the Tribunal

has no reason to believe that the views they express are not sincerely held, the Tribunal

Tr. 30 April 2019, p. 255. See C-12 and para. 124, above.
First Witness Statement of C. Grachane, (19.
First Witness Statement of C. Grachane, { 20.

148

does not consider that the witness testimony resolves the issue. The Tribunal thus turns to

the other evidence available to it, the documents in the record.

377. We begin with the offer letter itself.**° That letter phrased ANE’s offer in the following

terms:

On the basis of what above mentioned, ANE hereby proposes to
CMC Ravenna the agreement on Euro 8.220.888 against Euro
15.802.053, covering all the additional costs and financial charges
incurred during the execution of the Construction Contract,
according to the enclosed table.**°
378. To ascertain what claims ANE was offering to settle, therefore, it is important to focus on
what claims were embraced within the total of EUR 15,802,053 referenced in the offer
letter. The sum of EUR 8,220,888 was simply the amount that ANE said that it was willing
to pay in settlement of the claim for the larger amount. The components of the
EUR 15,802,053 figure were shown in the table attached to ANE’s 30 October 2009 letter,
and added up to EUR 14,052,053 before interest was added. The relevant columns of that

table show the following breakdown:

 

Amount (Euros)
Description requested by the
Contractor

 

Demining of borrow pits.
1 Increase of borrow pits due to 167,133
technical reason

 

Delay on payment of.
2 compensation to local people by 470,513
Contracting Authority

 

Delay on submission of the
3 required documentation by the 1,393,193
Contracting Authority for _
custom clearance material

 

Increase of quantities of cut to

 

 

 

 

 

4 R 6,783,896
spoil

5 Unexpected Additional 45,726
holidays

 

485 C2; see para. 346, above.

486 C-2 (Claimants’ amended translation).

149

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 Disruption due to delay on 195,396
payments
7 Increase of borrow pits 1,750,570
8 ROP cost of labour 584,429
9 Hard excavation 123,755
10 Increase of cement for 81,286
stabilization
i Extra works post TOC 2,456,157
SUB TOTAL 14,052,053
Interest on above amounts
12 (rough calculation) 1,750,000
TOTAL 15,802,053

 

 

 

 

379. For purposes of this analysis, the portion of the EUR 15,802,053 figure representing

estimated interest (EUR 1,750,000) can be disregarded. The question then becomes

whether the EUR 2,440,925 awarded to CMC by the Engineer was or was not included in

the total claim amount of EUR 14,052,053 in the table attached to ANE’s letter of
30 October 2009.

380. When the Engineer awarded EUR 2,440,925 to CMC in his letter of 11 May 2009,*87 he

awarded that amount against a claim by CMC for a total amount of EUR 12,759,498.18.

The Engineer awarded a portion of the amounts claimed in four of the twenty line items

submitted by CMC to the Engineer (representing 70% of CMC’s total claim), plus an

unexplained additional amount, as shown in the table below; he awarded nothing for the

other line items. “8°

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Claim | Description Amount for which Amount awarded by
Number CMC applied to the Engineer
Engineer
Delay on payment of compensation to
2 local people by Contracting Authority 470,512.79 65,295
5 Increase of quantities of cut to spoil 6,783,895.86 1,432,983
87 C28.

488 C.28, Annex II (Claimants’ amended translation).

150,

 

 

Unexpected Additional holidays

45,725.85 18,033

 

Increase of borrow pits 1,750,570.08 915,597

 

Unexplained additional amount 9,017

 

 

 

 

 

9,050,704.58 2,440,925

 

381.

When CMC wrote to ANE on 6 October 2009 to complain about the amounts awarded by
the Engineer, it presented a claim for six items, plus interest, totaling EUR 13,315,000.
Leaving interest aside, the claim presented was for total compensation of EUR 11,815,000,

as summarized in Annex 2 to CMC’s letter,**’ reproduced in part here:

 

 

Description

Claimed Amount

 

Borrow pits demining - increase of borrow pit quantity due to
technical reasons

167,000

 

Delay of payment by the Contracting Authority of compensations

470,000

 

Late issuance of documentation required for the importation of
materials and parts by the Contracting Authority

1,400,000

 

Exaggerate increase of cut to spoil

9,500,000

 

Chipping rescreening

83,000

 

Disruption due to lack of/ late payment

195,000

 

ayafula

Interests on the above mentioned amounts

1,500,000

 

 

 

TOTAL | 13,315,000

 

 

382.

Two of these items (Nos. 2 and 4) had been awarded by the Engineer in smaller amounts;

the Engineer had awarded nothing in the other categories claimed.

Atleast from items 2 and 4, it would appear that CMC did not subtract the amounts awarded
by the Engineer from the amounts it asked ANE to pay. For item 2, it asked ANE for EUR
470,000, which is less than (and appears to have been rounded down from) the EUR
470,512.79 for which it had asked the Engineer, but the difference between the figures is
not the EUR 65,295 awarded by the Engineer. For item 4, rather than reducing the EUR
6,783,895.86 for which it asked the Engineer by the EUR 1,432,983 awarded by the
Engineer, CMC increased its demand to EUR 9,500,000.

489 C-33 (Claimants’ amended translation).

151

 

383.

It is very difficult to compare the numbers assigned to individual items by CMC, the
Engineer, and ANE in their communications with each other with any precision, because
the categories for which claims were made were not consistent, the figures assigned to
particular categories changed over the period from May through October 2009, and the

total amount demanded changed with each articulation of the claim.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

384. A more reliable guide to the intentions of ANE emerges from comparing the amounts
awarded by the Engineer on 11 May 2009 with the amounts offered by ANE on 30 October
2009. ANE offered more than the Engineer had awarded for two line items (Engineer’s
items 2 and 5/ANE items 2 and 4), and less than the Engineer for one item (Engineer’s
item 14; ANE item 7). ANE, unlike the Engineer, awarded nothing on the fourth
(Engineer’s item 10/ANE item 5). The numbers are such, however, that on each line of
overlap, one could either add the ANE number to the Engineer’s number, or replace the
Engineer’s number with the ANE number, without exceeding the amount for which CMC
applied in the first place.
Engineer’s| Description Amount for which | Amount awarded | ANE Item} Amount
Claim. CMC applied to | by Engineer Number | Offered
Number the Engineer by ANE
Delay on payment of
2 compensation to local 470,512.79 65,295 2 300,000
people by Contracting
Authority
5 Increase of quantities | 6 733 395.86 1,432,983 4 4,500,000
of cut to spoil
Unexpected
10 ‘Additional 45,725.85 18,033 5 0
holidays
14 Increase of borrow pits 1,750,570.08 915,597 7 700,000
Unexplained additional 9,017
amount
9,050,704.58 2,440,925
385. The total amounts of CMC’s various claims against ANE, while not entirely free from

ambiguity, seem to the Tribunal to offer more reliable guidance to what CMC had in mind

152

 

386.

387.

388.

than the line items. CMC first asked the Engineer for EUR 12,759,498.18, in response to
which request he awarded EUR 2,440,925 on 11 May 2009. CMC then requested
EUR 11,815,000 (without interest) from ANE on 6 October 2009. But CMC’s figures do
not tell us what ANE had in mind. For that we turn to the correspondence between the

Director of ANE and the Minister.

Director Nunes of ANE submitted a memorandum to the Minister of Public Works and
Housing on 20 October 2009, proposing to “[n]egotiate with the contractor a reasonable
compensation proposal considering the proposal put forward in annex 2.”4°° Annex 2 to
that memorandum put the total amount “Requested by Builder” at EUR 14,052,053, before
adding interest.**! That is the same figure as the subtotal before interest in the table attached
to ANE’s offer letter of 30 October 2009 (see para. 378 above). None of the total amounts
demanded ever exceeded, or even equaled, the total figure, EUR 15,802,053 (including
interest), against which ANE’s letter of 30 October 2009 made the offer of EUR 8,220,888.

To recap, CMC’s total claims, excluding amounts claimed as interest, were stated by either

CMC or ANE to be as follows between May and October 2009:
e 11 May 2009 (CMC) EUR 12,759,498.18
© 6 October 2009 (CMC) EUR 11,815,000
© 20 October 2009 (ANE) EUR 14,052,053
© 30 October 2009 (ANE) EUR 14,052,053

To read ANE’s 30 October 2009 letter as intending for its offer of EUR 8,220,888 to be
entirely in addition to the amount awarded by the Engineer, one would have to add the
amount awarded by the Engineer to the total claim that ANE intended to settle, EUR
14,052,053 after subtracting interest. If we were to add EUR 14,052,053 to EUR 2,440,925,
the sum would be EUR 16,492,978. That figure is higher than any total amount of
compensation that CMC ever claimed. Indeed, ANE’s base figure of EUR 14,052,053 is

490 C-12 (Claimants’ amended translation).

491 C-12, Annex 2.

153

389.

390.

391.

higher than any total amount of compensation that CMC ever claimed or that ANE ever
considered. It seems more likely to the Tribunal that ANE understood and intended the
EUR 14,052,053 that it took as the starting point for calculating its offer to include the
claims which the Engineer had already considered, and thus for the EUR 8,220,888 that it
offered to include the EUR 2,440,925 already awarded by the Engineer.*””

The Tribunal therefore concludes, based on the documentary record before us, that ANE
did not intend in its letter of 30 October 2009 to offer CMC EUR 8,220,888 in addition to
the EUR 2,440,925 awarded to CMC by the Engineer. Rather, the letters and numbers
exchanged between the Parties lead us to conclude that ANE intended its offer to resolve
all of CMC’s claims against ANE, including the amounts that had been certified by the

Engineer as due.

The foregoing conclusion about what ANE is likely to have intended to include in its offer
leads to the further conclusion that CMC’s response to that offer, “clarifying” that the
EUR 8,220,888 offered was “additional to” the amount certified by the Engineer, was not

an unqualified acceptance of ANE’s offer. Rather, it amounted to a counteroffer.

On the understanding of Mozambique law to which the experts presented by both Parties
agreed, such a counteroffer amounted to a rejection of the original offer, unless the
counteroffer was itself accepted by the party that made the original offer. While the
Claimants argued that, if a counteroffer was made, the Respondent had accepted it,’ the
evidence advanced for that proposition is that ANE did not immediately reject CMC’s
invoices, and the testimony of Mr. Gridella. The Tribunal does not find the former
convincing, and is not (for the reasons explained at paragraphs 74-75 above) prepared to

base a conclusion upon the latter.

492 Had ANE intended to offer EUR 8,220,888 on top of the EUR 2,440,925, it would presumably have said that the

493

settlement proposal was against EUR 13,361,128 rather than against EUR 15,802,053.

Tr. 1 May 2019, p. 490, 1. 17 — p. 491, 1. 17.

154

392.

393.

394.

44 CY,

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal finds that no agreement was reached between CMC
and ANE in November of 2009 on an amount to be paid by ANE to settle CMC’s claims,
so that no binding settlement agreement was ever concluded.
B. Article 2(3) of the BIT: Did Mozambique Treat the Claimants Justly and
Fairly?
1. The Claimants’ Claim
The Claimants contend that Mozambique’s obligation under Article 2(3) of the BIT to “at
all times ensure just and fair treatment of the investments of investors of the other

Contracting Party”4*

is analogous to the fair and equitable treatment (“FET”) standard
found in other treaties.°° The Claimants contend that Mozambique violated the FET
standard, and thus breached its obligations to them under Article 2(3), by:

a. arbitrary, inconsistent, and contradictory conduct;

b. frustrating the Claimants’ legitimate expectations;

c. acting in bad faith;

d. not acting in a sufficiently transparent manner; and

e. coercing the Claimants.**°

The Claimants assert that, regardless of whether a settlement agreement exists under
Mozambican law, they were not treated justly and fairly, because Mozambican authorities

led them to believe that an agreement had been reached on the additional Lot 3 claims.**”

5 CM, 4202.

496 CM, 1202-205.

97 CRMJ, (102.

155

a. Arbitrary, inconsistent, and contradictory conduct

395. The Claimants first contend that Mozambique acted in an arbitrary, inconsistent, and

contradictory manner towards their investments.*°*

396. The Claimants argue that state conduct is arbitrary when it is “not justified by the rule of
law” and, to a reasonable and impartial person, “creates the effect of ‘shock’ or
‘surprise’.”“°? Repudiating an agreement with an investor amounts, the Claimants say, to a
“willful disregard of due process of law, an act which shocks, or at least surprises a sense
of juridical propriety;”*°° “[t]he repudiation of the settlement agreement reached on 2
November 2009 by the Government after 20 months of silence surprises and shocks any

reasonable and impartial person.”>"!

397. The Claimants argue that a state’s conduct is inconsistent and contradictory when it
amounts to a willful refusal by a government authority, not based on reasonable grounds,
to abide by its contractual obligations. The FET standard requires governments to act “in
an open manner and consistent with commitments it has undertaken.”°°? As an example,
the Claimants point to the award in PSEG Global, in which the tribunal found a violation

of the FET standard “because Turkey kept changing its position vis-a-vis the investors. It

49

CM, 1207-222.

49

CM, 9207-210; relying on Saluka Investments B.V. v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial Award (CL-22)
at 309; Elettronica Sicula s.p.a., (United States of America y. Italy), Judgment (20 July 1989) (CL-31) ICJ
Reports (1989); Pope & Talbot Inc. v. The Government of Canada, Award in respect of Damages (31 May 2002)
(CL-23) at 64.

50 Elettronica Sicula s.p.a., (United States of America v. Italy), Judgment (20 July 1989), ICJ Reports (1989), (CL-
31) at pp. 76, 77; CM, (211.

so CM, (211.

502 CM, 491212-218; relying on PSEG Global Inc v Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5, (“PSEG Global’)
Award, (CL-27) at 9246, 254; Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y, Republic of Tajikistan, SCC Case No.
V064/2008, Partial Award on Jurisdiction and Liability (CL-37) at (185; Schreuer, C. “Fair and Equitable
Treatment in Arbitral Practice”, the Journal of World Investment & Trade (2005) (CL-21) at p. 380; Mondev
International Ltd. v. United States of America, (“*Mondev”), ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award (CL-26) at
4134; Eureko B.V. v. Poland, Partial Award (CL-18) at 9231-234; Siemens A.G. v. The Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8 (“Siemens”) Award (6 February 2007) (CL-25) at 319; Técnicas Medioambientales
Tecmed, S.A. v. The United Mexican States, CSID Case No. ARB (AF)/00/2 (“Tecmed”) Award (CL-24) at {154.

 

 

156

398.

399.

503

50

E

505

506

507

stated that it was, ‘not only the law that kept changing but notably the attitudes and policies

of the administration.

999503

The Claimants argue that Mozambique’s conduct was arbitrary, inconsistent, and

contradictory, because:

a.

Mozambique offered to enter into a settlement agreement on 30 October 2009,
made the Claimants believe that the settlement agreement would be honored after
it was accepted on 2 November 2009, and then repudiated that commitment on 8

August 2011.°%

Mozambique failed to respond to the Claimants’ repeated requests for payment
during the period from 2010 until 2017 and refused to engage in good faith

discussions during that time period.”

More specifically, the Government failed to inform the Claimants in a timely
manner that its position regarding the settlement agreement had changed after a
new Minister of Public Works and a new Director General of ANE took office
following the 2009 elections, instead waiting for 20 months to reply to the

Claimants’ requests for payment.>°°

In addition, the Claimants insist that Mozambique claimed to base its decision not to honor

the settlement agreement on a report by the private engineering firm Consultec, without

giving the Claimants a meaningful opportunity to respond to Consultec’s findings.*"” The

grounds for non-payment invoked in the Consultec report, such as “public interest” and

“unjust enrichment,” were never adequately explained and merely served as a pretext for

CM, 1219.
CM, 1220.

CM, 1219.

CM, 217; PSEG Global Award (CL-27) at $254.

CM, {{{[219-220; C-4.

157

400.

401.

an arbitrary decision that had no basis in genuine legal reasoning.*°* The contradiction and
inconsistency in Mozambique’s position, the Claimants continue, became apparent in
December 2017, when technical officials from ANE acknowledged the amount due and

payable to ANE.”

b. Frustrating the Claimants’ legitimate expectations

The Claimants argue that a predictable legal framework is an essential element of fair and
equitable treatment, and that a predictable legal framework includes the obligation “to
protect the legitimate expectations arising from specific representations made by the State
to the investor.”>!° According to the Claimants, “legitimate expectations are based on
specific representations or promises made, or unilateral conditions offered explicitly by the
host State such as contracts.”>!! This includes the situation where the host state assumed a
specific obligation regarding the investor after the making of the initial investment.*!? The
Claimants assert that the Respondent frustrated their legitimate expectation that they would

be paid 8.2 million euros in 2010 pursuant to the settlement agreement.*°

In response to the Respondent’s submission that legitimate expectations must arise at the
time when the investment was made or acquired, the Claimants argue that their
expectations were created when the Lot 3 Contract was signed. They reason that, by
entering into that agreement, the Respondent committed to respect contractual
undertakings such as the Claimants’ right to payment under a subsequent settlement

agreement.>!*

508 CM, 491220-221.

50° CM, 4222.

510 CM, 491223-225.

SCM, 4226.
512 CM, 4228.
518 CM, 9232.

514 CRMBJ, {i106-108.

158

c. Acting in bad faith

The Claimants argue that Mozambique violated the FET standard by acting in bad faith,
which they contend is an inherent component of that standard.>!° The Claimants argue that
Mozambique acted in bad faith by shifting its position with regard to the settlement
agreement after the new political appointees assumed their offices at ANE and the
Ministry, by waiting more than 20 months to reply to a request for payment, by revisiting
the settlement agreement, and by failing to engage in meaningful discussions to resolve

outstanding issues.°!°

d. Not acting with sufficient transparency

The Claimants argue that Mozambique has not been sufficiently transparent, meaning that
Mozambique did not maintain a legal framework that was readily apparent to the Claimants
and to which they could trace any decision affecting them.*!” The Claimants take the
position that the lengthy delays and lack of valid reasons for refusing payment amount to

non-transparency in willful disregard of due process of law and in breach of the BIT.*!*

In response to the Respondent’s assertion that the applicable legal framework did not
change, the Claimants argue that such a change is only one of the factors to be considered.
The Claimants contend that the FET standard is breached when an investor is not treated

in an even-handed and just manner.>!”

e. Coercion

The Claimants argue that Mozambique violated the FET standard by engaging in coercion,
which consisted in pressuring them into “agreeing to a predetermined result.” The

Claimants contend that “Mozambique’s refusal to pay and to honor its commitment can

CM, 9236.

CM, 99124 1-242.

CM, 991243-244.

CM, 991246-248.

CRMJ, 110.

159

only be explained by a desire to avoid payment or to force a renegotiation of the Lot 3
Project and the two additional disputes. This amounts, in the Claimants’ submission, to

coercion and a breach of Mozambique’s promise of just and fair treatment.>”°

2. The Respondent’s Defense

406. The Respondent denies that it failed in any way to treat the Claimants’ investment justly
and fairly, as required by Article 2 of the BIT.*”! It argues that the non-payment of a non-
existent settlement agreement cannot be a basis for a violation of the requirement of just
and fair treatment. According to the Respondent, ANE’s settlement offer was not accepted
by the Claimants, and the Claimants’ counteroffer was not accepted by ANE.” The
Respondent further contends that its decision to engage a neutral third-party consultant to

review CMC’s claim is evidence that it has treated the Claimants fairly.>??

407. In reply to the Claimants’ argument that Mozambique’s conduct was arbitrary,
inconsistent, and contradictory, the Respondent argues that it did not “repudiate” the
settlement agreement, but rather consistently took the position that there was no settlement
agreement. The Respondent communicated this position to the Claimants in its 8 August
2011 letter. It also gave a detailed explanation of why it would not make payments which
were not approved by the Engineer in the 2009 Engineer’s Final Decision and in the 2011
Consultec Report.*** The Respondent further points out that it did not wait 20 months to
respond to the Claimants: its 8 August 2011 letter expressing its refusal to pay came within
two weeks of the Claimants’ letter of 26 July 2011, in which they first complained about

non-payment.°25

520 CM, 491252-253.

RCM, 143.

522 RCM, 154.

RCM, 155-156.

32.

RRM, {{f[142-143; C-4; C-28; C-40.
525 RRM, 1145; C-37.

160

408.

409.

410.

411.

52

82

52

530

The Respondent submits that, to be legitimate, the Claimants’ expectations must be based

 

on the local legal order as it was understood at the time of the investment. It insists that no
sovereign action was taken to change Mozambique’s legal order to the detriment of the
Claimants after their purported investment, and points out that the Claimants have not
established that the Respondent changed its position in any material respect.>?° The
Respondent further asserts that the Claimants have not established that Mozambique failed
to provide a stable and predictable business environment at any time.**’ In any case, the
Claimants could not have had a legitimate expectation that the Respondent would abide by

a non-existing agreement.>”

The Respondent denies that it acted in bad faith. It contends that it has granted the
Claimants every opportunity to substantiate their claim, and that it engaged an independent
third party to review their claims without being required to do so. The Respondent points
out that the mere fact that the Claimants were able to meet with the President, the Prime
Minister, the Minister of Public Works, and the Director of ANE shows that they were

given every opportunity to be heard.*”°

As to the alleged lack of transparency, the Respondent submits that the applicable legal
framework is readily apparent and that all decisions affecting the Claimants can be traced
back to that framework. The Mozambican law of contracts, and of offer and acceptance, is

not ambiguous.**°

As regards the Claimants’ argument that they were coerced, the Respondent contends that

it is the Claimants who attempted to leverage the Lot 2 Contract in an attempt to effect a

RCM, 1163, 167.
RCM, 164.
RCM, 165.
RCM, {iff 170-173.
RCM, 174-176.

161

412.

413.

414.

settlement of their Lot 3 claim. The Respondent did not seek to amend or revise the Lot 3

Contract, under which the Respondent insists that no payment is due to the Claimants.**!

3. The Tribunal’s Decision

The Claimants frame their claim that they were denied just and fair treatment in violation
of Article 2(3) of the BIT in the alternative: Either ANE had agreed to a settlement of their
claims, and it was unjust and unfair for ANE and the Government of Mozambique to refuse
to honor that settlement agreement, or, it was unjust and unfair of the Respondent to refuse

to agree to pay them more than the Engineer had awarded.

The Claimants’ claim that the Respondent’s refusal to honor the settlement agreement
amounted to unjust and unfair treatment cannot survive the Tribunal’s finding, in the
preceding section of this Award, that no settlement agreement was ever concluded. That

finding disposes of the following claims without the need for further analysis:

a. The Claimants’ claim that the Respondent’s failure to abide by its contractual
undertakings was arbitrary, inconsistent, and unreasonable, because there was no

contractual obligation by which the Respondent was required to abide; and

b. The Claimants’ claim that the Respondent’s conduct frustrated their legitimate
expectations that the state would respect its representations to the investor that it
would be paid, because no such representations have been shown to have been

made.

The Claimants assert, however, that the Respondent is in breach of its duty to treat their
investments justly and fairly in several respects that do not depend on the existence of a
settlement agreement. The Claimants contend that their claims that the Respondent acted
in bad faith, with insufficient transparency, and that it subjected the Claimants to coercion,
all constitute claims for breaches of Article 2(3) that do not depend on the predicate of a

settlement agreement. The Tribunal therefore addresses each of those claims separately.

5 RCM, q{179-180.

162

Als.

416.

417.

533

5a

535

Cl.

a. Bad faith

There is no explicit requirement in the BIT that a State Party must act in good faith. Indeed,
the International Court of Justice has observed that good faith, as a concept, “is not in itself
a source of obligation.”**? The Claimants assert that good faith is an inherent component
of the FET standard, and that Mozambique effectively agreed to an FET standard by
agreeing, in Article 2(3), to “ensure just and fair treatment of the investments of investors

of the other Contracting Party.”>??

The Claimants argue that the Respondent acted in bad faith: (1) by shifting its position with
regard to the settlement agreement after new political appointees at ANE and the Ministry
took office; (2) by waiting more than 20 months to reply to CMC’s request for payment;
(3) by revisiting the settlement agreement; and (4) by failing to engage in meaningful
discussions to resolve outstanding issues.**4 The Tribunal does not find the Respondent’s

conduct in any of these respects to amount to bad faith.

First, the Claimants have not established that the Respondent shifted its position on
settlement at all, much less that it did so in bad faith. ANE extended a settlement offer to
CMC on 30 October 2009, but CMC did not accept that offer. The offer expired by its
terms seven days after it was made, and ANE never made another offer. It is true that a
new administrator of ANE, Mr. Grachane, took over as General Director of ANE in January
of 2011, and Mr. Grachane made it clear that he felt that it had been a mistake for ANE to
make the settlement offer in the first place.**° But the offer made in 2009 had expired long
before Mr. Grachane took office. It is not bad faith for two successive holders of the same
office to hold different views, and that is all that the Claimants have established on this

point.

Border and Transborder Armed Actions (Nicar. v. Hond.), Judgment, 1988 LC.J. 69, 105 (Dec. 20), quoted in B.
M. Cremades, Good Faith in International Arbitration, A M. U. INT’L L. REV. 27:4 (2012).

CM, 9241-242.

See First Witness Statement of C. Grachane, (20.

163

418.

419.

420.

536

537

The Tribunal agrees that ANE’s treatment of CMC’s invoices 28 and 29, which were
submitted for the sums that the Claimants contend that ANE had agreed to pay
(EUR 3,200,938.04 and EUR 5,578,970.34) on 13 January 2010, could have been more
diligent.**° Those invoices provided ANE and the Government with an opportunity to clear
up the misunderstanding early on, but neither took advantage of that opportunity. The
fault, such as it is, does not lie entirely with the Respondent, however, because CMC made
no apparent effort to follow up. There is no record before the Tribunal of any
correspondence from either side on the subject for a year and a half after these invoices
were submitted. Mr. Gridella’s witness statement seeks to explain CMC’s inaction by
stating that Mr. Nunes had left ANE in March 2010, and that Mr. Gridella was then
informed that no funds were available, but that “monies were more readily available at the
start or end of each year,”°?” but this is hardly persuasive evidence of either diligence on
the part of the Claimants or of bad faith on the part of the Respondent. Both sides could
clearly have done better, but it does not appear to the Tribunal that either side has advanced

any evidence of bad faith on the part of the other.

The Claimants’ third allegation of bad faith — that the Respondent revisited the settlement
agreement — seems to depend on the existence of a settlement agreement, and would fail
for that reason even if it was otherwise understandable. The fourth allegation — an alleged
failure to discuss meaningful issues — may be frustrating to the party that wants to talk, but
the Claimants failed entirely to explain (much less to convince the Tribunal) how such a

failure could amount to bad faith.

The claim that the Respondent acted in bad faith is accordingly rejected.

C-36. Mr. Gridella stated that “invoicing would have been delayed to have it brought into the 2010 fiscal year.”
First Witness Statement of N. Gridella, 948.

First Witness Statement of N. Gridella, (50.

164

421.

422.

423.

424,

b. Transparency

The Claimants allege that Mozambique failed to maintain a legal framework that was
readily apparent to the Claimants and to which they could trace decisions affecting them.

The Tribunal finds this allegation unpersuasive on the facts and on the law.

On the facts, the Claimants have identified no instance in which Mozambique concealed
who was making a decision. The documentary record shows that the Director General of
ANE, Mr. Nunes, consulted with the Minister of Public Works before extending a
settlement offer to CMC, that the Minister approved the offer, and that the offer was
made.°*** Nothing in that sequence shows a lack of transparency or any confusion about

who was responsible for making decisions.

After CMC responded to ANE’s offer in November 2009, there was silence from ANE and
the Ministry. There is on that account some room for criticism, since one could wish in
retrospect that ANE had informed CMC promptly that it considered CMC’s response to
the offer to be a counteroffer, and thus a rejection of the offer. But not every deficiency in
communication amounts to a denial of just and fair treatment. CMC was told clearly that
the offer was good for seven days, and CMC failed to accept the offer unconditionally
within those seven days. ANE was under no obligation to say anything more. And, as noted
above, the long period of silence during most of 2010 and half of 2011 is as much

chargeable to the Claimants as it is to the Respondent.

The Tribunal does not exclude the possibility that a treaty provision calling for just and fair
treatment of investments may provide the same protections as an FET clause, nor does it
deny that the duty of fair and equitable treatment may include an obligation of
transparency. But the Tribunal is not persuaded that the circumstances before it
demonstrate any violation of the BIT on this account. The Tribunal accordingly rejects the

Claimants’ claim under Article 2(3) of the BIT based on an alleged lack of transparency.

538 C-12; C-2.

165

425.

426.

427.

428.

c. Coercion

The Claimants assert that the Respondent pressured them into “agreeing to a predetermined
result.”>*? The Tribunal finds no evidence in the facts before it of improper pressure being
exerted by the Respondent, or of any agreement to any result, predetermined or otherwise,

having been reached between the Claimants and the Respondent.

ANE paid in full the amounts to which the Engineer determined the Claimants to be entitled
for their work on the Lot 3 Contract. On 30 October 2009, it effectively offered to pay
approximately EUR 5.8 million more, but the Claimants did not accept that offer.
Thereafter, ANE refused to pay more for the Lot 3 work, either on its own or in conjunction
with CMC’s work on Lot 2 and other projects described by Mr. Alicandri. The Claimants
have, however, failed to demonstrate how ANE’s refusals to pay amounted to coercion, or

to explain what it is that they were coerced to do.

The Claimants point to authorities, including the decisions of the arbitral tribunals in
Tecmed and Saluka, that coercion “may be considered inconsistent with the fair and
equitable treatment to be given to international investments.”*“° The Tribunal accepts that
as a correct statement of international law, but finds no occasion to apply that law in this

case. The claim of coercion is accordingly rejected.

Cc. Article 2(3) of the BIT: Did Mozambique Impair the Claimants’ Investments
by Unjustified or Discriminatory Measures?

1. The Claimants’ Claim

The Claimants contend that Mozambique’s conduct with regard to the settlement offer after

30 October 2009 also breached the portion of Article 2(3) of the BIT that provides that:

Either Contracting Party shall ensure that the management,
maintenance, use, transformation, enjoyment or assignment of the
investments effected in its territory by investors of the other
Contracting Party, as well as companies and enterprises in which

539 OM, 1252-253.

5 Tecmed, Award (CL-24) at 163;see CM, 249-251; Saluka Investments B.V. v. The Czech Republic,
UNCITRAL, Partial Award (CL-22) at 4308.

166

429.

430.

431.

432.

433.

SC.

2 CM,

these investments have be effected, shall in no way, be subject to

unjustified or discriminatory measures.**!
The Claimants argue that Mozambique breached Article 2(3) by disregarding its obligation
to pay the Claimants the amount agreed without any justifiable reason. In particular, they
point out that Mozambique has not alleged that the Claimants failed to fulfil any obligation
to ANE or to Mozambique. The Claimants state that Mozambique’ s true reason for altering
its position was a change in the leadership of the Ministry and ANE, and that it
commissioned the Consultec report to obtain a pretext for refusing to pay the 8.2 million

committed to the Claimants.*4

The Claimants have not developed the argument that Mozambique’s conduct was

discriminatory, nor have they submitted any evidence of discrimination.

2. The Respondent’s Defense

The Respondent replies that its conduct was not unjustified, because there was no binding
settlement agreement, because ANE followed the contractual procedures established in the
Lot 3 Contract, and because ANE never altered its position on what was due to the

Claimants after they refused ANE’s settlement offer of 30 October 2009.54

3. The Tribunal’s Decision

As with many of their other claims, the Claimants’ claim that their investment in
Mozambique was subjected to unjustified measures is premised on ANE having entered
into an agreement to settle CMC’s Lot 3 claims. Since the Tribunal has found in Part
V.A(3) above that no settlement agreement was concluded between ANE and CMC, the

predicate for this claim falls away.

The Claimants’ claim that they were subjected to unjustified measures is dismissed for

failure to establish an underlying obligation of the State. The Claimants’ claim that they

9256-261; CRMJ, (1118.1.

5 RCM, 185-187.

167

434,

435.

436.

were subjected to discriminatory measures is dismissed for failure to advance any evidence

of discrimination.

D. Article 2(4) of the BIT: Did Mozambique Fail to Create And Maintain a Legal
Framework Apt to Guarantee the Claimants the Continuity of Legal
Treatment of All Undertakings Assumed?

1. The Claimants’ Claim

Article 2(4) of the BIT provides that:

Each Contracting Party shall create and maintain, in its territory a

legal framework apt to guarantee to investors the continuity of legal

treatment, including the compliance, in good faith, of all

undertakings assumed with regard to each specific investor.
The Claimants interpret Article 2(4) as a guarantee that “commitments assumed by the
State must be complied [with] in good faith.”*4 In effect, they read it as the equivalent of
an umbrella clause, even though they also (as discussed in the next section of this Award)
seek to import an umbrella clause from another treaty. They contend that: “a violation by
a host State of a binding undertaking assumed with regard to a specific investor may
constitute a violation of Article 2(4) of the Treaty.”*4° The Claimants argue that

Mozambique breached Article 2(4) of the BIT by “repudiating its obligation to pay.”*“°

In response to the Respondent’s argument that Article 2(4) comes into play only if the host
state’s “commitment” operated as an inducement to an investor to make its investment in
the first place, the Claimants argue that Article 2(4) of the BIT, which applies to “all

undertakings,” contains no such limitation.547

54 OM, 1262-265.

55 CM, 265.

546 CM, 4271.

7 CRMJ, (123.

168

437.

438.

439.

440.

441.

442.

2. The Respondent’s Defense

The Respondent replies that, since the settlement agreement was never agreed to, there was
never an “undertaking” within the meaning of Article 2(4) of the BIT to pay the amount

claimed.

The Respondent further argues that Article 2(4) applies only to an investor’s legitimate
expectations with regard to undertakings and representations made by the host state to
induce investments, before a particular investment is made. Even if the purported
settlement agreement had existed, the Respondent argues, it would have come into being
after the Claimants’ alleged investment was made, so that the alleged “undertaking” could

not have been an inducement to make any investment.**

3. The Tribunal’s Decision

The Tribunal’s finding that no settlement agreement was reached between CMC and ANE
is also fatal to this claim, which is premised on the existence of a binding undertaking that
the State has failed to honor. In the absence of such an undertaking, the premise for this

claim falls away.

In addition to the absence of an undertaking, the Claimant has not demonstrated any failure
on the part of the Respondent to “create and maintain, in its territory a legal framework apt
to guarantee to investors the continuity of legal treatment.”>4? No deficiency in the legal

framework available to the Claimants was identified.
The Claimants’ claim for a breach of Article 2(4) of the BIT is accordingly dismissed.

E. Does the MEN Clause Allow Claimants to Import An Umbrella Clause From
the Switzerland-Mozambique BIT?

1. The Claimants’ Claim

Article 3 of the BIT provides:

58 RCM, {{190-195.

5 Article 2(4) BIT (C-1).

169

443.

444,

445.

446.

550

552

1. Both Contracting Parties, within the bounds of their own territory,
shall offer investments effected by, and the income accruing to,
investors of the other Contracting Party no less favourable treatment
than that accorded to its own nationals or investors of Third States.

2. In case, from the legislation of one of the Contracting Parties, or

from the international obligations in force or that may come into

force for the future for one of the Contracting Parties, should come

out a legal framework according to which the investors of the other

Contracting Party would be granted a more favourable treatment

than the one foreseen in this Agreement, that more favourable

treatment will apply also for the outstanding relationships.
The Claimants take the position that this MFN provision entitles them to rely on other
bilateral investment treaties to which Mozambique is a party that are more favorable to
them than the BIT. They invoke in particular Article 11(2) of the Switzerland-
Mozambique BIT, which provides that: “[e]ach Contracting Party shall observe any
obligation it has assumed with regard to investments in its territory by investors of the other

Contracting Party.”°°°

The Claimants argue that Mozambique’s failure to comply with the 2009 settlement
agreement constitutes a breach of Article 3 of the BIT, in that it amounts to a failure by
Mozambique to observe obligations it assumed with regard to an investment in its

territory.>!

Nevertheless, the Claimants’ final request for relief in their Reply on the Merits does not
include any request for any remedy for any breach of Article 3 of the BIT.*>?
2. The Respondent’s Defense

The Respondent replies that this argument is essentially the same as the Claimants’

argument that the Respondent must observe all undertakings assumed with regard to them.

CM, 9275; CL-35.
CM, 9279.

CM, {288; CRMJ, 321.

170

447.

448.

449.

450.

It contends that both arguments fail for the same reasons stated above, specifically the fact

that no settlement agreement was ever reached.*>?

3. The Tribunal’s Decision

The Claimants seek to use Article 3 of the BIT, the MFN clause, to import into the BIT the
“umbrella clause” from the Switzerland-Mozambique BIT, and then to argue that the
Respondent failed to observe an “obligation it has assumed with regard to investments in

its territory by investors of the other Contracting Party.”°>4

There is a well-documented difference of opinion among investment treaty tribunals
concerning whether and to what extent an MEN clause may properly be used to vary the
terms of the investor-state arbitration provisions of a BIT. The Decision on Jurisdiction in
Garanti Koza LLP v. Turkmenistan collected citations to the various published decisions

to have considered the issue, and found them to be evenly divided on that question.*°°

This is not a question that this Tribunal is required to address, however. The underlying
“obligation” that the Claimants assert that the Respondent has failed to observe is the
alleged settlement agreement between ANE and CMC. Since the Tribunal has concluded
in Part V.A(3) above that no settlement agreement was reached between ANE and CMC,
the predicate for this claim is as absent as it is for the Claimants’ claim under Article 2(4)

of the BIT. This claim is dismissed for the same reason.
F. Are the Claimants’ Claims Timely?

1. The Respondent’s Objection

The Respondent asserts that the requirement in Article 1 of the BIT that investments be “in

conformity with the laws and regulations of the Contracting Parties” mandates that the

RCM, 4200.

Agreement between the Swiss Confederation and the Republic of Mozambique on the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments,

 

signed in Maputo on 29 November 2002, Article 11(2) (CL-35).

Garanti Koza LLP v. Turkmenistan, Decision on the Objection to Jurisdiction for Lack of Consent, ICSID Case

No. ARB/11/20 (3 July 2013).

171

451.

452.

453.

454,

Claimants’ investments must be in conformity with the laws of Mozambique, including the

statutes of limitation.*°

The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ claim would have come into existence, if at all,
at the end of 2010, when the Respondent purportedly failed to honor its alleged undertaking
to make payment in the course of 2010. The Claimants have not pursued their contract

claim in any venue and did not commence this arbitral proceeding until 2017.°*”

Ms. Muenda testified that, so far as is relevant here, Mozambican law provides for either
one, two, or three-year statutes of limitation.** She opined that the general limitation
period of 20 years advocated by the Claimants does not apply in this case; that period
applies only when no specific limitation period fits the case, and the three-year limitation
period referred to in Article 498(1) of the Civil Code of Mozambique applies here.*°? The
Respondent contends that the longest limitation period that could apply to this case—three

years—expired on 31 December 2013 at the latest.>°°

In response to the Claimants’ assertion that the Respondent has been in continuous breach
of its treaty obligations since 2011, the Respondent argues that the Claimants failed to

prove that they diligently pursued their claim or that they reasonably believed that amicable

settlement was possible.*°!

In response to the Claimants’ argument that the Respondent is estopped from raising a
timeliness objection because it stated that it would accept the jurisdiction of a Cotonou

Convention tribunal, the Respondent argues that the fact that ANE and the Ministry would

RCM, {120.

RCM, 121.

First Witness Statement of Ms. Muenda, {{{6-10.

Second Witness Statement of Ms. Muenda, §§(20, 21, 33.
RCM, 123.

RRM, {124.

172

455.

456.

457.

458.

562

accept a different jurisdiction does not estop Mozambique from raising an objection to this

Tribunal’ s jurisdiction.°”

In addition, the Respondent argues that the Claimants have unreasonably delayed in
bringing their claims.*°? The Claimants have been on notice about the Respondent’s

position since August 2011.°%*

2. The Claimants’ Response
The Claimants contend that the Respondent’s argument regarding the timeliness of their
claims must be rejected because such arguments raise issues of admissibility. Pursuant to
Procedural Order No. 1, any issue of admissibility should have been raised in the

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction.*®

The Claimants further take the position that the Respondent is estopped from raising this
objection because it stated, during the Hearing on Bifurcation, that it would accept the
jurisdiction of an arbitral tribunal constituted under the Cotonou Arbitration Rules. The
Claimants contend that the objection now raised by the Respondent would have applied

equally in a Cotonou Convention arbitration.*°

The Claimants contend that the wording of the BIT does not contain a time limit for
bringing claims based on international law. They argue that there is no legal basis under
the applicable rules of international law for the premise that domestic statutes of limitation

apply to treaty claims based on international law.”

RRM, 122.
RCM, 132-133.
RRM, 126.
CRMJ, 73.
CRMJ, 74.
CRMIJ, 75.

173

459.

460.

461.

462.

568

570

The Claimants argue that even if the domestic limitation period were to be relevant, it
would not have lapsed. Mr. Timbane opined that neither the one, two, nor three-year
limitation periods referred to by Ms. Muenda applies, but rather the general limitation
period of 20 years provided for in Article 309 of the Civil Code of Mozambique.*® The
three-year period, which the Respondent seems to argue is applicable does not apply,
Mr. Timbane says, because that period only applies to non-contractual liability.*© Nor are
the one or two-year periods relevant in this case.*”° The settlement agreement between the
Parties gave rise to contractual liability limited only by the general limitation period of

20 years.>7!

The Claimants further reason that if any of the one, two, or three-year limitation periods
were to apply, it has not lapsed, because the Respondent has been in continuous breach of
its obligations under the BIT since its non-transparent behavior that started in 2010 and

lasted until 2016.57

In response to the Respondent’s argument that the Claimants unreasonably delayed in
bringing their claims, the Claimants insist that any alleged delay was reasonable, because

they persisted in their efforts to reach an amicable solution through 2016.°77

3. The Tribunal’s Decision
The Claimants’ claims before this Tribunal arise under the BIT and international law.

Neither provides a limitations period, so the Claimants’ claims are not time barred.*”*

Legal Opinion of Mr. Timbane, 966.

Legal Opinion of Mr. Timbane, 99157, 68.

Legal Opinion of Mr. Timbane, §{169-73.

Legal Opinion of Mr. Timbane, (77.

CRM, (177-78.

CRMJ, 180; Witness Statement of E. Alicandri, {[][23-26, 30, 31, 39-45.

See Restatement, Third, Foreign Relations Law of the United States (Revised) (1987), reporters’ note 2 &
comment c to § 902 (“No general rule of international law limits the time within which a claim can be made”),
citing George W. Cook (U.S.A.) v. United Mexican States, General Claims Commission (3 June 1927), Reports

of International Arbitral Awards, Volume IV, p. 214.

174

463.

464.

465.

VI.

466.

467.

Having reached that conclusion, the Tribunal need not rule on the Claimants’ argument

that the Respondent's statute of limitations defense was not raised in a timely manner.

This Tribunal has no occasion or competence to rule on what period of limitations might

apply to any claims that the Claimant might seek to bring under the Lot 3 Contract.
The Respondent’s objection to the timeliness of the Claimants’ claims is dismissed.

G. Summary of the Tribunal’s Decisions on the Merits

For the reasons explained above, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants have failed to prevail
on any of their claims. It therefore finds in favor of the Respondent, and dismisses each of

the Claimants’ claims.

DAMAGES

The Claimants have argued two theories of damages. Their primary theory is that they have
suffered damages in the amount of EUR 8,220,888, resulting from the failure of the
Respondent to honor a legally binding settlement agreement requiring it to pay them that

amount, in violation of international law.>”>

In the alternative, regardless of whether a settlement agreement exists, the Claimants argue
that the Respondent was unjustly enriched in the amount of EUR 8,220,888. Because the
Respondent conducted itself in a manner inconsistent with the requirement of fair and
equitable treatment, the Claimants are entitled to be compensated for the additional works
carried out by them. The Claimants contend that the value of those additional works is

equal to the unpaid invoices for a total amount of EUR 8,220,888.>76

575 CRMJ, 310.

576 CRMB, 9312-316.

175

468.

469.

470.

471.

472.

473.

474.

The Claimants further claim interest at the EURIBOR three-month rate plus a 5% risk
premium for Mozambique, compounded semi-annually from January 2010 until full

payment is made.*””

The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ primary damages theory must fail, because

there was no valid and binding settlement agreement.>”®

The Respondent argues that the Claimants’ alternative damages theory must also be
rejected on the ground that it was raised too late. The Claimants first made this argument
in their Reply on the Merits. The Respondent takes the position that the Claimants cannot
change horses midstream by turning a purely contract-based damages claim into a claim

based on work that was allegedly carried out under the underlying Lot 3 Contract.>”

In any case, the Respondent says that the Claimants’ alternative theory must be rejected,
because the Claimants have not substantiated their position that they were paid

EUR 8,220,888 too little for their work on the Lot 3 Project.

Having found no breach of any article of the BIT by the Respondent, the Tribunal
necessarily finds that the Claimants are not entitled to recover any damages for breach of

the BIT.

Any claim the Claimants may have based on the value of the work done under the Lot 3
Contract or alleging any error on the part of the Engineer would be claims to be pursued
under the dispute resolution provisions of that contract. This Tribunal has no jurisdiction

to consider such claims or to rule on whether or not they would now be time barred.

The Tribunal accordingly awards no damages to the Claimants. There is thus no occasion

for the Tribunal to address the subject of interest.

5” CRM, 4317.

578 RRM, q{f151-153.

5 RRM, W{154-156.

176

Vil. COSTS

475. Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as
the parties otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the
parties in connection with the proceedings, and shall decide how and
by whom those expenses, the fees and expenses of the members of
the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre
shall be paid. Such decision shall form part of the award.

476. ICSID Arbitration Rule 28(1) provides:

Without prejudice to the final decision on the payment of the cost of
the proceeding, the Tribunal may, unless otherwise agreed by the
parties, decide:

(a) at any stage of the proceeding, the portion which each
party shall pay, pursuant to Administrative and Financial
Regulation 14, of the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and
the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre;

(b) with respect to any part of the proceeding, that the related
costs (as determined by the Secretary-General) shall be
borne entirely or in a particular share by one of the parties.
477. On 29 May 2019, each party to this arbitration submitted an application for its costs in this

proceeding pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 28(2).

478. In Claimants’ Submission on Costs, the Claimants applied for reimbursement by the

Respondent of the following costs:>*°
Item Amount
Counsel Fees: € 307,027 Euro
Counsel Expenses: € 8,485 Euro
ICSID fees: $ 250,000 USD**!
Mozambican Expert Legal Advice: € 48,982 Euro

80 The Claimants made a separate application for fees and costs incurred in relation to the question of jurisdiction
(pars. 16-18 of Claimants’ Submission on Costs), but that appears to be a subset of the total.

581 This number includes the USD 25,000 non-reimbursable filing fee. The Claimants paid a further advance of USD

75,000 which is not included in this total. Therefore, the advances paid by the Claimants to ICSID (not including
the filing fee) amount to USD 299,970 USD.

177

479.

480.

481.

582

Translations: € 3,813 Euro
Salaries of CMC staff who assisted

in preparation of documents: € 52,000 Euro
Expenses of Claimants and counsel

attending hearing and witness interviews: € 30,952 Euro

Totals: Euro: € 451,259, plus
USD: $ 250,000

The Respondent, in Respondent’s Statement of Costs, applied for reimbursement by the

Claimants of the following costs:

(a) US $778,252.34 in attorneys’ fees;

(b) US $45,544.53 in costs;

(c) US $423,480 in expert’s fees; and

(d) US $225,000 in ICSID and arbitrators’ fees.

Total: US $1,472,276.87

The Tribunal understands that both the Claimants and the Respondent believe that only the
prevailing party should recover its costs, that each believes that it should be the prevailing
party, and that both therefore believe that the other side should not recover any costs at all.
The Respondent has also submitted an Opposition to the Claimants’ Statement of Costs in
which it reiterates, in some detail, its positions on the merits. The Claimants objected to
the admission of the Respondent’s Opposition on the grounds that it was in the nature of a
post-hearing brief,**? which the Parties agreed to forego.** In defending its costs
application, the Respondent made a similar objection to paragraphs 7-9 of the Claimants’

application for costs.**4

The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that paragraphs 3 through 9 of Respondent’s
Opposition consists of argument as to why the Claimants should not prevail on their claims,

rather than comments on the particulars of the Claimants’ application for costs. The

See para. 83, above.

58Tr, 1 May 2019, p. 570, 1. 7-9.

58 Respondent's e-mail of 12 June 2019.

178

482.

483.

484.

485.

486.

487.

Claimants engaged in advocacy to a significantly lesser extent than the Respondent, but

still went beyond what was appropriate in a costs application.

The advocacy contained in paragraphs 3 through 9 of the Respondent’s Opposition to the
Claimants’ Statement of Costs, and also in paragraphs 8 and 9 of the Claimants’

Submission on Costs, has accordingly been disregarded.

The Tribunal has considered the submissions of both sides concerning costs and finds both
submissions reasonable in amount. However, the Tribunal agrees with the Parties that any
allocation of the costs of one party to another party should be based, at least in significant

part, on which party has prevailed in the arbitration.

In this arbitration, the Claimants have prevailed on the many objections to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction advanced by the Respondent, including at least one issue — the effect of the
Cotonou Convention — that appears to be an issue of first impression in an ICSID
arbitration. These jurisdictional issues required considerable effort and briefing by both

sides.

The Respondent, on the other hand, while unsuccessful in its objections to jurisdiction, has

prevailed on the merits of the Claimants’ claims.

In these circumstances, where each party has been successful on a significant element of
the case and unsuccessful on the other, the Tribunal decides that the costs of the arbitration
— the fees and expenses invoiced to the Parties by ICSID — should be borne equally by the

Parties, and that each party should bear its own costs and expenses of presenting its case.

The costs of the arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal and the
Tribunal’s Assistant, ICSID’s administrative fees and direct expenses, amount to

474,768.90 (in USD):

179

488.

Vill.

489.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Arbitrators’ fees and expenses
John Townsend 123,793.01
J. Brian Casey 56,909.43
Peter Rees QC 89,529.29
Assistant’s fees and expenses 29,733.00
ICSID’s administrative fees 126,000.00
Direct expenses (estimated) 48,804.17
Total 474,768.90

 

The above costs have been paid out of the advances made by the Parties (the Claimants
have advanced USD 299,970 and the Respondent advanced USD 225,000). Each Party’s
share of the costs of arbitration amounts to USD 237,384.45. Accordingly, the Respondent
shall pay the Claimants USD 12,384.45 and the remaining balance will be reimbursed to

the Claimants.

AWARD
For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal makes the following Award:

a. For the reasons stated in Part IV of this Award, the Tribunal concludes that it has

jurisdiction to hear the claims presented by the Claimants.

b. For the reasons stated in Part V of this Award, the Tribunal finds that the
Respondent has prevailed on the merits, and accordingly dismisses each of the

Claimants’ claims.

c. For the reasons stated in Part VII of this Award, the Tribunal decides that the costs
of the arbitration should be borne equally by the Parties, as provided in paragraph
488, and that each party should bear its own costs and expenses of presenting its

case.

d. All other requests for relief are dismissed.

180,

[Signed] [Signed]

 

J. Brian Casey Peter Rees QC
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: [3 October 2019] Date: [8 October 2019]
[Signed]

John M. Townsend
President of the Tribunal

Date: [1 October 2019]

181

