UNCITRAL Arbitration Proceedings

CME Czech Republic B.V. (The Netherlands)

vs. W’o hereby certify this

 

 

to be a true copy of ihe
The Czech Republic c
©.
C
I” .hed Liability Partnership
PARTIAL AWARD :..J Aldersgate Street
I -nton
LIA 43J

issued in Stockholm, Sweden, on September/ 3, 2001 in the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Proceedings

between

CLAIMANT:

and

RESPONDENT:

BEFORE:

CME Czech Republic B.V., Hoogoorddreef 9, 1101 BA Am-
sterdam Zuid-Oost, The Netherlands (hereinafter referred
to as “CME”) represented by:

Mr. John S. Kiernan and Mr. Michael M. Ostrove, De-
bevoise & Plimpton, 875 Third Avenue, New York, New
York 10022, U.S.A.

The Czech Republic

represented by the Minister of Finance of the Czech Re-
public Mr. Jifi Rusnoki, Ministry of Finance, Letenzka 15,
11810 Prague 1, The Czech Republic represented by:
Mr. Jeremy Carver and Mr. Audley Sheppard, Clifford
Chance, 200 Aldersgate Street, London EC1A 4JJ and
Mr. Vladimir Petrus and Mr. Miroslav Dubovsky, Clifford
Chance Pinder, Charles Bridge Center, Krizovnické
nam. 2, 1 10 00 Prague 1, Czech Republic

Dr. Wolfgang Kihn, Dusseldorf, Chairman,
Judge Stephen M. Schwebel, Washington D.C., Arbitrator,
JUDr. Jaroslav Handl, Prague, Arbitrator

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

A. Background of the Dispute
(1) The Parties 4
(2) The UNCITRAL Arbitration Proceedings 2
(3) The Netherlands / Czech Republic Bilateral Investment Treaty 3
(4) CME's “investments” under the Treaty 4
(5) CME’s shareholding 5
(6) The Broadcasting Licence 8

(7) The Formation of CNTS 11
(8) The CNTS Memorandum of Association 12
(9) CNTS’ Broadcasting Services 13
(10) TV NOVA's success 14
(11) The Change of Media Law 15
(12) The Amendment of the Memorandum of Association 16
(13) The 1999 Events 17
(14) The Prague Civil Court proceedings 19
(15) CME's Allegations 20
(16) Investment Dispute and Breach of Treaty 23
B. Relief Sought 25
(1) Relief Sought by CME Czech Republic B.V. 26
(2) Relief Sought by the Czech Republic 29
C. Procedure
(1) Initiation and Conduct of Proceedings 30
(2) The Procedural Hearing 40
(3) The Parties’ Request for Production of Documents 52
(4) The Parties’ Request for Interim Remedies or Similar Orders 55
(5) The Tribunal’s Decision on Interim Remedies 64
and Similar Orders
(6) Further Conduct of Proceedings 65
(7) The Submission of Witness Statements 70
(8) Declarations in Support of the Statement of Claim
(9) Statements in Support of the Statement of Defence
(10) Documents and Authorities 71
(11) The Stockholm Hearing 72
D. Position of the Claimant 74
I. The Claimant's Investment in the Czech Republic 75
Il. The Role of CNTS 86
IL The Memorandum of Association 93
IV. The Formation of TV NOVA 103
V. The Media Council's Reversal of Position 107
Vi. The Council Compels CNTS to Alter the MOA 114
Vil. The Destruction of Claimant's Investment 119
Vill. | The Media Council's Failure to Fulfil its Obligation 133
to Protect Claimant's Investment
Ix. The Czech Republic's Additional Continuing Violations 137
of the Treaty
Xx. Other Legai Actions by CME or CNTS 140

Apart from this Arbitration

E. Claimant's Argument

I. CME’s Entitlement to Assert a Claim under the Treaty 145
Ml. The Czech Republic's Obligations under the Treaty 148
1. The Obligation Not to Deprive Investors of Their Investments 149
2. The Obligation of Fair and Equitable Treatment 155

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

   

-3-

3. The Obligation Not to Engage in Unreasonable and 158
Discriminatory Treatment

4. The Obligation of Full Security and Protection 159

5. The Obligation of Treatment in Accordance with Standards 162

of International Law

i. The Czech Republic Has Violated Its Treaty Obligations

1. the Gzech Republic Is Responsible for the Media Council's 163
onduct
2. The Media Council's Conduct has Violated the Czech 166

Republic's Treaty Obligations

IV. The Czech Republic Is Required to Remedy Its Breaches 171
of the Treaty

F. Position of the Respondent

I. Introduction 172

I. The Treaty 181

Ut. The Media Law 182

IV. The Media Council 189

Vv. The Grant of the Licence to CET 21 191

Vi. The Formation of CNTS 214

Vil. The Unlawful Implementation of the Licence 225

Vili. Administrative Proceedings Against CNTS 237

IX. CME Takes Secret Control of CET 21 . 241

Xx. Change of Memorandum of Association of CNTS 243
and Service Agreement

Xi. The Media Council did not reverse its Position 253

XII. | The Media Council did not Compel CNTS to Alter the MOA 257

XII. March 15, 1999 Letter 261

XIV. The Dispute Between CET 21 and CNTS 265

XV. The alleged Destruction of Claimant's Investment 270

XVI. The Media Council did not Fail to Protect 277
Claimant's Investment

XVII. The Czech Republic's Alleged Additional 281

Continuing Violations of the Treaty

G. The Respondent's Argument
|

. The Interpretation of the Treaty and Burden of Proof 284
i. The Governing Law 286
Hh. The Tribunal Lacks Jurisdiction 288
4. CME has Failed to Establish that It has an Asset Invested 291
in the Czech Republic
2. CME's Claim is Not an Investment Dispute under the Treaty 294
3. CME May Not Currently Pursue the Same Remedies in 302
Different Fora
IV. CME Czech Republic B.V. has no claim in substance 311
Vv. The Czech Republic's Obligations under the Treaty 312
4. The Obligation Not to Deprive Investors of Their Investments 317
2. The Obligation of Fair and Equitable Treatment 335
3. The Obligation Not to Engage in Unreasonable and Discrimi- 342
natory Treatment
4. The Obligation of Full Security and Protection 351
5. The Obligation of Treatment in Accordance with Standards 359

of International Law
Vi. The Czech Republic has not Violated its Treaty Obligations

1. ihe gzech Republic is Responsible for the Media Council's 362
onduct
2. The Council’s Conduct did not Violate the Czech Republic’s 363
Treaty Obligations
Vil. CME Failed to Plead Any Loss 372
Vill. | Respondent's Conclusion 374

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

H. The Analysis of the Tribunal
I. Jurisdiction

I.
J.

(10)

(4
(12)

The Claimant's Investment

The Claimant's 1997 Share Acquisition

The Claimant's Predecessor’s 1994 Share Acquisition
The 1994 Share Assignment not notified

The Claimant’s Predecessor’s 1996 Share Acquisitions
CME’s Predecessor's Original 1993/1994 Contributions
qualify as Investment under the Treaty

The Investment Dispute under the Treaty

Parallel Proceedings

No abuse of Treaty Proceedings

Outcome of Civil Court Proceedings have

no Effect on Jurisdiction

Respondent's Defence that no Loss Occurred
Claimant itself made no Investment

The Substance of the Claimant's Case
1. Admissibility / Timewise Limitation

(1)
(2)
(3)

Parallel Treaty Proceedings

No restriction of the Claimant's case timewise
Admissibility of the Claimant's case

in respect to the 1994 Share Acquisition

2. 1h Merits of the Claimant’s Case under the Treaty

(2
(3
(4)
(65
(6)

(7)

E's and CME’s predecessor's investments
in the Czech Republic
The Media Council in 1996 coerced CME to abandon the
legal security for its investment in the Czech Republic
The Media Council supports the destruction
of CME’s investment
ENTS’ dismantling as exclusive service provider
supported by Council’s actions and inactions
Causation of damage by Council’s actions
and omissions
The Respondent breached the Treaty
(i) The obligation not to deprive the Claimant
of its investment (Treaty Article 5)
(ii) | The remaining claims
a) The obligation of fair and equitable treatment
(Article 3 (1) of the Treaty)
b) The obligation not to impair investments by
unreasonable or discriminatory measures
(Article 3 (1) of the Treaty)
c) The obligation of full security and protection
(Article 3 (2) of the Treaty)
The obligation to treat investments in con-
formity with principles of international law
(Articles 3 (5) and 8 of the Treaty)
The Reparation Claim

&

Costs of the proceedings

Decision

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

419
425
427
428
460
539
559
575

586
591

610
611

612

613
614

615
619
624

 

-5-

A.
Background of the Dispute

(1) The Parties

1. The Claimant CME Czech Republic B.V. is a corporation organized under
the laws of the Netherlands. The Respondent, the Czech Republic, is a
sovereign governmental entity, represented in these proceedings by its
Ministry of Finance.

(2). The UNCITRAL Arbitration Proceedings

2. | CME Czech Republic B.V. (CME) initiated these arbitration proceedings
on February 22, 2000 by notice of arbitration against the Czech Republic
pursuant to Art. 3 of the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commis-
sion on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

(3) The Netherlands / Czech Republic Bilateral Investment Treaty

3. CME brought this arbitration as a result of alleged actions and inactions
and omissions by the Czech Republic claimed to be in breach of the
Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection of Investments
between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak Fed-
eral Republic, executed on April 29, 1991 (hereinafter: “the Treaty”). The
Treaty entered into force in the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic on
October 1, 1992 and, after the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic
ceased to exist on December 31, 1992, the Czech Republic succeeded to
the rights and obligations of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic under
the Treaty.

(4) CME’s “investments” under the Treaty

4. CME holds a 99 % equity interest in Ceska Nezavisla Televizni Spoleé-
nost, spol. s r.o. ("CNTS”), a Czech television services company. CME
maintains that, among other things, CME’s ownership interest in CNTS
and its indirect ownership of CNTS’ assets qualify as “investments” pursu-
ant to Art. 1 (a) of the Treaty. CME and these investments, therefore, are
thereby entitled to the protection and benefits of the Treaty.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME_- Partial Award 0709/spe

 

-6-

(5) CME’s_ shareholding

5. CME acauired its 99 % ownership interest in CNTS in steps. It acquired
5.8 % shares in 1997 by purchasing the Czech holding company NOVA
Consulting, which owned these shares, and by purchasing, in May 1997,
93.2 % from CME’s affiliated company, CME Media Enterprises B.V.,
which, in turn, in 1996 had acquired 22 % of the shares in CNTS from the
Ceska Spofitelna a.s. (Czech Savings Bank) and 5.2 % from CET 21
Spol. s r.o. (CET 21).

6. Earlier, in 1994, CME Media Enterprises B.V. had acquired a 66 % share-
holding in GNTS from the Central European Development Corporation
GmbH (“CEDC”), a German company under the same ultimate control as
CME and CME Media Enterprises B.V. of an American corporation in turn
controlled by Mr. Ronald S. Lauder, an American businessman with domi-
cile in the United States of America.

7. CEDC (with a share of 66 %), CET 21 (with a share of 21 %) and the
Czech Savings Bank (with a share of 22 %) were co-founders of CNTS,
formed as a joint venture company in 1993 with the object of providing
broadcasting services to CET 21.

(6) The Broadcasting Licence

8.  CME’s investments (its ownership interest in CNTS and its indirect owner-
ship of CNTS’ assets) are related to a Licence for television broadcasting
granted by the Czech Media Council, empowered to issue licences by the
Czech Republic’s Act on the Operation of Radio and Television Broad-
casting, adopted on October 30, 1991, Act No. 468/1991 Coll. (hereinaf-
ter, the “Media Law”). This Licence was granted to CET 21, acting in con-
junction inter alia with CEDC, for the purpose of the acquisition and use of
the Licence for broadcasting throughout the Czech Republic. CME’s and
its predecessors’ investments in this joint venture, inter alia between
CEDC and CET 21, are the object of the dispute between the parties.

9. In late 1992 and early 1993, CEDC, on the invitation of CET 21, which
was owned by five Czech nationals and advised by Dr. Vladimir Zelezny,
a Czech national, participated in negotiations with the Czech Media Coun-
cil (hereinafter: “the Council”) with the goal of the issuance of the Broad-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

 

-7-

casting Licence to CET 21 with a participation therein, either directly or in-
directly, by CEDC.

10. The Council issued the Licence to CET 21 on February 9, 1993 to operate
the first nation-wide private television station in the Czech Republic. The
decision granting the Licence acknowledged CEDC’s “substantial in-
volvement of foreign capital necessary to begin television station activi-
ties” and the conditions attached to the Licence acknowledged CEDC’s
partnership with the holder of the Licence, CET 21.

(7) The Formation of CNTS

11. Instead of CEDC taking a direct share in CET 21 (as initially contem-
plated), and instead of a license being issued jointly to CET 21 and CEDC
(also so contemplated), the partners of CET 21 and Dr. Zelezny agreed
with CEDC and the Media Council to establish CEDC’s participation in the
form of a joint venture, CNTS. The Media Council was of the view that
such an arrangement would be more acceptable to Czech Parliamentary
and public opinion than one that accorded foreign capital a direct owner-
ship or licensee interest.

(8) The CNTS Memorandum of Association

12. The Memorandum of Association was made part of the Licence Condi-
tions, defining the co-operation between CET 21 as the licence holder and
ENTS as the operator of the broadcasting station. CET 21 contributed to
ENTS the right to use the Licence “unconditionally, unequivocally and on
an exclusive basis” and obtained its 12 % ownership interest in CNTS in
return for this contribution in kind. Dr. Zelezny served as the general di-
rector and chief executive of CNTS and as a general director of CET 21.
CENTS’ Memorandum of Association (“MOA”) was approved by the Council
on April 20, 1993 and, in February 1994, CNTS and CET 21 began broad-
casting under the Licence through their newly-created medium, the broad-
casting station TV NOVA.

(9) CNTS’ Broadcasting Services

13. CNTS provided all broadcasting services, including the acquisition and
production of programs and the sale of advertising time to CET 21, which
acted only as the licence holder. In that capacity, CET 21 maintained liai-
son with the Media Council. It was CET 21 that appeared before the Me-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

 

-8-

dia Council, not CME, though Dr. Zelezny’s dual directorships of CET 21
and CNTS did not lend themselves to clear lines of authority.

(10) TV NOVA’s success

14. TV NOVA became the Czech Republic's most popular and successful
television station with an audience share of more than 50 % with
US $109 million revenues and US $ 30 million net income in 1998. CME
claims to have invested totally an amount of US $ 140 million, including
the afore-mentioned share purchase transactions for the acquisition of the
99 % shareholding in CNTS, by 1997. The audience share, the revenues
and amount of the investment are disputed by the Respondent.

(11) The Change of Media Law

15. As of January 1, 1996, the Media Law was changed. According to the new
Media Law, licence holders were entitled to request the waiver of licence
conditions (and Media Council regulations imposed in pursuance of those
conditions) related to non-programming. Most of the licence holders ap-
plied for this waiver, including CET 21, with the consequence that the Me-
dia Council lost its strongest tool to monitor and direct the licence holders.

(12) The Amendment of the Memorandum of Association

16. As a consequence of certain inter-actions between the Media Council and
CET 21, including CNTS, the shareholders of CNTS in 1996 agreed to
change CNTS‘ Memorandum of Association and replaced CET 21 ‘s con-
tribution "Use of the Licence“ by ,,Use of the Know-how of the Licence“.
The circumstances, reasons and events related to, and the commercial
and legal effects deriving from? this change are in dispute between the
parties. In conjunction with the change of the contribution of the use of the
Licence, CET 21 and CNTS entered into a Service Agreement. That
Agreement thereafter was the basis for the broadcasting services pro-
vided by CNTS to CET 21 for operating TV NOVA.

(13) The 1999 Events

17. In 1999, after communications between the Media Council and Dr. Zel-
ezny, the character and the legal impact of these communications being in
dispute between the parties, CET 21 terminated the Service Agreement
on August 5, 1999 for what it maintains was good cause.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

20.

21.

22.

-9-

The reason given for this termination was the non-delivery of the day-log
by CNTS to CET 21 on August 4, 1999 for the following day. CET 21
thereafter replaced CNTS as service provider and operator of broadcast-
ing services by other service providers, with the consequence that CNTS’
broadcasting services became idle and, according to CME, CNTS’ busi-
ness was totally destroyed.

(14) The Prague Civil Court proceedings

ENTS sued CET 21 for having terminated the Service Agreement without
cause. The Prague District Court on May 4, 2000 judged that the termina-
tion was void, the Court of Appeal, however, confirmed the validity of the
termination, and the Czech Supreme Court decision was still pending
when these arbitration proceedings were closed.

(15) CME’s Allegations

CME claims that CNTS, the most successful Czech private broadcasting
station operator with annual net income of roughly US $ 30 million, has
been commercially destroyed by the actions and omissions attributed to
the Media Council, an organ of the Czech Republic.

CME claims, inter alia, that an already signed Merger and Acquisition
Agreement between CME’s interim parent company and the Scandinavian
broadcaster and investor SBS was vitiated by these actions and omis-
sions of the Media Council. CME accordingly suffered damage in the
amount of US $ 500 million, which was the value allocated by that Agree-
ment and by the joint venture partners to CNTS in 1999 before the disrup-
tion of the legal and commercial status of CNTS as a consequence of the
Media Council’s actions and omissions.

The Czech Republic strongly disputes this contention and the purported
underlying facts, maintaining that, inter alia, the loss of investment (if any)

is the consequence of commercial failures and misjudgments of CME and,

in any event, that CME’s claim is part of a commercial dispute between

ENTS and Dr. Zelezny, for which the protection of the Treaty is not avail-

able.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

23.

24,

25.

-10-

(16) Investment Dispute and Breach of Treaty

CME contends that the dispute between the parties is a dispute “between
one Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party con-
cerning an investment of the latter’ as defined by Art. 8 (1) of the Treaty.
As such, it is the position of CME that the dispute is subject to Arbitration
pursuant to Art. 8 (2) through 8 (7) of the Treaty.

CME alleges that the Czech Republic has breached each of the following
provisions of the Treaty:

@) “Each Contracting Party shall ensure fair and equitable
treatment to the investments of investors of the other Con-
tracting Party and shall not impair, by unreasonable or dis-
criminatory measures, the operation, management, mainte-
nance, use, enjoyment or disposal thereof by those inves-
tors” (Art. 3 (1));

(b) “.. each Contracting Party shall accord to [the investments
of investors of the other Contracting Party] full security and
protection which in any case shall not be less than that ac-
corded either to investments of its own investors or to in-
vestments of investors of any third State, whichever is more
favourable to the investor concerned” (Art. 3 (2)); and

(c) “Neither Contracting Party shall take any measures depriv-
ing, directly or indirectly, investors of the other Contracting
Party of their investments unless the following conditions
are complied with:

a the measures are taken in the public interest
and under due process of law;

bd the measures are not discriminatory;

c) the measures are accompanied by provision
for the payment of just compensation” (Art. 5).

B.
Relief Sought

In its Notice of Arbitration, CME “requested the Tribunal to provide a relief
necessary to restore CNTS’ exclusive rights to provide broadcasting serv-
ices for TV NOVA and thereby restore to CME the economic benefit avail-
able under the arrangement initially approved by the Council” (restitutio in
integrum). During the proceedings, CME changed the Relief Sought and
requested the Tribunal to give the following Relief to the Claimant. Both

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

-ll-

parties instructed the Tribunal that, if damages are to be awarded, the Tri-
bunal shall not decide on the quantum at this stage of the proceedings.

(1) Relief Sought by CME Czech Republic B.V.

26. Claimant seeks an award:

1. Deciding Respondent has violated the following provisions of the

Treaty:

a) The obligation of fair and equitable treatment (Art. 3 (1));

b) The obligation not to impair the operation, management, main-
tenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of investments by unrea-
sonable or discriminatory measures (Article 3 (1));

c) The obligation of full security and protection (Art. 3 (2)); and

d) The obligation to treat investments at least in conformity with
the rules of international law (Art. 3 (5)); and

e) The obligation not to deprive Claimant of its investment by di-

rect or indirect measures (Art. 5); and

2. Declaring that Respondent is obliged to remedy the injury that
Claimant suffered as a result of Respondent's violations of the
Treaty by payment of the fair market value of Claimant’s investment
in an amount to be determined at a second phase of this arbitration;

3. Declaring the Respondent is liable for the costs that Claimant has in-
curred in these proceedings to date, including the costs of legal rep-
resentation and assistance.

27. Claimant confirms that it has withdrawn its request for the remedy of res-
titutio in in tegrum.

28. The Respondent sought the following Relief:

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

(2)

-12 -

Relief Sought by the Czech Republic

29. The Czech Republic seeks an award that:

30.

31.

(1) _CME’s claim be dismissed as an abuse of process.

(2) And/or CME’s claim be dismissed on grounds that the Czech Repub-
lic did not violate the following provisions of the Treaty as alleged (or
at all):

(a) The obligation of fair and equitable treatment of investments
(Art. 3 (1)).

(b) The obligation not to impair investments by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures (Art. 3 (1)).

(c) The obligation to accord full security and protection to invest-
ments (Art. 3 (2)).

(d) The obligation to treat investments in accordance with the
standard of international law (Art. 3 (5)).

(e) The obligation to not deprive investors directly or indirectly of
their investments (Art. 5).

(3) And/or CME’s claim be dismissed and/or CME is not entitled to dam-
ages, on grounds that alleged injury to CME’s investment was not
the direct and foreseeable result of any violation of the Treaty.

(4) And CME pay the costs of the proceedings and reimburse the rea-
sonable legal and other costs of the Czech Republic.

Cc.
Procedure

(1) Initiation and Conduct of Proceedings

After having initiated the arbitration proceedings, the Claimant appointed
Judge Stephen M. Schwebel, Washington, and the Respondent
JUDr. Jaroslav Handl, Prague, as party-appointed arbitrators. Both arbi-
trators appointed Dr. Wolfgang Kithn, Dusseldorf, as Chairman of the Ar-
bitral Tribunal on July 19, 2000, which appointment was accepted by the
Chairman on July 21, 2000.

On August 4, 2000 the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order No. 1 setting
dates for the parties for the Statement of Claim and the Statement of De-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

-13-

fence, in accordance with Art. 23 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The
Tribunal requested the parties to annex to their statements the documents
that the parties deemed relevant.

32. In accordance with Art. 17 of the UNCITRAL Rules, the Tribunal deter-
mined the language to be used in the proceedings to be English and in-
structed the parties that any documents annexed to the Statement of
Claim or Statement of Defence and any supplementary documents or ex-
hibits submitted in the course of the proceedings, delivered in their original
language, shall be accompanied by a translation into English.

33. In accordance with Art. 16 of the UNCITRAL Rules, the place of arbitration
was determined to be Stockholm. The Tribunal convened a meeting with
counsel of the parties on November 17, 2000 in Stockholm in order to dis-
cuss further conduct of the proceedings and the parties were invited to
give a short presentation of their case. The Tribunal also made a proposal
with respect to the Arbitrators’ fees.

34. The Claimant by letter dated August 10, 2000 accepted the Tribunal’s
proposal in respect to costs and fees, whereas no answer was received
from the Respondent within the specified time. The Tribunal therefore in-
formed the parties by letter dated September 5, 2000 that the Tribunal will
proceed on the basis that the parties accept the Tribunal’s proposal in Or-
der No. 1 dated August 4, 2000. By letter dated September 25, 2000 the
Respondent requested that the whole amount of the costs for the arbitra-
tion should be borne by the Claimant and therefore declined to pay the
advance payment, which was requested by the Tribunal by Order No. 2.

35. On September 22, 2000 the Claimant submitted its Statement of Claim
including exhibits, declarations and authorities. The Claimant made the re-
quired deposits for costs. By Order No. 3 the Tribunal requested the
Claimant to make the required payment not made by the Respondent,
which the Claimant did.

36. By Court Order No. 4 dated October 24, 2000 the Tribunal changed the

place of the hearing on November 17, 2000, due to accommodation prob-
lems in Stockholm, to Dusseldorf. The change of the place for the hearing

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

 

 

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

-14-

did not change the seat of the arbitration, which still was denominated to
be Stockholm.

On November 9, 2000 the Respondent submitted its Statement of De-
fence including witness statements, exhibits and authorities. In its State-
ment of Defence the Respondent raised, inter alia, the defence of jurisdic-
tion stating that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction, or, in the alternative, CME’s
claim is inadmissible.

On November 14, 2000 the Claimant submitted a Request for Production
of Documents describing the requested documents broadly as Media
Council’s records related to the grant of the Licence to CET 21, the opera-
tion of TV NOVA, the administrative proceedings initiated by the Media
Council against CNTS in 1996 and the correspondence between the Me-
dia Council and CET 21, Dr. Zelezny, CME or GNTS, including internal
minutes for 1998, 1999 and 2000.

On November 16, 2000 the Respondent requested the Tribunal to refuse
the Claimant's Request for Production of Documents as being too broad
and unsubstantiated and, therefore, not in compliance with the Interna-
tional Bar Association Rules on Taking Evidence in International Commer-
cial Arbitration adopted on June 1, 1999 (“IBA Rules”).

(2) The Procedural Hearing

For the hearing of November 17, 2000, the parties jointly submitted an
agenda. Under the first topic, CME suggested the co-ordination of these
arbitration proceedings with the so-called Lauder vs. the Czech Republic
arbitration proceedings. In the Lauder vs. the Czech Republic proceed-
ings, the ultimate majority shareholder of CME advanced similar claims in
a pending UNCITRAL Arbitration brought against the Czech Republic un-
der a bilateral investment treaty between the United States of America
and the Czech Republic. The Tribunal did not take a decision on co-ordi-
nation because the parties did not agree to co-ordination.

The Claimant’s proposal to have the two proceedings inter-linked in their
timing was not pursued because the parties were in disagreement.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

-15-

In respect to jurisdiction, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal
should hold summary threshold proceedings whereas the Claimant's posi-
tion was that the jurisdictional issues should be considered in conjunction
with the hearing of the merits after the Claimant's Reply Memorial, the Re-
spondent’s Sur-Reply and the issues (in substance) had been fully pre-
sented.

In respect to this and other procedural issues the Tribunal, on Novem-
ber 17,2000, issued Order No. 5.

The Tribunal decided that at this point of time no hearing on jurisdiction or
the admissibility of the claim was to be held.

In respect to Procedures for Taking Evidence, the parties proposed to ap-
ply the IBA Rules except as follows:

‘(i) In interpreting Article 4 (7 and 8), the Arbitral Tribunal can de-
cide, taking into consideration all circumstances, whether to ac-
cept or disregard a witness statement if the witness does not
appear. The Arbitral Tribunal additionally can decide whether it
wants to hear testimony from all witnesses who have previously
submitted a witness statement, or only testimony from certain
witnesses.

(ii) | The Claimant did not agree to the adoption of Article 3 (2-7)
(relating to requests to produce documents) or Article 3 (12)
(relating to confidentiality of documents produced by a party).
The Respondent, however, invited the Tribunal to adopt these
articles.

(ili) The parties jointly agreed that witness statements and testi-
mony provided in the arbitration between Mr. Lauder and the
Czech Republic may be referred to in this arbitration.”

In accordance with Art. 15.1 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the Tribu-
nal decided to conduct the arbitration in the manner it considers appropri-
ate. For this purpose, the Tribunal decided, to the extent appropriate, to
apply the IBA Rules.

In respect to the production of documents the Tribunal decided that the
Claimant's Request for the Production of Documents dated Novem-
ber 14,2000 was not in accordance with the IBA Rules. The Tribunal, by

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

 

4%.

49.

50.

51.

52.

-16-

Order No. 5, instructed the Claimant and the Respondent to submit de-
tailed requests for the production of documents, such documents to be
produced in their original language and to be accompanied by an English
translation.

In respect to the Determination of the Amount of Any Damage Award, the
parties jointly informed the Tribunal that they were in agreement that the

hearing on the merits should be devoted to resolving issues of liability and

the appropriate form of remedy. If the determination of a quantum of
monetary damages was necessary - for example, because the Arbitral Tri-
bunal were to order a remedy referred to in § 111 or § 112 of Claimant’s
Statement of Claim - that quantum should be established in further pro-
ceedings, so that the briefs and witness statements will not at this stage
deal with the amount of monetary damages.

In respect to Confidentiality, the parties informed the Arbitral Tribunal that
they were in agreement that these proceedings should not be open to the
public; however, the parties indicated that they were in disagreement as to
whether they are required to keep the submissions in the proceedings
confidential. The Arbitral Tribunal did not comment on this subject.

Further, in accordance with the joint proposals of the parties, the Tribunal
set dates for further submissions by the parties, for the Claimant for its
“Reply” and for the Defendant for its “Sur-Reply”, final witness statements
to be filed and served by a set date thereafter. Further, the Tribunal set a
date for a hearing from April 23, 2001 to May 2, 2001 and reconfirmed the
legal seat of the arbitration as Stockholm.

The parties complied with the dates set. The Chairman submitted its Reply
Memorial on December 22, 2000 and the Respondent its Sur-Reply on
February 14,2001.

(3) The Parties’ Request for Production of Documents

The Claimant submitted its Request for Production of Documents on De-
cember 1, 2000 invoking the Tribunal’s procedural Order No. 5 and
Art. 3 (3) of the IBA Rules. The Claimant requested the production of
documents related to specific Media Council files related to the Licence,
comprising 18 specifically described documents. The Claimant further re-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

 

53.

54.

55.

-17-

quested the production of six further categories of documents related inter
alia to CET 21. These categories of documents were all defined either by
dates or by specific file numbers of the Media Council. Further, the Claim-
ant asked for the production of eleven specific documents identified by
date and a further description. The Claimant gave reasons in respect to
televance and materiality and also in respect to the possession of the
documents.

By Order No. 6 dated December 22, 2000, the Tribunal by majority-deci-
sion instructed the Respondent to produce the documents requested by
the Claimant, however deleting certain documents from the list which were
already in the possession of the Claimant, and further deleting a state-
ment of the chief of the legal department of the Media Council dated July
22, 1996, which statement might have a status of privilege or confidenti-
ality.

On February 14, 2001 the Tribunal issued Order No. 7 on costs and pro-
ceedings. The Tribunal set the date for the hearing beginning on
April 23, 2001 in Stockholm and set out a time schedule for the hearings.

(4) The Parties’ Request for Interim Remedies or Similar Orders

By submission dated January 30, 2001, the Respondent notified to the Tri-
bunal “that the Respondent has been provided with copies of documents
which indicate that Mr. Lauder/CME has been spying on the Media Coun-
cil, immediately prior to this arbitration being commenced, if not earlier.”
The Respondent requested the Tribunal to issue an Order that
Mr. Lauder/CME disclose immediately all copies of communications re-
lated to the Media Council, which have been provided by a source within
the Media Council, copies of all communications from a certain investiga-
tion agency, copies of CME’s instructions to this agency and further to or-
der that Mr. Lauder/CME identify the name of the person(s) who has/have
provided any communications referred to herein-above to the investigation
agency. By a submission dated February 6, 2001, the Respondent ex-
tended the request for an Order and further requested the Tribunal to or-
der that CME shall identify any other person(s) in Czech Government De-
partments who has/have provided, directly or indirectly, any communica-
tions of a similar nature to the investigation agency and/or CME.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

-18-

56. Further, the Respondent requested permission from the Tribunal to apply
for an order securing the attendance before the Tribunal of a certain em-
ployee of the investigation agency in order to give oral testimony and to
produce documents (pursuant to Section 43 of the English Arbitration Act
1996).

57. By submission dated February 11, 2001, the Respondent extended its
previous submissions and requested permission to subpoena the already
mentioned employee of the investigation agency under Section 43 of the
English Arbitration Act, should the Tribunal decide to hold a hearing in
England and repeated the request under Section 26 of the Swedish Arbi-
tration Act and Section 1050 of the German Arbitration Act.

58. By submission dated February 12, 2001, the Respondent requested the
Tribunal to issue an Order that the Claimant produce the following docu-
ments:

(1) All pleadings, submissions and evidence submitted by CNTS in the
Czech Court proceedings between CNTS and CET 21, including
both, the Prague Regional Court and Prague Czech Supreme Court
(i.e. Appeal Court) proceedings.

(2) All pleadings, submissions and evidence submitted by CME Media
Enterprises B.V. in the ICC Arbitration proceedings between CME
and Dr. Zelezny. The Respondent stated that the requested docu-
ments are relevant to the present Arbitration proceedings.

59. By submission dated February 27, 2001, the Respondent notified to the
Tribunal that, after having received from the Czech Civil Court copies of
the Court file in the proceedings between CNTS and CET 21, the request
for the production of the respective documents was withdrawn, whereas
the Respondent maintained its request for all pleadings, submissions and
evidence “submitted by CME Media Enterprises B.V.” in the proceedings
against Dr. Zelezny.

60. On the same day, the Respondent reconfirmed that it maintains its posi-

tion that it should not have to pay for parallel arbitrations brought, in effect,
by the same Claimant.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

61.

62.

63.

(5)

64.

-19-

By submission dated February 2, 2001 and submissions thereafter, the
Claimant rejected the Respondent's request for an Order and accused the
Respondent of unlawful use of stolen confidential documents, which al-
legedly had been taken from CME’s offices in London in breach of English
law. The Claimant requested the Tribunal to issue an Order that the Re-
spondent be directed to cease its review of stolen CME documents and
confidential CME arbitration records that have been improperly provided
to it by Dr. Zelezny or its representatives.

Further, the Claimant demanded that Respondent's request for the Orders
related to further information be denied and that Respondent's request for
permission to subpoena an employee of the investigation agency be re-
jected.

By submission dated February 26, 2001, the Claimant further made the
argument that the Respondent's request for disclosure of documents was
untimely, as the subject was already substantially discussed between the
parties six months prior to the first hearing of these proceedings. The
Claimant further took the position that the pleadings and documents of the
CME v. Zelezny ICC proceedings are irrelevant for this Arbitration.

The Tribunal’s Decision on Interim Remedies and Similar Orders
On March 3, 2001 the Arbitral Tribunal decided not to take a decision on
Interim Remedies or similar Orders at the present time. The Tribunal is-
sued the following Order No. 8 on Interim Remedies or similar Orders:

1. The Tribunal rejects the Respondent's request that the Tribunal order
the Claimant

|. to disclose

(a) Copies of all communications relating to the Media Council which
have been provided by a source within the Media Council, includ-
ing any reports of the Council’s meetings;

(b) copies of all communications from Kroll to CME, relating to (a)
above; and

(c) a copy of CME’s instructions to Kroll.

Ih to identify the name of the person(s) who has/have provided any
communications referred to in (a) above to Kroll and the “interme-
diary” between Kroll and the informant;

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

65.

66.

Mil.

2.

(6)
The Claimant in accordance with Order No. 8 submitted to the Tribunal
the ICC Award CME Media Enterprises B.V. vs. Dr. Zelezny

- 20 -

to identify any other person(s) in Czech government departments
who has/have provided, direct/y or indirectly, any communications
of a similar nature to Kroll and/or CME.

The request by the Respondent for the arbitrators’ consent under
Section 26 of the Swedish Arbifration Act of 1999 and/or other na-
tional laws to have Mr. Morgan-Jones testify before the respective
countries’ civil courts is rejected.

The Claimant’s request dated February 8, 2001 that the Respon-
dent to be directed “to cease its review of stolen CME documents
and confidential CME arbitration records that have been improp-
erly provided to it by Dr. Zelezny or its representative” is rejected.

The Tribunal is of the opinion that any flow of information between
the Media Council and the Claimant and/or its intermediaries and
its usage as alleged by the Respondent, and any flow of informa-
tion from the Claimant to the Respondent and its usage as alleged
by the Claimant are not subject of these proceedings and the re-
spective Claimant’s and Respondent’s requests should be ad-
dressed to the appropriate authorities / courts of the countries in-
volved.

In respect to the Respondent's request regarding the disclosure by the

Claimant of all pleadings, submissions and evidence submitted by
CME Media Enterprises B.V. in the ICC Arbitration Proceedings be-
tween CME Media Enterprises B.V. and Dr. Zelezny, the Tribunal is

not in a position to order the requested discovery, as the Parties of the

ICC Arbitration Proceedings are different from the Parties to these
proceedings. The Tribunal understands, however, that the ICC Award
of the afore-mentioned proceedings was published on the internet on
the CME pages. The Arbitral Tribunal, therefore, instructs the Claim-
ant to submit as soon as possible to the Arbitral Tribunal and to the
Respondent the ICC Award to the extent available to the public on the
internet. The Tribunal assumes that the Respondent’s demand for dis-
closure of the ICC proceeding will be sufficiently met by the disclosure

of the ICC Award.

Further Conduct of Proceedings

By submission dated March 14, 2001 and upon receipt of Order No. 8

dated March 6, 2001 the Respondent maintained its position in respect to

the Court Order requested and declared:

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

67.

68.

69.

70.

-21-

“The Czech Republic continues to participate in this Arbitration under
protest and reserves all its rights, in particular its rights under Swed-
ish Arbitration Act, Art. V (2) (b) of the New York Convention 1958
and principles of public policy generally.”

On March 19, 2001 the Respondent declared that without prejudice to its
position that it should not have to pay for two parallel arbitrations brought
in effect, by the same Claimant; and without prejudice to its protest com-
municated in its fax of March 14, 2001 the Czech Republic is willing to pay
the requested down payment for costs of the Stockholm hearing.

Thereinafter the Respondent complied with further Tribunal’s request for
down payments of costs equally with the Claimant.

On April 16, 2001 the Claimant as requested by the Chairman submitted a
chronological list of the executives of CNTS, CEDC/CME and CET 21 and
a diagram showing the sequence of shareholdings in CNTS, including the
dates of the share transfer and enclosed a similar diagram showing the
sequence of shareholdings in CET 21.

(7) The Submission of Witness Statements
In conjunction with their submissions, the parties have submitted to the
Tribunal the following witness statements:

(8) Declarations in Support of the Statement of Claim

1. Declaration of Richard Bacek dated 22 September 2000 (without at-

tachments)

Declaration of Laura DeBruce dated 22 September 2000

Declaration of Michel Delloye dated 20 September 2000

Declaration of Fred T. Klinkhammer dated 20 September 2000

Declaration of Martin Radvan dated 22 September 2000

Declaration of Jan Vavra dated 20 September 2000

Statement of Ing. Jifi Broz dated 5 December 2000

Supplemental Declaration of Laura DeBruce dated 15 Decem-

ber 2000

Declaration of Leonard M. Fertig dated 7 December 2000

10. Supplementary Declaration of Fred T. Klinkhammer dated 13 Decem-
ber 2000

11. Declaration of PhDr Marina Landova dated 15 December 2000

12. Supplemental Declaration of Martin Radvan dated 15 Decem-
ber 2000

13. Declaration of Nicholas G. Trollope dated 21 December 2000

14, Supplemental Declaration of Jan Vavra dated 15 December 2000

15. Declaration of Ing. Miroslav Pycha dated 21 December 2000

ornoaakwn

©

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

71.

72.

73.

-22-

16. Second Supplemental Declaration of Laura DeBruce dated 27 Febru-
ary 2001

(9) Statements in Support of the Statement of Defence

. Statement of Doc. Ing. Pavel Mertlik CSc dated 7 November 2000
. Statement of Josef Josefik dated November 6 November 2000

. Statement of RNDR. Josef Musil, PhDr. dated 6 November 2000

. Statement of PhDr. Helena Halvikova dated 6 November 2000

. Second Statement of Josef Josefik dated 28 February 2001

. Statement of Mgr. Milan Jakobec dated 28 February 2001

PaRroni

(10) Documents and Authorities

The parties attached to their submissions copies of some 300 documents
comprising several thousand pages. They further attached binders com-
prising several thousand pages of authorities in support of their respective
memorials.

(11) The Stockholm Hearing

From Monday, April 23, 2001 to Wednesday, May 2, 2001 the hearing
took place in Stockholm. At the beginning of the hearing, the parties’ rep-
resentatives submitted to the Tribunal the verbatim record of the examina-
tion of witnesses taken in London at the Lauder vs. Czech Republic UN-
CITRAL proceeding under US / Czech Republic BIT. At the Stockholm
hearing the patties presented their case and the following witnesses were
examined:

Claimant's witnesses: Laura DeBruce
Michel Delloye
Fred T. Klinkhammer
Martin Radvan
Jan Vavra
Leonard M. Fertig
Marina Landova

Respondent's witnesses: Josef Josefik
Josef Musil
Helena Havlikova

At the end of the hearing, the parties’ representatives summarized orally
their respective positions. The Tribunal in agreement with the parties de-
clared the hearing closed (Art. 29 UNCITRAL Rules). The Claimant sub-
mitted to the Tribunal Claimant’s post-hearing brief on May 25, 2001. The
Respondent submitted its written Closing Submissions on the same day.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

-23-

D.
Position of the Claimant

CME’s claims arise out of the Czech Republic’s treatment of its invest-
ments in the first private nation-wide commercial television station in the
Czech Republic. CME maintains that the Czech Republic breached its ob-
ligations under the Treaty by actions and inactions of the Media Council
which destroyed the Claimant's investment in the Czech Republic.

I, The Claimant’s Investment in the Czech Republic

In 1992, the Czech National Council decided to issue a Licence for the
first nation-wide commercial television station. The Licence was to be
awarded through a tender process administered by the Czech Media
Council which the Czech National Council had created in 1992 as a sepa-
rate State agency, subject exclusively to the sovereignty of the Czech Re-
public, to be responsible for regulating the broadcasting industry and en-
suring compliance with laws relating to radio and television broadcasting.

The Media Law required the Media Council to take into consideration the
extent of Czech ownership and management when considering a Licence
application from a company with foreign equity participation, but no provi-
sion in the Media Law expressly barred (or now bars) foreign parties from
holding television licences.

CEDC, the Claimant’s predecessor, pursued an application for the Li-
cence.

Initially, CEDC and CET 21 pursued a joint application for a Licence, con-
templating that they would act together to administer the Licence. On
January 5, 1993, CEDC and the Czech investors in CET 21 executed an
agreement providing that upon the award of a Licence to CET 21, CEDC
would “provide financing needed . . . to establish[ ] a commercial television
station in Prague through an equity investment in CET 21,” in return for a
49 % ownership share in CET 21, with the Czech investors in CET 21

holding 14 % and the remaining equity reserved for further investors.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

79.

80.

81.

-24-

CET 21’s Project Proposal, submitted to the Media Council as a center-
piece of the application, presented CEDC as a desirable “direct participant
in CET 21’s application for the Licence” on the basis that CEDC was “a
quality foreign partner,” which had “investment experience” in Central
Europe, knew how to “advantageously combine[] a commercial . . . TV
station with a programme of a higher standard, and with the participation
of cultural foundations,” offered “sensitive respect for local traditions and a
well-qualified understanding of the needs of the Central European region,”
was financially supported by “prominent entrepreneurial personalities and
groups (e.g. the Lauder group),” and offered valuable links to sources of
programming. The minutes of a January 25, 1993 public hearing on the
Licence application reflect the centrality of CEDC’s role and the need for
long-term foreign investments.

The Media Council publicly announced on January 31, 1993, that after
public hearings and full deliberation concerning the twenty-six candidates
who had submitted applications for a Licence, it had determined to issue

the Licence to CET 21, with CEDC as “a direct participant of the Licence
application.” In its letter to CET 21 announcing its decision, the Media

Council similarly noted that CEDC was “a direct party to the application,”

listing the proposal’s “adequate financing with capital about whose origin
and reliability there can be no doubt” as one of the main factors in its deci-

sion. Likewise, in a public statement on February 1, the Media Council's
chairman, Mr. Daniel Korte, repeated this language and stressed that the
choice of the successful Licence applicant had taken into account that
“the project has proved sufficiently financially backed by the capital whose
origin and reliability cannot be doubted.“

In the face of intense political pressure, though, the Media Council de-
cided that it would not permit foreign ownership of the Licence. This re-
quirement created a significant practical difficulty because foreign capital
was plainly needed to fund the development of the station. As CET 21 had
explained in the Project Proposal it submitted to the Media Council, ‘[ijt
would be a. . . pretense to say that the financial funds in terms of millions
and billions [of Czech crowns] which must be invested in relatively short
time [to establish the station] are available in the Czech Republic, and that
CET 21 (as any other starting TV station) will do without foreign partners.”

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

82.

83.

84.

- 25 -

In close consultation with the Media Council, CEDC and the Czech in-
vestors in CET 21 sought to resolve this difficulty through the creation of
ENTS - an entity that would be jointly owned by CEDC (which would con-
tribute the majority of the cash needed to fund the establishment of the
station), CET 21 (as the party that would contribute the use of the Li
cence), and a Czech bank (as a third investor). Each contributor was to
obtain an equity interest in CNTS corresponding to the economic value of
its contribution, and CNTS was to establish and manage the television
station. The Media Council participated actively in negotiating this solution
that maintained domestic ownership of the Licence while providing for the
obtaining of needed foreign capital from a desirable source.

The Media Council openly acknowledged, prior to this dispute, that it had
played a central role in directing the formation of CNTS, and that its moti-
vation for doing so had arisen from its determination that the Licence not
fall directly into the hands of a non-Czech investor. In a January 31, 1998
report to the Czech Parliament, for example, the Media Council explained
its 1993 insistence on the CNTS structure, and the reasons for that insis-
tence, as follows:

The reason why this model came into existence [was]
the Council’s fears of a majority share of foreign capital
in the licence-holder’s Company.

When granting the Licence to the Company CET 21, for
fear that a majority share of foreign capital in the li-
cence-holder’s Company might impact the independ-
ence of full-format broadcasts, the Council assumed a
configuration that separates the investor from the I-
cence-holder himself. That is how an agreement came
into existence (upon a series of remarks from the Coun-
cil) by which the Company CNTS was established the
majority owner of which is CEDC/CME.

The Media Council thus approved the arrangements between CNTS and
CET 21. It realized that direct foreign investment in television would be
unacceptable. It, therefore, blessed a structure that gave the foreign in-
vestment the economic benefits of Licence ownership through carefully
considered and negotiated contractual arrangements, in the formulation of
which, leading to the approval it gave, it actively participated.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

85.

86.

87.

-26-

CEDC was entitled to rely and did rely on the Media Council's strong of-
ficial assurances that CNTS’s role and economic position would be closely
integrated with that of CET 21 (as the nominal licence-holder) in the for-
mation, management, operation and broadcasting of the new commercial
television station.

IL The Role of CNTS

On February 3 and 5, 1993, after CET 21 and CEDC had been informed
of the award of the Licence but before the Licence was actually issued,
they entered into a pair of nearly identical agreements describing their re-
lationship and establishing the framework under which CNTS would oper-
ate. Each of these agreements described CEDC as “a direct contractual
participant within the terms and conditions of this Licence.” The February
3 agreement, entitled “Overall Structure of a New Czech Commercial
Television Entity,” further stated:

1. CET 21 and CEDC will jointly create a new
Czech company which will be the only Commer-
cial Company to create and run the TV station.
CET 21 and CEDC agree to allow the Commer-
cial Company to have exclusive use of the Li-
cence as long as CET 21 and CEDC have such a
Licence.

2. CET 21 and CEDC confirm that neither party has
the authority to broadcast commercial television
without the other.

(Emphasis added)

The February 3 agreement further provided that “[alll operating personnel
[of the station] will be employees of the Commercial Company.” The
agreement stated that within two months following the execution of the
conditions to the Licence, CET 21 and CEDC would enter into a more
complete agreement respecting the organization of the “Commercial
Company” that ultimately became CNTS. This agreement was submitted
to the Media Council which requested changes. It became part of the offi-
cial file of CET 21’s application. The February 5 agreement, entitled “Basic
Structure of a New Czech Commercial Television Entity,” substantially
identical, contained the changes.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

88.

89.

90.

91.

-27-

After receiving the agreements setting out the terms of the CNTS struc-
ture, the Media Council formally issued Broadcasting Licence
No. 001/1993 (the “Licence”) on February 9, 1993. The Licence documen-
tation included the “Licence Certificate,” the “Licence Decision” and the
“Licence Conditions.”

Each of these documents expressly linked CEDC and CNTS to the Li
cence grant. The Licence Certificate required CET 21 to “ensure that the
broadcasting is in accordance with the information stated in the applica-
tion on the basis of which this Licence was issued.” That “information” in-
cluded the terms of the arrangements between CET 21 and CEDC that
had been described to the Media Council and had been specified in the
February 5 agreement submitted to the Media Council before the Licence
was issued. That “information” also included the Project Proposal that de-
scribed CET 21 and CEDC as “partners” in the project.

The Licence Decision observed once again the importance of CET 21’s
“contractual partner, the Company CEDC” to the Licence application pro-
cess. In listing critical features of the winning applicant, the Media Council
explained that the applicant had “demonstrated adequate financing with
capital about whose origin and reliability there can be no doubt’, and ac-
knowledged with approval “the substantial involvement of foreign capital
necessary to begin television station activities”.

The Licence Conditions which were labelled “Appendix to Licence” and
were made a part of the Licence through the Licence Certificate’s re-
quirement that the licensee “observe the conditions stated in the appendix
to this Licence”, provided a more specific presentation of the rules under
which the Licence would operate. Condition 17 expressly required that the
Licence be used in accordance with the arrangements between CET 21
and CEDC that had been described to the Media Council during the appli-
cation process and recorded in the February 3 and 5 agreements. In rele-
vant part, it provided:

The licence-holder agrees:

“17/ that it will submit to the Council for its prior consent
any changes in the legal entity that is the licence-holder,

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

92.

93.

-28-

capital structure of investors and provisions of the busi-
ness agreement between the licence-holder and inves-
tors. Parties to the business agreement are the licence-
holder, CEDC and Ceska spofiteina, in the scope and
under the conditions set by the business agreement
which will be submitted to the Council within 90 days
after the decision to issue the Licence takes legal effect;
the business agreement will observe the provisions of
the “agreement on the business agreement” between
the licence-holder and CEDC [i.e. the February 3/5
agreements that had been submitted to the Council]
which is an appendix to the Licence conditions. ”

“18/ that CEDC, as a party to the business agreement
specified in the Licence conditions, and other investors
specified by the business agreement, will not in any way
interfere in the programming of the television station,
and, in particular, will not interfere with the editorial inde-
pendence of newscasting employees. "

With this language, the Media Council not only endorsed, but also made
explicitly a part of its Licence grant, the basic contractual agreement be-
tween CEDC and CET 21, including the provisions that CET 21 would
contribute the “exclusive use of the Licence” into CNTS, that neither
CET 21 nor CEDC would have “the authority to broadcast commercial
television without the other,” and that all business of the project would be
transacted through CNTS (which would employ all staff). Because the Li-
cence Conditions expressly implicated the rights, obligations and interests
of CEDC, and because CEDC was a “direct participant” in the application
process, Mark Palmer, the president of CEDC, executed the Licence
Conditions for CEDC.

lll. The Memorandum of Association

Over the next several months, CET 21 and CEDC negotiated a Memoran-
dum of Association and Investment Agreement (the “MOA”) to flesh out
the February 3/5 agreements that the Media Council had incorporated into
the Licence in Condition 17. The Media Council participated actively in this
process, providing comments on drafts before the MOA was finalized to
ensure that the MOA reflected the Media Council’s views about how the
CNTS arrangement was to be structured. For example, on April 9, 1993,
the Media Council wrote CET 21 to request (i) that CET 21 provide a final
draft of the MOA for its approval by April 19, (ii) that “the final draft of the

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-29.

contract proposal be in accord with the effective legal status” (making par-
ticular reference to “certain comments in the Appendix” containing the Li-
cence Conditions), and (iii) that the parties amend certain provisions of the
draft to conform with the requirements of Licence Condition 18. Condi-
tion 18 provided that CEDC will not interfere in the programming of the
television station with the editorial independence of newscasting employ-
ees.

94. CET 21, CEDC and the Czech Savings Bank agreed upon the final terms
of an MOA for GNTS in April 1993 and submitted it to the Media Council
for approval. The MOA provided that CEDC would contribute 75 % of
CNTS's capital and obtain a 66 % ownership interest in return, while the
Czech Savings Bank would contribute 25 % of the capital and obtain a
22 % ownership interest. CET 21 contributed no cash, contributing instead
“the right to use, benefit from, and maintain the Licence . . . on an uncon-
ditional, irrevocable and exclusive basis,” in return for a 12 % ownership
interest. /d. at art. 1.4.1. Dr. Vladimir Zelezny, a shareholder of CET 21,
who would eventually become its 60 % shareholder and one of its Execu-
tives, was appointed to serve as CNTS's General Director.

95. Reflecting the parties’ discussions with the Media Council, the MOA rec-
ognized that CNTS would be the operating company for the new television
station. Article 3.1 recited that CNTS’s business would include the “devel-
opment and operation of a new, independent, private national television
broadcasting station.” Paragraph D of the Preamble similarly confirmed
that the station would be “managed” by CNTS.

96. On April 21, 1993, the Media Council released a letter confirming that “in
accordance with Article 17 of the Conditions to the Licence,” it had ap-
proved “the submitted version of the Business Agreement between”
CET 21, CEDC and Czech Savings Bank at its April 20 meeting. CEDC
and the other parties executed the MOA shortly afterward, on
May 4, 1993. The Media Council confirmed its official approval of the MOA
and all its provisions on May 12, 1993, when it issued a decision changing
the wording of the Licence to add, among other amendments, a new sen-
tence in Licence Condition 17 expressly stating that the MOA “is an inte-
gral part of the Licence terms.”

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

 

-30-

97. As a result of its actions, the Media Council gave the imprimatur of the
State to CME’s investment. The Media Council, established by law to “su-
pervise[] the observance of legal regulations governing . . . television
broadcasting” (i) approved the CNTS arrangement, by requiring in the Li-
cence Certificate that the licensee act in accordance with the facts set
forth in the application, (ii) required as a Condition to the Licence that
CET 21 and CEDC operate in accordance with the February 3/5 agree-
ments, (iii) expressly approved the MOA, including the provision in which
CET 21 contributed the exclusive use of the Licence, and (iv) amended
the Licence Conditions to make the MOA an “integral part of the Licence.”

 

98. The arrangement between CNTS and CET 21 was thus known to and ap-
proved by the State organ responsible for administering television li-
cences. No organ of the Czech Republic challenged it or asserted that it
was illegal. Claimant's entire investment in CNTS being based on this ar-
rangement, it is legally entitled under the Treaty (and under Czech law) to
rely on these approvals and to expect the Czech Republic to adhere to the
legal arrangements that the Media Council had itself proposed and had
formally and publicly endorsed.

99. The Media Council documents clearly reflect not only substantial Media
Council involvement in the negotiation and finalization of the MOA’s terms,
but also the Media Council’s adherence to its original approvals of the
ENTS arrangement until changing political winds prompted a reversal in
1996. In a 1994 opinion responding to a challenge that it had acted im-
properly in approving the CNTS arrangement, for example, the Media
Council publicly stated:

ENTS is, by duly registered Memorandum of Associa-
tion, authorized by the holder of the Licence to perform
all acts related to the development and operation of the
NOVA TV television station. Participation of CET 21 in
the company consists of a non-financial contribution,
i.e., the financial valuation of the Licence. The Licence
as such has not been contributed to CNTS and is sepa-
rate from all other activities of CNTS.

This is a standard business procedure which was duly
discussed and approved by the licensing body, i.e., by
the [Media] Council, and does not violate any effective
legal regulations. [The Media Council] consulted with a

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-31-

number of /eading legal experts, both Czech and foreign
[before approving the arrangement].

100. Similarly, in a report to Parliament for the period from February 1-Sep-
tember 30, 1996, the Media Council explained that it was fully aware of
and accepted the CNTS structure:

At the time when [the CET 21-CNTS] arrangement was
made, there were no doubts about its legitimacy; in re-
gard to many related steps that were taken, the Council,
as it was then constituted and based on its experience
at the time, took a position of consent.

101. The Media Council’s January 1998 Report to Parliament equally ac-
knowledged that it had intended for CNTS to be a co-participant with
CET 21 in all TV NOVA broadcasting:

July 1993: GNTS . . . gets registered in the Companies
register. It{s] general director is V. Zelezny. As its sub-
ject of activity, CNTS states “full-format television
broadcasts.” Two Companies thus appear around one
Licence; one that has obtained it, and another that is
supposed to co-participate in implementing the broad-
casts. The majority partner of CNTS is CEDC/CME.

This model later appears elsewhere too . . . and the
Council considers it to be legal, it raised legal doubt only
later... .

Thus, next to the licence-holder’s Company, directly
linked to it, a new Company was established which was
to co-participate in implementing the broadcasts.

From the legal viewpoint, this construction did not and
does not contradict any law, but it created a basis for
problems... .

(Emphasis supplied.)

102. Given the Media Council’s discriminatory position as to foreign invest-
ment and ownership of the Licence, neither CEDC nor CET 21 intended
that CNTS would hold the actual Licence. All recognized that the Licence
would have to be held nominally by a company owned by Czech nation-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

- 32-

als. The parties nevertheless envisioned and sought to structure a sym-
biotic relationship in which the actual operations of TV NOVA, and all of
its economics, would be centered in CNTS, with the contributing partners
enjoying the benefit of the station’s success in accordance with their eq-
uity interests in CNTS. The documentary record demonstrates conclu-
sively that the Media Council participated substantively in developing this
arrangement, formally endorsed its legality, and gave Claimant every
reason to conclude that it could commit funds to the project based on
this arrangement without fear that the arrangement would later be forci-
bly dismantled by Media Council actions.

IV. The Formation of TV NOVA

103. Following the Media Council’s approval of the CNTS structure, CEDC
provided capital to CNTS for the formation and development of the new
television station, TV NOVA. CNTS registered in the Czech Companies
Register in July 1993, indicating that one of its activities was “nation-wide
television broadcasting,” and in February 1994 CNTS and CET 21 began
broadcasting TV NOVA under the Licence.

104. TV NOVA quickly became the Czech Republic’s most successful and
profitable private television station, with audience shares consistently
above 50 %. In contrast to the experiences of most start-up television
operations, TV NOVA became profitable within a year after beginning op-
erations, and grew quickly. By 1995, CNTS’s net income was approxi-
mately US $ 23 million, on revenues of approximately US $ 98 million.
CNTS'’s net income climbed to nearly US $25 million, on revenues of ap-
proximately US $109 million, in 1996, and would ultimately exceed
US $ 30 million on revenues of slightly under US $ 109 million in the year
before CNTS was shut down and destroyed.

105. As provided by the MOA and contemplated in all of CEDC’s dealings
with the Media Council, CNTS from the beginning performed all of the
activities associated with operating and broadcasting TV NOVA. CNTS
acquired all programmes, or produced them in its TV NOVA studios and
other facilities, and employed all the personnel needed to operate the
station. Editorial decisions were made by CET 21 through Dr. Zelezny,

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-33-

who became its 60 % shareholder and Executive while also serving as
CNTS’s General Director. Pursuant to a June 2, 1994 agreement, CNTS
was authorized by CET 21 to enter into an agreement with Czech Radio-

communications (Ceské radiokomunikace) which would perform the
technical tasks of transmitting TV NOVA’s signal. All other operational,
advertising and programming activities took place exclusively within
CNTS. CNTS also gathered all revenues associated with the television
station, using a portion of the revenues to pay all expenses of running

TV NOVA and retaining the balance as profit and return on its members’

cash and non-cash investments. CET 21, meanwhile, had no separate
operations. Its offices consisted of two rooms in a different building, it
held no assets other than the Licence, and its only employee was a sec-
retary whose compensation was paid by CNTS.

106. As CNTS grew and became a prosperous investment, its Czech inves-
tors began seeking to realize the profits from their investments by selling
their ownership interests in CNTS. On July 17, 1996, CME purchased
the 22 % interest in CNTS held by the Czech Savings Bank, at the
Bank’s request, bringing the bank a profit of well over US $ 30 million on
an investment of slightly more than US $2 million over the 38 months of
its participation in CNTS, and raising CME’s ownership interest in CNTS
to 88 %. In December 1996, CME acceded to a request from CET 21’s
shareholders that it purchase a 5.2 % interest in CNTS from CET 21, to
accelerate a portion of their return on the investment’s success. This
transaction raised CME’s interest in CNTS to over 93 %. The sharehold-
ers of CET 21 then arranged to pool all but 1% of their remaining inter-
ests in CNTS in a special purpose entity wholly owned by Dr. Zelezny. At
Dr. Zelezny’s insistence, CME purchased this entity (and the 5.8% inter-
est in CNTS that was its only asset) on August 11, 1997, for
US $28.5 million, thereby increasing its ownership interest in CNTS to
99 %, while the local Czech investors retained only the remaining 1 %.
As a result of these transactions, virtually the entirety of any gain or loss
experienced by CNTS belonged to CME.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-34-
V. The Media Council’s Reversal of Position

107. Three years after the Media Council mandated the creation of and gave
express approval to the CNTS structure, it abruptly reversed its position,
repudiated the arrangement it had officially approved, and forced CNTS
to surrender the exclusive right to use the Licence that CET 21 had con-
tributed in return for its equity interest. By a letter dated July 23, 1996,
but not sent to GNTS until August 30, 1996, the Media Council com-
menced administrative proceedings against CNTS claiming that CNTS
was “operating television broadcasting without authorization.”

108. The Media Council founded its claim of unauthorized broadcasting on
assertions that CNTS had improperly arrogated power to itself by (i) par-
ticipating in the “agreements” (and, particularly, the MOA) with CET 21,
(ii) including “nation-wide television broadcasting” as one of its recited
business activities in its Commercial Register entry, and (iii) entering into
contracts with an authors’ organization and Czech Radiocommunications
in its own name. The Media Council claimed that the Czech Academy In-
stitute of State and Law (the “Academy”) had issued an opinion con-
cluding that CNTS was carrying out “unauthorized broadcasting” based
on these three concerns, but the Media Council refused to provide that
asserted opinion to CNTS. The Media Council also indicated that the
Czech police had launched a criminal investigation “for suspicion of
committing the crime of ‘unauthorized conduct of business’ and ‘distort-
ing facts in economic and business records,” that turned on the same
determination as was presented in the administrative proceedings.

109. The Media Council offered no reason why the activities of CNTS that it
had approved and had permitted to proceed for several years had sud-
denly become objectionable. While the Czech Parliament had amended
the Media Law as of January 1, 1996, Act No. 301/1995 Coll., the Media
Council identified no provision of the new law that could serve as justifi-
cation for its reversal of position under Czech law.

110. The central motivating concern behind the Media Council’s action ap-
pears to have been that GNTS was simply becoming too prosperous,
and that Czech political circles looked with disfavour on permitting a
company overwhelmingly owned by foreigners to obtain such substantial

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-35-

wealth from an investment in such a conspicuous Czech company using
a broadcast Licence allocated by the State.

111. CNTS vigorously defended itself against the Media Council’s proceed-
ings, contending that it had been operating as agreed with the Media
Council in 1993 and had violated no law. As part of this defence, CNTS
contacted the Academy to inquire about the opinion that the Media
Council had indicated was a foundation for its proceedings. CNTS was
told that the Academy had not released an opinion at all, and that the
Media Council had merely been inaccurately characterizing as an Acad-
emy opinion an expression of views by a single individual, Dr. Jan Barta.
In expressing these views, moreover, Dr. Barta was responding to a hy-
pothetical question put to him by the Media Council that took no account
of the history or specific nature of the CET 21-CNTS arrangements and
was worded in conclusory terms calculated to solicit a response unfa-
vourable to CNTS.

112. On August 13, 1996 the Academy released its only real opinion on the
issues presented by the administrative proceeding which concluded that
CNTS’s activities did not violate the Media Law. In direct rebuttal to the
Media Council’s contention that CNTS’s activities constituted unauthor-
ized broadcasting based on the Licence that had been granted to
CET 21 rather than CNTS, the Academy Opinion asserted that the Media
Law permitted a “broadcasting operator” as that term is used in the Me-
dia Law (such as CET 21) to use another party (such as GNTS) to carry
out broadcasting, stating:

The realization of broadcasting, through third parties is .

. not excluded by the [Media Law]... . This means
that also somebody else than the operator may ensure
broadcasting by conclusion of contracts with third par-
ties....

The relationship of [GNTS] with the licence-holder is in
our opinion just such ensuring of broadcasting through
third persons.

113. While the Academy explained that it was not authorized “to assess opin-
ions prepared by [legal] experts” (id. at 2), it made clear that Dr. Barta’s
opinion was not an expression of the Academy’s views, was directed en-
tirely to the Media Council’s irrelevant hypothetical question of what rules

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-36-

should apply if a licence failed to broadcast and an unlicensed party did
broadcast, and unwarrantedly failed to address whether a licensee could
arrange to have a third party carry out the operational mechanics of
broadcasting so long as the operating company did not interfere with the
licensee’s editorial functions (as had always been CNTS’s practice).
GENTS submitted the Academy Opinion to the Media Council, but that
submission did not alter the Media Council's position or even prompt the
Media Council to release the opinion by Dr. Barta on which it had
claimed to rely.

VI. The Council Compels CNTS to Alter the MOA

114. In opposing the Media Council’s proceedings, CNTS had to weigh the
risk that if it failed to dissuade the Media Council, CNTS could face the
fines authorized by Section 20 (5) of the Media Law, plus criminal
charges against its statutory representatives and Executives, plus revo-
cation of the Licence. Claimant’s representatives recognized that while
such actions by the Media Council or other Czech authorities might be
subject to court challenges, TV NOVA could be destroyed by any such
actions even before any such challenge could be resolved. Moreover,
there was the risk, acute in light of the political pressures in the Czech
Republic arising from the resentment of CNTS’s profitability, that the Me-
dia Council's reversal of position, although violative of the Treaty, might
be found by a Czech court to satisfy Czech law.

115. In these circumstances, CNTS had no choice but to make changes to
the MOA to obtain the termination of the administrative proceedings.
CME and CNTS capitulated to the Media Council because they quite
reasonably believed they could not win if they opposed the Media Coun-
cil. Thus, its hand forced by the Media Council, CME agreed to amend
Article 1.4.1 of the CNTS MOA, in which CET 21 had contributed the
“right to use” the Licence on an exclusive basis, to provide that CET 21
contributed to CNTS only the “know-how” connected with the Licence,
albeit still on an exclusive basis. CNTS also amended the description of
its business activities in the Czech Commercial Register to delete the
teference to “nation-wide broadcasting,” again yielding to the Media
Council's insistence that CNTS could not be involved in broadcasting be-
cause that was the exclusive province of the licensee.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

116.

117.

118.

-37-

As part of the package of contractual changes coerced by the Media
Council, on May 21, 1997, CNTS and CET 21 also entered into a new
Agreement on Co-operation in Ensuring Service for Television Broad-
casting (the “Co-operation Agreement’, hereinafter also the “Service
Agreement’). This agreement expressly identified CET 21 as the licence-
holder and the “television broadcasting operator” of TV NOVA. It further
provided that CNTS had the “rights and obligations . . . to ensure, ac-
cording to this contract, service for the television broadcasting that is
conducted on the basis of the Licence issued to CET 21, and that CNTS
is authorized to keep an agreed income from this activity.” An annex
identified the “agreed income” as advertising and related revenues, less
CZK 100,000 per month paid to CET 21. The Co-operation Agreement
further addressed the Media Council’s concerns by stating that CNTS
would enter contracts with the Czech Radiocommunications and authors’
organizations on “behalf of CET 21 as the licence-holder and operator of
television broadcasting” while providing that CNTS would continue to pay
all the costs of those contracts. Once again, the Media Council reviewed
and approved this agreement which was a direct response to the admin-
istrative proceedings.

The Media Council dismissed the administrative proceeding against
ENTS in September 1997. Its order of dismissal expressly declared that
it had obtained the concessions it required from CNTS. In a Septem-
ber 1999 opinion to the Czech Parliament, the Media Council made clear
that the amendment of the MOA had been a primary condition for the

Media Council's termination of the proceedings, stating that through the

1996 proceedings “the Council made the licence-holder to remedy cer-
tain legal faults in the Memorandum of Association.” In connection with

the resolution of the administrative proceedings, the Media Council can-

celled Condition 17 of the Licence.

The agreements for the creation of CNTS that the Media Council origi-
nally approved had not characterized CNTS as a mere provider of “serv-
ices,” but rather as the manager of the station and as a co-participant in
broadcasting with exclusive rights to use the Licence. Nonetheless, at
the time when GNTS made the concessions compelled by the Media
Council, Claimant’s representatives were hopeful, and expected, that the

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-38-

resulting amendments to the MOA would not alter CNTS’s position as
the exclusive manager of TV NOVA and as the economic and opera-
tional center-piece of the enterprise. They did not yet know that the
changes that the Media Council had lawlessly extorted would become
the basis for the destruction of CNTS.

Vil. The Destruction of Claimant’s Investment

119. The consequences to the Claimant of the Media Council’s actions in
1996 and 1997 began to become apparent in 1998. At that time, CET 21
and Dr. Zelezny - having virtually no remaining economic interest in
ENTS - began taking steps to dismantle the exclusive arrangement be-
tween CNTS and CET 21 that had been the foundation for CEDC’s origi-
nal investment in TV NOVA and had been in place since TV NOVA be-
gan operations. Those steps were made possible by the Media Council’s
prior actions, and were carried out with the Media Council's connivance
and active assistance.

120. In mid-1998 and continuing thereafter, Dr. Zelezny began to demand
with increasing frequency and intensity that CME agree to fundamental
changes in the arrangement between CNTS and CET 21. While the spe-
cific changes Dr. Zelezny was demanding varied over time, all would
have required CME to make substantial economic and contractual con-
cessions to its great financial detriment. Various proposals would have
required, for example, that CME agree to delete all references to exclu-
sivity in agreements between CET 21 and CNTS and permit CET 21 to
obtain business from other providers, that CME pay a portion of
TV NOVA’s revenues to CET 21, and that CME agree to release all obli-
gations from CET 21 to CNTS at the end of the current Licence period,
while surrendering its existing rights to participate in any Licence re-
newal.

121. The Media Council's actions in 1996, along with the threat of future Me-
dia Council action against CNTS, formed Dr. Zelezny’s primary founda-
tion for these demands. In discussions with Michel Delloye (then CME’s
President and Chief Executive Officer) and later with Mr. Delloye’s suc-
cessor, Fred Klinkhammer, Dr. Zelezny repeatedly insisted that the
changes he demanded were needed because the Media Council’s 1996

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-39-

administrative proceedings and the resulting amendments to CNTS’s
MOA had ended any contractual obligation of exclusivity in the relation-
ship between CNTS and CET 21. He also contended that the Media
Council strongly disfavoured exclusivity, was continuing and would con-
tinue to pressure CNTS to surrender all exclusive arrangements with
CET 21, and would take further action if CME refused to make these
changes. In late 1998, Dr. Zelezny caused CET 21, without CME’s con-
sent, to begin acquiring programming through sources other than CNTS.

122. The agreement between the parties that CNTS would manage TV NOVA
and gather all revenues, and the commitment that CET 21 would use its
best efforts to obtain the renewal of the Licence in 2005 and to continue
the relationship between CET 21 and CNTS, had been the predicates for
CME’s investment. Therefore, CME could not let CNTS be bullied by
Dr. Zelezny into accepting an arrangement according to which CET 21
would elect whether to use CNTS or some other service provider for
each particular line of activity, and pay CNTS only for the work CET 21
might ask it to perform. Likewise, it could not agree to a termination of
the relationship between CNTS and CET 21 at the end of the current Li-
cence period which Dr. Zelezny was insisting on. Each of these changes
would have had an enormously adverse effect on the value of CME’s in-
vestment.

123. Over time, Dr. Zelezny began to threaten that CET 21 would sever all
relations with CNTS if CME did not capitulate to his wishes, relying again
on the Media Council’s 1996 actions terminating CET 21’s contribution to
ENTS of the exclusive “right to use” the Licence and on the continuing
pressure assertedly being exerted by the Media Council to alter the rela-
tionship. At a February 24, 1999 CNTS board meeting, for instance,
Dr. Zelezny demanded that CME agree to pay CET 21 4 % of
TV NOVA’s gross revenues and replace the Co-operation Agreement
with a collection of new agreements directed to separate areas of service
being provided by GNTS. These proposed new agreements would have
permitted CET 21 to acquire services from sources other than CNTS and
to pay GNTS only for particular services acquired from GNTS, would
have eliminated CNTS’s right to collect and keep all revenues from ad-
vertising, and would have provided that CET 21’s relationship with CNTS
would extend only until the end of the current Licence period on Janu-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

- 40-

ary 30, 2005. These changes were needed, Dr. Zelezny asserted, be-
cause the Media Council continued to disapprove of any exclusive ar-
rangement between CET 21 and CNTS and would shortly issue a state-
ment that the arrangement was “not correct.” Dr. Zelezny threatened that
if CME did not agree to this “ultimatum,” CET 21 would hire another
company to sell TV NOVA’s advertising time and shift advertising reve-
nues away from GNTS - a step that Dr. Zelezny asserted CET 21 was
free to take because the changes to the MOA mandated by the Media
Council in 1996 had left CET 21 with no obligation of exclusivity toward
CNTS.

124. The arrangements demanded by Dr. Zelezny in 1998 and 1999, based
on the Media Council’s past actions and threatened future actions, were
a far cry from the original arrangement, in which (in the Media Council’s
words) “two companies” would “appear around one Licence,” with GNTS,
as a “co-particip[ant] in implementing the broadcasts, “performing* all
acts relat[ing] to the development and operation of the NOVA TV” in an
exclusive bond with CET 21 that was to last as long as CET 21 held the
Licence.

125. In fulfilment of the threats by Dr. Zelezny, in early 1999 the Media Coun-
cil went beyond its 1996 reversal of position leading to the forced
amendment of the MOA. Now it provided active assistance to Dr. Zel-
ezny in his campaign to eliminate GNTS’S exclusive position respecting
CET 21. On March 3, 1999, a few days after threatening CME that the
Media Council would issue a letter supporting his position, Dr. Zelezny
surreptitiously wrote the Media Council to solicit a declaration from it that
exclusive relations between the licensee and service provider were le-
gally impermissible, particularly as a result of the Media Council's 1996
action “withdrawing the use of the Licence from a service organization
[GNTS] and taking it back for the licensed holder”. Dr. Zelezny’s letter
asked the Media Council to confirm in writing that:

Relations between the operator of broadcasting and its
service organizations must be established on a nonex-
clusive basis, because exclusive relations between the
licence-holder and the service organization may en-
courage the transfer of some functions and rights that
are dependent on the Licence and that are not transfer-
able by law.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-41-

126. Dr. Zelezny further sought confirmation that “CET 21 s.r.o. will act, func-
tion, and proceed as an operator, and therefore, it has to carry out rele-
vant managerial, administrative and accounting tasks, and must build up
its own company structure” - an express request for a mandate that
ENTS should no longer perform the managerial functions it was created
to perform. He additionally sought a declaration that revenues from ad-
vertisements “must be revenues of CET 21,” although they had always
been collected and, after payment of expenses, retained exclusively by
CNTS.

127. Dr. Zelezny did not hide his motives for seeking these confirmations in
the form of a Media Council declaration. He told the Media Council that
“[wle would like to use this opinion for discussions with our contractual
partners, without disclosing other internal matters of our company.” Bra-
zenly, he explained that he wished to use the Media Council’s declara-
tion to restructure the arrangement with CNTS in critical ways, including
not only by “build[ing]-up” CET 21 to perform management functions pre-
viously performed by CNTS and by having CET 21 rather than CNTS
collect all advertising revenues, but also by replacing existing contracts
with CNTS with new short-term contracts that would permit the use of
new service providers other than CNTS and would terminate all obliga-
tions to CNTS upon any Licence renewal.

128. Instead of refusing to make the proclamations Dr. Zelezny had proposed
on the basis that they were flatly at odds with entitlements for CNTS that
the Media Council had expressly approved, the Media Council sent
Dr. Zelezny a letter on March 15, 1999, parroting nearly verbatim from
his request the language respecting exclusivity:

Business relations between the operator of broadcast-
ing and service organizations are built on a nonexclu-
sive basis. Exclusive relations between the operator and
the service organization may result in de facto transfer
of some functions and rights pertaining to the operator
of broadcasting and, in effect, a transfer of the Licence.

129. The Media Council also stated that CET 21 “operates, functions and acts
as an operator, /.e., carries out relevant administrative and accounting
tasks,” and that all advertising revenues must be treated as revenues of
CET 21. In issuing this letter, the Media Council did not disclose that it

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

130.

131.

-42-

was adopting the language and the analysis Dr. Zelezny had proposed,
or that it had received a letter from Dr. Zelezny asking it to express these
views.

The Media Council stated in its March 15 letter that the fulfilment of these
so-called “requirements” had been the “precondition” for its termination of
the 1996 administrative proceedings against CNTS, and that it believed
these requirements had been “confirmed by changes in the Memoran-
dum of Association.” The positions set forth in the letter, like the 1996
administrative proceedings, were wholly at odds with the Media Council's
1993 approval of the MOA which gave CNTS the exclusive right to use
the Licence and established CNTS as the manager of TV NOVA, and on
the basis of which approval CNTS had acted for years as the exclusive
source of managerial, administrative and other business activity for
TV NOVA. The issuance of the letter was also beyond the scope of the
Media Council's authority under the Media Council Act which authorizes
the Media Council only to adjudicate rights and obligations in the context
of administrative proceedings - not to issue ex parte declarations in sup-
port of one party to a dispute.

Dr. Zelezny used the Media Council's letter as conclusive proof that the
existing exclusive arrangement between CNTS and CET 21 had to be
changed. Based on the letter, over the succeeding weeks he continued
to take steps to destroy that exclusive arrangement. On April 19, 1999,
CME concluded that given Dr. Zelezny’s lack of loyalty - indeed, given
his outright hostility to CME’s essential interests and those of CNTS - it
had no alternative but to recall Dr. Zelezny from his position as General
Director of GNTS. Dr. Zelezny responded by publicly pursuing the devel-
opment of entities whose mission was to replace CNTS in the perform-
ance of the activities necessary to operate TV NOVA. Finally, on
August 5, 1999, three and a half months alter his termination,
Dr. Zelezny caused CET 21 to sever its dealings with CNTS altogether,
and to begin broadcasting TV NOVA using the services of new compa-
nies under his direction. Since that date, CNTS has performed no serv-
ices for CET 21 and has generated no revenues. It has been forced to
lay off nearly all of its workforce. It has essentially gone out of business.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-43-

132. The pivotal role that the Media Council played in bringing about this
State of affairs is apparent from CET 21’s August 16, 1999 letter to
CME’s shareholders. In it, CET 21 again pointed to the Media Council’s
actions in 1996 and 1999 as the basis for the August 5 termination of its
dealings with GNTS, echoing many of the statements in the Media
Council's January 1998 report to the Czech Parliament. CET 21 recited,
for instance, that the “partnership structure” that the Media Council ap-
proved in 1993 had been “consistently criticized” by “legislati[ve], regu-
latory and State bodies of the Czech Republic” in succeeding years, on
the basis that it provided “excessive powers to foreign investors.” These
criticisms, CET 21 alleged, combined with the “serious political and so-
cial problems” caused by the perception of CME’s “extraordinarily high
revenues,” were the forces that had prompted the Media Council to open
the 1996 administrative proceedings against CNTS and demand that
CNTS amend its MOA. CET 21 also asserted that it was not required to
maintain the exclusive relationship with CNTS, because the “exclusive
link” between the two companies had been “terminated” with the 1996
amendment of the MOA. CET 21 additionally referred to the Media
Council’s March 15, 1999 letter as proof that the Media Council would
not tolerate an exclusive arrangement, not only because of the Media
Council’s view of the Media Law, but also on the ground of CME’s focus
“on its immediate short-term profit.”

Vill. The Media Council’s Failure to Fulfil its
Obligation to Protect Claimant’s Investment

133. As the authority charged with ensuring compliance with the Czech Re-
public’s television broadcasting laws, the Media Council had both the
power and the obligation under Czech law to remedy CET 21’s unlawful
actions to sever its exclusive relationship with CNTS. The Media Law re-
quires the Media Council to impose an appropriate penalty if it deter-
mines that a licence-holder has “violat[ed] the duties specified by this Act
or the conditions of the granted Licence.” The “duties specified” by the
Media Law include an obligation to obtain the Council’s advance ap-
proval for any “change concerning data stated in an application” for a Li-
cence. Id. at §§14(1), 20(4)(g) (requiring a fine for any breach of this ob-
ligation). The Media Law further authorizes the Media Council to revoke

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-44-

a Licence if, among other things, the licence-holder “seriously violates
the conditions given by a decision to grant a Licence” or the “duties set
by this Act or other legal regulations.” /d. at § 15 (2) (a).

134. CET 21’s actions were in direct violation of the Licence which explicitly
required CET 21 to broadcast in accordance with the premises described
in its Licence application, and were in violation of the undertakings by
CET 21 that the Media Council had expressly identified as a basis for is-
suance of the Licence in Condition 17. The statement of facts submitted
with the Licence application included an explanation of the proposed
“partnership” with CEDC in the Project Proposal. The same facts as to
the arrangement between CET 21 and CEDC were addressed in discus-
sion during oral hearings before the Media Council. The statement in the
original version of Condition 17, that the February 3/5, 1993 agreements
were attached as an appendix to the original Licence, makes clear that
the agreement between CET 21 and CEDC was part of the set of critical
“facts” on which the Media Council based its Licence grant. After CET 21
repudiated its exclusive relationship with CNTS, it was no longer broad-
casting through TV NOVA in compliance with the facts set forth in its ap-
plication for the Licence. The Media Council consequently could and
should have acted under the Media Law - even apart from its obligations
under the Treaty - and forced CET 21 into compliance with its obligations
under the threat of the revocation of the Licence.

135. However, the Media Council has repeatedly refused to take such action,
and other organs of the Czech Republic have equally refused to inter-
vene, despite the pivotal role that the Media Council played in bringing
about the loss of CNTS’s exclusive right to use the Licence. Since
June 1999, CNTS and CME have repeatedly asked the Media Council
and other Czech bodies to redress these breaches of the Licence, the
Media Law and the Treaty:

. In a June 24, 1999 letter to the Media Council, CNTS identified the
Media Council's approval of the CNTS arrangement as the basis for
the issuance of the Licence, and asked the Media Council to inter-
vene against the unlawful actions by Dr. Zelezny and CET 21 to re-
pudiate that arrangement. CNTS followed this request with a letter
specifically pointing out that CNTS’s continued participation in
CET 21’s broadcasting was a requirement of the Licence.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-45-

. On August 2, 1999, CNTS and CME wrote to the Permanent Com-
mittee of the House of Representatives of the Czech Parliament
(‘Parliamentary Media Committee”) challenging the Media Council's
policy of passivity in respect to Dr. Zelezny’s actions and asking
that the Media Council (which is answerable to Parliament) be di-
tected to take action. This letter was accompanied by a detailed
factual summary with supporting documentation.

. On August 6, 1999, the day after Dr. Zelezny caused CET 21 to
terminate all dealings between CET 21 and CNTS, CNTS asked the
Media Council to commence Licence revocation proceedings
against CET 21 “due to its . . . material breach of the conditions
arising out of the decision granting the Licence, of the obligations
stipulated by the [Media Law] and obligations stipulated by other
above-stated legal acts.”

. On August 13, 1999, GNTS again asked the Media Council to ad-
dress CET 21’s breaches of the conditions to the Licence and the
Media Law, including the failure “to perform the broadcasting in ac-
cordance with the facts which it stipulated in the application.”

136. In response to these repeated requests for action, the Media Council
publicly characterized the actions of CET 21 and Dr. Zelezny as mere
manoeuvres in a commercial dispute that should be resolved by the pri-
vate parties, and not by State action. With its July 26, 1999 letter to
ENTS, the Media Council enclosed an excerpt from its most recent re-
port to the Parliamentary Media Committee, in which it stated that the
dispute between CME and CET 21 was of a “commercial nature,” in
which the Media Council had “no legal reason or right to interfere.” The
Media Council has continued to adhere to this position in subsequent
public statements. Thus, the Media Council failed to take responsibility
for the role it had played in igniting the dispute, ignored its own regula-
tory obligations to address the resulting violations of the Licence and the
law, and has refused to fulfil its obligation, binding on all organs of the
Czech Republic, to comply with the Treaty.

IX. The Czech Republic’s Additional Continuing Violations of the Treaty

137. Since this arbitration was filed, the Czech Republic has continued to
breach its obligations to provide Claimant’s investment full security and
protection, and has continued to take actions (or has refused to act) in
ways that, at Claimant’s expense, improperly favour the Czech investors
in CET 21. For example, the Media Council has affirmatively assisted

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

- 46-

Dr. Zelezny in evading the effectiveness of orders of an ICC arbitral tri-
bunal. On November 10, 1999, CME obtained an order of interim meas-
ures in an ICC arbitration initiated against Dr. Zelezny, directing him to
use his control over CET 21 as its Executive and majority shareholder to
restore the partnership between CET 21 and CNTS to its prior position of
economic exclusivity. Dr. Zelezny refused to comply with this order.

138. CNTS gave the Media Council a copy of the ICC tribunal's order. Nev-
ertheless, the Media Council approved, on December 21, 1999, a plan
by which Dr. Zelezny, in a sham transaction, transformed his majority
shareholding in CET 21 into a minority shareholding, so as to be able to
foil the ICC tribunal’s order by asserting that he could no longer exercise
a 60 % shareholder's power over CET 21. The sham was apparent:
Close associates of Dr. Zelezny agreed to contribute only CZK 4.8 mil-
lion (less than US $ 150,000) to the capital of CET 21, paid nothing to
Dr. Zelezny, and were issued large nominal interests in CET 21 designed
to dilute Dr. Zelezny’s interest to approximately 12 %. The Media Council
had full knowledge of the ICC tribunal’s order, and GNTS explained the
sham to the Media Council in a letter dated November 18, 1999. CET 21
was required to obtain the Media Council’s approval for the transaction.
The Media Council approved this recapitalization. The Media Council's
approval brought Dr. Zelezny the goal he had sought: In an
April 17, 2000 ruling, the ICC tribunal amended its order by withdrawing
the directive that Dr. Zelezny use his control over CET 21 to restore
GNTS'S exclusivity, stating that Dr. Zelezny no longer possessed the
majority control over CET 21 that he needed to comply with the order.

139. In addition to helping Dr. Zelezny avoid his obligations to the foreign in-
vestors in CNTS, the Czech Republic has disregarded criminal wrong-
doing by Dr. Zelezny directed against CME’s investment. On Octo-
ber 14, 1999, CNTS filed a criminal complaint against Dr. Zelezny with
the Prague State Attorney's Office. To date, neither the Czech police nor
the City or State Attorney’s Office has taken any action with respect to
CNTS's complaint.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-47-
X. Other Legal Actions by CME or CNTS Apart from this Arbitration

140. Several actions have been brought in Czech court by both CNTS and
CET 21. On May 4, 2000, the Prague Regional Commercial Court held in
an action initiated by CNTS that CET 21 was obligated under the 1997
Co-operation Agreement to procure all services for the operation of
TV NOVA exclusively through CNTS.

141. CET 21 has refused to comply with this decision. Despite a request by
GENTS, the Media Council has refused to take any action based on the
Court's decision.

142. CME’s ICC arbitration against Dr. Zelezny alleges that he personally
breached the August 11, 1997 Share Purchase Agreement pursuant to
which CME acquired a 5.8% interest in CNTS held by an entity that
Dr. Zelezny owned. On February 9, 2001 the ICC International Court of
Arbitration rendered the Award ordering Dr. Zelezny to pay
US $23.35 million to CME Media against the return of the NOVA Con-
sulting shares.

143. Ronald S. Lauder, the ultimate controlling shareholder of CME, has him-
self brought an ad hoc arbitration against the Czech Republic pursuant
to the bilateral investment treaty in force between the United States and
the Czech Republic (the “US Treaty”). The factual predicate of the claims
in that proceeding are virtually identical to the factual predicate of this
action. An award in favour of Mr. Lauder restoring CNTS to the exclusive
position it held before Respondent's breaches and providing him dam-
ages for the losses he has suffered as a result of those breaches could
be of substantial assistance to CME and reduce the damage suffered by
CME as a result of Respondent's breaches. Such an award would not,
however, make CME itself whole.

144, Claimant, CNTS and Mr. Lauder have properly taken multiple measures
to seek to protect their interests and recover for the harm they have suf-
fered in this matter. The existence of other claims neither erases Re-
spondent’s egregious violations of binding international obligations nor
excuses Respondent from its obligation to remedy those breaches and
their proximate results.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

- 48 -

E.
Claimant’s Argument
|. CME’s Entitlement to Assert a Claim under the Treaty

145. Asa “legal person[] constituted under the law” of The Netherlands, CME
is an investor subject to the protections of the Treaty. Exh. Cl at
art. I(b). CME directly holds a 99 % ownership interest in CNTS.

146. The Treaty protects “investments” in the Czech Republic that are made
by Dutch investors. The Treaty defines “investment” broadly, to include
“every kind of asset.” Treaty at art. 1(a). Examples of protected invest-
ments enumerated in the Treaty include “movable and immovable prop-
erty .. . rights,” “shares . . . and other kinds of interests in companies and
joint ventures, as well as rights derived therefrom,” “title to . . . assets
and to any performance having an economic value” and “intellectual
property, also including technical processes, goodwill and know-how.” Id.

147. CME’s ownership interest in CNTS, and all that CME has directly or indi-
rectly invested to obtain that ownership interest and cause it to grow,
plainly constitutes an investment in the Czech Republic within the
meaning of the Treaty. The investment assets of CME in the Czech Re-
public also plainly include CNTS’s tangible and intangible property - in-
cluding its buildings, studio equipment, and intellectual property rights,
such as its rights to air licensed programmes - and CME’s and CNTS’s
legal interest in maintaining the exclusive business arrangement be-
tween CNTS and CET 21, all of which CME owns either directly or indi-
rectly by virtue of its 99 % ownership interest in CNTS.

ll. The Czech Republic’s Obligations under the Treaty

148. The Treaty imposes five central obligations on the Czech Republic:
(i) not to deprive investors of their investments, directly or indirectly, if
such deprivation is unlawful or without compensation; (ii) to treat invest-
ments fairly and equitably; (iii) not to impair the enjoyment of investments
by unreasonable or discriminatory measures; (iv) to provide investments
full security and protection; and (v) to ensure treatment of investments
that complies with the standards of international law.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

- 49 -
1. The Obligation Not to Deprive Investors of Their Investments

149. Article 5 of the Treaty provides that “[nJeither Contracting Party shall take
any measures depriving, directly or indirectly, investors of the other Con-
tracting Party of their investments,” unless the deprivation is “taken in the
public interest and under due process of law,” is carried out non-dis-
criminatorily, and is accompanied by just compensation.

150. The Treaty’s provision regarding “deprivation” tracks the broadest expro-
priation provisions in bilateral investment treaties, specifically, and in in-
ternational law, generally. A “deprivation” thus occurs under the Treaty
whenever a State takes steps “that effectively neutralize the benefit of
the property for the foreign owner.” Such expropriations may be deemed
to have occurred regardless of whether the State “takes” or transfers le-
gal title to the investment. It is also immaterial whether the State itself
(rather than local investors or other third parties) economically benefits
from its actions. These rules arise under the well-established principle
that State interference with an investor’s use of property should be
deemed an actionable “deprivation” regardless of the form that the inter-
ference takes.

151. The Treaty avoids any narrow definition of expropriation in part by
avoiding the use of that word altogether. The Treaty focuses on the in-
terference in the investor’s ownership, rather than any transfer of the in-
vestment to the State, by prohibiting “deprivations” rather than “takings.”
Article 5 further expressly adopts the international rule against unlawful
indirect expropriations (measures may not be taken “depriving, directly or
indirectly,” investors of their investments).

152. A deprivation effected by coercing an investor's agreement to changes in
its investment’s status violates the Treaty in the same measure as a di-
rect taking. Attempts by State defendants to use “consent” obtained from
an investor on pain of administrative sanction to defend State conduct
have a long pedigree in expropriation cases. States often “take the cir-
cuitous route of expropriation by consent,” either due to a “recognition of
the existence of an international [prohibition against expropriation] or out
of a practical desire not to advertise their defiance of it.”

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

153.

154.

155.

156.

157.

-50-

The Czech Republic’s actions in this case - threatening destruction of
CME’s investment through regulatory proceedings once the foreign in-
vestor’s profits appeared too large - fall within this recognizable pattern:

The “expropriation by consent” that the Czech Republic extorted from
ENTS through its administrative proceedings is no more permissible un-
der international law than the outright appropriation of an investment.

2. The Obligation of Fair and Equitable Treatment

The Treaty further provides that investments are to be ensured “fair and
equitable treatment.” Treaty at art. 3 (I). The Treaty’s Preamble under-
scores the importance of this obligation, acknowledging that “fair and eq-
uitable treatment” of investments plays a major role in realizing the
Treaty’s goal of encouraging foreign investment.

The broad concept of fair and equitable treatment imposes obligations
beyond customary international requirements of good faith treatment.
The Treaty makes this plain by separating the requirement of “fair and
equitable treatment” in article 3(1) from the obligation to adhere to “obli-
gations under international law” in article 3(5). The obligation of fair and
equitable treatment is a specific provision commonly at the heart of in-
vestment treaties that may prohibit actions - including State administra-
tive actions - that would otherwise be legal under both domestic and in-
ternational law.

Whether conduct is fair and equitable depends on the factual context of
the State’s actions, including factors such as the undertakings made to
the investor and the actions the investor took in reliance on those un-
dertakings. This requirement can thus prohibit conduct that might be
permissible in some circumstances but appears unfair and inequitable in
the context of a particular dispute.

3. The Obligation Not to Engage in Unreasonable and Discriminatory

158.

Treatment

The Treaty similarly provides that a State shall not “impair, by unreason-
able or discriminatory measures, the operation, management, mainte-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-51-

nance, use, enjoyment or disposal” of investments. Treaty at art. 3 (1).
As with the fair and equitable standard, the determination of reasonable-
ness is in its essence a matter for the arbitrator's judgment. That judg-
ment must be exercised within the context of asking what the parties to
bilateral investment treaties should jointly anticipate, in advance of a
challenged action, to be appropriate behaviour in light of the goals of the
Treaty.

4. The Obligation of Full Security and Protection

159. The Treaty further requires that, “[mJore particularly, each Contracting
Party shall accord to such investments full security and protection.”
Treaty at art. 3 (2). Under this provision, each State is required to take all
steps necessary to protect investments, regardless of whether its do-
mestic law requires or provides mechanisms for it to do so, and regard-
less of whether the threat to the investment arises from the State’s own
actions or from the actions of private individuals or others.

160. The provision imposes an obligation of vigilance under which the State
must take all measures necessary to ensure the full enjoyment of protec-
tion and security of the foreign investment. The State may not invoke its
own legislation to detract from any such obligation.

161. The Treaty stresses the primacy of its “full security and protection” stan-
dard over domestic limitations by making clear that the more favourable
of domestic or most favoured nation protections is a necessary, but not
of itself sufficient, component of what must be accorded to investors of
the other Contracting Party. Exh. Cl at art. 3 (2).

5. The Obligation of Treatment in Accordance with Standards of In-
ternational Law

162. The Treaty contains a broad provision requiring the Contracting Parties
to treat investments at least as well as required by “obligations under in-
ternational law existing at present or established hereafter between the
Contracting Parties . . . whether general or specific.” Treaty at art. 3 (5).
In addition to all obligations under treaties or otherwise, general princi-
ples of international law require host States to provide certain minimum
protections to international investments.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-52-

Ml. The Czech Republic Has Violated Its Treaty Obligations

=

. The Czech Republic Is Responsible for the Media Council’s Conduct

163. The Media Council is an official organ of the Czech Republic established
as an administrative body by the Media Council Act. The Czech Republic
is responsible under the Treaty for the Media Council’s conduct, based
on the well-established principle that a State is responsible for the
wrongful acts of its instrumentalities or agents.

164. A State bears international responsibility for the actions of its instrumen-
talities or agents even if the conduct at issue was beyond the agent's
authority under domestic law.

165. The Media Council’s official endorsement of the MOA and related
agreements which led to Claimant's initial investment thus gave Claimant
legally enforceable rights under the Treaty irrespective of whether the
endorsement was valid under Czech law (as it was) or whether the Me-
dia Council's subsequent reversal of position and failure to intervene to
protect CNTS were valid under Czech law (as they were not).

2. The Media Council’s Conduct has Violated
the Czech Republic’s Treaty Obligations

166. Respondent has violated each of the foregoing Treaty obligations with
respect to CME’s investment. The 1993 structuring of the investment
through GNTS was the product of the Media Council’s own instigation
and approval. The Media Council's 1996 reversal of its own 1993 action
approving the partnership between CNTS and CET 21, as spelled out in
the February 1993 agreements and the MOA, violated its obligations not
to deprive Claimant of its investments, to provide fair and equitable
treatment, not to take unreasonable and discriminatory actions, to pro-
vide full security and protection for Claimant's investment, and to act in
compliance with principles of international law.

167. The Media Council’s continued connivance with Dr. Zelezny to destroy
the exclusive relationship between CNTS and CET 21 constituted a fur-

ther breach of its Treaty obligations, including particularly its obligations

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-53-

to provide full security and protection to Claimant's investment. Indiffer-
ent to the Czech Republic’s affirmative obligation of protection, the Media
Council actively assisted Dr. Zelezny’s efforts, most notably by issuing its
March 15, 1999 declaration to support Dr. Zelezny’s avowed effort to
eliminate the exclusive economic relationship between CNTS and
CET 21 that had been the foundation of CME’s investment. The Media
Council's willingness to put forward Dr. Zelezny’s views as its own was
unambiguously calculated to gut the “partnership” that had been entered
between CNTS and CET 21 in 1993 at the Media Council's instigation
and with its full support.

168. Respondent further breached its obligation to provide full security and
protection to Claimant’s investments when both the Media Council and
the Parliament refused all requests for intervention to protect CNTS, al-
though at the time of such requests GNTS was being destroyed by the
Media Council's reversal of its original approval of the exclusive ar-
rangements it had brought about between CNTS and CET 21.

169. CNTS did not lose its entire business and revenues simply as the result
of market forces or a private business dispute, as the Media Council has
asserted. The ground for Dr. Zelezny’s termination of the relationship
between CNTS and CET 21 was laid by the amendments to the MOA
that the Media Council coerced, since CET 21 could not have severed
an arrangement in which CNTS was entitled to the exclusive right to use
the Licence. Even after that wrongful severance which the Media Coun-
cil facilitated, CNTS would not have been forced to discontinue its busi-
ness operations if the Media Council had fulfilled its obligations under the
Treaty and Czech law by restoring CNTS to the exclusive position with
respect to CET 21 that the Media Council had approved in 1993.

170. The Media Council’s course of dealings - including its initial requirement
that the Licence be held by Czech nationals, its commencement of the
unfounded administrative proceedings against CNTS, its actions forcing
GENTS to weaken the contractual underpinnings that were the basis of
Claimant's investment, its articulation of a policy disfavouring the exclu-
sive economic relationship it had helped to structure and had approved,
and its failure to act to protect GNTS’s interests - enabled Dr. Zelezny to
take actions that have destroyed the value of Claimant’s investment. The

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-54-

Media Council's actions and refusals to act have effected a deprivation
of Claimant’s investment by the Czech Republic that fails to meet the
Treaty’s requirements of public purpose, due process, non-discrimination
and adequate compensation.

IV. The Czech Republic Is Required to Remedy Its Breaches of the Treaty

171.

172.

173.

The Czech Republic has an obligation under international law to remedy
its Treaty violations. The Permanent Court of International Justice recog-
nized more than seventy years ago that States must be required to rem-
edy violations of international treaties, noting that “[ijt is a principle of in-
ternational law that the breach of an engagement involves an obligation
to make reparation” in an adequate form.

F.

Position of the Respondent
|. Introduction

The Czech Republic acknowledged its obligations under the Treaty and
confirms that it is committed to providing fair and equitable treatment to
investment by Dutch nationals and companies. The Czech Republic’s
position is, however, that it is an abuse of the protection afforded by the
Treaty for CME to have brought this arbitration against the Czech Re-
public.

The claims brought by CME relate to a private commercial dispute be-
tween the CME group and its former business partner, Dr. Vladimir Zel-
ezny. The essence of CME’s complaint is that Dr. Zelezny procured the
wrongful termination of the contractual relationship between the broad-
cast licence-holder CET 21 and a provider of broadcast services CNTS.
The Czech Republic is not a party to any contract involving CNTS. The
Treaty is not intended as a means of resolving commercial disputes
arising out of private contractual arrangements between two private par-
ties.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

174.

175.

176.

177.

178.

179.

-55-

CME/CNTS brought legal proceedings against Dr. Zelezny/CET 21 in the
Czech courts alleging wrongful termination of this contractual relation-
ship. In those proceedings, CME/GNTS alleged that Dr. Zelezny/CET 21
deprived CME/ CNTS of their investment in the Czech Republic.

On 4 May 2000 the Regional Commercial Court in Prague has held that
CET 21 wrongfully terminated the Service Agreement with CNTS and
that CNTS is to be the exclusive service provider to CET 21. (The judg-
ment was reversed in 2000 by the Court of Appeal). Dr. Zelezny/CET 21

caused the loss of which CME complains in this arbitration. Those pro-
ceedings confirm that there is no substance in CME’s argument that it is
the Czech Republic that has deprived CME of its investment. Those pro-
ceedings raise a res judicata and issue estoppel in respect of the issues
pleaded and decided therein.

The judgment discloses no wrongdoing by the Czech Republic which
could give rise to a cause of action under the Treaty.

As a further abuse of the Dutch Treaty, Mr. Lauder, who purportedly con-
trols CME, has brought arbitration proceedings under the “US Treaty” in
which Mr. Lauder makes identical allegations and seeks identical relief.

CME fails to establish that the contractual relationship between CNTS
and CET 21 constitutes an asset of CME invested in the Czech Republic.

The Czech Republic requests dismissal of CME’s claims on grounds of
lack of jurisdiction:

(a) CME has not established that it has an asset invested in the
Czech Republic as defined in the Treaty;

(b) CME’s claim is not an investment dispute as defined in the
Treaty, but is of a private commercial nature with Dr. Zel-
ezny/CET 21; and

(c) CME may not concurrently pursue the same remedies in differ-
ent fora;

further and/or alternatively, on grounds of lack of admissibility:

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

180.

181.

182.

183.

- 56-

(a) CME has pursued the same remedies in other fora; and
(b) CME has failed to plead any loss.

The Czech Republic denies that there has been any breach of the Treaty
or of Czech law by the State or any of its instrumentalities.

Il. The Treaty

The Czech Republic relies on the terms of the Treaty for its full terms
and effect and agrees that it is bound by the Treaty as from
1 January 1993.

Ill. The Media Law

The Media Law of 30 October 1991 provided, amongst other things, for
the issuing of a Licence by the Media Council to a “broadcasting opera-
tor”.

Article 10 set out the “Conditions for granting a Licence” and provided,
inter alia:

"(1) A Licence authorizes its holder to broadcast in the scope
and under the conditions set in it.
(2) ALicence is not transferable.

(4) In evaluating the application (§11), the licence-granting
bodies give consideration to ensuring the conditions for
plurality and balance in the programme services offered,
especially local programme services, equal accessibility of
cultural values, information and views, as well as ensuring
the development of the culture of the nations, nationalities
and ethnic groups in the Czech and Slovak Republic, and
the extent of the applicant’s previous business activities in
the area of mass media.

(5) — In evaluating the application, the licence-granting bodies
see to it that none of the applicants will gain a dominant
position in the mass media.

(6) In evaluating applications from companies with foreign eq-
uity participation, the licence-granting bodies take into con-
sideration the applicant's contribution to the development
of original domestic work, as well as the equity holdings of
Czechoslovak natural persons and legal entities, and their
representation in the company’s bodies. “

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-57-

184. Article 11 concerned the “Licence application” and provided, inter alia:

(3) Only the person or entity who is applying for a Licence is a
party to the Licence proceedings.”

185. Article 12 concerned the “Decision to grant a Licence” and provided, in-
ter alia:

“(3) _ In addition to conditions stated in paragraph 2, the decision
to grant a Licence also includes conditions which the li-
cence-granting body will set for the broadcasting operator.”

The power to impose conditions was, however, removed in 1996.

186. Article 14 concerned “Changes in the licence” and provided, inter alia:

“(7) A broadcaster is required to notify the body which issued
the Licence of all changes relating to the data stated in the
application or the fulfilment of the conditions set in the li-
cence and submit documentation of them within 15 days
after these changes occur...

(2) On the basis of the notification under paragraph 1, the li-
cence-granting body, depending on the circumstances of
the case, will decide on a change in the granted Licence or
will revoke the Licence (§ 15). "

187. Article 15 concerned “Revoking a Licence” and provided, inter alia:

“(1) The body which granted the Licence shall revoke it from the
licence-holder if:

(a) _ the licence-holder no longer meets the prerequisites for
granting a Licence specified in § IO par. 6 and 7;

a changes have occurred concerning the licence-holder
which do not permit fulfilment of the conditions set in the Li-
cence [this provision was removed in 1996]

(2) The body which granted the Licence may revoke it if
(a) _ the licence-holder violates in a serious manner the condi-
tions set in the Licence, duties specified by this Act or by
other generally binding legal regulations;”
188. Article 20 concerned “Fines” and gave the Media Council the power to
impose fines if the licence-holder violated its duties set by the Media Law
or the Conditions to the licence. In addition, Article 20 (6) provided that a
fine will be imposed on anyone who broadcasts without being authorised
to do so. The fine could be between CZK 10,000 and CZK 2,000,000.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-58-

IV. The Media Council

189. On 21 February 1992, the Czech Parliament passed an Act
(Act No. 103/1992 COll.) establishing the Media Council or “Council”. The
function of the Council was to supervise the observance of legal regula-
tions governing radio and television broadcasting, including the obser-
vance of the Media Law.

190. The Council has at all times been an autonomous body, independent of
the Government and answerable to the Czech Parliament under Arti-
cle 3 (5) of the Media Law and Article 29 of the Act on Competencies of
State Institutions. It has nine members elected by the Czech Parliament.
Members of the Council may not be members of Parliament, nor hold of-
fices in political parties or political movements, nor be members of com-
panies that do business in the field of mass media, nor represent busi-
ness interests that might be in conflict with the performance of their office
or that could adversely affect their impartiality and the objectivity of their
decision making.

V. Grant of the Licence to CET 21

191. In 1992, the Council commenced proceedings for the issue of a new Li-
cence for broadcasting commercial television, pursuant to the proce-
dures prescribed in the Media Law. The Council had special regard to
the urgency and importance of such task at a time when no competition
existed in Czech television broadcasting.

192. The Licence was not to be issued through a tender process (in the sense
that it would be awarded to the bidder with the most advantageous fi-
nancial package to the Government). The Licence was to be issued after
a public enquiry which examined the viability and suitability of all sub-
mitted bids.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-59-

193. The Council invited bidders. Over 20 applications were received, one of
which was CET 21, represented by Dr. Zelezny. In April 1993, Dr. Zel-
ezny acquired a 17 % interest in CET 21. In August 1996 he increased
his interest to 60 %.

194. The Media Law did not bar foreign parties from effectively holding televi-
sion licences. The Media Law merely stipulated, as many countries do,
that a legal entity could only become a licence-holder if it had a regis-
tered office on the territory of the Czech Republic and was registered in
the Commercial Register. CEDC never applied to the Media Council for a
Licence. CME has failed to establish that it assumed the rights and obli-
gations of CEDC as a matter of law.

195. CEDC could have applied for a Licence on its own through a Czech reg-
istered company. CEDC chose not to. Neither CEDC (nor later CME)
ever raised any formal complaint with the Council or the Government at
the time. The Czech Republic has also no knowledge of whether CEDC
and CET 21 contemplated pursuing a joint application for a Licence. In
any event, only CET 21 submitted an application, dated 27 August 1992.

196. CET 21’s application was supported by a document entitled “Project for
an independent Television Station’. \t explained that, inter alia, financial
backing would be provided by CEDC, the shareholders of which were
said to be part of the “Lauder group”. CET 21 stated in the Project Pro-
posal, submitted with its application, that CEDC was a “direct participant
in CET 21’s application for the Licence’. However, neither the Media
Law, nor Czech law in general, recognises any legal term or gives any
legal definition to the term “direct participant’. The Project Proposal itself
made clear that it was CET 21, and CET 21 only, that was applying for
the Licence. The applicant for the Licence was named as CET 21.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

197.

198.

199.

200.

201.

202.

- 60 -

In mid January 1993, CET 21 provided the Council with a “business
plan” which set out in detail the expected revenues and expenses of
CET 21 and CNTS.

The Council received assistance from a Council of Europe expert mis-
sion. It evaluated the business plans of the projects. CET 21 and two
other companies had the best plans. The Council then had to choose
one of the three shortlisted applicants, having regard to the criteria in Ar-
ticle 10 of the Media Law. CET 21 was chosen.

The Council, by letter dated 30 January 1993, informed CET 21 that it
had been granted a Licence for nation-wide broadcasting. It was clearly
understood by Council members such as Dr. Josefik that the applicant
for the Licence was CET 21 alone and that CEDC would be a future in-
vestor. The letter referred to CEDC being a “direct participant to the ap-
plication”. That reflected the understanding that CEDC would be an in-
vestor in the project, and this phrase had no legal significance under the
Media Law. In addition to the financial considerations, members of the
Council such as Dr. Josefik voted in favour of CET 21 because their
broadcasting format appeared most likely to provide competition to the
existing public television stations and to provide a plurality of views.

Accordingly, as a matter of Czech law, any rights and obligations pre-
scribed by the Media Law and the Licence are only given to and as-
sumed by the party that made the application and is named in the Li-
cence.

The Council did not violate the Treaty including in particular by not per-
mitting foreign ownership of the Licence. No political pressure took place.
The Media Law does not preclude foreign investment in the broadcasting
industry. It only requires that the broadcasting Licence be held by an en-
tity which has a registered office in the Czech Republic and which is
registered in the Commercial Register.

After the announcement of the decision, CET 21 and CEDC entered into
two agreements: the “Overall Structure of a Czech Commercial Televi-
sion Entity" of 3 February 1993 and the “Basic Structure of a New Czech

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

203.

204.

-61-

Commercial Television Entity” of 5 February 1993. Both agreements pro-

vided that CET 21 and CEDC would create a new company to manage

the TV station, with investments to be made by CEDC and the Czech

Savings Bank. The earlier agreement stated that CET 21 and CEDC

agreed to allow the new company to have exclusive use of the Licence
but this was omitted from the later agreement. The earlier agreement

confirmed “that neither party has the authority to broadcast commercial
television without the other” but in the later “CET 21 acknowledges that it
is not entitled to carry on broadcasting without the direct participation of
CEDC".

The two agreements were different in certain material respects. Moreo-
ver, they were both significantly different from the “Terms of Agreement"
between CEDC and CET 21 dated 5 January 1993 which provided that
CEDC was to be a major shareholder of CET 21.

The Council did not participate actively in negotiating a solution which led
to the creation of CNTS. It did not play a central role in directing the for-
mation of CNTS. It did not discriminate against foreign investors in
Czech television. The Council did not bless the arrangements between
CET 21 and CNTS or give its approval to those arrangements or actively
participate in their formulation. The Council could not and did not provide
any official assurances to CEDC.

205. The Council's Decision and the separate Licence (containing 31 Condi-

206.

tions) were formally issued in writing to CET 21 on 9 February 1993. The
Decision stated that the Council “awards a Licence for nation-wide televi-
sion broadcasting on the territory of the Czech Republic to the limited li-
ability company CET 21.”

The “Reasoning” referred to CET 21’s “contractual partner, the company
CEDC". The “Reasoning” stated that “the CET 21 proposal best suited
the aim to create a project for television broadcasting by a private op-
erator which respects the public interest, contributes to the creation of a
democratic society, and reflects a plurality of opinion and will provide
objective and balanced information necessary to form opinions free/y. ”

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

207.

208.

209.

-62-

It also noted that the proposal demonstrated adequate financing, but it
added that ‘[djespite the substantial involvement of foreign capital nec-
essary to begin television station activities, the proposal clearly guaran-
tees the intent to preserve the national character of programming. "

It concluded:

"... Through the formulation of Licence conditions and through in-
spection of their observance, [the Council] intends to ensure that
the aims stated in the proposal which convinced the Council that
this proposal is the best, will be observed. "

The Licence itself named the ‘licence-ho/der” as “CET 27”. It stated:

“The licence-holder is required to ensure that the broadcasting is
in accordance with the information stated in the application on the
basis of which this Licence was issued. It also agrees to observe
the conditions stated in the appendix to this Licence."

The Licence Conditions 17 and 18 (the complete wording already cited
above) provided that “any change in the legal entity” of the licence-holder
and the investors CEDC and the Czech Savings Bank required the prior
approval of the Media Council (Condition 17) and that the investors shall
not interfere into “the programming and the editorial independence of the
newscasting employees” (Condition 18).

The purpose of the Licence Conditions was, to monitor the business ar-
rangements between CET 21 and the investors (CEDC and Czech Sav-
ings Bank) and to ensure that the investors actually became parties to
the project. At that time (1992/93), many foreign investors promised to
fund huge projects in the Czech Republic, but when it came to pay the
money they disappeared. Condition 18 also emphasized the requirement
of editorial independence (a key attribute of any Licence). Similar condi-
tions were imposed upon other licence-holders. The Czech Republic
contends that the wording of Condition 17 has very little legal signifi-
cance as far as the investors were concerned. It conferred no right on
the investors (or GNTS) vis-&vis the Czech Republic. The legal effect of
the Conditions was exactly according to their terms: they imposed obli-
gations on CET 21. And the Licence and the Conditions were expressly
accepted by CET 21, and only by CET 21.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

- 63 -

210. The specific reference to the MOA was recognition that the requirement
in the original Condition 17 that CET 21 submit the MOA within 90 days
had been fulfilled. It also identified the contractual structure which the |i-
cence-holder had entered into with its investors and over which the
Council intended to exercise regulatory supervision (pursuant to Condi-
tion 17). The Council was concerned to ensure that the editorial inde-
pendence of CET 21 was secured (Condition 18). The Council was re-
sponsible for ensuring that this independence remained intact, and it
therefore imposed reporting requirements in Condition 17.

211. Thus, the Council envisaged, as reflected in the Licence Conditions, that
CEDC and Czech Savings Bank would be “investors” in a company es-
tablished to manage and operate the television station. The Czech Re-
public contends that this terminology has no legal significance in the
sense contended by CME and does not confer any rights upon CEDC, or
the Czech Savings Bank, or GNTS. Such wording recognised the fact
that the licence-holder, CET 21, intended to obtain funding and know-
how from CEDC; and that CEDC’s rights vis-avis CET 21 were to be
contractual. It does not elevate CEDC to the status of co-licence-holder.
In the Conditions to the Licence, CEDC is referred to as an ‘investor’.

212. The Council did not contemplate that CET 21 would transfer the Licence
to CEDC or any other entity or person. Indeed, the Media Law forbade it.
Neither the Decision nor the Licence required CET 21 to enter into any
relationship with CEDC or anyone else whereby it would lose control of
broadcasting and programming, nor did the Decision or the Licence ap-
prove any such relationship made by CET 21.

213. The Council did not take into account the February agreements when it
issued the Licence. The Licence documentation did not link CEDC and
ENTS to the Licence issued to CET 21 in any manner beyond acknowl-
edging that CEDC was to be an investor in the project.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

214.

215.

216.

217.

218.

- 64-

VI. The Formation of CNTS

CET 21, Czech Savings Bank and CEDC established and became
shareholders in CNTS.

Condition 17 of the Licence Conditions required the submission to the
Council of a Business Agreement (herein: the “MOA”). A text was sub-
mitted to the Council. By letter dated 21 April 1993 the Council notified
CET 21 that the Council affirmed in its meeting of April 20, 1993 “in ac-
cordance with the Article 17 of the Conditions to the Licence” the sub-
mitted version of the MOA between CET 21, CEDC and the Czech Sav-
ings Bank.

In respect to the formation of CNTS and its MOA, the Czech Republic’s
position is that the Council did not participate actively in the negotiation
of the MOA. The Council did not have the power or authority to approve
the MOA submitted to it. It simply acknowledged that Condition 17 of the
Licence had been complied with. The Council did neither approve the ar-
rangements between GNTS and CET 21, nor proposed them, nor pub-
licly endorsed them. No actions of the Council could release CET 21 and
CNTS from conducting their arrangements in compliance with the Media
Law. The Council was not substantially involved in the negotiation and
finalization of the terms of the MOA and the adherence to these arrange-
ments until 1996. The Council was not influenced by “changing political
winds”.

In 1996, the Council commenced administrative proceedings because
there was clear evidence of a violation of the Media Law which CNTS

was unwilling to remedy. The Council was not fully aware of and did not

accept the CNTS structure. The Council never agreed that CET 21 could

transfer the Licence to CNTS. The Council did not take a discriminatory
position towards foreign investment and/or ownership of the Licence.

The Council did not participate substantively in developing the arrange-

ment between CET 21 and CNTS, did not formally endorse its legality
and did not forcibly dismantle the arrangement.

On 4 May 1993 CET 21, Czech Savings Bank and CEDC executed the
“Memorandum of Association” (the MOA). CET 21 was to have a 12 %

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-65-

ownership interest in CNTS; Czech Savings Bank a 22 % ownership in-
terest; and CEDC a 66% (and therefore controlling) ownership interest.

219. The MOA recorded that the subject of CNTS’s business activity was "the
development and management of a new independent private, country-
wide television broadcasting station in compliance with the Licence and
the conditions attached thereto”. The MOA noted that CET 21 had been
“granted and became the holder of a Licence for nation-wide broadcast-
ing” and referred to CEDC as an ‘investment company”. In addition, the
MOA provided (at para. 1.4.1):

‘(CET 21] shall contribute to [CNTS] unconditionally, unequivo-

cally, and on an exclusive basis the right to use, exploit and
maintain the Licence held by [CET 27].”

The Czech Republic’s position is that no specific legal entitlements de-
rive for CNTS or CME from the MOA and in particular from CET 21’s
contribution of the use of the Licence to CNTS. The meaning and effect
of the Memorandum of Association is a matter governed by Czech law.
CME would have the Tribunal conclude that it allowed CNTS to broad-
cast without a Licence. The Czech Republic contends that the wording in
the Memorandum of Association did not, and in any event could not,
equate to a transfer of the Licence to CNTS, as that would have been in
clear breach of Article 10 (2) of the Czech Media Law. CME may have
had a different understanding or expectation: in its Statement of Claim,
CME states that ".. the Media Council expressly approved the agree-
ment under which CET 21 assigned the exclusive right to use its Licence
to CNTS”. That premise, namely that CNTS became assignee of all
rights associated with the Licence, is an essential element of CME’s
case. But that premise is fundamentally wrong both in fact and law.

The Council’s understanding of the contribution of the Licence to CNTS
was explained in its Report of May 1994:

“The Licence as such has not been contributed to CNTS and is
separate from all other activities of CNTS ... The Memorandum of
Association and the Licence terms specify the relationships be-
tween CNTS and CET 21 and contain a number of mechanisms
that prevent the potential non-permissible involvement of CNTS in
the rights and obligations of the licence-holder’”.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

220.

221.

222.

223.

- 66 -

In the opinion of the Council, and contrary to CME’s contention, the Li-
cence Conditions and in particular, Conditions 17 and 18, were in fact
intended to prevent CNTS becoming the broadcaster.

GENTS was to have a Programming Council consisting of seven
(7) members of whom three (3) were to be appointed by CET 21, two (2)
by Czech Savings Bank, and one (1) by CEDC. The seventh was to be
the Programming Director (para 8.1). This implied that CEDC would not
control the programming (as required by Condition 18 of the Licence).

At paragraph 10.4, CEDC, Czech Savings Bank and CET 21 expressly
agreed ‘to be bound and to respect all of the conditions of fhe Licence,
mandated by the Council. In particular, CEDC and [Czech Savings
Bank] agree to abide by condition No. 18 not to interfere by any means
with the programming of Television station and especially not to interfere
with journalistic independence of the news department.”

The Council did not consider that it had the power to disapprove the
wording of the commercial arrangements between the parties, including
the words of CET 21’s contribution to CNTS. But the Council was con-
cerned as to how the arrangement between the various parties would be
implemented in practice, and how CET 21 would perform its obligations
as broadcaster under the Media Law. The Council understood that CNTS
would provide services to CET 21, but the Council did not foresee that
the scope of exclusivity between the licence-holder and the service pro-
vider would be so great that CET 21, far from being the broadcaster,
would become a mere shell company, the entire operation lying in prac-
tice in the hands of CNTS. Even if the Council had been actively involved
in drafting the MOA, that cannot be interpreted as approval of unauthor-
ized broadcasting by CNTS.

At the request of CET 21, the Council issued a Decision dated 12 May
1993 changing the wording of the Licence Conditions. The relevant Con-
ditions which were changed were Conditions 17 and 18:

“The licence-holder obliges itself:

(17) to submit [to] the Council for approval any changes of legal
person which has been the licence-holder, or of the capital
structure of the investor which result in a change of control
over their activities, and of the provisions of partnership

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

224.

225.

226.

227.

-67-

agreement between the licence-holder and investors. The
partnership agreement is an integral part of the Licence
terms. The partners of this partnership agreement are the
licence-holder, CEDC and Ceska spofitelna, in the scope
and under the conditions stipulated by this Memorandum of
Association.

(18) to ensure the CEDC specified as the partner to the partner-
ship agreement in the Licence terms and other investors
specified therein will in no way interfere in television station
programmes, particularly in editorial independence of news
service workers. "

ENTS was registered on 8 July 1993. CNTS entered in the Commercial
Register that the subject of its business activity was “nation-wide televi-
sion broadcasting under Licence no, 001/1993”. This was unknown to
the Council. Dr. Zelezny was appointed General Manager. TV NOVA
commenced broadcasting in February 1994.

Vil. The Unlawful Implementation of the Licence

Soon after broadcasting commenced, the Council became concerned
about the role of CNTS. The Council was contacted by an independent
producer of programmes who complained that two television broadcast-
ing licence-holders, TV NOVA and Premiéra TV, were only re-broad-
casting existing programmes and not developing domestically produced
programmes. It was also observed that the broadcaster was not clearly
identified at the end of each TV NOVA programme. The Council started
to investigate these issues.

On 1 February 1995, the Council received a letter from a law firm claim-
ing that their client believed his reputation had been damaged as a result
of a programme broadcast on TV NOVA and intended to start defama-
tion proceedings. They wanted to know the identity of the broadcaster.
The letter also referred to a judgment of the Regional Commercial Court
in Prague dated 13 September 1994 and a decision of the Municipal
Court of Prague 1 which stated that CNTS was the actual operator of the
broadcasting.

Following this, the Council requested the Commercial Court to clarify the
scope of the registered business activities of CET 21 and CNTS.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

228.

229.

230.

231.

232.

233.

-68-

Further, it came to the attention of the Council that CME had apparently
replaced CEDC (in August 1994) as a party to the business agreement
but that no approval had been sought from the Council as required by
Condition 17 of the Licence.

The Media Council also discovered that it was CNTS, rather than the
licence-holder, CET 21, that had entered into agreements with Czech
Radiocommunications which was transmitting the signal, and with OSA
and Integram which represented authors and producers respectively and
protected their copyright. The Media Law required the broadcaster to
enter into these agreements.

It thus became evident to the Council that CET 21 was just an empty
shell company performing none of the obligations of the licence-holder
and that CNTS was in fact acting as licence-holder and receiving all the
revenues therefrom. The Council concluded there had been a de facto
transfer of the Licence to CNTS and that CNTS was broadcasting with-
out a Licence, in breach of the Media Law.

The Council sought an independent legal opinion from the Institute of
State and Law of the Academy of Sciences (the “Institute”) concerning
the arrangements between CET 21 and GNTS. In February 1996, the In-
stitute issued a legal opinion concluding that CNTS was not authorised
to broadcast as the Licence was issued to CET 21 and therefore CNTS
was in breach of the law. The opinion recommended that the Council ini-
tiate administrative proceedings against CNTS for unlicensed broad-
casting and that the Council consider the revocation of CET 21’s Li-
cence.

On 13 March 1996, the Council met CET 21 to discuss the issue of unli-
censed broadcasting by CNTS and the changes to CET 21’s sharehold-
ers which had not been notified to and approved by the Council. In
April 1996, CET 21 provided the Council with two alternative draft
agreements between CET 21 and GNTS regarding the services to be
performed by CNTS for CET 21. The Council again referred the question
of lawfulness to the Institute. On 2 May 1996, the Institute issued a fur-
ther legal opinion commenting on the draft agreements.

The Institute concluded that Draft No. 1 “basically correctly resolves the
situation.” In summary, the Institute found decisive not so much the text
of the agreement but the factual fulfilment of two points:

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

234.

235.

236.

237.

-69-

(a) CET 21 (and not CNTS) was to become a party to the
agreement with Czech Radiocommunications; and

(b) Advertising revenues were, in terms of “accounting and
taxes, to be revenues of CET 21 (and not CNTS), and CET
21 was to pay fees to CNTS for its services.

In its second opinion, the institute set out at some length the conditions
which had to be satisfied for the issue of unlicensed broadcasting to be
resolved. On 4 June 1996, the Council wrote to CET 21 requesting
CET 21 to amend the description of the business activities of CET 21
and of GNTS, and commented on the two draft agreements submitted by
CET 21 in April 1996, and requested CET 21 to notify properly the
changes to its shareholders. On 27 June 1996, the Council was provided
by CET 21 with a copy of an agreement between CET 21 and GNTS (in
fact dated 23 May 1996). It was different to the drafts provided in May.
The arrangements between CET 21 and CNTS still did not satisfy the
concerns of the Council.

The new Media Law entered into force on 1 January 1996. A licence-
holder could request the Council to delete those conditions of its Licence

which did not concern control of the programming. On 2 January 1996,
CET 21 had applied for the removal of most of the conditions to its Li-
cence, including Conditions 17 and 18. If that were done, the Council
would no longer be able to request information on the arrangements
between CET 21 and CNTS, and thereby monitor those arrangements.

During 1996, the Council had also been investigating Premiéra TV and
Radio Alfa, discovering that the arrangements between the respective li-
cence-holders and their service providers were not as the Council
thought they should be.

VIII. Administrative Proceedings Against CNTS

At a meeting on 23 July 1996, the Council decided to commence admin-
istrative proceedings against the service providers involved in TV NOVA,
Premiéra TV and Radio Alfa.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-70-

238. By letter dated 23 July 1996, the Council advised CNTS that, as recom-
mended by the Institute in its Opinion, the Council was commencing ad-
ministrative proceedings against CNTS seeking the imposition of finan-
cial sanctions for unauthorised broadcasting in breach of the Media Law.
There were three grounds for such proceedings: (i) the incorrect descrip-
tion of the business activities of CNTS in the Commercial Register; (ii)
that CNTS rather than CET 21 had entered into contracts with Czech
Radiocommunications and OSA; and (iii) the lack of control by CET 21
over the disseminated programmes.

239. Article 20 (5) of the Media Law provides for fines between CZK 10,000
(approximately US $ 250) to CZK 2,000,000 (approximately
US $ 50,000). It is determined by the Council after a decision on liability
is reached. In fact, the Council’s intention was not to impose a fine, be-
cause that would not solve the problem, but to ensure that the relation-
ship between the licence-holder and the service provider was corrected.

240. It was not relevant to the Council whether the service provider (of
TV NOVA, Premiéra TV or Radio Alfa) was owned or controlled by a for-
eign entity. It was concerned only with the relationship between the
broadcaster and the service provider. Its key concern was that the attrib-
utes of the licence-holder were not transferred to the unlicensed service
provider. In fact, Premiéra TV a.s. which was a service provider similar to
ENTS, had no foreign ownership (as far as the Council was aware).

IX. CME Takes Secret Control of CET 21

241. About this time in 1996, no doubt aware that the arrangements between
CET 21 and CNTS violated the Media Law and would have to be
changed, CME secretly sought to acquire control of CET 21. CME pro-
vided a loan to Dr. Zelezny of US $4.7 million to enable him to buy an
additional 43 % stake in CET 21 (from four of the original five sharehold-
ers) thus increasing his holding from 17 % to 60 % which he did. The
loan agreement, dated 1 August 1996, provided that Dr. Zelezny would
exercise his voting rights only as directed by CME. The secret control by
CME of CET 21 was in clear breach of the requirements of the Media
Law and the Licence. The Council was not informed either of Dr. Zel-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

242.

-71-

ezny's acquisition of a controlling interest in the licence-holder, or of the
terms of the loan agreement giving voting control over CET 21 to CME.
Condition 17 of the Licence required the Council's prior approval of both
arrangements.

Upon discovering in late 1996 the Loan Agreement between CME and
Dr. Zelezny, the Council initiated a meeting with CET 21 and Dr. Zelezny
in order to find out more about the loan agreement. Dr. Zelezny assured
the Council that the Agreement was not going to be fulfilled. In fact, as
appears from an Amendment to the Loan Agreement, dated
11 March 1997, the Conditions of the original Loan Agreement had been
fulfilled and Dr. Zelezny was released from the obligation to repay the
loan.

X. Change of Memorandum of Association of CNTS and Service Agree-

243.

244.

ment

By letter dated 4 October 1996, CNTS and CET 21 made a joint pro-
posal to the Council involving a sequence of several steps which it
hoped would resolve the Council’s concerns over the CET 21/CNTS re-
lationship. CNTS and CET 21 asked that the proposal be taken as “an
expression of our goodwill, openness to discussion, and forthcoming at-
titude.” CET 21/CNTS offered, inter alia: to submit to the Council for their
information a new business agreement between CET 21 and CNTS; that
CNTS would conclude in the name of CET 21 agreements with Czech
Radiocommunications and agencies representing authors and perform-
ing artists (i.e. OSA and Intergram); to change the description of CNTS’s
business activities in the commercial register; and to submit for approval
by CNTS’s General Assembly a change to Article 1.4.1 of its Memoran-
dum of Association whereby CET 21 contributed the Licence on an ex-
clusive basis. CNTS and CET 21 also sought the cancellation of Condi-
tion 17 of the Licence. These proposals were in principle agreeable to
the Council.

CENTS provided the Council with a copy of an agreement between
CET 21 and CNTS, dated 4 October 1996 which was said to govern the
relationship between them.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

245.

246.

247.

248.

249.

-72-

In November 1996, the MOA of CNTS was amended to read that
CET 21:

“contributes to [CNTS] unconditionally, irrevocably and on an ex-
clusive basis, the right to use, make a subject of [CNTS’S] benefit
and maintain, know how related to the Licence, its maintenance
and protection”.

In December 1996, Condition 17 was removed with legal effect from
February 1997.

In February 1997, the change of business activities of CNTS was regis-
tered with the Commercial Register. CNTS deleted ‘nation-wide televi-
sion broadcasting pursuant to Licence no. 001/1993' from its activities.

On 15 May 1997, the investigation by the State Prosecution Office which
had commenced in April 1996, was stopped.

In May 1997, the 4 October 1996 agreement between CET 21 and
CNTS was superseded by a further agreement dated 21 May 1997
(which was stated to reflect the changes in the Commercial Register). An
Addendum to that Agreement was also agreed on the same date. These
became known as the “Services Agreement” or “Co-operation Agree-
ment”. This new agreement provided:

“The patties confirm that the holder of Licence 001/1993 and op-
erator of television broadcasting with the Licence under Act
no. 468/1991 Co/l., as amended, is CET 21 and that the Licence
is non-transferable. [Art. |]

The parties have agreed that from prior agreements CNTS has
authorization to arrange, under this agreement, services for tele-
vision broadcasting which is operated on the basis of the licence
issued to CET 21 and that CNTS is authorized fo keep an agreed
profit from this activity. [Art. 2 (l)]

ENTS shall conduct the activity stated in para. 1 in accordance
with generally binding legal regulations, as well as with the con-
tent of the Licence whose holder is CET 21. [Art. 2 (3))]

if broadcasting on TV NOVA violates obligations to which CET 21,
as the licence-holder and broadcasting operator, is bound by law
or the Licence, CET 21 is authorized to interfere with program-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

250.

251.

252.

253.

254.

256.

- 73 -

ming through persons named by the general assembly of CET 21
and whose names CET 21 will announce to the company CNTS
immediate/y after their appointment [Art. 5]”

Also during this period, CET 21 concluded agreements with Czech Ra-
diocommunications, OSA and Intergram.

The formal arrangements between CET 21, CME and CNTS were now
considered to comply with the Media Law. Accordingly, the Council
stopped the administrative proceedings by its Decision dated 16 Sep-
tember 1997.

Premiéra TV and Radio Alfa eventually made similar changes to their
arrangements and the administrative proceedings against their respec-
tive service providers stopped on 14 December 1998.

XI. The Media Council did not reverse its Position

The Council did not abruptly reverse its position or repudiate the ar-
rangement it had officially approved or force CNTS to surrender the ex-
clusive right to the use of the Licence.

The Council became concerned that there had been a de facto transfer
of the Licence to CNTS in violation of the Media Law. Such violation
could not and was not approved by the Media Council. When it discov-
ered the violation, it first held negotiations with CET 21 and CNTS in an
attempt to persuade them to change their arrangements. When this was
unsuccessful, the Council commenced administrative proceedings
against CNTS for unlawful broadcasting. Similar proceedings were
commenced against the service providers to Premiéra TV and
Radio Alfa. CET 21 and GNTS subsequently proposed changes to their
arrangements and relationship which appeared to comply with the Media
Law.

The activities of CNTS were in violation of the Media Law. They had
never been approved by the Council. They did not “sudden/y become
objectionable”. The Council had been concerned for many months that
there may have been unlawful broadcasting by CNTS, and had raised its

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

256.

257.

258.

259.

260.

-74-

concerns with CET 21 and CNTS. The relevant legislative provisions
were those in the original Media Law which forbade a transfer of the Li-
cence. Political factors did not motivate the Council.

The Council did receive an Opinion from the Institute, not from Dr. Barta

in his individual capacity. Dr. Jan Barta was the head of the public law
Section at the Institute and thus had to issue legal opinions on Institute
letterhead on behalf of the Institute. The Institute’s letter dated 13 August
1996 relied on by CME does not support its assertion that the institute
disowned the Opinions of Dr. Barla. The letter addressed to Dr. Zelezny
dated 13 August 1996 was not the Institute’s “only rea/ opinion’.

XII. The Media Council did not Compel CNTS to Alter the MOA

The Council did not “force” CNTS and CET 21 to amend the Memoran-
dum of Association. CNTS and CET 21 no doubt ‘capitulated’ because
they recognised that their implementation of the Licence did, in fact, vio-
late the Media Law. The Council did not insist that CNTS “could not be
involved in broadcasting” but rather, the Council insisted that CNTS

could not be the de facto licence-holder.

The contractual changes were not ‘coerced’ by the Council. This asser-
tion is contradicted by CNTS’s pleadings in the recent Czech Court pro-
ceedings against CET 21 in which GNTS relied on the validity of, inter
alia, the amended Memorandum of Association and the Service Agree-
ment dated 21 May 1997.

The Czech Republic relies on the “Reasoning” which is included in the
“Decision” of the Council dated 16 September 1997. The Czech Republic
is not responsible for the consequences of changes to commercial ar-
rangements required to be made by the parties thereto in order to com-
ply with Czech law.

GENTS could have contested the Council's interpretation of the Media
Law through the administrative proceedings or through the Czech courts.
Alternatively, it could amend the business arrangements with CET 21
and have the proceedings dropped. It chose voluntarily to amend the
business arrangements, and has since relied in the Czech courts upon

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

261.

262.

263.

264.

-75-

those amended agreements as a valid expression of the clear will of
CNTS and CET 21.

XIll. March 15,1999 Letter

In response to a request by CET 21, the Council met with Dr. Zelezny on
2 March 1999 which was in compliance with a licence-holder’s right to
request a meeting with the Council in order to discuss issues relating to
its Licence. They discussed a number of matters relating to CET 21, in-
cluding its relationship with its service provider.

The Council’s policy in connection with the arrangements between Ili-
cence-holders and service providers was discussed. This was a topic of
public debate. The Council had expressed its views at meetings of a
special Media Panel which had been set up by a number of broadcasters

to discuss a new Media Law then being drafted by the Ministry of Cul-

ture. Dr. Zelezny and his lawyer had attended most of those meetings. It

was a matter of public record that the Council did not favour exclusive

relationships between licence-holders and service providers because

that might lead to a de facto transfer of the Licence. That policy was

based on its experience with TV NOVA, Premiéra TV and Radio Alfa.

The next day (3 March), Dr. Zelezny wrote to the Council, setting out his
summary of the Council's policy and asking for confirmation. The Council
replied by letter dated 15 March 1999. Dr. Zelezny’s summary was gen-
erally an accurate summary of the Council's policy, as expressed at the
2 March meeting and elsewhere. The Council wrote a similar letter to at
least one other licence-holder.

This letter represented the Council's policy and applied to all licence-
holders. However, since the Council no longer had the power to impose
conditions through which it could monitor the arrangements between the
licence-holder and its service provider(s), the Council could not enforce
this policy.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

265.

266.

267.

268.

-76-
XIV. The Dispute Between CET 21 and CNTS

In or about October 1998, CET 21 had informed CNTS that activities
performed by CNTS would in future be performed by a company called
AQS a.s. The effect of this on the relations between GNTS and Dr. Zel-

ezny is not known, but on 19 April 1999, CME dismissed Dr. Zelezny

from his position as General Manager of CNTS. Then on 5 August 1999,
CET 21 withdrew from the Services Agreement (of 21 May 1997), on the
ground that GNTS’s failure to provide daily broadcasting schedules con-
stituted a material breach of contract, and stopped using the services of
CNTS.

On 9 August 1999, CNTS commenced proceedings against CET 21 in
the Regional Commercial Court in Prague. The Court decided:

[CET 21] is obligated to procure all services for television broad-
casting performed on the basis of Licence No. 001/1993 for the
operation of a full-coverage television broadcasting station
granted to him by the Council exclusively through [CNTS], and by
means of services provided by [CNTS], in accordance with the
terms and conditions of the [Services Contract] concluded be-
tween [CNTS] and [CET 21] on 5/21/1997, ...“.

The Court stated that the arrangements between CET 21 and CNTS had
been voluntarily amended.

The Services Agreement was not "part of the package of contractual
changes coerced by the Media Council”. On the contrary, CNTS relied

upon the Services Agreement as the basis of its claim against CET 21.

The Regional Commercial Court recorded that CNTS had submitted that
‘[tlhe change in the definition of the contribution to the capital stock was

not understood by [CNTS] and [CET 21] as a change altering their legal
relationship, but only as a change meeting the requirements of the
Council and resulting in staying the administrative proceedings.” The

Court noted that, "fajecording to an expert opinion [of CNTS] valuating
this non-monetary contribution [of the Licence know-how], the value of
this contribution remain unchanged. "

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

269.

270.

271.

272.

273.

-77-

The Court stated that CET 21 was not entitled to withdraw from the
Services Agreement. The judgment was reversed by the Court of Ap-
peal.

The proceedings before the Prague Regional Commercial Court deprive
this Tribunal of jurisdiction. CME must be assumed to have elected to
pursue CNTS’s commercial rights before the Czech courts. CME cannot
refer that same dispute to arbitration under the Treaty. Moreover, the
pleadings and judgment in those proceedings confirm that the Czech
Republic is not responsible for any harm which CME may have suffered
to its alleged investment.

XV. The alleged Destruction of Claimant’s Investment

The Council is not responsible for the actions of private parties in their
dealings with their contractual partners. The steps taken by Dr. Zelezny
and CET 21 were not taken with the Council’s “connivance and assis-
tance’.

The Czech Republic cannot comment on the dealings between
Dr. Zelezny and CNTS/CME. Ary action taken by Dr. Zelezny in relation
to GNTS/CME is part of their private commercial dispute. It is irrelevant
to the Czech Republic’s obligations under the Treaty. The Council did not
threaten further action. The dispute escalating between Dr. Zelezny and
CME has led to any “investment” by CME being harmed.

The Council did not provide “active assistance to Dr. Ze/ezny in his cam-
paign to eliminate CNTS’s exclusive position respecting CET 21”. All ac-

tions of the Council, including responding to Dr. Zelezny’s request in his
letter of 3 March 1999, were carried out in fulfilment of its role of broad-

casting regulator. The Czech Republic cannot comment on Dr. Zelezny's

motivations or intentions in writing to the Council.

In the Council's letter of 15 March 1999 to Dr. Zelezny, the Council reit-
erated its policy concerning the relationship between licence-holders and
service providers. That policy had been expressed publicly in meetings
of the Media Panel and in its submissions to the Ministry of Culture on

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

274.

275.

276.

-78 -

the proposed new Media Law. The Council wrote a similar letter to at
least one other licence-holder.

The Council’s policy in early 1999 as reflected in its letter of
15 March 1999 was not in conflict with its previous practice. The Coun-
cil’s policy was consistently not to favour exclusive relationships between
licence-holders and service providers because that might lead to a de
facto transfer of the Licence. The Council’s experience with TV NOVA,
Premiéra TV and Radio Alfa was evidence that this might happen. How-
ever, the Council had no power to intervene unless a violation of the Me-
dia Law occurred.

The 15 March 1999 letter did not go beyond the scope of the Council's
authority under the Council Act. The Council, as broadcasting regulator,
was not only entitled to, but obliged to, respond to queries from licence-
holders. The Council was not issuing an ex parte declaration in support
of one party to a dispute.

The Council did not play a negative role in the events leading to the es-
trangement of Dr. Zelezny/CET 21 and Mr. Lauder/CNTS/CME. The
Council was to monitor and enforce the Media Law, as it was empow-
ered and obliged to do under Czech law.

XVI. The Media Council did not Fail to Protect Claimant’s Investment

277.

278.

The Council does not have the power to police and enforce private
commercial contracts. Nor can it dictate to a licence-holder whom it
should choose as a service provider.

The Council and other organs of the Czech Republic did not fail to re-
spond as appropriate to complaints made by CNTS and CME. The
Council, inter alia, reported to the Permanent Commission for Media of
the House of Deputies of Parliament concerning the dispute between
Dr. Zelezny and CNTS, and wrote to GNTS and CET 21 (letters dated
26 July and 29 July 1999).

279. The actions of CET 21 and Dr. Zelezny of which CNTS had complained

in its letters in June, July and August 1999 to the Council were part of a

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

280.

XVIL.

281.

282.

283.

284.

285.

-79-

commercial dispute that should be resolved by the parties concerned,
with resort to the courts, if necessary.

The Council is not responsible in any way for the dispute between
CET 21 and CNTS. It did not ignite the dispute, ignore its own regulatory
obligations, or refuse to comply with its obligations under the Treaty.

The Czech Republic’s Alleged Additional Continuing Violations of
the Treaty

The Czech Republic did not continue to breach its obligations under the
Treaty since the instigation of this arbitration. It did not favour the Czech
investors in CET 21. The Council has not ‘affirmatively assisted
Dr. Zelezny in evading the effectiveness of orders of an ICC arbitral tri-
bunal". The Czech Republic has enacted legislation relating to the rec-
ognition and enforcement of arbitral awards in accordance with its obli-
gations under the New York Convention.

The Council considered the request to increase the share capital of
CET 21 and to transfer certain shares. The Council concluded that there
was no legal obstacle preventing the transactions and therefore gave its
approval.

The Czech Republic did not disregard criminal wrongdoing by
Dr. Zelezny directed against CME’s investment. Respective complaints
have been properly investigated by the Czech police authorities.

G.
The Respondent’s Argument

I The Interpretation of the Treaty and Burden of Proof

The Treaty must be interpreted according to the ordinary rules of treaty
interpretation as established by State practice and as codified in Arti-
cle 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (1969).

In respect to the breach of the Treaty as alleged, the burden of proof is
on the Claimant to demonstrate that both the breach and the responsibil-
ity of the Czech State is engaged: a ‘[pjarty having the burden of proof

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

286.

287.

288.

289.

290.

- 80-

must not only bring evidence in support of his allegations, but must also
convince the Tribunal of their truth, lest they be disregarded for want, or
insufficiency, of proof".

Il. The Governing Law

Article 6 of the Treaty provides:

“The arbitral tribunal shall decide on the basis of the law, taking
into account in particular though not exclusively:
the law in force of the Contracting Party concerned;
the provisions of this Agreement, and other relevant
Agreements between the Contracting Parties;
the provisions of special agreements relating to the invest-
ment;
the general principles of international law.”

The Respondent's view is that Czech law should be given primacy in
determining whether or not the Czech Republic has breached its obliga-
tions under the Treaty.

lll. The Tribunal Lacks Jurisdiction

The Tribunal has jurisdiction in respect of "All disputes between one
Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party con-
cerning an investment of the latter” (Art. 8).

“Investment” is defined as “every kind of asset invested either directly or
through an investor of a third State . . ." (Art. 1 (a)).

The Tribunal lacks jurisdiction, on the grounds that:

0) CME has failed to establish that it has an asset invested in the
Czech Republic;

(ii) CME’s claim is not an investment dispute under the Treaty; and

(iii) CME may not concurrently pursue the same remedies in different
fora.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

291.

292.

293.

294.

295.

296.

297.

- 81-

1. CME has Failed to Establish that It has an Asset Invested in
the Czech Republic

The Claimant’s assertion of a claim under the Treaty is unclear and un-
particularized. CME is not entitled to bring a claim under the Treaty.

CME fails to identify the “investment” which it alleges gives rise to rights
under the Treaty. CME failed to identify, whether CME’s “investment” is
its alleged shareholding in CNTS or some contractual right allegedly en-
joyed by CNTS or some right conferred on CEDC.

Further, CME fails to establish that it has assumed the rights and obliga-
tions of CEDC.

2. CME’s Claim is Not an Investment Dispute under the Treaty

CME’S claim demonstrates a fundamental misunderstanding of the pur-
pose and ambit of the Treaty (and, indeed, BITs in general). The Czech
Republic considers that the attempt to use the dispute settlement provi-
sions of the Treaty in order to settle private disputes in the manner
sought by CME distorts the Treaty and if successful would represent a
grave threat to the stability of the entire network of BITs.

This is a private commercial dispute and not an investor-host State dis-
pute.

CME seeks to utilise the Treaty regime as an alternative or additional
means for the resolution of a dispute arising from a falling out between
two business partners, CME/ GNTS and Dr. Zelezny/CET 21. The con-
tractual rights and legal rights referred to are exclusively those made
between GNTS or CME and CET 21 or Dr. Zelezny. The Czech Republic
is a party to none of them.

It is the contractual arrangements between CET 21 and CNTS, and not
the Licence, upon which the claimed exclusivity that CME seeks to se-
cure in these proceedings is based. The Council did not impose the
claimed exclusivity arrangement, and had no power to do so. The grant
of the Licence signified no more than that the Council considered, on the
basis of the information then available to it, that CET 21 was a proper re-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

298.

299.

300.

-82-

cipient of the Licence. The Council attached conditions to the Licence
that required CET 21 to advise the Council of the business arrangements
it entered into with CEDC and the Czech Savings Bank but the Council
did not have the power, nor did it, approve or endorse those arrange-
ments.

The dispute between Mr. Lauder (and his companies including CME) and
Dr. Zelezny (and his companies) has already been, and is still being,
pursued through various courts and arbitral tribunals. The Czech Repub-
lic is not a party to that dispute, and it takes no position on the merits of
the arguments advanced on either side in the continuing litigation (save
as articulated in judgments of the Czech courts). But it is clear from
CME’s own Statement of Claim that Mr. Lauder’s claim against the
Czech Republic relates to the withdrawal by Dr. Zelezny and his compa-
nies from various contractual arrangements to which the State was not a
party. The Prague Commercial Court has upheld CNTS’s claim that
Dr. Zelezny/CET 21 wrongly withdrew from those arrangements. It is
therefore Dr. Zelezny / CET 21 that has allegedly injured CME’s interests
within the Czech Republic. The Czech Republic is not responsible for the
actions of private parties.

In the relief originally sought, CME asked the Tribunal to restore the ex-

clusivity of the relationship between CNTS and CET 21. CME dropped

this request during the proceedings. The relationship of exclusivity is a
contractual one for which the parties must bargain and agree, within the

limits of the law, and which they must enforce using the procedures of
the law. The courts may uphold and enforce such contractual relation-
ships (and it is to the courts which CNTS has turned to obtain such re-
lief). But contractual relationships between a licence-holder and service
provider(s) cannot be imposed or enforced via the licensing procedures
of the Czech Republic.

This is not a dispute concerning the treatment by the Czech Republic of
an investment: it is a dispute concerning an alleged breach of a commer-
cial contract made by private parties. That dispute should be settled ei-
ther according to procedures agreed by the parties (such as arbitration),
or through courts in the Czech Republic or some other State within the
jurisdiction of whose courts the dispute falls. Treaty procedures were not
intended to be used in these circumstances. If they were allowed to be
so used, every commercial dispute involving a foreign investor could be

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

301.

302.

303.

304.

-83-

elevated to the level of a dispute within the Treaty procedures. That is
plainly not the intention of the Treaty.

CME’s claim must be dismissed on grounds that CME’s claim is not an
investment dispute within the scope of the Treaty.

3. CME May Not Concurrently Pursue the Same Remedies in Differ-
ent Fora

It is an abuse of the Bilateral Investment Treaty regime for Mr. Lauder,
who purportedly controls CME, and, subsequently, CME to bring virtually
identical claims under two separate treaties. The Czech Republic does
not consider it appropriate that claims brought by different claimants un-
der separate Treaties should be consolidated and the Czech Republic
asserts the right that each action be determined independently and
promptly.

As recognized by CME in its Statement of Claim, the action commenced

by Mr. Lauder “may not provide the full relief to which CME is entitled be-

cause it is brought on behalf of only a single controlling ultimate share-
holder of CME . . . Only this Tribunal can declare that the Czech Republic
has breached its Treaty obligations to [CME] and can provide full relief to
[CME] for those breaches”. In these circumstances, it is an abuse for Mr.

Lauder to pursue his claim under the US Treaty and the Czech Republic
is fully entitled to insist that CME make good its claim under the Dutch
Treaty in separate proceedings.

The dispute between CME/CNTS and Dr. Zelezny/CET 21 has been
conducted as a private dispute. Several actions, in courts and arbitral tri-
bunals, have according to CME itself, already been instituted, including
one ICC arbitration and ten law suits at the Regional Commercial Court
in Prague.

In particular, CNTS has sought a ruling from the Czech Court upholding
its claim to exclusivity under the Services Agreement made with CET 21.
That is essentially the same remedy as is sought in the present pro-
ceedings. Thus, CME/CNTS has already taken the present dispute be-
fore a competent court. The Regional Commercial Court has ruled in
CME/CNTS’s favour and upheld the claim to exclusivity in relations be-
tween CNTS and CET 21, precisely in terms that “restore the initial eco-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

305.

306.

307.

308.

309.

- 84-

nomic and legal underpinnings of [CME’s] investment’, as those under-
pinnings were set out in the Services Agreement. The Prague Court of
Appeal meanwhile reversed the judgment. The lawsuit is pending at the
Czech Supreme Court. That Services Agreement was said by GNTS it-
self to be “the expression of a clear will of both contractual parties to
determine the mutual relationship on an exclusive basis” between them.
CME/CNTS is seeking at the Prague Civil Courts the remedy that it
seeks from this Tribunal. Seeking the same remedy again is a plain
abuse of process; and it conflicts with the spirit, if not with the letter, of
the res judicata principle.

The Regional Commercial Court found that CET 21 had acted in breach
of the contract, and whatever losses might have been suffered by CNTS
clearly derive from GNTS’s departure from the exclusivity arrangement.
There is no suggestion, in the present claim or elsewhere, that there is
any compensable loss that is not attributable to the breakdown of the ex-
clusivity arrangement.

If a Claimant chooses to pursue a contractual remedy in the local courts
or private arbitral tribunals, he should not be allowed concurrently to pur-
sue a remedy under the Treaty.

The claims by investors under a BIT depend upon assertions that the
State has treated the investment in a manner incompatible with the
treaty. “The State” includes also the State’s courts. If an investor takes
the complaint of mistreatment before the State’s court, it cannot be de-
termined how “the State” has treated the investment until the State’s
courts have finally disposed of the case initiated by the investor. There
can be no complaint that “the State” has mistreated the investment until
the litigation has run its course.

An investor should not be allowed to switch to a treaty procedure which
has the result of depriving the other party to the proceedings in the local
court of the opportunity of arguing its case before the treaty tribunal.

The Tribunal is faced with the danger of incompatible and ostensibly “fi-
nal” decisions being made not only in the various Czech court proceed-
ings but also by another tribunal set up under the US Treaty and by the
ICC arbitral tribunal ruling between CME and Dr. Zelezny. This is pre-
cisely the prospect of disorder that the principle of lis alibi pendens is de-
signed to avert.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

310.

311.

312.

313.

314.

-85-

Therefore, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction, or in the alternative, CME’s
claim is inadmissible.

IV. CME Czech Republic B.V. has no claim in substance

CME invested in CNTS only after the broadcasting of TV NOVA com-
menced in February 1994. CME must have considered the commercial
risk of investing in CNTS as well as the legal framework in which this in-
vestment would be made, when it decided to acquire CEDC’s rights and
obligations in the Memorandum of Association to CME. This assignment
was not notified by the Council as required by Condition 17.

V. The Czech Republic’s Obligations under the Treaty

CME’s claim should be dismissed on grounds that its Statement of Claim
does not disclose a prima facie case that the Czech Republic has
breached the Treaty having regard in particular to Czech law.

Essentially, CME claims that a Czech public body having granted a li-
cence and had filed with it a contractual scheme which on its face did not
infringe the law, may not take action when implementation of the Licence
clearly does infringe the law. That proposition is patently incorrect, and
must be clearly rejected if the entire balance of international instruments
for the protection of foreign investment is to be maintained. The Czech
Republic owes duties to investors, foreign and domestic, other than CME
and Dr. Zelezny, and to the Czech people. The Czech Republic, like
other States, must have the power to enact laws and regulate industries,
such as broadcasting, pursuant to those laws, for the good order of the
State and its economy. The Treaty was not intended to remove that
power and does not remove that power.

The very core of the argument advanced by CME is fundamentally mis-
conceived, because it denies the right of States to regulate their own
economies, and to enact and to modify the laws, and to secure the

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

315.

316.

317.

318.

- 86-

proper application of the law. It is no exaggeration to say that CME’s ar-
gument involves a repudiation of the Rule of Law.

The facts show that the Council consistently applied the Media Law (in
particular Article 10 (2) which proscribes the transfer of a Licence) and
took action when the implementation of the Licence by CET 21 and
CNTS infringed the law. It took similar action against Premiéra TV and

Radio Alfa. Its position remains the same today: The transfer of a broad-
casting Licence to a service provider is contrary to the Media Law. The
Czech Republic has done no more than regulate its economy in a normal
and entirely proper way. The impact of that regulation upon private con-
tractual relations between investors is solely a matter for such investors.

The Czech Republic accepts its obligations under the Treaty.

1. The Obligation Not to Deprive Investors of Their Investments

The Treaty provides at Article 5 that “fnjeither Contracting Party shall
take any measures depriving, directly or indirectly, investors of the other
Contracting Party of their investments unless the following conditions are

complied with:

(a) The measures are taken in the public interest and under due pro-
cess of law;

(0) The measures are not discriminatory;

(c) The measures are accompanied by provision for the payment of
just compensation. "

In accordance with customary international law, the Treaty does not pro-
vide that the deprivation (or expropriation as it is often referred to) of in-
vestments is unlawful per se. Such deprivation is unlawful only if certain
conditions are not met. It is acknowledged that the Treaty includes both
“direct” and “indirect” forms of deprivation: however, no deprivation in
either form has taken place in this case. There has been no taking attrib-
utable to the State.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

319.

320.

321.

322.

323.

324.

-87-

Deprivation or expropriation clearly involves a “compulsory transfer of
property rights”. It is said to occur if a State interferes with property rights
“to such an extent that these rights are rendered so useless that they
must be deemed to have been expropriated”.

In the legal literature, it is said that, the essence of the matter is the dep-
rivation by State organs of a right of property either as such, or by per-
manent transfer of the power of management and control. State meas-
ures, prima facie a lawful exercise of powers of government, may affect
foreign interests considerably without amounting to expropriation. Bona
fide regulation must also be distinguished from expropriation or depriva-
tions of property.

The meaning of deprivation may be drawn from the Convention Estab-
lishing the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency. Article 11 (a) (ii)
defines that expropriation is not given by

“non-discriminatory measures of general application which gov-

ernments normally take for the purpose of regulating economic
activity in their territories. "

The Council’s actions do not fall within the definition of deprivation or ex-
propriation of investments.

The Czech Republic's involvement in this dispute was as follows: (i) the
Council issued a Licence to CET 21 in light of the information provided to
it; (ii) it reviewed compliance with the Media Law; (iii) the Council com-
menced administrative proceedings against CNTS on the basis of un-
lawful broadcasting in breach of the Media Law; (iv) it withdrew the ad-
ministrative proceedings in light of the amended arrangement between
CNTS and CET 21; (v) the jurisdiction of Czech courts have been in-
voked in respect of disputes arising out of the arrangements between
CNTS and CET 21.

In addition, a deprivation requires that there has been governmental in-
terference with a property right of CME. It is not enough for CME to say
that it is less well off than it thinks that it should be because CNTS
changed its arrangements with CET 21 at the insistence of the Council.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

325.

326.

327.

328.

- 88 -

The Respondent refers to the Permanent Court of International Justice

stated in the Oscar Chinn Case:
“The Court, though not failing to recognize the change that had
come over Mr. Chinn's financial position, a change which is said
to have led him to wind up his transport and ship-building busi-
nesses, is unable to see in his original position - which was char-
acterised by the possession of customers and the possibility of
making a profit - anything in the nature of a genuine vested right.
Favourable business conditions and good-will are transient cir-
cumstances, subject to inevitable changes. "

CME’s complaint is this. CME had an initial arrangement with CET 21

which, it says, gave CNTS the arrangements of an exclusive supplier to
CET 21. That arrangement was amended at the behest of the Council.
The amended arrangement, CME fears, does not give GNTS the rights
of an exclusive supplier. But what CME says it has lost is not property,
nor even rights under the initial or amended contracts. What CME says it
has lost is the measure by which the business advantage to it of the ini-
tial agreement exceeds that of the amended agreement. That is not a
property right. The law recognises and upholds rights created by con-
tract, but there is no legal concept of a separate property right to the
maintenance of a particular balance of commercial power.

The Council's actions have been the lawful exercise of the power of
Government, carried out as part of the regulation of economic activity in
the Czech Republic.

The Czech Republic has taken no property of CME, of GNTS, or of any
company owned or controlled by Mr. Lauder. The only property right
granted by the Czech Republic, the Licence issued to CET 21, remains
in the hands of CET 21 as it has done at all material times.

The Czech Republic did not agree, and could not agree, to CET 21

transferring the Licence to CNTS. The Czech Republic did not create or
confirm any rights for CNTS. GNTS’s rights, and CME’s alleged interests,
arose solely under contracts made with CET 21. The rights asserted by
CME in this case were created and defined by those contracts and were
necessarily constrained by Czech law: those rights could not amount to a

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

329.

330.

331.

332.

333.

-89-

transfer of the Licence to CNTS. CNTS is correct to look to CET 21,
rather than the State, as the source of any remedy for unlawful injury to
its rights.

The authorities cited by CME do not support the case it has advanced.
The Czech Republic denies that it had any intention of injuring CME or
its investment.

There is no a priori limit on the kind of State measure or action that may
amount to deprivation or expropriation. CME has, however, entirely failed
to explain why it considers that the actions of the Czech Republic do so.

Although in some circumstances a coerced capitulation may constitute
an expropriation, a review of the authorities indicates that there is no
solid or wide consensus on coercion outside of the cases dealing with
physical force.

Far from maintaining that CNTSwas coerced into the making of a new

agreement with CET 21 in 1997, in the proceedings in the Prague Com-

mercial Court, CNTS stated, “that the Services Agreement as we// as the
agreements previously concluded between [CNTS] and [CET 21] on
6/2/1994, 5/23/1996 and 10/4/1996 determining the rights and obliga-
tions relating to operating the television broadcasting facilities, have al-
ways been the expression of a c/ear will of both contractual parties to
determine the mutual relationship on an exclusive basis. "

CENTS makes no suggestion that the Services Agreement, described in
CME’s Statement of Claim as "part of the package of contractual
changes coerced by the Media Council," was coerced or was invalid. On

the contrary, it was used as the basis of CNTS’s claim; and the Regional

Commercial Court upheld its validity (meanwhile reversed by the Court of
Appeal).

CME has failed to establish a prima facie case of deprivation or expro-
priation.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

- 90 -

334. The Respondent's position is that expropriation has not occurred due to
the fact that

(1) the Claimant invested in CNTS after the 1996 changes had been
made; therefore, it cannot have lost the 1993 safety net by expro-
priation;

(2) it is a matter of pure speculation, whether the 1996 safety net was
materially better or more effective than the 1993 safety net;

(3) that, in any event, the 1996 changes were voluntarily, if reluc-
tantly, made by CNTS; and

(4) that the institution of the 1996 administrative proceedings could
not, in the absence of proof of abuse of power or mala fides, or
some such defect, amount to coercion. In essence, it is not estab-
lished that anything was taken from the Claimant or that the Re-
spondent forced the Claimant to give anything up.

2. The Obligation of Fair and Equitable Treatment

335. The Treaty provides that investments shall be accorded fair and equita-
ble treatment (Art. 3 (1)). The support given for this principle in its Pre-
amble provides:

“Recognising that agreement upon the treatment to be accorded
to such investments will stimulate the flow of capital and technol-

ogy and economic development of the Contracting Parties and
that fair and equitable treatment is desirable”.

336. There is no precise definition of the requirement contained in Article 3 (1)
of the Treaty to provide investments with “fair and equitable treatment".
What is fair and equitable is an issue to be interpreted on the facts in
each individual case.

337. CME does not point to the facts relied upon in order to support the alle-
gation that this obligation has been breached. No case is made out to
which the Czech Republic can respond.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

338.

339.

340.

341.

342.

343.

344.

-91-

It is denied that the Czech Republic treated CME’s alleged interests less
than fairly and equitably. The Media Law has been applied according to
its terms. Unlawful broadcasting by CNTS has been treated in the same
way as that by other service providers, in particular Premiéra TV and
Radio Alfa. Due process has been respected.

CME has failed to establish a prima facie case that the Czech Republic
breached its obligation of fair and equitable treatment.

In particular in respect to the March 15, 1999 letter addressed by the
Media Council to Dr. Zelezny, the Czech republic is of the opinion that
there is no unfair or non-equitable treatment. The Council could not ig-
nore Dr. Zelerny’s request for giving guidance and had to consider
CET 21's right to be heard. Further, the letter was addressed to
TV NOVA, being also represented by Dr. Zelezny at that time. The letter
itself had no legal effect. No proceedings were connected to it. The Me-
dia Council explained its general policy.

Also, the 1996 administrative proceedings did not breach the obligation
on fair and equitable treatment as other broadcasters were treated in the

same way. Until 1996, both, CET 21 and CNTS were joined in a con-

tinuing duty to comply with the terms of the Media Law, and that included

a duty not to effect a de facto transfer of the Licence. CNTS appeared to

be breaking that obligation. The Media Council simply tried to bring it
back into line with the law.

3. The Obligation Not to Engage in Unreasonable and Dis-
criminatory Treatment

The Treaty provides that a State party shall not “impair, by unreasonable
or discriminatory measures, the operation, management, maintenance,
use, enjoyment or disposal“ of investments (Art. 3 (1)).

The term “unreasonable” is not defined in the Treaty. It is insufficient to
show discrimination; unreasonable conduct must also be demonstrated.
In any event, the actions of the Czech Republic have been neither un-
reasonable nor discriminatory.

CME’s claim fails at two levels.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

345.

346.

347.

346.

349.

350.

-92-

First, CME does not explain why it considers that the Czech Republic
behaved unlawfully. In the view of the Czech Republic, the Council acted
at all times in conformity with Czech law. The Czech Republic notes that
CME did not seek to raise in the Czech courts at the time of the adminis-
trative proceedings, or subsequently, arguments that the Council had
violated Czech law. Second, CME does not explain what unreasonable-
ness it finds in the allegedly unlawful conduct of the Council.

The term “discriminatory” is not of itself defined in the Treaty.

The complete failure to indicate what facts are alleged to amount to dis-
crimination prevents a reasoned response by the Czech Republic. The
Czech Republic notes, that it cannot be seriously suggested that admin-
istrative proceedings to stop unlicensed broadcasting lacked any legal
basis in Czech law or bona fide governmental purpose. It should also be
noted that CNTS and CET 21 were treated in accordance with the Media
Law, and in the same manner as Premiéra TV and Radio Alfa were
treated in similar proceedings at the same time.

CME’s assertion that the requirement that the licence-holder had to be
Czech is a violation of the Treaty’s prohibition against discrimination, is
wrong, It is routine in international practice that foreign investors invest in
the State through the medium of a locally incorporated company, which
is a regulation stipulating how foreign investment is to be organized.

CME’s Statement of Claim refrains from any explaining as to why the
Council’s reconsideration of the initial arrangement and agreement with
CNTS and CET 21 of the amended arrangement might be thought un-
reasonable and discriminatory.

CME has failed to establish a prima facie case that the Czech Republic
breached its obligation not to engage in unreasonable and discriminatory
treatment.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

351.

352.

353.

354.

355.

-93-

4. The Obligation of Full Security and Protection

The Treaty provides that “each Contracting Party shall accord to such
investments full security and profection” (Art. 3 (2)).

The phrase “full security and profecfion” has received attention in both
arbitral and judicial bodies. The cases indicate that CME must demon-
strate both that the standard contained in the phrase “full security and
protection” has been breached; and that the breach is the result of the
actions of the Czech Republic.

The requirement to provide constant or full security and protection can-

not be construed as the giving of a warranty that property shall never in

any circumstances be occupied or disturbed. Similarly an obligation to

provide the nationals of the other Contracting State to a BIT with “full
protection and security” is not an absolute obligation in the sense that
any violation thereof creates automatically a ‘strict liability’ on behalf of
the host State. A government is only obliged to provide protection which

is reasonable in the circumstances.

CME asserts a failure to provide full security and protection for its in-
vestment. CME is arguing that it was the responsibility of the Czech
authorities to maintain and enforce the contractual arrangements into
which CNTS entered with CET 21. That is absurd. The obligation of “full
security and protection” is an obligation of due diligence relating to the
activities of the State. No Czech authority was a party to the contracts
between CNTS and CET 21. It was for CNTS to enforce its rights under
those contracts, as it is doing through the Czech courts.

Also, CME’s argument that the alleged change of position of the Council
in 1996 deprived CNTS of benefits that it had enjoyed by virtue of the
alleged previous position of the Council in 1993, is untenable. The
Council did not change its position between 1993 and 1996. At all times
the Council has taken the view that the Media Law forbids the transfer of
licences, and has sought to apply that law. What changed was the na-
ture of the relationship between CET 21 and GNTS. On the basis of facts

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-94-

discovered in 1994 - 1996, the Council reacted so as to ensure that
CET 21 and CNTS complied with Czech law.

356. CME contradicts the position that CNTS has taken in its successful liti-
gation in the Czech courts. It cannot be argued that investors have any
tight to suppose that positions taken by State authorities and provisions
of State law are forever unalterable. Nor can it be argued that every
regulatory change made by a State in accordance with its laws must be
accompanied by compensatory payments to anyone whose profits are
adversely altered by the change. There can be no legitimate expectation
that provisions and laws become frozen the minute that they touch the
interests of a foreign investor.

357. CME fails to identify any factual circumstances that could support its al-
legation that the Czech Republic failed to provide full security and pro-
tection for its investment, or that the Czech Republic breached the obli-
gations of full security and protection.

358. Further, it should be noted that the Media Council simply had no com-
petence to act outside administrative proceedings. Condition No. 17 of
the Licence was to be lifted under the new Media Law as of Janu-
ary 1, 1996; the Media Council had no influence any more on the rela-
tionship between CET 21 and GNTS. There was and is full protection
and security for CNTS’s legal rights available under the Czech legal
system provided by Czech courts.

5. The Obligation of Treatment in Accordance with Standards of In-
ternational Law

359. The Treaty provides that if “obligations under international law . . . enti-
tling investments by investors . . . to a treatment more favourable than is
provided for by the present Agreement, such rules shall to the extent that
they are more favourable prevail over the present Agreement,”
(Art. 3 (5)).

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-95-

360. CME has quoted from the decision in the International Court of Justice in
the Barcelona Traction Case to affirm that "[wjhen a State admits into its
territory foreign investments, . . .it is bound to extend to them the protec-
tion of the law and assumes obligations concerning the treatment to be
afforded them.” The judgment in the Barcelona Traction Case continues
with the sentence, “These obligations, however, are neither absolute or
unqualified.” The Court's comment was made in the quite different con-
text of a State’s right to provide diplomatic protection to shareholders of
entities incorporated in a third State. The Court did not set up absolute
standards for treatment of foreign investment.

361. No argument is presented to indicate why it is thought that the Czech
Republic has violated its obligations to treat CME in accordance with
general international law. CME mentions this obligation, but it is not pos-
sible to discern what, if any, argument CME seeks to make in relation to
it. This obligation has not been breached.

VI. The Czech Republic has not Violated its Treaty Obligations

1. The Czech Republic is Responsible for the Media Council’s Conduct

362. The Czech Republic accepts responsibility for the actions of the Council
for the purposes of this case. The Czech Republic does not accept the
characterisation of the Council activities made by CME, and denies any
breach of the Treaty by reason of the Council’s actions.

2. The Council’s Conduct did not Violate the Czech Republic’s Treaty Ob-
ligations

363. CME must demonstrate that the State has acted in breach of its Treaty
obligations, i.e. unlawfully, so as to harm its “investment”. Here, nothing
that the State has done, through the Council or the Institute or the courts,
can be described as unlawful or otherwise a breach of the Treaty. On the
contrary, the Council has sought to uphold the law by ensuring that the
implementation of the Licence was in accordance with the Media Law;
and that it was the licensee, CET 21, not the unlicensed CNTS which
controlled broadcasting by TV NOVA.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

364.

365.

366.

367.

368.

-96-

The administration of the law or insistence upon compliance with the law
cannot be described as “unreasonable” or “discriminatory” conduct by
the Council. Neither can they be characterised as actions “tantamount to
deprivation” by the Czech Republic.

CME knew the Media Law from the start of its involvement in the Czech
Republic. CME cannot complain about the consequences of its acting
unlawfully. CME’s own case and the facts known to the Council suggest
that CME was fully aware of the legal conditions under which television
broadcasting was licensed; and sought by various means to ensure its
control over the Licence despite the provisions of the Media Law and of
the Licence itself.

CME abandoned its attempts to circumvent the Media Law in 1997,
when CNTS voluntarily agreed new contractual terms with CET 21. Sub-
sequent events have shown that CME’s loss of control of the Licence

and TV NOVA may have harmed its investment in CNTS. But this cannot
be attributed to the Czech Republic.

CME now claims that the actions of the Council in addressing the ways
in which CET 21 and CNTS were implementing the Licence, and in
bringing administrative proceedings against CNTS for unlawful broad-
casting in 1996, constitutes an unlawful deprivation and otherwise
breaches the obligations of the Czech Republic under the Treaty. This
ignores the fact that the response of CET 21 and GNTS was voluntarily
to agree between themselves to change their relationship so as to com-
ply with the law. The Media Law, in common with the laws and proce-
dures of many other nations, licences scarce broadcast spectrum on the
basis of prudential and public interest considerations; and does not per-
mit unlicensed broadcasting. Under no circumstances can it be held that
the conduct of the Council gave rise to any breach by the Czech Repub-
lic of the Treaty.

The Council in its letter of 15 March 1999 was not supporting
Dr. Zelezny’'s effort to eliminate the exclusive economic relationship be-
tween CNTS and CET 21; it did not put forward Dr. Zelezny’s views as its
own. The Council was stating the policy which it had publicly declared in
the meetings of the Media Panel and in submissions on the proposed
new Media Law, as well as to individual licence-holders.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-97-

369. CME does not indicate what specific obligations it considers the Council
and Parliament to have in respect of CNTS’s requests. The Czech Re-
public notes that three of the four requests were made in the fortnight
preceding the filing of Mr. Lauder’s Notice of Arbitration in mid-
August 1999, and the fourth some six weeks before that. Under no cir-
cumstances is it reasonable to expect a Parliamentary Committee to take
action within two weeks on the basis of “a detailed factual summary with
supporting documentation”. The requests were intended to establish a
record for the purpose of the dispute which had by then broken out be-
tween CME and Dr. Zelezny.

370. The Council did not fail to fulfilits obligations under the Treaty and the
Council did not cause CNTS’s business operations to be discontinued.
The Council only ever took action to ensure that broadcasting was con-
ducted in accordance with the Media Law.

371. The Council's course of dealings did not enable Dr. Zelezny to take ac-
tions that may have affected CME’s investment. The Council was merely
fulfilling its obligations under Czech law by requiring that the Licence not
be transferred and by commencing the administrative proceedings
against unauthorised broadcasting. The Council’s actions did not force
GNTS to weaken the contractual arrangements under which CME’s in-
vestment was made. The Council did not adopt a policy disfavouring the
exclusive economic relationship between CET 21 and GNTS. The Coun-
cil did not fail to act to protect CNTS’s interests.

Vil. CME Failed to Plead Any Loss

372. The Czech Republic has an obligation under international law to remedy
any violations under the Treaty for which it is responsible. However,
CME failed to plead any loss. CME must demonstrate that it has in fact
suffered damage. No plea has been made addressing questions of the
nature of the loss, causation, the identity of the specific companies or in-
dividuals that are alleged to have suffered loss, the ownership and con-
trol of the companies at the material times and of the heads of damages.

373. The remedies which the companies owned or controlled by Mr. Lauder,
allegedly including CME which may be obtained in the various fora in

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

374.

(1)

375.

-98 -

which his dispute with Dr. Zelezny/CET 21 is being fought out, may com-
pensate for any losses which such entities may be found to have suf-
fered. It may be found that no damage has been suffered by any of the
entities involved in this affair, including CME. Thus the failure to plead
that CME has suffered damage not only strikes at the heart of the claim,
but is an inevitable consequence of the realities of the dispute. If CME
has suffered no damage, this claim fails in limine. CME must show that it
has suffered damage for the claim to be admissible under the Treaty.

Vill. Respondent’s Conclusion

The Czech Republic requests that CME’s claim be dismissed on grounds
of lack of jurisdiction; alternatively on grounds of lack of admissibility; al-
ternatively on grounds that CME has failed to establish any breach of the
Treaty; alternatively on grounds that CME has failed to plead any loss.

H.
The Analysis of the Tribunal
|. Jurisdiction

The Claimant’s Investment

The Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide this dispute under Article 8 of the
Treaty. According to Article 8.2 of the Treaty, each Contracting Party
consents to submit an investment dispute as defined in Article 8.1 to ar-
bitration. Investment disputes covered by this arbitration clause are dis-
putes between one Contracting Party and an investor of the other Con-
tracting Party concerning an investment of the latter. The Claimant is an
investor in accordance with Article 1 (b) of the Treaty, as the Claimant is
a legal person constituted under the law of one of the Contracting Par-
ties, the Kingdom of the Netherlands. The dispute concerns an invest-
ment of the Claimant within the terms of Article 1 (a) of the Treaty. Arti-
cle 1 (a) provides that the term investment shall comprise every kind of
asset invested either directly or through an investor of a third State. The
investment can be (inter alia) shares, other kinds of interests in compa-
nies and joint ventures, as well as rights deriving therefrom, title to

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

376.

377.

(2)

378.

379.

380.

-99-

money and other assets and to any performance having an economic
value.

The Claimant is the 99 % shareholder of CNTS. These shares as well as
all rights deriving therefrom qualify as an investment of the Claimant un-
der Article 8.1 and Article 1 (a) (ii) of the Treaty.

CME, the Claimant, acquired its 99 % ownership interest in CNTS in two
steps. CME acquired 93.2 % in May 1997 from its parent company, the
Czech Media Enterprises B.V. The Claimant further acquired 5.8 %
shares in 1997 by purchasing the Czech holding company NOVA Con-
sulting, which held a 5.8 % shareholding in CNTS.

The Claimant's 1997 Share Acquisition

The Respondent, for the first time at the Stockholm hearing, expressed
its view that the investment of the Claimant in the Czech Republic within
the meaning of the Treaty was (only) made when it purchased in 1997
the GNTS shares held by CME Media Enterprises B.V. The Respondent,
in respect to this investment of the Claimant in the Czech Republic, ex-
pressly did not raise the defence of lack of jurisdiction. The Respondent
is, however, of the opinion that Claimant’s investment in 1997 limits
timewise the Claimant's claim in substance which, therefore, will be dealt
with hereafter, when dealing with the merits of the Claim.

Any possible defence in respect to lack of jurisdiction related to the
Claimant's acquisition of the CNTS shares in 1997, therefore, must be
deemed as waived. That also would be consistent with Rule 21.3 of the
UNCITRAL Rules, according to which objections in respect to jurisdiction
must have been made in the Statement of Defence.

The Arbitral Tribunal considered whether (by disregarding the Respon-
dent’s waiver of a defence of lack of jurisdiction in respect to the 1997
share acquisition), the Tribunal is obligated ex officio to decide on this
subject. The majority of the Tribunal is of the opinion that, disregarding
possible Czech national law requirements, the clear provision of the UN-
CITRAL Rules must supersede national law, if deviating. According to

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

381.

(3)

382.

383.

- 100 -

the UNCITRAL Rules, a defence of jurisdiction is deemed to be waived,
if not raised in time. This concept derives from the assumption that de-
fences on jurisdiction can be waived by the Parties, with the conse-
quence that a Tribunal is not able to set aside or disregard a Party’s
waiver in respect to the defence of lack of jurisdiction.

Therefore, the Respondent's argument that the investment of the Claim-
ant in the Czech Republic was not made until May 21, 1997 must be
dealt with by the Tribunal in accordance with the Respondent's express
pleadings as a substantive defence, not as a defence to jurisdiction.

The Claimant’s Predecessor’s 1994 Share Acquisition

The Respondent in its Statement of Defence dated November 9, 2000
raised the defence of lack of jurisdiction in respect to the Claimant’s
predecessor's share acquisition. The Respondent claimed inter alia that
CME has failed to establish that it has an asset invested in the Czech
Republic as defined under the Treaty. The Respondent's position is that
the Claimant did not sufficiently identify its investment by leaving open
whether CME’s investment “is its alleged shareholding in GNTS or some
contractual right allegedly enjoyed by GNTS or some right conferred on
CEDC”. According to the Respondent, CME fails to establish that it has
assumed the rights and obligations of CEDC as a matter of law. This
defence of lack of jurisdiction, even if accepted as sufficiently specified,
is not justified. The Claimant's investment is vested in its shareholding in
ENTS which is an investment covered by Article 1 (a) (ii) of the Treaty.

As recounted in Section A. 5 of this Award, CME acquired its 99 % own-

ership interest in CNTS in 1997, an acquisition which, in respect to juris-
diction is not in dispute between the Parties (as described above). CME’s
predecessor, its parent company, Czech Media Enterprises B.V., had
acquired in 1994 66 % of CNTS from CEDC, a German company under
the same ultimate control as CME of an American corporation, in turn
controlled by Mr. Ronald S. Lauder. The transfer document done in Pra-
gue on July 28, 1994 between CEDC and CME Media Enterprises B.V.
gives sufficient proof that CME Media Enterprises B.V. acquired CEDC’s

66 % shareholding in CNTS. Under this Assignment Agreement and

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

384.

(4)

385.

386.

387.

-101-

Declaration on Accession to Memorandum of Association of CNTS, the
Claimant’s predecessor CME Media Enterprises B.V. acquired CEDC’s
shares in CNTS, comprising all rights and obligations thereto.

The acquired shares, including all rights and legal entitlements, are pro-
tected under the Treaty. Upon the acquisition, the Claimant's predeces-
sor became owner of the investment in the Czech Republic. The Treaty
does not distinguish as to whether the investor made the investment it-
self or whether the investor acquired a predecessor's investment. In this
respect, Article 8 of the Treaty defines an investment dispute as existing,
if a dispute concerns an investment of the investor. Article 1 of the Treaty
clearly spells out that an investment comprises every kind of asset in-
vested either directly or through an investor of a third State, which makes
it clear that the investor need not make the investment himself to be
protected under the Treaty.

The 1994 Share Assignment not notified

The Respondent did not expressly argue in these arbitration proceedings
that the assignment of the 66 % CNTS_ shares from CEDC to CME Media
Enterprises B.V. was void. The Respondent stated, however, that the
assignment was not notified to the Media Council which, in the view of
the Respondent, was necessary under Condition 17 of the Licence.

The non-notification of the assignment did not remove the Claimant's
protection under the Treaty. Under Section 12.1 of the MOA, the as-
signment of shares to an affiliated company was permitted without re-
questing the Media Council’s approval. Under Condition 17 of the Li-

cence as amended as of May 12, 1993, the Media Council stipulated that
the partnership agreement (the MOA) is an integral part of the Licence
terms. Further, the Media Council prescribed that the partners of the
MOA are the licence-holder (CET 21), CEDC and the Czech Savings
Bank in the scope and under the conditions stipulated by the MOA.

CET 21 was obligated to submit to the Council for approval any changes
of the legal person which has been the licence-holder, or of the capital
structure of the investor which results in a change of control over the ac-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

388.

389.

390.

- 102-

tivities and of the provisions of the partnership agreement between the li-
cence-holder and investors (the MOA). The change-of-control clause of
the MOA (Section 12.1) linked the shareholding in CNTS to the Licence.
Article 12. 1 of the MOA stated that, in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the Licence, CEDC, CET 21 and the Czech Savings Bank
cannot and shall not assign their shares to any third Party without ob-
taining in advance the express consent of all partners and the Council,
which would be given after a full disclosure of the intended transaction.

However, this provision does not apply to any “direct family member or
associated persons”. An associated company was defined as an entity
controlled by the same last partner of the shareholders. Therefore, the
MOA, being an integral part of the Licence, did allow a change of control
without having obtained in advance the express consent of the Council.

The Council requested by its resolution of April 9, 1993, the submission
of the final draft of the MOA for approval and by its resolution of April 9,
1993, requested final changes. At the Council Meeting on April 20, 1993,
the Council approved the final wording of the MOA which was imple-
mented accordingly. On May 12, 1993, the Council approved Licence
Condition 17 which referred to the amended MOA as approved by the
Council. This sequence of events is not in dispute between the Parties,
although the Parties interpret these facts differently.

In respect to jurisdiction, it is clear that CEDC’s investment in CNTS
could be assigned to CME Media Enterprises B.V. without requesting
prior approval from the Council. On the contrary, it is clear that CEDC’s
investment in CNTS included the right to freely transfer this investment to
an affiliated company. The assignment by CEDC of its shares in CNTS
to CME Media Enterprises B.V. was made with express reference to the
MOA. It is therefore clear that CME Media Enterprises B.V. (as a per-
mitted successor under the MOA, which was approved by the Council),
when acquiring CEDC’s investment in the Czech Republic, acquired full
protection for this investment under the laws of the Czech Republic
which include the bilateral investment treaties the Czech Republic had
entered into, including the Treaty.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-103-
(5) The Claimant’s Predecessor’s 1996 Share Acquisitions

391. The acquisition of 22 % of the shares in CNTS by CME Media Enter-
prises B.V. in 1996 from the Czech Savings Bank also qualifies as an in-
vestment under the Treaty. The same applies to the acquisition of 5.2 %
shares in CNTS from CET 21, also in 1996. These further acquisitions
were not the subject of any judicial dispute by the Parties in these arbi-
tration proceedings. These shares were part of the same initial invest-
ment made by the founding shareholders, CEDC (with a share of 66 %),
CET21 (with a share of 21 %) and the Czech Savings Bank (with a
share of 22 %) as co-founders who formed the joint venture company
ENTS in 1993.

392. In respect to jurisdiction, CEDC’s and CME Media Enterprises B.V.‘s ac-
quisition of shares qualify as an investment within the meaning of Arti-
cle 8 of the Treaty in conjunction with Article 1 (a) (ii) of the Treaty. When
initiating these arbitration proceedings, the Claimant was and still is
owner of 99 % of these shares in CNTS. It is true that the shares them-
selves were not directly affected by the Respondent's alleged breach of
the Treaty. The dispute to be defined as an investment dispute under Ar-
ticle 8 of the Treaty does not necessarily relate to the shares themselves,
but to the value of the shares, which, the Claimant alleges, have been
eviscerated by the Respondent, It is the Claimant's case that the Re-
spondent, in breach of the Treaty, expropriated (inter alia) CNTS’ legal
and commercial assets and rights. Such an expropriation of assets and,
in particular, legal rights and entitlements of CNTS, a joint venture of the
Claimant with Czech nationals (the Czech Savings Bank and CET 21),
could and allegedly did affect the value of CME’s shares in the joint
venture, such shares clearly being an “investment” in accordance with
Article 1 of the Treaty. Therefore, the Arbitral Tribunal will have to ex-
amine whether the Czech Republic expropriated the joint venture com-
pany CNTS as alleged by the Claimant (see Tradex Hellas S.A., Greece
vs/ Republic of Albania, ICSID Arbitration Award, April 29, 1999).

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

(6)

393.

394.

395.

396.

- 104 -

CME’s Predecessor’s Original 199311994 Contributions qualify as
Investment under the Treaty

The original contributions by CEDC, the Czech Savings Bank and

CET 21 were made on the basis of the Memorandum of Association and
Investment Agreement (the MOA) notarized in front of a Czech notary
on/or about May 4, 1993 and submitted for registration on/or about
July 8, 1993. The registered capital of CNTS was 148 million Czech
Crowns. CET 21’s non-monetary contribution, evaluated at 48 million
Czech Crowns, was to contribute to CNTS “unconditionally, unequivo-
cally and on an exclusive basis the right to use, exploit and maintain the
Licence held by CET 21.” The Czech Savings Bank contributed 25 mil-
lion Czech Crowns and CEDC contributed 75 million Czech Crowns. The
ownership interests were allocated as follows: CEDC 66 %, Czech Sav-
ings Bank 22 %, CET 21, 12 %.

According to Sec. 2 of the MOA, CEDC and the Czech Savings Bank
agreed to provide additional financing to CNTS as additional contribu-
tions to the registered capital of up to 400 million Czech Crowns. There-
after, the shareholders agreed to provide additional financing up to
900 million Czech Crowns as needed through bank loans. This obligation
to provide additional financing either by share capital or by bank loans
was secured under Section 2.5 of the MOA by 20 % interest on the debt
sum in respect to which a shareholder was in default. CEDC, therefore,
and the Czech Savings Bank obligated themselves to make substantial
contributions for the future of CNTS, dedicated for “the development and
management of the Television Station”.

The Claimant’s predecessor's investments, by acquiring in 1994 and
thereafter CNTS’ founders’ shares and by consummating their obliga-
tions under the MOA, qualify as an investment under the Treaty.

The Respondent, in this context, raised the defence that the Claimant
exercised some kind of (unacceptable) forum shopping. The Respondent
characterized the initiation of parallel treaty proceedings by Mr. Lauder
and by the Claimant as an abuse. In respect to jurisdiction, this defence
is not persuasive. CEDC, when making the investment in CNTS in
1993/1994, was under the protection of the German-Czech Republic In-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

397.

398.

399.

400.

- 105 -

vestment Treaty which, in essence, provides a similar protection as the
Treaty. The assignment of the investment in CNTS from a German cor-
poration to a corporation having its legal seat in the Netherlands does
not have, on the face of it, the stigma of an abuse. The Respondent
characterized the initiation of parallel treaty proceedings by Mr. Lauder
and by the Claimant as an abuse.

The Arbitral Tribunal’s view is that the contribution made by CEDC and
the assignment thereof in compliance with the investment structure ap-
proved by the Media Council to CME Media Enterprises B.V., qualifies as
an investment under Article 8 of the Treaty. The Respondent's argument
in respect to an alleged forum (or treaty) shopping is not sustainable.

In this context, the Tribunal refers to the FEDAX Award on jurisdiction
dated July 11, 1997, an ICSID arbitration (37 |.L.M. 1378/1998). In that
case, the FEDAX tribunal accepted ICSID jurisdiction for a claim under
promissory notes which had been transferred and endorsed to subse-
quent holders and to the claimant outside of the host country of the origi-
nal investment. The FEDAX tribunal rejected the argument that the for-
eign owner of the promissory notes did not qualify as an investor, be-
cause it has not made an investment in the territory of the host country
and accepted that, although the identity of the investor will change with
every endorsement, the investment itself will remain constant, while the
issuer of the notes will enjoy a continuous credit benefit until the time the
notes become due.

In the Claimant’s case, the situation is even clearer. CEDC made the
investment by making its shareholder's contribution at the formation of
ENTS in 1993. CNTS enjoyed the benefit of the investment during its

corporate life-time. TV NOVA started broadcasting in February 1994 by

using CEDC’s invested funds (together with the funds invested by the

Czech Savings Bank). By mid-1994, when the Claimant’s predecessor
acquired the investment, the investment was at full risk and it was not

until one year later that the investment turned out to be a success for the
investors.

Further, CEDC’s investment in CNTS must be seen in its legal entirety
as approved by the Media Council. A company affiliated to the investor,

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

(7)

401.

402.

403.

- 106 -

being an acknowledged (permitted) successor under the investment
structure approved by the Media Council, is protected by the investment
protection laws of the host country. Article 8 of the Treaty does not set
specific requirements related to the circumstances under which an in-
vestment can be regarded as belonging to the investor protected by the
Treaty. This is in accord with the great majority of modern bilateral in-
vestment treaties (see Antonio R. Parra in “Economic development, for-
eign investment and the law”, published by Kluwer 1996, page 35). In re-
spect to jurisdiction, therefore, the Claimant enjoys the full protection of
the Treaty, having acquired through its predecessor CEDC’s investment
66 % shareholding in CNTS in 1994. The same applies to the further
shareholding in CNTS acquired thereafter by the Claimant and the
Claimant's predecessor.

The Investment Dispute under the Treaty

The dispute between the parties as alleged by the Claimant derives from
the destruction of the joint venture’s assets and the devaluation of its
factual and legal position connected with the use of the broadcasting Li-
cence, contributed by CET 21 to CNTS as a founding shareholder of
ENTS. This dispute qualifies as an investment dispute within the mean-
ing of Article 8 of the Treaty. In particular, it is not disqualified as an in-
vestment dispute because it is not, as alleged by the Respondent, a pri-
vate commercial dispute but an investor-host State dispute.

GNTS' disputes and legal proceedings with CET 21 and Dr. Zelezny also
do not transform the dispute between the Claimant and the Czech Re-
public into a commercial dispute unrelated to the Treaty. Commercial dis-
putes and proceedings between private parties, though one party be the
investor and/or his joint venture company, do not per se exclude the ex-
istence of an investment dispute under the Treaty.

The investment dispute under the Treaty and the commercial dispute
between the investors’ joint venture company in the Czech Republic and
its shareholders and/or business partners must be distinguished. The
Claimant's position is that the Czech Republic, represented by the Media
Council, violated its duties under the Treaty in various ways. The Arbitral

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

404.

405.

406.

407.

- 107-

Tribunal has jurisdiction over such an investment dispute, whereas juris-
diction over private commercial disputes between CNTS and CET 21 /
Dr. Zelezny is vested in the Czech Republic’s courts or in arbitration as
the case may be.

The private commercial disputes in question are different in respect to
the parties, certain basic facts and underlying legal rights and obliga-
tions. This Tribunal has jurisdiction in respect to the dispute concerning
the alleged violation of the Treaty by the Czech Republic. The Tribunal
has no jurisdiction related to commercial disputes, regardless of whether
the respective civil court proceedings, in particular as initiated by CNTS
vs. CET 21, may provide a remedy to CNTS (depending on the final
judgment of the Czech Supreme Court). These civil court proceedings
may effect the quantum of the damage as claimed by CME in these arbi-
tration proceedings. The civil court proceedings, however, have no effect
on the jurisdiction of this arbitral Tribunal under the Treaty.

Although the contractual arrangements between CET 21 and CNTS
could be decisive for the Claimant's claim under these arbitration pro-
ceedings, this does not take away jurisdiction from this Tribunal. The
Claimant's claim is based on the Czech Republic’s interference and non-
protection of the Claimant’s and its predecessor’s investment which is
clearly an investment dispute and not a private commercial dispute. The
fact that a contractual arrangement between CET 21 and CNTS is also
the basis for civil law proceedings between these contractual parties
does not deprive the Claimant of its claims under the Treaty deriving
from the alleged breach of the Treaty committed by the Czech Republic
acting through the Media Council.

The Czech Republic’s position that the grant of the Licence signified no
more than the Council considered, on the basis of the information then
available to it, that CET 21 was a proper recipient of the Licence, is ir-
relevant for the qualification of these arbitration proceedings as invest-
ment treaty proceedings.

Whether the Media Council, as the Czech Republic stated, did not have
the power to approve or endorse the business arrangement between

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-108-

CEDC, the Czech Savings Bank and CET 21 is a question of the sub-
stance of the claim and not a question of jurisdiction.

408. Furthermore, the Respondents position, according to which the preju-
dice to the Claimants and its predecessor's investment was caused not
by the Media Council but by Dr. Zelezny, is a matter of substance and
not of jurisdiction. Decisive for the matter of jurisdiction is only the issue
of whether the Czech Republic by the Media Council’s action breached
the Treaty and caused injury to the Claimant’s and/or its predecessor's
investment. The Arbitral Tribunal is aware that it may well be that a vari-
ety of circumstances may have caused the debasement of the Claim-
ant’s investment. That will not take away jurisdiction from this Tribunal,
which is obliged to investigate and adjudicate the case restricted to the
investment treaty dispute, whereas civil law claims might be sorted out
between the respective parties in other proceedings.

(8) Parallel Proceedings

409. The Czech Republic’s view that Treaty procedures were not intended to
be used in these circumstances is not sustainable. Treaty proceedings
are barred by civil law proceedings only if the respective investment
treaty contains such a provision. Modern bilateral investment treaties
usually do not contain judicial limitations like that. Modern investment
treaties tend to allow a broad and extended access in the same way as
modern treaties avoid any kind of restrictions which may provide uncer-
tainties for the identification of the protected investment (Giorgio Sacer-
doti “Bilateral Treaties and Multilateral Instruments on Investment Pro-
tection” in Recueil des Cours 1997).

410. The Respondent's contention that the Claimant exploited a dispute under
a commercial contract to pursue Treaty proceedings must be rejected.
The Claimant based its claim on the alleged breach of the Treaty. In par-
allel the Claimant’s subsidiary in the Czech Republic has pursued its civil
law claims in front of the Czech Civil Courts. The fact that the object of
the two proceedings, compensation for injury to the Claimant's invest-
ment, is the same, does not deprive the parties in the Treaty proceed-
ings nor in the civil court proceedings of jurisdiction. An affirmative award

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

411.

(9)

412.

(10)

413.

- 109 -

and/or judgment may have impact on the quantum of the damages adju-
dicated in the proceedings or give the right to the respective defendant to
raise legal defences in the respective enforcement proceedings with the
argument that the adjudicated damage claim has been already remedied
under the award and/or judgment of the respective other proceeding.
However, jurisdiction is not affected by this incidence of parallel pro-
ceedings.

The Respondent's defence that the Claimant may not concurrently pur-
sue the same remedies in different fora is, therefore, rejected. Further, it
is understood and agreed between the Parties that the Claimant is not
obligated under the Treaty to exhaust local remedies in the Czech Re-
public.

No abuse of Treaty Proceedings

There is also no abuse of the Treaty regime by Mr. Lauder in bringing
virtually identical claims under two separate Treaties. The Czech Repub-
lic views it as inappropriate that claims are brought by different claimants
under separate Treaties. The Czech Republic did not agree to consoli-
date the Treaty proceedings, a request raised by the Claimant (again)
during these arbitration proceedings. The Czech Republic asserted the
right to have each action determined independently and promptly. This
has the consequence that there will be two awards on the same subject
which may be consistent with each other or may differ. Should two differ-
ent Treaties grant remedies to the respective claimants deriving from the
same facts and circumstances, this does not deprive one of the claim-
ants of jurisdiction, if jurisdiction is granted under the respective Treaty.
A possible abuse by Mr. Lauder in pursuing his claim under the
US Treaty as alleged by the Respondent does not affect jurisdiction in
these arbitration proceedings.

Outcome of Civil Court Proceedings have no Effect on Jurisdiction

Moreover, the Respondent's further contention that the outcome of the
civil court proceedings between GNTS and CET 21 will finally determine

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

- lO -

whether the Claimants shareholding in CNTS was prejudiced, is not con-
clusive. The final judgment by the Czech Supreme Court may reinstate
the Czech Regional Commercial Court judgment which ruled that
CET 21 did not validly terminate the Service Agreement and that CET 21
is obligated to exclusively have broadcasting services supplied by CNTS.
The outcome of the civil court proceedings was open at the closing of the
hearing of these proceedings. The civil law suit was still pending at the
Czech Supreme Court. However, even if the Czech Supreme Court were
to reinstate the Regional Commercial Court judgment, this would not
remedy the harm to the Claimant's investment.

414. On the contrary, the dependence of the Claimants investment on the
contradictory Civil Court judgments clearly shows how fragile the Claim-
ant’s investment is (the alleged consequence of the Czech Republic’s
breaches of the Treaty). Even if the regional Commercial Court’s judg-
ment is reinstated by the Czech Supreme Court, this will not remedy the
Claimant's investment situation. CET 21 may well, at any time, terminate
again the Service Agreement for good cause, whether given or not,
thereby recurrently jeopardizing the Claimant's investment.

415. The Claimant was, therefore, not obligated to wait for the Czech Su-
preme Court's decision before instigating Treaty proceedings. The out-
come of the civil court proceedings is irrelevant to the decision on the
alleged breach of the Treaty by the Media Council acting in concert with
the Respondent. It may affect the quantum of a damage claim which,
pursuant to agreement between the parties, is not a subject of this Par-
tial Award.

(11) Respondent’s Defence that no Loss Occurred

416. The Respondents’ argument that under the Claimant's pleadings there is
no suggestion that there is any compensable loss that is attributable to
the breakdown of the exclusivity arrangement should be dealt with on the
merits of the claim, not in respect to jurisdiction. The Respondents’ posi-
tion that an investor's complaint of a mistreatment in investment pro-
ceedings cannot be determined before the State has treated the invest-
ment finally including through judicial process, is a position which is not
sustainable. It is generally accepted that claims under investment trea-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

417.

(12)

418.

-111-

ties can be and shall be dealt with separately from the judicial process in
local courts, unless otherwise specifically provided for in the respective
Treaty. Such a requirement to exhaust local remedies is not found under
this Treaty and the initiating of a judicial process in the Czech Republic
does not bear upon proceedings under the Treaty. This is the under-
standing also of the Respondent, as specifically stated by Prof. Lowe,
the Respondent's representative at the Stockholm hearing, when he said
that there was plainly no requirement under the Treaty for the Claimant
to exhaust local remedies.

The Respondent's position was, as submitted by Prof. Lowe, a slightly
different one. The Respondents’ view is that the Claimant cannot prove
any loss as long as the Claimant did not exhaust the legal remedies un-
der the Czech Civil Court system. This contention is not acceptable. A
purpose of an international investment treaty is to grant arbitral recourse
outside the host country’s domestic legal system. The clear purpose is to
grant independent judicial remedies on the basis of an international, ac-
cepted legal standard in order to protect foreign investments. An invest-
ment treaty therefore may even grant indemnification in case of expro-
priation where the domestic law does not (see Sacerdoti as cited above
at page 289 referring to a decision of the Italian Supreme Court on this
subject). As the Treaty is silent on the obligation of exhaustion of local
remedies, the Claimant is entitled and in the position to substantiate its
loss without being obligated to have its subsidiary CNTS obtain a final
civil law court decision by the Czech Supreme Court.

Claimant itself made no Investment

The Respondent's further argument that the Claimant itself never made
an investment in the Czech Republic is rejected for the reasons already
mentioned above. The Treaty does not require that the assets or funds
be imported from abroad or specifically from the Netherlands or have
been contributed by the investor itself. (As Sacerdoti as cited above ob-
serves, this requirement is rarely found in recent bilateral investment
treaties. This is in compliance with the above-cited FEDAX Award which
held that the acquisition of promissory notes by the Dutch claimant was a
foreign investment despite the fact that FEDAX itself never transferred

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

419.

420.

421.

-112-

funds to Venezuela. FEDAX N.V. vs. Republic of Venezuela ICSID Case
no. ARB 96/3, the award on jurisdiction dated July 11, 1997 published in
ILM 37 (1998), 1378/1390 and the award in substance of March 9, 1998
published in ILM 37 (1998), 1391/1398.)

I. The Substance of the Claimant’s Case
1. Admissibility / Timewise Limitation

(1) Parallel Treaty Proceedings

The same reasons for the Tribunal to acknowledge jurisdiction apply to
the admissibility of the Claimant's case. The Respondent's argument that
the Claimant’s case is not admissible, submitted by the Respondent as
an alternative to the defence of non-jurisdiction, is rejected. The inadmis-
sibility argument is predominantly based on the fact that Mr. Lauder in
parallel to the Claimant initiated other Treaty proceedings. However, the
Claimant is free to initiate the Treaty proceedings, if there is an invest-
ment dispute in the meaning of Article 8 of the Treaty. The argument of
abusive Treaty shopping is not convincing. A party may seek its legal
protection under any scheme provided by the laws of the host country.

The Treaty as well as the US Treaty are part of the laws of the Czech
Republic and neither of the treaties supersedes the other. Any overlap-
ping of the results of parallel processes must be dealt with on the level of
loss and quantum but not on the level of breach of treaty. The Claimants’
case is admissible.

(2) No restriction of the Claimant’s case timewise

There is no time bar to the Claimant's case. The Respondent's position
is that the investment of the Claimant in the Czech Republic was not
made until May 21, 1997, when it purchased the shares held by CME
Media Enterprises B.V. in CNTS. This, as the Respondent clarified, is the
Respondent's defence on the merits. However, this defence, whether in
substance or in respect to admissibility, cannot succeed.

The Claimant acquired the shares held by CME Media Enterprises B.V.
under the Agreement on Transfer of Participation Interest. The Claimant,

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

422.

423.

424,

-113-

under the MOA, was an authorized transferee and the transfer did not
need the consent of the Media Council under Condition 17 of the Licence
which referred to the MOA of CNTS, because the transferor and trans-
feree of the assignment had the same ultimate shareholder,
Mr. Ronald S. Lauder. The Claimant acquired the participation interest as
it was at the day of transfer. The purchase price was US $52,723,613
and the acquired participation interest reflected a contribution of
344 million Czech Crowns. The Agreement on Transfer expressly stipu-
lated that the Claimant, being the transferee, declared its consent with
the MOA without any reservation. The Claimant, therefore, acquired its
parent company’s shares in CNTS without any reservation or limitation.
The participation interest transferred the legal status as it was, including
all rights and liabilities connected thereto.

The Respondent's view that the Claimant, by declaring its consent to the
MOA, may only advance claims in respect of violations of the Treaty that
occurred after May 21, 1997, is not sustainable. The consent to the MOA
which is required by Czech law has effect only between the sharehold-
ers. The consent is not a waiver of claims which derive from the Re-
spondent’s violations of the Treaty already incurred at the transfer date
and the consent did not waive the Claimant's protection under the
Treaty, should such protection derive from acts and circumstances that
occurred before the transfer of shares took place.

The Respondent's view that the transfer of shares deprived the Claimant
of the protection under the Treaty, because the investment changed
hands from one (Dutch) shareholder to the other is not convincing. The
Memorandum of Association was approved by the Media Council in 1993
and thereafter again, when the new MOA was implemented on Novem-
ber 14, 1996 without providing for any change of the change-of-control
clause. Therefore, any claims deriving from the Claimant’s predecessor’s
investment (also covered by the Treaty) follow the assigned shares.

Article 8 of the Treaty, therefore, does not debar the Claimant's claims
on the ground advanced by the Respondent. In accordance with Article 8
of the Treaty, an investment dispute under the Treaty is covered, if the
dispute derives from an investment of the investor. As already shown
above under the issue of jurisdiction and now, and in respect to the ad-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

425.

426.

-114-

missibility of the claims, it is the Tribunal’s view that the investment need
not have been made by the investor himself. This conclusion is sup-
ported by Article 1 of the Treaty which defines an investment as “any
kind of asset invested either directly or through an investor of a third
State”. This indicates a broad interpretation of the investment which also
allows the (Dutch) parent company’s investment to be identified as an in-
vestment under the Treaty. If the Treaty allows - as it does - the protec-
tion of indirect investments, the more the Treaty must continuously pro-
tect the parent company’s investment assigned to its daughter company
under the same Treaty regime.

(3) | Admissibility of the Claimant’s case in respect to the 1994
Share Acquisition

The Parties did not specifically address under the aspect of admissibility
of the Claimant’s claim or elsewhere the Claimant’s predecessor's acqui-
sition of shares from CEDC in 1994. The reason for not addressing this
subject might be that the alleged violations of the Treaty took place
thereafter. Therefore, this 1994 transfer need not specifically be dealt
with under the aspect of admissibility of the Claimant's case. However, it
is obvious that the Claimant's predecessor, when acquiring the CNTS
shares from CEDC (as admitted transferee under the MOA’s Change of
Control clause), acquired CEDC’s full investment, including all ancillary
rights and obligations.

In respect to this share transaction, the Respondent raised the view that
the Claimant's predecessor CME Media Enterprises B.V., when acquir-
ing the shares in 1994, “must have considered the commercial risk of in-
vesting in CNTS as well as the legal frame work, in which this investment
would be made, when it decided to acquire CEDC’s rights and obliga-
tions in the MOA”. It is undisputed between the Parties to these arbitra-
tion proceedings that CME Media Enterprises B.V. understood the legal
framework of CEDC’s investment when acquiring the CNTS shares. This
knowledge, however, has no influence on the investment’s protection
under the Treaty. It is not the case that the Claimant and its predeces-
sors entered willingly into the risk that their investments in CNTS will be
eviscerated by acts of the Media Council. On the contrary, it became

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

427.

428.

-115-

clear from the documents and other written communications submitted
by the Parties to these proceedings that the Claimant and its predeces-
sors relied on the protection of their investments by the Czech legal
system, including the Czech Republic’s obligations under the Treaty.
Therefore, the Claimants case is admissible and there is no time bar to
CME’s claim related to the Claimants and its predecessor's investment
in the Czech Republic.

2. The Merits of the Claimant’s Case under the Treaty

The Claimant's case is justified in substance. The Czech Republic vio-
lated the Treaty by actions and inactions of the Media Council which led
to the complete collapse of the Claimants and the Claimants predeces-
sor’s investment in the Czech Republic.

(1) | CME’s and CME’s predecessor’s investments in the Czech
Republic

The 66 % shareholding in CNTS which was acquired by CME’s prede-
cessor from its affiliated company CEDC in 1994 qualifies, as explained
above, as an investment under the Treaty. The same applies to the fur-
ther 33 % shareholding in CNTS acquired by the Claimant and the
Claimant’s predecessor. CEDC made a capital contribution under the
MOA for the initial share capital in the amount of 75 million Czech
Crowns. A further investment obligation obligated CEDC and the Czech
Savings Bank to invest further 1.3 billion Czech Crowns. The purpose of
the investments was to develop and manage the television station
TV NOVA, for which the broadcasting Licence was granted to CET 21 by
the Media Council, acting as the statutory regulator of the Czech Repub-
lic. CEDC’s investment was made under an investment scheme which
was developed in close liaison with and under approval of the Media
Council. It was also CEDC which had to provide the know-how for devel-
oping the new TV station, as neither the Czech Savings Bank as co-
founder of CNTS, nor CET 21 and its shareholders had relevant experi-
ence. The five Czech nationals who were the shareholders of CET 21

which initiated the joint project never worked in the broadcasting indus-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

429.

430.

431.

-116-

try. The investment structure was developed by CEDC, jointly with its
Czech Republic joint venture partner CET 21 in close conjunction with
the Media Council. While the broadcasting Licence was granted to
CET 21 (having no foreign shareholder), the operation of the TV station
was in its totality vested in the joint venture company CNTS.

The documents submitted by the Parties in these proceedings, in par-
ticular, the Media Council’s own statements to the Czech Parliament
leave no doubt that the investment, made by CEDC for the exclusive use

of the broadcasting Licence granted to CET 21, was monitored, directed

and approved by the Media Council. The basis for the investment struc-

ture with the participation of CEDC is the broadcasting Licence as
awarded by decision of the Media Council of February 9, 1993 to

CET 21. Its reasoning clearly spells out that the substantial involvement
of foreign capital and broadcasting know-how was necessary to begin
and operate television station activities. The legal tool to safeguard the

public interest was to require that the leading positions in the television
station were taken by Czech nationals, that the programming was not in-
fluenced by the foreign investor and that journalistic independence was

safeguarded. These were the Licence conditions designed to ensure the
national character of the programming of the new television station.

The Media Council further, in its justification for the Licence, stated that
the Media Council created sufficient mechanisms through which it could
monitor the observance of the schedule for implementation of the new
TV station. Through the formulation of Licence conditions and through
the inspection of their observance, the Media Council ensured that the
aims of the Media Council were realized.

The basis for the Media Council's decision to grant the Licence to
CET 21 was the “all-over structure” of a new Czech commercial televi-
sion entity dated February 5, 1993 which was submitted jointly by
CET 21 and CEDC to the Media Council. This “all-over structure” clearly
described the separation of the broadcasting operation vested in a new
legal entity (‘the Commercial Company”) to be formed by CEDC, the
Czech Savings Bank and CET 21, whereas the broadcasting Licence
was granted to CET 21 as the holder of the Licence for nation-wide tele-
vision broadcasting under the legal Act No. 468/1991 Col. The “all-over

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

432.

433.

-117-

structure” clearly spelled out that CET 21 and CEDC (CEDC as “direct
participant” in the contract under the conditions of that Licence) agreed
on the structure of the new entity which was formed with the purpose to
finance and run the commercial, technical, management and other ac-
tivities of the station. It was further clearly spelled out that the new com-
pany would be authorized to carry out these activities as long as CET 21

held the television Licence.

Further, it was stated that CET 21 acknowledged that it does not have
the authority to perform broadcasting “without the direct participation of
CEDC”. The “all-over structure” provided that a Board of Directors shall
govern the basic decisions in respect to the economic management of
the corporation. The day-to-day management and administration as well
as the programming of the station was to be performed by the operating
management. All operating personnel must be employees of the joint
venture company. 90 % of the employees and the management of the
station must be citizens of the Czech Republic. This management was to
be complemented by the best foreign experts talented in engineering
and technology, marketing and other areas to assist and train the local
personnel.

The “all-over structure” of February 5, 1993 was made an integral part of
the Licence granted by the Media Council to CET 21 by reference in the
Licence conditions to an appendix to it. In Licence conditions Nos. 17
and 18, CET 21 as licence-holder agreed

17/ "that is will submit to the Council for its prior consent any
changes in the legal entity that is the licence-holder, capital
structure of investors and provisions of the business agreement
[i.e. the Memorandum of Association] between the licence-holder
and investors. Parties to the business agreement are the licence-
holder, CEDC and Ceska Spofitelna a.s., in the scope and under
the conditions set by the business agreement which will be sub-
mitted to the Media Council within 90 days after the decision to is-
sue the Licence takes legal effect; the business agreement will
observe the provisions of the “agreement on the business agree-
ment” between the licence-holder and CEDC which is an appendix
to the licence conditions;

18 that CEDC, as a party to the business agreement specified in
the Licence conditions, and other investors specified by the busi-
ness agreement, will not in any way interfere in the programming

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

434.

435.

436.

-118-

of the television station , and, in particular will not interfere with the
editorial independence of newscasting employees,”

The reference to the “agreement on the business agreement” was a ref-
erence to the “all-over structure” of February 5, 1993, as was confirmed
by witnesses at the Stockholm hearing. This is consistent with the min-
utes of the meeting of the Media Council on February 4 and Febru-
ary 5, 1994, where CET 21 submitted “only one of the requested materi-
als, the agreement on the structure of broadcasting between CET 21 and
CEDC”. The witness Mr. Josefik, who was in 1993 member of the Coun-
cil and later its chairman, confirmed that on February 5, 1993 the Council
received “a new organizational structure of the future commercial broad-
casting”. The witness confirmed that the appendix to the Licence condi-
tion was the February 5 agreement. It is, therefore, clear that the “all-
over-structure” of CEDC’s investment was made part of the Licence.
Mr. Josefik further confirmed that the Council discussed the future ar-
rangement between CET21 and CEDC. The Council expressed its
opinion on proposals made by CET 21 in respect to the structure and,
based on the Council's comments, CET 21 submitted the amended
structure dated February 5, 1993 which was made part by reference of
Licence condition No. 17.

The various witness statements clarified that the “over-all structure”
dated February 5, 1993 was a carefully designed scheme to allow the
foreign investor CEDC take part in the operation of the TV station without
becoming a shareholder of licence-holder CET 21. The scheme was de-
veloped in close inter-action between the Media Council and CET 21. It
was developed from the an initial proposal submitted by CET 21 to the
Council dated February 3, 1993 which was prepared by CEDC’s repre-
sentative, Mr. Fertig, and submitted to the Council by Dr. Zelezny. Both
papers follow the same idea, having the holder of the broadcasting Li-
cence separated from the operator.

The separation of the licence-holder CET 21 and the operator became
necessary after the Council’s decision to grant the Licence to CET 21
was published on January 31, 1993. This decision created an uproar in
the Czech Parliament and the Czech public. Members of the Parliament
in particular criticised the grant of the Licence to CET 21. The Council
developed the view that, accordingly, it would not be feasible to transfer

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

437.

438.

439.

440.

-119-

a share in CET 21 as originally contemplated to the foreign investor
CEDC.

This sequence of events is supported by the underlying documents re-
lated to the application for the broadcasting Licence by CET 21, includ-
ing personal presentations by CEDC’s representatives in front of the Me-
dia Council before the Council decided to grant the Licence to CET 21.

The justifications of the decision to award the Licence of February 9,
1993 expressly stated that the Council’s decision is based on the appli-
cation by CET 21 for the broadcasting Licence, the written documents
submitted to the Council and also the facts presented in the public hear-
ing by CET 21 and CEDC. The documents submitted as part of the

CET 21 application for the broadcasting Licence comprised inter alia the

“project of an independent television station CET 21” which spelled out
that CEDC is “a direct participant in CET 21’s application for the Licence”
and, in the enclosed Letter of Intent, it was made clear that CEDC was
going to acquire a 49 % shareholding in CET 21 in exchange for its
commitment to fund the broadcast station and provide the seed capital.

The agreement between CET 21 and “its foreign partners and experts”
was communicated by CET 21 on December 21, 1992 to the Council. At
the Council hearing on December 21, 1992, Mr. Palmer and Mr. Fertig
represented CEDC and submitted the proposal to the Council according
to which an “extensive share [was] reserved for foreign capital” and it
was clearly indicated that this would be “a direct capital share, not
credit”. The financing to be provided by CEDC was an amount of
US $10 million which was confirmed in the Letter of Intent issued by
CEDC to CET 21 as an attachment to the application documents.

After the grant of the Licence to CET 21 was released to the public in a
press conference, followed by the uproar in the Czech Parliament, as
described by the witness Mr. Fertig, the Council communicated to
CET 21 that direct shareholding of CEDC was “politically impossible”.
Mr. Fertig stated that the Council requested the replacement of the direct
shareholding by a structure which would give an equivalent level of par-
ticipation from an economic standpoint and an equivalent level of influ-
ence from a business standpoint. In accordance with this request,

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

441,

442.

443,

- 120-

Mr. Fertig worked out the “over-all structure” dated February 3, 1993
which he typed on his personal computer. A Czech translation was sub-
mitted to the Council. Mr. Fertig stated that the “all-over structure” dated
February 5, 1993 was developed by incorporating the changes re-
quested by the Council.

The purpose of the changes was to have a separation of the Licence on
the one hand and the operations on the other hand. As Mr. Fertig stated,
the official “Decision to Award a Licence” at the Council meeting on Feb-
ruary 9, 1993 was not made before the amended “all-over structure”
dated February 5, 1993 was signed by CET 21 and CEDC.

This sequence of events as stated by the witness is confirmed by the
minutes of the Council meeting dated February 4, 1993 and the “Deci-
sion to Award a Licence” dated February 9, 1993 which, in its reasoning,
referred to the necessity of the substantial involvement of foreign capital
for beginning television station activities and referred to the legal struc-
ture set out in the Licence conditions, “which shall fully guarantee the
leading positions of domestic persons in the television station and their
programming and journalistic independence” and further, by the official
Licence document, including the Licence conditions and in particular the
Licence conditions Nos. 17 and 18, all dated February 9, 1993.

The split structure of the licence-holder CET 21 and the operator CNTS
was developed on the basis of the Media Law of October 30, 1991. The
Media Law of 1991 defined broadcasting as “dissemination of pro-
gramme services or picture and sound information by transmitters, cable
systems, satellites and other means intended to be received by the pub-
lic’. A broadcaster under the Media Law 1991 is (inter alia) anyone, who
obtained authorization to broadcast on the basis of an Act of the Federal

Assembly, an Act of the Czech National Council, etc. or by being granted

a Licence under this Act (a licence-holder). The Media Law 1991 did not
describe the commercial or technical requirements to be performed by a
licence-holder. However, according to Section 12.3 of the Media Law
1991, the Council was entitled to impose conditions on the licence-holder
as part of the Licence.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

444,

445.

446.

-121-

Therefore, the Media Council, the regulator of the Czech Republic under
the Media Law, decided to monitor the operation of the Licence under
the split structure (CET 21 as licence-holder and CNTS as operator) on
the basis of inter alia the Licence conditions Nos. 17 and 18. This
scheme was carefully designed legally and, on the face of it, in compli-
ance with the Media Law, as the Media Law did not contain any restric-
tions or requirements in respect to the operation of the broadcasting
system by the licence-holder or another operator. The Council, under
condition No. 17, imposed as a part of the broadcasting Licence, the
condition on CET 21 to submit the MOA between CET 21 and CEDC
within 90 days after the decision to issue the Licence was to take legal
effect. The MOA must reflect the provisions of the “agreement on the
business agreement” which was the “all-over structure” dated Febru-
ary 5,1993.

At the Council meeting dated April 8, 1993, the Council reviewed the
draft MOA as submitted by CET 21. The Council declined to approve the

MOA. With reference to the conditions of the Licence, the Council re-
quired that CET 21 shall provide the final version of the MOA between
CET 21, CEDC and the Czech Savings Bank to the Council for approval

by April 19, 1993 with the amendments required by the Council. This re-
quest for a change of the MOA was communicated by the Council to
CET 21 on April 9, 1993 with reference to the terms of the Licence. Fur-

ther, the Council approved Dr. Zelezny becoming a shareholder of

CET 21. CEDC did not agree with the proposed amendments and its

president and chief executive officer Mark Palmer sent a responsive let-
ter to the Chairman of the Council on April 13, 1992. At the Council

meeting on April 20, 1993, the final wording of the MOA was approved in
accordance with Article 17 of the Licence conditions which was commu-
nicated to CET 21 on the next day.

The MOA, with the full title “Memorandum of Association and Investment
Agreement”, thereby became the basic document for the Claimant's
predecessor's investment in the Czech Republic. The clear wording es-
tablished that the television station shall be managed by the new com-
pany and that the object of the new company’s business activity was “the
development and operation of the new, independent, private, national
television broadcasting station in compliance with the Licence and the

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

447.

448,

449,

450.

-122-

terms and conditions attached to it.” The purpose of the new company
was to operate an independent television station and to achieve profits
and ensure a high rate of return of equity for the partners, while providing
a popular television channel for the Czech public.

The business decisions of the new company were vested in the Com-
mittee of Representatives which committee in particular had the power
for decision-making on the programming principles, the programme
structures and the programme plan of the TV station “in consultation with
the chairman of the Programming Council’. The Programming Council
had certain veto rights in respect to the programming and CET 21, de-
spite its minority shareholding in CNTS, was entitled to appoint three
members to a Programming Council, two of its members to be appointed
by the Czech Savings Bank and only one member to be appointed by
CEDC, the seventh member being the programming director. The share-
holders expressly agreed to be bound by and to respect the terms and
conditions of the Licence granted by the Council.

Under Article 1.4.1 of the MOA, CET 21 was obligated to contribute to
the company “the right to use, benefit from and maintain the Licence of
the company on an unconditional, irrevocable and exclusive basis“. The
value of the non-monetary contribution was denominated by 48 million
Czech Crowns.

Further, the partners expressly agreed that they shall not undertake any
action that would present a well-founded concern that it will make it more
difficult to obtain a prolongation or renewal of the Licence in favour of the
company.

‘In consideration of the efforts and the contributions to the Company,
CET, CEDC and CS herewith commit themselves not to undertake any
actions, either by assuming a contractual obligation or by negligence,
that would jeopardize the granting of the Licence in general, and espe-
cial/y in accordance with the Act on Television Broadcasting in the Czech
Republic (No. 468/1991 Sb.), to assign any right, in part or in full, relating
to the aforementioned Licence to any third Party that is not a Party to this
Agreement, with the exception of any successor appointed by the Com-
pany with the approval of the Council”.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

451.

452.

453.

454.

- 123 -

It is the view of the Arbitral Tribunal that this structure, as it appears from
the MOA in conjunction with the Licence and its conditions Nos. 17 and
18, is a well-defined legal basis for the Claimant's predecessor's invest-
ment in the Czech Republic, granted after intensive consultations with
and following requests and advice by the Media Council.

It is obvious that the structure of the split of the licence-holder and the
operator, as specifically described and set out in this scheme, was the
legal basis for the Claimant's predecessor’s investment. The purpose of
this scheme was to secure the Claimant's predecessor's investment in
the Czech Republic in compliance with the Media Law of 1991. The
scheme was recognized and developed in conjunction with the Media
Council. In scrutinizing this scheme, it is apparent that the Claimant's
predecessor’s position was substantially more than a financial investor
as suggested by the witness Mr. Josefik, who, in the eyes of the Tribu-
nal, showed a rather selective and unpersuasive memory of the facts as
the documents show them to be.

The Parties to these arbitration proceedings described CET 21’s contri-
bution, the right to use the Licence, as a lawful contribution. The Media

Council itself in its report of October 1996 to the Czech Parliament reit-

erated that, “at the time when the arrangement was made, there were no
doubts about its legitimacy; in regard to many related steps that were
taken, the Council, as it was then constituted and based on its experi-
ence at the time, took a position of consent”. The Council in its report to

the Czech Parliament described the structure which was used by
TV NOVA, Premiéra TV and Radio Alfa as having the following analo-
gous features:

“Their operation and programming are provided by other compa-
nies than the companies that were awarded the Licence, namely,
on the basis of a special legal construction which captures, on the
basis of a contract, their collaboration and mutual rights and du-
ties. Therefore, there are two companies [related] to one Licence,
the one that was awarded the Licence and the one that was es-
tablished in order to implement it’.

The witnesses confirmed that the CET 21 / CNTS structure was used for
other broadcasting stations. It was in particular used also for Pre-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-124-

miéra TV (a minor enterprise) and for Radio Alfa (also controlled by
CME).

455. Also, the report (called “opinion”) of the Council to a Parliament Com-

456.

457.

mittee of May 1994 qualified the structure as “standard business proce-
dure which was duly discussed and approved by the licensing body, i.e.
by the Council, and does not violate any effective legal regulations, [The
Council] consulted with a number of leading legal experts, Czech and
foreign “.

Further, the Council stated in its legal opinion to the Parliament that

“the operation of a television station, it is of a television organiza-

tion (e.g., for the production of programmes), should be in no case

confused with the operation of television broadcasting, i.e. the
dissemination of programmes (Article 2 para. 1, letter (a) of Act
No. 468/1991 Coll.). The Memorandum of Association and the Li-
cence terms specified the relationship between CNTS and CET 21

and contain a number of mechanisms that prevent the potential
non-permissable involvement of CNTS in the rights and obliga-
tions of the licence-holder. CET 21 is responsible to the Council to

the full extent for the operation of television broadcasting. For the

reasons stated above, the Council does not share the opinion of
the Committee for Science [Parliament Committee]. The Council is
convinced about the correctness of the procedure and does not
admit any doubts of its legitimacy. "

Therefore, the Council itself viewed the CET 21/CNTS structure when
created and at least until May 1994 as a structure in compliance with the
Czech Media Law. The Tribunal accordingly concludes that the Claim-
ant’s predecessor's investment was based on a carefully designed legal
structure which was developed in conjunction with the Media Council and
implemented with its approval. The Tribunal concludes that such struc-
ture must be regarded as a legally well-founded basis for the Claimant's
predecessor's investment. It was also the legal basis for CME Media
when acquiring CEDC’s 60 % shareholding in CNTS in 1994. At that
point of time, the investment in TV NOVA was still at a high risk after
having started the TV station in spring 1994 with a substantial invest-
ment commitment under the MOA as requested and approved by the
Council. Any change of the CET 21/ CNTS investment structure by law
or by Council's interference, therefore, must be considered in the light of

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

458.

459.

460.

-125-

whether such changes adversely affected CME’s investment in the
Czech Republic and whether it could be seen as a breach of the Treaty.

It is undisputed between the Parties that TV NOVA within one year after
having started broadcasting in February 1994 became the most suc-
cessful and profitable private television station in the Czech Republic
with revenues which increased by 1996 to more than US $ 100 million
per year with a profit of roughly US $30 million per year (or US $51 mil-
lion pre-tax profit). This success is to be attributed to CEDC’s operational
support which enabled broadcasting to start within a timetable set by the
Licence, one year, which was seen as rather ambitious.

The witness Mr. Klinkhammer stated that CEDC and CME invested
US $ 140 million in TV NOVA which included the share acquisitions
made between 1994 and 1999. In the first purchase of 52 % CNTS
shares from the CET 21 shareholders, CME Czech Media Enter-
prises B.V. had paid US $5 million. In 1997, in the share transaction with
Dr. Zelezny, CME paid US $ 27,5 million for 5,8 %, evaluating CNTS at
that time at roughly US $500 million. Also, the acquisition of 22 % inter-
est in CNTS held by the Czech Savings Bank for roughly US $ 30 million
on July 17, 1996 indicated that the investment in CNTS was regarded as
sound and prosperous, a success must be, to a large extent, attributed
to the foreign investor CEDC and CME because the Czech nationals
who initiated the joint venture as shareholders of CET 21, including
Dr. Zelezny, never had practical experience in starting and running a TV
station.

(2) |The Media Council in 1996 coerced CME to abandon the legal
security for its investment in the Czech Republic

In 1996, the Media Council reversed its position related to the split
broadcasting structure between the licence-holder and the operator. The
treason for the reversed position is clearly spelled out in the Council’s re-
port of October 1996 to the Czech Parliament. In this report, the Council
made it clear that the split structure was in compliance with the Media
Law as long as it could be controlled by the Council via the Licence con-
ditions. "... in 1995 there existed a sufficient tie, in the form of Licence
terms [Licence conditions] between the licence-holder and the other

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

461.

462.

463.

464.

465.

- 126 -

company, to make it possible for the Council to intervene in the event the
existing split became truly problematic. "

“At the beginning of 1996, however, the amended law on broadcasting
that came into effect included the mandatory abolishing Licence terms,
and the operators of broadcasting reacted to it by requesting some
changes in the Licence. That meant a weakening and/or nullification of
the above-mentioned tie as a certain guarantee of the legality of the ex-
isting situation’.

Indeed, as the Council stated in its report to the Parliament, all three

broadcasting companies TV NOVA, Premiéra TV and Radio Alfa re-

quested that the relevant condition be abolished, which would have had

the effect that the Council would have lost control of the operator of the
Licence under the split Licence/operator scheme. The Council, in its re-
port to Parliament, identified the problem as follows: “The focus of the

problem is a subtle legal question of who is the operator of broadcasting,

which activities [it] may provide itself and which ones it may delegate to

other entities without actually transferring the Licence to them. The Law
on Broadcasting [Media Law], which stipulates inter alia the basic rules
for this very specific business activity, suffers from deficient short com-
ings in this respect;”

The Arbitral Tribunal’s clear view and understanding is that the Council,
in order to avoid loss of control of the operator of the split licence-
holder/operator scheme in 1996, decided to put pressure on the partici-
pants of the split scheme in order to change it. This transpires from the
facts, in particular the Council's own statements in this respect, the
documents and the witness statements.

As one step of its strategy, the Council did not comply with CET 21 re-
quest to delete condition No. 17 of the Licence which is “the tie” in the
words of the Council to the Parliament, to safeguard the split structure of
licence-holder and operator.

On February 12, 1996, the Council instructed Dr. Jan Barta of the State
and Law Institute of the Academy of Science of the Czech Republic to
render a legal opinion on the split structure. Dr. Barta rendered a legal

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

- 127-

opinion submitted under the letterhead of the institute of the State and
the Law within one week, on February 19, 1996, which concluded that
CET 21 does not operate broadcasting and never did, whereas CNTS
was broadcasting without authority. Dr. Barta stated that the approval of
the MOA by the Council has no significance as the Council has not is-
sued any resolution on this subject. In Dr. Barta’s view, the MOA ex-
pressly stated that the law would be violated (the Licence-holder pledges
not to broadcast, and the company that is being established carries on
unauthorized broadcasting). This was a violation of the law and the
Council was not in the position to permit that which is not permitted by
the law. Dr. Barta suggested initiating administrative proceedings for un-
authorized broadcasting against CNTS and he suggested as an alterna-
tive to withdraw the Licence from CET 21. He further stated “the given
group of investors can be excluded from broadcasting in accordance with
the law by these methods”. Further, as an alternative, Dr. Barta sug-
gested to compel CET 21 through penalties to initiate broadcasting at its
own expense and to modify contractual relations with the group of in-
vestors accordingly. As a further alternative, Dr. Barta suggested to issue
a new Licence for CNTS. “Until such Licence is legally effective, how-
ever, the broadcasting is still unauthorized and the fine has to be levied
in such a case as well”.

466. The circumstances of the rendering of Dr. Barta’s legal opinion are dubi-
ous. It is quite obvious that this legal opinion was rendered in response
to the Council's instruction letter of February 12, 1996 with the purpose
of laying the ground for the Media Council's reversal of position which
was opposite to the Media Council’s view that the CET 21/CNTS split
structure was in compliance with the Media Law, when implemented.
Dr. Barta’s legal opinion had serious deficiencies. Contrary to Dr. Barta’s
statement under Section 4 of his opinion, the Media Council by resolu-
tion of May 11, 1993 topic 2 by unanimous vote approved Licence condi-
tion No. 17, which decision was certified under the date of May 12, 1993
in full form. Further, the legal opinion did not deal with the question
whether an official State body, when reversing its decision by declaring a
legal structure for the use of a broadcasting licence illegal, must pay
compensation to the foreign investor who, in reliance on the validity of
the split structure, made large investments in the television station.
Dr. Barta was of the opinion that the Council at that time (1993) from a

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

467.

468.

469.

470.

- 128 -

formal point of view, acted incorrectly as administrative body. Dr. Barta’s
legal conclusion was that the Council is obligated to disregard the MOA
and that a decision of the Council shall “simply (be) based on the deter-
mined facts described above. "

This suggestion for the application of administrative law shall not be dis-
sected by the Arbitral Tribunal. Dr. Barta’s opinion, however, is unac-
ceptable under the requirements of the Treaty which does not allow re-
versal and elimination of the legal basis of a foreign investor's investment
by just taking the view that an administrative body's formal resolution, the
corner-stone for the security of the investment, was simply wrong. The
Tribunal is not to decide on the Czech Administrative Law aspect of this
question. However, Dr. Barta’s legal opinion is not in compliance with the
Respondent's obligations under the Treaty.

On the face of it, Dr. Barta’s opinion was requested by the Media Council
simply as a tool to cover up the reversal of the Council’s legal position
towards CET 21 and the foreign investor CEDC/CME. This view of the
Arbitral Tribunal is supported by the sequence of events, ending with
CME being forced to change the MOA and to give up the “safety net” (as
it was described by the Respondent’s representative Prof. Lowe at the
Stockholm hearing) by replacing in the MOA the “use of the Licence” as
CET 21’s contribution in GNTS by the “use of the know-how of the [i-
cence”.

It is clear that the replacement of the “use of the Licence” (which CNTS
enjoyed under the split structure) by the “use of the know-how of the li-
cence” vitiated the Claimant's protection for its investment in the Czech
Republic. The Tribunal need not decide whether the contribution of the
“use of the Licence” in 1993 was legally valid under Czech law. The par-
ties to these proceedings are in agreement that (in contrast to Dr. Barta)
the contribution of the use of the Licence was legally not questionable.
This view of the Respondent is supported by the Media Council's legal
opinions and reports to Parliament cited above.

However, the Respondent at the Stockholm hearing took the position
that the 1993 “safety net” (use of the Licence) was not better than the
amended structure (use of know-how of the licence and conclusion of a

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

471.

472.

473.

-129-

Service Agreement). The Respondent’s position on this subject is un-
sustainable. The use of “know-how” of a broadcasting Licence is mean-
ingless and worthless. The obvious purpose for replacing the wording of
“use of the licence” by “use of the know-how of the licence” was to but-
tress a wording in the MOA which could sustain the interpretation that
CET 21 did not receive a pay-back of its share capital made by a contri-
bution in kind.

The Respondent's position that the waiver of the “use of the Licence”
was counterbalanced by the new Section 10.8 of the new 1996 MOA is
unsustainable. The wording of Section 10.8 speaks against it:

‘(CET 21] hereby undertakes not to entrust the subject matter of
its contribution, or any other right connected with the Licence, or
the Licence itself, to the ownership or use of another legal entity
or natural person, or to enter into any legal relationship with any
legal entity or natural person other than the Company, by which it
would give that, or another, person or entity any right to the sub-
ject matter of its contribution to the Company or to CET 21 as
such which would result in the creation of rights similar to those
which the Company has, and undertakes not to even begin any
negotiations with another legal entity or natural person about the
creation of such a legal relationship.”

The “subject matter of its contribution” which, under Section 10.8 is re-
stricted in respect to transfer or even negotiations, is nothing else than
the “use of the know-how of the Licence” which, as indicated above, was
a rather meaningless and worthless right. Further, CET 21’s undertaking
not to assign the Licence itself was useless as the assignment of the L-
cence is not permitted under the Media Law anyway. The only important
issue was, whether CET 21 as licence-holder was obligated to contribute
the use of the Licence to CNTS which contribution alone was the “safety
net” for CNTS, ensuring that CET 21 would exclusively use the opera-
tional services of CNTS.

Moreover, the Respondent's argument that the waiver of the “use of the
Licence” under the 1993 split structure was fully compensated by the
Service Agreement entered into between CET 21 and CNTS 1996/1997,
is unsustainable. The contribution of the use of the Licence under the
MOA is legally substantially stronger than the Service Agreement, as
was demonstrated by the further sequence of events. A Service Agree-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

474,

475.

476.

-130-

ment could be terminated much more easily for good cause at any time
by CET 21 compared with a change or amendment of CET 21’s contri-
bution in kind as shareholder of CNTS under the MOA. Such contribution
cannot be recalled by an unilateral act of the shareholder who made the
contribution. This may not always apply, e.g. if CNTS as user of the Li-
cence by its conduct would have jeopardized the Licence, which was
never seriously suggested, either by CET 21 or by the Media Council.

In 1999, the legal weakness of the 1996 arrangements materialized. On
August 5, 1999, CET 21 terminated the Service Agreement for good
cause with the effect that the alleged non-delivery of the daily work log
for one (!) day (August 4, 1999) gave sufficient reason to terminate the
Service Agreement. Thereby, the legal basis for the co-operation be-
tween CET 21 and CNTS was vitiated with the consequence that the
Claimant's investments of purportedly US $ 140 million, evaluated at
US $ 500 million, was put at the risk of civil court decisions which ended
up with the first instance Regional Commercial Court decision which de-
cided that the termination was void, which decision was reversed by the
Appellate Court with the consequence that the dispute was still pending
at the Czech Supreme Court without a final decision having been ob-
tained at the time of the closing of the hearing of these arbitration pro-
ceedings, the Claimant's investment meanwhile having been totally de-
stroyed.

The Arbitral Tribunal cannot accept the argument that the 1996 “safety
net” was a real safety net in comparison with the 1993 safety net. Even if
the Czech Supreme Court were to reverse the Appellate Court's decision
and re-instate the first instance court decision, this would not change the
Tribunal’s assessment. Even if CNTS would be in the position to restore
the status of the TV station as it was on August 5, 1999, CET 21 could

easily jeopardize the arrangement by repeating the same procedure,
terminating the Service Agreement for purported good cause and again
dragging GNTS into Civil Court proceedings.

It is not the Tribunal’s role to pass a decision upon the legal protection
granted to the foreign investor for its investment under the Czech Civil
Law and civil court system.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

477.

478.

479.

480.

481.

-131-

Nevertheless, the Tribunal, after having studied the first instance judg-
ment and the Court of Appeal judgment, cannot conceal its opinion that
the Court of Appeal inadequately dealt with the facts and circumstances.
It permitted a US $ 500 million value investment to be destroyed by the
purported non-delivery of a one-day day-log under a Service Agreement
imposed on the investor by the Media Council, which circumstances and
facts were set out in detail by the first instance Court judge.

The Arbitral Tribunal is charged with assessing whether the amendment
of the legal structure of the Claimant’s investment in 1996 prejudiced the
protection of the Claimant's investment in the Czech Republic and
whether this was a breach of the Treaty.

The facts in respect to the change of the so called “safety net” them-
selves are to a large extent undisputed, whereas the Parties’ legal and
factual interpretation of these facts is controversial. The Respondent's
view that the change of the “safety net” in 1996 did not change or preju-
dice the protection of the Claimant’s investment is, as explained, unsus-
tainable.

The events in 1996 as documented by the exhibits to the parties’ sub-
missions are decisive in sustaining the conclusion that the Media Council
in 1996 forced GNTS and CME to agree to undermine the legal protec-
tion of CME’s investment. Considering the interpretation of the docu-
ments and the witness statements, the Tribunal is of the view that the
Council, in order to re-establish its control over the broadcasting opera-
tions of CET 21/CNTS (which operations were disconnected from the li-
cence-holder by the 1993 split structure), “made a very intensive effort”
(Mr. Josefik’s oral report to the Standing Committee of Parliament on
September 30, 1999) to force CET 21 / GNTS and its shareholders to
surrender the 1993 split structure.

At the March 13, 1996 Council Meeting, the representatives for CET 21
were confronted in the presence of Dr. Barta with the request to enter
into a different contractual relation; Dr. Barta acting in a rather inquisito-
tial function. He requested that measures be taken so that the physical
operator will be CET 21. After the cancellation of Licence condition
No. 17, a trade contract between CET 21 and CNTS was necessary as,

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

482.

483.

484.

- 132-

in Dr. Barta’s view, “CET 21 does not operate broadcasting”. The con-
clusion to this part of the meeting was:

“Lawyers of the Council and CET 21 will prepare the first version
of a contract on provision of performances and services between
CET 21 and CNTS, so that the first version of this contract will be
prepared by CET 21 within 10 days and submitted to the Council
for discussion. "

Keeping Dr. Barta in the process, Dr. Barta rendered a further legal
opinion dated May 2, 1996 which would have turned the existing 1993
split structure, CET 21 being the licence-holder and CNTS the operator,
upside-down. This legal opinion stipulated, in particular, that all pay-
ments for advertising are the income of CET 21 which would deprive
ENTS of its original source of income. The Council asked for a conse-
quent change of the MOA which was discussed at the Council Meeting
of May 7, 1996. On May 15, 1996, CME’s legal counsel, Laura DeBruce,
circulated a letter to the lawyers of CET 21 and CNTS, expressing
CME’s concern about the Council's recent proposal that the MOA be
amended so that the CET 21 contribution of the “exclusive use” of the Li-
cence would be deleted from the MOA and replaced by a Service
Agreement. Laura DeBruce made clear that CNTS as a consequence of
the change requested by the Council would be in rather weak legal posi-
tion, should CET 21 simply claim that CNTS was in breach of the Service
Agreement and terminate it.

The Council at that time involved itself in the draft of the Service Agree-
ment, sending comments to the parties to the agreement with the re-
quest to incorporate the comments in the agreement or to comment on
them within five business days of receiving the Council’s request which
dated June 4, 1996.

The Council put the issue of CET 21’s legal structure on the agenda of
the Council Meeting on June 28 and June 29, 1996 and decided at that
meeting in respect of CNTS that a warning of illegality of broadcasting
shall be sent to GNTS, which shall include a time-period for remedy,
ending on August 27, 1996. Further, the Council decided to postpone a
decision on a cancellation of Condition No. 17 of the Licence, “because
of the preliminary question of proceedings before a court and proceed-
ings at the State Prosecutor's Office”.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

485.

486.

487.

488.

- 133 -

On July 23, 1996, the Council initiated administrative proceedings to im-
pose a fine for operating television broadcasting without authorization
against CNTS. In the letter addressed to CNTS which reached CNTS in
September 1999, the Council set out three reasons.

. The first reason was that the Commercial Register for CNTS
showed it to be operating television broadcasting on the basis of
the Licence as its business activity.

: The second reason was that the agreement with the Authors’
Protection Union was concluded by CNTS and not by CET 21.

. The third reason was described as follows:

“Another basis are the agreements between CNTS and the com-
pany CET 21 spol. s. r. 0. which indicate, among other things, that
CNTS is arranging the broadcasting on its own account. There is
no control by the broadcasting operator over the disseminated
programming; the broadcasting operator's liability is rendered un-
clear by the Agreement. "

In support, the Council, in its letter to CNTS, referred to Dr. Barta’s legal
opinion rendered in the name of the Institute of State and Law of the
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic.

Mr. Josefik, who was Member of the Council and later Chairman of the
Council, stated at the Stockholm hearing that “the agreements between
CNTS and the company CET 21", referred to in the Council's letter to
CNTS, were the MOA. This interpretation of Mr. Josefik confirms the
wording of the Council’s letter, taking into account that no other agree-
ments between CET 21 and CNTS related to the use of the Licence
were in existence at that point of time.

The letter of July 23, 1996 and Mr. Josefik’s interpretation are in clear
contrast to the Respondent’s view and position that not the contractual
basis of the 1993 split structure but its implementation violated the Media
Law. Indeed, Dr. Barta’s opinion also did not suggest that the imple-
mentation of the 1993 split structure was a violation of the Media Law.
Dr. Barta maintained that the 1993 split structure itself was illegal.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

489.

490.

491.

492.

493.

494.

-134-

Therefore, the Media Council reversed its legal position in 1996, taking
the view that the 1993 split structure was illegal. The Respondents inter-
pretation of the events as an unlawful implementation of a lawful struc-
ture is, in the light of the facts, unsustainable.

The purpose of initiating administrative proceedings against CNTS was
solely to put pressure on CET 21 and GNTS, with the aim of elimination
of the 1993 split structure. This assessment, although contested by the
Respondent and some of the Respondent’s witnesses in these pro-
ceedings, is confirmed by the Media Council’s own written documents,
reports and legal opinions. The legal opinion of the Media Council’s legal
department dated November 6, 1996 stated in its review of the draft
Service Agreement::

“It may be stated that the said Agreement undoubtedly reacts to
the commencement of administrative proceedings against CNTS
for illegal broadcasting with the aim of making if seem that CNTS
has not been committing such illegal acts.”

In the report to Parliament of January 31, 1998, the Council repeated its
position, stating that the Council halted the proceedings with CNTS in
September 1997 because, in its opinion, once the scenario of actions
agreed with CNTS and CET 21 was fulfilled, the reasons for which the
proceedings about unauthorized broadcasting were conducted ceased to
exist.

In this report, the Council also confirmed the legality of the original 1993
split structure, which the Council considered to be “legal and which
raised legal doubts only later“.

“The reasons why this model came into existence were the Council's
fears of a majority share of foreign capital in the licence-holder’s com-
pany. The licensing conditions were an insurance of this configuration
that the Council considered to be a sufficient tool for regulating the
broadcast, even after the softening of them’.

In a sequence of events, the Council initiated administrative proceedings
after CET 21 and GNTS presented a proposal for an amicable solution in

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

495.

-135-

individual legal steps (which did not please the Council). In this respect,

the Council reported to the Parliament that, in December 1996, “after a
partial success regarding the legal documents of CET 21 as well as
ENTS, the Council abolished the licensing conditions according to the
application. The proceedings concerning unjustified broadcast against
CNTS, however, continue”. In the period from January till July, 1997, ac-

cording to the Council’s report to Parliament, CET 21 and CNTS gradu-

ally documented the implementation of the promised steps. On June 3,
the Council concluded that the premises for stopping the proceedings
were thus fulfilled.

On September 15, 1997 (as the Council further stated to the Parliament),
having examined the remaining legal issue, the Council stopped the pro-
ceedings against CNTS.

496. The Council, in its report to Parliament of January 31, 1998 reiterates

497.

that the original 1993 construction “from the legal view-point did not and
does not contradict any law, but it created a basis for problems ...".

“When it came into existence, such a construction was just right
and had its logic, on top of that, an integral part of this configura-
tion were the licensing conditions set by the Council by means of
which inadmissible influences on the broadcasting, emanating
from the procurement organization CNTS, were ruled out.”

The Council (in the response to Parliament's request) fully disclosed the
motivation for the 1993 split structure:

“When granting the Licence to the company CET 21, for fear that
a majority share of foreign capital in the licence-holder’s company
might impact the independence of full-format broadcasts, the
Council assumed a configuration that separates the investor from
the licence-holder himself That is how an agreement came into
existence (upon a series of remarks from the Council) by which

the company CNTS was established the majority owner of which

is CEDC/CME. Thus, next to the licence-holder’s company, di-
rectly linked to it, a new company was established which was to
co-participate in implementing the broadcast.

498. This is clear. The alleged unlawful implementation was not referred to.

The Respondent's view that the structure itself was legal, whereas the

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

+ 136 -

implementation was illegal, is not supported by the Council’s own report
to Parliament on January 31, 1998.

499. From the witness statements at the Stockholm hearing, it became ap-
parent that CME had to take Council's threat against GNTS seriously. As
an ultimate possibility which was already mentioned in Dr. Barta’s legal
opinion, the Council could have imposed substantial fines on CNTS in or-
der to stop CNTS operating TV NOVA and, furthermore, the Council
could have withdrawn CET 21’s broadcasting Licence.

500. Dr. Zelezny, who, at this point of time was in full accord with CME and
ENTS, informed the Representative Committee of CNTS that the broad-
casting Licence will be seriously endangered as a consequence of ad-
ministrative proceedings and there was a substantial risk for the Licence,
should CET 21/ CNTS not comply with the Media Council’s request for
change of the legal structure. From the minutes of this meeting, con-
firmed by the witness statements at the Stockholm hearing, it becomes
clear that, at that point of time, Dr. Zelezny was not acting in conflict with
GENTS and/or CME. On the contrary, he fully supported the joint position
of CNTS and CME towards the Council.

501. By a joint letter of CNTS and CET 21 dated October 4, 1996, both com-
panies gave in to the pressure of the Council and submitted a proposal
to amicably resolve the prolonged differences, “which arose in address-
ing the legal situation concerning the arrangement of legal relationship
between CNTS and CET 21, as well as around the cancellation of Li-
cence conditions in connection with Act No. 301/1995 Col.”

502. The proposal was:

. "First, to enter into a Service Agreement between CET21 and
CNTS related to television broadcasting services to be provided
by CNTS to CET 21;

. second, to amend CNTS’s_ entry in the Commercial Register;

. third, to delete radio broadcasting from CET 21’s registration and

. fourth, to obligate CNTS “to submit to the Council a draft amend-
ment to Article 1.4. 1 of the Memorandum of Association of CNTS

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

- 137 -

which will be submitted to the CNTS General Assembly for ap-
proval.”

503. By letter dated October 4, 1996, Dr. Zelezny, acting as “General Man-
ager and Agent” on behalf of TV NOVA, summarized the legal view and
situation on behalf of CNTS. This letter fully explained CNTS’ position in
respect to the legality of the CNTS/CET 21 structure, supported by a le-
gal opinion of the Institute of State and Law of the Academy of Science
which confirmed that the licence-holder, in compliance with the Media
Law, may broadcast through other persons.

504. In reference to the proposal submitted by CNTS by its joint letter with
CET 21 of October 4, 1996, in which they proposed steps for a concilia-
tory settlement to the administrative body, CNTS requested termination
of the administrative proceedings.

505. The shareholders of CNTS did not give in on a voluntary basis. The
amendment of the MOA on November 14, 1996, and the implementation
of the Service Agreement was the result of the Council’s threat to dis-
continue GNTS’ broadcasting operations. CME decided to disregard its
own counsel's legal advice according to which the replacement of the
CET 21 contribution “use of the Licence” by the “right to use, benefit and
maintain the know-how concerning the Licence” will be detrimental for
ENTS’ position as exclusive supplier of broadcasting services to CET 21,
the basis of CNTS’ business. CME carefully considered this advice,
however it was clear that without the amendment requested by the
Council the broadcasting Licence would be endangered. The change
lifting CME’s legal “safety net” for its investment was made because of
coercion exerted by the Council.

506. This clearly transpires from the submitted documents, in particular the
Council’s own report to the Parliament, and this position was supported
by Mr. Fertig. The witness, who communicated through Dr. Zelezny with
the Media Council, confirmed that the danger of losing the licence as fi-
nal consequence of the Media Council's action was to be taken seri-
ously, if an amicable solution were not reached. The Council demon-
strated the seriousness of the threat by initiating administrative proceed-
ings against CNTS, when CNTS tried to negotiate and delay the
amendment of the MOA.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

507.

508.

509.

510.

- 138 -

The witness stated that only because of the exercise of coercion was the
legal basis for the investment changed. Only the amendment of the MOA
to be redrafted along the lines that would satisfy the Media Council could
have solved the situation which otherwise would have been destructive
for CME’s investment.

Also, the witness Ms. Landova, who, in the years 1993 to 1997 worked
as a senior member of the staff of the office of the Council, supported
this position. She clearly stated that the Council initiated administrative
proceedings for unauthorized broadcasting against CNTS in order to put
pressure on CNTS to change the MOA and to make the other changes
requested by the Council.

The witness Mr. Radvan, a Czech lawyer who represented CEDC, also
testified that the Council insisted on deletion of the use of the Licence
from the MOA. Dr. Zelezny’s efforts to change the wording without
changing the substance had no success. According to Mr. Radvan’s wit-
ness statement, it was clear that, in respect to the legal protection of
ENTS, it made a huge difference between the use of a licence and the
contractual relationship which was introduced in 1996 instead of it, and
that it was abundantly clear for everybody involved that the use of the Li-
cence was different from the use of the know-how. By changing the
MOA, CET 21’s contribution to GNTS in the eyes of this witness was al-
most eliminated and the witness stated that the new Article 10.8 did not
adequately protect CNTS.

The witness Mr. Musil who was at the relevant time a member of the
Media Council, also confirmed to a large extent the sequence of events.
His interpretation of the events was that the Media Law of 1991 was un-
clear in respect to the definition of the “broadcasting operator’. He was of
the opinion that the administrative proceedings against CNTS achieved a
better status for the Council which was a stricter distinction between the
broadcasting operator and the service company. Also, his witness state-
ment made clear that the Council had the clear target of changing the le-
gal structure which was the basis for the Claimant’s investment.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

511.

512.

513.

514.

515.

516.

5

7

- 139 -

According to the statement of Mr. Josefik, who later became the Chair-
man of the Media Council, the administrative proceedings must have
been seen in the eyes of CNTS as a real threat. The witness stated that,
on the same basis as the Council initiated administrative proceedings
against CNTS, the Council, in accordance with the legal opinion of
Dr. Barta, could initiate proceedings to withdraw the Licence from
CET 21.

This threat was not a theoretical threat, as the Council in its notification
of the initiation of administrative proceedings to CNTS, referred explicitly
to the legal opinion of Dr. Barta which opinion was made known to all re-
spective parties involved and which clearly spelled out the possibility for
the Council to initiate proceedings to withdraw the Licence from CET 21.

This threat was fundamental because a withdrawal of the Licence in the
same way as interference with CNTS’ broadcasting operations would
have destroyed the Claimant's investment in the Czech Republic.

CME, at this point of time, could not take the risk of entering into long-
lasting legal battles, civil law and/or administrative law proceedings, as
such proceedings would carry the danger that, if the lawsuits were to be
lost, CME’s investment would have been irreversibly destroyed.

The Claimant decided to give in, which is a normal commercial conse-
quence in any situation of unlawful pressure, when the affected victim of
such pressure has to make a careful assessment.

Such a decision for a compromise, however, does not make the Coun-
cil’s unlawful acts legal and cannot be deemed as a waiver of CME’s
rights under the Treaty. This is the considered conclusion of the Arbitral
Tribunal.

. This view is supported by prominent legal authors such as Professor

Detlev F. Vagts “Coercion and Foreign Investment Re-Arrangements”
1978, published in the American Journal of International Law. Profes-
sor Vagts pointed out that, for example:

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

518.

519.

520.

- 140 -

“The threat of cancellation of the right to do business might well be
considered coercion... Such coercion might be found, even where
a ‘clean’ waiver of rights is signed”.

The Respondent's contention that CME voluntarily and of its own free will
amended the basis for its investment is unsustainable. The (unlawful)
situation of coercion is documented by the Media Council’s above-cited
reports and opinions to Parliament and, furthermore, in the Media Coun-
cil’s letter dated March 15, 1999 to Dr. Zelezny in his capacity as CEO of
TV NOVA and as Executive Director of CET 21. In this letter, which was
described by the Respondent as a letter containing the Council’s general
policy in respect to the relationship between a broadcasting operator and
a service organization, the Chairman of the Media Council stated:

“| contirm the fulfilment of the Council’s requirements that were a
pre-condition for the termination of the proceedings on unauthor-
ized broadcasting by the CNTS company. ”

“The Council terminated the administrative proceedings on unau-
thorized broadcasting, because most of the above-mentioned
material characteristics of the operator were respected and docu-
mented, by CET 21. According to the report and documents sub-
mitted by CET 21, this cause was also confirmed by changes in
the Memorandum of Association and its business contracts. "

The Media Council, also by this letter, gave an authentic interpretation of
the reasons for initiating administrative proceedings against CNTS. The
purpose of the proceedings was to force CNTS to release CET 21 from
its contribution, the exclusive use of the broadcasting Licence. The
Council’s aim was to bring back the right of the use of the Licence to
CET 21 which as the licence-holder, was, under the new Media Law in
force since 1996, the only legal entity which the Council could control,
whereas CNTS, enjoying the exclusive use of the Licence under the
1993 split structure, could not been monitored and controlled any more
by the Council, since Condition No. 17 of the 1993 Licence was to be
cancelled under the new Media Law.

The Media Council violated the Treaty when dismantling the legal basis
of the foreign investor's investments by forcing the foreign investor's joint
venture company GNTS to give up substantial accrued legal rights. The
clear alternative available for the Media Council in this situation was to
abstain from any pressure on CME/CNTS and allow the foreign investor

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

521.

522.

523.

524.

-141-

to maintain its investment on the basis of the legal structure which was
developed jointly with the Media Council and which was the basis for the
foreign investor’s investment decision. Any consequences deriving from
such coercion against the foreign investor and/or its investment company
CNTS must be remedied. The Respondent’s contention that the change
of the legal basis of the Claimant's investment was made voluntarily or
was the result of a commercial dispute between CME and/or GNTS and
Dr. Zelezny is unsustainable and must be rejected.

It is speculation whether the Media Council would finally have exercised
its powers to the full, or whether CME could have gained support through
the Czech Republic’s administrative and/or civil courts. A threat does not
become legal upon the victim’s surrender to the threat and the surrender
cannot be deemed as a waiver of its legal rights. The possibility that the
threatening State Authority would not exercise its powers or that law
courts would grant sufficient relief do not qualify the victim’s surrender as
voluntary.

A reasonable investor, having invested financial funds deriving from pub-
lic placements, such as the CME group, the parent group of which was
listed on the New York Stock Exchange, cannot jeopardize the funds
raised in the public financial markets by taking unforeseeable risks. The
Respondent's suggestion that CME could have sorted out the problem
with the Media Council, if any, in the law courts is therefore unaccept-
able.

The Respondent's further contention that the coercion in reality did not
take place as the communication between CME and the Media Council
was, to a large extent, channelled through Dr. Zelezny who followed his
own target which was, to regain the usage of the licence for CET 21, of
which he was majority shareholder, is unsustainable. Not a single docu-
ment or witness statement proves that in 1996, Dr. Zelezny exploited the
situation of being communicator between CET 21/CNTS and the Media
Council. On the contrary, more than one witness stated that, at that pe-
riod of time, Dr. Zelezny acted as an honest representative of both cor-
porations, pursuing the business interest solely of these corporations.

The Arbitral Tribunal is aware that coercion claims suffer significant
practical difficulties as they may raise the suspicion that the Claimant has

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

525.

526.

527.

- 142-

been playing a too clever game, first taking what he could get from the
deal with the foreign government and then, coming for a second bite un-
der the Treaty proceedings (see Professor Vagts as cited with similar
concern on page 34). The Arbitral Tribunal is of the view that such dan-
ger does not exist in these arbitration proceedings.

Should the Claimant's joint venture company CNTS receive a remedy
through Czech Republic civil or administrative court proceedings, this
may have an impact on the quantum of the damage claim. This issue
however, must clearly be distinguished from the question whether the
1996 treatment of CNTS and CME by the Media Council was a breach of
the Treaty. The Arbitral Tribunal’s response to this question is affirma-
tive. The danger that the coercion claim under the Treaty in these arbi-
tration proceedings will grant compensation in addition to CNTS Civil
Court claim (if granted), is not present, as the Parties instructed this Tri-
bunal not to deal with the quantum at this stage of the arbitral proceed-
ings.

Professor Vagts made the following suggestion for the elements of a
code of unfair bargaining practices during investor-government negotia-
tions (page 34 of Professor Vagts’ publication as cited above) which, in-
ter alia, prohibits a government from the following acts:

“Cancellation of the franchise, permit, or authorization to do busi-
ness in which the investor relies, except in accordance with its
terms; and Regulatory Action without bona fide governmental pur-
pose (or without bona fide timing) designed to make the investor's
business unprofitable. ”

This seems to be a reasonable threshold which is passed by the Coun-
cil’s actions in this case.

The Respondents argument that a breach of the Treaty by coercion did
not take place, because CNTS’ business under the amended 1996 MOA
and the Service Agreement was even more profitable than before is un-
sustainable. The effect of the coercion was that CME lost its legal pro-
tection for the investment. It is not necessary that the economic disad-
vantage, as a consequence of the loss of legal protection, occurred im-
mediately after the Media Council’s intervention into the contractual rela-
tionship between CET 21 and GNTS took place. Causation arises if the

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

528.

529.

530.

531.

- 143 -

damage or disadvantage deriving from the deprivation of the legal safety
of the investment is foreseeable and occurs in a normal sequence of
events. The protection of rights in corporate life does not materialize be-
fore a commercial conflict arises. This may occur years later. The mere
lapse of time does not diminish the Claimant’s rights as a consequence
of the Media Council's unlawful interference in CNTS’ basic legal right to
operate TV NOVA on the basis of the exclusive use of the Licence. The
negative effects of the loss of the legal security of the investment materi-
alized and surfaced in 1999 which is roughly 30 months later. This is not
a long time neither in corporate life nor in respect to a long-term invest-
ment in a TV station.

The Respondent's further contention is that the 1996 change of CME’s
investment protection is not a breach of the Treaty, as the 1993 invest-
ment protection, if construed in any legal action in accordance with
Czech law, would not have been enforced by a court as the Media Law
prohibited the transfer of the Licence under Article 10.2 of the Media
Law. The Respondent’s actions therefore, as Professor Lowe at the
Stockholm hearing argued, did not violate any legal disposition.

This contention is unsustainable. The Media Council jointly with CEDC
developed the investment scheme by creating the 1993 split structure
which was thereafter also used by other broadcasters. CME and its
predecessor as foreign investor could reasonably rely on this structure
which was developed in close conjunction with and approved by the Me-
dia Council.

Whether a Czech National Court would support and defend this structure
is not dispositive. The Media Council was obligated to defend and secure
this structure, after having attracted foreign investment on the basis of it.
This placed the obligation on the Media Council not to interfere with the
legal foundation of the Claimant’s predecessor's investment.

The Respondent’s position, also submitted by Professor Lowe at the
Stockholm hearing, that CET 21, by law, was always in the position to

use and exploit the Licence itself, is in clear contradiction to the MOA,
under which CET 21 contributed the exclusive use of the Licence to
ENTS. The legality or non-legality of the 1993 split structure is not at

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

532.

533.

534.

535.

-144-

stake. At stake is the protection of the structure and the Council’s obliga-
tion not to undermine this structure by pressing the investor to give up
basic rights which secured his investment.

The Respondent's further contention submitted by Professor Lowe that
the efficiency of the 1996 arrangement has never been tested is not con-
vincing. The lack of efficiency of the 1996 arrangement was seriously
displayed in civil law court proceedings. The Regional Commercial Court
protected the validity of the Service Agreement after it was terminated by
CET 21 on questionable grounds. The first instance judgment was how-
ever overturned by the Appellate Court by a highly unconvincing judg-
ment, leaving the final decision to the Czech Supreme Court. This unac-
ceptable legal and commercial risk of prolonged legal battles was exactly
what CEDC as foreign investor tried to avoid, when making its invest-
ment decisions in 1996. Such risk for the investor's investment is unac-
ceptable and demonstrates the inadequacy of the 1996 arrangements (in
contrast to Professor Lowe’s submissions).

The Czech Republic and/or the Media Council are as a matter of princi-
ple not debarred from amending or altering the basis for CME’s invest-
ment, subject to acquired rights and treaty obligations. This is a question
of the Czech Republic’s national sovereignty. However, any such action
should have been done under due process of law, providing just com-
pensation to the deprived investor (Art. 5 of the Treaty). The silent and
coerced vitiation of CME’s basis for its investment does not fulfil such a
requirement and is, therefore, under the standards of the Treaty, and the
rules of international law, a breach of treaty obligations.

The Respondent's further contention that CNTS could have avoided the
pressure from administrative proceedings: it only had “to stop breaking
the law”, is unsustainable. The Arbitral Tribunal cannot identify a breach
of law by CNTS, having scrutinized the documents submitted in these
proceedings and the witness statements made, as well as the testimony
of witnesses.

The Respondent's contention that CET 21 / GNTS improperly imple-
mented the 1993 legal arrangements is not supported either by docu-
ments or by witness statements. On the contrary, as shown in detail

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

536.

537.

538.

539.

- 145 -

above and also later in this Award, administrative proceedings were initi-
ated not to enforce the proper implementation of the 1993 legal ar-
rangements but to undo these arrangements. Otherwise, the Media
Council could have requested a change of the implementation without
requesting the change of the MOA and without requesting the imple-
mentation of the new Service Agreement. This was not the case. The
Media Council requested a complete change of the basic legal protection
of CME’s investment by substituting for “the use of the licence” contrib-
uted by CET 21 to GNTS the (useless) use of know-how of the licence.

Therefore, the final argument of the Respondent at the Stockholm hear-
ing, in particular alleging the “hand-over of the reins from CET 21 to
ENTS”, is not convincing. The reins were not handed over by CET 21 to
ENTS in the years 1993 to 1996. The legal basis for the investment was
not changed before 1996. The implementation of the 1993 legal ar-
rangements conformed to the legal documents of its formation.

The legal arrangements between CET 21 and CNTS were implemented
in accordance with the wording and the intentions of the Parties, includ-
ing the Media Council, which co-designed and approved the structure in
1993.

The Media Council, acting on behalf of the Czech Republic, in 1996
breached the Treaty by coercing CME and CNTS into giving up legal se-
curity for CME’s investment in the Czech Republic.

(3) The Media Council supports the destruction of CME’s in-
vestment

In 1999, the Media Council actively supported the destruction of CME’s
investment in CNTS. This conclusion is based predominantly on the
documents submitted to the Arbitral Tribunal and by the statements of
the witnesses. According to the minutes of the Council Meeting of
March 2, 1999, Dr. Zelezny, at that time CEO of TV NOVA (GNTS) and
Executive Director of CET 21, visited the Media Council on the so-called
‘Visitation Day”. According to the minutes, the reasons for the visit were
“the current relationships with the foreign investor, current internal situa-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

- 146-

tion of the investor”. Dr. Zelezny informed the Council about purported fi-
nancial difficulties of CNTS’ 99 % shareholder CME (1 % shareholding
by CET 21). Dr. Zelezny informed the Council about the conflict between
CET 21 (Dr. Zelezny having a majority of 60 % shareholding in this com-
pany at that time) and CNTS and that CET 21 had set a deadline for
CME for changing the MOA. Otherwise, CET 21 would sell its 1 % share
in GNTS and withdraw the broadcasting Licence from CNTS, unless
CNTS were prepared to enter in a new set of agreements “on the sale of
advertisements, technology operations and technology support”. If CME
would not accept this solution by March 20, CET 21 will enforce this
“clean alternative”. Dr. Zelezny, in his capacity as Executive Director and
shareholder of CET 21, requested the support of the Council against
ENTS, in spite of being the CEO of this company as well:

‘CET 21 would like to ask the Council to repeat some statements
of the Council (exclusivity, withdrawal of the Licence) in relation to
all steps within the logic of the development of the relationships
between CET 21 and the Council. If and when harming the inter-
ests of CNTS, Zelezny will need to be supported by a formal or
informal letter. They are interested in a long-term stability, also in
connection with a re-granting of the Licence. They ask the Coun-
cil, whether it would be willing to remind of the principles which it
had discussed with NOVA during various administrative proceed-
ings and other negotiations”.

540. Dr. Zelezny further gave details for the contemplated new legal structure
which he was going to impose on CNTS.

“It is a shift from a general [Service] Agreement to 5 specific
agreements. The only exception - exclusivity in case of re-granting
of the Licence. Zelezny asks for a letter redefining the general
principles on the basis of which a package of sufficiently specific
agreements could be proposed to the partners. If the Council de-
cides that such letter is not suitable, because it would pre-con-
ceive some formulations of the act, Zelezny will solve the situa-
tion. He would need as one of the documents a relevant docu-
ment with a new date, the partners consider it more convenient
not to reflect to it and not to risk a criminal recourse for not having
reported correctly on changes (amendment)... "

541. In the further discussions, the Council suggested to Dr. Zelezny to put
concrete questions to the Council. Further, the minutes say:

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

542.

543.

- 147 -

“We have a common interest. It is not a problem for Zelezny to
formulate the questions. The current version of the agreement will
be attached. They are willing to hand-over the agreements which
have been prepared in order to make the matter more transpar-
ent."

On the next day, on March 3, 1999, Dr. Zelezny, under the letterhead of
CET 21, sent the questionnaire to the Council. The letter spelled out that
the communication between the Council and Dr. Zelezny should not be
disclosed:

‘It is extremely important for us to receive the formulated princi-
ples in the form of an independent report of the Council as a reply
to our request. We would like to use this opinion for discussions
with our contractual partners, without disclosing other internal
matters of our company..."

“We consider this type of co-operation with the regulatory body, in
the form of a preliminary inquiry and professional consultation, to
be very suitable, and we would like to apply it in the future as well

Further, Dr. Zelezny offered (as promised) to supply to the Council the
new set of contracts to be implemented for the future co-operation with
ENTS. Further, Dr. Zelezny asked for the confirmation of his principles:

“These are formulations of general principles, on which we want to
base our activities. We ask you to confirm their validity in the form
of the Council's opinion:

“CET 21 will act, function and proceed as an operator, and,
therefore, it has to carry out relevant managerial, administrative,
and accounting tasks, and must build up its own company struc-
ture to include functions that cannot be transferred to service or-
ganizations. Employees responsible for programming and _pro-
gramme composition must be persons appointed or authorized di-
rectly by the CET 21 company.

Relations between the operator of broadcasting and its service
must be established on a non-exclusive basis, because exclusive
relations between the licence-holder and the service organization
may encourage the transfer of some functions and rights that are

dependent on the Licence and that are not transferable by law. In

our opinion, CET 21, the operator, should order services from
service organizations at regular prices so as to respect rules of
equal competition. The selection of services should be decided by
the licensed company independently, so that services are in ac-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

- 148 -

cordance with the profile of the television station stipulated in the
Licence and the quality of the services meet the requirements of
the licensed company, For the level of provided services to agree
with the terms of the Licence and Czech regulatory requirements,
the licensed subject must have the ability to select relevant serv-
ices anytime and anywhere at will which consideration ensues
from the responsibility to operate television broadcasting.

Because the broadcasting time reserved for advertisements is by
law a direct function of the Licence, and broadcasting business

activity is registered by the operator only, revenues from adver-
tisements that result from the sale of broadcasting time must be

revenues of CET 21, from which proportional profit is reported and
properly taxed in accordance with the Commercial Code. The ac-

counting methodology for the company should be adapted to this

fact. Of course, the right of the CET 21 company to pay fees for

services ordered by CET 21 is not affected by this fact.

CET 21 will unequivocally decide on the composition of broad-

casting, on programming and alloted time slots and genre, on the

ratio of domestically produced and foreign programmes, and on
questions of journalistic independence, objectivity, and balance in
news reporting. The right to use programme Licences and copy-

rights in the form of broadcasting is exclusively within the scope of
the operator who, for this purpose, must acquire Licences and

rights from servicing organizations or directly from the owners of
such rights and Licences."

544. The Council responded to this letter on March 15, 1999 by a letter
signed by the Chairman of the Council, Josef Josefik, on the Council's
official letterhead. The Council confirmed the “general principles” by six
bullet points which, in essence, repeat (to some extent word by word)
the proposal of Dr. Zelezny, the main difference being that the Council
generalized the principles by replacing “CET 21” by “operator” or “li-
cence-holder”. In essence, the contents of the bullet points and the
“general principles” as proposed by Dr. Zelezny are identical:

“In regard to the preparation of the Annual Activity Report of the
Council for Radio and Television Broadcasting, the Council also
dealt with the current status of private television broadcasting.

| refer to your personal visit to the Council during which you in-
formed us about the current situation in broadcasting and | con-
firm the fulfilment of the Council’s requirements that were a pre-
condition for termination of the proceedings on unauthorized
broadcasting by the CNTS_ company.

Because the Council was also asked by the Parliamentary Media
Committee to issue an opinion on whether commercial television
broadcasting complies with the Act on Broadcasting and valid Li-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-149-

cences, we would like to summarize requirements that, in our
opinion, express the contents of television broadcasting:

An operator operates, functions and acts as an operator,
i.e. carries out relevant administrative, and accounting
tasks. Employees responsible for programming and com-
position of programmes are persons employed and ap-
pointed (authorized) directly by the licence-holder;

Business relations between the operator of broadcasting
and service organizations are built on a non-exclusive ba-
sis. Exclusive relations between the operator and the serv-
ice organization may result in de facto transfer of some
functions and rights pertaining to the operator of broad-
casting and, in effect, a transfer of the licence;

The operator is fully responsible for the structure and com-
position of programme and carries full editorial responsibil-
ity. The operator broadcasts programme in its own and on
its own account and responsibility. The operator, therefore,
must unequivocally decide on the content of broadcasting,
its time and genre composition, and the ratio between do-
mestic and foreign programmes;

- The operator concludes contracts in its own name with
protection organizations for authors and performing artists.
The redemption of programme rights and copyright in the
form of broadcasting shall be form the exclusively by the
operator. For that purpose, the operator is obliged to obtain
Licences and rights from commission organizations or di-
rectly from their owners;

- The operator concludes contracts in its own name with or-

ganizations providing technical transmission of television
signals;
Revenue from advertising is the result of the sale of adver-
tising time which is directly connected to the Licence;
therefore, it must be repotted and taxed by the entity per-
forming the actual fulfilment [Translator’s Note: broadcast-
ing the commercials], i.e., the operator. (Of course, it is
permitted with respect to this area of business that the op-
erator concludes a contract with an agency which will pur-
chase the advertisement for the operator).

The Council terminated the administrative proceedings on unau-
thorized broadcasting because most of the above-mentioned ma-
terial characteristics of the operator were respected and docu-
mented, by CET 21 s.r.o. According to the report and documents
submitted by CET 21, this course was also confirmed by changes
in the Memorandum of Association and its business contracts,

We ask you to inform us about the current status of the imple-
mentation of the above-mentioned procedures and to document
the manner of the actual implementation of the above-mentioned
points in the current wording of the Memorandum of Association

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

545.

546.

547.

- 150-

and related business contracts concluded by the operator of
broadcasting, CET 21, s.r.o.

The Council inspects the current status of private television
broadcasting and monitors whether the broadcasting of commer-
cial television stations complies with the Act on Broadcasting and
whether these stations broadcast on basis of valid Licences.
Therefore, we ask you to submit the current programme composi-
tion and broadcasting schedule, in accordance with the Licence
terms.

[illegible signature]
Josef Josefik”

The Parties’ interpretation of the March 15, 1999 letter differs. While the
Claimant is of the opinion that the letter is a Treaty violation, the Re-
spondent’s view is that the letter expressed the Council’s general policy,
not binding in the specific situation of CNTS. The witness Josef Josefik,
at that time Chairman of the Council, interpreted the letter as a recom-
mendation and the witness Musil said that the letter reflected the Coun-
cil’s model, the Council's policy and that this letter was used as a model
by the Council.

The Arbitral Tribunal’s assessment is that the letter cannot be interpreted
without taking the circumstances into consideration. The letter was ad-
dressed and sent to Dr. Zelezny in both of his capacities: as CEO of
TV NOVA and as Executive Director of CET 21. The letter stated general
principles of the current status of private television broadcasting and, in
this letter, the Council summarized “requirements that, in our opinion,
express the contents of television broadcasting.” The principles summa-
rized under six bullet points are, therefore, not recommendations. The
Council summarizes “requirements”. Specifically addressed to CET 21
and TV NOVA, the Council requested TV NOVA and CET 21 “to inform
the Council about the current status of the implementation of the above-
mentioned procedures and to document the manner of the actual imple-
mentation of the above-mentioned points in the current wording of the
Memorandum of Association and related business contracts concluded
by the operator of broadcasting, CET 21.”

This letter, therefore, as its clear wording demonstrates, is not just the
expression of the Council's general policy. It is directly addressed to
CNTS and CET 21 and deals with their specific contractual situation.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-151-

Moreover, the Council stated that “it terminated the administrative pro-
ceedings on unauthorized broadcasting because most of the above-
mentioned material characteristics of the operator were respected and
documented by CET 21. According to the report and documents sub-
mitted by CET 21, this course was also confirmed by changes in the
Memorandum of Association and its business contracts”.

548. A neutral reader of this letter must interpret this letter as a clear request
by the Council to CET 21 and CNTS to comply with all of the “require-
ments” because the 1996/1997 contractual changes had fulfilled most
but not all of the “characteristics”. The reference to administrative pro-
ceedings was a clear warning by the regulator about possible conse-
quences, should CET 21 and GNTS not comply with the “characteristics”
or “requirements”.

549. The “characteristics” or “requirements” in the six bullet points substan-
tially deviate from the 1993 legal concept (the above so-called 1993 split
structure) and further, they also substantially deviate from the 1996/1997
required amendment of the legal structure between CET 21 and GNTS.
The first bullet point stipulates that the licence-holder has to carry out
relevant administrative and accounting tasks. The second bullet point
stipulates that the business relations between the operator of broad-
casting and service organizations are built on a non-exclusive basis
(which was in clear contrast to the exclusive Service Agreement between
CET 21 and GNTS) and, the sixth bullet point stipulates that revenues
from advertising must be reported and taxed by the entity performing the
actual fulfilment, i.e. the operator (in the meaning of the licence-holder).

550. This letter of the broadcasting regulator was a further blow to the already
fragile 199611997 contractual basis of CME’s investment (the exclusive
use of the know-how of the Licence as stipulated in the MOA and the ex-
clusive Service Agreement). It was a clear interference by the Council
with the 1996/1997 structure as implemented under the pressure of the
Council by CNTS being forced to enter into the Service Agreement and
agree on the amendment of the MOA. It was a serious interference, as it
contained the Regulator’s threat to enforce the requested changes, refer-
ring to the administrative proceedings for unlawful broadcasting by

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-152-

ENTS. The waiver of exclusivity would clearly destroy the legal basis for
CME’s investment in the Czech Republic.

551. This interference by the Media Council in the economic and legal basis
of CME’s investment carries the stigma of a Treaty violation. The Media
Council was obviously working hand-in-hand with Dr. Zelezny when sup-
porting Dr. Zelezny in his attack upon CME’s already fragile basis for
CME’s investment in CNTS. The March 15, 1999 letter refers to the per-
sonal visit of Dr. Zelezny to the Media Council. It, however, conceals
Dr. Zelezny’s letter dated March 3, 1999 which provided the wording for
the bullet points. As the witness Mr. Klinkhammer stated, the letter of
March 3 was found in Dr. Zelezny’s papers by the company’s auditors
after Dr. Zelezny was dismissed later in the year. The March 3, 1999
letter was not seen by Mr. Klinkhammer, CME’s representative in the
Czech Republic, when it was communicated. The Respondent's wit-
nesses (including Mr. Josefik and Mr. Musil) could offer no explanation
for the failure of the Council's letter of March 15 to refer to Dr. Zelezny’s
letter of March 3, despite the former letter in fact being a reply to the lat-
ter.

552. Dr. Zelezny, at the meeting with the Media Council on March 2, 1999
openly disclosed to the Council that the purpose of the requested inter-
vention by the Council was “to harm GNTS”. Dr. Zelezny further openly
discussed with the Council his conflict of interest (“Dr. Zelezny - | am sit-
ting on two chairs which move off one from the other”). The Media Coun-
cil, the Czech Republic’s broadcasting regulator, at the Council Meeting
on March 2, 1999, when dealing with the topic “the current relationship
with the foreign investor”, did not abstain from actively supporting
Dr. Zelezny who clearly and openly violated his duties as CEO of CNTS,
the joint venture company, the beneficiary of the foreign investor's in-
vestment. This unconcealed violation by Dr. Zelezny of his duties under
corporate and civil law cannot be seen as a harmless commercial differ-
ence between the majority shareholder and Executive Director of CET 21
on one side and the service company CNTS on the other side. It is a
massive, clear and intentional breach by Dr. Zelezny of his director's du-
ties, a breach of law that must be assessed as a serious criminal offence
in any functioning judicial system.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

553.

554.

555.

- 153 -

The minutes of the March 2, 1999 Council Meeting which disclosed the
foregoing facts are from the Media Council's files, remitted to the Arbitral
Tribunal by its Order at the request of the Claimant. The parties are in
agreement on the translation submitted to the Arbitral Tribunal. The par-
ties disagree on the interpretation, but they do not dispute the wording of
the minutes. This wording is consistent with the witness statements, ac-
cording to which written minutes were in conformity with the facts or
speeches of what was heard at the Council Meeting.

The Arbitral Tribunal’s conclusion is that the sole purpose of the
March 15,1999 letter was to support Dr. Zelezny in putting pressure on
the foreign investor CME in order to achieve a re-arrangement of the
contractual relations between CET 21 and CNTS as desired by
Dr. Zelezny, an arrangement that would destroy the legal basis (the
safety net) of the foreign investor's investment. There was no other pur-
pose. In particular, there was no serious follow-up to this letter. In re-
sponse to the specific question by the Tribunal at the Stockholm hearing,
Mr. Josefik stated that he could not recall off the top of his head that the
Council had received a response to the part of the letter that asked
CET 21 to inform the Council about the current status of the implementa-
tion of the requirements. On the face of it and quite obviously, the Media
Council did not pursue any regulatory purpose with the letter. The only
object was to put the letter with the agreed wording into Dr. Zelezny’s
hands, the purpose of which was clearly described by Dr. Zelezny to the
Media Council at the Council meeting on March 2, 1999, which was
“harming the interest of CNTS”.

The March 15, 1999 letter was not a private matter of the Council’s
Chairman. According to Mr. Josefik, the letter was drafted in a standard
procedure, cleared through individual departments and then presented to
the Council. The letter referred to Dr. Zelezny’s visit at the Council
Meeting on March 2, 1999, but did not reveal that the bullet points were
prepared by Dr. Zelezny in his letter of March 3, 1999. The
March 15, 1999 letter, a regulatory letter of the broadcasting regulator,
was fabricated in collusion between Dr. Zelezny and the Media Council
behind the back of GNTS (TV NOVA) to give CET 21 a tool to undermine
the legal foundation of CME’s_ investment.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

556.

557.

558.

559.

-154-

The Respondent's view, supported by Mr. Josefik, according to which
the Council did not intend to support Dr. Zelezny in his dispute with CME,
is not convincing. The clear facts and circumstances speak against it. In

this context, the Arbitral Tribunal is constrained to observe again that
Mr. Josefik showed a selective memory. Specifically questioned on his
personal contacts with Dr. Zelezny in 1999, he responded on page 48 of

the Stockholm hearing outprint of day 7: “However, | do not recall that |
had any other talk than a courtesy talk”. When further interrogated as
whether he talked to Dr. Zelezny over the telephone in 1999, he admitted

that telephone conversations took place about the relationship between
CET 21 and GNTS, Dr. Zelezny carrying on a monologue on the subject.
“However, | do not recall any specific topic.” The witness Mr. Josefik was
vague in recollecting these communications, whereas in respect to other
details of the March 15, 1999 letter, his recollection was precise and

clear.

The Arbitral Tribunal’s impression was that Mr. Josefik’s witness state-
ments were coloured voluntarily or involuntarily by his desire not to qual-
ify the Media Council's actions as a breach of the Treaty, taking into ac-
count that Mr. Josefik prepared his written witness statements at a time
when he was still holding the position of the Chairman of the Council.

The Tribunal, therefore, is of the opinion that the Respondent's witness’
statements and the Respondent's suggestions for the interpretation of
the minutes of March 2, and the March 3 and the March 15, 1999 letters
do not overturn the plain wording of these documents which speak for
themselves. The Czech Republic, acting through its broadcasting regu-
lator, the Media Council, massively supported Dr. Zelezny in his efforts to
destroy CME’s investment in the Czech Republic by eliminating CNTS as
the exclusive service provider for CET 21.

(4) CNTS’ dismantling as exclusive service provider supported
by Council’s actions and inactions

With the Media Council’ letter of March 15, 1999 in his hands,
Dr. Zelezny fulfilled the threats of his ultimatum which he had given to
CME at the meeting of the Board of Representatives of CNTS on Febru-
ary 24, 1999. At this meeting, Dr. Zelezny had requested a change of the

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

560.

561.

-155-

Service Agreement by eliminating exclusivity. Otherwise, he threatened,
he would change the contractual relation between CET 21 and CNTS
unilaterally. In that case, Dr. Zelezny announced, CET 21 will hire an-
other advertising agency for the sale of the advertisement time and pro-
cure broadcasting services from other providers on the basis that the
Service Agreement between CET 21 and GNTS was not exclusive. This
was, de facto, the withdrawal of the use of the Licence, what Dr. Zelezny
later at his visit at the Media Council, according to the minutes of this
meeting, described as “the clean alternative”.

Dr. Zelezny, at the Board Meeting, further announced that "the Council
wants to change its original decision and to write a letter with the state-
ment that the present relationship between CET 21 and CNTS is not cor-
rect”. In particular, due to the announcement of this yet-to-be-written let-
ter of the Media Council, it is obvious that, in contrast to the Council's
chairman Mr. Josefik’s rather vague and evasive oral witness statement
at the Stockholm hearing, Dr. Zelezny had prepared his ultimatum and
the implementation of his threats in communications with the Council,
which communications were confirmed by Mr. Josefik (who denied any
talk of substance) and which communications are also confirmed by
Mr. Klinkhammer’s witness statement, according to which Dr. Zelezny in
this critical period, as revealed by company telephone charges, made
numbers of telephone calls on the CNTS mobile phone to the Council.

The witness Mr. Klinkhammer, who took over as a Chief Executive of
CME on March 23, 1999, stated that CME made substantial efforts to
prevent the dismantling of CNTS by Dr. Zelezny by making various
commercial approaches to bring to him such as merging CET21 and
ENTS in order to retain the use of the licence for the joint venture com-
pany. The witness stated that, as part of these efforts, CME and/or its ul-
timate shareholder Mr. Lauder, offered to pay to Dr. Zelezny up to
US $ 200 million in order to find a suitable arrangement securing the
continued exclusive use of the Licence which was the basis for the in-
vestment of CME in the Czech Republic. These efforts failed and it ap-
pears obvious that Dr. Zelezny had gained the Media Council's legal
support for CET 21’s view that the Service Agreement was not exclusive.
This legal position of the Regulator provided the basis for Dr. Zelezny to

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

- 156 -

dismantle the Service Agreement relationship and take over TV NOVA
without compensating the foreign investor CME.

562. According to Mr. Klinkhammer’s witness statement, CNTS’ majority
shareholder CME at the shareholder's meeting on April 19, 1999 dis-
missed Dr. Zelezny as CEO of CNTS after having confronted Dr. Zelezny
with documents proving that CET 21 through Dr. Zelezny’s actions al-
ready had breached the exclusive Service Agreement with CNTS, inter
alia submitting a letter which Dr. Zelezny had written announcing that
GENTS had been withdrawn from the business of programme acauisition
and that this would now be handled by a company AQS, a clear breach
of the Service Agreement.

563. Dr. Zelezny’s breach of contract was strongly supported by the Council's
letter dated March 15, 1999. This view is supported by the further se-
quence of events as derived from the documents and confirmed inter alia
by the witness Mr. Klinkhammer. Mr. Klinkhammer, as representative of
CME, appeared in front of the Council in April 1999 and gave a two-hour-
presentation on CME’s/CNTS’ factual and legal position as basis for
CME’s investment. Mr. Klinkhammer explained the events that led to
Dr. Zelezny’s dismissal. This presentation, according to Mr. Klinkham-
mer, made the situation abundantly clear for the Media Council. CME
made the clear statements about CME’s/CNTS’s conviction and intent to
continue to operate within the broadcasting and all other laws of the
Czech Republic and all regulations imposed on CNTS, the MOA and the
Service Agreement of 1997. CME, also according to Mr. Klinkhammer,
put the Council on notice that CME thought that the Council's action of
March 15, 1999 “had confiscated at least a portion of our investment in
the Czech Republic”.

564. At the latest at this point of time the Media Council, the broadcasting
regulator in the Czech Republic, must have clearly understood the con-
sequences of its interference in the legal relations between CNTS as
service provider and CET 21 as licence-holder. The Council, at the latest
at this point of time, could have clarified the legal situation and remedied
its interference by recalling its letter of March 15, 1999.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

565.

566.

567.

568.

569.

- 157 -

The Council did not respond to CME’s two-hour-presentation which, ac-
cording to Mr. Klinkhammer, was accompanied by a written communica-
tion which was handed over, after the presentation was finished.

By letter dated June 24, 1999, signed by both its new executive and gen-
eral director and its lawyer, CNTS repeated its position to the Media
Council with copies to the Vice-Chairman of the Permanent Media
Committee of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of the
Czech Republic, to the Vice-Chairwoman of the same Committee and
with copies to three Vice-Chairpersons of the Media Council. GNTS,
again, described the legal basis for CME’s investment in the Czech Re-
public in 1993 which was amended in 1996 as approved and adopted by
the Council in 1997. CNTS referred to the exclusivity of the legal ar-
rangement and described Dr. Zelezny’s breaches of CET 21’s obliga-
tions under the various agreements, in particular under the MOA and the
Service Agreement. CNTS requested the Media Council to explain its le-
gal position in respect of the legal structure of the inter-relation between
CET 21 and CNTS and CME or “to take measures which would resolve
the current dispute between CET 21, CNTS and CME in connection with
the legal structure of these relationships and prevent their violation on
the part of CET 21 and Dr. Vladimir Zelezny".

The Media Council disregarded CME’s and CNTS’ request for clarifica-
tion of the legal situation and abstained from any action or intervention,
thus tolerating CET 21’s breach of contract, supported by and based on
the Council’s March 15, 1999 letter.

By letter of July 13, 1999 CNTS, again, requested the Council’s evalua-
tion of the exclusivity of the relationship between CET 21 and CNTS.
ENTS, in full detail, referred to the history of the contractual relation, the
Council's involvement and the inter-relation between the exclusive Serv-
ice Agreement and the foregoing agreements between the contractual
parties, as the basis for the Claimant’s investment in the Czech Republic.

ENTS concluded its request as follows:

“We hope the above specified facts ... will help to evaluate the
legal relationship between CNTS and CET 21 impartially, and thus
to conclude that the relationship between CNTS and CET 21 is an

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

570.

571.

572.

- 158 -

exclusive relationship which was as such established, construed,
and, up until the creation of the dispute with Dr. Zelezny, as such
respected by all participated physical and legal entities and by
concrete legal acts was being fulfilled”.

The Media Council did not reverse its unlawful interference. On the con-
trary, the Tribunal increased its pressure on CNTS. In a response letter
dated July 26, 1999, the Council referred to a legal opinion which the
Council had prepared at request of the Permanent Commission for Me-
dia of the Parliament on the dispute between CNTS and CET 21 with
special regard to disputed matters regarding the exclusivity of agree-
ments between CNTS and CET 21, and which the Council provided to

the Parliament on the same day. The Council attached an excerpt of this
opinion to the letter to CNTS requesting CNTS “to stop immediate/y your
media campaigns in connection with a trade dispute and to inform the
Czech Media Council by August 15, 1999 on new steps that shall mini-
mize the risks mentioned and shall lead to a final settlement of the dis-

pute in compliance with the applicable laws”.

The legal opinion submitted to the Parliament referred to the “risk of a
breach of the Media Law taking the position that as long as the dispute
did not deviate from its commercial nature, the Council had no legal rea-
son or right to interfere in it.” The Media Council neither addressed the
issue of the non-exclusivity of the Service Agreement nor did it revoke its
letter of March 15, 1999.

This non-response and inaction by the Media Council aggravated the
deterioration of CME’s legal basis for its investment in the Czech Repub-
lic by reiterating and further supporting the elimination of the contractual
exclusivity of the Service Agreement, the (already fragile) basis for the
protection of CME’s investment in the Czech Republic. In August 1999
and thereafter, the Media Council, although recurrently informed by
GNTS and CET 21 of Dr. Zelezny’s further acts to dismantle CNTS’ legal
and factual position as exclusive service provider to CET 21 (including
the termination of the Service Agreement on August 5, 1999), disre-
garded CNTS’ request to protect the legal arrangement which was the
basis for CME’s investment in the Czech Republic.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

~159-

573. The Media Council, after having coerced the 1996/1997 change in the
legal basis for CME’s investment and after having further jeopardized in
conjunction with Dr. Zelezny the (already) fragile legal arrangements
between CNTS and CET 21 by the Council’s letter dated March 15,
1999, was obligated to re-establish and secure the legal protection for
CME’s investment. As a minimum measure to clarify the legal uncertainty
for the Claimant's investment (caused by Council's acts), the Council
should have recalled its collusive March 15, 1999 letter by confirming the
exclusive service relation between CET 21 and CNTS. The Council, in its
capacity as broadcasting regulator, was bound to have abstained from
supporting the dismantling of CME’s investment by Dr. Zelezny.

574. After the Council by its acts had jeopardized the legal basis of CME’s
investment, it was not sufficient for it to keep silent and abstain from any
regulatory clarification of the legal situation when, beginning in July 1999
and thereafter, Dr. Zelezny and CET 21 exploited the vitiation of the legal
protection of CME’s investment by eliminating CNTS as exclusive service
provider, which was the basis of CME’s investment in the Czech Repub-
lic.

(5) Causation of damage by Council’s actions and omissions

575. The collapse of CME’s investment was caused by the Media Council’s
coercion against CME, in requiring in 1996 the amendment of the legal
structure as the basis of its investment and by aggravating the Media
Council’s interference with the legal relationship between CET 21 and
ENTS by issuing an official regulator's letter which eliminated the exclu-
sivity of the Service Agreement, an exclusivity that was the cornerstone
of CME’s legal protection for its investment. The destruction of CME’s in-
vestment after the termination of the Service Agreement on
August 5, 1999 was the consequence of the Media Council's actions and
inactions. The legal disputes, proceedings and actions between CET 21,
GNTS and CME thereafter do not affect the qualification of these actions
and omissions as breach of the Treaty.

576. The key question of these arbitration proceedings, whether the Council
by coercion forced CME to give up its legal “safety net” in 1996, is to a

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

577.

578.

- 160 -

large extent answered by the Council's own interpretation of the se-
quence of events. In contrast to the Respondent's submission in these
arbitration proceedings (according to which CME 1996 voluntarily agreed
on the change of CNTS’ Memorandum of Association and on the imple-
mentation of the Service Agreement), the Media Council’s own descrip-
tion of the events is probative. In the Report of the Council for the Czech
Parliament of September 1999, the Council made it abundantly clear that
the Council was successfully requiring CME to change the MOA by
threatening it with administrative proceedings. In respect to the exclusiv-
ity of the use of the Licence, which was a cornerstone for the protection
of the Claimant’s investment in the Czech Republic, the Council reported
to the Parliament as follows:

“Each party has its own version of the heart of the issue based on
a different interpretation of concluded agreements. CME insists on
exclusivity and claims that CET 21 is obliged to broadcast exclu-
sivity through CNTS whereas CET 21 denies exclusivity and
claims its right to conclude service agreements with any compa-
nies it pleases. As in the past, the Council's position in this matter
is close to the opinion that an exclusive relationship between the
licence-holder and a service company is not desirable as it gives
an opportunity to manipulate with the licence. However, in this
dispute the Council will not provide interpretation of relevant provi-
sions of agreements concluded between the two parties of the
dispute as it is not its authority from the nature of matters. The
Council can only state that results of past administrative proceed-
ings, when the Council made the licence-holder to remedy certain
legal faults in the Memorandum of Association and to adhere to
laws, are currently showing in this matter’.

This is a very modest description of the Regulator’s pressure put on
CME/GNTS in order to change the legal basis for the co-operation be-
tween CET 21 and GNTS, now describing this as "the remedy of certain
legal fault” in the MOA which, in 1993, the Council (at that time com-
posed of other Council members) had jointly developed and imple-
mented in order to attract the investment and support of the foreign in-
vestor CEDC.

Also, the oral report of the Chairman of the Council, Mr. Josefik, at the
meeting of the Standing Committee for Mass Media of the Parliament of
September 30, 1999, as reported by the minutes of the meeting, ex-
plained the background for the Council's reversal of its legal position in

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

579.

- 161-

respect to the 1993 split structure, taking the ex-post-view that the 1993
structure was the illegal transfer of the licence to CNTS:

“The arrangement between the service organization and the op-
erator was quite unclear from the very beginning, and the Council
was criticized for insufficient control of whether, for example, the
licence was being transferred from the licensed entity to the CNTS
company. In May 1994 the Council was recalled precisely be-
cause, in the opinion of the House of Representatives, it had ac-
cepted a situation in which the provisions of the Act on Broad-
casting were constantly violated in the case of the operation of
nation-wide broadcasting by a subject that was not authorized to
perform such activity. Therefore it tolerated the illegal transfer of
the licence to CNTS.

Then came a period in which the Council, in its new composition,
made a very intensive effort to achieve clear relationships be-
tween the service organization and the operating company which
would be in compliance with the Act on Broadcasting. After an un-
successful attempt to delete an activity entered in the Commercial
Register for the CNTS company, the Council initiated an adminis-
trative proceeding concerning violation of the Act on Broadcasting
by this company’s unauthorized broadcasting. . . . [in the following
Mr. Josefik dealt with the new Media Law of 1996.] ...however, it
then proceeded with administrative proceedings concerning un-
authorized broadcasting and terminated them only when the op-
erator, CET 21, proved that the broadcasts were in compliance
with the law. These changes were also reflected in the Memoran-
dum of Association and the modification of relationships between
CET and CNTS”.

The Respondent's position in these arbitration proceedings, according to
which the original 1993 split structure did not violate the Media Law, that
(only) its implementation was unlawful and (further) that, in 1996,

CME/CNTS voluntarily agreed to change the MOA is unsustainable, in
the light of the Media Council’s and its Chairman’s own reports to the

parliament. The Media Council required CME to give up its legal protec-
tion for its investment and aggravated its so doing by interfering in con-

junction with Dr. Zelezny into the contractual relationship between
CET 21 and GNTS_ in 1999. These acts caused the complete destruction
of CME’s investment in the Czech Republic, CNTS holding now idle as-
sets without a business operation after Dr. Zelezny and his company
CET 21 established new service providers for TV NOVA.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

580.

581.

582.

- 162-

The Respondent further argued that no harm would have come to CME’s
investment without the actions of Dr. Zelezny; hence, the Media Council

and the Czech State are absolved of responsibility for the fate of CME’s
investment. This argument fails under the accepted standards of interna-

tional law. As the United Nations International Law Commission in its

Commentary on State responsibility recognizes, a State may be held re-
sponsible for injury to an alien investor where it is not the sole cause of

the injury; the State is not absolved because of the participation of other

tortfeasors in the infliction of the injury (Articles on the Responsibility of
States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, adopted on second reading by
the United Nations International Law Commission, 9 August 2001, Arti-
cle 31, “Reparation”, Commentary, paragraphs 9-10, 12-13).

This approach is consistent with the way in which the liability of joint
tortfeasors is generally dealt with in international law and State practice:

“It is the very general rule that if a tortfeasor’s behaviour is held to be a

cause of the victim’s harm, the tortfeasor is liable to pay for all of the
harm so caused, notwithstanding that there was a concurrent cause of
that harm and that another is responsible for that cause ... . In other

words, the liability of a tottfeasor is not affected vis-avis the victim by the

consideration that another is concurrently liable” (J.A. Weir, “Complex Li-
abilities”, in A. Tunc (ed.), International Encyclopedia of Comparative
Law. (Tubingen, Mohr, 1983), vol. XI., p. 47).

The Media Council’s actions in 1996 interfered with CME’s investment by
depriving CNTS’s broadcasting operations of their exclusive use of the
broadcasting licence, which was contributed by CET 21 to CNTS as a
corporate contribution. This interference with CNTS’ business and the
Media Council’s actions and omissions in 1999 must be characterized
similar to actions in tort. The Tribunal therefore is of the view that the
above described principles apply in this case. CME as aggrieved Claim-
ant may sue the Respondent in this arbitration and it may sue
Dr. Zelezny in separate proceedings, if judicial protection is available un-
der Czech or other national laws. In this arbitration the Claimant's claim
is not reduced by the Claimant's and/or CNTS's possible claims to be
pursued against Dr. Zelezny in other courts or arbitration proceedings,
although the Claimant may collect from the Respondent and any other

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

583.

584.

- 163 -

potential tortfeasor only the full amount of its damage. This question is
not dealt with in this Partial Award, It could be decided when deciding on
the quantum of the Claimant's claim or by national courts when dealing
with the enforcement of an award or judgment, which adjudicates the re-
covery for the same damage.

The U.N. International Law Commission observed that sometimes sev-
eral factors combine to cause damage. The Commission in its Com-

mentary referred to various cases, in which the injury was effectively

caused by a combination of factors, only one of which was to be as-
cribed to the responsible State. International practice and the decisions
of international tribunals do not support the reduction or attenuation of
reparation of concurrent causes, except in cases of contributory fault.

The U.N. International Law Commission referred in particular to the

Corfu Channel case, according to which the United Kingdom recovered
the full amount of its claim against Albania based on the latter’s wrongful
failure to warn of mines at the Albanian Coast, even though Albania had

not itself laid the mines (see Corfu Channel, Assessment of the Amount

of Compensation, |1.C.J. Reports 1949, p. 244 at p. 350). “Such a result
should follow a fortiori in cases, where the concurrent cause is not the

act of another State (which might be held separately responsible) but of
private individuals”, (UN International Law Commission as cited). The

U.N. International Law Commission further stated:

‘It is true that cases can occur where an identifiable element of
injury can properly be a/located to one of several concurrently op-
erating causes alone. But unless some patt of the injury can be

shown to be severable in causal terms from that attributed to the
responsible State, the latter is he/d responsible for all fhe conse-
quences, not being too remote, of its wrongful conduct.”

Various terms are used for such allocation of injury under international
law.

“The allocation of injury or loss to a wrongful act is, in principle, a
legal and not only a historical or causal process. Various terms
are used to describe the link which must exist between the
wrongful act and the injury in order for the obligation of reparation
to arise. For example, reference may be made to losses “attribut-
able [to the wrongful act] as a proximate cause”, or to damage
which is ‘too indirect, remote, and uncertain to be appraised.”

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

585.

- 164 -

“In some cases, the criterion of “directness” may be used, in oth-
ers “foreseeability” or “proximity”. But other factors may also be
relevant: for example, whether State organs deliberately caused
the harm in question or whether the harm caused was within the
ambit of the rule which was breached, having regard to the pur-
pose of that rule (see U.N. international Law Commission with
further extensive citations).

Pursuant to these standards, the allocation of injury or loss suf-
fered by CME to the Media Council’s acts and omissions is appro-
priate. The Media Council, when coercing CNTS in 1996 to amend
its MOA and to implement the Service Agreement must have un-
derstood the foreseeable consequences of its actions, depriving
CME of the legal “safety net” for its investment in the Czech Re-
public. Also in 1999 the Media Council must have foreseen the
consequences of supporting Dr. Zelezny, in dismantling the exclu-
siveness of CNTS’ services for CET 21 by the Council’s regulatory
letter of May 15, 1999, which supported Dr. Zelezny’s actions “to
harm CNTS.”

The Respondent breached the Treaty

By the Media Council's actions and failures to act, the Respondent has violated
its obligations towards the Claimant and its predecessors under the Treaty.

586.

The Respondent's violation of the Treaty relates only to the Media Coun-

cil’s actions and omissions, although the Czech Parliament had substan-

tial influence on the Media Council. For example “In May 1994, the

Council was recalled precisely because, in the opinion of the House of
Representatives, it had accepted a situation, in which the provisions of
the Act on Broadcasting were constantly violated in the case of the op-
eration of nation-wide broadcasting by a subject that was not authorized
to perform such activity” (minutes of the 6th meeting of the Standing

Committee for Mass Media of September 30, 1999, page 9 of the trans-
lation). Thereafter, the Council “in its new composition” reviewed the

situation and took certain steps to reverse the relationship between the

service company and the operating company.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

587.

588.

589.

590.

- 165 -

Further, the Council was obligated to render regular reports to the Per-
manent Commission for the Media of the Lower House of the Parliament
and further, was obligated to give special reports on certain issues such
as “the situation of the television station NOVA” as requested by the
Permanent Commission in its resolution of September 30, 1999.

Moreover, the Czech Parliament, by implementing the new Media Law in
force as of January 1, 1996, strongly affected broadcasting licences al-
ready granted by the Media Council, in particular by allowing the licence-
holder to request the waiver of licence conditions. This amendment of
the Media Law had substantial influence on the 1993 split structure as
developed by the Media Council for CET 21/CNTS and other broadcast-
ers to secure the proper co-operation of the licence-holder and the serv-
ice provider. By this amendment of the Media Law, the Media Council
lost its tool to monitor and supervise this co-operation. It remained a
broadcasting regulator responsible for the fulfilment of the legal require-
ments and duties under the Media Law, whereas the service provider,
providing the broadcasting operation, as a consequence of the new Me-
dia Law, escaped the Council’s survey and control.

It transpires from the documents submitted to the Arbitral Tribunal in
these proceedings that the Media Council clearly understood and de-
plored this development. However it is also clear that the Czech Parlia-
ment has the authority to organize national broadcasting in any way it
feels suitable, subject to any relevant international obligations of the
Czech State. The acts of the Czech Government, the Czech Parliament
or its Commissions are not under scrutiny by the Arbitral Tribunal in
these proceedings.

The Czech State acted towards the Claimant and its predecessors as
investors under the Treaty solely by acts of the regulator, the Media
Council. It is not the task of the Arbitral Tribunal to judge whether these
acts were in compliance with Czech law and regulations. The only task
for this Tribunal is to judge whether the actions and omissions of the Me-
dia Council were in compliance with the Treaty. The Tribunal’s consid-
ered conclusion is that the actions and failures to act of the Media Coun-
cil as described above, affecting CME and CNTS, were in breach of the
Treaty.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

- 166-

(i) The obligation not to deprive the Claimant of its investment
(Treaty Article 5)

591. The Claimant's expropriation claim under Article 5 of the Treaty is justi-
fied. The Respondent, represented by the Media Council, breached its
obligation not to deprive the Claimant of its investment. The Media
Council’s actions and omissions, as described above, caused the de-
struction of CNTS’ operations, leaving CNTS as a company with assets,
but without business. The Respondent's view that the Media Council's
actions did not deprive the Claimant of its worth, as there has been no
physical taking of the property by the State or because the original Li-
cence granted to CET 21 always has been held by the original Licensee
and kept untouched, is irrelevant. What was touched and indeed de-
stroyed was the Claimant's and its predecessor's investment as pro-
tected by the Treaty. What was destroyed was the commercial value of
the investment in CNTS by reason of coercion exerted by the Media
Council against CNTS in 1996 and its collusion with Dr. Zelezny in 1999.

592. The reversal of the Media Council’s position in respect to CME’s invest-
ment (after Council members were replaced by the Czech Parliament in
response to criticism of the Licence granted to CET 21 in conjunction
with the foreign investment in GNTS) might have been motivated by the
new Media Law as of January 1, 1996. However, this does not justify the
Council’s new interpretation of the legal situation or other regulatory ne-
cessities seen by the Council in 1996 and there is no justification for the
Council's actions in 1996, enforcing the amendment of 1993 arrange-
ments.

593. The Respondent’s defence that this interference in 1996 did not do any
harm, as “the Czech Court determined that, as a matter of law as well as
a matter of fact, CNTS had the exclusive right to provide certain televi-
sion services to CET 21 before CNTS took the step that terminated the
1997 Service Agreement and that step, of course, was the withholding of
the daily programme log on the 4th August 1999”, is not convincing. In
particular, the Defendant's view: “That step plainly had nothing whatever
to do with the Czech Authorities”, is unsustainable. The amendment of
the MOA by replacing the licence-holder’s contribution of the Licence by

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

594.

595.

596.

597.

- 167-

the worthless “use of the know-how of the Licence” is nothing else than
the destruction of the legal basis (‘the safety net”) of the Claimant's in-
vestment. This destruction was clearly caused by the Czech State, acting
through the Media Council.

The Respondent's claim that the Media Council has never reversed its
attitude to exclusivity, as it accepted exclusivity in 1993, but also ac-
cepted exclusivity in the amended provisions in 1996, is not supported
by the clear wording of the documents. The contrary is the case, as al-
ready explained above. The Respondent's contention that the Media
Council consistently tried to make clear that it was not concerned by the
question of exclusivity but by the question of the danger that an exclu-
sive arrangement may lead to an unlawful transfer of the Licence, is not
convincing. The clear facts speak against it. The Council, according to its
own interpretations in its reports to the Czech Parliament, reversed its
assessment of the legal situation in respect to the validity of the 1993
split ‘structure and took the necessary steps to implement this view by
coercing the change in the 1993 legal arrangements.

The Respondent’s further argument that the Council, in its internal delib-
erations, never discussed the matter of exclusivity until recently, might
well be the case. Indeed, the Council's interference in 1996, enforcing
the amendment of the MOA, was much more far reaching. The Council
forced the shareholders of GNTS to replace CET 21’s contribution of
“use of the Licence” by a worthless substitute, carrying a similar name.
The amendment was extracted from CNTS by the institution of adminis-
trative proceedings which sprung from the Media Council's own assess-
ment of the events. As already dealt with above, the Respondent's argu-
ment that the 1993 arrangement was not better than the 1996 amended
arrangement is not convincing.

The Respondent's further argument, also already rebutted above, that
the 1993 legal arrangements did not prevent CET 21 from obtaining
broadcasting services from other providers, goes against the exclusivity
of the 1993 arrangement in the MOA.

The Respondent's further argument, according to which the efficacy of
the 1993 arrangement has never been tested, is also not convincing.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

- 168 -

The Czech Civil Courts tested the arrangements. The Czech Appeal
Court's view that CNTS’ refusal to deliver the 4th August daily log gave
good cause for CET 21 to terminate the Service Agreement is a clear
proof of the fragile character of the (coerced) 1996 amendment. Since
1996, the legal safety net for the investment was based on the fragile
structure of a Service Agreement which could be terminated by CET 21
under any given or invented reason, creating by this an intolerable un-
certainty for a long-term investment.

598. In this respect, it would be superfluous to say that the contribution of “the
use of a Licence” (approved by the regulator) provided substantially
more legal safety for CNTS than the bilateral Service Agreement whose
legal uncertainty is demonstrated by the sequence of the following
events and the differing court decisions on this subject by the Regional
Commercial Court of Prague, the Appellate Court of Prague and the
Czech Appeal Court's decision pending when the hearing of these arbi-
tration proceedings were closed.

599. The Respondent's argument that no loss occurred in 1996 and 1997 as
a direct consequence of the legal changes in 1996 and that CME was in
the position to equally enjoy its investment after the implementation of
the 1996 arrangements, is not convincing. Legal protection (and safety
nets, as the Respondents representatives said) prove their strength not
at the day of implementation but at the day of breach. The enforced or
coerced waiver of legal protection was per se a substantial devaluation
of the Claimant’s investment. The persons involved, including the repre-
sentatives of the Media Council, CET 21 and CNTS and also CNTS’
shareholders, clearly understood the character and the impact of the
enforced changes on the protection of CNTS’ operations as exclusive
service provider for CET 21. The Media Council deprived the Claimant of
its investment’s security by requiring CME in 1996 to enter into a new
MOA and thereby giving up the exclusive right to use the Licence and
further, in 1999, by actively supporting the licence-holder CET 21, when
it breached the exclusive Service Agreement with CNTS.

600. The Council, after having issued on March 15, 1999 a regulatory letter to

CNTS and CET 21 requesting the implementation of the non-exclusive
service arrangement in support of Dr. Zelezny’s openly disclosed inten-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

601.

602.

603.

- 169 -

tion to harm the foreign investor, was obligated to rectify the situation. In
the least, the Council should have withdrawn the March 15, 1999 letter
and made clear that the 1996 contractual relations were not in breach of
the Media Law. However the Media Council, although frequently notified
by CNTS and CME of the consequences of its actions and failures to act,
remained silent or disclaimed jurisdiction and so supported the vitiation
of the Claimant's investment.

The basic breach by the Council of the Respondent's obligation not to
deprive the Claimant of its investment was the coerced amendment of
the MOA in 1996. The Council’s actions and omissions in 1999 com-
pounded and completed the Council's part in the destruction of CME’s
investment.

The Media Council, by its actions and omissions in 1996 and 1999,
caused the damage suffered by the Claimant. Causation arises because
the Media Council intentionally required CNTS to give up the right of the
exclusive use of the Licence under the MOA. The Media Council's possi-
ble motivation for such action -- to obtain regulatory control again over
the broadcasting operation of CET 21 after the new Media Law came
into force in 1996 -- is irrelevant. A change of the legal environment does
not authorize a host State to deprive a foreign investor of its investment,
unless proper compensation is granted. This was and is not the case.
Furthermore, it must be noted that the change of the 1993 legal arrange-
ment in 1996 as required by the Media Council, for whatever reasons,
does not justify the Council's collaboration in the assault on CME’s in-
vestment by supporting CET 21’s breach of the Service Agreement in
1999. The Respondent, therefore, is obligated to remedy the damages
which occurred as a consequence of the destruction of Claimant’s invest-
ment.

Of course, deprivation of property and/or rights must be distinguished
from ordinary measures of the State and its agencies in proper execution
of the law. Regulatory measures are common in all types of legal and
economic systems in order to avoid use of private property contrary to
the general welfare of the (host) State. The Council’s actions and inac-
tions, however, cannot be characterized as normal broadcasting regula-
tor’s regulations in compliance with and in execution of the law, in par-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

604.

605.

606.

-170-

ticular the Media Law. Neither the Council’s actions in 1996 nor the
Council's interference in 1999 were part of proper administrative pro-
ceedings. They must be characterized as actions designed to force the
foreign investor to contractually agree to the elimination of basic rights
for the protection of its investment (in 1996) and as actions (in 1999)
supporting the foreign investor's contractual partner in destroying the le-
gal basis for the foreign investor's business in the Czech Republic. The
actions and inactions affected the value of CME’s shares in CNTS, such
shares being clearly a “foreign investment” in accordance with the
Treaty, as already dealt with above (see also the TRADEX case as cited
above).

The expropriation claim is sustained despite the fact that the Media
Council did not expropriate CME by express measures of expropriation.
De facto expropriations or indirect expropriations, i.e. measures that do
not involve an overt taking but that effectively neutralize the benefit of the
property of the foreign owner, are subject to expropriation claims. This is
undisputed under international law (G. Sacerdoti page 382 as cited
above, referring to numerous precedents such as the German Interests
In Polish Upper Silesia case, 1926, PClJ, Series A, No. 7, reprinted in
M. Hudson, ed., | World Court Reports 475 (1934); see also Southern
Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd. v. Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/84/3
(1992), 32 I.L.M. 993, 1993, dealing also with the expropriation of con-
tractual rights of the operating company).

Furthermore, it makes no difference whether the deprivation was caused
by actions or by inactions. [See Biloune, et al. v. Ghana Investment
Centre, et al. 95 I.L.R. 183, 207-10 (1993); also published in the Year-
book Commercial Arbitration XIX (1994, page 11) and see also the Inter-
national Technical Products Corp. v. Iran Award No. 196-302-2 (1985), 9
lran-US CTR Rep. 273, page 239].

In the Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States case (ICSID Case
No. ARB (AF)/97/1 (2000) in respect to NAFTA Article 1110 (expropria-
tion), the ICSID Tribunal stated that an expropriation under this provision
included not only open, deliberate and acknowledged takings of prop-
erty, such as outright seizure or formal or obligatory transfer of title in fa-
vour of the host State, but also covert or incidental interference with use

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-171-

of property which has the effect of depriving the owner, in whole or in sig-
nificant part, of the use or reasonably to be expected economic benefit of
property even if not necessarily to the obvious benefit of the host State.
Thus, by permitting or tolerating the conduct of the municipality, which
the tribunal had held amounted to an unfair and inequitable treatment
that breached Article 1105, and by participating or acquiescing in the de-
nial to the investor of the right to operate, notwithstanding the fact that
the project had been fully approved and endorsed by the federal Gov-
ernment, the State Party must in the tribunal’s opinion have taken a
measure tantamount to expropriation in violation of Article 1110 (1). This
view of the ICSID Tribunal is supported by the Biloune award as cited
above.

607. Expropriation of CME’s investment is found as a consequence of the
Media Council's actions and inactions as there is no immediate prospect
at hand that CNTS will be reinstated in a position to enjoy an exclusive
use of the licence as had been granted under the 1993 split structure
(even if the Czech Supreme Court would re-instate the Regional Com-
mercial Court decision). There is no immediate prospect at hand that
ENTS can resume its broadcasting operations, as they were in 1996 be-
fore the legal protection of the use of the licence was eliminated.

608. In this respect, the lran-United States Claims Tribunal stated:

‘A deprivation or taking of property may occur under international
law through interference by a State in the use of that property or
with the enjoyment of its benefits, even where legal title to the
property is not affected. [Citations omitted.] While assumption of
control over property by a government does not automatically and
immediately justify a conclusion that the property has been taken
by the government, thus requiring compensation under interna-
tional law, such a conclusion is warranted whenever events dem-
onstrate that the owner was deprived of fundamental rights of
ownership and it appears that this deprivation is not merely
ephemeral. The intent of the government is less important than
the effects of the measures on the owner, and the form of the
measures of control or interference is less important than the real-
ity of their impact.”

(see Tippetts, Abbett, McCarthy, Stratton v. TAMS/Affa Consulting Engi-
neers of Iran et al. of 29.06.1984; 6 lran-United States CTR, 219 et seq.
page 225 as confirmed by Phelps Dodge Corp. et al v. 2. Iran, Award

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-172-

No. 217-99-2 (1986), reprinted in 10 Iran - U.S. Cl. Trib. Rep. 121 (1987);
see also Sea-Land Service, Inc. v. Iran, 6 lran-United States C.T.R. 149
at 166):

‘A finding of expropriation would require, at the very least, that the
Tribunal be satisfied that there was deliberate governmental in-
terference with the conduct of Sea-Land’s operation, the effect of
which was to deprive Sea-Land of the use and benefit of its in-
vestment. "

609. In the case before this Tribunal, the situation is even clearer. The object
of the Media Council in 1996 was to amend the 1993 split structure by
removing the exclusive use of the licence from GNTS to CET 21, the only
company which under the new Media Law in force as of January 1, 1996
was under control of the Council. This deprivation of CNTS’ “exclusive
use of the Licence” was compounded by the Media Council’s actions and
inactions of 1999. This qualifies the Media Council’s actions in 1996 and
actions and inactions in 1999 as expropriation under the Treaty.

(ii) | The remaining claims

610. The remaining claims are based on the same facts as the expropriation
claim.

a) The obligation of fair and equitable treatment (Arti-
cle 3 (1) of the Treaty)

611. The Media Council’s intentional undermining of the Claimant's invest-
ment in GNTS equally is a breach of the obligation of fair and equitable
treatment. The Respondent's position that the Media Council also re-
quired other broadcasters in the same way to revise the structure of the
1993 split legal arrangements between licence-holder and service pro-
vider is irrelevant. The facts and circumstances of the legal arrange-
ments of the other broadcasters were not a subject of these arbitration
proceedings. Should the Media Council have interfered with the con-
tractual relations of other broadcasters in the same way as it did between
CET 21 and GNTS, these other actions might also be qualified as a
breach of law as the case may be. These other cases, however, to the

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

612.

613.

-173-

extent that they are realistic, do not legitimate the Media Council's ac-
tions and inactions versus CME/GNTS as being fair and equitable. The
standard for actions being assessed as fair and equitable are not to be
determined by the acting authority in accordance with the standard used
for its own nationals. Standards acceptable under international law ap-
ply, e.g. the threshold test of Professor Vagts as cited above. The Media
Council breached its obligation of fair and equitable treatment by evis-
ceration of the arrangements in reliance upon with the foreign investor
was induced to invest.

b) The obligation not to impair investments by unreason-
able or discriminatory measures (Article 3 (1) of the

Treaty)

The same considerations set out under the expropriation claim govern
the claim for unfair and inequitable treatment as well. On the face of it,
the Media Council’s actions and inactions in 1996 and 1999 were unrea-
sonable as the clear intention of the 1996 actions was to deprive the for-
eign investor of the exclusive use of the Licence under the MOA and the
clear intention of the 1999 actions and inactions was collude with the
foreign investor's Czech business partner to deprive the foreign investor
of its investment. The behaviour of the Media Council also smacks of
discrimination against the foreign investor.

c) The obligation of full security and protection (Arti-
cle 3 (2) of the Treaty)

The Media Council’s actions in 1996 and its actions and inactions in
1999 were targeted to remove the security and legal protection of the
Claimant's investment in the Czech Republic. The Media Council’s (pos-
sible) motivation to regain control of the operation of the broadcasting
after the Media Law had been amended as of January 1, 1996 is irrele-
vant. The host State is obligated to ensure that neither by amendment of
its laws nor by actions of its administrative bodies is the agreed and ap-
proved security and protection of the foreign investor's investment with-

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-174-

drawn or devalued. This is not the case. The Respondent therefore is in
breach of this obligation.

d) The obligation to treat investments in conformity with
principles of international law (Articles 3(5) and 8 of the
Treaty)

614. The Media Council’s actions as described above are not compatible with
the principles of international law, which the Arbitral Tribunal is charged
with applying. On the contrary, the intentional undermining of the Claim-
ant’s investment’s protection, the expropriation of the value of that in-
vestment, its unfair and inequitable treatment, the Media Council's un-
reasonable actions, the destruction of the Claimant's investment security
and protection, are together a violation of the principles of international
law assuring the alien and his investment treatment that does not fall
below the standards of customary international law.

(7) The Reparation Claim

615. The Respondent, as a consequence of the breach of the Treaty, is under
an obligation to make full reparation for the injury caused by the Media
Council’s wrongful acts and omissions as described above. A causal link
between the Media Council’s wrongful acts and omissions and the injury
the Claimant suffered as a result thereof, is established, as already
stated above. The Respondent's obligation to remedy the injury the
Claimant suffered as a result of Respondent's violations of the Treaty de-
rives from Article 5 of the Treaty and from the rules of international law.
According to Article 5 subpara. c of the Treaty, any measures depriving
directly or indirectly an investor of its investments must be accompanied
“by a provision for the payment of just compensation. Such compensa-
tion shall represent the genuine value of the investments effected.” A
fortiori unlawful measures of deprivation must be remedied by just com-
pensation.

616. In respect to the Claimant’s remaining claims, this principle derives also
from the generally accepted rules of international law. The obligation to

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

617.

618.

-175-

make full reparation is the general obligation of the responsible State
consequent upon the commission of an internationally wrongful act (see
the Commentary to the Articles on the Responsibility of States for Inter-
nationally Wrongful Acts adopted by the U.N. International Law Commis-
sion as cited above). The general principle of the consequences of the
commission of an internationally wrongful act was stated by the Perma-
nent Court in the Factory at Chorzow case:

“It is a principle of international law that the breach of an engage-
ment involves an obligation to make reparation in an adequate
form. Reparation therefore is the indispensable complement of a
failure to apply a convention itself. Differences relating to repara-
tions, which may be due by reason of failure to apply a conven-
tion, are consequently differences relating to its application.” (Fac-

tory at Chorzdéw, Jurisdiction, 1927, P.C.l.J., Series A, No. 9,
para. 21).”

In a subsequent decision the Permanent Court in the Factory at Chorzow
case went on to specify in more detail the content of the obligation of
reparation. It said:

“The essential principle contained in the actual notion of an illegal
act - a principle which seems to be established by international
practice and in particular by the decisions of arbitral tribunals - is
that reparation must, so far as possible, wipe out all the conse-
quences of the illegal act and re-establish the situation which
would, in all probability, have existed if that act had not been
committed. Restitution in kind, or, if this is not possible, payment
of a sum corresponding to the value which a restitution in kind
would bear; the award, if need be, of damages for loss sustained
which would not be covered by restitution in kind or payment in
place of it - such are the principles which should serve to deter-
mine the amount of compensation due for an act contrary to inter-
national law.” (Factory at Chorzdw, Merits, 1928, P.C.l.J., Se-
ries A, No. 17, para. 47).

This view has been accepted and applied by numerous arbitral awards
(Commentary of the Articles on the Responsibility of States for Interna-
tional Wrongful Acts with further citations). The Respondent is obligated
to “wipe out all the consequences” of the Media Council’s unlawful acts
and omissions, which caused the destruction of the Claimant's invest-
ment. Restitution in kind is not requested by the Claimant (as restitution
in kind is obviously not possible, CNTS’ broadcasting operations having
been shut down for two years). Therefore, the Respondent is obligated

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

619.

620.

-176-

to compensate the Claimant by payment of a sum corresponding to the
value which a restitution in kind would bear. This is the fair market value
of Claimant's investment as it was before consummation of the Respon-
dent’s breach of the Treaty in August 1999. In accordance with the par-
ties joint request, the quantum of the Claimant's claim shall not be de-
termined by this Award. Therefore, on request of the Claimant, the
amount of the Claimant's claim is to be determined in a second phase of
this arbitration.

Costs of the proceedings

The parties instructed the Arbitral Tribunal to render an Award, if affirma-
tive in respect to the Claimant's claims, that does not decide on the
quantum of the claims. The parties further requested the Arbitral Tribunal
to adopt a decision in respect to the costs of the proceedings incurred by
the rendering this Partial Award. The Arbitral Tribunal, however, cannot,
at this stage, judge to what extent the Claimant will be successful in re-
spect of the quantum of its damage claims although the decision on the

quantum would provide a better basis for the allocation of costs. In re-

spect to costs, the Tribunal, therefore, makes an assessment on the ba-
sis of the present status of the proceedings without by this assessment
pre-judging the quantum of damages, and on the basis as well of Arti-
cle 40, paragraph 1 of the UNCITRAL Rules, which says that “the arbitral
tribunal may apportion each of such costs between the parties, if it deter-
mines that apportionment is reasonable, taking into account the circum-
stances of the case.”

In assessing what costs of the Claimant to be refunded by the Respon-
dent are acceptable and reasonably incurred, the Tribunal further con-
sidered inter alia that the Claimant initiated these arbitration proceedings
after having initiated and partly carried through the Lauder vs/ The
Czech Republic UNCITRAL Arbitration Proceedings which, in essence,
deal with the same dispute. The parties used, as the Tribunal was in-
formed, the work product of their advisors and the witness statements of
these parallel UNCITRAL Arbitration Proceedings. The Respondent ex-
pressly stated in its Statement of Costs that the Respondent was able to
use to a large extent the pleadings and witness statements originally

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

-177-

drafted for the use by the Respondent in the Lauder vs. Czech Republic
UNCITRAL Arbitration.

621. The Arbitral Tribunal took account of this situation and also the fact that
the Claimant and its ultimate shareholder, by initiating two parallel UNCI-
TRAL Treaty Proceedings had, as the Claimant expressed it, "two bites
of the apple”, and thereby enlarged costs and risks. It is, therefore, rea-
sonable to decide that the Respondent, although this Partial Award is
wholly unfavourable to it, shall be required to refund to Claimant only a
portion of the Claimant’s legal fees and disbursements, which portion is
determined by the Arbitral Tribunal being US $ 750,000.

622. For the Tribunal’s costs and disbursements the Tribunal charged the
parties in the total amount of US $ 1,096,498.86 for the Tribunal’s serv-
ices and as compensation for the Tribunal’s expenses for the period until
the rendering of this Partial Award. The Claimant made an advance of
costs in the amount of US $623,249.43 and the Respondent an advance
of US $400,000, all together US $ 1,023,249.43. By letter dated
August 28, 2001, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that the pay-
ment of the final advance of costs in the amount of US $ 73,249.43 to
the Tribunal as requested by the Tribunal on August 15, 2001, will be
made. The Tribunal, therefore, by letter dated August 30, 2001, withdraw
its instruction to the Claimant dated August 30, 2001 to pay this amount.
The Tribunal dealt with the respective payment in this Partial Award as if
it has been made. The Tribunal may render a further partial award on
costs, should such payment fail.

623. In respect to the allocation of these costs to the parties the Arbitrai Tri-

bunal took account of the above-mentioned facts and circumstances and
allocated these costs as decided below.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

- 178 -

J.
Decision

624. The Tribunal decides as follows:

1. The Respondent has violated the following provisions of the

Treaty:

a. The obligation of fair and equitable treatment (Article 3 (1));

b. the obligation not to impair investments by unreasonable or
discriminatory measures (Article 3 (1));

c. the obligation of full security and protection (Article 3 (2));

d. the obligation to treat foreign investments in conformity with
principles of international law (Article 3 (5) and Article 8 (6),
and

e. the obligation not to deprive Claimant of its investment (Ar-
ticle 5); and

2. The Respondent is obligated to remedy the injury that Claimant
suffered as a result of Respondent’s violations of the Treaty by
payment of the fair market value of Claimant's investment as it
was before consummation of the Respondent's breach of Treaty
in 1999 in an amount to be determined at a second phase of this
arbitration;

3. (1) The Respondent shall bear its own legal costs.

(2) The Respondent shall pay to Claimant as refund of Claim-
ant’s legal costs and expenditures US $750,000.

(3) The Claimant shall bear one third and the Respondent two
thirds of the Arbitral Tribunal’s costs and expenditures. The
Respondent, therefore, shall further pay to the Claimant as
refund of Claimant’s payments of the Tribunal’s fees and
disbursements US $257,749.81.

403/VERMERK/2001/CME - Partial Award 0709/spe

- 179 -

4. This Partial Award is final and binding in respect to the
issues decided herein. The legal seat of the proceedings is
Stockholm, Sweden.

The Tribunal will continue the arbitration proceedings in
order to decide on the quantum of the Claimant's claim
upon request of one of the Parties.

K. Statement in accordance with Article 32 (4) UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules related
to Dr. Handl’s failure to sign the Partial Award

625. By letter dated September 11, 2001, Dr. Hand! requested the Chairman to attach
to the Award (whose issuance he delayed) an explanation of his failure to sign the
Award, as well as a dissenting opinion. Dr. Handl refused to sign the Award with
the following remark:

“Partial Award not signed by Dr. Handi as expression of his protest and
dissenting from this Award - dissenting opinion enclosed, date: 11.9.2001,
signature Dr. Handl”

The Chairman of the Tribunal, on his behalf and that of Judge Schwebel, pointed
out to Dr. Handl that his failure to sign would be in breach of his obligations as ar-
bitrator. In the event, it is also a breach of his repeated recent assurances to the
Chairman, in writing, that he “will sign” the Award.

The UNCITRAL Rules that govern this arbitration provide, in Article 32 (4), that:
“An award shall be signed by the arbitrators . . . "(emphasis supplied). The Tribunal
is confirmed in the conclusion that an arbitrator's failure to sign the award is a vio-
lation of the arbitrator's professional responsibilities by its examination of the rules
and practice of the principal arbitral institutions as well as the papers and proceed-
ings of the Stockholm and Paris Congresses of the International Council on Com-
mercial Arbitration. Dr. Handl’s failure to perform his responsibilities as arbitrator is
matched by the intemperance and inaccuracy of his dissent. He makes charges
about the conduct of the hearings and the deliberations that are groundless. His

position on the merits of the dispute speaks for itself.

Stockholm, 4% September 2001

OL, Lot Coby

(Dr. Wolfgang Kith)~ Qudge Stephen M. Schwebel) (JUDr. Jaroslav Handl)
Chairman of the Arbitrator Arbitrator
Arbitral Tribunal)

