40806342

CLAIMANT

The Czech Republic

Represented by the Minister of Finance of the Czech Republic, Bohuslav
Sobotka

Ministerstvo financi

Letanska 15, 118 10 Prag 1

The Czech Republic

Counsel

1.Attorney Tore Wiwen-Nilsson
Box 4291, 203 14 Malmé.

2. Attorney Stefan Brocker
Box 2235, 403 14 Gothenburg

3. Attorney Malin Palsson
Box 4291, 203 14 Malmé.

RESPONDENT

CME Czech Republic B.V.

Hoogoorddreef 9, 1101 BA Amsterdam Zuid-Ost
The Netherlands

Counsel
1. Attorney Hans Bagner
Box 1703, 111 87 Stockholm

2. Attorney Robert Romlév
Box 11025, 404 21 Gothenburg

3. Attorney Paolo Fohlin
Box 11025, 404 21 Gothenburg

THE MATTER
Challenge of arbitration award

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 

JUDGMENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL...

 

 

 

 

BACKGROUND. 2
THE MOTIONS 7
GROUNDS FOR THE CLAIM 7
THE REPUBLIC. 7
CME 9

 

 

DEVELOPMENT OF THE CLAIM

THE REPUBLIC. 13

EXCLUSION OF AN ARBITRATOR FROM THE DELIBERATIONS..

 

FAILURE TO TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION APPLICABLE LAW...

 

LIS PENDENS AND RES JUDICATA ....

 

EXCESS OF MANDATE - JOINT TORTFEASORS...

EXCESS OF MANDATE - DECISION REGARDING DETERMINATION OF DAMAGES ...41

 

EXCESS OF MANDATE - PREVIOUS INVESTORS AND EARLIER VIOLATIONS.

CME 47

 

EXCLUSION OF AN ARBITRATOR FROM THE DELIBERATION:

 

FAILURE TO TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION APPLICABLE LAW...

 

LIS PENDENS AND RES JUDICATA ....

EXCESS OF MANDATE - JOINT TORTFEASORS...

 

EXCESS OF MANDATE- DECISION CONCERNING DETERMINATION OF THE
DAMAGES. 76

 

 

EXCESS OF MANDATE- PRIOR INVESTORS AND PREVIOUS VIOLATIONS...

REASONS FOR THE JUDGMENT. 1

GENERALLY. 83

 

EXCLUSION OF AN ARBITRATOR FROM THE DELIBERATIONS..

 

LIS PENDENS AND RES JUDICATA ....

 

EXCESS OF MANDATE - JOINT TORTFEASORS.

EXCESS OF MANDATE - DECISION CONCERNING DETERMINATION OF THE
DAMAGE 101

EXCESS OF MANDATE - PREVIOUS INVESTORS AND PRIOR VIOLATION:

 

INVALIDITY IN GENERAL 105
LITIGATION COSTS 106

THE JUDGMENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL MAY NOT BE APPEALED...

 

4689-12

JUDGMENT OF THE COURT OF APPEAL

1. The Court of Appeal denies the Czech Republic’s motion that the Court of Appeal
declare invalid or, alternatively, set aside the arbitration award issued in Stockholm on
September 13, 2001 in the arbitration between CME Czech Republic B.V. and the
Czech Republic.

2. The Czech Republic shall compensate CME Czech Republic B.V. for its litigation
costs in the amount of thirty-four million kronor (SEK 34,000,000) and interest
pursuant to section 6 of the Interest Act (SFS 1975:635) commencing on the date the

Court of Appeal’s judgment until such time as payment is made.

BACKGROUND

In August 1992, a Czech company, Central European Television (hereinafter “CET
21”) applied to the Czech Council for Radio and Television Broadcasts (hereinafter
the “Media Council”) for a broadcasting license (hereinafter the “license”) in
accordance with the Czech Media Act. The application was seconded by Central
European Development Corporation GmbH (hereinafter “CEDC”), which is a German
company and ultimately controlled by a US citizen, Ronald S. Lauder. During the
application process for the license, CET 21 was represented principally by the Czech

citizen, Dr. Vladimir Zelezny.

On February 9, 1993, the Media Council formally issued a license to CET 21. The
license was subject to certain conditions. According to the Media Act, the license

could not be assigned.

A model for the business, which included the formation of a new Czech company,
Ceska nezavista televizni spolecnost, spol.s.r.o. (hereinafter “CNTS”) was developed
to run TV Nova. In addition to CEDC, a Czech savings bank would finance the new
company. In order to form CNTS, CET 21, CEDC, and the Czech savings bank
entered into a Memorandum of Association and Investment Agreement, dated May 4,
1993 (hereinafter the “1993 MOA”). According to the 1993 MOA, inter alia, CET 21
would contribute to CNTS, as payment for the shares in CNTS which the company

was to acquire, “unconditionally, unequivocally, and on an exclusive basis” the right

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

to use, exploit, and maintain the license. The occurrences referred to as the 1993
events pertain to the Media Council’s alleged refusal to accept CEDC as a foreign
shareholder of CET 21 (the holder of the license), and the Media Council’s
requirement that a structure would be created in which CEDC was to participate in
CET 21 by holding shares in CNTS. This is described in the relevant arbitration

award as the “split structure”.

CME Media Enterprise B.V. (hereinafter “CME Media”), a Dutch company which
was also ultimately controlled by Lauder, acquired CEDC’s shareholdings in CNTS in
August 1994.

By virtue of an amendment to the Media Act, which entered into force on 1 January,

1996 and resulted in the repeal of many of the conditions which were associated with
the license, CET 21 applied to the Media Council in January 1996 for the revocation

of certain conditions. CET 21’s application was granted and the conditions were

repealed.

In 1996, the MOA was amended pursuant to which CET 21’s contribution to CNTS,
“the use of the License”, was replaced with “the use of the know-how of the License”.
A provision was also to be incorporated in the 1993 MOA which would thwart any
other party (with the exception of CET 21) from using the license (hereinafter the
1996 MOA). CET 21 and CNTS entered into a service agreement dated May 21,
1997 (hereinafter the “service agreement”) which governed CET 21’s responsibility
for programming and CNTS’ rights and obligations, as an exclusive service company,

regarding the operation of TV Nova.

The occurrences referred to as the 1996 events pertain to the coercion exercised by the
Media Council on CNTS to relinquish its exclusive right of use to the license pursuant
to the 1993 MOA in order, instead, to obtain an exclusive right to the use of the
know-how of the license in accordance with the 1996 MOA and to consent to the

other amendments to the agreements with CET 21; the coercion consisted primarily of

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

an administrative law procedure commenced by the Media Council against CNTS for

broadcasting without a license.

In 1996 and 1997, CME Media purchased shares in CNTS and increased its stake in
CNTS to 93.2 per cent. In May 1997, CME Media transferred its interest in CNTS to
the wholly-owned subsidiary, CME Czech Republic B.V. (hereinafter “CME”), also a
Dutch company, in accordance with the Agreement on Transfer of Participation
Interest (hereinafter the “transfer agreement”). Later that year, CME increased its

interest in CNTS to 99 per cent.

On March 2, 1999, the Media Council held a meeting with Zelezny, as representative
of CET 21. On March 3, 1999, CET 21 sent a letter to the Media Council as a
consequence of the discussions conducted at the meeting. On March 15, 1999, the
Media Council responded in a letter to CET 21 and TV Nova. On April 19, 1999,
CME dismissed Zelezny as Managing Director of CNTS. However, Zelezny
remained as the Managing Director of CET 21. CET 21 terminated its service
agreement with CNTS on August 5, 1999 on the grounds that CNTS had failed to
deliver a daily report of broadcasts, which allegedly constituted a material breach of

contract. CET 21 also ceased using the CNTS’ services.

The 1999 events pertain to the alleged actions and omissions undertaken by the Media
Council in 1999, inter alia, by the issuance of the letter of March 15, 1999 and the

failure to retract said letter.

On February 22, 2000, CME demanded arbitration (hereinafter the “Stockholm
proceedings”) against the Czech Republic (hereinafter the “Republic”) in accordance
with the bilateral investment treaty between the Netherlands and the Republic
(Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal of Investments between the Kingdom
of the Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic), dated April 29, 1991
(hereinafter the “Treaty”). CME commenced the proceedings on the basis of alleged

violations of the Treaty by means of the 1993, 1996, and 1999 events.

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

On July 21, 2000, an arbitral tribunal was composed pursuant to the Treaty by the
two arbitrators appointed by the parties, Judge Stephen M. Schwebel (appointed by
CME) and Juris Doctor Jaroslav Handl (appointed by the Republic), appointing Dr.
Wolfgang Kiihn as the Chairman (hereinafter the “Stockholm Tribunal”).

In November 2000, the parties in the Stockholm proceedings agreed that the
proceedings would be bifurcated. One of the disputed issues in the matter was the
determination of which issues would be examined by the Stockholm Tribunal in the
first and second phases respectively. In any case, however, the issue of whether the
Republic had violated the Treaty and was per se liable for damages would be
examined during the first phase of the proceedings while, in any case, the issue as to

the amount of damages would be examined in the second phase of the proceedings.

Between April 23 and May 2, 2001, the final hearing was conducted in Stockholm.
The Stockholm Tribunal thereafter convened in Diisseldorf for deliberations in the
beginning of June 2001. The meeting was preceded by certain correspondence
between the arbitrators. The correspondence continued after the Diisseldorf meeting
up to the issuance of the arbitration award in the case in Stockholm on September 13,

2001 (hereinafter the “Stockholm award”).

The majority of the Stockholm Tribunal found that the Republic had violated the
Treaty through actions and omissions relating to the Media Council in 1996 and 1999,
but not in 1993. In its decision, the Tribunal stated that the Republic was liable to
redress the injury incurred by CME as a consequence of the Republic’s violation of
the Treaty by paying the fair market value of CME’s investment as such was prior to
the violation by the Republic of the Treaty in 1999, in an amount to be determined by
the Stockholm Tribunal during the second phase. In the second phase of the
Stockholm proceedings, the award was issued on March 14, 2003 in which the

amount of damages was determined.

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

The Stockholm award was signed by only two of the three arbitrators, Kiihn and
Schwebel. The dissenting arbitrator, Handl, issued a dissenting opinion dated
September 11, 2001 which was appended to the Stockholm award. Hand resigned his

appointment as arbitrator on September 19, 2001.

On September 3, 2001, an arbitration award was issued in London between Lauder
and the Republic (hereinafter the “London award”). Lauder initiated the arbitration
(hereinafter the “London proceedings”) against the Republic on August 19, 1999
pursuant to the bilateral investment treaty applicable between the US and the Republic
(Treaty Between the United States of America and the Czech and Slovak Federal
Republic Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investment),

prepared on October 22, 1991 (hereinafter the “American Investment Treaty”).

Lauded commenced the London proceedings claiming that the Republic had violated
the American Investment Treaty. The alleged violation of the American Investment
Treaty consisted of the same actions and omissions by the Media Council which CME
asserted in the Stockholm proceedings. The arbitral tribunal in the London
proceedings (hereinafter the “London Tribunal”) unanimously agreed that only the
1993 events constituted a violation of the American Investment Treaty, but that such
violation did not, however, give rise to any liability of the Republic for damages. The

London Tribunal dismissed Lauder’s claim for damages.

Both the Stockholm proceedings and London proceedings applied the arbitration rules
promulgated by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

(hereinafter the “UNCITRAL rules”).

Pursuant to Article 9 of the Treaty, the Republic demanded, in the autumn of 2001,
consultations with the Netherlands regarding the interpretation and application of the
Treaty. In this context, “Agreed Minutes” were prepared from which it is evident that

the parties reached a common position regarding certain issues, inter alia, the

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

applicable interpretation of Article 8.6 of the Treaty and the assignment of claims

which took place in accordance with the Treaty.

THE MOTIONS

The Republic has moved that the Court of Appeal declare invalid the Stockholm
award in accordance with section 33 of the Arbitration Act (SFS 1999:116) or,
alternatively, that the Court of Appeal set aside the Stockholm award pursuant to

section 34 of said Act.

CME contests the Republic’s motions.

The parties have claimed compensation for their litigation costs.

GROUNDS FOR THE CLAIM

The Republic

1. The Stockholm award and the manner by which it was rendered are obviously
incompatible with the basic principles of the Swedish legal system. In addition, two
of the arbitrators, who comprised the majority of the Stockholm Tribunal, exceeded
the mandate of the Stockholm Tribunal and committed procedural errors as set forth
below. Each of the grounds pertaining to the exclusion of an arbitrator from the
deliberations and the Stockholm Tribunal’s lack of jurisdiction as a consequence of lis
pendens and res judicata, as well as the various grounds invoked by the Republic
collectively, constitute such serious errors that they are covered by section 33 of the

Arbitration Act.

1.1 The majority of the Stockholm Tribunal excluded one of the arbitrators, Handl,

from crucial parts of the deliberations of the Stockholm Tribunal.

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

1.2 The Stockholm Tribunal failed to apply the law which the Stockholm Tribunal
was obligated to apply pursuant to the Treaty, i.e. Czech law and general principles of

international law.

1.3. The Stockholm Tribunal lacked jurisdiction to examine the case per se due to lis
pendens and res judicata since: (i) the London proceedings were commenced prior to
the Stockholm proceedings; (ii) the Stockholm proceedings involved the same claims,
grounds, and damage, and the same investments and factual circumstances in general,
and violations of essentially the same treaty obligations as the London proceedings;
(iii) the defendants in the Stockholm proceedings and London proceedings were
identical and, in practice, the petitioners were the same; and (iv) the London award
was issued prior to the Stockholm award. The conflicting outcome of the Stockholm
award is unacceptable from a legal standpoint. The existence and content of the
parallel proceedings were invoked by the Republic as grounds for dismissal. The
Stockholm Tribunal was fully aware of the pending London proceedings. Before the
Stockholm award was issued, the Stockholm Tribunal also knew that the arbitration

award had been issued in the London proceedings, and the outcome thereof.

1.4 The Stockholm Tribunal based the Stockholm award on the existence of “joint
tortfeasors”, a ground not invoked by CME in the Stockholm proceedings and which
had not been referred to as a fact. Nor had it been the subject of legal argument by any

of the parties.

1.5 In violation of the instructions given by the parties, the Stockholm Tribunal

examined issues concerning the amount of damages.

Should the Court of Appeal set aside the Stockholm award only with respect to the
excess of mandate pertaining to the determination of damages, paragraph 624 (2) of
the Stockholm award is to be worded as follows: “The Claimant is entitled to

damages to be determined at a second phase of this arbitration.”

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

1.6 The Stockholm Tribunal exceeded its mandate when it applied the Treaty to the
alleged violations which occurred during a time the investment was held by an

investor other than CME.

2. The Republic was not the cause of any of the errors referred to in section 1 above.

3. Collectively or individually, the errors asserted in section 1 above have, or at least

likely have, affected the outcome of the Stockholm proceedings.

In addition, the Republic has contested the assertion that any of the grounds of
challenge are barred or that the Republic may be deemed to have waived objections in

any respect as asserted by CME.

CME

1. CME denies that the Stockholm award and the manner by which it was rendered
are obviously incompatible with the basic principles of the Swedish legal system. In
addition, it denies that both arbitrators who constituted the majority of the Stockholm
Tribunal exceeded the mandate of the Stockholm Tribunal and committed the errors

asserted by the Republic.

1.1 The types of errors asserted in section 1.1 do not constitute grounds for
invalidation pursuant to section 33 of the Arbitration Act but, rather, should be
evaluated in accordance with section 34 of said Act. CME denies that Hand! was
excluded crucial parts of the determinations of the Stockholm Tribunal. Handl was
afforded the opportunity to participate at all stages of the deliberations and he was
also afforded sufficient time in which to assert his views on all disputed issues. In any

case, the alleged error has not affected the outcome of the case.

1.2 The Stockholm Tribunal did not exceed its mandate in the manner asserted by the

Republic in section 1.2, and did not act as amiable compositeur. Rather, the

10
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Stockholm Tribunal resolved the dispute on the basis of law. Nor was any procedural
error committed in this respect which likely affected the outcome of the Stockholm
proceedings. The failure to apply Czech legal rules which were not invoked in the

Stockholm proceedings cannot constitute an excess of mandate or procedural error.

The interpretation of the choice of law provision in Article 8.6 of the Treaty fell
within the purview of the Stockholm Tribunal’s mandate and, in the event the
Stockholm Tribunal committed an error in the interpretation of the Treaty, such
constitutes only a substantive error and does not form a basis of challenge. In any
case, the Stockholm Tribunal interpreted the choice of law provision correctly and
applied the Treaty and international law, and took into consideration Czech law when
the Tribunal examined the issue of whether the Republic had violated the Treaty.
Furthermore, the Republic’s assertions regarding Czech law are incorrect, and the
outcome of the Stockholm proceedings would not have been different had additional

Czech legal rules been applied or considered.

In any case, the Republic has caused the alleged errors or, alternatively, the Republic
may be deemed to have waived the right to assert the alleged errors. Accordingly,

this ground for challenge is barred.

1.3 The type of error asserted by the Republic in section 1.3 does not constitute a
ground for invalidating pursuant to section 33 of the Arbitration Act but, rather, is to
be assessed only in accordance with section 34 of the said Act. In the event the
Republic’s claim in this respect is also to be interpreted as an challenge, the basis of
challenge invoked is barred since the Republic expressly waived objection to, and

denied the existence of, /is pendens and res judicata in the Stockholm proceedings.

Even if the Republic’s claim is examined in accordance with section 34 of the
Arbitration Act, and even if its basis of challenge may not be deemed to be barred, the
claim cannot be granted. The Stockholm Tribunal has, namely, the jurisdiction to

examine the matter on its merits since the principles of res judicata and lis pendens

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

are not applicable to this type of international dispute. Even if they were deemed to be
applicable, they have not constituted an impediment to examination of the dispute
since: (i) Lauder and CME are not the same party; (ii) Lauder and CME invoked
different substantive agreements in support of their respective claims; and (iii) the
issues disputed in the Stockholm proceedings were not covered by the arbitration

agreement applicable in the London proceedings.

1.4 The Stockholm Tribunal examined only issues falling within its mandate and
based its decision only on the facts which had been invoked by the parties. The
Stockholm award was not based on any type of liability principle pertaining to joint
tortfeasors or on any principle regarding joint and several liability for coordinated
effort towards a common goal but, rather, on the fact that the Republic, via the Media
Council, violated the Treaty and that the Republic was thereby deemed to have caused
CME injury. The Stockholm Tribunal referred to joint tortfeasors only as a case of
contributory causes when the Stockholm Tribunal decided the issue of causality,
including the issue of whether the injury was a foreseeable consequence of the actions
of the Media Council. The causality issue fell within the mandate of the Tribunal and,
furthermore, pertained to a substantive issue which may not be reviewed by means of
challenge. The fact that the Stockholm Tribunal referred to joint tortfeasors had no

effect on the outcome of the Stockholm proceedings.

In any case, the Republic may be deemed to have stipulated to the examination of the
issue. At any rate, the Republic may be deemed to have waived its right to assert the

alleged excess of mandate. Accordingly, the basis of challenge is barred.

1.5 The Stockholm Tribunal did not exceed its mandate when the Tribunal
determined that the Republic was liable to pay damages equal to the fair market value

of CMS’s investment.

It was within the mandate of the Tribunal to examine this issue since (i) the

examination of the issue was covered by the agreement entered into in November

12

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

2000 regarding bifurcation of the Stockholm proceedings; (ii) the examination of the
question was, in any case, covered by the final claim made by CME in writing during

the final hearing.

By challenging the claim under (ii) and its failure to object, the Republic, in any case
in conjunction with the final hearing, is deemed to have stipulated to the examination
of the issue. At any rate, the Republic may thereby be deemed to have refrained from
asserting that an examination of the issue is tantamount to an excess by the arbitrators

of their mandate. The ground for challenge is thereby barred.

In the event the Court of Appeal finds that the Stockholm Tribunal exceeded its
mandate by determining that the Republic was liable to pay damages equal to the fair
market value of the investment, the Stockholm award is to be set aside in part.
Paragraph 624 (2) of the Stockholm award must, in such case, be worded as follows:
“The Respondent is obligated to remedy the injury that Claimant suffered as a result

of the Respondent's violation of the Treaty”.

1.6 The arbitration agreement covered an examination of violations of the Treaty
which allegedly took place both prior to and after CME’s acquisition of the
investment in May 1997. On this basis alone, the arbitrators had jurisdiction to
examine the issue of violations committed prior to 1997. In any case, the arbitrators
had jurisdiction to examine the issue regarding previous violations in that the issue
was incorporated in the Stockholm proceedings without any assertion by any of the

parties that the issue was not covered by the proceedings.

In any case, the Republic forfeited the right to assert that the issue was not covered by
the arbitration agreement or that an examination of the issue would exceed the
mandate of the arbitrators since the Republic did not, in its Statement of Defence,
assert any objection, which the Republic was obligated to do pursuant to Article 8.5 of

the Treaty and Article 21 (3) of the UNCITRAL rules and because the Republic,

13
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

during the final hearing, expressly waived the right to assert that the issue was not
covered by the arbitration agreement or the mandate of the arbitrators.

In any case, the ground for challenge was barred by section 34, second paragraph of
the Arbitration Act since the Republic, at any rate, may be deemed to have refrained
from asserting that the issue was not covered by the arbitration agreement or that the
examination of the issue exceeded the mandate of the arbitrators since the Republic

participated in the proceedings without objection.

The examination of the question whether CME’s investment was protected with
respect to violations committed prior to CME’s acquisition of the investment
constituted an examination on the merits, and the determination by the arbitrators of
the issue thus constituted a substantive assessment. Even if the Stockholm Tribunal
made an erroneous assessment in this context, which they did not, such does not

constitute a ground for challenge.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE CLAIM

The Republic

Exclusion of an arbitrator from the deliberations

Following the final hearing in the Stockholm proceedings, Kiihn sent to Handl and
Schwebel a list of questions by fax dated May 14, 2001. The fax states, inter alia,
that the list of questions was completed on May 9 but the fax was not sent before May
14. Several items in the list addressed the significance of Czech law, inter alia, in
sections III, IV, and VI. On May 15, 2001, that is already the day after it was sent,
Schwebel replied to the list of questions. The reply was arranged in accordance with
Kiihn’s arrangement in the list of questions and, in the reply, Schwebel discussed,
inter alia, the import of Czech law. It is also apparent from the reply that Schwebel
received a letter from Kiihn on May 11. Handl never received the letter and the
Republic has no information regarding the contents of the letter. On May 23, 2001,

Hand! replied to the list of questions. It is apparent from the answer, inter alia, that

14
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

he contributed views on Czech law and the implication of Czech law with respect to
certain issues. In certain respects, Handl reached the same conclusions as the London

Tribunal.

On May 24, 2001, Schwebel sent a fax which stated, inter alia, that Kiihn requested
that he submit comments to arguments which had been asserted by the Republic’s
counsel, Professor Lowe, in the Stockholm proceedings. At no time did Kiihn request
that Hand! comment on Professor Lowe’s argument. On May 25, 2001, another fax

was sent from Kiihn to Handl and Schwebel, and from Handl to Kiihn.

Hand! was present at the meeting in Diisseldorf. However, the meeting lasted only
one day, on June 1, 2001. At the meeting, documents were handed out to which
Hand had not had prior access. These documents were a memorandum from
Schwebel regarding Handl’s comments pertaining to the investment protection
according to the Treaty, an expanded list of questions from Kiihn, and comments from
Kiihn to Handl’s reply to the list of questions. It is apparent from the expanded list of
questions that it was completed on May 28. It is apparent from the document
containing Kiihn’s comments to Handl’s responses that it was completed on May 25.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned, the documents were not distributed until June 1.
Furthermore, it is apparent from Kiihn’s comments to Handl’s reply that Czech law
was discussed, but the reasoning was not reiterated during the deliberations or in the
Award. A comparable document in which Kiihn commented on Schwebel’s reply to
the list of questions does not exist. Handl was not afforded any opportunity to study
these documents before they were taken up for discussion at the meeting, which was a
clear disadvantage for him. Conducting the deliberations during the period of one day
only was altogether too little time for such a complex case as was to be determined by
the arbitrators. At the meeting, Kiihn and Schwebel ignored all of Handl’s comments

without any discussion or specific explanation.

It is apparent, inter alia, from Handl’s aide-mémoire of June 6, 2001 that many

questions were left open at the meeting in Diisseldorf. Further, it is apparent that

15
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Kiihn and Schwebel referred, as regards the issue of damages, to the fact that certain
issues in connection therewith should be determined during the second phase of the
proceedings. Some of the issues raised by Kiihn in his list of questions are not
addressed by Handl in his aide-mémoire and there is nothing in the aide-mémoire
which indicates that the deliberations were concluded at the Diisseldorf meeting.
Purely factually, the deliberations were not concluded at that time. It is apparent from
the notes that the arbitrators agreed at the meeting that Kiihn would prepare a first
complete draft of the arbitration award which was to be sent both to Schwebel and
Hand! for their review and comments. The draft was to be sent to them on July 15,

2001.

On June 7, 2001, Schwebel sent a fax to Kiihn which indicates that Kiihn requested
that Schwebel conduct an analysis of the assignment of claims upon the transfer of
shares. The fax reveals that the deliberations were ongoing. On June 20, 2001, Handl
sent a fax in which he presented his views regarding certain documents and stated that
he would be back in Prague on July 25, 2001. Handl also appended a supplement to
his views during the meeting in Diisseldorf. On July 10, 2001, Schwebel sent a fax to
which he appended a memorandum regarding the manner in which American law
regulated the assignment of rights in conjunction with share transfers. It is apparent

from the fax that it was Kiihn who requested that he do so.

On July 30, 2001, Kiihn sent a 175-page draft award to Schwebel and Handl
(hereinafter the “First Draft”). Kiihn requested that Schwebel and Handl review and
comment on the content as soon as possible. It is not clear from the cover fax whether
the deliberations had been concluded. It may be gleaned from the pages of the award
which were appended to the fax that the draft award was completed as early as July

25.

As early as August 2, 2001, Schwebel notified Kiihn and Hand that he would send
his comments to the First Draft during the afternoon of the same day. Schwebel sent

his comments to Kiihn, but not to Handl. Most of Schwebel’s comments were

16

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

linguistic in nature, but he also had substantive comments. At no time did Handl
receive Schwebel’s comments and, accordingly, he did not have the possibility to
express a view thereon. Schwebel also wrote that he wanted the arbitration award to

be signed prior to August 17, 2001.

During the evening of August 3, 2001, Kiihn’s secretary sent a fax to Handl and asked
whether he wished to receive the communication between Kiihn and Schwebel as well
as a fax to Schwebel in which reference was made to interim draft award which Handl
never received. The faxes are dated August 2, 2001. On August 6, 2001, Handl
requested that Kiihn grant him at least 14 work days to submit his comments
regarding the First Draft. Hand stated, inter alia, that he intended to criticize the
award in certain respects and that the suggestion that the award be signed on August
17 must be regarded as an attempt to outmaneuver him. He also stated that he wanted
to receive the communication which had been exchanged between Kiihn and

Schwebel.

On August 7, 2001, Kiihn d ded that Handl i diately submit his cc to

 

the First Draft and that such comments consist of proposals for amendments and
corrections of facts and spellings. Kiihn also stated in the fax that a majority had been
formed at the meeting in Diisseldorf. Furthermore Kin stated, inter alia, that he had
worked out a proposal with linguistic assistance from Schwebel and that the changes
Schwebel had proposed were only linguistic. On the same day, Kiihn sent a “final
draft” of the award (hereinafter the “Second Draft”). On August 8, 2001, Schwebel
sent a fax in which he indicated, inter alia, the types of comments which Hand was to
provide in respect of the draft award, and stated that Handl could write a dissenting
opinion and that “the substance of the opinion” was clear at the meeting in

Diisseldorf.

On August 8, 2001, Kiihn sent a fax to Handl and asked whether he wanted to have
Schwebel’s handwritten comments. On August 9, 2001, Hand reacted to Kiihn’s and

Schwebel’s letters of August 7 and 8, 2001 and stated, inter alia, that he did not

17

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

regard the deliberations as concluded and that he had not understood that he would be
held responsible if the award was delayed. Hand also stated that he would limit his
comments in order to avoid being accused of delaying the award. The
correspondence of August 7 and 8, 2001 between the arbitrators with respect to the
Second Draft reveals, inter alia, that Kiihn and Schwebel did not wish to conduct
further discussions with Handl, that they were of the opinion that the deliberations had

been concluded in Diisseldorf, and that they were not interested in Hand1’s opinions.

Handl submitted his comments on August 16, 2001, i.e. 13 days after he received the
First Draft, which was less time than he had requested. Since he only had a limited
time in which to review and ponder the draft award, he did not have the possibility to
submit his views on all issues raised. Handl sent his comments regarding the First
Draft by fax both to Kiihn and Schwebel. In his comments, Hand raised the issue of
Zelezny’s role and stated that it was Zelezny who had caused the injury and that the
Media Council was not liable for the injury, and the Republic could only be imputed
proportional liability in the event the Republic was found liable. In addition, Handl,
inter alia, addressed the issue of Czech law regarding the assignment of rights, the
1993 and 1996 MOAs, the administrative proceedings, and coercion. It is also
apparent from his comments that, on many points, he applied the same reasoning as
the London Tribunal, inter alia, with respect to the Media Council’s letter of March
15, 1999. It further appears that Handl was not of the opinion that the deliberations

had been concluded by the meeting in Diisseldorf.

Kin did not respond to Handl’s comments until August 29, 2001, nearly two weeks
later. Kiihn dismissed all of Handl’s views and, the same day, sent another “final
draft” of the award (hereinafter the “Third Draft”). A copy for signature was to be
sent some days later. It may be gleaned from Kiihn’s response that it was completed
on August 21. During the time which transpired between August 16 up to and
including the time at which the response was sent on August 29, some discussions
must have taken place between Kiihn and Schwebel regarding the manner in which

they were going to proceed.

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

On Saturday, September 1, 2001, Kiihn sent a fax to Handl dated August 31, 2001.
Appended thereto was an additional “final draft” (hereinafter the “Fourth Draft”) of
the award and separate signature pages dated August 31, 2001, which were already
signed by Kiihn. The Draft and signature pages were also sent by courier to Handl.
As of a consequence of the Fourth Draft, Handl was definitively denied any
possibility to comment on the Third Draft on time. Nonetheless, the award was
amended following such date. Handl responded and confirmed receipt on September
3, 2001. On that day, the London Tribunal issued the London award in which all
claims against the Republic were denied. The award was widely disseminated and
became known to Kiihn. On September 4, 2001, Kiihn requested that Handl send the
signature pages directly to Schwebel and stated that further amendments were to be
made to the award. On the same day, Handl received another 33 pages with

corrections to the award from Schwebel.

On September 5, 2001, Handl stated that he would not sign an award to which the
signature pages were not appended to the original and returned the signature pages to
Kihn. Handl also pointed out, inter alia, that the award could not be dated before it
was signed by all of the arbitrators. It was Handl’s opinion that the arbitration award
was to be dated at the time it was signed by the last arbitrator, particularly since the

award was still subject to amendments.

On Friday, September 7, 2001, Kiihn sent to Handl six complete and undated copies
of the award (hereinafter the “Fifth Draft”) for signature which Handl, as a
consequence of the intervening weekend, received on Monday, September 10, 2001.
Kiihn requested that Hand sign and send to Schwebel all copies of the award for his
signature. Handl informed Kiihn on the same day that he did not intend to sign the
award. On September 11, 2001, Handl sent his dissenting opinion to Kiihn and

Schwebel in which he explained why he would not sign the award.

19
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

On September 11, 2001, Handl sent the award to Schwebel for signature. This was
the same day on which the United States of America was attacked and it was
impossible to send anything to the US by air on that or subsequent days. On the same
day, Hand stated in a fax to Kiihn that he was entitled not to sign the award and that
he would append a dissenting opinion. On that day Kiihn expressed his views
regarding the deliberation process. At this stage Kiithn wrote “for the record”.
Notwithstanding the difficulties in communications with the US, the Stockholm
award was sent to the parties on September 14, 2001, signed both by Kiihn and
Schwebel, and dated September 13, 2001.

On September 23, Handl gave notice of his resignation as arbitrator and appended to
the parties and the other arbitrators what he had told the Republic’s Minister of
Finance regarding the reasons for his resignation. The stated reasons were, inter alia,
that the other two arbitrators, particularly Kiihn, had excluded him and deliberated

without him.

The First Draft was far from a complete draft of the Stockholm award. After the First
Draft had been sent to Handl and Schwebel, a number of amendments and
supplements were made which were crucial for the outcome of the case and which
incorporated new legal arguments. Handl received no information from Ktihn or
Schwebel as to why these new paragraphs were incorporated in the draft or on whose
initiative or request this took place. Handl was not allowed to participate in any
discussions regarding these new paragraphs, and Hand] was under the impression that
the two other arbitrators were involved in the amendments made to the draft of the
Stockholm award in August 2001. Handl only had five days to review the 175-page
First Draft prior to the commencement of the distribution of the next, and many
subsequent drafts, all of which were designated “final draft”, and had no opportunity
to submit his views on a draft before the distribution of the subsequent draft. In
addition, Handl neither expected nor could expect that entirely new sections which
contained substantive legal issues would be incorporated in a “final draft” without any

prior discussion. At some point, probably commencing June 2001 and onwards, the

20
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

two arbitrators ceased to include Hand in their continued discussions. No internal

arrangement of work in the Stockholm proceedings was agreed upon.

In the First Draft of the award, the issue of causality was addressed, and it appears
from the draft that the Tribunal concluded that the Republic had caused the injury.
This is set forth, inter alia, in paragraphs 427, 520, and 590.

The Second Draft contained both amendments which were marked and amendments
which were unmarked. This is apparent, inter alia, in paragraphs 11, 13, 26, 401, 408,
424, 427, 469, 533, 551, 584, and 586. The amendments were not only linguistic in
nature. In the marked paragraphs, 598-604, substantial amendments and supplements

were made to the reasons for the award regarding expropriation.

The Third Draft also contained amendments which were not marked. There was also
marked text which did not have amendments, e.g. paragraph 393. The work of
reviewing the draft was thereby rendered more difficult. Important amendments were
also incorporated in paragraphs 580-585, which was a section regarding joint
tortfeasors. These paragraphs were entirely new and were based upon the commentary
to the draft Articles on State Responsibility which were adopted by the United
Nations International Law Commission (hereinafter the “ILC”) during its summer
session which was held between July 2 and August 10, 2001. In paragraph 580, the
term “tortfeasors” was used for the first time. Paragraph 581 reproduced a citation
referring to national law which was derived from the commentary to Article 31.
Paragraph 582 characterized the Media Council’s actions as “torts”. In the second,
erroneously numbered paragraph 581, reference is made to the sections which do not
address the case to be adjudicated by the arbitrators. It appears that the Tribunal
incorporated parts of citations from various parts of the commentary in the award and
“rearranged” them. In the second, erroneously numbered paragraph 582, the Tribunal

discussed causality and proximity issues.

21
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Article 31 of the draft Articles on State Responsibility addresses Reparation. In
footnote 500, under section 12 in the ILC commentary to Article 31, there is a
paragraph which was cited in the award, with the exception that the award uses
“international law” in lieu of “national law”. The Tribunal also used in the
erroneously numbered paragraph 581 a citation from the commentary to Article 31
and incorporated a case therefrom in the Third Draft. Article 31, however, addresses a
state’s liability vis-a-vis other states, not vis-a-vis private legal subjects. Paragraphs
580-585 were added to that part of the award which addresses causality, which is not
addressed in Article 31. Article 47 addresses situations in which there are several

contributing states.

The concept, “joint tortfeasor”, which does not exist in international law, was of
determinative significance for the position of the majority that the Republic was liable
for damages pursuant to the Treaty. The majority also based its decision regarding
which principles were to be applied for the determination of the amount of damages
on this concept. Only in the Third Draft did Handl discover this issue. The ILC
commentary was not available prior to the latter part of August 2001. Handl was not
sent a copy of the ILC commentary by Kiihn or Schwebel. The Fourth Draft was sent
to Handl only two days after he had received the Third Draft. Handl was not afforded
any opportunity to review and express an opinion regarding the concept “joint
tortfeasor”, and the references to the ILC commentary in the Stockholm award before

Kiihn demanded that he sign the award.

Paragraphs 613-616 of the Third Draft were also new and addressed the Reparation
claim. The term, fair market value, was raised for the first time in paragraph 616.
Amendments were also made to paragraph 617, which were reflected in paragraph
620. Neither compensation in general nor particular principles for the determination
of the compensation had been addressed by the Stockholm Tribunal prior to the Third
Draft. Nor, in this case either, was HandI afforded the opportunity to submit his
comments before he was requested to sign the arbitration award. Nor was Handl

afforded, at this late stage, any opportunity to attempt to prevent the majority of the

22
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Stockholm Tribunal from exceeding the parties’ agreement to separate the liability

issue from the determination of damages.

Kiihn and Schwebel had discussed and added the section regarding joint tortfeasors,
damages, and the ILC commentary without affording Handl the opportunity to

participate in this work.

In the Fourth and Fifth Drafts, amendments were also made. In addition, there are
two final versions of the award in which the paragraphs are numbered differently.
The work of finalizing the arbitration award thus continued even after the Third Draft

had been distributed.

The fact that Hand stated in his dissenting opinion that he had notified Kiihn and
Schwebel of his views cannot be regarded as though Hand participated in the
discussion concerning the joint tortfeasors since this concept, as well as the
paragraphs regarding damages and the ILC commentary, were not known prior to the
Third Draft on August 29, 2001. Nor can the text on page 20 of the dissenting
opinion concerning “tortfeasor” be regarded as a confirmation that Handl had
discussed the issue with the two other arbitrators. It is at this juncture that Hand first

expresses his views regarding “tortfeasors”.

Hand! did not attempt to intentionally delay the rendering of the Stockholm award. It
appears obvious, however, that the majority of the Stockholm Tribunal wanted to
render the Stockholm award effective as of August 31, 2001 notwithstanding that they
were not ready to render it until later. There is no other explanation for pre-dating.
The reason for this must have been that the majority was concerned that the London
award would entail res judicata in relation to the Stockholm award. The final hearing
in the London proceedings commenced seven weeks earlier than the final hearing in
the Stockholm proceedings, March 5, 2001 compared with April 23, 2001. The

London Tribunal conducted deliberations in the case from the conclusion of the final

23
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

hearing on March 13, 2001 until the issuance of the London award on September 3,

2001.

Failure to take into consideration applicable law

The conclusions reached by the Stockholm Tribunal in the Stockholm award raised a
number of issues which, pursuant to the choice of law provisions in Article 8.6 of the
Treaty, were to be determined by application of Czech law. These issues concerned,
inter alia, the protection afforded the original investor pursuant to the 1993 MOA, the
commencement of the administrative proceedings in 1996, and the alleged coercion in
conjunction therewith, the relationship between the 1996 MOA and the 1993 MOA,
the service agreement, what transpired when CME acquired the interests in CNTS
from CME Media Enterprises B.V. (hereinafter “CME Media”) in 1997, the Media
Council’s letter of March 15, 1999 and the alleged collusion with Zelezny, the
obligation of the Media Council to intervene, and the termination of the service
agreement. These issues could only be resolved by the application of Czech law. The
Stockholm Tribunal had an obligation to comply with the choice of law clause and, in
accordance with the same, an obligation to apply Czech law. The Stockholm Tribunal
did not apply Czech law with respect to the aforementioned issues and went so far as
to openly disregard Czech law. When the Stockholm Tribunal did not apply Czech
law, it could not determine issues raised in the Stockholm proceedings in a correct
manner. Nor did the Stockholm Tribunal apply international law or any other legal
system with respect to the aforementioned issues, and did not reach its decision on the
basis of law. The outcome of the case would have been different had the Stockholm

Tribunal applied Czech law.

The Stockholm Tribunal was composed of a jurist with expertise in international law,
Schwebel, a jurist with expertise in Czech law, Handl, and a jurist with expertise in
commercial law and international arbitration, Kiihn. The parties expected that the
Stockholm Tribunal would make use of this collective expertise when it decided the

case and believed that Czech law would be investigated, inter alia, in light of the fact

24
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

that there was a Czech jurist on the Stockholm Tribunal. The Stockholm Tribunal
also had an obligation to investigate the content of the applicable law, i.e. Czech law.
The Republic’s appointment of Hand as an arbitrator provided the Republic with a
well-founded right to anticipate that Handl’s expertise would be taken into
consideration by the Stockholm Tribunal. Handl’s expertise in Czech law was
necessary for the determination of the dispute. The exclusion of Hand] from the
Stockholm Tribunal’s deliberations resulted in Czech law being ignored in the

Stockholm award.

The expectation that Czech law would be investigated and applied was initially shared
by the arbitrators which, inter alia, is apparent from the fact that, following the final
hearing in Stockholm, Kiihn entrusted Handl with investigating Czech law and
Schwebel with investigating international law. The Republic invoked Czech law in
the Stockholm proceedings and argued in detail regarding Czech law in its written
submissions, inter alia, in the Statement of Defence, in the Sur-Reply, and in the
Written Closing Submission, and in conjunction with the final hearing before the
Stockholm Tribunal. The Republic stated, for example, that the Media Council’s role
was to monitor and enforce the Media Law, which it was empowered and obligated to
do in accordance with Czech law. The Republic also submitted translations of, inter
alia, the Media Law, the Administrative Proceedings Act, and the Act governing the
Media Council. However, in many respects, the burden of proof during the Stockholm
proceedings rested with CME. The parties argued both Czech law and international
law in the Stockholm proceedings, and the Stockholm Tribunal posed questions
concerning Czech law and international law during the final hearing. The failure to
apply applicable law could not be discovered before the Stockholm award had been
issued. There was nothing against which the Republic could protest during the

Stockholm proceedings.

The Republic has stated that the Stockholm Tribunal disregarded Czech law in the

award, inter alia, as follows.

25
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

The Tribunal should have analyzed the manner in which the original investment made
by CEDC 1993 was to be characterized and, in such context, investigated a large
number of issues covering, inter alia, company law and contract law. The Tribunal
concluded, without any legal analysis, that the 1993 MOA and “the split structure”
were a “carefully designed scheme”, that it was in compliance with Czech law, and

that it was the basis for CEDC’s investment.

The Tribunal concluded, without legal analysis, that “The use of ‘know-how’ of a
broadcasting Licence is meaningless and worthless” and that the 1996 contribution to
the MOA of “the use of the know-how of the License” was quite a worthless and
meaningless right. The Stockholm Tribunal conducted no analysis of the value of
CET 21’s contribution to CNTS in 1993 of the exclusive use of the broadcasting
license. When the Tribunal noted which protection the investment enjoyed according
to the 1993 MOA compared with the 1996 MOA, the Tribunal did not take into
account Czech law but, rather, looked to the actual chain of events in order to find
support for its reasoning that the protection had deteriorated. The Tribunal asserted
that the service agreement could be terminated and concluded more easily without
analyzing whether this was actually the case legally and argued around the legal
proceedings which were commenced in the Czech Republic. The Stockholm Tribunal
stated in paragraph 476 that the protection enjoyed by the investor pursuant to Czech

civil law and in Czech courts was not significant to the conclusions of the Tribunal.

The Stockholm Tribunal assessed whether the Media Council’s acts in 1996 could
constitute coercion or whether the amendments to the MOA were voluntary. The
Tribunal, in this context, questioned whether the “opinion” rendered by Dr. Barta in
which he concluded that “the split structure” was not compatible with law and that
measures should be taken and concluded that it involved coercion. The Tribunal
stated that it was not necessary to examine the Czech administrative law aspect of the
issue and how the Media Council’s actions were to be adjudged according to Czech
law, and whether the structure was legal according to Czech law. Instead, the Tribunal

went directly to the Treaty and made an assessment based thereon.

26

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

In paragraph 575, the Tribunal described the cause of the collapse of CME’s
investment and stated that it was the Media Council’s acts and omissions. In the
conclusion in paragraph 590, the Tribunal stated it was not, in this context, necessary
to consult Czech law in order to determine if the Media Councils’ acts were in
accordance with Czech law but, rather, asserted that the Treaty could be consulted
directly to determine whether the acts involved a breach of the Treaty. This was not,

however, possible since the Treaty did not answer these issues.

It is also apparent from the arbitrators’ correspondence and statements that the
majority did not apply, nor considered that it was necessary to apply, Czech law.
Czech law was raised in the list of questions prepared by Kiihn. Kiihn posed
questions regarding Czech law and the question whether Czech law was to apply was
raised. The reasoning, however, was never followed through. Schwebel stated in his
response to the list of questions that he interpreted Article 8.6 of the Treaty to “take
into account” entails a freer formulation than “apply”. Of the arbitrators, Schwebel
was of the opinion that Czech law need not be applied. Rather, the Treaty could be
directly consulted in order to determine whether CME had incurred an injury.
Characteristic of Schwebel’s position was that he devoted himself to opining in lieu of
investigating Czech law and the provisions thereof. For example, Schwebel did not
analyze the difference between CET 21’s contribution to CNTS in 1993 and 1996,
and whether the contribution could be retracted. Instead, Schwebel referred to the
fact that the Media Council was of the opinion that the contribution in 1993 was legal.
In addition, Schwebel did not know what the change in the 1996 MOA entailed
according to Czech law, nor did he concern himself with investigating the impact.
Hand! was of the opinion that the amendments to the 1996 MOA did not entail any
change, but his opinion was not afforded any weight in the award. However, the

award stated, notwithstanding that the arbitrators were not clear regarding the

27
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

situation following the deliberations in Diisseldorf, without any analysis pursuant to
Czech law or any other legal system, that the protection afforded by the 1996 MOA
had deteriorated and that the contribution of the know-how pursuant to the license in
1996 was meaningless and worthless. Schwebel also devoted himself to speculation
and not an analysis of Czech law when the issue of the impact of CME’s consent to
the 1996 MOA, as expressed in the transfer agreement of 1997, was analyzed. On the
other hand, Handl asserted that CME was bound by its consent pursuant to Czech law.
However, the majority did not pay heed to Handl, but found, without any analysis of
Czech law, that CME was not bound by the consent in such a way that CME could not
bring claims based on the 1996 MOA. Also as regards the import of the Media
Council’s letter of March 15, 1999, the majority did not take into account Czech law

but, rather, engaged in speculation.

An example of the issues in which the Stockholm Tribunal did not apply Czech law
and, where appropriate, international law, and in which the outcome of the case would

thereby have been different, the Republic states as follows.

The legal basis for the investment

The Stockholm Tribunal concluded that “the split structure” was the basis of the
investment and that it was a well-defined legal basis therefor. However, the Tribunal
did not make any analysis of what CET 21’s contribution to CNTS consisted of and
how it was to be defined. The Tribunal did not investigate which rights CEDC
acquired through its investments in the Czech Republic and what protection the 1993
MOA afforded the investment. The Tribunal did not state, nor did it refer to, any law
which explained why the 1993 MOA afforded greater protection than the 1996 MOA,

nor did it state in any other manner what had occurred from a legal perspective.

The Republic referred, with respect to this issue, to Czech law and stated objections
based on Czech law. Had the Stockholm Tribunal applied Czech law, it would had
determined that the only rights acquired by the CEDC through its investment were

28
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

contractual rights vis-a-vis CET 21 and that it was only CET 21 which obtained the

broadcasting license pursuant to Czech law.

Changes in 1996 and 1997 in the contractual relationships with CET 21

The Tribunal did not conduct an analysis of what had occurred in conjunction with the
change to the MOA 1996 and the execution of the service agreement. The Tribunal
assumed that the legal protection was lost and stated, without legal support therefor,

the value of the contribution of “know-how” of the license.

Dr Radvan was a Czech lawyer who participated in the negotiations concerning the
1996 MOA, and testified during the proceedings as a witness regarding the facts in
the case and not regarding the import of Czech law. During the proceedings, the
Tribunal did not attach any importance to Dr. Radvan’s testimony regarding the
import of Czech law but, rather, requested a written opinion of another person. His
testimony cannot be taken as a pretext that the Tribunal based its award on Czech law.
Nor can the statement of CME’s corporate counsel regarding the legal protection in
1993 compared with the protection in 1996 be taken as a pretext therefor since she did
not testify regarding the import of Czech law but, rather, regarding the facts.
Independent appraisers also concluded that the value of the contribution was the same

in 1993 as it was in 1996.

The content and effect of 1993 MOA and the 1996 MOA and the service agreement
should have been adjudged according to Czech law. Without analyzing the content
and effect pursuant to Czech law of the contractual relationships between CET 21 and
ENTS in 1993 compared with 1996 and 1997, and the content of the revocation of the
terms and conditions of the license, it was not possible for the Stockholm Tribunal to
determine whether CME/ CNTS had lost its legal safety net. Had the Stockholm
Tribunal applied Czech law, it would have concluded that CET 21 would have been
able to broadcast TV Nova irrespective of the provisions of the 1993 MOA and found
that CME/ CNTS had not lost any legal protection by virtue of the 1996 events.

29
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

 

Co of administrative pr lings and coercion

The Stockholm Tribunal found that the Media Council commenced the administrative
proceedings in 1996 for the purpose of coercing CET 21 and CNTS into dissolving
the exclusive relationship and bring about the end of the 1993 “split structure”. The
issue of whether coercion existed was of determinative significance to the outcome of
the case. Without concluding that coercion existed, the Tribunal could not reach the

conclusion rendered by the Tribunal.

The award refers, inter alia, in paragraph 515 to “unlawful pressure” and in paragraph
516 to “unlawful acts”, but it does not refer to any legal system upon which such are
based. Within international law, there is nothing other than physical coercion.
Professor Vagts’ article, to which the Tribunal referred in paragraph 517 of the award,
does not constitute international law, and Professor Vagts himself emphasized that the
statements in the article did not constitute international law. The reference to
Professor Vagts’ article is not tantamount to the application by the Tribunal of
international law since reference to the article falls outside the scope of the
application of international law. The Tribunal did not apply any legal system at all.
According to Czech law, certain conditions must be satisfied in order for coercion to
be deemed to exist. The act which constitutes coercion must, inter alia, be unlawful.
In addition, according to Czech law, acts which are coerced are void. Where,
following the cessation of coercion, a party who is subject to such coercion invokes a
legal act which came about under such coercion, the legal act is no longer regarded

according to Czech law as having come about under coercion.

Had the Tribunal analyzed the administrative proceedings according to Czech law, the
Tribunal would have found that, in accordance with the Media Law, the Media
Council had an obligation to commence proceedings in the event there was a
suspicion of a violation under the Media Law. Since the Media Council had an

obligation to commence administrative proceedings against CNTS, there can be no

30
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

talk of coercion pursuant to Czech law. Instead of applying Czech law, the Tribunal
stated that it was not necessary to determine whether the Media Council’s acts were in
accordance with Czech law, that it was not obligated to determine the Czech
administrative law aspect of the issue, and that it was not the duty of the

Arbitral Tribunal to determine whether the Media Council’s acts were compatible
with Czech law. Instead, the Tribunal stated that it needed only determine whether

the Media Council’s acts were compatible with the Treaty.

The Republic invoked Czech law regarding the Media Law and the Media Council’s
obligations and the Administrative Proceedings Act, inter alia, in its Statement of

Defence and during the final hearing in the Stockholm proceedings.

The London Tribunal analyzed these questions on the basis of Czech law and
concluded that the commencement of the administrative proceedings was a normal

procedure for the Media Council.

Had the Stockholm Tribunal applied Czech law, the Tribunal would have concluded
that the Media Council was obligated to ensure compliance with the Media Law, that
the Media Council had not acted unlawfully, and that the administrative proceedings
could not entail coercion. Had the Tribunal concluded that the amendments of the
1996 MOA occurred under coercion, the Tribunal would have also concluded that
they were void and, accordingly, no amendment would have been made to the 1993

MOA.

31
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Transfer agreement between CME Media and CME

The Stockholm Tribunal failed to apply Czech law when it analysed the import of the
transfer of the shares in CNTS from CME Media to CME in accordance with the
transfer agreement. The Stockholm Tribunal reach the conclusion in its award that
CME’s consent to the 1996 MOA was effective only as between the shareholders, and
that the consent did not entail a waiver of rights pursuant to the Treaty which arose
due to the violations prior to CME’s acquisition of the shares in CNTS. The Tribunal
conducted no analysis of Czech law notwithstanding that Czech law undisputedly
governed the transfer. The Republic made objections regarding the import of the
consent according to Czech law. Neither international law nor the Treaty contains
any rule which could have applied to the assessment of the issue. Instead, Kiihn
charged Schwebel with carrying out an investigation to see whether there were any

analogies which could drawn from American law on the issue.

According to Czech law, a party is bound by the provisions included in the agreement,
and the Tribunal should have concluded, by an application of Czech law, that CME
was bound by Article 4 of the transfer agreement. Pursuant to Czech law, CME was
required to provide such consent as provided by CME in Article 4. By granting its
consent, CME approved the 1996 MOA and the alleged amendments vis-a-vis the
1993 MOA, including the alleged coercion. According to Czech law, claims inuring
to a person do not follow the shares in a share transfer. Nor did CME Media transfer
any claims to CME. Had the Stockholm Tribunal applied Czech law in order to
determine the significance of the content of the transfer agreement, the Stockholm
Tribunal would not have concluded that CME was able to assert the claims based on

the alleged coercion in 1996.

The Media Council's letter of March 15, 1999

The Stockholm Tribunal failed to apply Czech law and international law when it

analysed the Media Council’s letter of March 15, 1999 to CET 21. The conclusion

32
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

drawn from the letter by the Stockholm Tribunal was that the Media Council had
assisted CET 21 in eliminating CNTS. The Stockholm Tribunal concluded that the
issuance of the Media Council’s letter of March 15, 1999 and the failure to revoke
such letter were violations of the Treaty. The Stockholm Tribunal concluded, without
any legal support, that such a letter was a letter entailing a formal and binding
decision (regulatory letter) of the supervisory authority for broadcasts, and that the
letter contained requirements and not recommendations. The Republic’s standpoint in
the proceedings was that the letter could not have the legal effects as ascribed by the

Tribunal.

After having applied Czech law, the London Tribunal found that the letter was not
intended to, nor could it have, any legal consequence since it was only an expression
of the supervisory authority’s general understanding of the correct interpretation of

the Media Act.

Had the Stockholm Tribunal applied Czech law, it would have reached the conclusion
that the letter could not have had the legal effect ascribed by the Tribunal. By failing
to apply Czech law regarding the legal status of the letter, the Stockholm Tribunal
reached the conclusion that the letter could eliminate exclusivity in accordance with
the service agreement and weaken the legal protection. Neither Czech law,
international law, nor the Treaty provided any support for the conclusion that the mere
issuance of a letter by a state supervisory authority could eliminate an exclusivity
clause in an agreement between two private entities. The Stockholm Tribunal did not

apply any legal system when it reached its conclusions.

Possible intervention by the Media Council

The Stockholm Tribunal failed to apply Czech law or international law in determining
whether the Media Council could or should have revoked the letter of March 15,
1999. The award contains no analysis of Czech law as to whether the Media Council

could and should have revoked the letter.

33

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

The Stockholm Tribunal found that the Media Council could have, not later than a
certain time, clarified the legal situation and remedied its intervention by revoking its
letter of March 15, 1999. The Stockholm Tribunal also stated, without providing any
legal grounds therefor, that the Media Council was not entitled to refrain from
“regulatory clarification”. When the Stockholm Tribunal reached these conclusions,
the Stockholm Tribunal failed to take into account the Media Council’s authority
pursuant to Czech law. The Stockholm Tribunal’s conclusion that the Media Council
was obligated to protect CME’s investment was not based on any legal analysis of

Czech law, international law, or the Treaty.

Had the Stockholm Tribunal taken into account Czech law, it would have found that
the Media Council could only have acted in accordance with Czech legislation and
that there was no possibility for the Media Council to intervene in a private dispute as

that existing between CET 21 and CNTS.

Termination of the service agreement

The Stockholm Tribunal failed to apply international law or Czech law when it
analysed the alleged termination of the service agreement by CET 21. At the time of
the Stockholm proceedings, litigation was underway in Czech courts regarding the
termination of the service agreement. According to international law, the Stockholm
Tribunal was not entitled to disregard judgments issued by the Czech courts in these
disputes only to replace the judgment of the courts with its own assessment. The
Stockholm Tribunal could not disregard the decisions of the Czech courts as an
interpreter of Czech law. Without analysing the termination of the service agreement
according to Czech law, the Tribunal reached the conclusion that it was CET 21 that

had committed a breach of contract.

In order for the Stockholm Tribunal to have been able to state that there was a

violation of international law, the Tribunal must have found that the Czech judgment

34
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

itself, or the Czech legal system, entailed a violation of the Treaty, e.g. in that CME
was denied justice or due to the fact that the judgment or the legal system are

incompatible with some rule according to international law.

The London award found that the Republic had an obligation to make its legal system
available to CME, which the Republic also had done. For its part, the Stockholm
Tribunal criticised the Czech courts and declared that it was not the role of the
Stockholm Tribunal to take decisions regarding the legal protection which a foreign
investor enjoyed for its investment according to Czech civil law and in the Czech civil
court system. The Tribunal also stated that the fact that two different conclusions
were reached in the two instances which had examined the termination showed that

the investment was fragile.

Joint tortfeasors

The Stockholm Tribunal applied neither international law nor Czech law when it
introduced the legal concept of “joint tortfeasors” in the Stockholm award. The
conclusion regarding joint tortfeasors was determinative to the outcome of the
Stockholm proceedings since the Republic could not have been held liable for
Zelezny’s actions without such a determination. In support of its assertion regarding
joint tortfeasors, the award contained a short citation from an ILC commentary which
referred to Dr. Weir’s chapter in “The International Encyclopaedia of Comparative
Law”. The ILC commentary does not constitute applicable international law. Dr
Weir’s work was neither a work about Czech law nor international law but, rather,
concerned comparative national law. The term, joint tortfeasors, postulated by the
Tribunal exists neither in international law nor in Czech law. A natural or legal
person cannot be jointly liable for damages together with a state according to
international law. A state may be liable according to international law, and a natural
or a legal person may only be liable according to national law. Accordingly, a state
and a natural or a legal person cannot be jointly and severally liable for damages for a

“tort” according to international law. The Stockholm Tribunal has postulated a term

35

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

without support in any applicable legal system. This is not a question of the
erroneous application of international law but, rather, the non-application of

international law to a determinative issue.

Obligations as senior executive

The Stockholm Tribunal found that Zelezny had breached his obligations as a senior
executive of CNTS notwithstanding that this fact had not been invoked either by
CME or the Republic. The Stockholm Tribunal drew this conclusion without stating
which obligations a senior executive has in a Czech company vis-a-vis the company
according to Czech law. The Tribunal stated, without providing any legal basis or any
support in Czech or any other law, inter alia, that Dr Zelezny’s open breach of his
obligations according to company and civil law was a massive, clear, and intentional
violation of his obligations as Managing Director, a violation of law which must be
adjudged to be a serious crime in all legal systems. The aforementioned conclusion
was determinative for the Stockholm Tribunal’s conclusion that the Republic and
Zelezny were joint tortfeasors and that the Republic thereby breached the Treaty in
1999. The conclusion regarding Dr Zelezny’s actions was reached without any

analysis of Czech law.

The Stockholm Tribunal failed to apply Czech law when it reached the
aforementioned conclusions. Neither did the Stockholm Tribunal apply international
law nor any other legal system. Had the Stockholm Tribunal applied applicable law
when it reached the aforementioned conclusions, the outcome of the case would have

been different.

Lis pendens and res judicata

The principles of /is pendens and res judicata are a part of the ordre public and the
principles are applicable between arbitration proceedings in different countries and

which are carried out under different bilateral investment treaties. The Stockholm

36
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

award is thereby invalid. In any event, the Stockholm Tribunal committed a
procedural error by not dismissing CME’s claim during the proceedings with
reference to the principle of /is pendens, and after the issuance of the London award

with reference to the principle of res judicata.

The identity criteria between the London proceedings and the Stockholm proceedings
were fulfilled. The London proceedings and the Stockholm proceedings concerned
the same investment, the same alleged treaty violations, the same facts, the same
damage, the same claims for, firstly, restitution and, secondly, damages, the same

parties, and the same legal grounds.

Both Lauder and CME invoked the same legal grounds based on their respective
bilateral investment treaties. The two investment treaties provide the same protection
and notwithstanding that they are variously drafted there is no great difference
between them. The linguistic differences are insignificant. The obligations of the
Republic pursuant to the two investment protection treaties are essentially identical.

A claim pursuant to any of the treaties leads to the same legal consequences. CME
did not in any of the arbitration proceedings claim that the treaties were different. In a
letter of March 10, 2000 from CME’s counsel to the London Tribunal, it was stated
that the treaties were indistinguishable documents, which was also stated in CME’s

Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim in the Stockholm proceedings.

Notwithstanding that Lauder and CME were not formally the same legal entity, they
were to be regarded as the same party with respect to the issue of /is pendens and res
judicata. Lauder and CME constitute shareholders at different levels in the chain of
companies which Lauder used to make his investment in CNTS. Lauder owned and
owns a minority of the shares in the parent company, Central Media Enterprises Ltd,
which, in turn, through inactive wholly-owned subsidiaries, owns 99 per cent of the
shares in CNTS. Lauder was and is the controlling shareholder of the parent
company, which made it possible for him to exercise control over CME and over the

companies in the CME group. Such control was also a necessary condition in order

37

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

for Lauder to be able to bring his claim pursuant to the American Investment Treaty.
Lauder was the only shareholder who was, the entire time, a constant in the chain of

companies which controlled CNTS from 1993 until the Stockholm proceedings.

CME revealed the identity between CME and Lauder when CME’s counsel, in both
proceedings, proposed that the London proceedings and the Stockholm proceedings
be consolidated. It was the same representative for Lauder and CME, Frederic T.
Klinkhammer, who instructed the same lawyers to represent Lauder in the London
proceedings and CME in the Stockholm proceedings and who also participated during

both proceedings.

It would not have been possible to resolve the problem of two awards against the
Republic merely by setting off the amount which the Republic was to pay, inter alia,

due to company and tax law rules.

Also according to English law, the res judicata effect does not only extend to the same
party in a strict sense, but can also be extended and, by the application of English law,

the res judicata effect of the London award affects the Stockholm proceedings.

The Republic immediately and persistently objected to parallel proceedings by
invoking various grounds during the Stockholm proceedings, and took the position
that either the London or Stockholm proceedings would have to be discontinued. It is
true that the Republic did not invoke the legal-technical import of the doctrines of /is
pendens and res judicata when it objected, but the Republic moved for dismissal and
stay. This was due, inter alia, to the existence of the large number of disputes
regarding CME, CET 21, CNTS, and Zelezny, in addition to the disputes between
Lauder/CME and the Republic which the Republic also referred to in the Stockholm
proceedings. This is apparent, inter alia, from the Republic’s Statement of Defence,
Sur-Reply, and its opening statement in the Stockholm proceedings. The Republic

invoked all circumstances in the Stockholm proceedings which are invoked in the

38
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

present case regarding /is pendens and res judicata notwithstanding that the Republic

did not use the same legal labels in the Stockholm proceedings.

The Republic did not raise any new objection regarding res judicata after the London
award was issued since the proceedings at that time had been concluded and the
Stockholm Tribunal had deliberated for four months. The Stockholm Tribunal was
aware the entire time of the London proceedings. On a number of occasions, Kiihn
telephoned the parties’ legal counsel to find out whether the London Tribunal had
issued its award. The arbitrators in the Stockholm Tribunal learned of the London
award when it was issued. When the London award was issued, the Stockholm

Tribunal should have stayed the proceedings to consult the parties.

Immediately after CME had requested the Stockholm proceedings, CME wanted the
proceedings to be consolidated. The Republic was of the opinion that it was not
lawful to allow both proceedings to proceed, and that it was not possible to
consolidate the cases pursuant to the respective treaties but, rather, that CME/Lauder
should choose which proceeding they wanted to pursue. The Republic was left only
to continue to object and hope that one of the proceedings would be terminated.
Consolidating the proceedings was also incompatible with the Republic’s position that
neither of the proceedings could be pursued according to the respective Investment
Treaties. The Republic did not state that its actions constituted a waiver of the right to

assert the principles of /is pendens and res judicata in subsequent proceedings.

Excess of mandate — joint tortfeasors

CME did not invoke joint tortfeasors or the grounds on which it depends in the case.
Joint tortfeasors was referred to only one time throughout the entire proceedings,
which was during the penultimate day of the main hearing. CME also made a
reference to “concurrent causation”. CME did not invoke the necessary legal grounds

for the application of joint tortfeasors.

39

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

In order for the Stockholm Tribunal to be able to determine damages, an
impermissible act or omission must first have occurred — a principle upon which
liability is based — on which a claim could be based and, secondly, causation must
have exist between the act or omission and the injury incurred. The term, joint
tortfeasors, exists in national law and, in the sense the term was used in the award, the
term entails that there must exit a coordinated action between several “tortfeasors”
towards a common end. Joint tortfeasors is a principle on which liability is based, and

not a principle of concurrent causation.

Joint tortfeasors is referred to by CME’s counsel in the reasoning pertaining to the
Media Counsel’s role and pertaining to causation and the proximity arguments. CME
talked about causation between the Media Council’s actions and omissions and the
injury incurred, and stated that liability existed for states even in conjunction with
concurrent causation. CME’s counsel stated, inter alia, that a state could be liable
notwithstanding the existence of other intervening events in the chain of causation,
but no reference was made that someone had committed a “tort”, neither Zelezny nor
the Media Council, nor that one or more was a joint tortfeasor and that this principle
was to be applied. CME claimed that there was direct causation between the Media
Council’s acts in 1996 and 1999 and the injury incurred through the termination of the
service agreement, and that the termination of the service agreement was an
intervening act which did not sever the causal link. CME did not assert that two
persons acted towards a common end, nor did it invoke the necessary requisites for
the application of joint tortfeasors. Counsel for the Republic referred to the principles
of causation and foreseeability when he stated that it was a correct summary of the

principles rendered by CME, not the principle of joint tortfeasors.

The Stockholm Tribunal found that the 1996 events gave rise to an injury due to the
fact that the investment’s safety net was weakened and that the value of the in-kind
property — CET 21’s contribution of the exclusive use of the license — was
undermined. The Tribunal did not find coordination between Zelezny and the Media

Council at this time but, rather, to the contrary, at this time, Zelezny worked against

40
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

the Media Council. It does not appear in the award that, in 1996, the Media Council
could foresee what would occur in 1999 when the service agreement was terminated.
In paragraph 585, the Tribunal stated that the Media Council, in 1996, could foresee
that the safety net would be ruined, but not that the Media Council could foresee what
would subsequently transpire. The Tribunal did not find the Media Council’s actions
and omissions in 1999 caused any injury directly, but that there was coordination
between the Media Council and Zelezny in order to undermine the exclusivity and
that the Media Council supported Zelezny. The Tribunal also found that it was
Zelezny’s termination of the service agreement which eliminated the exclusivity,
which led to the injury in the form of a decline in revenues and that the Media
Council could foresee this event in 1999. According to the Stockholm Tribunal, the
actions in 1996 were the decisive attack on CME’s investment since the Tribunal

found that the Media Council compelled amendments to the MOA.

In order for the Stockholm Tribunal to be able to impute liability to the Republic
notwithstanding that it was Zelezny who was the direct cause of the injury through
termination of the service agreement, the Tribunal was compelled to assume that, in
1996, the Media Council could foresee Zelezny’s actions in 1999. The Tribunal could
not do so since Zelezny worked against the Media Council at this time. Nor could the
Tribunal find that it would be the most proximate cause of the injury. The Tribunal
could not, by means of a normal tort reasoning, find that the Media Council and the
Republic could be liable for the injury. However, the Tribunal was compelled to find
a link between the injuries caused by the termination of the service agreement and the
Council’s actions and omissions, and therefore introduced the concept of joint
tortfeasors. The Media Council was found by the Tribunal to be a “joint tortfeasor”,
together with Zelezny, who the Tribunal, without such having been invoked by CME,
had found to be a “tortfeasor” in causing the injury incurred by CME’s investment.
Their actions were coordinated. The concept and reasoning therefor were

incorporated in paragraphs 580-585 only in the Third Draft of the award.

41
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

In paragraph 580, the Tribunal stated that liability could be imputed to states
notwithstanding concurrent causes. In addition, the Tribunal stated in paragraph 581
that international law contains the principle of joint tortfeasors. In paragraph 582, the
Tribunal stated that it was not only Zelezny who was a “tortfeasor” but also the Media
Council, and subsequently that the principle of joint tortfeasors applies in this case,
which was fundamental to the Tribunal’s assessment. Accordingly, the Tribunal stated
that there were two tortfeasors and that the principle of joint tortfeasors applied in this
case. In this way, the Media Council could be held liable for the injury which
occurred as a consequence of Zelezny’s actions. In paragraph 583, the Tribunal
reiterated that liability could be imputed notwithstanding other events in the chain of
causation which were not related to the state. In paragraph 584, the Tribunal stated the
terms which are generally used in an analysis of causation giving rise to liability,
which is more in the way of a general analysis. In paragraph 585, the Tribunal stated
that the Media Council, in 1996, did not foresee what would happen in 1999 but,
rather, that the Media Council could foresee that the safety net would be removed and

that the Media Council supported Zelezny in 1999, i.e. that they were joint tortfeasors.

There was nothing against which the Republic could object during the Stockholm
proceedings, since the fact that the Stockholm Tribunal had applied the principle of
joint tortfeasors became known only after the Stockholm award was issued. Nor had
CME invoked the principle of joint tortfeasors or claimed that anyone had committed
a “tort”. As noted above, joint tortfeasors is a principle regarding liability for
damages, not regarding causation, therefore the Republic did not have any reason to

object to the principle.
Without the conclusion that there existed joint tortfeasors, the Republic could not
have been held liable for the injury incurred by CME’s investment and the outcome of

the case would have been different.

Excess of mandate — decision regarding determination of damages

42

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

At CME’s request, the parties agreed to bifurcate the question of liability and the
determination of damages into two sub-proceedings. In accordance therewith, the
Stockholm Tribunal was instructed not to decide upon any damages prior to the
determination of liability in a partial award. In the first proceedings, the parties
referred to the Stockholm Tribunal to decide whether there was a breach of the
Treaty. The Stockholm Tribunal went further in its award and took a decision
regarding which injuries would be compensated and rendered, inter alia, assessments

regarding joint tortfeasors.

The limits on what the Stockholm Tribunal could decide upon were determined by
Article 8 of the Treaty and Agreed Minutes. The parties further limited the Stockholm
Tribunal’s mandate by their presentations during the proceedings, inter alia, through
the Notice of Arbitration, the Statement of Claim, and instructions and submissions to

the Stockholm Tribunal.

In CME’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, CME argued all matters in
the Stockholm proceedings and not only the first part which was addressed in the
Stockholm award. Originally, CME’s claims extended to restitutio in integrum
(restitution) alternatively/and damages. In the pleadings pertaining to the entire
proceeding, reference was made to fair market value. What was presented in those
documents thus had significance to the mandate of the Stockholm Tribunal as to the
entire Stockholm proceedings, but was not insignificant to the scope of the Stockholm

Tribunal’s mandate in the first phase of the proceedings.

Following the parties’ agreement to bifurcate liability and determination of damages,
CME did not argue in its Reply-Memorial of December 22, 2000 that the Republic
would pay damages equal to the fair market value of the investment. CME only
reiterated its basic position that, in the event the Stockholm Tribunal was of the
opinion that the Treaty had been violated, the Republic would be obligated to pay
restitution or damages. The Stockholm Tribunal would, in the first phase of the

proceedings, only declare whether or not a violation of the Treaty had occurred.

43
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

In his opening statement in the Stockholm proceedings, CME’s counsel stated orally
that the restitution claim had been withdrawn. Accordingly, only the issue of whether
the Republic had breached the Treaty remained. In addition, CME’s counsel asserted
a claim which was in accordance with the agreement of the parties, namely that the
Stockholm Tribunal was to establish that the Republic had violated the Treaty and
that CME had a right to damages in an amount which would be determined in later

proceedings. CME’s counsel did not refer to fair market value in the claim.

During the last day of the final hearing, the parties submitted the specifics of their
claims in writing and reference was made in CME’s claim, for the first time since the
bifurcation agreement to compensation equal to the fair market value of the
investment. This claim did not accord with the agreement between the parties and the
Stockholm Tribunal. At this time, the parties had, ever since the agreement was
reached, been in agreement that the principles governing the determination of
damages would be addressed in the second phase of the proceedings, and this question
had not been addressed during the proceedings. When the Stockholm Tribunal
requested the claims in writing, the Tribunal probably wanted CME to clarify its

position due to the withdrawal of the restitution claim.

In its Post-Hearing Brief, which was submitted to the Tribunal on May 25, 2001,
CME stated that it was seeking “an award declaring that Respondent has breached the
Treaty and that Claimant is entitled to damages to be determined at a second phase of
this proceeding, plus costs”. In its summary, CME accordingly did not refer to fair
market value. CME stated, quite simply, that it was seeking a declaratory award
according to which the Republic had violated the Treaty and that CME was entitled to
damages. Questions concerning the grounds, causality, and other questions of this
kind pertaining to fair market value were not addressed. This pleading was in

compliance with the bifurcation agreement.

44
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

It is apparent from the award that questions concerning the determination of damages
would be addressed at the second phase of the proceeding, e.g. in paragraphs 415 and
525. The question concerning the calculation of damages, i.e. that the Republic would
compensate CME for fair market value, was incorporated only in the Third Draft;
paragraphs 615-618 of the final award. It was in this draft that a reference to joint
tortfeasors was incorporated, which was part of the determination of what liability
could be imputed to the Republic. The Stockholm Tribunal established that the
Republic would be liable for the entire injury. The Stockholm Tribunal concluded
that the Republic would compensate CME by paying “a sum corresponding to the
value which a restitution in kind would bear” which was “the fair market value” of
CME’s investment. By incorporating reasoning in the award pertaining to the
principles for the determination of the damages, the Stockholm Tribunal addressed
important questions which had been reserved for the second phase of the proceedings,
e.g. with respect to the issue of whether more than one party was liable for damages

and that this could affect the amount to be paid.

No argumentation was presented during the proceedings regarding the issues of the
principles for the determination of damages, e.g. concerning contributory fault and
adjustment or whether “genuine value” in the Treaty was the same as “fair market
value”. Neither CME nor the Republic invoked any principles for the determination

of the damages during the proceedings.

The term, fair market value, exists in the American Investment Treaty but not in the
Treaty. It is probable that CME obtained the term from this source. Nor is fair market

value equivalent to “just compensation”, which is what the Treaty prescribes.

During the second phase, CME moved for compensation in an amount equal to the
fair market value of the investment. The Republic introduced in the proceedings,
inter alia, arguments pertaining to the questions regarding which standard would be
used for the calculation of damages which, among other things, raised issues that

should have been addressed when determining how the damages were to be

45
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

calculated. The Republic argued, inter alia, the manner in which CME’s injury would
be determined and the manner in which the valuation should be carried out. During
the proceedings, CME claimed that the Republic attempted to incorporate questions
which did not pertain to the determination of fair market value in the dispute but
which, rather, related to other ways of calculating the damages. The fact that the
Tribunal decided on compensation equal to fair market value meant, according to
CME, that they eliminated a number of objections which the Republic could have

made.

Determining damages equal to the fair market value of the investment is in no way

natural but, rather, there are a number of other ways of calculating compensation.

Prior to the Stockholm award, the Republic could not know that the Stockholm

Tribunal reached its decision in such a manner.

In the event the Court of Appeal only sets aside the Stockholm award in this respect,
according to the Republic, paragraph 624 (2) is to be worded as follows: “The
Claimant is entitled to damages, if any, to be determined at a second phase of this

arbitration”.

The proposed wording is in accord with CME’s Post-Hearing Brief, which ultimately

determined CME’s claim in the first phase of the Stockholm proceedings.

Excess of mandate — previous investors and prior breaches

The original investment in the Republic was made by the German company, CEDC,
in 1993. In 1996, 93.2 per cent of the shares in CNTS were owned by CME Media. In
April 29, 1997, CME was formed. In May 21, 1997, CME made its investment in the
Republic through the acquisition of CME Media’s interests in CNTS.

46
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

The Treaty affords protection when the investment is made and does not protect an
investment made by an investor against events which occurred prior to the
investment. As set forth in the Agreed Minutes and the Treaty, it is possible to assign
rights according to the Treaty in two different ways. There are no international law
rules which address the relevant questions in the case pertaining to the assignment of
rights in accordance with bilateral Investment Treaties. CME Media did not assign to

CME any rights in accordance with the Treaty.

The transfer of the shares in CNTS between CME Media and CME was governed by
Czech law. According to the transfer agreement, CME acquired shares in CNTS
without reservation. CME acquired the company with the alleged reduced value as a

consequence of the 1996 MOA.

In its Statement of Defence in the Stockholm proceedings, the Republic claimed that
CME was compelled to show that CME was an investor according to the Treaty. This
was a jurisdictional objection pursuant to Article 21.3 of the UNCITRAL rules.
Thereupon the Republic made a reservation that it wanted to be able to develop the
issue regarding CME’s right to bring a claim if the company could prove that it was

an investor according to the Treaty.

CME presented evidence regarding the transfer, to which the Republic responded by
saying that CME presented evidence that the company was an investor but the
Republic also made a reservation that CME, in any case, did not have a right to bring

the claim pursuant to the Treaty.

During the first day of the final hearing, the Republic asserted that CME did not have
any right to bring a claim based on amendments to the 1996 MOA, and that CME had
not acquired a right to any claims which its predecessor could have brought against
the Republic as a consequence of its activities in the Media Council. Such a claim fell
outside the mandate of the Stockholm Tribunal since no investor could base a claim

on a violation asserted to have taken place before the investment was made. In the

47
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

transfer agreement, CME had expressly accepted the wording of the MOA following
the amendments in 1996 when CME made its investment in 1997. The asserted
objection was maintained through the final hearing and in subsequent documents, and
it is this objection that is asserted by the Republic in this case. The Republic claimed
that the arbitration clause in Article 8 of the Treaty did not cover claims based on

violations of the Treaty before CME made its investment.

The Republic did not abstain from making the aforementioned objection. It is also an
absolute objection which cannot be waived since the Treaty does not cover such a
claim. The Treaty was entered into between two sovereign states and there was no
possibility for the parties in the Stockholm proceedings to expand the scope of the
agreement through a waiver of the asserted type and thereby empower the Stockholm
Tribunal to issue decisions regarding previous violations in the manner in which the
Tribunal did; this is irrespective of whether the Tribunal has examined the issue as a
substantive issue or not. In order for the Stockholm Tribunal to have been able to
examine the issue, it would have been necessary that the rights according to the

Treaty had been transferred to CME in the manner prescribed in the Agreed Minutes.

CME
Exclusion of an arbitrator from the deliberations

Hand! participated in both the oral hearing in Stockholm and the deliberations in
Diisseldorf, received and reviewed all drafts of the Stockholm award before the award
was issued, informed the other arbitrators of his views before the award was issued,
and wrote a dissenting opinion comprising approximately 11,000 words. Handl had
the same possibilities as the other arbitrators to present and discuss his opinions.
Hand's possibilities to participate were the same since he had access to the same
documentation and had the same time at his disposal as the other arbitrators. Between
the conclusion of the final hearing and the date of issuance of the award, Hand] had

ample time to review the draft award and comment thereon, which he also did.

48
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

On May 14, 2001, Kiihn distributed a list of questions which comprised four pages of
single-spaced text and was aimed at facilitating the deliberations. The list of
questions contained 37 questions divided under six sub-headings. The list of
questions covered all important issues in the case, namely applicable law, the
jurisdiction of the Stockholm Tribunal, the status of the investment in accordance
with the Treaty, whether CME's legally protected status had been violated, the extent
to which CME was caused any loss, and the significance of the termination in 1999 of
the service agreement between CNTS and CET 21. On May 15, 2001, Schwebel sent
a 13-page long memorandum to both Kiithn and Handl. On May 23, 2001, after
having had access to Schwebel's comments for over a week, Hand] sent Kiihn a 15-
page long memorandum containing replies to Kiihn's questions in which he described
in detail his position on many issues. It is evident from the reply that Handl and
Schwebel had different opinions on many issues but that they presented their opinions

on all questions and neither of them was excluded from submitting a reply.

On May 24, Schwebel sent both Kiihn and Hand his analysis of the arguments raised
by the Republic in its final pleading with respect to international law. At the time,
Schwebel had not received Hand!'s memorandum and expressed his disquiet with

respect thereto.

Prior to the meeting in Diisseldorf and after having received Handl's memorandum,
Schwebel wrote a comment to Hand's argument as to why CME had not made any
investment which was protected under the Treaty. Kiihn made a revised presentation
of the main issues which were to be addressed at the meeting in Diisseldorf which,
through one of a few changes, took specifically into consideration Hand!'s questions
concerning administrative law in the Republic and compiled a detailed written
comment to Handl's memorandum of May 23, 2001, which he attached to the

memorandum.

The entire Tribunal was present at the meeting in Diisseldorf and submitted comments

regarding relevant issues in the case. There was a lively exchange of views during the

49
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

deliberations. In his notes from memory from the meeting, Hand listed 12 points
which the arbitrators had discussed. Handl presented his comments but they were not
accepted by the other arbitrators. Hand was of one opinion and Schwebel and Kiihn
of another. Handl's comments were not rejected by Kiihn and Schwebel without a
discussion or detailed explanation and the majority of the Stockholm Tribunal had not
decided to disregard the opinions Handl might have. Handl made it clear at the end of
the meeting that he did not wish to receive any incomplete drafts of the Arbitral award

but, rather, wished to wait until a complete draft was available.

Ina letter dated June 6, 2001, which was also sent to Schwebel and Handl, Kiihn
notified the parties that the Stockholm Tribunal had held deliberations in Diisseldorf
on June | and 2 and as to the time expended so far by the arbitrators. Handl raised no

objections to the description of the time he had expended.

Following the deliberations, on June 7, 2001, Schwebel sent by fax a brief explanation
as to why he believed that the parties had not debated whether CME might be deemed
to be an investor in accordance with the Treaty, notwithstanding that a German
company had made the initial investment. The issue had been addressed by Handl in
his reply to Kiihn's list of questions and by Schwebel in the memorandum he
distributed during the deliberations. From the conclusion of Schwebel's fax, it is
evident that in May 2001 Kiihn had not already assigned Schwebel the task of
studying the issue of assignments of rights in connection with transfers of shares but,
rather, that this request was made at the deliberations in Diisseldorf. Handl raised no
objection whatsoever to Schwebel's study in this part of his memorandum of June 20,
2001. Handl further stated in his memorandum of June 20 that he had postponed his

vacation in order to be back in Prague on July 25, 2001.

On July 30, 2001, Handl received from Kiihn an essentially complete draft of the
arbitration award. This First Draft was 175 pages long, of which 97 pages contained a
neutral and non-controversial description of the conduct of the Stockholm

proceedings and the parties’ claims and arguments. The remaining pages contained

50
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

the Stockholm Tribunal's award and the reasons for the award. The draft contained in
all essential respects what would become the final award. In the award, only the
words "in 1999" were incorporated in the second point of paragraph 599. The First
Draft contained all of the decisions that the Tribunal was required to make. In the
reasons for the award, the destruction of CME's investment was addressed point by

point, as was the fact that the Republic had violated the Treaty.

Schwebel sent his relatively modest comments to Kiihn on August 2, 2001. The faxed
letter was sent to both Kiihn and Handl but comments were sent only to Kiihn. At this
point in time, Kiihn and Schwebel were in agreement regarding the award and the

reasons for the award.

Kiihn incorporated Schwebel's amendments and notified Handl thereof. From Hand!'s
fax of August 6, one can also read that Hand did not wish to receive the intermediate
draft in which the amendments had been incorporated. Handl wished to have almost
one month at his disposal in order to submit comments to the First Draft. Handl
stated that he wanted the time not merely to suggest amendments to the award but
also to provide critical comments. Kiihn informed Hand regarding his contacts with
Schwebel with respect to the proposed corrections described by Schwebel in his fax to
Kiihn of August 2, 2001 and Kiihn gave Hand the possibility to review them and
comment on them. This aforesaid is also evident from Handl's reply of August 6,

2001 to the fax from Kiihn.

On August 7, 2001, Kiihn wrote that he had amended the award in certain places and
stated that amendments which had been inserted on the advice of Schwebel had not
been marked specifically and that Handl could review Schwebel' handwritten
amendments. Kiihn also wished Handl to review the award and provide his comments
as soon as possible. Kiihn was of the opinion that they had exchanged views at the
meeting in Diisseldorf and that the opinion of the majority on key issues was clear
after the meeting. Kiihn was disturbed by the time that Handl wished to have at his

disposal and the timetable. Kiihn did not think it appropriate that Handl's dissenting

51
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

opinions should be incorporated in the award. On August 9, 2001, Handl wrote to
Kiihn that he indeed wished to have an opportunity to once again fully present his

views in order to attempt to persuade the other arbitrators to change their opinions,
but that his views which differed from those of the majority should not constitute a

part of the award.

The Second Draft was distributed eight days after the First Draft. Seven paragraphs,
598-604, which related to the expropriation claim, had been added to the draft. The
paragraphs addressed one of the five obligations that CME alleged the Republic had
breached and the issue whether the Media Council's actions could be deemed to
constitute expropriation. No new independent arguments were added but, rather, the
supplement was a development of analyses made previously. In addition, a number of
linguistic adjustments were made in light of Schwebel's corrections. The linguistic

changes were not marked. The actual conclusions in the award were not changed.

Hand wrote a 23-page long criticism of the award which he sent to his fellow
arbitrators on August 16, 2001, 18 days after having received the First Draft. The
issues addressed by Hand in his document had largely already been taken up during
the deliberations, as is evident from Hand's reply to Ktihn's list of questions and his
notes from memory. The issues addressed by Handl included, inter alia, Zelezny’s
roll, the 1993 and 1996 MOAs, and the administrative law proceedings in 1996. The
issues which he had not previously addressed included, inter alia, CEDC's transfer of
shares in CNTS. Kiihn awaited these comments notwithstanding his wish that the

award be issued promptly.

Ina fax dated August 29, 2001, Kiihn described point by point his views regarding
Hand's letter of August 16. Kiihn's reply contained a description as to why he did not
share Hand's opinions and as to which parts of Hand's proposed changes he
accepted. Schwebel's fax to Kiihn of August 29, 2001, which Kiihn forwarded to
Handl on August 30, 2001, clarified Schwebel's position regarding Hand!'s comments

and the fact that Schwebel regarded Kiihn's reply as excellent.

52
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

The Third Draft was distributed simultaneously with Kiihn's reply to HandI's
criticism. The draft contained changes which were probably due to Kiihn's desire to
demonstrate and clarify to Hand! why the latter was in error. The amendments which
were inserted addressed Zelezny's role and the fact that his behaviour was included in
the causal chain, but that the behaviour did not affect the Republic's liability since the
injury was foreseeable based on the Media Council's actions and omissions. From a
memorandum prepared by Handl dated November 5, 2001 it is evident that Handl
believed that the new paragraphs in the Third Draft came about as a result of his
comments. The addition of paragraphs 580-583, which in effect were six paragraphs,
occurred in the part of the award that addressed the issue whether the Media Council's
actions had caused any injury. Handl had previously argued that it was Zelezny's
actions - and not the Media Council's - that were the cause of the injury, as is evident
from Hand's reply to Kiihn's list of questions. In the Third Draft, in addition to the
aforementioned supplement, sections were added concerning “reparation”, and
amendments were made to the section concerning costs. No amendments were made
to the conclusions in the award. Handl was not excluded from the deliberations

insofar as certain amendments were incorporated in the Third Draft.

After August 29, 2001, only entirely non-controversial amendments were
incorporated into the award. These consisted of linguistic amendments and a
correction of a decision regarding payment of costs as a consequence of the Republic
having made a payment which the Republic was ordered to make. On August 31,
2001, the Fourth Draft was sent to Handl, which was largely identical to the Third
Draft. On September 3, 2001, Handl had received the Third and Fourth Drafts and
had, on this occasion, no objection to signing a separate signature page. On
September 4, Kiihn notified the arbitrators that he would not use the signature page
prior to being requested to do so by the fellow arbitrators. On September 4, Handl
received 33 pages containing supplements which had been prepared by Schwebel and
which contained corrections of spelling errors and similar corrections. These did not

result in any amendments to the award other than certain general linguistic changes

53
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

which were incorporated into the Fifth Draft of September 5. Handl himself did not

believe that the supplements were of any significance.

On September 5, 2001 Handl announced that he would not sign the separate signature
page and requested the definitive and appended versions of the award and averred
several times that he would sign the award. At this point it can be noted that Handl
did not wish the Stockholm award to be dated before the London award, which by that

time had been made public.

Hand! did not sign the arbitration award but, rather, forwarded the copies to Schwebel
without any signature. Handl appended instead a dissenting opinion. Handl's
dissenting opinion contained 12 sections and his arguments accorded largely with
what he had stated during the deliberations. Handl expressed his opinion regarding
the majority's assessment of joint tortfeasors, whereupon he stated that the majority
were not correct on this issue and that, in his opinion, the Republic was neither a
tortfeasor nor a joint tortfeasor. Handl also expressed his opinion regarding
determination of the damages. The dissenting opinion also contained errors as early
as the introductory section, in which Hand stated that Kiihn and Schwebel wished to
blame the Republic. Handl also stated that he had presented the argument in the

dissenting opinion to the other arbitrators and, primarily, to the chairman.

After having resigned as arbitrator, Handl prepared and submitted a document
containing arguments as to the manner in which the award might be challenged, and
handed over to the Republic's counsel all documents to which he had access in the

Stockholm proceedings.

CME was unaware that Handl had been provided with a copy of the ILC commentary.
The document was publicly available and Handl did not request Kiihn or Schwebel to
provide him with it. Handl never demanded further meetings for deliberations or

telephone conferences, nor did he raise any new issues for discussion.

54
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Hand! attempted to delay the Stockholm proceedings and thereby made it possible
that the London award might be issued before the Stockholm award, which
conclusion the Stockholm Tribunal majority also reached when it held that Handl had

deliberately delayed the issuing of the Stockholm award.
Failure to take into consideration applicable law

The fundamental issue in dispute which the Stockholm Tribunal was obliged to
adjudicate was whether the Media Council's actions or omissions, in relation to
CNTS, entailed that the Republic had violated the provisions of the Treaty. The
Stockholm Tribunal stated also in paragraph 590 of the award that its task was to
determine whether the Republic had violated the Treaty. The Stockholm Tribunal
carefully considered applicable law and did not act as amaible compositeur. The
Stockholm award is based on sources of law that are relevant for the assessment of a
claim which is based on a violation of the Treaty, i.e. the investment protection
provisions in the Treaty, and international law. In its assessment on the merits of the
dispute, the Stockholm Tribunal took into consideration other issues with respect to

legal and factual circumstances, to the extent such were relevant.

The Republic devoted little attention to Czech law during the Stockholm proceedings.
The relevant Czech law related to the Media Act, the Media Council, and the Czech
Administrative Procedure Act. In the Stockholm proceedings, the Republic presented
no evidence regarding Czech law corresponding to that which has been presented in
the instant case and referred neither to the Czech Commercial Code nor the Civil
Code. Of the legal experts retained by the Republic, it was not a Czech lawyer but
rather an English professor of international law, Professor Lowe, who solely
expressed opinions regarding international law. However, the Republic's team of

lawyers in the Stockholm proceedings also included Czech lawyers.

At the time they answered Kiihn's list of questions, Schwebel and Handl held
differing views regarding the purport of the choice of law clause in the Treaty, but

both considered what it entailed and deemed themselves as bound by it. Handl

55
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

believed, inter alia, that Czech law should take precedence. At the time of the
Diisseldorf meeting, Kiihn also regarded himself as bound by the choice of law clause
but did not share HandI's opinion that the clause meant that precedence be accorded to
Czech law. The issue of applicable law was addressed during the deliberations of the
arbitrators and all of the arbitrators regarded themselves as bound by the choice of law

clause.

The Stockholm award is based on an analysis of the Treaty and applicable law. The
following can be cited as examples of instances in which the Stockholm Tribunal

applied international law and the Treaty.

- In the award, the Stockholm Tribunal carefully analysed the concepts that governed

CME’s right to demand arbitration, e.g. “investment dispute” and “investors”.

- The Stockholm Tribunal investigated whether the Czech authorities had approved

the legality of the original investment. The Stockholm Tribunal verified whether the
split structure was legal in order to seek whether prior investors could have relied on
the actual approval, which was an assessment that the Stockholm Tribunal conducted

on the basis of international law.

- CME argued in the arbitration proceedings, inter alia, that a deprivation/
expropriation had taken place, which was a claim based on the provisions of the
Treaty. CME claimed that there had been coercion and that the company had been
deprived of its investment. In its assessment whether expropriation existed, the
Stockholm Tribunal found that CME and its predecessor had been able to rely on the
Media Council's approval of the split structure. The Tribunal further described when
a public authority's behaviour might constitute deprivation and expropriation in
accordance with international law. The Tribunal assessed that the Media Council's
behaviour could be attributable to normal administrative law measures. In addition,
the Tribunal described when an expropriation might pertain and that such might be

the case even in the event of failure to act. The Tribunal subsequently referred to

56
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

sources of international law with the regard to expropriation, such as various cases,
before the Tribunal concluded that the Media Council's actions in 1996 and the

actions and omissions in 1999 were to be deemed expropriation under the Treaty.

- In paragraphs 575-585 of the award, the Stockholm Tribunal carefully examined
whether a breach of the Treaty had occasioned any injury. In this section, the

Tribunal also addressed an objection raised by the Republic with respect to causality.

- In paragraphs 615-618, the Stockholm Tribunal addressed the principle governing
the determination of damages and, also in this section, the Tribunal referred to sources

of international law.

None of the examples cited by the Republic provide support for the view that the
Stockholm Tribunal failed to apply governing law, entailing that the Tribunal acted as
amiable compositeur. The Stockholm Tribunal reached its decisions based on law
and applied the sources of law stated in the choice of law clause to the extent such

was necessary. The application made by the Tribunal was also correct.

The Stockholm Tribunal was not obliged to take into consideration Czech law to the

extent claimed by the Republic, as is evident, inter alia, from the following examples.

In both the challenge and the Stockholm proceedings the Republic has addressed the
Media Council's role. During the Stockholm proceedings, however, the Media
Council's role was not in dispute and, accordingly, there was nothing for the
Stockholm Tribunal to decide upon in this regard. Nor was it disputed that it was not
possible to assign the license pursuant to the Media Act and, in addition, the parties
were agreed that CET 21's contribution of the exclusive use of the license to CNTS
did not entail an assignment of the license. It was not disputed that CET 21 was the
sole holder of the license and only CET 21 could assert rights as a consequence
thereof. In the Stockholm proceedings, CME did not argue that it held any rights as

licensee. In addition, the parties were agreed that CEDC was not a “direct

57
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

participant” in the license application and this matter was not a matter for adjudication
in the Stockholm proceedings. CME did not invoke any rights as direct participant in
accordance with the Media Act but, rather, argued that it was an investor under the
Treaty and had been able to rely on an approval from the Czech authorities. The
parties were agreed that the purport of the 1993 and 1996 MOAs was subject to Czech

law.

In paragraph 467, the Stockholm Tribunal stated that "The Tribunal is not to decide
on the Czech Administrative Law aspect of this question", which does not mean that
the Stockholm Tribunal chose to disregard Czech law. The Stockholm Tribunal
found that Dr. Barta’s statement that the Media Council was not entitled to decide
upon approval of the split structure did not address the international law aspect of the
issue and noted that Dr. Barta's opinion was not in accordance with the Republic's
obligations under the Treaty. The issue of the Media Council's approval having
violated Czech Administrative Law was not relevant under international law and
CME could not have based any claim on the Media Council having violated Czech
Administrative Law. What was relevant was that there existed an approval from the
Media Council in 1993 and that the approval could not be changed without the
investor receiving compensation. The Republic thus was not entitled to weaken the
structure which the Republic had previously approved. The Stockholm Tribunal
thereupon conducted an assessment whether Czech law was relevant to the issue of

whether the Treaty had been breached.

In paragraph 590, the Stockholm Tribunal stated that "It is not the task of the Arbitral
Tribunal to judge whether these actions are in compliance with the Czech law and
regulations", which does not provide any support for the view that the Stockholm
Tribunal failed to apply law. The statement was made in a section in which the
Stockholm Tribunal summarized its assessment whether the Republic had breached
the Treaty. The issue which was relevant for the Stockholm Tribunal was whether the

Media Council's actions were in accordance with the Treaty or whether they

58
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

constituted a violation thereof, and the Stockholm Tribunal was of the opinion that the

issue should be determined on the basis of the provisions of the Treaty.

The Stockholm Tribunal's statement in paragraph 476 that "It is not the Tribunal's role
to pass a decision upon the legal protection granted to a foreign investor for its
investment under the Czech law and civil court system" does not mean that the
Stockholm Tribunal failed to apply law. The statement was made in a part of the
award in which the Stockholm Tribunal addressed the issue of the weakening of the
safety net for the investment. In the Stockholm proceedings, the Republic argued that
the amendment to the MOA in 1996 was offset by the service agreement and the fact
that Article 10.8, which was incorporated in the 1996 MOA, maintained the
exclusivity and that the safety net had not been weakened. The Stockholm Tribunal
found that the safety net in accordance with the 1996 MOA and the service agreement
were weaker than the safety net enjoyed under the 1993 MOA. The outcome of the
dispute between CNTS and CET 21 regarding termination of the service agreement in
the Czech courts and the issue of whether CET 21 was entitled to terminate the
service agreement was, in the opinion of the Stockholm Tribunal, irrelevant to the
question of whether the protection had been weakened in 1996 compared with 1993.

The Stockholm Tribunal thereafter made its determination in paragraph 476.

The Stockholm Tribunal did not conduct an assessment of the Czech legal system and
its courts since the issue was not relevant for the assessment by the Stockholm
Tribunal. It is evident from paragraph 525 of the award that the Stockholm Tribunal
drew a distinction between whether CNTS and could be successful in civil law
disputes against CET 21 and whether CMT was entitled to damages based on the
Republic's breach of the Treaty, and stated that in the event CNTS were to obtain
damages this might have significance for the issue of the amount of the damages, but

not the issue of liability.

In the Stockholm proceedings, the Republic did not invoke any Czech rules of law

which were alleged to be of significance for the comparison between the protection in

59
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

accordance with the 1993 and 1996 MOAs. The Republic's position during the
Stockholm proceedings was, however, that there was a difference between the 1993
and 1996 MOAs. The Republic argued that CME was obliged to prove that the
protection under the 1996 MOA was weaker than under the 1993 MOA, and that
CME had lost something. In order to prove this, CME was forced to go to court and
pursue litigation in the matter. The Republic argued that it was not possible in
advance to determine whether the protection had become weaker and it was merely a
matter of speculation that such was the case. The Republic did not present a claim
that CME should exhaust local legal remedies by first pursuing a claim in the Czech

courts.

The statement in paragraph 380 that "UNCITRAL Rules must supersede national law,
if deviating" relates to a procedural issue and addresses issues of objections to
jurisdiction. The statement is entirely irrelevant to the issue whether Czech law was
applied. It was not until the final hearings that the Republic raised an objection that
CME was not able to raise claims derived from the period prior to 1997. The
Republic declared that this did not constitute an objection to jurisdiction but, rather,
was a substantive objection. The Stockholm Tribunal considered whether the
Tribunal was obligated, of its own motion, to decide the issue of jurisdiction, i.e.
without taking into consideration that the Republic expressly refrained from raising an
objection to jurisdiction. In this context, the Stockholm Tribunal took into
consideration that the provision in the UNCITRAL Rules is based on a party being
able, with binding effect, to waive an objection to jurisdiction, and reached the
conclusion that the Tribunal should not, of its own motion, try the objection as

constituting an objection to jurisdiction.

Nor does the statement in paragraph 469 that "The Tribunal need not decide whether
the contribution of the "use of the Licence" in 1993 was legally valid under Czech
law" mean that the Stockholm Tribunal disregarded Czech law. CME and Republic
were agreed in the Stockholm proceedings that the contribution in question was

lawful. The Stockholm Tribunal was thus obliged to assume that such was the case

60
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

and, for procedural reasons, it followed that this matter need not be tried. The
Republic's position was that the structure in question was valid, while the realization
thereof, on the other hand, was unlawful. In holding that the original investment was
legally well founded, the Tribunal took into account the 1993 MOA and the fact that
the original structure was approved by Czech authorities. The Stockholm Tribunal
took into account the Media Act and came to the conclusion that it did not contain any
restrictions as to the identity of the party responsible for the operation of TV stations.
The Stockholm Tribunal took into consideration Czech law when the Tribunal
investigated whether the approval might have created reasonable expectations
amongst at CME in accordance with Czech law, which was the relevant issue under
international law. In paragraph 609, the Stockholm Tribunal stated what was to be
regarded as expropriation under the Treaty. It was that the Media Council deprived
CME of the original capital contribution — the exclusive use of the license. The
original approval, which created reasonable expectations by the investor, and the

consequent revocation of the approval, were a breach of international law.

With respect to certain specific issues, where the Republic has argued that the
Stockholm Tribunal did not apply Czech law or any other law and that the outcome of
the case would have been different had governing law been applied, CME has

asserted the following.

The legal basis for the investment

The manner in which the Stockholm Tribunal came to the conclusion that the split
structure constituted a legally well-founded basis for CEDC's investment is evident
from paragraphs 453-456 of the award. Among other things, the Media Council's
own written statements and letters constituted a basis for the conclusion that the
structure was compatible with Czech law and, in light of all these circumstances,
CME and its representative were entitled to rely on the approval from the Media

Council.

61
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Changes in 1996 and 1997 of the contractual relationship with CET 21

The Stockholm Tribunal took into consideration Czech law when the Tribunal
analyzed the 1996 changes in the MOA and service agreement. The Stockholm
Tribunal noted that the 1993 contribution entailed a stronger protection for the
investment than the service agreement, which was justified by the fact that the
contribution could not be terminated unilaterally. This was entirely in accordance
with Czech law. In the Stockholm proceedings, Dr. Radvan testified, inter alia, that
an owner could not retract a unilateral contribution. The Republic adduced no
evidence in rebuttal of Dr. Radvan's testimony, notwithstanding that the Stockholm
Tribunal proposed during the proceedings that this might take place in writing. In its
subsequent final submissions, CME commented on the evidence in question,
notwithstanding that the Republic made no claims regarding the issue in its final
submissions. Dr. Radvan also said that the service agreement might be terminated for
due cause. CET 21 would have borne the burden of proof with regard to a retraction
of the contribution, while CMPS had the burden of proof in the event of termination
of the service agreement. The Republic concurred, during the final hearing, with what
CME had stated on the issue and the Republic’s counsel stated that CME had
correctly emphasized the difference between the protection under the 1993 MOA and
the 1996 MOA. However, he stated the reasons why, in the Republic opinion, this
issue was not relevant in the Stockholm proceedings. Following the final hearing, the
parties were able to submit a pleading in order to comment on matters that had arisen
in the course of the hearing. In its Written Closing Submission, the Republic did not
raise any arguments which rebutted what Dr. Radvan had stated in the hearing. In its
Post-Hearing Brief, CME emphasized that there was a difference between the
contribution of the exclusive use of the license and the contribution of know-how to
the license, and referred to Dr. Radvan's testimony and the legal rules cited to by him.
The Stockholm Tribunal referred to Dr. Radvan's testimony in paragraph 509 of the

award.

62
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

The Stockholm Tribunal did not apply the subsequent events as the basis for its
assessment of the issue but noted that subsequent developments were a consequence
of the weakened protection. The Stockholm Tribunal was of the opinion that the risk
of termination of the service agreement had materialized and was demonstrated by

subsequent events.

Czech law contains no legal provisions regarding the weakening of the legal
protection other than those presented in the Stockholm proceedings. The Republic
did not invoke any rule of law which might be applicable, nor did it do so in these
proceedings. The Stockholm Tribunal's statement that the contribution of know-how
was worthless and meaningless was part of a comparison which the Tribunal made
between the 1993 and 1996 MOAs. When the Stockholm Tribunal interpreted the
MOA, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that the replacement of "use of the
license" with "use of know-how of the license" constituted a weakening. Nor is it
possible to reach any conclusion other than that reached by the Stockholm Tribunal in
its comparison of the 1993 and 1996 MOAs.

Initiation of administrative law pr s and coercion

The Stockholm Tribunal did not fail to take into consideration Czech law when it
came to the conclusion that the administrative law proceedings were commenced for
the purpose of forcing CET 21 and CNTS to get rid of the split structure. The
Republic's position in the Stockholm proceedings was that the Media Council
commenced administrative law proceedings since the very implementation of the
structure was illegal, not the legal structure per se. The Stockholm Tribunal based its
conclusion as to the purpose of the proceedings, inter alia, on the fact that the Media
Council, under questionable circumstances, obtained a legal opinion which attacked
the split structure and not the actual implementation, on the fact that the Media
Council rejected a proposal whereby CET 21 consented to all of the Media Council's
demands apart from the modification to the CNTS structure, and that, during the

administrative law proceedings, the Media Council expressly insisted on a

63
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

modification of the split structure and not the actual implementation. The conclusion
was thus based on the evidence in the case. The Stockholm Tribunal did not need to
decide whether the Media Council's behavior and commencement of the
administrative law proceedings were in accordance with Czech Law. Nor did the
Stockholm Tribunal believe that it needed to determine whether the administrative
law proceedings were in accordance with Czech law, since this was not relevant for a

determination of the issue whether the Republic had violated the Treaty.

In the Stockholm proceedings, CME claimed, inter alia, that the Republic had
violated Article 5 of the Treaty, which addresses expropriation, through the Republic
having forced through a modification of the 1993 MOA. The Republic argued in the
proceedings that there could be no question of expropriation since CME and CNTS
had voluntarily accepted the amendments to the 1993 MOA. CME, in its Statement
of Claim, invoked an article by Professor Vagts, as well as international cases. The
Republic replied in its Statement of Defence to CME's arguments and referred to
international law. Also during the final hearing, the Republic argued the issue of
coercion on the basis of international law. The Republic argued on the basis of
international law principles and not on the basis of Czech law with respect to the issue
of whether it was proven that there was expropriation as referred to in Article 5 of the
Treaty. The Republic did not explain the purport of Czech law in relation to coercion.
The assessment whether coercion existed should be made on the basis of international
law and the argumentation was based thereon. In the Stockholm proceedings, the
Republic raised no objection that Professor Vagts' Article did not constitute a part of

international law.

In paragraph 526, the Stockholm Tribunal made an assessment of reasonableness
within law when the Tribunal stated what should constitute a reasonable threshold,
and this constituted a part of the Tribunals interpretation of international law and the
Treaty. The Stockholm Tribunal applied, or attempted to apply, international law. If
the Stockholm Tribunal had applied Czech law, it would also have found that

coercion existed and the Tribunal's conclusion would not have been different.

64

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Transfer agreement between CME Media and CME

The Stockholm Tribunal took into consideration both international law and Czech law
when it analyzed the contents of the transfer of the shares in CNTS from CME Media
to CME. The Republic claimed that CME, through declaring its consent to the MOA,
could only assert claims relating to breaches of the Treaty after May 21, 1997. It was
not until the final hearing that the Republic argued that a provision in the transfer
agreement entailed that CME acceded to the MOA when CME acquired the shares in
CNTS without reservation. CME emphasized that the statement "without reservation"
was a formal requirement in Czech law which did not entail that CME waive its right
to bring claims in respect of previous violations of the Treaty. In paragraph 422 of
the award, it is stated that the Tribunal found that the consent to the MOA did not
result in a waiver of the right to bring claims based on previous violations of the
Treaty. This interpretation of the transfer agreement is correct under both
international law and Czech law. The Republic has not proven any rule of law which
might entail that CME, through its consent to MOA, had waived its right to bring

claims against the Republic.

The Media Council's letter of March 15, 1999

In the Stockholm proceedings, CME did not argue that the letter of March 15, 1999
was a formal act and did not claim that the letter had any legal consequences under
Czech law. The issue whether the Media Council's letter of March 15, 1999
constituted a formal act and whether the letter constituted a decision in accordance
with Czech administrative law was not relevant in the Stockholm proceedings. CME
did not pursue a claim for any legal sanctions under Czech law and, in order to prove
CME's grounds in the Stockholm proceedings, the Stockholm Tribunal was not
required to determine whether the letter had any effect under Czech law. CME
argued in the Stockholm proceedings that the letter expressed the Media Council's
position and purpose, and that it had actual consequences and legal consequences in

accordance with the Treaty and international law. Taking into consideration the

65
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

purpose and consequences of the letter, CME argued that the issuance of the letter

constituted a violation of the Treaty which resulted in CME being entitled to damages.

In paragraph 575 of the award, the Tribunal stated the effect the letter had. The
Stockholm Tribunal's statement in the award accorded with the Republic's position in
the Stockholm proceedings when the Republic shared the opinion that the letter was a
regulatory letter. The Stockholm Tribunal was not of the opinion that the letter had a
legal effect which entailed that the exclusivity in the service agreement terminated
between the contracting parties. The Stockholm Tribunal held that the letter de facto
eliminated CNTS's exclusivity as it existed after the modifications in 1996. The
Stockholm Tribunal did not come to the conclusion that the letter had any effect on
the civil law contractual relationship between CET 21 and CNTS. The Stockholm
Tribunal assessed the actual effect of the letter by interpreting the letter and
considering the surrounding circumstances. The Stockholm Tribunal's analysis was
not based on the legal status of the letter under Czech law. The effect and the purpose
of the letter were matters of evidence and an additional legal analysis of the letter

would not have had any effect.

The possible intervention by the Media Council

The responsibility of the Media Council to intervene constituted an international law
obligation as a consequence of the Media Council's previous intervention through the
issuance of the letter of March 15, 1999, which was sought by Zelezny. It is evident
from paragraph 563 of the award that CME's Managing Director had warned the
Media Council that the Media Council, through its actions and the letter of March 15,
1999, had confiscated part of CME' investment. In the subsequent paragraphs in the
award, the Stockholm Tribunal expressed the opinion that the Media Council, by this
time at the latest, could have intervened and clarified the legal situation and cured its
previous intervention by retracting the letter. Even if the Media Council had no legal

possibility to prepare such a letter, the issue was not relevant from an international

66
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

law perspective. The Media Council could have prepared a correcting letter under the

same circumstances as it had prepared the letter of March 15, 1999.

Termination of the service agreement

The Stockholm Tribunal did not determine the issue whether the termination of the
service agreement was compatible with Czech law. The Stockholm Tribunal found
that the Republic had violated the Treaty through its actions in 1996 and 1997 and,
accordingly, the outcome of the dispute between CET 21 and CNTS was irrelevant in

the Stockholm proceedings.

It is evident from the award that the Stockholm Tribunal did not need to determine
what conclusions the Czech Courts had reached with respect to the issue whether the
termination of the service agreement was valid. In paragraph 477, the Stockholm
Tribunal stated that "nevertheless" it could not conceal its opinion in the matter. The
remark that the Stockholm Tribunal made shows only how vulnerable the investment

became after the Media Council forced through the changes to the 1993 MOA.

Joint tortfeasors

The Republic's argumentation on this issue is based on an erroneous interpretation of
the award. The Stockholm Tribunal made the statements referred to by the Republic
in conjunction with the Tribunal's assessment of the issue of a causal link as a result
of an objection raised by the Republic that it was Zelezny who caused the injury and
not the Republic. In paragraph 580, the Stockholm Tribunal held that this objection
was not sustainable since the existence of another tortfeasor who contributes to the
injury does not release the state from liability under international law. The Stockholm
Tribunal did not base its statements on the grounds relating to the other tortfeasor’s
liability since this is not relevant under international law. In paragraph 581, the
Stockholm Tribunal stated that there existed a general rule with the import asserted by
the Stockholm Tribunal. The statement in the middle of paragraph 582 regarding tort

probably refers to the fact that there was no civil law agreement between CNTS/CME

67
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

and the Media Council/the Republic. Already in paragraph 580, the Stockholm
Tribunal reached the conclusion that the Republic's liability to CME was not reduced

by the claim that CME might have against the Zelezny.

The ILC commentary, to which the Stockholm Tribunal referred, correctly describes
international law and the decision to accord weight to various sources of international
law constitutes a substantive assessment made by the Stockholm Tribunal. The
Stockholm Tribunal correctly stated in its judgment the international law as expressed

in the ILC commentary and any erroneous assessment cannot be reviewed.

Obligations as senior executive

The question whether Zelezny had violated his obligations as senior executive did not
have any effect on the Stockholm Tribunal's conclusions in the issue of the Republic's
liability for violations of the Treaty. The Stockholm Tribunal was only interested in
considering whether Zelezny's behavior might release the Republic from liability.

The Stockholm Tribunal would have come to the same conclusion with respect to the
issue of the Republic's liability even if the Tribunal had not stated that Zelezny had

violated his obligations.

In the challenge proceedings, the Republic has raised a number of new allegations
regarding the content of Czech law and references to Czech rules of law which were

not invoked in the Stockholm proceedings.

In the Stockholm proceedings, both parties stated that Article 1.4.1 of the 1993 MOA
constituted a contribution from CET 21 to CNTS and, during the proceedings, the
Republic did not claim that any further legal act was required in order for the
contribution to be valid. Nor was it asserted that the purport of the contribution was
not established through Article 1.4.1 of the 1993 MOA. Nor is the allegation correct
that, according to Czech law, the content of Article 1.4.1 of the 1993 MOA did not

determine the scope of the contribution.

68
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

The argument that the change in Article 1.4.1 of the 1993 MOA to the wording in the
1996 MOA did not have any effect is an argument which was not raised during the
arbitration proceedings. At the time, both parties were in agreement that an
amendment took place with legal effect in the 1996 MOA, but the question was
whether this change weakened the safety net for the investment. The Republic was of
the opinion that the amendment to the 1996 MOA was offset, inter alia, by Article
10.8 of the MOA and the service agreement. The argument that the amendment of
Article 1.4.1 in the 1996 MOA with respect to the contribution had no effect on the

1993 contribution under Czech law is also not correct.

An allegation that the service agreement and the 1996 MOA are invalid if they came
about as a consequence of coercion and that, in such case, the 1993 MOA is still
valid, constitutes a new claim which was not raised during the arbitration proceedings.
In this respect, the Republic argued on the basis of international law. The allegation

per se is not correct.

In the challenge proceedings, the Republic has raised an objection that CME cannot
invoke events prior to 1997, since CME consented to the 1996 MOA in the transfer
agreement in the arbitration proceedings, and raised a similar objection during the
final hearing in the proceedings. However, the Republic does not cite any Czech law
or other rule of law in support of the claim in the proceedings. In addition, the
Republic’s assertions in this regard in respect of Czech law are erroneous, since under
Czech law consent to the MOA could not have had the effect claimed by the

Republic.

Nor, under Czech law, could CME waive the claim for damages, since according to
Czech law a person is not entitled to waive a future claim for damages and, in
accordance with Czech law and also international law, a claim for damages does not

arise until it has materialized in a financially measurable manner.

69
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Lis pendens and res judicata

None of the parties in the arbitration proceedings, their legal counsel, nor the
arbitrators, were Swedish. It is clear from the award that it was not written on the
basis of Swedish principles of /is pendens and res judicata. The parties in the case
argued on the basis of international /is pendens and res judicata and it may be stated
that there was some form of silent agreement between the parties to apply certain
types of international principles in the proceedings. However, this probably did not
extend as far as to the criteria for /is pendens and res judicata, or to the application

thereof in cases before Swedish courts of law.

The principles of lis pendens and res judicata do not fall under section 33 of the
Arbitration Act but, rather, are to be assessed on the basis of the rules in section 34 of
the same Act. Nor are the principles of lis pendens and res judicata applicable in the
instant case between two different international arbitration proceedings in accordance

with two different bilateral investment protection treaties.

Nor was there any identity between Lauder and CME. Lauder did not own more than
30 percent of the controlling company, Central Media Entertainment Limited — a
Bermuda registered company which is listed on the New York Exchange and has
approximately 3,000 shareholders — nor was such the case when the arbitration
proceedings were pending. Lauder controlled the company through a majority of the
voting capital, but did not own a majority of the share capital. The companies, which
were structured as the parent company Central Media Enterprises Limited and CME,

were wholly owned.

Nor was there identity between the bases for CME's and Lauder's claims. CME's and
Lauder's claims were based on two different bilateral investment protection treaties
between the Republic and Holland, and the USA respectively. The investment
protection treaties are in all essential regards identical but there are differences

between the treaties. These are, inter alia, that it is not obvious that CME's right as

70
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

successor to a previous investor should be assessed equally under both treaties; that
Lauder, in accordance with the American Investment Treaty, could claim
compensation as a controlling shareholder; and that there are differences in the
treaties with respect to the time in which a party may claim compensation. In
addition, Lauder would not have been able to pursue a claim based on the Treaty and
CME would not have been able to pursue its claim in accordance with the American

Investment Treaty.

The injuries were not the same for Lauder and CME. In the London proceedings,
Lauder could only claim damages in an amount corresponding to his loss, while CME
claimed injury as owner of 99 percent of the CNTS. The injury and the calculation of
damages would have been different. Nor would the Stockholm Tribunal have ordered
different damages with the consequences that the Republic would have to pay twice.
The Stockholm Tribunal also discussed the question of the Republic’s different
behavior in different cases with respect to the jurisdiction issue and came to the

conclusion that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal was not affected.

If CME cannot have a claim tried in accordance with the Treaty since Lauder brought
a claim in accordance with the American Investment Treaty, the consequence is that
CME and other shareholders, apart from Lauder, are being denied the possibility to

have their claims tried.

In the Stockholm proceedings, the Republic explicitly stated that the Republic
refrained from raising any objection regarding /is pendens, a matter which the
Stockholm Tribunal and CME seized on. This is evident, inter alia, from the
Republic's Statement of Defence, Sur-Reply, and the opening statement in the
Stockholm proceedings. The Republic argued on the basis of a concept of “abuse of
process” in the Stockholm proceedings. Abuse of process is a concept which exists
within the English legal tradition and an objection on the basis thereof does not
include an objection based on /is pendens. There was no illegitimate purpose behind

Lauder and CME commencing separate proceedings. Lauder was obliged to use the

71
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

American Investment Treaty and the Treaty prescribes a waiting time which meant
that Lauder could commence arbitration proceedings six months earlier than CME,

which he also did.

The Stockholm Tribunal did not find that there existed any abuse of process and that
the overlapping awards could be handled when the amount of the damages was to be
determined; on the other hand, an assessment could not be made as to whether there

existed a breach of the Treaty.

The London Tribunal also found the co-ordination could take place on the damages

level when determining an amount and that there was no abuse of process.

In any event, the Republic was the cause of the parallel proceedings. CME made a
large number of attempts to coordinate the London and Stockholm proceedings in
order to avoid a situation such as the instant one. CME proposed that the proceedings
be consolidated, that they should have the same arbitrators, that the arbitrator
appointed by CME should be the same in both proceedings, that the Stockholm
Tribunal should stay its proceedings, and that the London Tribunal's award with a
respect to the issue whether there existed a breach of the American Investment Treaty
should be binding on the Stockholm Tribunal in its assessment whether there was a
violation of the Treaty. Both the Stockholm and the London Tribunals referred to the

aforementioned facts in their reasons for their awards.

Excess of Mandate — joint tortfeasors

CME claimed in the arbitration proceedings that the Media Council had withdrawn its
previous approval of the split structure which constituted the basis for the original
investment. The Arbitral Tribunal found that the Media Council acted in this manner
through the Media Council having forced CNTS to make modifications to the 1996
MOA and that the protection for the investment was thereby weakened. The Tribunal

also reached the conclusion that the Media Council, in 1999, supported Zelezny at a

72
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

time when the latter no longer had any ownership interest in CNTS, in his attempt to
exploit the weakened protection and divested CNTS of the license. The Tribunal
further found that a state was liable for the entire consequences of its actions
irrespective of whether there existed joint causes of injury and irrespective of whether
the joint cause of injury constituted an action by a natural person. The Tribunal stated
that the state was liable for the entire injury irrespective of whether there was another

tortfeasor who was liable in damages.

The opinion that the issue of causality should not be determined in the first part of the
proceedings is not correct. The Republic claimed in the proceedings that CME's
claim should be dismissed since the alleged injury was not a direct and foreseeable
injury due to a violation of the Treaty. Thus, the Republic wished the Tribunal to
determine the issue of causality, and the parties argued the matter. It was not a part of
the Tribunal's mandate to determine whether there existed a causal link between the

Media Council's behavior and CME's injury.

In CME's Statement of Claim, CME stated the circumstances that CME invoked in
support of the view that the Media Council had caused the investment to be destroyed.
Inter alia, it was stated that the Media Council sent its letter of March 15, 1999 to
Zelezny, which in content accorded with Zelezny's demand. The factual
circumstances that CME alleged to have occurred were examples of circumstances
that CME argued constituted a violation of the Treaty, not examples of coordinated

behavior towards a common goal between the Media Council and Zelezny.

In its Statement of Defence, the Republic argued that it was Zelezny who had caused
CME injury and that the Republic was not liable for the actions of private legal

subjects.

In its Reply-Memorial, CME claimed that States are fully liable for their actions in
conjunction with joint contributory causes of injury under international law and that

the Republic bore full liability for damages also in the event there were other

73
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

tortfeasors. CME argued on the issue of causality and asserted that there was a causal
link between the Media Council's actions and the injury suffered by CME, and that
what occurred was a foreseeable consequence of the Media Council's actions,
irrespective of the fact that it was Zelezny who terminated the service agreement, and

Zelezny's role.

The parties thus argued the issue of causality before the final hearing. Also during the
final hearing the parties - both CME and the Republic - argued the issue of causality.
CME argued in great detail with respect to the causal link and argued that there
existed a causal link between the Media Council's actions and CME's injury,
notwithstanding that it was Zelezny who terminated the service agreement. In his
argumentation, CME's counsel referred to joint tortfeasors in the argumentation
whether the Republic could be held liable in damages without reference to Zelezny's
actions. CME's counsel stated that if there were joint tortfeasors in the causal chain,
there existed joint and several liability towards the injured party for the full injury.
The tortfeasor's liability was not reduced by the existence of other tortfeasors in the
causal chain. CME argued that a causal chain which resulted in liability for the state
could also include actions of other persons, insofar as such actions were foreseeable.

CME also referred to previous ILC reports.

In principle, the Republic agreed on the principle of foreseeability and that there
existed liability as long as the actions of an intervening third party were not
unexpected, and stated that CME's summary of the legal position was correct. The
Republic argued that the principle was not applicable in this case and that evidence
was lacking that the injury had been foreseeable. The Republic did not state that the

Tribunal would exceed its mandate by deciding in the issue.

In CME's Post-Hearing Brief, CME further argued with respect to the causality issue
and that the Republic was liable for foreseeable consequences of its actions and its

omissions. In the Republic's Written Closing Submissions, the Republic argued that it

74
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

was CNTS's own actions, as well as CET 21's and Zelezny’s actions, which had

caused CME injury, and not the Republic.

Thus, the concept of joint tortfeasors was not invoked as any ground for coordinated
behavior towards a common goal. The concept is mentioned in the causality issue in

response to the Republic's objection, and not as a basis for liability.

The section in the award in which joint tortfeasors are referred to is included in the
Arbitral Tribunal's handling of the issue of causality in paragraphs 575-585. The
Tribunal applied international law principles regarding contributory causes of injury
and not liability for contributory behavior towards a common goal. The core of the
Tribunal's reasoning was that the Tribunal held that CME's injury constituted a
foreseeable consequence of the Media Council's actions and omissions in 1996 and

1999.

In paragraph 580 of the award, the Arbitral Tribunal held that a state was liable for its
actions towards foreign investors irrespective of the existence of other tortfeasors. In
paragraph 581, the Tribunal stated that this was compatible with the manner in which
joint tortfeasors are treated under national and international law. In this paragraph, an
article was cited which is also cited in the ILC commentary. The issue was whether
the state's liability is reduced, not the liability grounds with respect to other
tortfeasors. The Tribunal found that a state which has violated a treaty is liable for its
actions irrespective of the presence of other tortfeasors in the causal chain. In
paragraph 582, the Tribunal applied the principle of a state's liability notwithstanding
the presence of other tortfeasors in the causal chain. The Tribunal found that the
Republic's liability is not reduced by Zelezny being a part of the causal chain, even in
the event Zelezny was liable in damages. The Tribunal stated that when determining
the amount, it was possible to take into consideration whether CME had obtained
damages from another tortfeasor. The principle applicable in the case was that the
Republic bore full liability for the amount of the damages notwithstanding that there

existed other tortfeasors in the causal chain who were also liable in damages. In

75
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

paragraph 583, the Tribunal referred to the ILC's commentary and to cases in which
there existed contributory causes of injury and where only one of these causes of
injury was imputable to the liable state. In addition, the Tribunal stated that
international practice did not provide any support for the damages being reduced. In
paragraph 584, the Tribunal described the causal link between a state's unlawful
actions under international law and injury for which liability existed under
international law. In paragraph 585, the Tribunal concluded as to how the principle
should be applied in the Stockholm proceedings and came to the conclusion that the
Media Council must have understood the foreseeable consequences of its actions and

omissions in 1996 and 1999.

The argumentation in paragraphs 580-583 was raised in order to refute the Republic's
objection that the Republic bore no liability, since it was Zelezny who had caused the
injury. The fact that the Arbitral Tribunal stated that Zelezny had violated his

obligations did not constitute a ground for imposing any joint and several liability on

the Republic for coordinated behavior towards a common goal.

What the Arbitral Tribunal stated in paragraph 554 of the award regarding Zelezny's
violation of his obligations did not affect the Tribunal's assessment, since Zelezny had
stated that he intended to injure CNTS, which meant that the injury was foreseeable
for the Media Council. The Tribunal's conclusions that the Republic had violated the
Treaty would also have been the same even if the Tribunal had not stated an opinion
regarding Zelezny's actions and whether the actions were criminal. The Tribunal did
not base the award on Zelezny's behavior but, rather, on the Media Council's own
actions and omissions. The Stockholm Tribunal had, already before stating its
reasons in paragraphs 580-585 in which joint tortfeasors are mentioned, come to the
conclusion that it was the Media Council's actions which had caused the injury. Ina
later section in the award, the issue of liability is addressed. It is there stated that the
liability was based solely on violation of the Treaty and joint tortfeasors are not

mentioned in this regard.

76

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Paragraphs 580-585 of the award were inserted in the Third Draft, after Handl had
written his memorandum of August 16, 2001. Handl was of the opinion that there
was no causal link between the Media Council's actions and the injury. Handl was of
the opinion that it was Zelezny who had caused the injury. However, the Stockholm
Tribunal had already previously made an assessment regarding the issue of causality.
The issue of causality was addressed in Kiihn’s list of questions. Schwebel stated in
his answer to the list of questions that there existed a causal link between the Media
Council's actions and the injury, irrespective of Zelezny's actions, and that the state's
liability was not reduced as a consequence of the actions of third parties. In Kiihn’s
reply to Handl of August 29, 2001, he stated that the Arbitral Tribunal was aware of
Zelezny's role in the causal chain. Notwithstanding this, paragraphs 580-585 were
inserted in the Third Draft. However, this document has no significance for the
outcome in the case. The conclusions and the outcome were clear before the
supplement was made. Handl was of the opinion that the document constituted a

reply to what he had stated in his memorandum of August 16, 2001.

Since the Republic shared CME's opinion regarding the existence and content of the
international law principles regarding liability in the event of contributory causes,
pursuant to which the existence of another contributory tortfeasor does not release the
state from liability, it argued on the basis of this principle and did not protest against
what CME asserted, and the Republic may be deemed to have accepted that the issue
be tried. In any event, the Republic may thereby be deemed to have refrained from

asserting the alleged excess of mandate.

Excess of mandate— decision concerning determination of the damages

Initially, CME claimed in the Stockholm proceedings both restitution and damages.

In the Notice of Arbitration, CME stated that the damages should be determined, inter
alia, taking into consideration a fair market value. In the document, CME argued ona
legal basis and it stated that the compensation should correspond to the genuine value

of the investment and asserted that, in the event of the unlawful expropriation — as

77
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

well as in the event of lawful expropriation - the investor was entitled to

compensation corresponding at least to the genuine value of the investment.

In the Statement of Claim, CME developed the manner in which it regarded the
amount of damages and referred, inter alia, to cases with respect to the manner in
which the damages should be determined. CME argued as to the amount of
compensation to which CME was entitled if the investment could not be restored.
Initially, CME claimed both restitution and damages but the argumentation applied
equally to the principles as to how the damages should be determined. CME's opinion
was that the starting point for determination of damages was the fair market value of
the investment. From this, it was possible to reach the value of the restitution and loss
of income in order to achieve the amount of the damages. CME further argued that,

in the event the Tribunal was unable to decide upon restitution, CME should be
awarded the full amount. Fair market value thus corresponded to compensation in
full; CME should obtain full compensation. The fact that, in the award, a decision
was made regarding compensation corresponding to the fair market value of the
investment was thus in accordance with the claim presented by CME. In addition,
CME proposed a bifurcation of the proceedings and that the amount of monetary

damages be left until the second phase of the proceedings.

In the letter from CME's Counsel dated November 7, 2000, containing a proposal for
an agreement, it was proposed that a determination of the actual amount of damages
be left until the second phase. In the letter, it was stated that it was the actual amount
of any damage award which should be left until the second phase of the proceedings.
The proposal was accepted by the Republic, which affirmed that the first phase should
not relate to the quantum of damages. The Republic further wished to reserve its right

to pose arguments with respect to the determination of the damages in the first phase.

In an interim award agreement, it was thus stated that the quantum and amount of

monetary damages should be handled in the second phase.

78
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

In conjunction with the final hearing, CME withdrew its initial motion for restitution.
CME 's counsel stated that it should be declared in the arbitration proceedings that a
breach of treaty had been committed and that CME was entitled to damages, and that
any amount of damages be left until the second phase. The starting point for the
claim for damages after the initial claim for restitution was withdrawn was fair market
value. CME wished to obtain a declaration that the Republic had violated the Treaty
and that CME was entitled to damages in an amount to be determined in a second

phase.

During the concluding phase of the final hearing, the arbitrators requested that the
parties state in writing their final claims with respect to the first phase. CME argued
that the Tribunal should declare that the Republic had violated the Treaty and that the
"Respondent is obliged to remedy injury the Claimant suffered as a result of the
Respondent's violation of the Treaty by payment of the fair market value of the
Claimant's investment in an amount to be determined at a second phase in this
arbitration." In addition, there was a confirmation that CME had withdrawn the claim
for restitution. The claim did not entail any modification of what CME had
previously claimed in the proceedings and was covered by the interim award

agreement.

CME 's motion led to no reaction from the Republic. The Republic did not argue that
the claim violated what had been agreed or that the Tribunal did not possess
jurisdiction to try the claim. The Republic objected, instead, to CME's claim in detail,
point by point, and asserted that the Republic had not violated the Treaty, and raised
under point 2 — under the same point in which CME presented in its claim for

damages - an objection relating to causality.

Following the final hearing, the parties submitted concluding pleadings. Nor at this
stage did the Republic protest against the claim presented by CME during the final

hearing. In the final point of its concluding pleading, CME summarized its claim,

79
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

however this did not mean that CME had changed its claim as presented during the

final hearing.

Already in the First Draft it was stated in the award that compensation should
correspond to fair market value. In later drafts, the award was detailed in this respect
but the finding that compensation should correspond to fair market value was not
modified. The award reproduced correctly CME's motion as presented during the

final hearing.

In paragraphs 625-618 [sic], the Tribunal stated the manner in which CME had
asserted that the liability to repair the injury was derived from Article 5 of the Treaty
and general international law principles, and that this constituted “just compensation”
corresponding to the genuine value of the property. In paragraph 616, the Tribunal
referred to the case cited by CME and, in paragraph 618, also referred to the case in
the manner CME had done. Since CME no longer claimed restitution, the Republic
was obligated to pay damages in an amount corresponding to what restitution would
entail. Already initially, CME had claimed that, in the event the claim for restitution
was accepted, CME should obtain damages for the difference up to a fair market
value, and the Tribunal came to the conclusion that the Republic should compensation

CME for the fair market value.

Excess of mandate— prior investors and previous violations

The UNCITRAL rules were applicable in the Stockholm proceedings and these
contain rules as to when an objection to jurisdiction must be raised. The Republic
was obliged to comply with this provision. The argument that the Arbitral Tribunal's
mandate could only be restricted through the actions of the parties is not correct;
rather, the mandate could also be extended and, in such case, the Republic was

obliged to raise an objection in accordance with the applicable UNCITRAL rules.

80
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

In its Notice of Arbitration, CME stated that CME was regarded as an investor under
the Treaty and that CME held a 99 percent holding CNTS. CME stated that CME
Media had taken over the investment in 1994 and that CME acquired the investment
from CME Media in 1997.

In its Statement of Claim, CME stated that the company had acquired the rights and
obligations from CME Media. When the Republic was to submit its Statement of
Defence, the Republic was aware of the circumstances stated by CME which, inter
alia, entailed that the Republic was aware that the claim was based on events that had
occurred prior to May 1997 and that a transfer and acquisition of the shares in CNTS

had occurred, and that CME had acquired the shares in May 1997.

The Republic raised certain objections to jurisdiction in its Statement of Defence but
no objection pursuant to which the Arbitral Tribunal could not render an award based
on claims which related to events which occurred in 1996. The Republic objected
substantively that CME had not acquired CME Media's rights and obligations and that
CME bore the burden of proving such acquisition. The Republic's reservation
regarding the possibility to comment when it knew more about the investment is
irrelevant, since it referred to an objection which was based on the dispute not being
covered by the Treaty; the dispute was a the dispute being between private subjects.

This objection was tried separately by the Arbitral Tribunal.

CME submitted evidence of its acquisition of the shares in its Reply Memorial, inter

alia, the transfer agreement between CME and CME Media.

After CME had submitted evidence, the Republic stipulated that CME had presented
evidence that it was an investor in accordance with the Treaty and that CME was
regarded as an investor. However, the Republic raised another substantive objection
with respect to notification of the transfer. Nor, after the Republic had received other
written evidence from CME, did it raise any objection that CME was unable to

present claims based on events which had occurred before CME's acquisition of the

81
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

shares in CNTS, or that the Tribunal did not possess jurisdiction to try such claims in

accordance with the Treaty.

On the first day of the final hearing, the Republic's counsel referred to the fact that
CME had presented claims based on events that had occurred before CME had made
its investment. Counsel stated then, for the first time, that pursuant to Article 4 of the
transfer agreement between CME and CME Media CME did not have any basis for
raising claims based on violations which allegedly had occurred prior to CME's
acquisition in 1997. This was a substantive objection. The Republic further asserted
that CME was not entitled to any of the rights that the previous investors had held vis-
a-vis the Republic. CME reacted and interpreted the Republic's assertions both as an
objection to jurisdiction and as a substantive objection. CME's counsel stated, inter
alia, that the Republic was regarded as having waived the objection to jurisdiction and
stated, substantively, that Article 4 of the transfer agreement could not be deemed to
entail a waiver of rights. Furthermore, counsel stated that if the objection had been
made in the Statement of Defence, the matter could have been rectified through CME

Media having been joined in the proceedings.

On the same day, the Republic's counsel stated that the Republic did not assert any
objection to jurisdiction but, rather, an objection on substantive grounds. The
Republic thereby refrained explicitly from asserting that it was beyond the scope of
arbitration agreement or the Tribunal's jurisdiction to assess the issue. In the
Republic's closing arguments, the Republic's counsel stated that no right had been
transferred to CME and that, even if such right had been transferred to CME, CME
could not assert any rights taking into consideration the consent to MOA 1996 in
Article 4 of the Transfer Agreement. CME reverted to this matter and stated that the
Republic had refrained from asserting objections based on the UNCITRAL rules and,
substantively, that if the objection was that CME had waived its rights, in accordance

with international law such a waiver must be express.

82
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Also after the final hearing, the Republic, in its concluding pleading, stated that CME
could only assert claims based on violations that had occurred after May 1997. The
Republic thereupon referred to the consequences of Article 8.1 of the Treaty. The
Republic asserted that claims based on violations that had occurred before May 1997
were not covered by the arbitration agreement. The Republic asserted,
simultaneously, that this did not constitute an objection to the Tribunal's jurisdiction
but, rather, related to the Republic's defense from a substantive perspective. In
addition, the Republic stated that CME had no legal grounds in substance and asserted
that the transfer agreement had not entailed any transfer of rights and, in addition, that
CME had waived the right to bring any claims through its consent to the MOA 1996.
The Republic did not raise the objection which it has raised in this case, namely that
the objection related to jurisdiction but, rather, was only that it was an objection on

substantive grounds.

The Arbitral Tribunal found that CME was an investor who made an investment in
accordance with the Treaty. The Tribunal further considered the objection raised by
the Republic at the final hearing and stated that it should be determined substantively.
The Tribunal also stated that the Republic must, in any event, be deemed to have
waived the assertion of an objection to jurisdiction in relation to CME's acquisition of
the shares in CNTS in 1997. The Tribunal also addressed the issue of whether the
Tribunal should, of its own motion, consider the issue and came to the conclusion that
it should not. The Tribunal further found that CME's acquisition and the rights which
accompanied the acquisition were protected under the Treaty. The Tribunal also
examined the Republic's argument that there was a deadline for CME's claim, but did
not share the Republic's opinion. The Tribunal also considered substantively the
Republic's objections based on the consent to the 1996 MOA in the transfer
agreement and concluded that it could not be interpreted as a waiver of rights under
the Treaty. The Tribunal found that CME Media's rights under the Treaty had been
transferred to CME together with the transfer of the shares in CNTS.

83

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

The arbitration agreement and Article 8.1 covered an assessment of transfers which
had occurred prior to the investment being made. The Treaty imposes no requirement
that the investor must own the investment when the transfer takes place. The Tribunal
assessed substantively in the award what demands could be imposed under the Treaty,
e.g. the issue of which rights had been transferred to CME from previous investors
and what protection the Treaty afforded CME. Even if one disregards the Republic’s
failure to raise an objection and accepts that the issue be tried, the Tribunal acted
within its authority. The issue whether CME had acquired the right to assert rights
and claims based on previous violations was determined in the award on the basis of
law and cannot be challenged. Substantively, both Czech law and international law
led to the conclusion that a full claim for damages existed in 1997 which was
transferred to CME together with the acquisition. The claim for damages only came
into being, however, when there existed an injury which was quantifiable in money

terms, which was in accordance with both Czech law and international law.

REASONS FOR THE JUDGMENT

Generally

The Court of Appeal has held a main hearing in the case. At the hearing, testimony
was heard from the following persons. Professors Christoph Schreuer, August
Reinisch, Filip De Ly, Philippe Sands, and Jan Dedic, as well as the arbitrator, Dr.
Jaroslav Handl, testified on behalf of the Republic. The arbitrators, Dr. Wolfgang
Kiihn and Judge Stephen M. Schwebel, as well as Van Vechten Veeder (QC),
Professor Giorgio Sacerdoti, and Dr. Tomas Pohl, testified on behalf of CME. The
parties have submitted and invoked very extensive written evidence, including legal
opinions issued by Schreuer, Reinisch, De Ly, Sands, Dedic, Veeder, Sacerdoti, and
Pohl. The parties have also submitted opinions issued by the former Chancellor of
Justice, Johan Lind, and Professor Lars Heuman. Extensive reference has also been

made to case law and literature.

84
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Applicable law in the challenge

The Republic has challenged the arbitration award and moved that it be declared
invalid or set aside, in whole or in part, based on sections 33 and 34 of the Arbitration
Act (SFS 1999:116). At the same time, the Republic has emphasized that there exists
an international dimension, since what is involved is an international commercial
dispute which has been handled within the scope of a bilateral investment treaty.
According to the Republic, as a consequence of this international dimension certain
legal concepts may have a different meaning than in accordance with Swedish law, a

fact which should be afforded significance when adjudicating in the case.

It is correct per se that an international commercial arbitration is involved and that
none of the parties has any connection to Sweden other than the fact that the
arbitration proceedings took place here. However, according to section 46 of the
Arbitration Act the Act shall apply to arbitration proceedings that take place in
Sweden notwithstanding that the dispute has an international connection. In
conjunction with the enactment of the current Arbitration Act, consideration was also
given to developments in international arbitration law. In this context mention may
be made, inter alia, of the Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration of
1985 created by UNCITRAL, United Nations Trade Commission, which has been
accorded significance in conjunction with the drafting of the Swedish Arbitration Act.
The fact that a particular solution finds support in the Model Law has been accorded
great significance and has had a significant intrinsic value. In connection with each
individual provision in the new Act, consideration has been given as to the extent to
which the provision accords with the Model Law (Government Bill 1998/99:35, New
Arbitration Act, p. 47).

Accordingly, the Court of Appeal finds that the fact that there exists an international
dimension has no consequence other than that the issue whether the arbitration award
shall be declared invalid or set aside shall primarily be determined in accordance with

Swedish law; international law is deemed to be a part of Swedish law. To the extent it

85

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

may be proven in the case that foreign law may be of significance for the adjudication
and that the law in any respect differs from Swedish law, the foreign law may also be

taken into consideration.

Generally regarding challenges and enforcement of international awards

In line with what might be deemed to be an expression of the legal situation in many
other countries, by virtue of the Arbitration Act the Swedish legislature has adopted a
restrictive approach towards to the possibilities to successfully have an arbitration
award declared invalid or set aside based on a challenge (see Government Bill, pp.
142, 148, and 234). The same approach characterizes the rules in the aforementioned
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitration Awards Act and the underlying
reasons given therefor. This has also been expressed in decisions of the Supreme
Court when applying corresponding older provisions (see the cases reported in NJA
1979, p. 527 and 1992, p. 733). On the international plane, this restrictive approach
has been expressed in the 1958 New York Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards and in UNCITRAL's Model Law. In this
context, it may be noted that, in a judgment cited in this case, the European Court of
Justice stated that"... it is in the interest of efficient arbitration proceedings that
review of arbitration awards should be limited in scope and that annulment of or

refusal to recognize an award should be possible only in exceptional circumstances".

Exclusion of an arbitrator from the deliberations

Generally

To begin with, it may be noted that the Arbitration Act contains no formal
requirements as to the manner in which the arbitrators’ deliberations shall be
conducted. Clearly, a general reason why the procedure is not governed in detail has
been to allow for the possibility to smoothly and expeditiously adapt the various
stages in the proceedings to the circumstances of the particular case. This thereby

promotes the public interest of promptness and flexibility in arbitration proceedings.

86
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Some guidelines as to the manner in which proceedings are to be conducted are

provided in sections 21 and 30 of the Arbitration Act.

Section 30, first paragraph provides that where an arbitrator fails to participate in the
arbitrators' assessment of an issue without valid cause, such fact shall not prevent the
other arbitrators from determining the issue. In a former provision in the Arbitration
Act it was stated that all arbitrators must participate in the determination of dispute.
The present provision is modeled on UNCITRAL's Model Law. The reason given is
that, particularly in international disputes, an arbitrator may sabotage or delay the
proceedings by not participating in the hearing or deliberations or by otherwise
preventing or delaying the issuance of an award. This is to be prevented through the
amended wording (Government Bill 1998/99:35, p.128). From the previous wording,
combined with the stated reasons for the amendment, the conclusion may be drawn
that the main rule under section 30 is that all arbitrators shall participate in the

deliberations.

Section 21, first sentence provides that the arbitrators shall handle the dispute
impartially, expeditiously, and promptly. This must also include the deliberations.
The requirement of impartiality thus means that the arbitrators shall be treated equally
and be provided the same possibilities to participate in the deliberations and attempt
to influence the other arbitrators though substantive arguments. The requirement of
expeditiousness means that the deliberations shall be conducted in a cost-efficient and
flexible manner. As a consequence of the lack of formal rules, the deliberations may
be oral or written, a timetable for the deliberations may but need not be established,
deadlines may be set within which the arbitrators must express their opinions.
However, the deadlines may also be changed as required. The lack of formal rules
also means that there is no obligation on the chairman to arrange a formal vote when
it becomes clear that two arbitrators are in agreement regarding an outcome of the
dispute which the third arbitrator cannot support. Against the requirement of
promptness, due process aspects must of course be guaranteed. The parties have

legitimate interests in the arbitrated dispute being adjudicated in detail and with due

87
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

care. However, the requirement of promptness and the provisions of section 30 entails
that when two arbitrators have agreed upon the outcome of the dispute, the third
arbitrator cannot prolong the deliberations by demanding continued discussions in an
attempt to persuade the others as to the correctness of his opinion. The dissenting
arbitrator is thus not afforded any opportunity to delay the writing of the award. On
the other hand, the deliberations should not be deemed concluded before the arbitral
award is signed. The dissenting arbitrator should, therefore, be afforded an
opportunity to submit comments on the proposed award. Better conditions are

thereby created for a substantively correct award.

The Court of Appeal’s assessment

After the hearing was concluded on May 2, 2001, Kiihn drafted a list of questions.
The various issues were set out in this list of questions and testimony has been given
in the case that Kiihn had thereby carried out very serious and ambitious work. In
addition, in a cover letter, Kiihn also invited both of the other arbitrators to make their
own supplements to the list of questions. The list of questions was answered in detail
by Schwebel and Handl. Kiihn thereafter processed the list of questions so that it
could serve as a basis for the oral deliberations in Diisseldorf which, from what
appears to have been proven, were held during the whole of June | and for a couple of
hours in the morning of June 2. It has been testified that essentially all significant
issues were discussed at the meeting. Both Schwebel and Kiihn have stated that
Hand was the one who spoke most. The focal point of the deliberations must be
deemed to have been the list of questions, the answers thereto, and the discussions
between the arbitrators in Diisseldorf. Nothing has come to light in the case which
entails criticism of the manner in which the deliberations were conducted up to and
including the Diisseldorf meeting. Nor does the Republic otherwise appear to allege
that Handl was excluded from this part of the deliberations. Rather, the Republic is
instead of the opinion that the entire chain of events from the final hearing onwards

must be considered in order to determine whether Hand was excluded.

88
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Prior to the meeting in Diisseldorf, both Schwebel's and Hand's positions in the
dispute were probably clear to the others, while Kiihn had not yet reached a decision.
Following the meeting, it was clear what the outcome would be since Kiihn had then
decided to side with Schwebel's opinion that the Republic had breached the Treaty,
while Handl was of the opposite opinion. Schwebel has stated that he believed that
Handl, directly after the meeting, would begin writing a dissenting opinion. Kiihn has
stated that he proposed that Hand write the introduction to the award — "to keep him
in the team" — since he would not be able to participate in the drafting of the reasons
for the award. Schwebel has also stated that Hand! made it entirely clear that he did
not wish to participate in the production of the draft award. In addition, Handl stated
very clearly that he did not wish to receive the introduction or parts of the draft award.
Instead, he would submit comments only after having received a complete draft
award. The veracity of the Republic's allegation that Handl was excluded from the

continued deliberations must be adjudged in light of the aforesaid.

On July 30, Kiihn had prepared a complete draft award, which he distributed to
Schwebel and Handl. Hand! commented on the award in detail in a letter dated
August 16, which Kiihn responded to two weeks later. Both Kiihn and Schwebel have
stated that they regarded Hand!'s comments as largely constituting a repetition of his
reply to the list of questions and what he stated at the deliberations in Diisseldorf.
Thereafter, there were additional draft awards in which various amendments and

supplements were made, which did not, however, affect the outcome.

According to the Republic, Hand's position is that he only reached a dissenting
opinion sometime after September 3, and accordingly, it is only the period of time
thereafter which is "irrelevant" to the assessment of whether or not he was excluded.
However, through the testimony of Kiihn and Schwebel it must be deemed proven
that it was entirely clear to the arbitrators — without any formal voting having taken
place — that Handl had a dissenting opinion at the Diisseldorf meeting. The Republic
argues that from the commencement of the drafting of the award, HandI no longer

participated on the same terms as the two other arbitrators; the two other arbitrators

89
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

held discussions without him, he was not awarded sufficient time to rebut the various
draft awards, and he was thereby deprived of the possibility to express his opinion on

certain essential questions.

Kiihn has stated that, admittedly, he desired to receive comments to the draft award as
soon as possible but that he made no attempt to hurry Handl. His desire for
promptness has not been stated as due to his desire to have the award ready before the
London award. Besides, he had believed that the London award would be rendered
much earlier than in fact was the case. Schwebel's desire that an award be ready
before August 17 was due to the fact that he was to go on a journey on that date, while
Kiihn has stated that he did not attach any great significance to that date. Kiihn was of
the opinion that Handl was given the time that he deemed necessary but that, in the

end, Kiihn got the impression that Handl was attempting to delay the award.

Hand has received all essential communications between the arbitrators. The
evidence in the case does not support the Republic's allegations that the two other
arbitrators deliberated without Handl and that Handl did not have an opportunity to
participate on equal terms, that they worked against him, and that the two other
arbitrators ignored his opinions. On the contrary, Kiihn appears the whole time to
have treated Handl correctly and Handl appears to have been afforded an opportunity
to submit his comments to the extent which reasonably may be dictated by
considerations of courtesy between colleagues. Hand's feeling of having been
excluded is probably, in all essential regards, connected to the fact that he did not
meet with support for his opinion in the case. When assessing the issue of whether
Hand was afforded sufficient time to comment and submit opinions on the various
draft awards, it must be borne in mind that Kiihn, as chairman, had a responsibility to
issue the award without unnecessary delay. In addition, there is the fact that what are,
in the opinion of the Republic, the significant issues which were first introduced into
the draft award towards the end and on which, in the opinion of the Republic, Handl
did not receive sufficient time to comment, consisted of additional legal arguments

introduced by the majority in support of their position. However, as the arbitrator in

90
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

the minority, Handl no longer played any necessary role with respect to these reasons
for the majority's award. The Court of Appeal further believes that certain of the
deadlines which Handl requested appear to be unreasonably long and that the reasons
he advanced in connection with his need for the requested time cannot be deemed to
be reasonable. On the contrary, they are difficult to understand. Accordingly, the
Court of Appeal finds that Hand] received due time to submit comments to the draft

award.

The Republic's other assertions in this regard, inter alia, that Kiihn attempted to
convince Handl to sign pre-dated separate signature pages already signed by Kiihn,
are devoid of significance and, all in all, the Court of Appeal finds the Republic's
allegation that Hand! was excluded from the deliberations to be unproven and close to
groundless. Accordingly, the Republic's claim based on the aforesaid ground cannot

be accepted.

Failure to take into consideration applicable law

The Republic has alleged that the arbitral tribunal failed to apply the law that the
arbitrators were obligated to apply in accordance with the Treaty, namely Czech law
and international law. The arbitral tribunal has, instead, based the award on general
assessments of reasonableness. According to the Republic, the arbitral tribunal has
thereby exceeded its mandate and, in any event, committed gross procedural errors,
each of which individually, and in any event taken together, affected the outcome of

the arbitration proceedings.

As distinct from UNCITRAL's Model Law, the Arbitration Act does not contain any
tules as to the legal premises on which arbitrators should determine a dispute. In the
legislative history to the Arbitration Act it is stated that such a rule may be dispensed
with and, inter alia, the following is also stated. In Sweden, there is probably a
unanimous view that arbitrators should base their awards primarily on governing law,

unless the parties may be deemed to have decided differently. In light of the desire to

91
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

restrict the possibilities of challenge, in favor of the finality of an arbitration award,
there exist predominant reasons against the implementation of any rule as to the legal
premises on which a dispute shall be determined. However, the aforesaid does not
prevent the parties from entering into an agreement that the dispute shall be
determined in accordance with the law of a particular country or that the arbitrators
shall determine the dispute based on reasonableness. Where it is evident that the
arbitrators have applied the law of a different country in violation of such an
agreement, upon application to the Court, the award may be set aside on the ground
that the arbitrators have exceeded their mandate. On the other hand, in conjunction
with a challenge, the Court should not, of course, determine whether the arbitrators
erroneously applied the law agreed upon by the parties. Such a fact can still not lead

to the arbitration award being set aside (Government Bill 1998/99:35 p. 123).

A general conclusion which may be drawn from that which is stated in the legislative
history is that the legislature has sought to reduce the possibilities to challenge an
arbitration award on the ground that the arbitrators have applied the wrong law. The
arbitrators may be deemed to have exceeded their mandate only where they have
applied the law of a different country in violation of an express provision that the law
of a particular country shall govern the dispute; in the opinion of the Court of Appeal,
an almost deliberate disregard of the designated law must be involved. There is no
excess of mandate where the arbitrators have applied the designated law incorrectly.
Nor can there hardly be any question of excess of mandate where the arbitrators have
been required to interpret the parties' designation of applicable law and, in so doing,

have interpreted the designation incorrectly.

In accordance with Articles 8.2 and 8.5 of the Treaty, the arbitration proceedings have
taken place within the scope of the UNCITRAL rules. Articles 33.1 and 33.2 of the
UNCITRAL rules provide, inter alia, that the arbitral tribunal shall apply the law
which the parties stated to be applicable to the dispute and that the tribunal shall base
its decision on assessments of reasonableness (shall decide as amiable compositeur or

aequo et bono) only where the parties have expressly authorized the tribunal to do so.

92
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

The relevant choice of law clause is found in Article 8.6 of the Treaty. It is worded as

follows:

"The arbitral tribunal shall decide on the basis of the law, taking into account in

particular though not exclusively:

- the law in force of the Contracting Party concerned;

- the provisions of this Agreement, and other relevant Agreements
between the Contracting Parties;

- the provisions of special agreements relating to the investment;

- the general principles of international law".

A Swedish translation of the clause is as follows:

Skiljenémnden skall besluta pa grundval av lagen och i synnerhet ehuru ej
uteslutande ta hdnsyn till
- giillande rétt i berérd avtalspart;
- stadgandena i detta avtal och andra relevanta avtal mellan
avtalsparterna;
- stadgandena i sarskilda avtal med avseende pa investeringen;

- de allmdnna principerna i folkritten.

The first part of the provision whereby the arbitrators "shall decide on the basis of the
law" is clear, while the following parts leave room for interpretation, as shown by the
arbitrators' differing opinions regarding the correct legal purport of the provision. The
arbitrators have been obliged to comply with the choice of law provision and,
accordingly, their mandate has also included interpretation of the provision insofar as
it is not clear or not unambiguous. In the opinion of the Court of Appeal, an excess of

mandate may be involved only where the arbitrators' interpretation of the choice of

93
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

law clause proves to be baseless such that their assessment may be equated with the

arbitrators almost having ignored a provision regarding applicable law.

General principles regarding interpretation of treaties under international law are
found in the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. The basic rule in
Article 31.1 is that a treaty shall be interpreted in good faith and in accordance with
the normal meaning which the treaty provisions are to be accorded in the treaty in its
context and in light of its purpose and goals. In accordance with Article 31.3 (c), each
relevant international law rule which is applicable to the relationship between the
parties is of interest for interpretation by the arbitral tribunal. This accords, in

essence, with the general rules regarding interpretation of treaties.

The wording that the arbitral tribunal shall "take into account in particular although
not exclusively" must be interpreted such that the arbitrators may also use sources of
law other than those listed. The four sources of law are not numbered, nor are they
otherwise marked in such a manner that governing law in the relevant contracting
state should primarily be applied and general principles of international law applied
thereafter. The un-numbered list almost gives the impression that the contracting
states have left to the arbitrators the determination, on a case by case basis, as to
which source or sources of law shall be applied. If the case concerns an alleged
violation of the Investment Treaty, it might be relevant first of all to apply
international law, in light of the Investment Treaty's purpose of affording protection to

foreign investors by prescribing norms in accordance with international law.

In the Agreed Minutes, it is stated concerning the interpretation of the choice of law
clause that the arbitral tribunal must "take into account as far as they are relevant to
the dispute the law in force of the Contracting Party concerned and the other sources
of law set out in Article 8.6". The interpretation which can be given to the wording of
the clause is thus hereby confirmed, namely that the clause leaves to the arbitral
tribunal to take into account Czech law and other sources of law insofar as such are

relevant in the dispute.

94
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

The Court of Appeal does not believe that the various sections in the arbitral award
are to be reviewed in order to ascertain which of the sources of law listed in Article
8.6 of the Treaty have been applied by the arbitral tribunal. In the Court of Appeal's
opinion, when assessing whether the arbitrators have exceeded their mandate, it is
sufficient to clarify whether the arbitral tribunal applied any of the sources of law
listed in the choice of law clause or whether the tribunal has not based its decision on
any law at all but, rather, judged in accordance with general reasonableness. The
various sections in the arbitration award which the parties have invoked in the case in
support of their respective opinions as to which source or sources of law were or were
not applied and as to the extent to which such has occurred leads to no conclusion
other than that the arbitral tribunal has complied with the provisions of the choice of
law clause as such must be interpreted, i.e. applied relevant sources of law, primarily
international law, and thus has not based its decision that the Republic violated the
Treaty on a general assessment of reasonableness devoid of any basis in law. The fact
that each legal statement in the award is not directly derived citing a rule of law
cannot be deemed to mean that the tribunal conducted a general assessment of

reasonableness.

Accordingly, taking into consideration the aforesaid, the Court of Appeal finds that

the arbitral tribunal did not exceed its mandate by failing to apply applicable law.

With respect to the issue of whether the arbitrators committed procedural errors by
failing to apply Czech law on certain parts, the Court of Appeal finds, taking into
consideration the aforesaid, that the Republic has not shown ample reasons for its
allegations that such errors have arisen as referred to in section 34, first paragraph,
sub-paragraph 6 of the Arbitration Act. The Republic's claim cannot be accepted

based on the now addressed ground either.

95
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Lis pendens and res judicata

When deciding whether the arbitration award should be set aside on the grounds of
alleged lis pendens and res judicata, an assessment must first be made whether the
stated grounds at all are applicable with respect to arbitration awards issued by two
different arbitral tribunals following arbitration proceedings in accordance with the
UNCITRAL rules under two different bilateral investment treaties. In this regard, the
parties have different opinions. The issue whether /is pendens and res judicata may
be applicable in a situation such as the instant one has not, as far as is known, arisen
previously. The mere fact that the arbitrations were initiated under different
investment treaties which were entered into between different states, the Czech
Republic and the United States in the one treaty and the Czech Republic and the
Netherlands in the other, militates against these legal principles being applicable at
all. However, a couple of arbitration awards have been invoked from which it at least
is evident, that the dispute has been considered to be the same in different arbitration

proceedings which were brought under two different treaties.

Since, in any event, it cannot be ruled out entirely that the principles of lis pendens
and res judicata may become applicable as between two different international

arbitrations, the Court of Appeal will proceed with its assessment.

The UNCITRAL rules contain no provisions which shed light on the issue. The
Republic has argued that English law might be applicable. However, the claim has not
been based on any investigation which clarifies in detail the position under English
law and the legal opinions that have been submitted do not contribute to a clarification
of the legal situation. Taking the aforesaid into consideration, and since the issue
whether English law is applicable to some extent is unclear, the Court of Appeal will

disregard this matter for the time being.

To begin with, the Court of Appeal notes that, according to Swedish law, in

arbitration proceedings /is pendens and res judicata constitute bars to substantive

96
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

adjudication which are taken into account only after a party has raised an objection
with respect thereto. Since the parties are free to raise, or not raise, an objection of /is
pendens and res judicata, any violation thereof should not violate ordre public.
Consequently, a violation based on the aforesaid cannot result in invalidity in
accordance with section 33 of the Arbitration Act. Instead, the matter is to be
adjudged as a ground for challenge in accordance with section 34 of the same Act (see
Government Bill, p. 236). From section 34, second paragraph it is evident that a party
is not entitled to invoke a circumstance which, through participating in the arbitration
proceedings without objection or otherwise, he may be deemed to have waived. Thus,
in such a case, the right to invoke a circumstance is barred. The Court of Appeal will

now proceed to determine whether this is the case.

In the arbitration proceedings, the Republic expressly stated in its "Sur Reply" that it
did not rely on the doctrines of /is pendens and res judicata. The statement was made
in connection with the Republic's claim that the arbitral tribunal should declare that
CME 's claim was not acceptable and should not be adjudicated. Instead, the Republic
argued that — even excluding the arbitration proceedings in London — it had been
exposed to or affected by a large number of actions brought by Lauder and the CME
companies and that this constituted a type of abuse of process by the initiation of

similar cases.

Accordingly, the Republic expressly waived raising an objection of lis pendens or res
judicata. The aforesaid strongly supports the view that the right to challenge the
Stockholm award is barred with respect to the allegation that the Stockholm tribunal
acted erroneously in failing to take into consideration the principles of lis pendens and

res judicata.

In the present case, however, the Republic has argued that the objection during the
arbitration proceedings regarding abuse of process constitutes an objection with a
special meaning which also includes the principles of lis pendens and res judicata.

By invoking abuse of process the Republic has, so it is argued, nevertheless not

97

SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

waived an objection of /is pendens and res judicata. Thus, the Republic claims that it

is still entitled to invoke such grounds in the challenge proceedings.

The concept of abuse of process has no direct equivalent in Swedish law and it has
also been questioned whether it can be applied in conjunction with international
arbitration proceedings. Taking into consideration what has come to light in the case,
it appears to be unclear whether an objection of abuse of process includes or does not

include an objection regarding lis pendens and res judicata.

In light of the aforesaid, the Court of Appeal elects, for reasons of judicial economy,
not to adopt a definite position regarding the issue of a bar but, rather, will determine
whether the conditions are otherwise fulfilled in order for /is pendens and res judicata
to be applicable. The Court of Appeal will, in this context, first determine whether
identity may be deemed to exist between the claimant parties in the different

arbitration proceedings, namely Lauder and CME.

It has come to light in the case that Lauder, a private person who is a citizen of the
United States, holds not more than 30 percent of the share capital in CME's parent
company and is the controlling shareholder in such company. CME is a legal entity
with its registered office in the Netherlands. It has not even been argued that identity
in the formal sense exists between Lauder and CME. However, the Republic has
argued that, in reality, they may nevertheless be deemed to be the same party. Based
on the fact that the Court, primarily bearing in mind the international dimension of the
case, should not adopt a too restrictive approach when making its assessment, the
Republic has in support of its position referred, inter alia, to principles regarding
piercing the corporate veil, which for example may entail, in certain circumstances,
that a shareholder may be equated with the company, and to the concept of privy in

English law.

CME has called into question the application of English law and denied that there

exists a situation in which any form of piercing of the corporate veil is applicable.

98
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

CME has, inter alia, further argued that Lauder would not have been able to bring his
claim under the Treaty even if he had been a citizen of the Netherlands and that CME
would not have been able to bring its claim based on the US and Czech Investment

Treaty even if the company had a registered office in the United States.

The Court of Appeal notes that the concept of “privy”, and what it might be deemed
to entail — the meaning of the concept has not been clarified entirely — lacks any direct
equivalent in Swedish law. There is no reason to take this concept into consideration

in conjunction with the assessment.

With respect to piercing the corporate veil, no international cases have been presented
in the case in which, in an actual situation of lis pendens and res judicata, a

controlling minority shareholder has been equated with the company.

According to Swedish law, one of the fundamental conditions for /is pendens and res
judicata is that the same parties are involved in both cases. As far as is known, the
same condition applies in other legal systems which recognize the principles in
question. Identity between a minority shareholder, albeit a controlling one, and the
actual company cannot, in the Court of Appeal's opinion, be deemed to exist in a case
such the instant one. This assessment would apply even if one were to allow a broad

determination of the concept of identity.

Thus, since Lauder and CME cannot be deemed to be the same party, one of the pre-
requisites for /is pendens and res judicata is lacking. Based on the aforesaid, the

Republic's claim cannot be accepted based on the ground now considered.

Excess of mandate — joint tortfeasors

The Republic has argued that the arbitral tribunal exceeded its mandate by basing the
arbitration award on an application of the concept of joint tortfeasors, which is a

ground that CME did not invoke in the arbitration proceedings and which had not

99
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

been mentioned as a circumstance, nor was it the subject of legal argument by any of

the parties in the arbitration proceedings.

The Republic has argued that without the conclusion that joint tortfeasors existed the
outcome in the arbitration would necessarily have been different. The arbitral tribunal
was, in fact, forced to find a direct causal link between Zelezny's termination of the
service agreement, which was the direct cause of the damage, and the Media Council's
behavior in 1996 and 1999, which the tribunal was unable to do. Therefore, the
tribunal introduced joint tortfeasors and found, without this concept having been
invoked by the parties, that the Republic and Zelezny were joint tortfeasors. The
argument that the arbitral tribunal felt itself forced to base the award on joint torts is
also supported by the fact that this concept was introduced into the award only at a

very late date.

CME has objected, primarily, that the award has not been based on any type of
principle of joint tortfeasor liability or on any principle of joint and several liability in
conjunction with coordinated behavior towards a common goal, and that the tribunal
thus did not exceed its mandate. In the alternative, CME argues that the ground for
challenge is barred. CME has argued that the award was based on the fact that the
Republic, through the Media Council, violated the Investment Treaty and that the
Republic, through the Media Council, thereby caused CME damage.

The Republic has denied that the ground for challenge is barred, since the tribunal's

application of joint tortfeasors only became known after the award was issued.

100
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

The Court of Appeal’s assessment

The expression “joint tortfeasors” is found in paragraph. 581 of the award in the
section headed "Causation of damage by Council's actions and omissions". The
section addresses, inter alia, whether the Media Council's actions and omissions have

caused damage.

In the opinion of the Court of Appeal, it cannot be inferred from the award other than
that the arbitral tribunal, in accordance with international law principles as found by
the tribunal, held that there existed a link between the Media Council's actions and
omissions and CME's damage which, in accordance with the arbitral tribunal's
assessment of international law, meant that it was reasonable to impute CME's
damage to the Media Council's actions and omissions, see, e.g., paragraphs 575 and
584-585 of the award. Thus, the arbitral tribunal found that there existed a causal link
between the Media Council's actions and omissions and CME's damage. The arbitral
tribunal further found that the Media Council's actions and omissions constituted a
violation of the Treaty and that, as a consequence of violation of the Treaty, the
Republic was obligated to make good the damage caused by the Media Council's
unlawful actions or omissions. In the Court of Appeal's opinion, it follows from the
aforesaid that the Republic's liability for damages is not based on the Republic and

Zelezny being joint tortfeasors.

Nor can it be inferred from the award other than that the Tribunal — following an
objection from the Republic that no damage would have been caused to CME's
investment but for Zelezny's actions and that the Media Council and the Republic
bore no liability for what happened to CME's investment — made the assessment that a
state may be held fully liable for damage suffered by a foreign investment company,
notwithstanding that the state is not alone in having caused the damage. It is further
evident from the award that the tribunal applied this assessment as a basis for its
conclusion that the Republic was fully liable in the instant case, irrespective of

Zelezny's actions which contributed in causing the damage.

101
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Taking into consideration the aforesaid, the Court of Appeal does not find it
established that the arbitral tribunal exceeded its mandate in basing the award on the
existence of joint tortfeasors and, therefore, the Republic's claim cannot be accepted
on the aforesaid ground. In light of this assessment, there is no reason to decide

whether the ground of challenge might be barred.

Excess of mandate — decision concerning determination of the damages

The Republic has argued that the arbitral tribunal exceeded its mandate by
determining questions concerning the amount of the damages, in violation of the
parties’ instructions. In support for its claim in this regard, the Republic has, inter
alia, argued that CME's original claim in the arbitration proceedings comprised this
entire procedure, including the issue of the amount of the damages based, inter alia,
on the principle of fair market value. After the parties agreed that the dispute would
be limited to the existence of liability for damages as such, the claim related
exclusively to what was thus agreed upon; the amount of the damages was to be
determined in a second phase of the arbitration proceedings. Following the
agreement, CME did not argue further on the basis of the concept of fair market value
and, in any event, it was not agreed between the parties that the method of calculation
for any damages would be established in the first phase of the proceedings. In this
context, the Republic has pointed out that the Treaty does not contain any reference to
fair market value provision; instead, the concept of "just compensation" and "genuine

value" are used.

CME has objected to the assertion that the concept of fair market value is covered by
both its original claim and the final claim which CME presented in writing during the
final hearing. The ground for challenge is barred due to the fact that Republic
answered the final claim with respect to this issue without raising any objection other
than that CME's claim for compensation based on fair market value should be

dismissed, since CME had no grounds for its claim. Thus, the Republic did not object

102
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

to an assessment of the claim on the ground that the claim should be deemed to entail

an amendment to the claim, or any other procedural grounds.

The Court of Appeal’s assessment

It has not been established that the Republic — based on allegations of violation of the
bifurcation agreement — raised any objections against the claim for compensation in
accordance with fair market value that CME presented in writing during the final
hearing in the arbitration proceedings. If the Republic believed that the claim was to
be regarded as a new claim in excess of that agreed upon by the parties and, thereby,
in the Republic's opinion constituted an impermissible amendment to the claim, the

Republic should have objected thereto.

Section 34, second paragraph of the Arbitration Act provides, as stated previously,
that a party is not entitled to invoke a circumstance which, by participating in the
arbitration proceedings without objection or otherwise, it may be deemed to have
waived. The Court of Appeal finds that the Republic's failure to raise the objection
against CME's claim in conjunction with the submission of the written document at
the final hearing has the result that the Republic is now barred from arguing that the
arbitral tribunal exceeded its mandate in this respect. Thus, the Republic's claim

based on the aforesaid ground cannot be accepted.

In light of this assessment, the Court of Appeal has no reason to determine whether

the arbitral tribunal's assessment of the principle of fair market value as a ground for
determination of the damages was properly included as part of the tribunal's mandate
with respect to the first phase of the proceedings or whether the tribunal's assessment
preceded what should have been adjudicated during a second phase of the arbitration

proceedings and thus should be deemed to constitute an excess of mandate.

103
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Excess of mandate — previous investors and prior violations

The Republic has argued that the arbitral tribunal exceeded its mandate by applying
provisions in the Treaty with respect to alleged violations which took place when the
investment was held by a different investor than the one that brought the claim in the
arbitration proceedings. To be precise, according to the Republic, the Treaty provides
protection only when an investment is made; it does not protect an investment against

events which occurred before the investor made his investment.

CME has objected to the assertion that all of CME's allegations regarding violations
of the Treaty are covered by the arbitration agreement and that the arbitrators thus
enjoyed jurisdiction to determine the issue. In any event, they gained jurisdiction
through the issue being introduced into the arbitration proceedings without the
Republic arguing that the issue was not covered by the arbitration agreement. In any
event, in CME's opinion, the Republic has waived the right to claim that the issue was
not covered by the arbitration agreement or that an assessment thereof was in excess
of the arbitrators' jurisdiction. In fact, in its Statement of Defense, the Republic raised
no objection that the arbitration agreement did not cover the dispute, which the
Republic was obligated to do in accordance with Article 8.5 of the Treaty and Article
21 (3) of the UNCITRAL rules. The ground for challenge is barred in accordance
with section 34, second paragraph of the Arbitration Act, since the Republic
participated in the proceedings without raising the objection that the issue was not

covered by the arbitration agreement.

The Court of Appeal’s assessment

It is apparent from the evidence that the Republic questioned whether CME was
entitled to bring the action based on the Treaty. However, the Republic never
expressly stated, in its Statement of Defense or in a later pleading (Sur Reply), that
CME 's claim fell outside the scope of the Treaty and thereby the arbitrators’ mandate
on the ground that the alleged events occurred before CME became the investor and

the claim was not assigned to CME.

104
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

It has further transpired that, during the final hearing, the Republic argued that CME
raised claims based on events that occurred before CME made its investment. After
CME questioned whether the Republic was thereby raising an objection to
jurisdiction, the Republic replied that no such objection was involved but, rather, only
a substantive objection. Following the final hearing, the Republic asserted in writing
that CME had only been entitled to bring claims which were based on events that
occurred after May 1997 and stated that claims based on circumstances that occurred
before May 1997 were not covered by the arbitration agreement. At the same time,
the Republic argued that this did not constitute an objection to the arbitral tribunal's

jurisdiction but, rather, was related to the Republic's substantive defense.

In light of the aforesaid, the Court of Appeal holds that the Republic, as its statements
during the arbitration proceedings must be understood, expressly refrained from
raising objections to jurisdiction. Thus, the issue is whether the ground for challenge
is barred. The Republic has argued that, since the Treaty did not cover claims related
to the time before a person became an investor, it was not possible for the parties, in
the arbitration proceedings, to waive this type of objection to jurisdiction. The Treaty
has, in fact, been entered into between two sovereign States and, accordingly, the
parties do not have any possibility to expand the scope of the arbitration agreement

through a waiver of the type in question.

The Treaty refers to the UNCITRAL rules which, including the limitation clause in
Article 21 (3), are thus covered by the intention of the contracting States. In the Court
of Appeal's opinion, taking the aforesaid into consideration, it is hardly incompatible
with the aspect of sovereignty that a party should be able to expressly refrain from
raising objections to jurisdiction. Thus, the Court of Appeal finds that the Republic
has not shown ample reason for the claim that a waiver cannot be taken into

consideration.

105
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

In light of the above and in accordance with that which has been stated in connection
with other grounds for challenge, in this context the Republic is deemed to have
refrained from arguing that the arbitral tribunal exceeded its mandate by applying the
Treaty with respect to alleged violations which took place at a time when the
investment was held by an investor other than CME. This assessment leads to the
conclusion that the ground for challenge based on section 34, second paragraph of the
Arbitration Act is barred. Thus, the Republic's claim based on the aforesaid ground

cannot be accepted.

Irrespective of this assessment with respect to the issue of preclusion of claims, the
Court of Appeal cannot avoid noting that the assessments made by the arbitral
tribunal, insofar as such are at issue, were probably of a substantive nature and,

consequently, were not challengeable.

Invalidity in general

The Republic has also argued that the Stockholm award and the manner in which it
came about are manifestly incompatible with the principles on which the legal system
of Sweden is based. Furthermore, according to the Republic, each of the grounds
concerning the exclusion of an arbitrator from the deliberations and the lack of
jurisdiction of the Stockholm tribunal as a consequence of /is pendens and res
judicata, and also the other grounds invoked by the Republic taken together, are of

such a serious nature that they are covered by section 33 of the Arbitration Act.

The Court of Appeal finds that the Republic has not shown ample reason for why the
arbitration award or the manner in which it came about should be in violation of ordre
public and thereby invalid based on the grounds asserted. Thus, the Republic's claim

cannot be accepted in this regard either.

106
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

Litigation costs

In light of the outcome in the case, the Republic shall compensate CME for its

litigation costs.

CME has claimed compensation for litigation costs in the amount of SEK 38 million,
of which SEK 30.3 million relates to counsel's fees and SEK 7.7 million to
disbursements. The Republic has stipulated to an amount of SEK 34 million as
reasonable per se, which corresponds to the amount that the Republic has claimed as

compensation for its litigation costs.

Chapter 18, section 8 of the Swedish Code of Judicial Procedure provides that
compensation for litigation costs shall correspond in full to the costs for the
preparation and pursuit of a claim in the case, as well as fees to counsel or

representatives insofar as the costs are reasonable for furtherance of the parties' rights.

Neither party has provided detailed information with respect to its claim in this
regard; both parties have orally stated their claims for costs broken down only
between counsel fees and disbursements. The Court of Appeal cannot find that CME
has proven that an amount in excess of that stipulated to by the Republic is
reasonable. Accordingly, the Court of Appeal finds that CME shall be deemed
reasonably entitled to SEK 34 million without such amount being broken down into

fees and disbursements.

The judgment of the Court of Appeal may not be appealed

In accordance with section 43, second paragraph of the Arbitration Act, the Court of
Appeal's decision regarding a claim against an arbitration award pursuant to sections
33 and 34 of the same Act may not be appealed. However, in accordance with the
same paragraph, the Court of Appeal may allow an appeal of the decision where it is
of importance for the development of case law that the appeal be reviewed by the

Supreme Court. Based on the assessment described by the Court of Appeal in this

107
SVEA COURT OF APPEAL JUDGMENT Case no T 8735-01
Department 16

judgment, the Court of Appeal finds that no grounds exist for allowing an appeal of
the judgment.

[signature]

[signature] [signature]

Court of Appeal President Ulla Erlandsson and Court of Appeal Judges Per Eklund

and Mans Edling, rapporteur, participated in the judgment. Held unanimously.

