CMS Gas Transmission Company
v.
Argentine Republic

(ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8)
(Annulment Proceeding)

 

DECISION OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE APPLICATION FOR
ANNULMENT OF THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Judge Gilbert Guillaume, President
Judge Nabil Elaraby
Professor James R. Crawford

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee

Mr. Gonzalo Flores

Representing the Claimant: Representing the Respondent:

Ms. Lucy Reed Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino

Mr. Reza Mohtashami Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién

Ms. Daina Bray Buenos Aires, Argentina

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP

New York, NY 10022 and

and Professor Philippe Sands, QC
Ms. Alison MacDonald

Mr. Nigel Blackaby Matrix Chambers

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP Grays’ Inn

Paris, France London, U.K.

and

Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil
Dr. Héctor Huici

Dr. Ignacio Minorini Lima
M. & M. Bomchil

Buenos Aires, Argentina

Date of dispatch to the parties: September 25, 2007

OP

=

TABLE OF CONTENTS

paragraph

INTRODUCTION. 1
THE DISPUTE

THE GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT.
(a) Manifest excess of powers...

(b) Failure to state reason:

CMS’ JUS STANDI
(a) The Award
(b) The Parties’ sut

(c) The C ittee’s view
FAIR AND EQUITABLE TREATMENT....
(a) The Award
(b) The Parties’ sut

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(c) The C ittee’s view

THE UMBRELLA CLAUSE

(a) The Award 6
(b) The Parties’ submissi 7
(a) The C ittee’s view 89

 

THE STATE OF NECESSITY UNDER CUSTOMARY INTERNATIONAL LAW

 

 

 

 

AND ARTICLE XI OF THE BIT 101
(a) The Award 101
(b) Argentina’s submissi 111
(c) CMS’ submissi 116
(d) The Committee’s view 119

 

(i) Failure to state reasons -120

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(ii) Manifest excess of power: 128
THE TEMPORARY CHARACTER OF NECESSITY AND CONSEQUENCES
FOR COMPENSATION 137
(a) The Award 137
(b) Argentina’s submissi 139
(c) CMS’ submissi 142
(d) The Committee’s view 144
COMPENSATION 151
(a) The Award 151
(b) The Parties’ submissi 152
(c) The Ci ittee’s view 154
CONCLUSION 158
DECISION 163

 

on Co. v. Argentina
‘ase No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

  

DECISION

A. Introduction

1. On 8 September 2005, the Argentine Republic (Argentina) filed with the
Secretary-General of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID) an application in writing, requesting the annulment of an Award dated 12 May
2005 rendered by the Tribunal in the arbitration between CMS Gas Transmission

Company (CMS) and the Argentine Republic.

2. The Application was made within the time provided in Article 52(2) of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of
Other States (the ICSID Convention). In it, Argentina sought annulment of the Award on
two of the five grounds set out in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention, specifically that
the Tribunal had manifestly exceeded its powers and that it failed to state the reasons on

which it was based.

3. The Application also contained a request, under Article 52(5) of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings
(the Arbitration Rules), for a stay of enforcement of the Award until the Application for

Annulment was decided.

4. The Secretary-General registered the Application on 27 September 2005 and on
the same date, in accordance with Rule 50(2) of the Arbitration Rules, transmitted a
Notice of Registration to the parties. The parties were notified that, pursuant to

Arbitration Rule 54(2), the enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed.

5. By letter of 30 September 2005, the Claimant made a request under Arbitration
Rule 54(2) for the stay of enforcement of the Award to be lifted unless Argentina
provided adequate assurances as to the payment of the Award should the application for

annulment fail.

on Co. v. Argentina
‘ase No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

  

6. By letter of 18 April 2006, in accordance with Rule 52(2) of the Arbitration Rules,
the parties were notified that an ad hoc Committee (the Committee) had been constituted,
composed of Judge Gilbert Guillaume, of French nationality, Judge Nabil Elaraby, of
Egyptian nationality, and Professor James Crawford, of Australian nationality. The
parties were also informed that Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Senior Counsel, ICSID, would serve

as Secretary of the Committee.

7. By letter of 20 April 2006, the parties were notified that Judge Gilbert Guillaume

had been designated President of the Committee.

8. By letter of 2 May 2006, the Centre sent to the parties copies of the declarations

signed by each Member of the Committee pursuant to Arbitration Rule 52(2).

9. The parties disagreed on the effects of the provisional stay of enforcement of the
Award over Argentina’s option to purchase CMS’s shares in Transportadora de Gas del

Norte (TGN), as provided for in sub-paragraph 3 of the dispositif of the Award.

10. After due deliberation, the Committee decided that, since the payment of
compensation has been stayed, the condition precedent to the transfer of shares in TGN
for the time being could not be met and thus the time limit set forth in the Award for such
transfer must be considered as likewise provisionally stayed. The decision of the

Committee was notified to the parties by the Secretariat on 10 May 2006.

11. By letter of 16 May 2006, the Argentine Republic requested that the provisional
stay of enforcement of the Award be continued until the Committee had the opportunity
to hear both parties on the matter. By letter of that same date, the Claimant reiterated its
request that the stay be discontinued unless adequate assurances were provided by the
Argentine Republic that it would comply with the Award in the event its annulment

application was rejected.

12. By letter of 17 May 2006, the Committee informed the parties of its decision to
continue the stay of the Award until 5 June 2006 (the date previously fixed for the first

session of the Committee with the parties).

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

13. The first session of the Committee was held, as scheduled, with the agreement of
the parties, on 5 June 2006, at the premises of the World Bank in Paris, France, and
several issues of procedure were agreed and decided. During the session, both parties
addressed the Committee on the question of the continuance of the stay of enforcement of

the Award.

14. After having heard the parties’ arguments, the Committee requested a written
statement on behalf of the Argentine Republic, to be filed within seven days, with respect
to its compliance with the Award under the ICSID Convention if the Award were not
annulled. It further decided that it would be open to CMS to comment within the further
seven days on such statement. At the same time, it decided to continue the stay of

enforcement of the Award until it had taken a decision.

15. In accordance with the Committee’s directions, the Argentine Republic submitted
on 12 June 2006, a written statement signed by Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino,
Argentina’s Attorney-General, in which it stated that:

“The Republic of Argentina hereby provides an undertaking to CMS Gas Transmission
Company that, in accordance with its obligations under the ICSID Convention, it will
recognize the award rendered by the Arbitral Tribunal in this proceeding as binding and

will enforce the pecuniary obligations imposed by that award within its territories, in the
event annulment is not granted.”

16. In a letter dated 19 June 2006, CMS contended that Dr. Guglielmino’s letter did

not provide additional comfort, that it must be viewed in context and that it did not bind

Argentina.

17. On the invitation of the Committee, on 26 June 2006 Argentina submitted a copy

of the decision rendered by its Supreme Court in Ekmedjidn v. Sofovich.!

18. By letter dated 27 June 2006, Argentina expressed the view that the matters raised

by CMS in its letter of 19 June 2006 did not require any further response. It did,

' Argentina, Supreme Court, Ekmekdjian, Miguel Angel v. Sofovich, Gerardo y otros, Fallos:

315:1492 (7 July 1992).

on Co. v. Argentina
‘ase No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

  

however, provide a copy of the Argentine regulations relating to the power of the

Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina.

19. By letter dated 30 June 2006, CMS made further comments and submitted to the

Committee relevant passages of the Argentine Constitution.

20. After considering the parties’ written and oral arguments on the matter and due
deliberation, the Committee issued on 1 September 2006 its Decision on the Argentine

Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award.

21. In its Decision, the Committee ordered that the stay of execution be continued
pending its decision on Argentina’s application for annulment without the need for
Argentina to provide a bank guarantee. In the Committee’s view, Argentina had
demonstrated that CMS would not be prejudiced by the grant of a stay, other than in
respect of the delay which is, however, incidental to the Convention system of annulment
and which could be remedied by the payment of interest in the event the annulment

application was unsuccessful.

22. In accordance with the timetable set forth by the Committee during the 5 June

2006 session, Argentina filed its Memorial on Annulment on 13 September 2006.

23. By letter dated 15 September 2006, the law firm of Mayer, Brown, Rowe and
Maw LLP informed the Committee that it would no longer represent the Argentine

Republic in this proceeding.

24. By letter dated 22 September 2006, CMS claimed that 48 of the 60 legal and
factual authorities referred to in Argentina’s Memorial were missing. By letter dated 29
September 2006, the Argentine Republic responded, stating that the authorities referred
to in CMS’ letter were in the public domain and easily available to the Claimant. The
Argentine Republic noted that it did enclose with its Memorial the Argentine legal

authorities cited, which would not be of easy access to non-Argentine lawyers.

25. Through letter from the Secretary of the Committee dated 12 October 2006, the

Committee, noting that, in fact, the documents in question were publicly available,

on Co. v. Argentina
‘ase No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

  

invited CMS to indicate, by 13 October 2006, which of the legal authorities Argentina
referred to in its Memorial it would need to receive, and instructed Argentina to provide
copies of such documents to counsel for CMS in Buenos Aires, by 18 October 2006. By
letter dated 13 October 2006, counsel for CMS informed the Committee that they had

been able to collect all of the legal authorities referred to in Argentina’s Memorial.

26. On 21 December 2006, CMS filed its Counter-Memorial on Annulment; the
Argentine Republic filed its Reply on 22 January 2007, and CMS filed its Rejoinder on
22 February 2007.

27. After consultation with the parties, the President of the Committee held a
preliminary organizational telephone conference call with counsel for both parties on 19
March 2007. The conference call was attended by Ms. Lucy Reed, Mr. Nigel Blackaby
and Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil, on behalf of CMS and by Dr. Gabriel Bottini, on behalf of
the Argentine Republic. During the conference call the parties agreed on the manner in
which the hearing on annulment would be conducted. These agreements were reflected

in a letter from the Secretary of the Committee to the parties dated 20 March 2007.

28. As agreed, a 2-day hearing was held at the World Bank offices in Paris on 27-28
March 2007, at which counsel for both parties presented their arguments and
submissions, and responded to questions from the Members of the Committee. Present at
the hearing were the Members of the Annulment Committee: Judge Gilbert Guillaume,
Judge Nabil Elaraby and Professor James Crawford; the Secretary of the Committee: Mr.
Gonzalo Flores; CMS’ representatives: Ms. Lucy Reed, Mr. Nigel Blackaby, Dr. Lluis
Paradell, Mr. Reza Mohtashami and Ms. Daina Bray of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer
LLP; Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil and Dr. Ignacio Minorini Lima of M. & M. Bomchil and
Ms. Sharon MclIInay and Mr. Thomas Miller of CMS Gas Transmission Company; and
representatives of the Argentine Republic: Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino, Procurador
del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina, Dr. Gabriel Bottini, Dr. Ignacio Torterola, Dr. Jorge
Barraguirre, Dr. Ignacio Perez Cortés, Dr. Diego Gosis, Dr. Verénica Lavista and Dr.
Juan José Zurrro, from Argentina’s Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién and Professor

Philippe Sands, QC and Ms. Alison MacDonald of Matrix Chambers.

on Co. v. Argentina
‘ase No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

  

29. The President of the Committee declared the proceeding closed on September 21,
2007. During the course of the proceedings, the Members of the Committee deliberated
by various means of communication, including meetings in Paris on 15 May and 3 July

2007, and have taken into account all pleadings, documents and testimony before them.

B. The Dispute

30. In order to put an end to the economic crisis of the late 1980s, Argentina adopted
in 1989 an economic recovery plan which included a privatization program of
government-owned industries and public utilities. For that purpose, it enacted Reform of
State Law N° 23.696 of August 1989, Currency Convertibility Law N° 23.928 of March
1991 and Decree N° 2.128/91 pegging the Argentine currency to the United States dollar.

31. Within this framework, Gas Law N° 24.076 of May 1992, implemented by
various decrees, established the legal framework for the privatization of the gas industry
and regulated the transport and distribution of natural gas. The Law established a new
regulatory regime with ENARGAS, the public regulatory agency of the gas industry,
supervising the proper functioning of the industry, and in particular determining the

tariffs charged by the transporters to the distributors.

32. Gas del Estado, a national State-owned monopoly, was thus divided into two
transportation companies and eight distributor companies to be privatized.
Transportadora de Gas del Norte was one of the companies established as a result of this
restructuring. In December 1992, TGN was granted a license to transport gas in
Argentina through the operation of the North and Central West pipelines in conformity

with Decree 2.255/92.

33. At the same time, Argentina sold 70% in TGN to a consortium of investors. It
placed 5% in an Employee share program and retained 25%. This 25% was purchased in
1995 by CMS Gas Argentina, a wholly owned subsidiary of CMS Gas Transmission
Company. In 1999, CMS Gas Argentina purchased from third parties a further 4.42%
share in TGN.

on Co. v. Argentina
‘ase No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

  

34. As recalled by the Tribunal,’ in CMS’s view, under the regime established by
those laws and decrees and by the license granted to TGN, tariffs were to be calculated in
dollars, conversion to pesos to be effected at the time of billing and tariffs adjusted every
six months in accordance with the United States Producer Price Index (US-PPI). As
noted again by the Tribunal, Argentina had a different understanding of the nature and

legal effects of those various instruments.

35. Towards the end of the 1990s a serious economic crisis began to unfold in
Argentina. The representatives of the gas companies agreed twice, subject to certain
conditions, in January 2000 and July 2000, to defer the US PII adjustment of the gas
tariffs. However an Argentine court issued in August 2000 an injunction for the
suspension of the second agreement and on several occasions ENARGAS later confirmed

the continuing freeze of the US-PPI adjustment.

36. In late 2001, the crisis deepened and, on 6 January 2002, Law N° 25.561 declared
a public emergency. Under that Law the right of licensees of public utilities to adjust
tariffs according to the US PPI was terminated, as well as the calculation of tariffs in

dollars. The tariffs were redenominated in pesos at the rate of one peso to one dollar.>

37. In July 2001, ICSID had already received from CMS a request for arbitration
relating mainly to the decisions taken in August 2000 concerning the application of the
PPI to tariffs of the gas industry. The arbitral tribunal was duly constituted in January
2002. In its memorial of July 2002, CMS extended its claim to cover the measures taken

later by Argentina, and in particular those adopted in January 2002.

38. By decision taken on 17 July 2003, the Tribunal decided that the whole dispute
was “within the jurisdiction of the Center and the competence of the Tribunal”.* Then, in
an Award of 12 May 2005, the Tribunal rejected CMS’ claims of expropriation under

Article IV and of discriminatory and arbitrary treatment under Article II(2)(b) of the

2 CMS v. Argentina (2005) 44 ILM 1205, 1211 (para. 57) (“Award”).
3 From March 2002 onwards the official exchange rate for the peso was in the region of 3-3.85 per
US$1, a devaluation of more than 60%.

CMS v. Argentina (Jurisdiction) (2003) 7 ICSID Reports 494, 521-522 (para. 131) (“Jurisdictional
Decision”).

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

Argentina-US Bilateral Investment Treaty (the BIT).> On the other hand it ruled that
Argentina had “breached its obligations to accord the investor the fair and equitable

treatment guaranteed in Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty and to observe the obligations
entered into with regard to the investment guaranteed in Article II(2)(c) of the Treaty”. 6
It did not accept Argentina’s “defenses” based on necessity and article XI of the BIT. It

awarded CMS compensation of US$133.2 million.

39. In sub-paragraphs 3 and 4 of its dispositif the Tribunal added:

“3. Upon payment of the compensation decided in this Award, the Claimant shall transfer to
the Respondent the ownership of its shares in TGN upon payment by the Respondent of the
additional sum of US$2,148,100. The Respondent shall have up to one year after the date this
Award is dispatched to the parties to accept such transfer.

4. The respondent shall pay the Claimant simple interest at the annualized average rate of
2.51% of the United States Treasury Bills for the period August 18, 2000 to 60 days after the date
of this Award, or the date of the effective payment if before, applicable to both the value loss
suffered by the Claimant and the residual value of its shares established in 2 and 3 above.
However, the interest on the residual value of the shares shall cease to run upon written notice by
Argentina to the Claimant that it will not exercise its option to buy the Claimant’s shares in TGN.
After the date indicated above, the rate shall be the arithmetic average of the six-month US
Treasury Bills rates observed on the afore-mentioned date and every six months thereafter,
compounded semi-annually”.

The Tribunal specified that “[e]ach party shall pay one half of the arbitration costs and

bear its own legal costs.”” It dismissed all other claims.
40. Argentina asks the Committee to annul this Award.

Cc. The Grounds for Annulment

41. Before entering into the examination of the case, the Committee will first recall
the basis on which it must deal with the submissions of Argentina. Under Article 52 of
the ICSID Convention, each Party may request annulment of an award on one or more of

the following grounds:

5 Treaty between the United States of America and the Argentine Republic Concerning the

Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investment, 14 November 1991 (in force 20 October 1994).
Award, sub-para. | of the dispositif.

7 Ibid., sub-para. 5 of the dispositif.

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

“(a) that the Tribunal was not properly constituted;
(b) _ that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;
(c) _ that there was corruption on the part of a member of the Tribunal;
(d) _ that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure; or
(e) _ that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.”

42. In the present case, Argentina identifies a large number of perceived defects in the
Tribunal’s jurisdictional findings, in its findings relating to Articles II(2)(a), II(2)(c) and
XI of the BIT and to necessity under customary international law, as well as in the
calculation of the damages. It submits that the Award must be annulled because, on
many of those grounds, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers (Article 52(b)) or

failed to state the reasons on which it based its decisions (Article 52(e)).

43. Both parties recognize that an ad hoc committee is not a court of appeal and that
its competence extends only to annulment based on one or other of the grounds expressly
set out in Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. That basic proposition was specified, for
example, by the ad hoc Committee in Vivendi v. Argentina’ and has been confirmed by
other ad hoc committees.” Argentina, however, submits that “the present case was the
first award in the large group of ICSID arbitrations currently pending against
Argentina”.'° It stresses the importance of the problems raised by those arbitrations. It

concludes that “the extraordinary implications of the Tribunal’s decision mandate close

scrutiny of its reasoning by the Annulment Committee.”"!

44, At the outset, the Committee must recall that, in the ICSID system, annulment has

a limited function. As stated in MTD v. Chile (Annulment), a committee

8 CAA & Vivendi Universal v. Republic of Argentina (2002) 6 ICSID Reports 340, 357-8 (paras. 62,

64) (“Vivendi”).

See Kléckner Industrie- Anlagen GmbH & Others v. United Republic of Cameroon (1985) 2 ICSID
Reports 95, 119-120 (para. 61) (“Ki °); Amco Asia Corporation and Others v. Republic of Indonesia I
(1986) 1 ICSID Reports 509, 515 (para. ee Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of
Guinea (1989) 4 ICSID Reports 79, 87 (para.5.04), 88 (para. 5.08) (“MINE”); Amco Asia Corporation &
Others v. Republic of Indonesia (1992) 9 ICSID Reports 9, 39 (para. 7.19), 51 (para. 8.08); Wena Hotels v.
Arab Republic of Egypt (2002) 6 ICSID Reports 129, 135 (para. 18) (“Wena Hotels”), CDC Group v.
Republic of the Seychelles (2005) 11 ICSID Reports 237, 248-250 (paras. 34-37); Patrick Mitchell v
Democratic Republic of Congo, Decision of 1 November 2006, para. 21; MTD Equity & MTD Chile v.
Republic of Chile, Decision on Annulment, 21 March 2007, para 52 (“MTD v. Chile”); Hussein Nuaman
Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, Decision on Annulment, 5 June 2007, para. 20.

Argentina’s Annulment Memorial, para. 10.
" Ibid., paras. 4, 10.

 
  

 

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

“cannot substitute its determination on the merits for that of the Tribunal. Nor can it
direct a Tribunal on a resubmission how it should resolve substantive issues in dispute.
All it can do is annul the decision of the tribunal: it can extinguish a res judicata but on a
question of merits it cannot create a new one. A more interventionist approach by
committees on the merits of disputes would risk a renewed cycle of tribunal and
annulment proceedings of the kind observed in Kléckner and AMCO.”?

45. As Argentine noted, the present arbitration was the first of a long series relating to
the Argentine crisis of 2001-2002. Accordingly the Committee will seek to clarify
certain points of substance on which, in its view, the Tribunal made manifest errors of
law. It remains to be seen, however, whether as a consequence the award should be

annulled.
(a) Manifest excess of powers

46. In the present case, Argentina first submits that the Tribunal “manifestly exceeded
its powers by exercising jurisdiction over claims by a company’s shareholder for income
lost by the company,”"? It also contends that it did so “by authorizing CMS, which was
not a party to any of the applicable instruments, to claim a breach of obligations” under

Article II(2)(c) of the treaty, the so-called “umbrella clause”.

47. As the ad hoc Committee in Kléckner I said:

“Clearly, an arbitral tribunal’s lack of jurisdiction, whether said to be partial or total,
necessarily comes within the scope of an “excess of powers” under Article 52 (1)(b).”5

48. Argentina further submits that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in
transforming the “fair and equitable” and “umbrella” clauses of the BIT into strict
liability provisions. According to Argentina, it did so also “by failing to give effect to
Treaty Article XI’.'© Moreover Argentina contends that the Tribunal manifestly

exceeded its powers in rejecting Argentina’s defense of necessity under customary

MTD vy. Chile, para. 54.
Argentina’s Annulment Memorial, p. 25.
i" Ibid., p. 34.

Kléckner, para. 4.

Argentina’s Annulment Memorial, p. 52.

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

international law.'’ More generally it submits that the Tribunal failed to apply the

governing law. 1s

49. It is well established that the ground of manifest excess of powers is not limited to
jurisdictional error. A complete failure to apply the law to which a Tribunal is directed

by Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention can also constitute a manifest excess of powers

50. However ad hoc Committees have sought to distinguish between failure to apply
the law and error in its application. For instance the Committee in the MINE case stated
that:

“TA] tribunal’s disregard of the agreed rules of law would constitute a derogation from
the terms of reference within which the tribunal has been authorized to function.
Examples of such a derogation include the application of rules of law other that the ones
agreed by the parties, or a decision not based on any law unless the parties had agreed on
a decision ex aequo et bono. If the derogation is manifest, it entails a manifest excess of
power.

Disregard of the applicable rules of law must be distinguished from erroneous application

of those rules which, even if manifestly unwarranted, furnishes no ground for
annulment.”!

51. As the Committee in MTD v. Chile (Annulment) said:

“An award will not escape annulment if the tribunal, while purporting to apply the
relevant law actually applies another, quite different law. But in such a case the error
must be ‘manifest’, not arguable, and a misapprehension (still less mere disagreement) as
to the content of a particular rule is not enough.”

52. When considering the submissions of Argentina concerning the Tribunal’s
findings under Articles II(2)(a), II(2)(c) and XI of the BIT and under customary

international law, the Committee will keep those distinctions in mind.

 

. 170-180.
8 . 181-205.
8 MINE, paras. 5.03-5.04.
0 MTD Chile, para. 47.

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

(b) Failure to state reasons

53. Argentina submits that the Tribunal in its decision on jurisdiction and in its
finding relating to the BIT and customary international law of necessity as well as in its
calculation of damages, failed to state the reasons on which the award is based, contrary

to Article 52 (e) of the ICSID Convention.”!

54. Committees have frequently applied this provision. The Committee in the Vivendi

case stated in this respect:

“[I]t is well accepted both in the cases and the literature that Article 52(1)(e) concerns a
failure to state any reasons with respect to all or part of an award, not the failure to state
correct or convincing reasons. Provided that the reasons given by a tribunal can be
followed and relate to the issues that were before the tribunal, their correctness is beside
the point in terms of Article 52(1)(e). Moreover, reasons may be stated succinctly or at
length, and different legal traditions differ in their modes of expressing reasons.
Tribunals must be allowed a degree of discretion as to the way in which they express
their reasoning.

 

In the Committee’s view, annulment under Article (52)(1)(e) should only occur in a clear
case. This entails two conditions: first, the failure to state reasons must leave the decision
on a particular point essentially lacking in any expressed rationale; and second, that point
must itself be necessary to the tribunal’s decision. It is frequently said that contradictory
reasons cancel each other out, and indeed, if reasons are genuinely contradictory so they
might. However, tribunals must often struggle to balance conflicting considerations, and
an ad hoc committee should be careful not to discern contradiction when what is actually
expressed in a tribunal’s reasons could more truly be said to be but a reflection of such
conflicting considerations.”

55. Committees in other annulment cases have expressed similar views. Thus the

Committee in the MINE case stated that:

“[T]he requirement to state reasons is satisfied as long as the award enables one to follow
how the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to point B. and eventually to its conclusion,
even if it made an error of fact or of law. The minimum requirement is in particular not
satisfied by either contradictory or frivolous reasons.””>

“[T]he requirement that an award has to be motivated implies that it must enable the
reader to follow the reasoning of the Tribunal on points of fact and law. It implies that,

at Argentina’s Annulment Memorial, paras. 166-171, 206-223.
2 Vivendi, paras. 64-65.
2

2 MINE, para. 5.09.

 

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

and only that. The adequacy of the reasoning is not an appropriate standard of review
under paragraph 1(e).. vd

56. In Wena Hotels, the Committee added:

“Neither Article 48(3) nor Article 52(1)(e) specify the manner in which the Tribunal’s
reasons are to be stated. The object of both provisions is to ensure that the Parties will be
able to understand the Tribunal’s reasoning. This goal does not require that each reason
be stated expressly. The tribunal’s reasons may be implicit in the considerations and
conclusions contained in the award, provided they can be reasonably inferred from the
terms used in the decision.”*>

“Tt is in the nature of this ground of annulment that in case the award suffers from a lack
of reasons which can be challenged within the meaning and scope of Article 52(1)(e), the
remedy need not be the annulment of the award. The purpose of this particular ground
for annulment is not to have the award reversed on its merits. It is to allow the parties to
understand the Tribunal’s decision. If the award does not meet the minimal requirement
as to the reasons given by the Tribunal, it does not necessarily need to be resubmitted to a
new Tribunal. If the ad hoc committee so concludes, on the basis of the knowledge it has
received upon the dispute, the reasons supporting the Tribunal’s conclusions can be
explained by the ad hoc Committee itself”°°

57. The Committee agrees, and will consider Argentina’s submission based on Article

52(1)(e) on this basis.

D. CMS’s Jus Standi

(a) The Award

58. The Tribunal analyzed the objections by Argentina to CMS’s jus standi in
observing in its decision on jurisdiction that those objections raised two issues: “First ...
whether a shareholder can claim for its rights in a foreign company independently from
the latter’s rights and, if so, whether these rights refer only to its status as shareholder or
also to substantive rights connected with the legal and economic performance of its

investment. Second ... whether the Claimant satisfies the jurisdictional requirements of

ad Tbid., para. 5.08.
35 Wena Hotels, para. 81.
26 Ibid., para. 83.

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

the Convention and the BIT”,?’ particularly whether the alleged dispute “arises directly

from the investment”.”*

59. The Tribunal examined the first question under Argentine legislation, general
international law, the ICSID Convention and the Argentina-United States BIT” It
concluded that Argentine legislation was not relevant in this respect.” Tt found “no bar in
current international law to the concept of allowing claims by shareholders independently
from those of the corporation concerned.”*! It arrived at the same conclusion with
respect to the ICSID Convention.” Finally it decided that CMS had a “direct right of

action” as shareholder under the BIT.**

60. Passing to the second point, the Tribunal reaffirmed that “the rights of the
Claimant can be asserted independently from the rights of TGN and those relating to the
License...” It added that “the Claimant has a separate cause of action under the Treaty

35

in connection with the protected investment... It concluded that the dispute arose

directly from the investment.*°
6l. On both grounds the Tribunal decided that CMS had jus standi.
(b) The Parties’ submissions

62. Argentina submits that “the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction over the case because
CMS was claiming compensation for alleged breaches of rights belonging not to it, but to

TGN.”*’ In its view “the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by exercising

jurisdiction over claims by a company’s shareholder for income lost by the company.”**

dictional Decision, 502 (para. 41).

id., 502-508 (paras. 42-65).
id., 502 (para. 42).
id., 504 (para. 48).
id., 506 (para. 56).
id., 508 (para. 65).
id., 508 (para. 68).

 

Argentina’s Annulment Memorial, para. 68.
Ibid., 25.

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

63. In this respect Argentina first contends that the Tribunal “erroneously affirmed the

Tt notes that the

non-applicability of Argentine law in the jurisdictional phase.
Tribunal “nevertheless went on to refer to that law in its process of decision.””” It adds
that in doing so, the Tribunal failed to apply the relevant provisions of Argentine law

which specify the rights of shareholders.*!

64. Criticizing the conclusions of the Tribunal under general international law,
Argentina submits that

“in its process of decision, the Tribunal was trying to determine whether shareholders
have a direct right of action, when it should have considered (and never did) whether
CMS was invoking it own rights in the proceedings. In order to determine the latter, it is
obviously material whether the investor is a party to a concession agreement or a license
agreement with the host State. The Tribunal had limited jurisdiction over that part of the
investment dispute that concerned CMS’ rights as shareholder; it did not have jurisdiction

over any part of any investment dispute concerning the rights of the party to the
concession agreement or License.”

65. Passing to the issue of jus standi under the ICSID Convention, Argentine
underlines that, before the Tribunal, “CMS was concerned not with its rights as
shareholder, but with the alleged ‘dismantling’ of a tariff regime that granted rights to
TGN, not to CMS." According to Argentina, this was an “indirect claim” which clearly
falls outside ICSID’s jurisdiction as attested by the travaux préparatoires and by Article

25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.“

66. Argentina concludes that the Tribunal did not have the power to go beyond the
“outer limits” of ICSID’s jurisdiction set out in Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, even

if the 1991 BIT authorized it to do so (which Argentina does not accept)."° “Tf the

 

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

Tribunal had followed the applicable rules of treaty interpretation, as reflected in the

1969 VCLT, it would have avoided the manifest excess into which it fell"

67. CMS submits that, “[a]s the Tribunal correctly determined, national law is not
‘determinant’ in establishing the jus standi of CMS in the present case.”*” It adds that the
Tribunal’s holding with respect to Argentine law is obiter dicta. It affirms that “no part
of CMS’s dispute concerned TGN’s contract rights as such. Conversely, all aspects of
the dispute concerned CMS’s own rights as a protected investor” under the BIT and “as a

betrayed investor in Argentina’s gas privatization.”**

It states that “investment treaty
case law overwhelmingly recognizes the right of action of shareholders to complain of
acts prejudicial to their shareholding that may be directed at the company in which the
shares are held.’””? It adds that article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention has “no impact
upon the autonomous right of a shareholder in a company incorporated in the host State
to pursue its own BIT claim independently from the local company.”*? Thus the Tribunal
correctly analyzed the claim and rightly decided that it had jurisdiction on all aspects of

the dispute.
(c) The Committee’s view

68. The Committee first recalls that the jurisdiction of the Centre is determined not by
Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention but by Article 25. The competence of the
Tribunal is governed by the terms of the instruments expressing the parties’ consent to
ICSID arbitration, i.e. in the present case the Argentina-United States BIT. In
consequence, as the Tribunal correctly decided, “the applicable jurisdictional provisions
are only those of the Convention and the BIT, not those which might arise from national

legislation.”*! Argentine law is irrelevant in this respect, as recognized in the Award and

46

 

Argentina’s Annulment Memorial, para. 92, citing Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 23
May 1969, 1155 UNTS 331.
“7 CMS’ Annulment Counter-Memorial, para. 25.

48 Ibid., para 31.
° CMS’ Annulment Rejoinder, para. 21.
50 Tbid., para. 28.

3 Jurisdictional Decision, 502 (para. 42).

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

in many other ICSID decisions.” The observations which were made in passing by the

Tribunal on the piercing of the corporate veil in Argentine law” are thus obiter dicta.

69. With respect to general international law, the Committee notes that the parties
advanced different interpretations of the judgments rendered by the International Court of
Justice in the Barcelona Traction case™ and the ELSI case.*> Those cases were
concerned with diplomatic protection under customary international law and not with the
protection of the rights of investors under treaties relating to the protection of
investments.*° As specified by the Tribunal, those judgments are not “directly relevant to
the present dispute”.” Moreover, as noted in the Jurisdictional Decision of 17 July 2003,
nothing in general international law prohibits the conclusion of treaties allowing “claims
by shareholders independently from those of the corporation concerned... even if those

958

shareholders are minority or non-controlling shareholders. Such treaties and in

particular the ICSID Convention must be applied as lex specialis.°

70. Under Article 25(1) of that Convention:

 

“The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly out of an
investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent subdivision or agency of a
Contracting State designated to the Centre by that State) and a national of another
Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the
Centre.”

71. Article 25 of the ICSID Convention did not attempt to define “investment.”

Instead this task was left largely to the terms of bilateral investment treaties or other

2 See e.g. Azurix Corporation v. Argentine Republic (2003) 43 ILM 262, 276 (para. 72) (“Azurix”);

Siemens AG v. Argentine Republic (2004) 44 ILM 138, 161-162 (para. 141); Continental Casualty
Company v. Argentine Republic, Decision on Jurisdiction, 22 February 2006, para. 82 (“Continental
Casualty”).
8 Jurisdictional Decision, 502 (para. 42).
Case concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited (Belgium v. Spain),
ICJ Reports 1970, p. 3.

3 Case concerning Elettronica Sicula S.p.a. (United States of America v. Italy), ICJ Reports 1989, p.

4

15.
56 This distinction was clearly recognised by the International Court in Case concerning Ahmadou
Sadio Diallo (Republic of Guinea v. Democratic Republic of the Congo) (Preliminary Objections),
Judgment of 24 May 2007, paras. 87-88.

a Jurisdictional Decision, 503 (para. 44).

38 Tbid., 504 (para. 48).

* Ibid.

(ii)

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

instruments on which jurisdiction is based. In the present case, this definition is provided
for by Article I(1) of the Argentina-United States BIT which states:
“(a) “investment” means every kind of investment in the territory of one Party owned or

controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or companies of the other Party, such as
equity, debt, and service and investment contracts; and includes without limitation:

A company or shares of stocks or other interests in a company or interests in the assets
thereof.”

72. The Committee notes that this definition of “investment” is very broad, as already
observed by various ICSID Tribunals in comparable cases. Such a definition remains

however compatible with the object and purpose of the ICSID Convention.

73. The Committee observes in particular that, as regard shareholder equity, the BIT
contains nothing which indicates that the investor in capital stock has to have a majority
of the stock or control over the administration of the company. Investments made by
minority shareholders are covered by the actual language of the definition, as also

recognized by ICSID arbitral tribunals in comparable cases.°!

74. One must add that whether the locally incorporated company may itself claim for
the violation of its rights under contracts, licenses or other instruments, in particular
under Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, does not affect the right of action of
foreign shareholders under the BIT in order to protect their own interests in a qualifying

investment, as recognized again in many ICSID awards.”

75. Thus in the present case, and as decided by the Tribunal, CMS must be considered
an investor within the meaning of the BIT. It made a capital investment in TGN covered

by the BIT. It asserted causes of action under the BIT in connection with that protected

oo See e.g. AES Corporation v. Republic of Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, 26 April 2005, para.

88; Azurix, para. 73; Enron Corporation v. Republic of Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, para. 44
(“Enron”); Sempra Energy International v. Republic of Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, 11 May 2005,
para. 93 (“Sempra Energy”).

o See e.g. Camuzzi International S.A. v. Republic of Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction, 11 May
2005, para. 81; Enron, para. 44; LG&E v. Republic of Argentina, Decision on Liability, 3 October 2006,
para. 78; Sempra Energy, para. 93.

o See e.g. Continental Casualty, para. 86; Enron, para. 49.

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

investment. Its claims for violation of its rights under the BIT were accordingly within
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. This is without prejudice to the determination of the

extent of those rights, a question to which the Committee will return.

76. For these reasons, the Committee concludes that there is no manifest excess of

powers in this respect.
E. Fair and Equitable Treatment
(a) The Award

77. CMS asserted before the Tribunal that Argentina had breached the provisions of
Article II(2)(a) of the BIT according fair and equitable treatment to investments covered
by the Treaty. The Tribunal stated that ‘“‘a stable legal and business environment is an

essential element of fair and equitable treatment”®

and observed that “[t]he measures that
are complained of did in fact entirely transform and alter the legal and business
environment under which the investment was decided and made.” It concluded that
those measures “resulted in the objective breach of the standard laid down in Article

II(2)(a) of the Treaty.”*
(b) The Parties’ submissions

78. Argentina first submits that the Tribunal failed to determine the scope of
international and domestic law as it applied to the dispute. It disregarded the Argentine
law theory of “imprévision” and the Argentine doctrine of “contract revision”.©° Instead,
it relied on a single French judgment, the decision of the Conseil d’Etat in Gaz de

Bordeaux. It thus failed to carry out any proper analysis of the situation in Argentine

 
  

law.

6 Award, para. 274.

oF Ibid., para. 275.

6s Ibid., para. 281.

66 Argentina’s Annulment Memorial, paras. 189-200.

o Conseil d’Etat, Compagnie Générale d’Eclairage de Bordeaux, Rec. 125,30 March 1916.

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

79. Argentina adds that “the Tribunal failed to interpret the 1991 Treaty and
proceeded to give an award based on an unreasoned and unexplained assumption that

investors have an enforceable legitimate expectation of total stability in the economy of

1968

the host State, irrespective of the circumstances. It “took no account of Argentina’s

269

 

legitimate right to regulate by way of general measures adopted in the public interes
It did not “evaluate the propriety of the challenged measures in the light of the dire
emergency facing Argentina...””° It held, “essentially, that investors have an enforceable
legitimate expectation of total stability in the economy of the host State irrespective of
the circumstances.””! It applied Article II(2)(a) in a mechanical manner and transformed
that Article into a strict liability clause.” It did not give reasons for such a decision and it

also manifestly exceeded its powers.

80. CMS contends that the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers in holding
that Argentina had violated Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty. It submits that ““Argentina’s
challenge is nothing more than a repeat of its defense at first instance and an appeal of the

Tribunal’s finding on the merits.” It submits that the Award applied Argentine law as

appropriate. In its application of the BIT, the Tribunal did not ignore the “context” and
did not “apply the fair and equitable treatment standard in a vacuum”.”? “Far from
equating fair and equitable treatment with strict liability, the Tribunal recognized that a
‘rebalancing’ between Argentina and CMS was required due to the changing economic
circumstances and that no such rebalancing had taken place — to the detriment of cms.”

CMS adds that the Tribunal provided adequate reasons for its holding on this point.
(c) The Committee’s view

81. Article II(2)(a) of the BIT provides: “Investment shall at all times be accorded fair
and equitable treatment, shall enjoy full protection and security and shall in no case be

accorded treatment less than that required by international law.”

Annulment Reply, para. 43.
44.

Annulment Memorial, para. 117.

 

CMS’ Annulment Counter-Memorial, para. 52.

20

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

82. The Tribunal observed that this Treaty “like most bilateral investment treaties,
does not define the standard of fair and equitable treatment...””° In the light of the
Preamble to the Treaty, the Tribunal stated that “‘a stable legal and business environment
is an essential element of fair and equitable treatment.””° It added that this standard “is

inseparable from stability and predictability”.””

According to the Tribunal, the legal
framework existing at the time of the investment does not need to be frozen, “as it can
always evolve and be adapted to changing circumstances”, but it cannot be “dispensed

with altogether when specific commitments to the contrary have been made”. 78

83. Passing to the dispute, the Tribunal referred to its previous findings about the
tariff regime. It analyzed the general principles of Argentine law applicable in this
respect, mentioning the Gaz de Bordeaux decision as a landmark decision which was at
the origin of the theory of “imprévision””? It added however that it did not need to look
into general principles of law to find an answer as to how the contract in this case could
have been adjusted to new economic realities. It observed that the pertinent
mechanisms were embodied in the Law and the License itself and that those mechanisms

had not been used.

84. The Tribunal concluded that “[t]he measures that are complained of did in fact
entirely transform and alter the legal and business environment under which the

investment was decided and made.”*!

It added that “the guarantees given in this
connection under the legal framework and its various components were crucial for the

investment decision.” It concluded that Article II(2)(a) of the BIT had been breached.

85. In the Committee’s view, this part of the Award is adequately founded on the

applicable law and the relevant facts. The Tribunal proceeded to a detailed analysis of

 

 

st Tbid., para. 275.

21

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

the rights of the Claimant,® of the “reality of the Argentine economy” at the time of the
crisis, of the measures then taken and of their consequences,** before concluding that the
fair and equitable standard had been violated.*° Contrary to what Argentina contends, the
Tribunal evaluated the legality of the challenged measures in the light of all the
circumstances of the case and did not transform Article II(2)(a) into a strict liability
clause. The Committee has no jurisdiction to control the interpretation thus given by the
Tribunal to that Article,°® still less to reconsider its evaluation of the facts. It is sufficient

for the Committee to hold that the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers.
F. The Umbrella Clause
(a) The Award

86. The Tribunal first recalled that according to CMS, the BIT had been breached by
Argentina under Article II(2)(c) of the Treaty, which provides that each party “shall
observe any obligation it may have entered into with regard to investments” (the so called
“umbrella clause”).'’ The Tribunal stated that it “will not discuss the jurisdictional
aspects involved in the Respondent’s argument, as these were dealt with in the decision
on jurisdiction.”** It went on to decide that “the obligation under the umbrella clause of
Article II(2)(c) of the Treaty had not been observed by the Respondent to the extent that
legal and contractual obligations pertinent to the investment have been breached and have

resulted in the violation of the standards of protection under the Treaty.”*°

(b) The Parties’ submissions

87. Argentina submits that neither the Republic of Argentina, nor any of its

instrumentalities, assumed any obligation to CMS, apart from the provisions of the 1991

8 Ibid., paras. 127-151.
st Ibid., paras. 53-67, 152-166.
85 Ibid., p 1.

 

The Committee would only note that the fair and equitable standard has been invoked in a great
number of cases brought to ICSID arbitration and that there is some variation in the practice of arbitral
tribunals in this respect. See Christoph Schreuer, “Fair and Equitable Treatment in Arbitral Practice”
(2005) 6 Journal of World Investment and Trade 357.

a Award, para. 296.

88 Tbid., para. 299.

 

22

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

Treaty itself.°° Therefore CMS could invoke no obligation under Article II(2)(c) of the
Treaty. It stresses that nonetheless the Tribunal authorized CMS to claim for a breach of
obligations under the umbrella clause in a manifest excess of powers and without giving

o1
any reason.

88. CMS submits that it did not claim for breach of TGN’s tariffs rights as such, but
for breach of the assurances given it as regards the tariff regime resulting from “the legal
instruments relating to the gas privatization, including the License” issued to TGN.”
Those assurances “constituted undertakings that Argentina was bound to observe under
the Umbrella Clause.””* In the light of findings made in other parts of the award, the
Tribunal rightly decided that Argentina did not observe its obligations under that Article.

There is no manifest excess of powers and no lack of reasoning.”
(c) The Committee’s view

89. Article II(2)(c) of the BIT provides that “Each Party shall observe any obligation
it may have entered into with regard to investments.” It is accepted that by “obligations”
is meant legal obligations. Although legitimate expectations might arise by reason of a
course of dealing between the investor and the host State, these are not, as such, legal
obligations, though they may be relevant to the application of the fair and equitable

treatment clause contained in the BIT.”

90. CMS stated categorically before the Committee that its claim was not predicated
on any Argentine law right of CMS to compliance with the terms of the License.”
Moreover, this is in conformity with what the Committee understands to be Argentine
law. Under that law, the obligations of Argentina under the License are obligations to

TGN, not to CMS, and CMS has no right to enforce them.

 

a. 303.
Annulment Memorial, para. 96.

 

 

 
  

. 97.
2 CMS’ Annulment Rejoinder, para. 32.
% Tbid., para. 32.

o Ibid., paras. 34-36.

See MTD v. Chile, paras. 67-69.
See Hearing on annulment proceedings, 27 March 2007, 206-209, 242-244; also CMS’ Annulment
Rejoinder, para. 15.

23

on Co. v. Argentina
‘ase No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

  

91. During the hearings, CMS referred to the possibility that an investor might
acquire an international law right to compliance with undertakings with regard to
investments. But it finally accepted that this was not the basis of its claim before the

Tribunal or of the Tribunal’s own reasoning.”

92. In the end, CMS relied on a literal interpretation of Article II(2)(c). It contended
that Argentina entered into legal obligations under the License, which were obligations
“with regard to investments” under that Article. Although CMS was not entitled as a
minority shareholder to invoke those obligations of Argentina under Argentine law (not
being the obligee), the effect of Article II(2)(c) was to give it standing to invoke them

under the BIT.

93. In paragraph 303 of the Award, the Tribunal concluded that “the obligation under
the umbrella clause of Article II(2)(c) of the Treaty has not been observed by the
Respondent to the extent that legal and contractual obligations pertinent to the investment
have been breached and have resulted in the violation of the standards of protection under

the Treaty.”

94. It is implicit in this reasoning that the Tribunal may have accepted the
interpretation of Article II(2)(c) referred to in paragraph 92 above. But the Tribunal
nowhere addressed this point expressly. Instead it repeatedly referred back to the
Decision on Jurisdiction of 17 July 2003, where this specific matter was not dealt with at
all.® Further, the Tribunal’s extended discussion of whether CMS had a right to
compliance with the terms of the License and of the Argentine Gas Law” would have
been unnecessary if the basis of its decision was that Article II(2)(c) gave CMS standing

to invoke obligations owned to TGN.

95. Moreover there are major difficulties with this broad interpretation of Article
TI(2)(c).

ad Hearing on annulment proceedings, 27 March 2007, 246; 28 March 2007, 514.

“8 See Award, paras. 132, 148, 299, and cf. Jurisdictional Decision, para. 65.

 

Award, paras. 127-151.

24

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

on Co. v. Argentina
‘ase No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

  

In speaking of “any obligations it may have entered into with regard to investments”, it
seems clear that Article II(2)(c) is concerned with consensual obligations arising
independently of the BIT itself (i.e. under the law of the host State or possibly under
international law). Further they must be specific obligations concerning the investment.
They do not cover general requirements imposed by the law of the host State.

Consensual obligations are not entered into erga omnes but with regard to particular
persons. Similarly the performance of such obligations or requirements occurs with
regard to, and as between, obligor and obligee.

The effect of the umbrella clause is not to transform the obligation which is relied on into
something else; the content of the obligation is unaffected, as is its proper law. If this is
so, it would appear that the parties to the obligation (i.e., the persons bound by it and
entitled to rely on it) are likewise not changed by reason of the umbrella clause.

The obligation of the State covered by Article II(2)(c) will often be a bilateral obligation,
or will be intrinsically linked to obligations of the investment company. Yet a
shareholder, though apparently entitled to enforce the company’s rights in its own
interest, will not be bound by the company’s obligations, e.g. as to dispute settlement.

If the Tribunal’s implicit interpretation is right, then the mechanism in Article 25(2)(b) of
the ICSID Convention in unnecessary wherever there is an umbrella clause.

There is no discussion in the award of the travaux of the BIT on this point, or of the prior

understandings of the proponents of the umbrella clause as to its function.

96. In the end it is quite unclear how the Tribunal arrived at its conclusion that CMS
could enforce the obligations of Argentina to TGN. It could have done so by the above
interpretation of Article II(2)(c), but in that case one would have expected a discussion of
the issues of interpretation referred to above. Or it could have decided that CMS had an
Argentine law right to compliance with the obligations, yet CMS claims no such right;

and Argentine law appears not to recognize it.

97. In these circumstances there is a significant lacuna in the Award, which makes it
impossible for the reader to follow the reasoning on this point. It is not the case that
100

See above, paragraph 90.

25

on Co. v. Argentina
‘ase No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

  

answers to the question raised “can be reasonably inferred from the terms used in the
decision”;!"' they cannot. Accordingly, the Tribunal’s finding on Article II(2)(c) must be

annulled for failure to state reasons.

98. In these circumstances it is not necessary for the Committee to decide whether it
would have been a manifest excess of powers for the Tribunal to decide that Article

II(2)(c) allows CMS to enforce the Argentine law rights of TGN.

99. Although the Tribunal’s finding of liability must be annulled, it does not follow
that the Award as a whole is affected. As the Vivendi Annulment Committee found,!°
severable parts of an award which are not themselves annulled will stand, a situation

expressly contemplated in Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention.

100. In the present case the Tribunal’s award of damages was made on the basis of
independent findings of breach of Article II(2)(a) and (c) of the BIT. Indeed the Tribunal
itself noted that “the umbrella clauses invoked by the Claimant do not add anything
different to the overall Treaty obligations which the Respondent must meet if the plea of
necessity fails.”'°> Thus the Committee’s finding on the umbrella clause does not entail
the annulment of the Award as a whole. It entails only annulment of the provisions of
paragraph 1 of the operative part of the Award under which the Tribunal decided that
“Tt]he Respondent breached its obligations... to observe the obligations entered into with

regard to the investment guaranteed in Article II(2)(c) of the Treaty.”

G. State of Necessity under Customary International Law and Article XI of the
BIT

(a) The Award

101. The Tribunal recorded that “Argentina has contended in the alternative that in the
event the Tribunal should come to the conclusion that there was a breach of the Treaty

the Respondent should be exempted from liability in light of the existence of a state of

ior Wena Hotels, para. 81.

if Vivendi, para. 68.
103 Award, para. 378.

102

 

26

(a)

(b)

(b)

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

necessity or state of emergency.”!™% Argentina invoked the existence of such a state under
both customary international law and Article XI of the BIT. The Tribunal noted that in

+105

doing so, Argentina raised “one fundamental issue’ which it examined under

customary international law before doing so under the BIT.

102. The Tribunal considered that Article 25 of the Articles of the International Law

Commission (ILC) on State Responsibility'”°

‘adequately reflects the state of customary
international law on the question of necessity.” Under that article:

“T. Necessity may not be invoked by a State as a ground for precluding the
wrongfulness of an act not in conformity with an international obligation of that State
unless the act:

is the only way for the State to safeguard an essential interest against a grave and
imminent peril; and

does not seriously impair an essential interest of the State or States towards which the
obligation exists, or of the international community as a whole.

2. In any case, necessity may not be invoked by a State as a ground for precluding
wrongfulness if:

the international obligation in question excludes the possibility of invoking necessity; or

the State has contributed to the situation of necessity.”

103. The Tribunal then undertook the task of finding whether the Argentine crisis met
the various requirements of Article 25. It expressed doubts as to whether “an essential
interest” of the State was involved in the matter and whether there was in this case a
“grave and imminent peril”.'° It added that the measures taken by Argentina “were not
the only steps available” to safeguard its interest and concluded that the conditions set out

under paragraph 1(a) of Article 25 were not met!

 

Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, annexed to UNGA
December 2001.

 

27

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

104. By contrast the Tribunal decided that neither an essential interest of the United
States! nor an essential interest of the international community as a whole!!! had been
seriously impaired by the measures taken by Argentina. Accordingly it stated that the
plea of necessity would not be precluded by paragraph 1(b) of Article 25.1?
105. Passing to paragraph 2 of that Article, the Tribunal examined whether the object
and purpose of the BIT excluded necessity. It arrived to the conclusion that “the

Argentine crisis was severe but did not result in total economic and social collapse”!3

and that in such a situation the “Treaty will prevail over any plea of necessity.” 4

106. The Tribunal further observed that Argentina’s “government policies and their

sl 15

shortcomings significantly contributed to the crisis and that consequently state of

necessity was precluded by paragraph 2(b) of Article 25.

107. Finally the Tribunal observed that all the conditions governing necessity under
Article 25 must be cumulatively satisfied.''® It concluded that “the requirements of
necessity under customary international law have not been fully met so as to preclude the

wrongfulness of the acts.”!!7

108. Then the Tribunal noted that “[t]he discussion on necessity and emergency is not
confined to customary international law as there are also specific provisions of the Treaty
dealing with this matter.”!'* In this respect it first recalled that Article XI of the BIT
provides:

“This treaty shall not preclude the application by either Party of measures necessary for
the maintenance of public order, the fulfillment of its obligations with respect to the

maintenance or restoration of international peace or security, or the protection of its own
essential security interests.”

110

 

358.
. 325, 358.

  

m1
112
113
114
115
116
7

8 Tbid., para. 332.

28

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

109. In this respect the Tribunal first determined that “there is nothing in the context of
customary international law or the object and purpose of the Treaty that could on its own
exclude major economic crises from the scope of Article XI”! It added that “Ta]gain,
the issue is then to establish how grave an economic crisis must be so as to qualify as an

essential security interest, a matter discussed above.”!2°

110. Then the Tribunal, in the light of a lengthy discussion of the question by the
Parties and their experts, expressed the view that “the clause of Article XI of the Treaty is

not a self-judging clause”.'7! Accordingly it decided that the judicial review it had to

perform under that clause was a “substantive review”!

(b) Argentina’s submissions

111. Argentina recalls that before the Tribunal it relied both on Article XI of the BIT
and on the doctrine of necessity reflected in Article 25 of the ILC’s Articles on State
Responsibility. It adds “[iJt is self-evident that these arguments are related but juridically
distinct.”'?> It stresses that “the Tribunal has conflated the Article XI argument and the
necessity argument and failed to distinguish between treaty and customary claims.”!*4
By treating these arguments as identical, the Tribunal “has fallen into fundamental
error.” It incorporated “into the interpretation and application of Article XI the
approach imposed by the law of responsibility but without any explanation as to why that

7!

is the proper approac! In doing so it entirely failed to carry out the task of

interpreting Article XI and ignored the language of that Article.

112. Argentina further contends that the Tribunal wrongly decided that Article XI is
not “self-judging” and that it must proceed to a substantive review of the measures taken.

It adds that having determined that Article XI required such a review, the Tribunal failed

   

  

126.
127.
. 131.

29

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

to carry it out, or at least to carry out the good faith review proposed by Argentina.'?”
Nowhere in the Award did the Tribunal carry out any “analysis of whether the measures
in question had been ... necessary to maintain public security and its essential security

: : . aq 7712
interests in the circumstances that prevailed. 128

113. Argentina adds that the Tribunal also failed to state reasons for its rejection of
Argentina’s defense of necessity under customary international law and that again on that
point it manifestly exceeded its authority.'? In this regard, it recalls that “[t]he Tribunal
rejected Argentina’s alternative defense of necessity under customary international law
on the basis that two of the factors set forth in Article 25 of the ILC’S Draft Articles on
State Responsibility were not satisfied: the measures were not the only steps available,
and Argentina itself contributed to the crisis.”"*°

114. According to Argentina, the Tribunal based its decision on the first point “on the
mere existence of different opinions on issues of economic policy, without considering

wl3l

whether the other alternatives were feasible. Moreover it nowhere addressed the

impact of either resorting to the adjustment mechanisms provided in the Gas Law and

: . oe 2
License, or taking no action in response to the emergency.'*”

115. Furthermore the Tribunal asserted that Argentina substantially contributed to the
crisis in two ambiguous sentences without engaging into any real analysis of the alleged

“shortcomings” in government policies.'*

(c) CMS’ submissions

116. CMS submits that, contrary to what Argentina contends, the Tribunal did not
manifestly exceed its powers and that there was no failure to state reasons. It stresses that

“Tt]o the extent there is any conflating of matters in connection with Article XI and

    

ar Ibid., paras. 136-144.

128 Tbid., para. 155.

129 Ibid., para. 180.

130 Ibid., para. 170.

1st Ibid., para. 175 (emphasis in original).
132 Ibid., para. 176.

. 178.

30

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

necessity under customary international law, it is Argentina and not the Tribunal that is at

134

fault’ According to CMS the Tribunal considered both defenses step by step,

separately, in the order in which Argentina pleaded them.'*

117. CMS moreover contends that the Tribunal correctly rejected Argentina’s defense
on necessity under customary international law in stating that Argentina’s measures were

8° Tt adds

 

not the only steps available to it and that Argentina contributed to the cri
that the Committee has no authority under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention to

reconsider the Tribunal’s findings of fact.'°7

118. CMS further notes that “after having already rejected Argentina’s defense under
customary international law, and after having concluded that Article XI is not self-
judging, the Tribunal correctly reverted to customary international law standards as
applicable in an analysis of Article xis “[H]aving found that Argentina had failed to
satisfy the conditions for establishing that a state of necessity existed, there was no need
for the Tribunal to duplicate the same analysis in connection with its review of Article
x”? In any case a review of whether the Tribunal correctly interpreted or applied
Article XI in its determination of Argentina’s defense is beyond the scope of the
Committee’s mandate.'*° “It is sufficient to note that the Tribunal did — step by step and
methodically, whether rightly or wrongly — interpret and apply Article XI in light of

customary international law and on the basis of the parties’ submissions.”'*!

(d) The Committee’s view

119. The Committee will first deal with Argentina’s arguments relating to failure to
state reasons under Article 52(e) before examining its submissions based on manifest

excess of powers under Article 52(b).

CMS’ Annulment Counter-Memorial, para. 81.

  

135 Tbid., para. 91.

136 Ibid., paras. 115-121
17 Tbid., para. 120.

138 Tbid., para. 84.

189 Tbid., para. 82.

140 Tbid., para. 91.

31

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

(i) Failure to state reasons

120. The Committee observes that, in Section D of the Award, the Tribunal dealt with
Argentina’s defense based on state of necessity or emergency under customary

international law before examining Article XI of the BIT.

121. The Tribunal considered that Article 25 of the ILC’s Articles on State
Responsibility reflects customary international law in that field and examined one by one
the conditions enumerated in that Article. It took a decision on each of them giving
detailed reasons. It arrived to the conclusion that two of those conditions were not
fulfilled, recalled that all conditions must be cumulatively satisfied and concluded that
the requirement of necessity under customary international law had not been fully met.
In that part of the Award, the Tribunal clearly stated its reasons and the Committee has
no jurisdiction to consider whether, in doing so, the Tribunal made any error of fact or

law.

122. With respect to the defense based on Article XI of the BIT, the Tribunal examined
the Parties’ arguments and concluded first that “there is nothing in the context of
customary international law or the object and purpose of the Treaty that could on its own
exclude major economic crises from the scope of Article X1.”'” Then it addressed the
debate which the parties had chosen to engage in as to whether Article XI is self-judging.
The Tribunal concluded that under Article XI it had the authority to proceed to a
substantive review and that “it must examine whether the state of necessity or emergency
meet the conditions laid down by customary international law and the treaty provisions

and whether it thus is or is not able to preclude wrongfulness.”!"

123. The problem is, however, that the Tribunal stopped there and did not provide any
further reasoning at all in respect of its decision under Article XI. To some extent this
can be understood in the light of the arguments developed at the time both by Argentina

and CMS. Argentina, on the basis of an expert opinion of Professor Anne-Marie

e Award, para. 359.
nal Ibid., para. 374.

 

32

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

Slaughter,'“4 contended before the Tribunal that Article XI was “self-judging” and that as
a consequence the Tribunal had to limit itself to consider whether it acted in good faith in
invoking this Article. The expert appointed by CMS, Professor José E. Alvarez, in his
statement, opposed that thesis and added that Article XI “must be read in the light of ...
the well established derogation for necessity now codified in Article 25 of the ILC’s

Articles on State Responsibility.”!°

Endorsing that opinion at the hearing, CMS
submitted that “Article XI is not self-judging and... its invocation is subject to
satisfaction of the test of necessity under international law.'46 Argentina took the same
approach, conflating “state of emergency” and “state of necessity” and adding that state

of necessity is included in Article xi!”

124. Along those lines, the Tribunal evidently considered that Article XI was to be
interpreted in the light of the customary international law concerning the state of
necessity and that, if the conditions fixed under that law were not met, Argentina’s
defense under Article XI was likewise to be rejected.“ Accordingly, having considered
the arguments eventually developed by the Parties with respect to Article XI, it did not
find it necessary to revert to its previous assessment concerning the application of
customary international law and to repeat the conclusions it had arrived at during the

course of examination of Argentina’s first defense.

125. The motivation of the Award on this point is inadequate. The Tribunal should
certainly have been more explicit in specifying, for instance, that the very same reasons
which disqualified Argentina from relying on the general law of necessity!” meant that
the measures it took could not be considered “necessary” for the purpose of Article XT

either.

126. Both Parties however understood the Award in that sense and, before the

Committee, CMS noted that the Tribunal incorporated into its interpretation of Article XT

Statement by Profe
Statement by Prot
Hearing on Merits
7 Ibid., 295, 300.
See Award, paras. 308, 374.

a Ibid., 320, 323, 324, 329, 355, 356.

r Anne Marie Slaughter, Hearing on Merits, 18 August 2004, 1844-1847.
1 José E, Alvarez, 17 March 2004, para. 32.
. 9 August 2004, 110.

  

33

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

the approach it had adopted to the law of state responsibility.!° Argentina did not contest
that point and only complained that the Tribunal did not “proceed to carry out the

substantive examination” which it rightly held was required.'*!

127. In the Committee’s view, although the motivation of the Award could certainly
have been clearer, a careful reader can follow the implicit reasoning of the Tribunal as
indicated in paragraph 124 above. On this point, therefore, the submission of Argentina

cannot be upheld.
(ii) | Manifest excess of powers

128. As indicated above the Tribunal, as likewise the parties, assimilated the conditions
necessary for the implementation of Article XI of the BIT to those concerning the
existence of the state of necessity under customary international law. Moreover,

'S2 the Tribunal dealt with the defense based on

following Argentina’s presentation,
customary law before dealing with the defense drawn from Article XI. Argentina
submits before the Committee that in doing so, the Tribunal on both points manifestly

exceeded its powers.

129. The Committee observes first that there is some analogy in the language used in
Article XI of the BIT and in Article 25 of the ILC’s Articles on State Responsibility. The
first text mentions “necessary” measures and the second relates to the “state of
necessity”. However Article XI specifies the conditions under which the Treaty may be
applied, whereas Article 25 is drafted in a negative way: it excludes the application of the
state of necessity on the merits, unless certain stringent conditions are met. Moreover,
Article XI is a threshold requirement: if it applies, the substantive obligations under the
Treaty do not apply. By contrast, Article 25 is an excuse which is only relevant once it

has been decided that there has otherwise been a breach of those substantive obligations.

150 Hearing on Annulment Proceedings, 27 March 2007, 179-182.

Argentina’s Annulment Memorial, para. 131.

Argentina’s Merits Counter-Memorial, paras. 716-742; Argentina’s Merits Reply, paras. 841-996;
Hearing on Merits, 9 August 2004, 100-112, 295-296.

   

34

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

130. Furthermore Article XI and Article 25 are substantively different. The first covers
measures necessary for the maintenance of public order or the protection of each Party’s
own essential security interests, without qualifying such measures. The second
subordinates the state of necessity to four conditions. It requires for instance that the
action taken “does not seriously impair an essential interest of the State or States towards
which the obligation exists, or of the international community as a whole”, a condition
which is foreign to Article XI. In other terms the requirements under Article XI are not
the same as those under customary international law as codified by Article 25, as the

153

Parties in fact recognized during the hearing before the Committee.”°” On that point, the

Tribunal made a manifest error of law.

131. Those two texts having a different operation and content, it was necessary for the
Tribunal to take a position on their relationship and to decide whether they were both
applicable in the present case. The Tribunal did not enter into such an analysis, simply

assuming that Article XI and Article 25 are on the same footing.

132. In doing so the Tribunal made another error of law. One could wonder whether
state of necessity in customary international law goes to the issue of wrongfulness or that
of responsibility. But in any case, the excuse based on customary international law could

only be subsidiary to the exclusion based on Article XI.

133. If state of necessity means that there has not been even a prima facie breach of the
BIT, it would be, to use the terminology of the ILC, a primary rule of international law.
But this is also the case with Article XI. In other terms, and to take the words of the
International Court of Justice in a comparable case, if the Tribunal was satisfied by the
arguments based on Article XI, it should have held that there had been “no breach” of the
BIT.'™ Article XI and Article 25 thus construed would cover the same field and the
Tribunal should have applied Article XI as the /ex specialis governing the matter and not

Article 25.

153 Hearing on Annulment Proceedings, 27 March 2007, 339-340; 28 March 2007, 69-70, 177.
1st Case concerning Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), Judgment
on Merits, 6 November 2003, para 34.

35

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
Case No.ARB/O1/8)
ision on Annulment

 

De

  

134. If, on the contrary, state of necessity in customary international law goes to the
issue of responsibility, it would be a secondary rule of international law — and this was
the position taken by the ILC.'® In this case, the Tribunal would have been under an
obligation to consider first whether there had been any breach of the BIT and whether
such a breach was excluded by Article XI. Only if it concluded that there was conduct
not in conformity with the Treaty would it have had to consider whether Argentina’s

responsibility could be precluded in whole or in part under customary international law.

135. These two errors made by the Tribunal could have had a decisive impact on the
operative part of the Award. As admitted by CMS, the Tribunal gave an erroneous
interpretation to Article XI. In fact, it did not examine whether the conditions laid down
by Article XI were fulfilled and whether, as a consequence, the measures taken by
Argentina were capable of constituting, even prima facie, a breach of the BIT. If the
Committee was acting as a court of appeal, it would have to reconsider the Award on this

ground.

136. The Committee recalls, once more, that it has only a limited jurisdiction under
Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. In the circumstances, the Committee cannot simply
substitute its own view of the law and its own appreciation of the facts for those of the
Tribunal. Notwithstanding the identified errors and lacunas in the Award, it is the case in
the end that the Tribunal applied Article XI of the Treaty. Although applying it
cryptically and defectively, it applied it. There is accordingly no manifest excess of

powers.

H. Temporary Character of Necessity and Consequences for Compensation

(a) The Award

137. After having decided that the requirements of necessity under customary
international law and Article XI of the BIT had not been met and having rejected

Argentina’s defense in this respect, the Tribunal considered the consequences to be

155 See the discussion reported in ILC Ybk 1999 vol II(2), 73-74, 85; ILC, Commentary to Part 1,
Chapter V, paras. (2)-(4), (7).

36

(a)

(b)

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

drawn for those conclusions as far as compensation was concerned. It recalled that under
Article 27 of the ILC’s Articles on State Responsibility:

“The invocation of a circumstance precluding wrongfulness in accordance with this
chapter is without prejudice to:

compliance with the obligation in question, if and to the extent that the circumstance
precluding wrongfulness no longer exists;

the question of compensation for any material loss caused by the act in question.”

The Tribunal declared itself “‘satisfied that Article 27 establishes the appropriate rule of
international law on this issue.”!*° It added that “[e]ven if the plea of necessity were
accepted, compliance with the obligation would reemerge as soon as the circumstance
precluding wrongfulness no longer existed, which is the case at present.”!°7 It concluded
that “any suspension of the right to compensation is strictly temporary, and that this right

is not extinguished by the crisis events.”!°*

138. Passing to the determination of the compensation due, the Tribunal calculated it

on the basis of the damages suffered by CMS from 2000 to 2027.'°
(b) Argentina’s submissions

139. Argentina submits that Article 27 of the ILC’s Articles on State Responsibility
“does not require the payment of compensation for measures subject to the defense of
necessity.”!° According to Argentina, this text only contemplates the possibility of such
a compensation in certain cases and does not attempt to specify in which circumstances
compensation could be payable. It adds that, in the present case, the matter is governed

by Article XI of the BIT, which necessarily excludes compensation.'*!

156
157

Award, para. 390.
Award, para. 382. The Tribunal had already decided that the cris
“sometime between late 2004 and early 2005” (para. 250).

158 Award, para. 392.

Award, para. 419.

Argentina’s Annulment Memorial, para. 162.

Ibid., para. 161.

 

s period came to an end

 

159
160
161

 

 

37

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

140. Argentina moreover contests “the Tribunal’s view that the period of necessity was
temporary”! and contends that “The tribunal entirely failed to consider the possibility
that the continuing stability following the crisis depended upon the continuation of
precisely the type of measures at issue in the case before it ... Furthermore, the
Tribunal’s view that the period of necessity was temporary cannot be reconciled with its

award of damages for harm allegedly incurred during the period of necessity.”"°

141. Thus, according to Argentina, the Award must on that point be annulled for

manifest excess of power.
(c) CMS’ submissions

142. CMS submits that “Argentina’s requested review of the Tribunal’s finding as to
the temporary nature of the emergency falls outside the Committee’s mandate for several
reasons.” In fact “[t]he Tribunal’s discussion of this issue constituted obiter dicta ...
and could not be identified as a manifest excess of power.”!® Moreover “it is not open to

the Committee to second-guess the factual findings of the Tribunal.”!©

143. CMS also contends that “the Tribunal’s consideration of Argentina’s obligation to
pay compensation retroactively in the event of a state of necessity was obiter dicta, in
light of the Tribunal’s prior rejection of Argentina’s defenses based on Article XI and
customary international law.”!97 Moreover, on this point, the Award is consistent with

both Parties’ positions before the Tribunal.
(d) The Committee’s view

144. In paragraphs 379 to 394 of the Award, the Tribunal analyzed Article 27 of the
ILC’s Articles on State Responsibility concerning the temporary nature of necessity and

the conditions under which compensation might be due even if necessity is established.

 

38

on Co. v. Argentina
‘ase No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

  

145. The Committee observes that Article 27 covers cases in which the state of
necessity precludes wrongfulness under customary international law. In the present case,
the Tribunal rejected Argentina’s defense based on state of necessity. Thus Article 27
was not applicable and the paragraphs relating to that Article were obiter dicta which

could not have any bearing on the operative part of the Award.

146. However the Committee finds it necessary to observe that here again the Tribunal
made a manifest error of law. Article 27 concerns, inter alia, the consequences of the
existence of the state of necessity in customary international law, but before considering
this Article, even by way of obiter dicta, the Tribunal should have considered what would
have been the possibility of compensation under the BIT if the measures taken by
Argentina had been covered by Article XI. The answer to that question is clear enough:
Article XI, if and for so long as it applied, excluded the operation of the substantive
provisions of the BIT. That being so, there could be no possibility of compensation being

payable during that period.

147. Moreover the Committee notes that Article 27 itself is a “without prejudice”
clause, not a stipulation. It refers to “the question of compensation” and does not attempt
to specify in which circumstances compensation could be due, notwithstanding the state

of necessity. 168

148. Paragraphs 379 to 394 of the Award being obiter dicta, it remains to be seen on
which basis the Tribunal decided that compensation was due by Argentina to CMS for

the damage suffered by it from 2000 to 2027.

149. The Tribunal had already decided that Argentina had breached its international
obligations under Article II(2)(a) and Article II(2)(c) of the BIT. It also decided that in
the present case there was no state of necessity and did so in terms which, by necessary
inference, excluded also the application of Article XI. Thus, under the well-known
principle of international law recalled in Article 1 of the ILC Articles, Argentina was

responsible for the wrongful measures it had taken.

39

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

150. The Committee concludes that, whatever may have been the errors made in this
respect by the Tribunal, there is no manifest excess of powers or lack of reasoning in the
part of the Award concerning Article XI of the BIT and state of necessity under

customary international law.

I. Compensation

(a) The Award

151. The Tribunal, in the absence of an agreed form of restitution, determined in
paragraphs 409 to 469 the amount of compensation due by Argentina to CMS. For that
purpose it decided to resort to the standard of fair market value and to calculate that value
in using the discounted cash flow method. It noted that the expert chosen by CMS was
the only one who estimated the value loss suffered by CMS on its TGN’s shares. It took
that estimation as a starting point, but appointed its own experts and in the light of their
report modified on a number of points the initial estimation. After that modification, it
arrived “at a DCF loss valuation of US$133.2 million for the Claimant on August 17,
2000, representing the compensation owed in that regard by the Respondent to the
Claimant at that date”.' It decided that Argentina must pay that amount. It added that:

“Upon payment of the compensation decided in this Award, the Claimant shall transfer to
the Respondent the ownership of its shares in TGN upon payment by the Respondent of

the additional sum of US$2,148,100. The Respondent shall have up to one year after the
date this Award is dispatched to the parties to accept such transfer.”'”°

The Tribunal then fixed the interest to be paid.!7!
(b) The Parties’ submissions

152. Argentina submits that the Tribunal failed “to explain why a percentage of a value
of the company should be the basis for granting compensation to a shareholder in a case

where there has been no expropriation. The Award goes on to put this principle into

 

168 See the ILC’s commentary on Article 27, paras. (1), (6): Yearbook of the International Law

Commission 2001, vol. II(2), 209, 211.
109 Award, para. 468.
Ibid., sub-para. 3 of the dispositif.
um Ibid., paras. 470-471.

170

   

40

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

practice without any adequate explanation for the figures chosen.”!”*

Moreover,
according to Argentina, the Tribunal contradicted itself in deciding that no expropriation
had taken place and in using the standard of compensation applicable in case of
expropriation.’ It made its calculation without giving the reasons of many of its
assumptions. “[T]he Award provides no reasons for the conclusion that CMS - rather
than simply TGN — had the right to calculate tariffs in dollars, obtain PPI tariff

adjustments, and benefit from the purported stabilization clause in the License.”!™4

153. CMS, for its part, stresses that the Tribunal highlighted its reasons for adopting
the fair market value standard for a breach of Article II of the BIT and clearly explained
the methodology it used for that purpose in the light of the various experts’ reports.'7°
Moreover, no contradiction can be noted in the Award, the substance of which cannot be

reviewed by the Committee.'”°

(c) The Committee’s view

154. The Committee observes that the Award is one of the most detailed decisions on
damages in ICSID case-law. Under the title “Remedies”, the Tribunal considered the
matter in 25 pages. It declared itself “persuaded that the cumulative nature of the
breaches discussed here is best dealt with by resorting to the standard of [compensation

known as the] fair market value.”!””

It specified that “[w]Jhile this standard figures
prominently in respect of expropriation, it is not excluded that it might also be
appropriate for breaches different from expropriation if their effect results in important
long-term losses.”!”* In doing so, the Tribunal clearly explained its reasons and did not

contradict its decision dismissing CMS’s claim of expropriation.

155. The Tribunal then listed the various methods which could be retained to calculate

the fair market value and concluded for reasons given in paragraphs 411 to 417 of the

 
 

Annulment Reply, para. 99.
101.

 

114 :
” ., para. 100.

us CMS’ Annulment Counter-Memorial, paras. 170-173.
"8 Ibid., paras. 173-174.

M7 Award, para. 410.

ms Ibid.

41

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

Award that the discounted cash flow method (DCF) was the one “that should be

retained.”!”

156. Passing to the evaluation of the damages, the Tribunal carefully examined the
reports of the experts chosen by both parties, in the light of the report of its own experts.
It used the “direct equity value” method to compute the value of the firm and its
securities. '*° Starting from the assumptions which were the basis of CMS’s expert report,
it modified them on a number of points in specifying the reasons of each modification. In
particular, it examined two different DCF scenarios: one in the “no regulatory change”
context (“without pesification”) and the other for the post-measures “new regulatory

context” (“with pesification”).'*!

This last scenario was to take into account the impact
of Argentina’s crisis on TGN’s performance in the absence of the measures complained
of by CMS. Thus and contrary to what is contented by Argentina this element was taken

into consideration.

157. The Committee accordingly concludes that there was no lack of reasoning or
contradiction in the reasoning with respect both to the standard of compensation retained

by the Tribunal and to the calculation of damages made by it.
J. Conclusion

158. Throughout its consideration of the Award, the Committee has identified a series
of errors and defects. The Award contained manifest errors of law. It suffered from
lacunae and elisions. All this has been identified and underlined by the Committee.
However the Committee is conscious that it exercises its jurisdiction under a narrow and
limited mandate conferred by Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. The scope of this
mandate allows annulment as an option only when certain specific conditions exist. As
stated already (paragraph 136 above), in these circumstances the Committee cannot
simply substitute its own view of the law and its own appreciation of the facts for those

of the Tribunal.

 

42

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentina
(ICSID Case No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

159. In the event Argentina’s application for annulment must be upheld as far as the

umbrella clause is concerned. The other claims of Argentina are dismissed.

160. As a consequence the stay of enforcement maintained by the Decision of the
Committee of | September 2006 is automatically lifted as from the date of the present
Decision, in accordance with Arbitration Rule 54(3). Consequently, payment by
Argentina of the sum awarded is again obligatory: see paragraph 15 above, and this
reactivates the Award’s stipulation'*? that, on payment of the amount due plus an
additional US$2,148,100, CMS’ shares in TGN are to be transferred to Argentina.
Pursuant to Article 44 of the ICSID Convention (as applied to annulment proceedings by
Article 52(4)), the Committee decides that Argentina has 228 days from the date this
Decision is dispatched to the Parties to accept the transfer of ownership of CMS’ shares

in TGN, as provided for in sub-paragraph 3 of the dispositif to the Award.

161. The ruling on the costs of the proceedings before the Tribunal stands. It remains
to deal with the question of the costs of the annulment proceedings, as to which the
Committee has a discretion. In all but one of the concluded annulment proceedings,
Committees have held that ICSID costs should be borne equally by the Parties.'** In the

circumstances of the present case the Committee proposes to follow the existing practice.

162. The costs of the Parties’ own representation during the annulment proceedings are
likewise within the Committee’s discretion. In view of the decision of partial annulment,
and having regard to all the circumstances, the Committee decides to make no order as to

the costs of representation before it.

182 Award, sub-para. (3) of the dispositif, and see paragraph 10 above.

183 See MTD vy. Chile, para. 110 (fn 139).

43

on Co. v. Argentina
‘ase No.ARB/O1/8)
Decision on Annulment

  

K. Decision
163. For the foregoing reasons, the Committee decides:

qd) Sub-paragraph 1 of the dispositif of the Award is annulled as far as it
provided that “The Respondent breached its obligations... to observe the obligations
entered into with regard to the investment guaranteed in Article II(2)(c) of the Treaty.”

(2) The other claims of the Argentine Republic are dismissed.

(3) Argentina has 228 days after the date this Decision is dispatched to the
Parties to accept the transfer of ownership of CMS shares in TGN as provided for in sub-
paragraph 3 of the dispositif to the Award.

(4) Each Party shall bear one half of the costs incurred by the Centre in
connection with this annulment proceeding.

(5) Each Party shall bear its own costs of representation in connection with

this annulment proceeding.

[signature]
JUDGE GILBERT GUILLAUME

President of the Committee
Date: 21 August 2007

[signature] [signature]

 

JUDGE NABIL ELARABY PROFESSOR JAMES CRAWFORD
Member Member
Date: 12 July 2007 Date: 12 July 2007

