INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES (ICSID): CMS GAS
TRANSMISSION COMPANY V. THE REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA®
[July 17, 2003]
+Cite as 42 ILM 788 (2003)+

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
Washington, D.C.
In the proceeding between

CMS Gas Transmission Company
(Claimant)

and

The Republic of Argentina
(Respondent)

Case No. ARB/01/8
Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction
Members of the Tribunal
Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuiia, President
The Honorable Marc Lalonde P. C., O. C., Q. C.
H. E. Judge Francisco Rezek
Secretary of the Tribunal

Mrs. Margrete L. Stevens

Representing the Claimant Representing the Respondent

Lucy Reed Rubén Miguel Citara

Sylvia Noury Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
New York, United States Buenos Aires, Argentina

Nigel Blackaby

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer
Paris, France

Jonathan Sutcliffe

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer
London, England

Lluis Paradell

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer
Rome, Italy

Guido Santiago Tawil

M. & M. Bomcil Abogados
Buenos Aires, Argentina

This document was reproduced and reformatted from the text provided by the law firm of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer.

2003] ICSID: CMS v. ARGENTINA 789

 

Date of decision: July 17, 2003
A. Procedure

1. On July 26, 2001, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID or the Centre) received
from CMS Gas Transmission Company (CMS), an entity incorporated in the United States of America, a Request for
Arbitration against the Republic of Argentina (Argentina). The request concerns the alleged suspension by Argentina
of a tariff adjustment formula for gas transportation applicable to an enterprise in which CMS has an investment. In
its request, the Claimant invokes the provisions of the 1991 "Treaty between the United States of America and the
Argentine Republic Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investment." (The Argentina-U.S.
Bilateral Investment Treaty or BIT).!

2. On July 27, 2001, the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of
Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (Institution Rules), acknowledged receipt and transmitted a copy of the
request to Argentina and to the Argentine Embassy in Washington D.C.

3. On August 15, 2001, the Centre requested CMS to confirm that the dispute referred to in the request had not
been submitted by CMS for resolution in accordance with any applicable, previously agreed, dispute-settlement
procedure under Article VII(2)(b) of the BIT. On August 23, 2001, CMS confirmed that it had taken no such steps.

4. On August 24, 2001, the Secretary-General of the Centre registered the request pursuant to Article 36(3) of the
ICSID Convention (the Convention). On this same date, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Institution Rule 7,
notified the parties of the registration of the request and invited them to proceed to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as
soon as possible.

5. On August 30, 2001, the Centre reminded Argentina of the Claimant's proposal concerning the number of
arbitrators and the method of their appointment. Under this proposal, contained in paragraph 60 of the request for
arbitration, the Arbitral Tribunal would consist of three arbitrators, one arbitrator to be appointed by each party and
the third, who would be President of the Tribunal, to be appointed by agreement of the parties.

6. On September 13, 2001, Argentina informed the Centre of its agreement to the proposal of CMS concerning
the number of arbitrators and the method of their appointment. On the same date the Centre informed the parties that
since their agreement on the number of arbitrators and method of their appointment was equivalent to the formula set
forth in Article 37(2)(b) of the Convention, the parties were invited to follow the procedure set forth in Arbitration
Rule 3 for the appointment of arbitrators.

7. On October 24, 2001 Argentina appointed Judge Francisco Rezek, a national of Brazil, as an arbitrator. On
November 9, 2001, CMS appointed the Honorable Mare Lalonde P.C., O.C., Q.C., a national of Canada, as an
arbitrator. The parties, however, failed to agree on the appointment of the third, presiding, arbitrator. In these
circumstances, by letter of December 5, 2001, the Claimant requested that the third, presiding, arbitrator be appointed
in accordance with Article 38 of the ICSID Convention.”

8. After consultation with the parties, Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuiia, a national of Chile, was duly appointed
as President of the Arbitral Tribunal. On January 11, 2002, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of
the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (Arbitration Rules) notified the parties that all three
arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore deemed to have been constituted on
that date. On the same date, pursuant to ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulation 25, the parties were informed
that Mr. Alejandro Escobar, Senior Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal.

790 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [VOL. 42:

 

9. The first session of the Tribunal with the parties was held on February 4, 2002, at the seat of ICSID in
Washington, D.C. At the session the parties expressed their agreement that the Tribunal had been properly constituted
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules and that they did not have
any objections in this respect.

10. During the course of the first session the parties agreed on a number of procedural matters reflected in written
minutes signed by the President and the Secretary of the Tribunal. The Tribunal, after ascertaining the views of the
parties on this matter, fixed the following time limits for the written phase of the proceedings: The Claimant would
file a memorial within 120 days from the date of the first session; the Respondent would file a counter-memorial
within 120 days of its receipt of the Claimant's memorial; the Claimant would file a reply within 60 days from its
receipt of the counter-memorial; and the respondent would file its rejoinder within 60 days of its receipt of the reply.
At the first session it was further agreed that in the event of the Respondent raising objections to jurisdiction, the
following time limits would apply: the Respondent would file its reply on jurisdiction within 30 days from its receipt
of the Claimant's counter-memorial on jurisdiction; and the Claimant would file its rejoinder on jurisdiction within
30 days from its receipt of the Respondent's reply on jurisdiction.

11. On May 24, 2002, the Claimant requested an extension till July 5, 2002 of the time limited fixed for the fixing
of its memorial. On June 6, 2002, the Tribunal granted the extension thought by the Claimant. In doing so, the
Tribunal noted that Argentina would be entitled to an equivalent extension if requested, of the time limit fixed for its
counter-memorial.

12. On July 5, 2002, the Claimant filed its memorial on the merits and accompanying documentation. On
August 5, 2002, Mrs. Margrete L. Stevens replaced Mr. Alejandro Escobar as Secretary of the Tribunal. On
September 4, 2002, Argentina requested an extension till October 7, 2002, of the time limit fixed for filing of the
memorial on jurisdiction. On September 11, 2002, the Tribunal granted the extension sought by Argentina. On
October 7, 2002, Argentina filed its memorial on jurisdiction.

13. On October 24, 2002, following the Respondent's filing of objections to jurisdiction, the proceeding on the
merits was suspended in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(3).

14. On December 17, 2002, the Claimant submitted its counter-memorial on jurisdiction. On January 22, 2003, the
parties requested an extension of 30 days for each of the remaining two jurisdictional filings. On January 27, 2003,
the Tribunal granted the extensions, and fixed the time limit for the filing of the Respondents reply on jurisdiction
for February 11, 2003; and the time limit for the filing of the Claimant's rejoinder on jurisdiction for March 25, 2003.

15. OnFebruary 13, 2003, the Respondent filed its reply on jurisdiction, and on March 25, 2003, the Claimant filed
its rejoinder on jurisdiction.

16. On April 7-8, 2003, the hearing on jurisdiction was held at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C. Ms. Lucy
Reed and Messrs. Nigel Blackaby, Jonathan Sutcliffe and Guido Tawil addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the
Claimant. Mr. Ignacio Suarez Anzorena addressed the Tribunal on behalf of Argentina. The Tribunal posed questions
to the parties, as provided in Rule 32(3) of the Arbitration Rules.

17. The Tribunal has deliberated and considered thoroughly the parties' written submissions on the question of
jurisdiction and the oral arguments delivered in the course of the April 7-8, 2003 hearing. As mentioned above, the
consideration of the merits has been postponed until the issue of the Centre's jurisdiction and the Tribunal's
competence has been decided by the Tribunal. Having considered the basic facts of the dispute, the ICSID Convention
and the 1991 Argentina-U.S. BIT, as well as the written and oral arguments of the parties' representatives, the Tribunal
has reached the following decision on the question of jurisdiction.

2003] ICSID: CMS v. ARGENTINA 791

 

B. Considerations
Argentina's privatization program

18. Beginning in 1989, the Republic of Argentina undertook a broad program of privatization of State-owned
companies and other activities, while at the same time it proceeded to peg the Argentine peso to the United States
dollar and adopted other stabilization measures.’ Important aims of this program were to achieve currency stability,
eliminate inflation and attract foreign investment.

19. One major sector subject to privatization was the gas industry. The Gas Law,* the Gas Decree,° the 1992
Information Memorandum,’ the Model License* and other instruments were prepared and enacted in order to
undertake the reorganization of this important sector of the economy. Within this overall legal framework,
Transportadora de Gas del Norte (TGN), an Argentine incorporated company, obtained in 1992 a license for the
transportation of gas while blocks of State-owned shares in the company were sold to private investors. Following
another Public Offering made in 1995, CMS purchased the shares still remaining in government hands that
represented 25% of TGN, and later purchased an additional 4.42% that had been assigned to an employee share
program, thus totaling 29.42% of TGN.

20. Under the arrangements made for the privatization of this sector, tariffs were to be calculated in U.S. dollars
and expressed in pesos at the exchange rate at the time of billing, and there were also to be adjusted semi-annually
in accordance with the United States Producer Price Index ("PPI"). Following a major economic and financial crisis,
the Republic of Argentina enacted, starting late 1999, various measures which had, in the Claimant's view, an adverse
impact on its business and breached the guarantees which protected its investment in TGN. These measures later led
to the devaluation of the currency and the adoption of additional financial and administrative measures also alleged
to have an adverse impact on the investor.”

21. The Republic of Argentina does not share those views and believes the measures adopted have a meaning and
extent different from what CMS claims. Moreover, the Republic of Argentina explains that many of these measures
are transitory in nature, are currently being subject to renegotiation with investors in the privatization program and
do not entail an expropriation of the investment made. The only guarantees made to CMS by the Republic of
Argentina, it is further affirmed, were those established in the Terms of the License and these have not been breached.

Nature and limits of the jurisdictional decision

22. The dispute between the parties has been submitted to arbitration under the ICSID Convention pursuant to the
Argentina-United States Bilateral Investment Treaty.’ Although many of the views expressed by the parties concern
aspects relating to the merits of the dispute, the Tribunal has at this stage to decide only on aspects of jurisdiction. The
discussion which follows relates of course only to the issues and facts pertinent to this particular case.

Measures of public interest and industry-specific measures distinguished

23. Both in the written pleadings and in the hearing, the Republic of Argentina raised, in connection with questions
of admissibility, the concern that part of the claim by CMS is not related specifically to the gas industry but to
measures of general economic policy affecting the country as a whole. The latter measures, it is further explained,
are mainly those connected with the situation of economic, financial and social emergency which arose in late 2001
and early 2002 and which led to the adoption of changes in the exchange and monetary policy then in effect.

24. The Republic of Argentina specifically discusses in its presentations Decree 1570/01 dated December 1, 2001''
and Law 25.561 of January 6, 2002, related to the public emergency and amendment of the exchanged system.” This
legislation brought to an end the regime of convertibility and parity of the Argentine peso with the United States dollar
which had been enacted by Law 23.928 in effect since 1991.'* Most of the foreign and domestic investments in the

792 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [VOL. 42:

 

public utilities sector were made under that regime in the 1990's. The new legislation also mandated the restructuring
and renegotiation of public and private contracts made in foreign currency, extinguished the right of the licensees in
the regulated public sector to link tariffs to U.S. price indices and redenominated rates and tariffs into pesos at the
exchange rate of one peso per dollar. A process of renegotiation which is still under way followed the "pesification"
and related measures. The Claimant believes that all such measures are not separate and distinct from the original
dispute and form a single continuum. According to the Claimant, the aggregate of measures has significantly affected
the value of its investment, a view which is disputed by the Republic of Argentina.

25. Although a good part of the views of the parties relating to those earlier measures and to others which followed
has much to do with the merits of the case, the Tribunal believes that it is necessary to establish at the outset a clear
distinction between measures of a general economic nature, particularly in the context of the economic and financial
emergency discussed above, and measures specifically directed to the investment's operation.

26. The ICSID Convention and the jurisdiction of the tribunal established under it were conceived as a system of
adjudication of legal disputes arising directly out of an investment, a premise that is specifically included in
Article 25(1) of that Convention. This definition excludes quite clearly two kinds of disputes. First, it excludes non-
legal questions and, second, it excludes disputes that do not arise directly out of the investment concerned.

27. It follows that, in this context, questions of general economic policy not directly related to the investment, as
opposed to measures specifically addressed to the operations of the business concerned, will normally fall outside the
jurisdiction of the Centre. A direct relationship can, however, be established if those general measures are adopted
in violation of specific commitments given to the investor in treaties, legislation or contracts. What is brought under
the jurisdiction of the Centre is not the general measures in themselves but the extent to which they may violate those
specific commitments.

28. The question is certainly not new in international law.'* Gold standards or reference currencies embodied in
financial transactions, stabilization clauses built into contracts and, more recently, the vast network of bilateral
investment treaties are all expressions of the search for stability and legal certainty. The right of the host State to adopt
its economic policies together with the rights of investors under a system of guarantees and protection are at the very
heart of this difficult balance, a balance which the Convention was careful to preserve.

29. In an early case an ICSID tribunal held that "Bilateral Investment Treaties are not insurance policies against
bad business judgments."'> Similarly, these treaties cannot entirely isolate foreign investments from the general
economic situation of a country. They do provide for standards of fair and equitable treatment, non-discrimination,
guarantees in respect of expropriation and other matters, but they cannot prevent a country from pursuing its own
economic choices. These choices are not under the Centre's jurisdiction and ICSID tribunals cannot pass judgment
on whether such polices are right or wrong. Judgment cannot only be made in respect of whether the rights of
investors have been violated.

30. The parties in this case appear not to disagree with this reasoning. The Republic of Argentina, in arguing about
the difference between what it considers to be two separate kinds of disputes, emphasizes that general measures of
public economic emergency are not directed towards investors but affect the country and its population as a whole.
More importantly, the Claimant in justifying its claim for compensation in connection with the "pesification" has also
stated:

"It should be noted, however, that CMS's compensation is not founded on the devaluation of the peso,

but rather on the loss in value of its investment due to Argentina's dismantling of the dollar-based tariff
a wi6

regime.

31. At the oral hearing held in this case, Counsel for the Claimant, when referring to this distinction between
general and specific measures also stated that:

2003] ICSID: CMS v. ARGENTINA 793

 

"CMS assumes that such distinction could be made. (. . .) However, CMS is by no means complaining
about general economic measures, but about specific measures of Argentine federal authorities that
breached the commitments made towards CMS under the Treaty and international law.""”

32. The Claimant has also explained that it is not currently pursuing an earlier claim against Argentina related to
restrictions on the transfer of funds introduced by Decree 1570/01 '* because such restrictions "have not had a material
impact on CMS or its investments to date,""° and has reserved the right to pursue that claim if damages are caused
in the future in violation of Article V of the BIT. In the statements and decisions noted the Claimant separates the
general measures of economic policy, with specific reference to devaluation, from the material impact they might have
had on its investment in light of the treaty, legislation and contracts.

33. On the basis of the above considerations the Tribunal concludes on this point that it does not have jurisdiction
over measures of general economic policy adopted by the Republic of Argentina and cannot pass judgment on whether
they are right or wrong. The Tribunal also concludes, however, that it has jurisdiction to examine whether specific
measures affecting the Claimant's investment or measures of general economic policy having a direct bearing on such
investment have been adopted in violation of legally binding commitments made to the investor in treaties, legislation
or contracts.

34. While conceptually the line between one and the other matter is clear, in practice whether a given claim falls
under one or the other heading can only be established in light of the evidence which the parties will produce and
address in connection with the merits phase of the case. Counsel for the Republic fo Argentina has rightly explained
that the distinction made "may have great relevance with regard to liability or responsibility."*° This means in fact
that the issue of what falls within or outside the Tribunal's jurisdiction will be subsumed in the determination of
whether a given claim is or is not directly connected with specific measures affecting the investment.

35. For the time being, the fact that the Claimant has demonstrated prima facie that it has been adversely affected
by measures adopted by the Republic of Argentina is sufficient for the Tribunal to consider that the claim, as far as
this matter is concerned, is admissible and that it has jurisdiction to examine it on the merits.

Objection to admissibility on the issue of the Claimant's jus standi

36. The Republic of Argentina has objected to the admissibility of the claim by CMS on the ground that the
Claimant does not hold the rights upon which it bases its claim — to wit, TGN being the licensee, and CMS only a
minority shareholder in this company, only TGN could claim for any damage suffered. It is further argued that, since
TGN is an Argentine company, it does not qualify as a foreign investor under the BIT nor is the License a foreign
investment. It follows, in the Respondent's view, that CMS is claiming not for direct damages but for indirect damages
which could result from its minority participation in TGN.

37. The Republic of Argentina has also advanced the view that, in addition, CMS cannot claim for its proportional
share in TGN, as this would imply that the shareholders have a standing different from that of the company. If TGN
arrives at an agreement with the Republic of Argentina, it is further stated, CMS could only oppose such arrangement
as an intra-corporate question and not as the holder of an independent right of action.

38. The Respondent explains that the only guarantee the Republic of Argentina gave to CMS related to the legal
quality of the shares which were transferred to the Claimant by the Republic of Argentina in the context of the
privatization process. Should that legal quality be proven defective, CMS would have jus standi to claim for
reparation, but this is not the case as the claim concerns the operation of the License and not the shares themselves.

39. CMS has opposed such arguments on the premise that both the BIT and the whole process of investing in TGN
was related to the privatization of the gas industry in Argentina, a process which was the subject of specific guarantees
and commitments by the Republic of Argentina. These guarantees included measures of legal stability and economic

794 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [VOL. 42:

 

mechanisms aimed at ensuring the financial feasibility and the success of the investment, not just the question of the
quality of the shares.

40. Inthis regard, it is also explained, CMS is not claiming for rights pertaining to TGN but for the rights associated
with its investment in the company. It is further stated that CMS qualifies as a foreign investor under the BIT and its
participation as a shareholder is a foreign investment protected under that Treaty, thus having a right of action
independently from TGN. This right of action, it is argued, arises directly from the BIT provisions and it is
independent from any contractual right of action that TGN might have under the License. International law and not
any domestic law which might relate to contracts or other transactions governs such rights of claim, it is further stated.
The claims being asserted under the BIT, it is also explained, are direct and not indirect.

41. The arguments that the parties have put forth involve a number of questions of admissibility and jurisdiction.
The distinction between admissibility and jurisdiction does not appear quite appropriate in the context of ICSID as
the Convention deals only with jurisdiction and competence. In any event, the Tribunal will follow the order of the
arguments introduced in respect of one and other concept so as to facilitate their discussion. First, there is the issue
of whether a shareholder can claim for its rights in a foreign company independently from the latter's rights and, if
so, whether these rights refer only to its status as shareholder or also to substantive rights connected with the legal
and economic performance of its investment. Second, there is the question of whether the Claimant satisfies the
jurisdictional requirements of the Convention and the BIT, particularly those concerning the existence of a legal
dispute, whether this dispute arises directly from the investment, and the nationality of the investor. The Tribunal will
address these questions next.

Corporate personality in Argentine legislation

42. The Republic of Argentina has raised as a first bar to the claim by minority shareholders the legal provision in
effect in that country, as in most civil and common law countries, to the effect that the corporate legal personality is
distinct and separate from that of the shareholders. Distinguished Argentine jurists have been invoked to this effect."
However true this legal distinction is, the fact is that it is not determinant in this case. First, as will be discussed further
below, the applicable jurisdictional provisions are only those of the Convention and the BIT, not those which might
arise from national legislation. But even if the Argentine legislation were relevant, it is also worth noting that that
legislation has contributed significantly to the piercing of the corporate veil when the real interests behind the
corporate personality need to be identified as evidenced for example by Article 54, par. 3, of Law 19.550, as amended
by Law 22.903.”

Shareholder rights under general international law

43. The parties have turned next to the discussion of the situation under international law, with particular reference
to the meaning and extent of the Barcelona Traction decision.” Counsel for the Republic of Argentina are right when
arguing that that decision ruled out the protection of investors by the State of their nationality when that State is
different from the State of incorporation of the corporate entity concerned, all of it in respect of damage suffered in
athird State. However, Counsel for the Claimant are also right when affirming that this case was concerned only with
the exercise of diplomatic protection in that particular triangular setting, and involved what the Court considered to
be a relationship attached to municipal law, but it did not rule out the possibility of extending protection to
shareholders in a corporation in different contexts. Specifically, the International Court of Justice was well aware of
the new trends in respect of the protection of foreign investors under the 1965 Convention and the bilateral investment
treaties related thereto.

 

44. Barcelona Traction is therefore not directly relevant to the present dispute, although it marks the beginning of
a fundamental change of the applicable concepts under international law and State practice. In point of fact, the
Elettronica Sicula decision evidences that the International Court of Justice itself accepted, some years later, the

2003] ICSID: CMS v. ARGENTINA 795

 

protection of shareholders of a corporation by the State of their nationality in spite of the fact that the affected
corporation had a corporate personality under the defendant State's legislation.”

45. Diplomatic protection itself has been dwindling in current international law, as the State of nationality is no
longer considered to be protecting its own interest in the claim but that of the individual affected.” To some extent,
diplomatic protection is intervening as a residual mechanism to be resorted to in the absence of other arrangements
recognizing the direct right of action by individuals. It is precisely this kind of arrangement that has come to prevail
under international law, particularly in respect of foreign investments, the paramount example being that of the 1965
Convention.

46. The Republic of Argentina has advanced the argument that, when shareholders have been protected separately
from the affected corporation, this occurred in cases where the shareholders were majority or controlling, not minority
shareholders as in the instant case. This fact may be true, but it is equally true, as argued by the Claimant, question
of controlling majorities; rather they were concerned with the possibility of protecting shareholders independently
from the affected corporation, that is, solely with the issue of the corporate legal personality and its limits.

47. State practice further supports the meaning of this changing scenario. Besides accepting the protection of
shareholders and other forms of participation in corporations and partnerships, the concept of limiting it to majority
or controlling participations has given way to a lower threshold in this respect. Minority and non-controlling
participations have thus been included in the protection granted or have been admitted to claim in their own right.
Contemporary practice relating to lump-sum agreements,” the decisions of the Iran-United States Tribunal” and the
rules and decisions of the United Nations Compensation Commission,* among other examples, evidence increasing
flexibility in the handling of international claims.

 

  

48. The Tribunal therefore finds no bar in current international law to the concept of allowing claims by
shareholders independently from those of the corporation concerned, not even if those shareholders are minority or
non-controlling shareholders. Although it is true, as argued by the Republic of Argentina, that this is mostly the result
of lex specialis and specific treaty arrangements that have so allowed, the fact is that /ex specialis in this respect is
so prevalent that it can now be considered the general rule, certainly in respect of foreign investments and increasingly
in respect of other matters.” To the extent that customary international law or generally the traditional law of
international claims might have followed a different approach — a proposition that is open to debate — then that
approach can be considered the exception.

  

Shareholder rights under the ICSID Convention

49. As mentioned above, the 1965 Convention is the paramount example of the approach now prevailing in
international law in respect of claims arising from foreign investments. It is a well-known fact that Article 25(1) of
that Convention did not attempt to define the term "investment", as no definition was generally acceptable. Against
this background, all relevant bilateral investment treaties and other instruments embodying the consent of the parties
to ICSID's jurisdiction have usually contained definition in this respect.*°

50. Arather broad interpretation of "investment" has ensued from these expressions of consent. It should be recalled
that the ownership of shares was one of the specific examples of investment given during the negotiations of the
Convention as pertinent for parties to agree in the context of their expressions of consent to jurisdiction.*' The
definition of investment in the Argentina-United States BIT will be considered further below.

51. Precisely because the Convention does not define "investment", it does not purport to define the requirements
that an investment should meet to qualify for ICSID jurisdiction. There is indeed no requirement that an investment,
in order to qualify, must necessarily be made by shareholders controlling a company or owning the majority of its
shares. It is well known incidentally that, depending on how shares are distributed, controlling shareholders can in
fact own less than the majority of shares. The reference that Article 25(2)(b) makes to foreign control in terms of

796 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [VOL. 42:

 

treating a company of the nationality of the Contracting State party as a national of another Contracting State is
precisely meant to facilitate agreement between the parties, so as not to have the corporate personality interfering with
the protection of the real interests associated with the investment. The same result can be achieved by means of the
provisions of the BIT, where the consent may include non-controlling or minority shareholders.

52. Article 25(1) of the Convention is also relevant in another respect. In the Fedax case, Venezuela had objected
to ICSID's jurisdiction on the ground that the dispute transaction was not a "direct foreign investment." Although the
transaction considered in that case was different from the one in the present case, the tribunal's holding is useful in
the interpretation of the scope of that Article:

"However, the text of Article 25(1) establishes that the ‘jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal
dispute arising directly out of an investment.’ It is apparent that the term 'directly' relates in this Article
to the ‘dispute’ and not the ‘investment’. It follows that jurisdiction can exist even in respect of
investments that are not direct, so long as the dsipute arises directly from such transaction. This
interpretation is also consistent with the broad reach that the term ‘investment’ must be given in light of
the negotiating history of the Convention."

53. With this background in mind, it is then possible for this Tribunal to examine the meaning of a number of
decisions of ICSID tribunals that have dealt with the protection of shareholders. The parties have a different reading
of these ICSID cases, with particular reference to AAPL v. Sri Lanka,® AMT vy. Zaire,* Antoine Goetz et consorts v.
Republique du Burundi, Maffezini v. Spain,** Lanco v. Argentina,” Genin v. Estonia,* the Aguas or Vivendi Award”
and Annulment’ and CME v. Czech Republic."' For the Republic of Argentina, all these cases deal with shareholder
rights, underlying arrangements and factual situations different from those given in the instant case, and hence do not
support jurisdiction in this case. CMS, for its part, believes that, to the contrary, in all those cases the right of
shareholders, including minority shareholders, to claim independently from the corporate entity affect has been
upheld.

54. There can be no doubt that the factual setting of each case is different and that some may lend themselves more
than others to illustrate points of relevance. In some cases, there has been majority shareholding or control by the
investor, in others not; in some cases there has been expropriation affecting specifically the shares, in others not; in
some cases, there has been no objection to jurisdiction, in others there has been.

55. However, there can be no doubt that most, if not all, such cases are immersed in the same trend discussed above
in the context of international law and the meaning of the 1965 Convention. In the present case, the Claimant has
convincingly explained that notwithstanding the variety of situations in ICSID's jurisprudence noted by the Republic
of Argentina, the tribunals have in all such cases been concerned not with the question of majority or control but
rather whether shareholders can claim independently from the corporate entity. In Goetz the tribunal reflected this
prevailing trend in the following terms:

«... le Tribunal observe que la jurisprudence antérieure du CIRDI ne limte pas la qualité pour agir aux
seules personnes morales directement visées par les mesures litigieuses mais I'étend aux actionnaires de
ces personnes, qui sont les véritables investisseurs.»”

56. The Tribunal can therefore conclude that there is no bar to the exercise of jurisdiction in light of the 1965
Convention and its interpretation as reflected in its drafting history, the opinion of distinguished legal writers and the
jurisprudence of ICSID tribunals.

Shareholder rights under the Argentina-United States Bilateral Investment Treaty

57. The Tribunal turns next to the examination of the definition of "investment" in the Argentina-United States BIT.
Article I(1) of this Treaty provides as pertinent:

2003] ICSID: CMS v. ARGENTINA 797

 

"(a) ‘investment’ means every kind of investment in the territory of one Party owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by nationals or companies of the other Party, such as equity, debt, and service
and investment contracts; and includes without limitation:

 

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a company or interests in the assets
thereof. . ."

58. Here again the parties have a different reading of that Article. The Republic of Argentina is of the view that,
since Article 25 of the Convention requires the control of a local subsidiary in order to qualify as a claimant, the fact
that the BIT does not make such a requirement is immaterial since the Convention has to prevail. The Tribunal
concluded above that the Convention does not really make such a requirement a central tenet of jurisdiction but only
an alternative for very specific purposes. In any event, the provision of the Treaty is not in any way incompatible with
Article 25 of the Convention.

59. The Republic of Argentina has also asserted that an investment in shares is indeed a protected investment under
the Treaty, but this would only allow claims for measures affecting the shares as such, for example, expropriation of
the shares or interference with the political and economic rights tied to those shares. Such interpretation would not
allow, however, for claims connected to damage suffered by the corporate entity. If a claim for indirect damage has
been allowed, it is further argued, this would have been stated expressly in the Treaty, as has been in other bilateral
investment treaties, including some signed by Argentina, or in the context of trade arrangements such as the North
American Free Trade Agreement or other instruments. Silence on this point the Respondent argues, cannot be
construed as an expression of consent to such type of claims.

60. CMS's understanding is different. In its view, the plain language of the provisions and their legal context can
only mean that investment in shares is a protected investment and that the investor has, under the Treaty, the right for
its investment independently from any claims that the company in which it has invested might have. Again here, it
is a question of seeking to identify the real economic interests between such transactions. It is argued, in addition, that
it was Argentina that required the licensees of the privatization of the gas industry to be local companies. The
protection granted by investment treaties was expressly mentioned in these invitations. If shareholders were not left
out of such substantive protection, it is further explained, this would render the treaties meaningless.

61. The parties have debated the meaning of the decisions of other ICSID tribunals on this question. Again, it is
evident that the factual and legal background of each such decision is different. Counsel for the Republic of Argentina
have rightly explained that, in some cases, there has been a treaty authorizing indirect claims by the investor, in others
there has been an expropriation of a license of the claimant or of the shares held by it, while in yet other cases
claimants have been controlling or majority shareholders and thus their claim becomes a direct one.

62. Counsel for CMS have also explained that while in some cases there have been controlling shareholders and
in others not, the relevant fact is that, in all cases, jurisdiction has been accepted on the basis that shareholders have
a protected right of their own arising from their investment. None of these cases, it is further stated, has ever reasoned
in terms of requiring control of the corporate entity for the protection of such rights.

63. The task of this Tribunal is rendered easier in light of the Lanco case, where the same Argentina-United States
BIT and the same definition of investment were interpreted. That tribunal examined jurisdiction under two separate
headings, one under the Treaty and the other under the concession agreement, concluding that, while jurisdiction could
be founded on either heading, the fact that the investor also had specific rights and obligations under the concession
agreement, held to be equivalent to an investment agreement, made the conclusion still more evident. The tribunal
held in this respect:

798 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [VOL. 42:

 

"The Tribunal finds that the definition of this term in the ARGENTINA-U.S. Treaty is very broad and
allows for many meanings. For example, as regards shareholder equity, the ARGENTINA-U.S. Treaty
says nothing indicating that the investor in the capital stock has to have control over the administration
of the company, or a majority share; thus the fact that LANCO holds an equity share of 18.3% in the
capital stock of the Grantee allows one to conclude that it is an investor in the meaning of Article | of
the ARGENTINA-U.S. Treaty."

Nonetheless, the question is more complex considering that LANCO is not only the owner of an equity
share in the capital stock of the grantee company, but also that the definition of investment’ set forth in
the ARGENTINA-U.S. Treaty allows one to conclude that LANCO has certain rights and obligations as
a foreign investor under the Concession Agreement with the Government of the Argentine Republic."**

64. A similar approach was taken by the Committee on Annulment in the Compajiia de Aguas del Aconquija or
Vivendi case, when holding under a different but comparable bilateral investment treaty:

"Moreover it cannot be argued that CGE did not have an ‘investment’ in CAA from the date of the
conclusion of the Concession Contract, or that it was not an ‘investor’ in respect of its own shareholding,
whether or not it had overall control of CAA. Whatever the extent of its investment may have been, it
was entitled to invoke the BIT in respect of conduct alleged to constitute a breach fo Articles 3 or 5."“*

65. In light of the above considerations, the Tribunal concludes that jurisdiction can be established under the terms
of the specific provisions of the BIT. Whether the protected investor is in addition a party to a concession agreement
or a license agreement with the host State is immaterial for the purpose of finding jurisdiction under those treaty
provisions, since there is a direct right of action of shareholders. It follows that the Claimant has jus standi before this
Tribunal under international law, the 1965 Convention and the Argentina-United States Bilateral Investment Treaty.

Jurisdictional objection on the dispute not arising directly from investment

66. In close connection with the issues discussed above, the Republic of Argentina has raised a jurisdictional
objection on the ground that the dispute does not arise directly from an investment as required by the 1965
Convention. In its view, while the acquisition of shares qualifies as an investment under the Treaty, neither TGN, as
an Argentine corporation, nor the License qualify as an investment under the BIT. TGN, the argument follows, has
its own assets, including the License; because these assets do not constitute an investment under the Treaty, CMS's
claims, based on the alleged breach of TGN's rights under the License, cannot be considered to arise directly from
an investment.

67. CMS shares the view that TGN is not an investor under the Treaty, and that it has not been agreed to treat this
company as a non-Argentine national because of foreign control. Neither is the License an investment under the
Treaty. However, CMS adds, its 29.42% share in TGN qualifies as an investment covered under the Treaty and no
majority or controlling ownership is required and hence CMS has the right to claim for compensation in the case of
a dispute that arises directly out of its investment in those shares. The dispute, it is further explained, does not relate
to TGN's rights but to those arising from the Treaty.

68. Because, as noted above, the rights of the Claimant can be asserted independently from the rights of TGN and
those relating to the License, and because the Claimant has a separate cause of action under the Treaty in connection
with the protected investment, the Tribunal concludes that the present dispute arises directly from the investment made
and that therefore there is no bar to the exercise of jurisdiction on this count.

69. There is still another point of contention between the parties. The Republic of Argentina believes that, in any
event, CMS could only claim for the 25% share of ownership of TGN it purchased from the Argentine government,
but not for the full 29.42% it actually owns, as the additional shares were bought from the employee share program.

2003] ICSID: CMS v. ARGENTINA 799

 

CMS is of the view that its full participation in TGN is the covered investment. Without prejudice that the extent of
eventual damages will be an aspect to be discussed at the merits phase of this case, the Tribunal believes that the BIT
does not make any differentiation as to the origin of the shares constituting the investment. It is only concerned with
the question of State measures that can eventually affect the rights of the investor. It is therefore held that, again prima
facie, the investor can make its claim for the full share of its participation in TGN.

Jurisdictional objection on not following contractual dispute settlement

70. A separate jurisdictional objection raised by the Republic of Argentina is based on the argument that TGN's
License has a separate dispute settlement mechanism before the Federal Courts of Buenos Aires on Contentious
Administrative Matters. Similarly, it is argued, the Terms of the License provide for the submission of disputes to the
Federal Courts of Buenos Aires on Civil and Commercial matters, entailing an express renunciation to any other forum
or jurisdiction. All of this, in the Respondent's view, precludes submission to the instant dispute to an ICSID tribunal.

71. CMS objects to that reasoning on the basis that it is not a party to the License and that the dispute does not arise
from the Terms of the License. The dispute, it is argued, relates to the breach of the BIT and its cause of action is
founded exclusively on the dispute settlement mechanism of that Treaty, independently from whether there is in
addition a dispute concerning the contract. The Claimant notes moreover that the disputes envisaged in the Terms of
the License refer only to questions connected with sale of the shares.

72. The task of the Tribunal is again rendered easier by the fact that a number of recent ICSID cases have had to
discuss and decide on similar or comparable provisions concerning contracts and the scope of the Treaty. First, it is
well established that consent to ICSID jurisdiction is to the exclusion of any other remedy pursuant to Article 26 of
the Convention. The tribunal in Lanco, for example, held in this respect:

"... when the parties give their consent to ICSID arbitration, they lose their right to seek to settle the
dispute in any other forum, domestic or international, and it therefore presupposes the non-interference
of any other forum with the ICSID arbitration proceeding once such proceeding has been instituted."“®

73. Neither in the Lanco case nor in the instant case is there a requirement of the exhaustion of local remedies as
a pre-condition to ICSID jurisdiction that could bring into play other jurisdictions. The Tribunal also concluded in
Lanco that:

"In effect, the offer made by the Argentine Republic to covered investors under the ARGENTINA-U.S.
Treaty cannot be diminished by the submission to Argentina's domestic courts, to which the Concession
Agreement remits."””

74. Following in part the Lanco precedent, another ICSID tribunal held in the Compajiia de Aguas del Aconquija:

"Article 16.4 of the Concession Contract does not divest this Tribunal of jurisdiction to hear this case
because that provision did not and could not constitute a waiver by CGE of its rights under Article 8 of
the BIT to file the pending claims against the Argentine Republic. (. . .) [T]hose claims are not based on
the Concession Contract but allege a cause of action under the BIT. (. . .) Thus, Article 16.4 of the
Concession Contract cannot be deemed to prevent the investor from proceeding under the ICSID
Convention against the Argentine Republic on a claim charging the Argentine Republic with a violation
of the Argentine-French BIT."**

75. The Annulment Committee held in Wena:

"The Committee cannot ignore of course that there is a connection between the leases and the IPPA since
the former were designed to operate under the protection of the IPPA as the materialization of the

800 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [VOL. 42:

 

investment. But this is simply a condition precedent to the operation of the IPPA. It does not involve an
amalgamation of different legal instruments and dispute settlement arrangements. (. . .) [T]he acts or
failures to act of the State cannot be considered as a question connected to the performance of the parties
under the leases. The private and public functions of these various instruments are thus kept separate and
distinct.”

76. This Tribunal shares the views expressed in those precedents. It therefore holds that the clauses in the License
or its Terms referring certain kinds of disputes to the local courts of the Republic of Argentina are not a bar to the
assertion of jurisdiction by an ICSID tribunal under the Treaty, as the functions of these various instruments are
different.

Jurisdictional objection on the "fork in the road" triggering

77. Theconsiderations made above also help the Tribunal on another jurisdictional objection raised by the Republic
of Argentina, namely that the investor triggered the "fork in the road" provision of Article VII(3)(a) of the Treaty. The
Republic of Argentina argues that because TGN appealed a judicial decision to the Federal Supreme Court and other
administrative remedies were sought, CMS cannot now submit the same dispute to arbitration under the Treaty.

78. The Claimant's view is different. First, there is no triggering of the "fork in the road" provision because TGN
is a separate legal entity and is not the investor; only the investor can make the choice of taking a claim to the local
courts or to arbitration, and CMS chose the ICSID arbitration option. Second, the court's decision appealed by TGN.
related to judicial proceedings initiated by the Argentine Ombudsman and in which TGN only intervened as a third
party; moreover, both the Argentine Government and ENARGS — the regulatory agency of the gas industry — also
appealed that particular decision. It follows, the argument further elaborates, that the Licensee was only undertaking
defensive and reactive actions in those proceedings. And third, CMS argues, not only are the parties to those
proceedings and to the arbitration different but also the subject-matter of the dispute is not the same; TGN's claim
concerns the contractual arrangements under the License while those of CMS concern the affected treaty rights.

79. The Claimant has also explained that TGN has been prevented from making a claim before the courts or through
arbitration because of the provisions of Decree 1090/02 of June 26, 2002, and the Ministry of Economy
Resolution 308/02 of August 20, 2002. These provisions direct the licensee to make its claims for breach of contract
only in the context of the renegotiation process under way and not before the court; if the latter action is followed,
the licensee will be excluded from such renegotiation. This situation, it is further explained, evidences again that TGN
could not bring a claim before the Argentine courts and has not done so. In any event, as mentioned above, such a
claim would be entirely separate from that of CMS under the Treaty.

80. Decisions of several ICSID tribunals have held that as contractual claims are different from treaty claims even
if there had been or there currently was a recourse to the local courts for breach of contract, this would not have
prevented submission of the treaty claims to arbitration.*° This Tribunal is persuaded that with even more reason this
view applies to the instant dispute, since no submission has been made by CMS to local courts and since, even if TGN
had done so — which is not the case —, this would not result in triggering the "fork in the road" provision against
CMS. Both the parties and the causes of action under separate instruments are different.

 

81. Had the Claimant renounced recourse to arbitration, for example by resorting to the courts of Argentina, this
would have been a binding selection under the BIT. In that case, the Tribunal would agree with Counsel for the
Republic of Argentina that although Carlos Calvo, a distinguished Argentine international jurist who fathered the
Calvo Doctrine and Clause, will not become an honorary citizen of countries having entered into bilateral investment
treaties, this would still be a binding decision.*! However, as no such renunciation took place, the Calvo Clause will
not resuscitate in this context.

2003] ICSID: CMS v. ARGENTINA 801

 

82. The issue did not pass unnoticed during the approval and ratification of the BIT. In the letter of submittal of
the BIT to the United States Congress, the U.S. President explained:

"The bilateral investment treaty (BIT) with Argentina represents an important milestone in the BIT
program. (.. .) Argentina, like many other Latin American countries, has long subscribed to the Calvo
Doctrine, which requires that aliens submit disputes arising in a country to that country's local courts. The
conclusion of this treaty, which contains an absolute right to international arbitration of investment
disputes, removes U.S. investors from the restrictions of the Calvo Doctrine and should help pave the way
for similar agreements with other Latin American states."**

Objections on assumed consequences

83. The Republic of Argentina has also expressed concern about some consequences which could arise from the
finding of jurisdiction by this Tribunal. In particular, the following possible situations were mentioned: (i) TGN could
come to a successful finalization of the negotiation process under way and, separately, an ICSID tribunal could reach
a different conclusion; (ii) the eventual discrimination which could take place between domestic and foreign investors
in TGN as only the latter have access to arbitration; and (iii) the eventual multiplication of international claims by
investors of different nationalities and under separate treaties.

84. The Respondent also argues that it cannot be assumed that CMS is entitled to claim compensation in proportion
to its 29.42% share in TGN because, if TGN were to be compensated for measures adopted by Argentina, there is no
guarantee that such benefit would flow through to TGN's shareholders.

85. Inthe Claimant's views those considerations are not relevant to jurisdiction as it is quite inevitable that different
treaty arrangements will assign rights to different investors and these rights most probably will be different from those
of domestic investors. Moreover, CMS believes that the negotiation process is not likely to lead to a successful
outcome. But, even it were, CMS affirms that it is not claims for TGN's losses but for its own loss in the investment
venture.

86. The Tribunal notes in respect that the Centre has made every effort possible to avoid a multiplicity of tribunals
and jurisdictions, but that it is not possible to foreclose rights that different investors might have under different
arrangements. The Tribunal also notes that, while it might be desirable to recognize similar rights to domestic and
foreign investors, this is seldom possible in the present state of international law in this field. Finally, it is not for the
Tribunal to rule on the perspectives of the negotiation process or on what TGN might do in respect of its shareholders,
as these are matters between Argentina and TGN or between TGN and its shareholders.

The law applicable to jurisdiction determination

87. The parties have discussed, in their written presentations and in the hearings, the question of applicable law,
with particular reference to the meaning of Article 42 of the ICSID Convention. The Republic of Argentina believes
that, under this provision, Argentine law is applicable, not only in respect of the resolution of the substance of the
dispute but also in respect of the jurisdictional questions the Tribunal has now to decide on. Counsel for the Republic
of Argentina has also submitted that, as the Treaty is also part of Argentine law, that law can also be applied,
particularly since the jurisdictional objections raised are not only based on Argentine law but also on the Treaty and
the ICSID Convention. The Claimant takes a different view and argues that Article 42 is only applicable to the
substance of the dispute, jurisdictional questions being decided on the basis of the Treaty and international law only.

88. Article 42 is mainly designed for the resolution of disputes on the merits and, as such, it is in principle
independent from the decisions on jurisdiction, governed solely by Article 25 of the Convention and those other
provisions of the consent instrument which might be applicable, in the instant case the Treaty provisions. However,
the argument of the Republic of Argentina has merit in so far as the parties can agree to a different choice of law

802 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [VOL. 42:

 

applicable also to jurisdictional questions. The very option the investor has under the Treaty to submit a dispute to
local jurisdictional also involves to an extent a choice of law provision, as local courts will apply mainly domestic
law. In such a case, domestic law might apply together with the Treaty and Convention or separately.

89. Since Argentina believes that the "fork in the road" provision has been triggered as explained above, it is also
reasonable to argue in that context for the application of Argentine law, including the Treaty as part thereof. However,
as the dispute under the Treaty is in this case separate from that under the License and no "fork in the road" provision
has been triggered, domestic law does not have a role to play in jurisdictional determination, at least not a direct one.

Objections to admissibility on the nature and number of disputes

90. In addition to the questions of admissibility and jurisdiction raised by the Republic of Argentina discussed
above, the Respondent advances three further objections against the admissibility of some of the CMS claims.
According to the Republic of Argentina, (i) The original dispute has no relation with the dispute as stated by CMS
in its Request for Arbitration; (ii) CMS has submitted to the Tribunal two different disputes and filing of the second
dispute does not comply with the temporal conditions set forth in the Treaty; and (iii) The dispute relating to the
alleged restrictions suffered by TGN to transfer funds abroad was not submitted in compliance with the terms of the
Treaty.

91. The Tribunal will summarize the arguments raised by Argentina on each of these points, as well as the answers
given by CMS to these objections and it will arrive at a determination on each of them.

Relationship between the original dispute and that submitted to arbitration

92. The first question concerns the absence of a relationship between the original dispute and the dispute as stated
in the Request for Arbitration. According to the Republic of Argentina, CMS, in its letter of March 12, 2001, prior
to notifying its consent to international arbitration, requested payment by Argentina to TGN of the appropriate
adjustments to the tariffs based on the PPI. However, the subsequent Request for Arbitration alleges loss by CMS of
the expected benefits of its investments and anticipates a claim in excess of USD 100 million. Consequently, the
argument follows, the Request for Arbitration implies a claim different from the one submitted by the investor, in its
letter of March 12, 2001.

93. Moreover, the Republic of Argentina argues that CMS modified the terms of the dispute along its development.
In particular, it was only in its Memorial that CMS disclosed that it intended to dispose of its shares in TGN and that,
once it received compensation, it would transfer them to the Argentine Government. Consequently, it is argued,
neither a dispute related to clearly identified issues between the parties nor a concrete claim was raised until CMS
submitted its Memorial.

94. CMS's position is that the dispute initially notified to Argentina is the same dispute as the one mentioned in the
Request for Arbitration and that events occurring after the filing of the Request for Arbitration are part of the same
dispute and are within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. It follows in the Claimant's view that there is no inconsistency
between the notification of the dispute to Argentina and the Request for Arbitration.

95. CMS further argues that there is no rule which requires a claimant to accurately or finally quantify its loss in
its Request for Arbitration. It is only at the time of filing its memorial that a claimant is required to quantify its
compensation claim, and even then the figure can be adjusted as the situation changes. This explains, according to
CMS, that the estimate of losses for alleged breaches of the BIT at the time of the Request for Arbitration is one thing
and the estimate made at the time of filing of its Memorial and taking into account measures adopted by the
Government of Argentina after the Request is another thing.

2003] ICSID: CMS v. ARGENTINA 803

 

96. In CMS's view, the other argument of the Respondent namely that CMS referred, only at the time of its
Memorial, to its decision to relinquish ownership of its shares to Argentina upon receipt of compensation is also not
relevant to the determination of jurisdiction. CMS argues that this is a merits-related matter and that, in any event,
the issues were identified clearly and there was a concrete claim before the production of its Memorial. The offer to
relinquish its shares was made by CMS in order to prevent any suggestion of double recovery.

97. The Tribunal cannot agree with the Republic of Argentina's argumentation on this point. First, the Republic of
Argentina refers to a CMS letter of March 12, 2001 requesting payment to TGN of the appropriate adjustments to the
tariffs based on the PPI. In fact, a number of letters were sent by CMS to the Argentine authorities concerning this
issue, beginning with a letter to the President of Argentina dated August 28, 2000, which under cover letters dated
October 28, 2000, were transmitted to officials in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, International Trade and Worship;
those letters drew to the attention of the authorities of a dispute between the Republic of Argentina and CMS about
its investment in that country, mentioning specifically the impact upon CMS of the non-adjustment of the tariffs of
TGN on the basis of the U.S. PPI and requesting the initiation of consultation and negotiations pursuant to
Article VII(2) of the Treaty. That request was repeated in letters of October 27, 2000 to the same authorities, in
another letter to the President of Argentina on December 12, 2000°° and, finally, in the letter of March 12, 2001
referred to by the Respondent in its Memorial on Jurisdiction. While that letter requests that specific steps be taken
to allow TGN to benefit from the application of the tariff adjustment in accordance with the Terms of the License
granted to it, it also mentions that the absence of such adjustment has resulted in "unlawful reduction of CMS's
earnings" and that it has affected its credit qualifications with financial institutions and rating agencies. It then states
that, unless appropriate measures are taken to remedy the situation, CMS will file a request for arbitration. There does
not appear to have been an answer to those various letters.

98. The six-month period provided by the Treaty for consultation and negotiation having expired without results,
CMS formally notified the President of Argentina on July 12, 2001 that it was consenting to arbitration under the
terms of the Treaty.” In its Request for Arbitration of July 24, 2001, CMS alleges breaches of Article II(2)(a), (b)
and (c) and of Article IV(1) of the Treaty and claims compensation for the ensuing damages.

99. The Tribunal is of the opinion that there is full correlation between the content of the letters sent to the
Argentine authorities before the Request for Arbitration and the Request itself. The Republic of Argentina argues that
if, in accordance with the request in the letter of March 12, 2001, it had paid to TGN the amount it is alleged should
have been paid to it, the dispute with CMS would have been resolved, but it then adds that, in the absence of such
payment, the subsequent claim by CMS for damages for loss of its investment constitutes a different matter. Referring
to the decision on jurisdiction in Maffezini v. Spain,” the Republic of Argentina affirms that the concrete claim
formulated by CMS on March 12, 2001 "is notoriously different from the one state in the Request for Arbitration."

100. The Tribunal, however, does not share the Respondent's line of reasoning. In its various letters preceding the
Request for Arbitration, CMS clearly stated the nature of the dispute between CMS and Argentina, its impact upon
its investment, and its request for consultation and negotiations under Article VII(2) of the Treaty. There could not
have been any doubt, after receipt of those letters, as to what the dispute was about and the conclusions contained in
the Request for Arbitration flowed naturally from the statements made in those letters. Argentina was presented with
both clearly identified issues and a concrete claim. Consequently, the Tribunal cannot accept the objection to
admissibility raised by the Republic of Argentina on this ground.

Two disputes or a single continuing dispute

101. The second issue raised by the Republic of Argentina concerns the existence of two different and separate
disputes. According to the Republic of Argentina, CMS has submitted to the Tribunal two different disputes. The First
related mainly to actions taken by the Argentine Ombudsman and the judiciary, in August 2000, concerning the
application of the PPI to tariffs of the gas industry. The second relates to measures adopted by the executive and

804 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [VOL. 42:

 

legislative authorities during December 2001 and January 2002 and having to do with the major economic crisis faced
by the country at that time. That second dispute, it is further affirmed, was not registered in accordance with
Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention and the six-month period required by Article VII(3) of the Treaty between the
dates a dispute arose and that of its submission for arbitration has not elapsed. The two disputes, in the Respondent's
view, are independent of each other because they are separable in time, in their origins, in their scope, in their
circumstances, in their causes and in their treatment.

102. The Respondent argues in particular that the first dispute relates to a decision the effects of which do not go
beyond the gas industry, while the additional dispute relates to measures of general scope affecting the whole
economy in the context of the economic and social emergency referred to above. In the case of the original dispute,
the Argentine Government and its regulatory agency challenged the judicial decision by the Ombudsman, while the
situation concerning the additional dispute, it is believed is completely different.

103. Similarly, it is argued by the Respondent, the background of the original dispute is an alleged inconsistency
between the Gas Law, the Convertibility Law and the national Constitution, while the background for the additional
dispute is a general crisis and the impossibility of maintaining a certain monetary and exchange rate policy.

104. The measure which gave rise to the first dispute, the Respondent explains, did not require a specific negotiation
process with the affected companies. In contrast, there is a specific renegotiation process currently taking place in the
context of a general contracts renegotiation concerning public utilities. In fact, it is further stated, as such renegotiation
is ongoing with the public utilities concerned one should not prejudge what the conclusion of that process will be;
a direct claim can only be made when the situation it deals with is irreversible and definitive.

105. According to CMS, the post-July events related to the same subject-matter as those before July 2001. The
December 2001 and January 2002 measures constituted new facts in the same dispute relating to the Republic of
Argentina's interference with the tariff regime, suspending and then abolishing the PPI adjustment of tariffs
completely and removing the right to calculate tariffs in U.S. dollars and then express them in convertible pesos at
the time of billing. The so-called additional dispute relates to the same subject-matter, the same factual background
and the same causes of action.

106. In any event, CMS concludes on this matter, the fact that the post-July 2001 events were not mentioned in the
Request for Arbitration does not affect the Claimant's entitlement to submit them to the Tribunal in its Memorial. CMS
affirms that Article 36(2) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 2(1)(e) of the ICSID Institution Rules only require the
request to "contain information concerning the issue in dispute," and that accordingly, Arbitration Rule 31 indicates
that it is only at the time of its memorial that the claimant is required to argue its claims with specificity. Moreover,
under Article 46 of the Convention and Rule 40 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, CMS argues its entitlement to bring
the matter as an additional or incidental claim because both clauses specifically provide for such a possibility.

107. The Tribunal cannot agree with the Respondent's conclusions on this second issue and it will deal with the
various arguments raised by Argentina in that regard. First, whether certain events occurred before and others after
the Request for Arbitration is not a determinant factor in deciding whether the Tribunal is seized with one or more
disputes. What the Tribunal has to decide, in light of Article 46 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 40,
is whether those claims arise directly out of the subject matter of the disputes, whether they are within the scope of
the consent of the parties and whether they are within the jurisdiction of the Centre.

108. Inso far as the international liability of Argentina under the Treaty is concerned, it also does not matter whether
some actions were taken by the judiciary and others by an administrative agency, the executive or the legislative
branch of the State. Article 4 of the Articles on State Responsibility adopted by the International Law Commission
is abundantly clear on this point.** Unless a specific reservation is made in accordance with Articles 19, 20 and 23

2003] ICSID: CMS v. ARGENTINA 805

 

of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, the responsibility of the State can be engaged and the fact that some
actions were taken by the judiciary and others by other state institutions does not necessarily make them separate
disputes. No such reservation took place in connection with the BIT.

109. At the outset of this Decision, the Tribunal drew the line between acts which directly affect the investor's rights
under binding legal commitments and other acts which relate to questions of public policy. Actions which affect those
rights will normally relate to measures specifically addressed to the gas industry, but they may also be adopted in
conjunction with measures of a more general nature. As long as they affect the investor in violation of its rights and
cover the same subject matter, the fact that they may originate from different sources or emerge at different times does
not necessarily mean that the disputes are separate and distinct. The Tribunal is also mindful that, as explained above,
what the Claimant has now to demonstrate that prima facie it has been affected by actions adopted in violation of its
rights and this burden has been met.

110. Ona similar line of reasoning, so long as the rights of the investor are affected in a direct manner, what justified
the judicial decision of August 18, 2000 and what motivated the adoption of administrative and legislative measures in
December 2001 and January 2002 does not alter the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. As noted, it is only when the measures
in question are unrelated to specific legal commitments made to the investor that the jurisdiction of the Tribunal will be
excluded and liability non-existent. Equally, the fact that the Government of Argentina and one of its regulatory agencies
have challenged the above-mentioned judicial decision while the Government has supported the post-July 2001 measures
is irrelevant in deciding whether the Tribunal is called upon to deal with one or two disputes.

111. The argument that the background to the so-called two disputes is different is also not a deciding factor as to
whether there are one or two disputes. What the Tribunal has to look at is the nature of the dispute or disputes; their
background may be different but again, what counts is whether the rights of the investor have been affected or not
and whether the claims arise directly out of the same subject-matter.

112. The argument that the first dispute did not require negotiations with the companies concerned while the second
opened the door to a renegotiation process is not convincing. The Tribunal is faced with a Request for Arbitration
between a foreign investor and the Republic of Argentina under the BIT, the investor claiming that some of its
protected rights have been interfered with. The disputants are CMS and the Republic of Argentina; as noted above,
whether there are some negotiations taking place between the Government of Argentina and some third parties on
some of the same events which gave rise to the dispute cannot be a matter for the Tribunal's consideration, at least
not at this stage of the proceedings.

 

113. The Tribunal is also mindful that the essential facts relating, first, to the suspension of the PPI adjustment in
2000 and the enactment of the other measures in December 2001 and January 2002 are not contested. There is no
disagreement between the parties about the fact that CMS is the investor in the affected company, TGN. Rather the
problem lies in the effect that each party assigns to each of these matters.

114. In order to establish whether the Tribunal is faced with one or two disputes, it is worthwhile keeping in mind
that CMS's request for relief in its Request for Arbitration of July 2001 concerns in essence the breach of various
rights it alleges to have under the BIT. These rights relate mainly to fair and equitable treatment and full security and
protection, arbitrariness and discrimination, observance of obligation and indirect expropriation without
compensation.

115. The Request for Arbitration contains a list of the measures which are alleged to be in breach of the Treaty and
CMS specifically reserves the right to update its claims in the course of the proceedings. CMS argues that "there is
one continuing dispute involving Argentina's interference with and dismantling of the tariff regime that it committed
to foreign investors would apply for the gas transportation sector."

806 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [VOL. 42:

 

Ancillary claims

116. The question to be addressed by the Tribunal is then whether the claims for post-July 2001 events are
"incidental or additional claims arising directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute." Note B to Arbitration
Rule 40 adds the following explanation:

"The test to satisfy this condition is whether the factual connection between the original and the ancillary
claim is so close as to require the adjudication of the latter in order to achieve the final settlement of the
dispute, the object being to dispose of all grounds of dispute arising out of the same subject matter."

117. To this end the Tribunal must reach a determination on the subject-matter of the dispute and decide whether
the ancillary or additional claim arises directly out of that subject matter.

118. The Tribunal is of the view that, in the instant case, the subject-matter of the dispute is the alleged loss by CMS
of its investment in TGN caused, it is argued, by the breaches by the Republic of Argentina of its obligation under
the BIT. Such breaches relate, in the Claimant's view, to the interference of organs of the Argentine State with the
tariff regime applicable to TGN, which was first subjected to deferral of adjustments, followed by a freeze,
culminating in the abrogation of that adjustment and the removal of the right to calculate tariffs in U.S. dollars and
then express them in convertible pesos at the time of billing.

119. Note B to Arbitration Rule 40 supports the conclusion that the post-July 2001 events give rise to incidental or
additional claims. There is no doubt, in the mind of the Tribunal, that the claim resulting from those events is "so close
as to require the adjudication of the latter in order to achieve the final settlement of the dispute, the object being to
dispose of all the grounds of dispute arising out of the same subject matter."

120. Tribunals in two cases®! under Chapter 11 of NAFTA, the first one under the ICSID Additional Facility
Arbitration Rules and the other under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, reached the same conclusion, on the basis
of acts similar to those in the present case.”

Observance of consultation period

121. In connection with its allegation about the existence of two separate disputes, the Republic of Argentina has
also made the argument that submission to arbitration of the second dispute is inadmissible because it is premature.
Under the Treaty, it is maintained, the six-month period referred to above must have elapsed, but the additional
dispute was only formally raised with the Government of Argentina on February 13, 2002, some six months after the
registration of the case by the Secretary-General of ICSID, on August 24, 2001. The Request for Arbitration was
limited to the original dispute relating the U.S. PPI and does not include the additional subject-matter. Since that
dispute is different from the first one, the argument follows, it would have required a separate request for arbitration,
after the expiry of the above-mentioned six-month period, the whole in accordance with Article 36 of the ICSID
Convention and Article VII(3) of the BIT.

122. In the Claimant's view, however, the six-month negotiation period is a procedural and not a jurisdictional or
admissibility requirement. Provided the parties have had an opportunity to engage in negotiations, and in particular
whether the host State has shown no willingness to take this opportunity, the registration period requirement must be
deemed to be satisfied. Moreover, it is concluded, the Republic of Argentina has suffered and will suffer no prejudice
as a result of the inclusion of the post-July 2001 events.

123. This argument need not be addressed by the Tribunal in light of its conclusion above that there is a single
dispute which contains, however, incidental or additional claims. It is clear from the ICSID Arbitration Rules that such
claims do not require either a new request for arbitration or a new six-month period for consultation or negotiation,
before the submission of the dispute to arbitration under the Treaty. Rule 40(2) which provides that "an incidental or

2003] ICSID: CMS v. ARGENTINA 807

 

additional claim shall be presented not later than the reply." But even if it is thought that the period in question does
apply, the Tribunal is mindful that CMS, as explained above, repeatedly invited the Argentine Government to
undertake consultations on this matter, albeit to no avail. It cannot then be argued that any prejudice has ensued or
will ensue for the Republic of Argentina in this context.

Discussion of additional assumed consequences

124. The Respondent has also argued in connection with the two-disputes issue that admitting the additional dispute
would constitute a dangerous precedent with the following consequences: (i) an incentive for investors to submit
claims ignoring the required six-month period for consultation and negotiation and depriving governments of an
opportunity to evaluate the situation; (ii) a disruption of the renegotiation process of public utilities which is currently
taking place in Argentina; (iii) since the Tribunal was not given jurisdiction to decide any dispute other than the one
which was registered on the basis of the Request for Arbitration, the Tribunal, if it heard the additional dispute, would
deprive Argentina of its right of defence. The Claimant does not share these views.

 
    

125. As the Tribunal has concluded that, in this case, the disputes are not separate and independent and relate to the
same subject-matter, it is immaterial whether the pertinent events occurred before or after the submission of the
dispute to arbitration as long as any ancillary claim is made before reply, as required by Arbitration Rule 40(2). The
nefarious effects feared by the Republic of Argentina will therefore not occur as a consequence of this determination.
Rather, nefarious effects would occur if the Tribunal reached a different conclusion for, as the tribunal held in
Metalclad: "A contrary holding would require a claimant to file multiple subsequent and related actions and would
lead to inefficiency and inequity."* The Tribunal wishes to stress, however, that law alone provided all the necessary
elements to support the conclusion reached by the Tribunal in the present case.

126. As explained above, the Tribunal also cannot consider the question of whether the current negotiations with
various public utilities companies are going well, as believed by the Respondent, or not at all, as affirmed by the
Claimant. Those are res inter alios acta; it may be that, when the Tribunal comes to address the merits of this case,
those elements will have to be taken into consideration but, at this stage, they are irrelevant for the purpose of
determining jurisdiction.

Jurisdiction affirmed

127. Inlight of all the elements discussed above, the Tribunal concludes that the claims resulting from post-July 2001
events, to the extent that they cause damage to the investor in breach of its rights, are of the nature of ancillary claims
which, in conformity with Article 46 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 40, arise directly out of the
dispute, are within the scope of the consent of the parties and are otherwise within the jurisdiction of the Centre.

 

128. The Republic of Argentina has also raised a question of admissibility in connection with CMS's allegation that
it suffered damage connected with the transfer of funds, since this claim has never been presented as a disputed issue
under the BIT. However, as noted above, because CMS is not pursuing this claim, at least for the time being, the
question of admissibility is rendered moot.

129. The Republic of Argentina has also requested that CMS provide evidence, in connection with Article I(2) of
the BIT, that it is not controlled by nationals of a third country and that it has substantial business activities in the
United States. Upon review of the submissions of the parties, the Tribunal concludes that CMS has provided such
evidence and the record is abundantly clear on this matter.

130. The Tribunal wishes to note in concluding that counsel for both parties have performed their duties with
outstanding professionalism and have at all times fully cooperated with the work of the Tribunal, an attitude for which
they must be commended. Their respective arguments have been made in the spirit of professionalism and have raised
questions of great importance for this case, ICSID arbitration and arbitration in general.

808 INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [VOL. 42:

 

C. Decision

131. For the reasons stated above the Tribunal decides that the present dispute is within the jurisdiction of the Centre
and the competence of the Tribunal. The Tribunal has, accordingly, made the necessary Order for the continuation
of the procedure pursuant to Arbitration Rule 41(4).

So decided.
/s/
Francisco Orrego Vicuiia
President of the Tribunal
/s/ /s/
Marc Lalonde Francisco Rezek
Arbitrator Arbitrator

ENDNOTES
1. Treaty between the United States of America and the Argentine Republic concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection

of Investment. November 14, 1991, in force from October 20, 1994. Hereinafter cited as the U.S.-Argentina BIT.

2. Under Article 38 of the ICSID Convention, if the Tribunal is not yet constituted within 90 days after the notice of registration of the
request has been dispatched, the Chairman of ICSID's Administrative Council shall, at the request of either party, and after consulting
both parties as far as possible, appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed and designate an arbitrator to be the President of
the Tribunal.

 

3. Law No. 23.696 of 1989 on the Reform of the State.

4. Law No. 23.928 of 1991 on Convertibility.

5. Law 24.076 of 1992 on the Privatisation of the Gas Sector.

6. Decree 1738/92 of 1992 on the implementation of the Gas Law.

7. Information Memorandum on the Initial Public Tender Offer, 1992.
8. Decree 2255/92 of 1992 on the terms and conditions of licenses.

9.

Law No. 25.561 of 2002 on Public Emergency and Reform of the Currency Exchange Regime, Decree 71/2002 on Public Emergency
and Decree 214/2002 on "pesification".

10. See supra, note 1.

11. Decree 1570/2001, December 1, 2001 on Financial Entities.
12. Supra, note 9.

13. Supra, note 4.

14. J. Sulkowski: "Questions Juridiques soulevées dans les Rapports Internationaux par les Variations de Valeur des Signes Monétaires",
Recueil des Cours de I' Académie de Droit International, Vol. 29, 1929. 5 and ff.

15. Maffezini v. Spain, CSID Award of November 13, 2000, par. 64.
16.  Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, at 18, par. 50.
17. Hearing, April 8, 2003, at 84.

18. Supra, note 11.

2003] ICSID: CMS v. ARGENTINA 809

 

20.
21.

22.
23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

44.
45.
46.
47.
48.

Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, at 50, note 118.

Hearing, April 8, 2003, at 40.

Carlos Suarez Anzorena: "Personalidad de las Sociedades", Cuadernos de Derecho Societario, 1973, ‘ited in the Memorial on

Jurisdiction, note 82.

 

Law no. 19.550 of 1972 on Commercial Corporations, Article 52, par. 3.
Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Co. Lid. (Belgium v. Spain), Judgment of February 5, 1970, ICI Reports 1970, 3.

Case Concerning the Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI) (United States of America v. Italy), Judgment of July 20, 1989, ICI
Reports 1989, 15.

International Law Commission: Preliminary Report on Diplomatic Protection, by Mohammed Bennouna, Special Rapporteur,
AICN.4/484, 4 February 1998, at 5.

David J. Bederman: "Interim Report on Lump Sum Agreements and Diplomatic Protection", International Law Association, Committee
on Diplomatic Protection of Persons and Property, Report of the Seventieth Conference, New Delhi, 2002, 230, at 253-256.

For the jurisprudence of the Untied States-Iran Claims Tribunal see generally George H. Aldrich: The Jurisprudence of the Iran-United
States Claims Tribunal, 1996; Charles N. Brower and Jason D. Brueschke: The Iran-United States Claims Tribunal, 1998.

United Nations Compensation Commission, Decision of the Governing Council on Business Losses of Individuals, S/AC.26/1191/4,
23 October 1991, par. F, and Decision 123 (2001).

International Law Association, Committee on Diplomatic Protection of Persons and Property, First Report, Sixty-Ninth Conference,
London, 2000,

Fedax v. Venezuela, Decision of the ICSID Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, July 11, 1997, pars. 21-26 with citations to the
relevant and literature.

 

Ibid., par. 22, note 18
Ibid., par. 24.

AAPL y. Sri Lanka, ICSID Award of June 27, 1990.

AMT v. Zaire, CSID Award of February 21, 1997.

Antoine Goetz et consorts v. République du Burundi, Sentence du CIRDI du 10 Février 1999,
Supra, note 15.

Lanco v. Argentina, Preliminary Decision of the ICSID Tribunal of December 8, 1998.
Genin et al. v. Estonia, 1CSID Award of June 25, 2001.

Compania de Aguas del Aconquija et al. v. Argentina, ICSID Award of November 21, 2000.
Vivendi, ICSID Annulment Decision of July 3, 2002.

CME v. Czech Republic, Partial Award of September 13, 2001.

Supra, note 35, par. 89.

Supra, note 37, pars. 10, 11.

Supra, note 40, par. 50.

TGN License of December 18, 1992, Article 1.3.4, approved by Decree 2457/92.

Supra, note 37, par. 36.

Supra, note 37, par. 40.

Supra, note 39, pars. 53-54.

810

INTERNATIONAL LEGAL MATERIALS [VOL. 42:

 

49.

62.

63.

Wena v. Egypt, ICSID Annulment Decision of February 5, 2002, par. 35. The IPPA is the relevant Bilateral Investment Treaty between
Egypt and the United Kingdom.

See for example Aguas, supra, note 39, Genin, supra, note 38, Olguin v. Paraguay, Decision of the ICSID Tribunal on Objections to
Jurisdiction of August 8, 2000.

Hearing, April 7, 2003, at 75.

Letter of Submittal by the President of the United States, January 13, 1993, U.S. Government Printing Office, Treaty Doc. 103-2, 1993.

Exhibit 25 of the Request for Arbitration.
Exhibit 26 of the Request for Arbitration.

Exhibit 27 of the Request for Arbitration.

Exhibit 30 of the Request for Arbitration.

Supra, note 15.

James Crawford: The International Law Commission's Articles on State Responsibility, 2002, Comments on Article 4 at 94-99.
Hearing of April 7, 2003, at 113.

Article 46 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 40 of the Arbitration Rules.

Metalclad v. Mexico, Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, Award, (August 30, 2000), 40 ILM (2001), 36; Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Canada (Award
Concerning the Motion by Government of Canada Respecting the Claim Based upon the Imposition of the "Super Fee" (August 7,
2000). Legal Authorities No. 95.

It is worth noting that the UNCITRAL Rules do not provide for ancillary claims as such. Article 20 of those Rules states that: "During
the course of arbitral proceedings either party may amend or supplement his claim or defense unless the arbitral tribunal considers it
inappropriate to allow such amendment having regard to the delay in making it or prejudice to the other party or any other
circumstances. However, a claim may not be amended in such a manner that the amended claim falls outside the scope of the arbitration
clause or separate arbitration agreement.” In many instances, the distinction between supplementing a claim and introducing an
ancillary claim may be more semantic than real. However, Article 46 of the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rule 40 are more
restrictive in the sense that the ancillary claim must arise directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute and that it must be made no
later than in the reply, if it is an additional or incidental claim, and no later than the counter-memorial, if it is a counter-claim. In the
Pope & Talbot case, the tribunal concluded that the issue raised by the Claimant "is not a new claim and consequently no amendment
of the Claim is required.”

 

    

Supra, note 61, par. 67.

