ICSID CASE NO. ARB/09/17

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

COMMERCE Group CorP
AND
SAN SEBASTIAN GOLD MINES, INC.
(CLAIMANTS)

and

THE REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR
(RESPONDENT)

AWARD

ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
Professor Albert Jan van den Berg, President
Dr. Horacio A. Grigera Naén, Arbitrator
Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C., Arbitrator

Secretary to the Tribunal
Mr. Marco T. Montafiés-Rumayor

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 14 March 2011

Representing Commerce Group
Corp. and San Sebastian Gold
Mines, Inc.

Mr. John E. Machulak

Mr. Eugene Bykhovsky
MACHULAK, ROBERTSON & SODOS,
S.C.

1733 North Farwell Avenue
Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53202
USA

and

Prof. Andrew Newcombe
UNIVERSITY OF VICTORIA
PO Box 2400, STN CSC
Victoria, BC, V8W 3H7
Canada

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

Representing the Republic of
EI Salvador

Mr. Luis Parada

Mr. Derek Smith

Mr. Tomas Solis

Ms. Erin Argueta

DEWEY & LEBOEUF LLP

1101 New York Avenue, N.W.
Suite 1100

Washington, D.C. 20005-4213
USA

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

L THE PARTIE: 3
Il. THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL 4
II. — PROCEDURAL HISTORY 5
IV. FACTUAL BACKGROUND. 18

 

Vv. SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS AND RELIEF SOUGHT
A. dent’s Position 21
B. Claimants’ Position 22

 

VI. INTRODUCTION TO THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS...

 

VII. JURISDICTION.
A. What Does the Waiver Provision require? .
(a) The Parties’ Position:
(b) The Tribunal’s Analysi
B. Did Claimants Act in Violation of the Waiver Provision’s Requirements?
(a) The Parties’ Position:
(b) The Tribunal’s Analysi

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C. Consequences of the Failure to Fulfill the Waiver Requirement ...
D. Can the Tribunal Hear Claims arising under the Foreign Investment Law of El
Salvador, Regardless of the Waiver Provision? ..
(a) The Parties’ Position:
(b) The Tribunal’s Analysi 4
VIII. Costs 44
A. The Parties’ Positions 44
B. The Tribunal’s Analysi: 45
IX. DECISIONS 46

 

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

THE PARTIES

Claimants:

1. Commerce Group Corp
6001 North 91* Street
Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53225
USA

hereinafter referred to as “Claimant No. 1” or “CGC”.

and

2. San Sebastian Gold Mines
6001 North 91* Street
Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53225
USA

hereinafter referred to as “Claimant No. 2” or “SSGM”.

Claimant No. | and Claimant No. 2 are hereinafter collectively referred to as

“Claimants”.

CGC is a company organized and existing under the laws of Wisconsin, U.S.A.

SSGM is a company organized and existing under the laws of Nevada, U.S.A.

Claimants are represented in this arbitration by their duly authorized attorneys

mentioned at page | above.

Respondent:

The Republic of El Salvador

Direccién de Administracién de Tratados Comerciales
Ministerio de Economia

Alameda Juan Pablo II y Calle Guadalupe

Edificio C1 — C2

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

Plan Maestro Centro de Gobierno
San Salvador — El Salvador

hereinafter referred to as “Respondent” or “El Salvador”.

Respondent is represented in this arbitration by its duly authorized attorneys

mentioned at page | above.

Claimants and Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties”.

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

The Arbitral Tribunal has been constituted as follows:

0)

(ii)

(iii)

Dr. Horacio A. Grigera Naén
(jointly appointed by Claimants)
2708 35" Place NW
Washington, D.C. 20007-1
US.A.

Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C.
(appointed by Respondent)

1000 Waterfront Centre

200 Burrard Street, P.O. Box 48
Vancouver, BC V7X1T2
Canada

Professor Albert Jan van den Berg as President

(appointed by the Secretary-General of the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes, hereinafter “ICSID”)

Hanotiau & van den Berg

IT Tower (9" floor)

480 Avenue Louise B.9

1050 Brussels

Belgium

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

Til. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

9. Claimants began mining precious metals in El Salvador in 1968. Between 1987
and early 2006, Claimants expanded their mining and related activities which were
regulated by exploration licenses and environmental permits granted by the
Government of El Salvador. However, in September/October 2006, the
Government revoked Claimants’ environmental permits and did not renew their

exploration licenses.

10. Claimants assert that these measures amount to a violation of Respondent’s
obligations under the Central American-Dominican Republic Free Trade
Agreement (hereinafter “CAFTA”), ratified in El Salvador on 17 December 2004
(effective as of 1 March 2006) and ratified in the United States on 27 July 2005
(effective as of 1 March 2006).

11. CAFTA contains the following arbitration provision:

Article 10.16

Submission of a Claim to Arbitration

 

1. In the event that a disputing party considers that an investment
dispute cannot be settled by consultation and negotiation:

(a) the claimant, on its own behalf, may submit to arbitration
under this Section a claim

(i) that the respondent has breached

(A) an obligation under Section A,

' This Agreement is referenced as DR-CAFTA-US, CAFTA-DR, US-DR-CAFTA, etc., in various texts.
For ease of reference, it will remain CAFTA throughout this Award.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

(B) an investment authorization, or
(C) an investment agreement; and
(ii) that the claimant has incurred loss or damage by reason
of, or arising out of, that breach; and
(b) the claimant, on behalf of an enterprise of the respondent that

is a juridical person that the claimant owns or controls directly or
indirectly, may submit to arbitration under this Section a claim

(i) that the respondent has breached
(A) an obligation under Section A,
(B) an investment authorization, or
(C) an investment agreement; and

(ii) that the enterprise has incurred loss or damage by
reason of, or arising out of, that breach.

2. At least 90 days before submitting any claim to arbitration under
this Section, a claimant shall deliver to the respondent a written notice
of its intention to submit the claim to arbitration (“notice of intent”).
L.]
3. Provided that six months have elapsed since the events giving
rise to the claim, a claimant may submit a claim referred to in
paragraph 1:
(a) under the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Rules of
Procedures for Arbitration Proceedings, provided that both the
respondent and the Party of the claimant are parties to the ICSID
Convention;
(b) under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules, provided that
either the respondent or the Party of the claimant is a party to the
ICSID Convention; or

(c) under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

4. A claim shall be deemed submitted to arbitration under this
Section when the claimant’s notice of or request for arbitration
(“notice of arbitration”):

(a) referred to in paragraph 1 of Article 36 of the ICSID
Convention is received by the Secretary-General;

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

(b) referred to in Article 2 of Schedule C of the ICSID
Additional Facility Rules is received by the Secretary-General;
or

(c) referred to in Article 3 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,
together with the statement of claim referred to in Article 18 of
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, are received by the
respondent.

A claim asserted for the first time after such notice of arbitration is
submitted shall be deemed submitted to arbitration under this Section
on the date of its receipt under the applicable arbitral rules.

5. The arbitration rules applicable under paragraph 3, and in effect
on the date the claim or claims were submitted to arbitration under this
Section, shall govern the arbitration except to the extent modified by
this Agreement.

6. The claimant shall provide with the notice of arbitration:
(a) the name of the arbitrator that the claimant appoints; or

(b) the claimant’s written consent for the Secretary-General to
appoint such arbitrator.

On 17 March 2009, Claimants served on El Salvador a written notice of their
intent to submit a claim to arbitration pursuant to Article 10.16.2 of CAFTA (the

“Notice of Intent”).

Pursuant to Articles 10.16.3 and 10.16.4 of CAFTA, Claimants had the right, six
months after serving their Notice of Intent, to file a Notice of Arbitration either

under the ICSID Convention or the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

On 2 July 2009, Claimants filed their Notice of Arbitration with ICSID,
accompanied by Annexes A through D (the “Request”).

The Request states that it is made pursuant to Article 36 of the ICSID Convention,
Articles 10.16(1)(a), 10.16(1)(b) and 10.16(3)(a) of CAFTA (quoted at J 11

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

above), and Article 15(a) of the Ley de Inversiones of El Salvador (“Investment

Law”). Article 15(a) of the Investment Law provides:

En caso que surgieren controversias o diferencias entre los
inversionistas nacionales 0 extranjeros y el Estado, referentes a
inversiones de aquellos, efectuadas en El Salvador, las partes podran
acudir a los Tribunales de Justicia, competentes, de acuerdo a los
procedimientos legales.

En el caso de controversias surgidas entre inversionistas extranjeros y
el Estado, referentes a inversiones de aquellos efectuadas en El
Salvador, los inversionistas podran remitir la controversia:

a) Al Centro Internacional de Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a
Inversiones (CIADI), con el objeto de resolver la controversia
mediante conciliacién y arbitraje, de conformidad con el Convenio
sobre Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a Inversiones entre Estados y
Nacionales de otros Estados (Convenio del CIADI);

[Tribunal’s translation:

In case of disputes arising between domestic or foreign investors and
the State, regarding their investments made in El Salvador, the parties
may resort to [El Salvador’s] Courts of Justice as the competent
authority under the legal procedures.

In case of disputes arising between foreign investors and the State,
regarding their investments made in El Salvador, the investors may
submit the controversy to:

a) The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID), in order to settle the dispute by conciliation and arbitration, in
accordance with the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the ICSID
Convention).]

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

16. Within their Request, Claimants included the following waiver of rights, as

required by Article 10.18.2(b)(ii) of CAFTA (the “Waiver Provision”):?

[T]he claimants hereby waive their rights to initiate or continue any
domestic proceeding with respect to any measure alleged to constitute
a breach for purposes of the present Notice of Arbitration.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, pursuant to Article 10.18.3 of CAFTA,
the claimants reserve the right to initiate or continue any proceedings
for injunctive relief not involving the payment of damages before any
administrative or judicial tribunal of the Republic of El Salvador, for
the purposes of preserving their rights and interests during the
pendency of this arbitration. Copies of the waivers are attached as
Exhibit “A” and Exhibit “B”.

17. On 29 July 2009, the Secretary-General of ICSID (the “Secretary-General”)
requested Claimants to submit additional information for purposes of determining
whether their Request was “manifestly outside the jurisdiction of the Centre”

pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention (the “Clarification”).

Request J 36.

Article 10.18.2 of CAFTA provides:

No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this section unless:

(a) the claimant consents in writing to arbitration in accordance with the procedures set out
in this Agreement; and

(b) the notice of arbitration is accompanied,

(i) for claims submitted to arbitration under Article 10.16.1(a), by the
claimant’s written waiver, and

(ii) for claims submitted to arbitration under Article 10.16.1(b), by the
claimant’s and the enterprise’s written waivers

of any right to initiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or court under
the law of any Party, or other dispute settlement procedures, any proceeding with
respect to any measure alleged to constitute a breach referred to in Article 10.16.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

On 14 August 2009, Respondent filed a letter in which it submitted that the present
dispute “is manifestly outside ICSID’s jurisdiction”, contending, among other
things, that Claimants had not stopped court proceedings extent in El Salvador in
which they sought to obtain the complete reversal of any measures taken against

them, thereby violating the mandatory Waiver Provision of CAFTA.

On 19 August 2009, Claimants submitted their Clarification, providing

supplemental Annexes E, F, and G to the Request.

On 21 August 2009, the Secretary-General registered Claimants’ Request with
Annexes A through G.

On 24 August 2009, Respondent filed a letter preserving its objections made in its
letter of 14 August 2009.

On 29 October 2009, ICSID confirmed the appointment of Dr. Horacio A. Grigera

Na6on to serve as the arbitrator nominated by Claimants.
Thereafter, this matter remained at a standstill for many months.

On 9 April 2010, the Secretary-General informed the Parties that failure to take
action during six consecutive months would lead to a discontinuance of

proceedings pursuant to Rule 45 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

On 13 April 2010, Claimants filed a letter with ICSID, requesting that the
Chairman of the Administrative Council immediately appoint an arbitrator on

behalf of Respondent, as Respondent had failed to appoint an arbitrator.

Before such action from ICSID became necessary, on 28 April 2010, Respondent

appointed Mr. J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C., to serve as co-arbitrator.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

On 11 May 2010, the Secretary-General informed the Parties of the need to

appoint a presiding arbitrator.

The Parties having been unable to agree on a presiding arbitrator, by letter dated
29 June 2010, the Secretary-General of ICSID advised that she had appointed Prof.
van den Berg pursuant to Article 10.19.3 of CAFTA.

On the same day (29 June 2010), Prof. van den Berg accepted his appointment as

President of the Tribunal, pursuant to Rule 5 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

On 1 July 2010, the Secretary-General informed the Parties that the Tribunal was
deemed constituted and that the proceedings had begun. Further, the Parties and
the Tribunal were informed that Mr. Marco T. Montafiés-Rumayor, Counsel at

ICSID, would serve as the Secretary to the Tribunal.

On 27 July 2010, the First Session was held by telephone at which a procedural
calendar for the further conduct of the proceedings was established. During the
First Session, it was agreed that the arbitration would be bifurcated between a

jurisdictional and a merits phase.

On 13 August 2010, the Parties jointly filed a letter evincing their agreement as to

the procedural timetable.

In accordance with this timetable, on 16 August 2010, Respondent filed its
Preliminary Objections under the expedited procedures of CAFTA (the “PO”). On

the same date, the Tribunal suspended the proceeding on the merits.

The relevant provisions regarding the expedited procedures of CAFTA are
contained in Article 10.20, captioned “Conduct of the Arbitration”, and provide as

follows:

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

4. Without prejudice to a tribunal’s authority to address other
objections as a preliminary question, a tribunal shall address and
decide as a preliminary question any objection by the respondent that,
as a matter of law, a claim submitted is not a claim for which an award
in favor of the claimant may be made under Article 10.26.

(a) Such objection shall be submitted to the tribunal as soon as
possible after the tribunal is constituted, and in no event later
than the date the tribunal fixes for the respondent to submit its
counter-memorial (or, in the case of an amendment to the notice
of arbitration, the date the tribunal fixes for the respondent to
submit its response to the amendment).

(b) On receipt of an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal
shall suspend any proceedings on the merits, establish a schedule
for considering the objection consistent with any schedule it has
established for considering any other preliminary question, and
issue a decision or award on the objection, stating the grounds
therefor.

(c) In deciding an objection under this paragraph, the tribunal
shall assume to be true claimant’s factual allegations in support
of any claim in the notice of arbitration (or any amendment
thereof) and, in disputes brought under the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, the statement of claim referred to in Article 18
of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The tribunal may also
consider any relevant facts not in dispute.

(d) The respondent does not waive any objection as to
competence or any argument on the merits merely because the
respondent did or did not raise an objection under this paragraph
or make use of the expedited procedure set out in paragraph 5.

5. In the event that the respondent so requests within 45 days after
the tribunal is constituted, the tribunal shall decide on an expedited
basis an objection under paragraph 4 and any objection that the dispute
is not within the tribunal’s competence. The tribunal shall suspend any
proceedings on the merits and issue a decision or award on the
objection(s), stating the grounds therefor, no later than 150 days after
the date of the request. However, if a disputing party requests a
hearing, the tribunal may take an additional 30 days to issue the
decision or award. Regardless of whether a hearing is requested, a
tribunal may, on a showing of extraordinary cause, delay issuing its

12

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

decision or award by an additional brief period, which may not exceed
30 days.

6. | When it decides a respondent’s objection under paragraph 4 or 5,
the tribunal may, if warranted, award to the prevailing disputing party
reasonable costs and attorney’s fees incurred in submitting or opposing
the objection. In determining whether such an award is warranted, the
tribunal shall consider whether either the claimant’s claim or the
respondent’s objection was frivolous, and shall provide the disputing
parties a reasonable opportunity to comment.

On 15 September 2010, Claimants filed their Response to El Salvador’s

Preliminary Objections (the “PO Response”).

On 30 September 2010, Respondent filed its Reply to Claimants’ PO Response
(the “PO Reply”).

On 7 October 2010, Respondent filed a letter requesting the Tribunal to hold a
hearing to address its PO pursuant to Article 10.20.5 of CAFTA.

On 15 October 2010, Claimants filed their Statement of Rejoinder to the PO Reply
(the “PO Rejoinder”).

On 20 October 2010, the Tribunal issued Order No. 1, addressing the procedure
and timeline for amicus curiae submissions pursuant to Article 10.20.3 of CAFTA
(“[t]he tribunal shall have the authority to accept and consider amicus curiae
submissions from a person or entity that is not a disputing party”) and Rule 37(2)
of the ICSID Arbitration Rules (“the Tribunal may allow a person or entity that is

not a party to the dispute [...] to file a written submission with the Tribunal”).

In response to Order No. 1, (i) Costa Rica filed a submission on 1 November 2010;

(ii) Nicaragua filed a submission on 1 November 2010; and (iii) the United States

Al.

42.

43.

44.

4S.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

filed a letter on 1 November 2010, informing the Tribunal that it would not make a

submission.

On 9 November 2010, the Tribunal informed the Parties of the agenda for the
hearing to address Respondent’s PO (the “Hearing”) and invited the Parties to

respond to the following two-part question (the “Pre-Hearing Question”):

(i) Can a party discontinue proceedings before the Supreme
Court of El Salvador when they are in a deliberation phase?

(ii) If so, what are the steps to be taken and what are the relevant
statutory provisions?

On 10 November 2010, Respondent requested that the Tribunal admit the
registration of Claimants’ joint venture® in the Commercial Registry of El

Salvador (the “Official JV Registration”) into the record.

On 11 November 2010, the Tribunal admitted the Official JV Registration into the

record.

On 12 November 2010, Respondent filed its response to the Pre-Hearing Question

with the Secretary of the Tribunal (the “Pre-Hearing Response”).

On the same day, Claimants filed a letter with the Tribunal, submitting that
“although we have been addressing these questions, we are unable at this time to

furnish the tribunal with our answer.”

See 56 below.

46.

47.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

On 14 November 2010, Respondent filed two additional documents, which the
Tribunal admitted into the record as supplemental attachments to its letter of 12

November 2010.

The Hearing to address Respondent’s PO was held in Washington, D.C., on 15

November 2010.* The following representatives attended the hearing:

a) on behalf of Claimants: Messrs. John Machulak, James Machulak, Eugene

Bykhovsky, and Prof. Andrew Newcombe;

b

on behalf of Respondent: Messrs. Derek Smith, Luis Parada, Tomas Solis,
Eric Stanculescu, Brian Vohrer, Ryan Tyndall, Christopher Dolan and
Mesdames Erin Argueta and Mary Lewis; Dr. Benjamin Pleités, Office of
the Attorney General of El Salvador; Mr. Enilson Solano, Embassy of El
Salvador in Washington, D.C.; and Mesdames Stephanie McDonnell and

Mimi Le of Doar Consulting;

c

On behalf of the non-disputing States, pursuant to Rule 32(2) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules: Ms. Ménica Fernéndez-Fonseca, Ministerio de Comercio
Exterior (COMEX), the Republic of Costa Rica; Ms. Yahaira Sosa
Machado, Ministerio de Industria y Comercio, the Dominican Republic;
Messrs. Jeff Kovar, Mark Feldman, Patrick Pearsall and Mesdames Lisa

Grosh and Karen Kizer, U.S. State Department; Ms. Kimberley Claman and

Video coverage of the hearing is available at: __http://icsid.worldbank.org/
ICSID/FrontServlet?requestType=CasesRH &action Val=OpenPage&PageT ype=Announce
mentsFrame&FromPage=A 71.

48.

49.

50.

51.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

Mr. Daniel Bahar, USTR; and Mr. Gary Sampliner, U.S. Department of

Treasury.

At the request of the Tribunal, Claimants provided an oral response to the Pre-
Hearing Question, submitting that although they did not disagree with
Respondent’s Pre-Hearing Response, they were still unable to provide a definite
answer.” When asked to comment on this by the Tribunal, Respondent submitted
that its Pre-Hearing Response and the accompanying opinion of the Attorney
General of El Salvador provide a “very clear” demonstration that “Claimant may
request termination of the proceedings during the deliberation phase . . . and that
the time period for a decision between the request for termination and the actual

termination has been [would be] about three months.”°

Thereafter, Claimants stated that they did not disagree with the rule of law

espoused in Respondent’s Pre-Hearing Response.’

Also at the Hearing, the Tribunal directed the Parties to respond to whether
discontinuance of administrative proceedings before the Supreme Court of El
Salvador is with or without prejudice to reinstatement (the “Post-Hearing

Question”).*

On 23 November 2010, the Parties filed their responses to the Post-Hearing

Question.

5 Tr. 15-16.

° Tr. 17.
Tr. 16.

52.

53.

54.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

On 30 November 2010, the Parties filed their respective submissions on costs.

Pursuant to Article 10.20.5 of CAFTA, a tribunal must render a decision or award
on the PO within 150 days of the date of the filing of the PO, to which an
additional 30 days may be added in the event a hearing is held. The Tribunal may,
on a showing of extraordinary cause, delay issuing its decision or award by an

additional brief period, which may not exceed 30 days.

In this Award, the Tribunal adopts the following method of citation:

. “Request” refers to the Notice of Arbitration filed by Claimants on 2 July
2009;
e “Notice of Registration” refers to the Notice of Registration registered by the

ICSID on 21 August 2009;

. “PO” refers to Respondent’s Preliminary Objections filed on 16 August
2010;
. “PO Response” refers to Claimant’s Response to the Preliminary Objections

filed on 15 September 2010;

. “PO Reply” refers to Respondent’s Statement of Reply to the PO Response
filed on 30 September 2010;

 

Tr. 274.

55.

56.

57.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

. “PO Rejoinder” refers to the Statement of Rejoinder filed by Claimants on

15 October 2010; and

. “Tr.” refers to the English transcript made of the Hearing on 15 November

2010 (Tr. 1 means Transcript on page 1).
FACTUAL BACKGROUND

As an initial matter, the Tribunal notes that, in accordance with Article 10.20.4(c)
of CAFTA, when deciding on Respondent’s PO, “the tribunal shall assume to be
true claimant’s factual allegations in support of any claim” in the Request. In light
of this, the Tribunal does not purport to make any findings of fact in this Section,
but rather sets out what it understands to be this matter’s factual background in
light of the factual allegations in the Request, which the Tribunal assumes to be

true in this phase of the proceedings.

On 22 September 1987, CGC and SSGM entered into a joint venture registered in
Wisconsin, U.S.A, to explore, develop, mine and produce precious metals in El

Salvador (the “Commerce/Sanseb Joint Venture”).

CGC owns 82.5% of the authorized and issued stock of SSGM. CGC also owns
52% of the authorized and issued common shares in Mineral San Sebastian, S.A.

de C.V. (the “Minsane”), an El Salvadoran corporation formed on 8 May 1960."°

Request 7.
0 Request {4 6, 8.

58.

59.

60.

61.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

Claimants received an exploitation concession from the Government of El
Salvador for the San Sebastian Gold Mine on 23 July 1987. At this time,
Claimants and Minsane entered into an agreement to lease 305-acres at the San
Sebastian Gold Mine (the “Minsane Agreement”). Later, in 1993, Claimants
acquired two additional properties, the El Modesto Mine and the San Cristébal

Mill and Plant.’

On 18 August 2002, Claimants met with the El Salvadoran Minister of Economy
and the Department of Hydrocarbons and Mines to cancel their exploitation
concession license for the San Sebastian Gold Mine in exchange for another

exploitation license, to last for 20 to 30 years. |?

In order to mine and process gold ore at the San Sebastian Mine and San Cristébal
Mill and Plant, Claimants received environmental permits from the El Salvador
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (the “MARN”) on 20 October
2002 and 15 October 2002, respectively, renewed for a 3-year period as of 4
January 2006."

In addition, El Salvador granted Claimants two further exploration licenses,
namely: (i) on 3 March 2003, encompassing the San Sebastian Mine and adjoining

areas (the “New San Sebastian Exploration License”); and (ii) on 25 May 2004,

Request {{ 15.
> Request if 15-18; PO J 106.
8 Request {| 16.

62.

63.

64.

65.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

encompassing eight former gold and silver mines (the “Nueva Esparta Exploration

License”).!4

On 13 September 2006, MARN revoked the environmental permits of the San
Sebastian Gold Mine and the San Cristébal Plant and Mine, thereby effectively

terminating Claimants’ right to mine and process gold and silver.

In response, on 6 December 2006, counsel for Commerce and SanSeb filed two
petitions with El Salvador’s Court of Administrative Litigation of the Supreme
Court of Justice, one for each affected mine, seeking a review of the Ministry of
the Environment’s revocation of the environmental permits and their

reinstatement. '®

On 29 April 2010, El Salvador’s Court of Administrative Litigation of the
Supreme Court of Justice notified its decisions of 18 March 2010 (Case No. 308-
2006) and 28 April 2010 (Case No. 309-2006) with respect to these two

complaints. '”

In the interim, over the course of 2006 and 2007, Commerce/Sanseb applied to
MARN for an environmental permit for the New San Sebastian Exploration
License and the Nueva Esparta exploration license, and then to Respondent’s

Ministry of Economy for the extension of the exploration licenses.'* The requested

‘4 Request {{¥] 18-19; PO J 106.
Request {{ 21.

te Request {{ 22.

"7 Tr. 164-166; R-5; R-6.
Request {{ 23.

20

66.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

environmental permits were not granted, and on 28 October 2008, El Salvador’s
Ministry of Economy denied Commerce/Sanseb’s application citing

Commerce/Sanseb’s failure to secure an environment permit.’

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS AND RELIEF SOUGHT

A. Respondent’s Position

Respondent submits that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to hear this
dispute because Claimants did not comply with the CAFTA Waiver Provision by
allowing the extant court proceedings which they had initiated in El Salvador to
continue. In Respondent’s view, adherence to the Waiver Provision is a condition
precedent to Respondent’s consent to arbitration under both CAFTA and the
ICSID Convention, and Claimants’ failure to remedy their non-compliance with
the Waiver Provision once they were put on notice by Respondent means that
Claimants have not preserved their claims in a timely fashion. For this reason,

Respondent requests that the Tribunal:”°

. Suspend the proceedings on the merits while this Preliminary
Objection is pending.

. Dismiss this arbitration in its entirety.

. Issue an order awarding the Republic of El Salvador its share of
the arbitration costs and its attorney’s fees incurred related to this
Objection, plus interest from the time of the decision until

8 Request, {| 23; PO { 106.
0 PO 126, “reaffirm[ed]” in PO Reply | 137.

21

67.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

payment is made, at a rate to be established at the appropriate
time.

. Grant the Republic any other remedy that the Tribunal may
consider proper.

B. Claimants’ Positi

 

Claimants consider that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear this dispute because
they have complied fully with the Waiver Provision. Claimants submit that the
waiver provided in the Request serves as “a unilateral and final abandonment,
extinguishment, and abdication of Claimants’ legal rights to initiate or continue
other proceedings” with regard to the claims before the Tribunal.”’ Claimants
further submit that CAFTA does not require immediate discontinuance of
domestic proceedings, but rather, allows Respondent to use Claimants’ waiver to
seek the discontinuance of domestic proceedings if it so desires. Based on the

foregoing, Claimants request that this Tribunal:

(1) reject the Respondent’s Preliminary Objection;

(2) award the Claimants their costs in opposing the Preliminary
Objection, including counsel fees and disbursements, and the
arbitration costs associated with the Preliminary Objection, with
compound interest;

(3) resume the proceedings on the merits and, after consultation with

the parties, establish a schedule for the written and oral phase of the
merits of the proceeding; and

PO Response 53.
PO Response 101; PO Rejoinder { 107.

22

VI.

68.

VII.

69.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

(4) grant such other relief as the Tribunal may consider appropriate.
INTRODUCTION TO THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

The Tribunal has carefully reviewed the written and oral pleadings, evidence and
legal authorities submitted by the Parties and has relied exclusively on those in the
analysis below. To the extent arguments raised by the Parties are not referred to
expressly in this Award, they must be deemed to be subsumed in the analysis. By
contrast, the Tribunal will not address arguments that have not been raised by the

Parties, as this Award is a decision only in the dispute as pleaded between them.

JURISDICTION

The Parties’ dispute revolves around the CAFTA Waiver Provision, which

provides as follows:

Article 10.18: Conditions and Limitations on Consent of Each
Party

1. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section if
more than three years have elapsed from the date on which the
claimant first acquired, or should have first acquired, knowledge of
the breach alleged under Article 10.16.1 and knowledge that the
claimant (for claims brought under Article 10.16.1(a)) or the
enterprise (for claims brought under Article 10.16.1(b)) has
incurred loss or damage.

2. No claim may be submitted to arbitration under this Section unless:

(a) the claimant consents in writing to arbitration in
accordance with the procedures set out in this Agreement;
and

(b) the notice of arbitration is accompanied,

(i) for claims submitted to arbitration under Article
10.16.1(a), by the claimant’s written waiver, and

23

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

(ii) for claims submitted to arbitration under Article
10.16.1(b), by the claimant’s and the enterprise’s
written waivers

of any right to initiate or continue before any
administrative tribunal or court under the law of any
Party, or other dispute settlement procedures, any
proceeding with respect to any measure alleged to
constitute a breach referred to in Article 10.16.

3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2(b), the claimant (for claims brought
under Article 10.16.1(a)) and the claimant or the enterprise (for
claims brought under Article 10.16.1(b)) may initiate or continue
an action that seeks interim injunctive relief and does not involve
the payment of monetary damages before a judicial or
administrative tribunal of the respondent, provided that the action
is brought for the sole purpose of preserving the claimant’s or the
enterprise’s rights and interests during the pendency of the
arbitration.

4. No claim may be submitted to arbitration:

(a) for breach of an investment authorization under Article
10.16.1(a)(i)(B) or Article 10.16.1(b)(i)(B), or 10-14

(b) for breach of an investment agreement under Article
10.16.1(a)(i)(C) or Article 10.16.1(b)(i)(C), if the claimant
(for claims brought under Article 10.16.1(a)) or the
claimant or the enterprise (for claims brought under Article
10.16.1(b)) has previously submitted the same alleged
breach to an administrative tribunal or court of the
respondent, or to any other binding dispute settlement
procedure, for adjudication or resolution.

A. What Does the Waiver Provision require?

(a) The Parties’ Positions

70. Respondent contends that the Tribunal has neither jurisdiction nor competence to

decide Claimants’ claims because Claimants failed to comply with the Waiver

24

71.

72.

73.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

Provision in not providing and acting consistently with the relinquishment of their

right to continue domestic court proceedings in favor of CAFTA arbitration.”

In Respondent’s view, the Waiver Provision places two requirements on
Claimants, namely, (i) a “form” requirement, whereby Claimants must in fact
submit a waiver, and (ii) a “material” requirement, whereby Claimants must abide
by such waiver by discontinuing domestic court proceedings before initiating this

CAFTA arbitration.

Respondent contends that to interpret Claimants’ waiver in good faith requires
Claimants, as the investors seeking to benefit from CAFTA, to take steps to
comply with the Waiver Provision even after filing for arbitration. By not doing
so, Claimants have not met their burden of perfecting Respondent’s “conditional
consent” to arbitrate under CAFTA and therefore Respondent has not consented to

arbitrate this dispute.”°

Claimants disagree and argue that the Waiver Provision only requires delivery of a
signed waiver to Respondent — which they did with the Request — and that it then
falls within Respondent’s discretion to seek discontinuance of the domestic court

proceedings.”

23 PO Response {| 77-80.

4 PO ff 39-40, 45; Tr. 69-70.
25 PO 437.

PO Fi 30, 44.

25

74.

75.

76.

77.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

In this respect, Claimants state that “CAFTA’s drafters could have required the
discontinuance of domestic proceedings as a condition precedent to the submission
of a claim”, but instead, “they required a waiver of the rights to continue the

927

proceedings” ', which allows a respondent state a “sovereign choice” whether it

prefers “concurrent proceedings to continue””*,

Claimants also submit that they were under no obligation to put an end to the court
proceedings after the start of the arbitration, arguing that events that occur after
receipt of the Request by the Secretary-General are “irrelevant” and have no

bearing on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.””

Respondent rebuts Claimants’ position, contending that Claimants seek to “impose
the burden on the respondent State to seek enforcement of the waiver” instead of
“accepting that a claimant is required to make its waiver effective by discontinuing
any parallel proceedings”.*” Respondent submits that Claimants “had within their

full power the ability to comply”.*!

Moreover, Respondent submits that it would have been “sufficient” for Claimants

to file their discontinuance application with the Supreme Court, where, pursuant to

7 POq4s.

* PO g23.

29 SoRj { 10.

30 PO Reply { 34.
Tr. 7h.

26

78.

79.

80.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

Salvadoran law, “discontinuance is automatic when claimant is in an

a . 9932
administrative case.

Respondent concludes that where Claimants were in a position to discontinue
domestic proceedings, they were correspondingly in a position to comply with the
Waiver Provision at the time of filing, and that “[i]t is a matter of good faith to
comply with the waiver and not to say, I filed my waiver and someday I will

discontinue . . . the waiver had to be valid when filed.”

(b) The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal notes that Respondent has put forth the argument that any waiver
must comply with both a formal and a material element. Claimant disagrees,
essentially arguing that the Waiver Provision only requires adherence to written

formalities.

The Tribunal agrees with Respondent. In the Tribunal’s view, to understand the
concept of waiver in any other way would render it devoid of meaning. Indeed, a
waiver must be more than just words; it must accomplish its intended effect. In
the case of CAFTA, this effect is to have Claimants relinquish “any right to initiate
or continue before any administrative tribunal or court under the law of any Party,
or other dispute settlement procedures, any proceeding with respect to any

measure alleged to constitute a breach” (see CAFTA 10.18(2)(b) in J 69 above).

2 Tr. 42.

33

Tr. 72.

27

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

81. The Tribunal is not alone in this view. For example, in its submission in these

proceedings, the Republic of Costa Rica has stated that:*

A Claimant complies with the requirement of [CAFTA] Article
10.18(2)(b) by physically submitting the waiver document
accompanying his request for arbitration. [S]aid submission
must also be accompanied by the effective waiver, withdrawal
or discontinuance, as appropriate, of any and all proceedings,
either court or administrative proceedings, pending when the
arbitration is commenced and whose procedural drive lies with
the claimant. Otherwise, this provision would be denied
effectiveness or “effet utile”.

82. The Republic of Nicaragua reiterated this point in its own submission:**>

If an investor submits a written waiver under Article 10.18.2(i)
and (ii), but fails to comply with such waiver, this conduct
would be deemed as [misleading] within the scope of the
general law and a violation to the rule within the scope of the
DR-CAFTA Agreement. Therefore, the claim may not be
submitted to arbitration.

83. Other tribunals have also seen things similarly. For instance, in Waste
Management Inc. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/2,
Arbitral Award, 2 June 2000, the tribunal decided that:*°

Any waiver [...] implies a formal and material act on the part of
the person tendering same. To this end, this Tribunal will
therefore have to ascertain whether [the claimant] did indeed
submit the waiver in accordance with the formalities envisaged

Non-Disputing Party Submission of the Republic of Costa Rica, {| 3.
Communication of the Republic of Nicaragua, {] 12 (unofficial translation).

© CL-7; RL-6.

28

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

under NAFTA and whether it has respected the terms of the
same through the material act of dropping or desisting from
initiating parallel proceedings before other courts or tribunals.

Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that Article 10.18(2)(b) of CAFTA requires
Claimants to file a formal “written waiver”, and then materially ensure that no

other legal proceedings are “initiated” or “continued”.

At this juncture, the Tribunal observes that, as Claimants would have it, the
Waiver Provision requires only the delivery of a signed waiver to Respondent, and
Respondent would have to seek discontinuance of the domestic court proceedings
itself. In other words, Claimants consider that while the formal requirement may

be Claimants’ responsibility, the material element is Respondent’s.

The Tribunal does not agree. The Tribunal has been provided with no reason to
conclude that the formal and material elements of the Waiver Provision should be
divided between the Parties. In any event, logic tells us that it is up to Claimants

to make the waiver of their legal rights effective, not Respondent.

Accordingly, in the next Section, the Tribunal will determine whether Claimants
have acted in accordance with the Waiver Provision’s formal and material

requirements.

B. Did Claimants Act in Violation of the Waiver Provision’s
Requirement:

(a) The Parties’ Positions

Respondent contends that Claimants were “in patent violation” of the Waiver

Provision by continuing with their claims before the national courts, “related to the

29

89.

90.

91.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

same measures to maximize the probability of obtaining a favorable result”, when

they filed their Request with ICSID in July 2009.*”

Respondent contends that Claimants’ violation turns upon the definition of
“measures” within the Waiver Provision. Citing the decisions of tribunals in the
RDC*, Thunderbird”, and Loewen” cases, as well as Article 2.1 of CAFTA,
captioned “Definitions of General Application”, Respondent submits that the
“same measures” challenged by the Claimants in the domestic judicial proceedings
and this arbitration include the revocation of permits and similar quantification of

monetary damages.*!

Respondent submits that Claimants’ non-compliance with the Waiver Provision is
evidenced by, among other things, a letter from El Salvador’s Court of
Administrative Litigation of the Supreme Court of Justice dated 1 October 2009,
whereby the court notified Claimants that the domestic proceedings initiated by

them were awaiting final decision.”

In response to the above, Claimants submit that Respondent’s PO has no merit.

7 POS.
Railroad Development Corporation v. Republic of Guatemala, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/23,
Decision on Objection to Jurisdiction under CAFTA Article 10.20.5 (17 Nov. 2008).

See International Thunderbird Gaming Corporation v. The United Mexican States,
UNCITRAL, Arbitral Award (26 Jan. 2006).

“© The Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. The United States of America, \CSID
Case No. ARB (AF)/98/3, Decision on Hearing of Respondent’s Objection to Competence
and Jurisdiction (5 Jan. 2001).

a PO {J 32-38; PO Response 76.

2 R16.

30

92.

93.

94.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

First, Claimants contend that they complied with the Waiver Provision because,
among other things, (i) their waivers comply with the provisions of CAFTA, (ii)
their waivers resulted in the abandonment of Claimants’ rights to pursue the
domestic proceedings, and (iii) CAFTA does not require discontinuance of

3 Tn this

domestic proceedings as a condition to submitting a claim to arbitration.
respect, Claimants submit that there is “no question of a defect ratione materiae in
the waivers”, seeing as they accurately reproduced the language of the Waiver

Provision.

Second, Claimants contend that “the fundamental point is that a waiver is a
unilateral and final abandonment, extinguishment and abdication of legal rights”,
rendering the fact that they took no steps to discontinue the domestic proceedings
immaterial.” In Claimants’ view, what is relevant is that they have also taken no
positive action to continue those proceedings and, therefore, have acted in

accordance with the waiver.“

Third, Claimants contend that there were no overlapping proceedings as between
the El Salvador courts and this arbitration, contrary to the issue faced by the
tribunal in RDC.” Instead, citing the tribunal in Vannessa Ventures*®, Claimants

contend that courts in parallel domestic proceedings “are in the best position to

6 PO Response, {{] 26-47.

PO Response, J 38.

PO Response {{ 17.

PO Response {{f 42-43, 53, 70; PO Rejoinder, {ff 21, 36.

Railroad Development Corporation v. Republic of Guatemala, supra at note 38.

31

95.

96.

97.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

enforce the waiver”, as opposed to the arbitral tribunal seized.” Further,
Claimants argue that to the extent the question of the revocation of the
environmental permits could be before the El Salvador courts and this Tribunal,
their claim that El Salvador has imposed a de facto ban on gold and silver mining

is not.

(b) The Tribunal’s Analysis

It appears that the Parties are on common ground that Claimants adhered to the
formal requirement of the Waiver Provision. The only question, therefore, is

whether Claimants also adhered to the material requirement.

As an initial matter, the Tribunal notes that the Parties agree that the relevant date
for determining the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is 2 July 2009, i.e., the date the Request
was filed.®' However, Claimants submit that, for purposes of examining the
waiver requirement, “there were no arbitral proceedings in the present case until 1

July 2010”, the date on which the Tribunal was constituted.”

In the Tribunal’s view, Claimants’ position is inconsistent. Claimants cannot at
once argue that 2 July 2009 is the relevant date for determining jurisdiction and 1

July 2010 for examining waiver, when the issue of waiver is a question of

 

Vannessa Ventures Ltd. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)04/6, Decision on Jurisdiction (22 Aug. 2008).

PO Response, {{f 60-62.

*0 PO Rejoinder, J 85-91.

Tr. 61-62; PO Response, J 40.
2 PO Response, J 69.

32

98.

99.

100.

101.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

jurisdiction. Indeed, Claimants have admitted as much.” Accordingly, the
Tribunal will examine whether Claimants’ behavior was in compliance with its

waiver as of 2 July 2009.

Respondent is of the view that Claimants were not in compliance with the material
waiver requirement because on the date they filed the Request, the same
“measures” challenged in these proceedings were also before El Salvador’s courts.

Claimants disagree, arguing that there were never even overlapping proceedings.

The Tribunal observes that while Claimants contend that there were never any
overlapping proceedings, Claimants argue this with reference to the date of the
constitution of the Tribunal (i.e., 1 July 2010) as opposed to the date of the

Request (i.e., 2 July 2009). Indeed, as of 1 July 2010, the proceedings before El

 

Salvador’s Court of Administrative Litigation of the Supreme Court of Justice had

ended, with its decisions having been notified on 29 April 2010.

However, as the Tribunal decided in { 97 above, the operative date for examining
the waiver is 2 July 2009. There is no dispute that, as of that date, the two
complaints filed by Claimants were awaiting judgment by El Salvador’s Court of

Administrative Litigation of the Supreme Court of Justice (see JJ 63 — 64 above).

Furthermore, those complaints relate very much to the same “measures” as those

at issue in these proceedings. The Article 10.18(2) waiver applies to proceedings

In { 5 of the PO Rejoinder, Claimants “accept that the submission of a waiver under
CAFTA Article 10.18 is a condition and limitation on consent and thus a jurisdictional
requirement”.

See generally PO Response, {ff 67-71.

33

102.

103.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

“with respect to any measure alleged to constitute a breach” of CAFTA. The
definition of “measure” in Article 2.1 of CAFTA “includes any law, regulation,
procedure, requirement or practice”. It is undisputed that the relevant “measures”
in this case and the El Salvador proceedings are the revocation of the

environmental permits (see {J 62 — 65 above).

Claimants have indicated (as they must) that they were aware when they filed their
Request that the proceedings which they had initiated in El Salvador were on-
going, but state further that they were unaware of the status of such proceedings
because of communication difficulties with local counsel.*° In the Tribunal’s
view, this is no excuse. Regardless of the status of the El Salvador proceedings,
Claimants knew the proceedings they had initiated and argued were pending a
decision of the Court. Claimants were accordingly under an obligation to
discontinue those proceedings in order to give material effect to their formal
waiver. It was fleshed out in connection with the Pre-Hearing Question that
discontinuing the proceedings would have been possible and relatively quick (see
Ml 48 — 49 above). In this respect, Claimants’ argument that they acted in
accordance with the waiver by not taking any positive action to continue those
proceedings holds no weight, as the El Salvador proceedings continued with no
positive action on Claimants’ part to discontinue them, and ultimately resulted in

two judgments.
The Tribunal notes that when El Salvador’s Court of Administrative Litigation of

the Supreme Court of Justice issued its judgments, it only named Claimant No. 1,

S Tr. 163.

34

104.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

omitting to mention Claimant No. 25° This is despite the fact that claims were
filed on behalf of both Claimants in the proceedings in El Salvador.*” Respondent
alleges that the Court’s decision came about due to confusion concerning the joint
venture’s name on the part of the Government of El Salvador (because of its
denomination in the commercial registry as “Commerce Group”, rather than
“Commerce/Sanseb Joint Venture”), and not due to any affirmative action by
Claimant No. 2 to discontinue its participation.** Be it as it may, nothing in the
record indicates any affirmative action by Claimant No. 2 to discontinue its
participation in such proceedings. On the contrary, as is clear from Claimants’
letter to the MARN dated 10 December 2009, both Claimants indicated that they
were awaiting a decision from the El Salvador’s courts.’ Further, the Tribunal
notes Claimants’ statement in its Request that Claimant No. 1 and Claimant No. 2
entered into a joint venture named the “Commerce/Sanseb Joint Venture” on 22
September 1988 and that the joint venture agreement authorizes Claimant No. | to
execute agreements on behalf of the Joint Venture and that the “Commerce/Sanseb
Joint Venture is a ‘national of another Contracting State’ for the purposes of the
ICSID Convention.” Thus, the Tribunal understands that Claimant No. 1 has been

acting on behalf of Claimant No. 2 in this matter and in the domestic proceedings.

At this juncture, the Tribunal must address the issue raised in connection with the

Post-Hearing Question, namely, whether Claimants’ discontinuing the proceedings

RS: R6.
7 C607.
Tr. 87-90.
* R-I5.

35

105.

106.

107.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

before the El Salvador courts would have been with or without prejudice to the

reintroduction of Claimants’ cause of action elsewhere.

In response to the Post-Hearing Question, Respondent submitted a memorandum
composed with input from local counsel, indicating that Claimants’ discontinuing
those proceedings would not result in their losing the right to pursue the
underlying cause of action in another forum.” For their part, Claimants submitted
a letter, asserting that discontinuing proceedings would be with prejudice to
reinstatement, “based on the combined effect of Art. 53 of the Law of
Administrative Litigation Jurisdiction and Articles 464 and 467 of the Civil
Proceedings Code”.°!

Claimants have not provided the Tribunal with the text of the laws to which they
refer, nor with an analysis of those laws. By contrast, Respondent’s memorandum
provides a thorough analysis of the Post-Hearing Question, with which the
Tribunal agrees. Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that Claimants’ rights
would not have been impinged upon by discontinuing the proceedings in El

Salvador.

In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal concludes that Claimants were obliged to
discontinue the proceedings before the El Salvador courts relating to the
revocation of the environmental permits, and by not doing so, Claimants did not

act in accordance with the requirements of the Waiver Provision.

© See Respondent's letter dated 23 November 2010.

See Claimants’ letter dated 23 November 2010.

36

108.

109.

110.

111.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

However, the foregoing does not dispose of the issue entirely. Indeed, the above
only addresses the revocation of the environmental permits being before both this
Tribunal and the courts of El Salvador. The above does not address Claimants’
claim that a de facto ban imposed by El Salvador on gold and silver mining can
still be heard in these proceedings because it is before this Tribunal only and not

before the El Salvador courts (see 94 above).

Respondent denies that such a de facto ban exists or ever existed and, in any event,
contends that such a policy cannot constitute a “measure” within the meaning of
CAFTA. Rather, Respondent contends that the only “measures” underlying
Claimants’ allegations of breach of CAFTA are the revocation of the

. +1. 63
environmental permits.

Claimants counter Respondent’s argument with reference to the tribunal’s decision
in RDC. In Claimants’ view, RDC stands for the proposition that a partial overlap
of claims between a CAFTA arbitration and parallel proceedings cannot render a
CAFTA waiver invalid in its entirety. Claimants consider that claims not heard in
the parallel proceedings can still be heard in the CAFTA arbitration. In light of
this, Claimants submit that, as the de facto ban claim is not before the El Salvador

courts, their waiver is valid and that claim can be heard before this Tribunal.
The Tribunal does not disagree with Claimants’ reading of the decision in RDC.

However, the Tribunal considers reference to RDC in the context of this case to be

o PO Rejoinder, J 80-83.
63 PO, { 30-31.
PO Rejoinder, ff 85-91.

37

112.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

inapposite, as the Tribunal has not been confronted with separate and distinct
claims. The Tribunal views Claimants’ claim regarding the de facto mining ban
policy as part and parcel of their claim regarding the revocation of the
environmental permits. Indeed, when Claimants sought to challenge the
revocation of the environmental permits before the El Salvador courts, they were
not just hoping to have their permits reinstated — they were hoping to be able to
mine again. The effect of the revocations, now upheld in Respondent’s courts,
was, to use Claimants’ phrasing in their Notice of Arbitration, to “effectively
terminat[e] Commerce/SanSeb’s right to mine and process gold and silver.”°° The
de facto mining policy was alleged to have emerged in the same month as the
permit revocations were notified to Claimants.® Consequently, in the Tribunal’s

view, the de facto mining ban policy claim is not separate and distinct.

Moreover, even if the de facto mining ban policy and the revocation of the permits
could be teased apart, the Tribunal is of the view that the policy does not constitute
a “measure” within the meaning of CAFTA. At most — at least based on the
Tribunal’s evaluation of this particular case — the ban is a policy of the
Government as opposed to a “measure” taken by it. By contrast, the revocation of
the environmental permits squarely constitutes a measure taken pursuant to that
policy and, as noted, it was that revocation which put an end to Claimants’ mining

and processing activities.

6 Request, {| 21.

® Request, {| 25. In fact, the orders of revocation preceded their notification to

Commerce/Sanseb by some two months.

38

113.

114.

115.

116.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

The Tribunal therefore determines that Claimants failed to fulfill the requirements

of the Waiver Provision with respect to their entire claims.

Cc. Consequences of the Failure to Fulfill the Waiver Requirement

Article 10.18 is clear in relevant part: “No claim may be submitted to arbitration . .
. unless . . . (b) the notice of arbitration is accompanied . . . (i) by the claimant’s
written waiver ... of any right to initiate or to continue . . . any proceeding with

respect to any measure alleged to constitute a breach referred to in Article 10.16.”

As analyzed above, the waiver is required as a condition to Respondent’s consent
to CAFTA. As also analyzed above, the waiver is invalid as it lacks effectiveness
due to Claimants’ failure to discontinue the proceedings before El Salvador’s
Court of Administrative Litigation of the Supreme Court. If the waiver is invalid,
there is no consent. The Tribunal, therefore, does not have jurisdiction over the

Parties’ CAFTA dispute.

For the sake of completeness, the Tribunal notes that Claimants have argued that
their conduct following the submission of the waiver is irrelevant to the
determination of jurisdiction and is rather subject to the Tribunal’s “supervisory
power” over the admissibility of the claims.®” However, as the Tribunal has
already determined that it does not have jurisdiction over the Parties’ CAFTA
dispute on the basis of Claimants’ behavior at the time the waiver was given,

questions regarding admissibility of claims subsequent to the waiver fall away.
6

PO Rejoinder, {| 46-58.

39

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

117. On the other hand, the question as to whether the Tribunal may entertain claims

based on the Foreign Investment Law of El Salvador will be addressed in the next

Section.

D. Can the Tribunal Hear Claims arising under the Foreign
Investment Law of El Salvador, Regardless of the Waiver
Provision?

(a) The Parties’ Positions

118. Claimants contend that “the current proceeding is based on two separate arbitral
consents”, one arising under CAFTA and the other under the Foreign Investment
Law of El Salvador. Claimants argue that the Waiver Provision has no effect on
their claims submitted under the Investment Law, such that in the event the
Tribunal agrees with Respondent regarding the Waiver Provision, Claimants’ other

claims can be heard.**

119. Respondent contends that Claimants’ claims under the Investment Law cannot be
heard in these proceedings because they were not raised in the Request, and
neither the ICSID Rules nor CAFTA allow for a Request to be amended. In any
event, Respondent argues that Claimants failed to particularize their claims

regarding Respondent’s alleged violation of its Investment Law.”

120. At the Hearing, Respondent further specified as follows:”

68

PO Rejoinder, { 98-100.
PO Reply, {ff 112-120.
Tr. 278.

69

0

40

121.

122.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

IT also just want to point out, there has been a considerable
discussion of whether or not the waiver applies to the
investment law proceedings regarding the investment law before
this tribunal. We’ve heard the position of the parties.

From El Salvador’s point of view, that issue is not yet ripe for
decision. It has not yet been placed before the tribunal. El
Salvador again reserves its right to raise that issue if the time
came, but would hope that the tribunal would reserve a decision
on that until it has been fully briefed, as it is a rather significant
and complicated legal issue.

(b) The Tribunal’s Analysis

Respondent’s position is, first and foremost, that the Tribunal cannot accept
jurisdiction under the Investment Law because Claimants have failed to assert any
claims thereunder.’! Respondent’s alternative position, as articulated in § 120
above, is that in the event the Tribunal decided that such claims have been
asserted, the Parties should be invited to brief the Tribunal as to whether those

claims are subject to the Waiver Provision.

Claimants have responded to Respondent’s primary argument by stating that “[i]t
is evident on the face of the Notice of Arbitration that the same measures that give
rise to CAFTA claims also give rise to breaches of the Foreign Investment Law”,

and that Claimants did not refer to the Foreign Investment Law in the Request

See PO Reply, {| 112-114, under the caption “Claimants did not submit any claims of
violations of the Investment Law”.

2 PO Rejoinder, | 93.

41

123.

124.

125.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

“because of the various rules in CAFTA” and because such was “not required

under the ICSID Institution Rules or the ICSID Arbitration Rules”.”*

Despite this, Claimants “confirm that they have submitted a claim for breach of the
Foreign Investment Law, in particular for breaches of Article 5 (equal protection),

Article 6 (non-discrimination) and Article 8 (compensation for expropriation)”.”*

 

The Tribunal is not satis

 

ed that Claimants have in fact raised any claims — i.e.,
causes of action — under the Foreign Investment Law. Claimants have, at most,
given explanations as to why they have not done so (see { 122 above). Further,

Claimants’ “confirmation” that they have submitted a claim for breach of the
Foreign Investment Law is unsupported by their submissions. Claimants have not
articulated any claims; rather, as the following review of the submissions
demonstrates, they have provided a perfunctory recital of the articles of the

Foreign Investment Law, at most.

Indeed, in {1 of the Request, Claimants state that the Request was filed pursuant
to the ICSID Convention, CAFTA and the Foreign Investment Law. Claimants
make no other reference to the Foreign Investment Law in this document, not even
in J 31 where they set forth their request for relief (referring only to “El Salvador’s
violation of its obligations under CAFTA-DR with respect to treatment of foreign

investors”).

8 PO Rejoinder, 95.
m PO Rejoinder, { 94, 97.

42

126.

127.

128.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

In {| 80 — 83 of the PO Response, Claimants submit that the revocation of the
environmental permits and the de facto ban on mining constitute violations “of
CAFTA and the Foreign Investment Law”. However, no provision of the Foreign
Investment Law is specifically referred to in those paragraphs. Similarly, in J 84
— 86 of the same submission, Claimants state that there are “multiple claims
arising from two separate sources (the CAFTA and the Foreign Investment Law)”,
but no specific reference to the Foreign Investment Law is made there, either.
Aside from in these paragraphs, the PO Response makes only passing reference to

the Foreign Investment Law.

It is only late in the pleadings stage, at {{[ 92 — 97 of the PO Rejoinder, that
Claimants finally make specific reference to the Foreign Investment Law. As
noted in { 123 above, Claimants “confirm that they have submitted a claim for
breach of the Foreign Investment Law, in particular for breaches of Article 5
(equal protection), Article 6 (non-discrimination) and Article 8 (compensation for
expropriation)”. However, aside from listing the article numbers and their
captions, Claimants have not made reference to the specific provisions of any of
these articles, nor have they indicated how the facts of this case apply to those
specific provisions. In other words, Claimants have, at best, made belated
contentions under the Foreign Investment Law that remain un-particularized; they

have not articulated any specific causes of action.

Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that there are no claims to be heard in this
arbitration under the Foreign Investment Law, regardless of any Waiver Provision.
In light of this, the dismissal of the CAFTA claims necessarily entails dismissal of

the entire case.

4B

VIL.

129.

130.

131.

132.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

Costs

A. The Parties’ Positions

On 17 November 2010, the Secretary to the Tribunal invited the Parties to submit

their respective “statements of costs” by 30 November 2010.

On 30 November 2010, Claimants submitted an Application for Costs, requesting

the Tribunal to:

Order Respondent to reimburse the Claimants for the Claimants’
portion of the Tribunal’s fees and expenses, along with ICSID’s
administrative fees and expenses, associated with the
Respondent’s preliminary objection; and,

Order Respondent to reimburse the Claimants for

US$ 145,120.59, representing the attorney fees and expenses

paid and/or incurred by Claimants, with interest at a rate to be

determined by the Tribunal from the date of the Award until

final payment.
That same day, Respondent submitted a statement of costs amounting to
US$ 790,399. In addition, Respondent specified that its statement did not include
its legal fees and costs incurred before 1 July 2010, in keeping with statements

made to Claimants earlier in the proceedings.

On 1 December 2010, Respondent objected to Claimants’ Application for Costs on
the basis that the Tribunal had simply asked for a statement of costs, i.e., “a list of
a party’s arbitration costs, submitted in the event the Tribunal decides to award
costs to that party pursuant to an application for costs the party made earlier during
the proceeding”. Respondent submitted that if “the Tribunal decides to admit

Claimants’ application for costs”, it would like an opportunity to respond.

44

133.

134.

135.

136.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

The Tribunal granted Respondent the opportunity to provide its comments on

Claimants’ Application for Costs, which it did on 2 February 2011.

In its comments, Respondent disputes Claimants’ Application for Costs, but
“reaffirms its request for costs and fees plus interest”. Respondent argues that it is
entitled to recover its own costs because Claimants’ claim was “frivolous”, as
evidenced by, among other things, “Claimants’ intention all along [...] to wait for
the Supreme Court to issue its decisions and to keep the CAFTA arbitration open
in case they lost”. Respondent also argues that it is entitled to recover its costs
because Claimants made frivolous arguments during the arbitration (e.g., waiver
was not a condition to consent, it was up to Respondent to make the waiver

effective) and in their Application for Costs.

B. The Tribunal’s Analysis
Article 10.20.6 of CAFTA provides as follows:

When it decides a respondent’s objection under paragraph 4 or
5, the tribunal may, if warranted, award to the prevailing
disputing party reasonable costs and attorney’s fees incurred in
submitting or opposing the objection. In determining whether
such an award is warranted, the tribunal shall consider whether
either the claimant’s claim or the respondent’s objection was
frivolous, and shall provide the disputing parties a reasonable
opportunity to comment.

Article 10.20.6 sets forth a test for tribunals to assess costs, namely, “the tribunal
shall consider whether either the claimant’s claim or the respondent’s objection
was frivolous”. In light of this, the Tribunal understands the power granted under
this Article to be limited, turning on whether the Tribunal considers Claimants

claims or Respondent’s preliminary objection to be “frivolous”.

45

137.

138.

139.

140.

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

The Tribunal has found entirely in favor of Respondent. However, to conclude
from Respondent’s victory that Claimants’ claims were “frivolous” would be to go
too far. Indeed, the Tribunal has been presented with no indication that Claimants
were not serious about the claims they asserted in these proceedings, nor that

Claimants pursued this matter in bad faith.

In light of this, the Tribunal considers that there are no grounds pursuant to Article

10.20.6 of CAFTA to award costs to either side.

Accordingly, the Tribunal shall order each side to bear one-half of the costs of

arbitration, and each Party to bear its own legal fees and expenses.
DECISIONS
FOR THE FOREGOING REASONS, the Tribunal renders the following decisions:

(1) DETERMINES that the dispute is not within its jurisdiction and competence
pursuant to CAFTA;

(2) ORDERS each side to bear one-half of the costs of arbitration, and each Party

to bear its own legal fees and expenses; and

(3) DISMISSES all other claims or requests for relief.

46

Commerce Group Corp. and
San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc.
v. The Republic of El Salvador

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17

THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL:

 

Dr. Horacio A. Grigera Naén ve Zoe Thomas, Q.C.

Arbitrator (6 wu Arbitrator <7 APG2ae, 201/

\_

Professor Albert Jan van den Berg
Presiding Arbitrator 2) FeGeuary Bors

