INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

COMMERCE GROUP CorP. &
SAN SEBASTIAN GOLD MINES, INC.

Applicants (Claimants),

REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR

Respondent.

ICSID Case No. ARB/09/17
(Annulment Proceeding)

 

DECISION ON EL SALVADOR’S APPLICATION FOR SECURITY FOR COSTS

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee:
Professor Michael Pryles
Professor Christoph Schreuer
Professor Emmanuel Gaillard (President)
Secretary to the ad hoc Committee:

Mr. Marco Tulio Montafiés-Rumayor

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: September 20, 2012

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On July 12, 2011, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or the “Centre”) received an Application for Annulment of the award
rendered on March 14, 2011 in the arbitration proceeding of Commerce Group Corp.
and San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc. v. Republic of El Salvador (ICSID Case No.
ARB/09/17). The application was brought by Commerce Group Corp. and San
Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc. (the “Applicants” or “Claimants”) against the Republic of
EI Salvador (the “Respondent” or “El Salvador”).

On July 15, 2011, the Centre registered the Application for Annulment pursuant to
Arbitration Rule 50(2)(a).

On August 8, 2011, the ad hoc Committee was constituted in accordance with
Arbitration Rule 52(2) as follows: Professor Emmanuel Gaillard (French), President;
Professor Michael C. Pryles (Australian); and Professor Christoph Schreuer (Austrian).

On August 17, 2011, the Centre requested the Applicants to pay US$ 150,000.00

pursuant to Administrative and Financial Regulation 14(3)(e).

On September 26, 2011, the ad hoc Committee held a first session with the parties by
telephone conference.

On October 24, 2011, the Centre informed the parties that it had not received the
advance payment from the Applicants. In accordance with Administrative and
Financial Regulation 14(3)(d), the Centre invited either party to pay the outstanding

balance.

On November 17, 2011, the Applicants replied to the Centre’s letter of October 24,
2011. The Applicants stated that they were engaged in efforts to satisfy the request, but

were unable to pay the advance at that time.

On December 15, 2011, El Salvador replied to the Applicants letter of November 17,
2011. It noted that it would not make the payment on behalf of the Applicants pursuant
to Administrative and Financial Regulation 14(3)(d).

On December 15, 2011, the Applicants filed their Memorial on annulment.

20.

On December 19, 2011, the ICSID Secretary-General moved that the Committee stay
the proceeding pursuant to Administrative and Financial Regulations 14(3)(d) and (e).
On the same day, the ad hoc Committee decided to stay the proceeding because of the

non-payment of the required advances.

On May 22, 2012, the Centre informed the parties that five months had passed since the
December 19, 2011 letter, without receipt of the outstanding payment. It also reminded
the parties that if the proceeding was stayed for a consecutive period in excess of six
months, the Secretary-General would move that the ad hoc Committee discontinue the

proceeding.

On June 18, 2012, the Applicants replied to the Centre’s letter of May 22 and requested

a 60-day extension to secure the necessary financing and make the payment.

On June 21, 2012, El Salvador wrote to the ICSID Secretary-General to oppose the

Applicants’ request.
On June 22, the Applicants renewed their request for a 60-day extension.

On July 3, 2012, El Salvador noted that if the Secretary-General or the ad hoc
Committee decided to grant the Applicants’ request for additional time, El Salvador

would request that the inuation of the P be ditioned on

their ability to provide security for costs.

On July 10, 2012, the Committee decided to grant a one-time 10-day extension
pursuant to which the Applicants had until July 20, 2012 to make the outstanding

payment,

On July 23, 2012, the proceeding was resumed following payment of the required

advance.

 

On August 3, 2012, the C ittee fixed the p dural calendar, including a schedul

for El Salvador’s potential request for security for costs.
On August 10, 2012, El Salvador filed its Application for Security for Costs.

On August 17, 2012, the Applicants filed their Response to El Salvador’s Application.

21.

I.

22.

23.

24,

25.

On August 21, 2012, the Committee decided to allow a second round of submissions
regarding El Salvador’s Application and fixed a schedule for this purpose. Pursuant to
the schedule, El Salvador filed its Reply Application for Security for Costs on August
27, 2012, and the Applicants filed their Rejoinder on El Salvador’s Application for
Security for Costs on September 5, 2012.

THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
A. The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent requests that the Committee order the Applicants to post security
corresponding to its estimated legal fees and costs as well as to the estimated fees, costs

and expenses of ICSID and the Committee.

The Respondent argues that under the ICSID Rules, the Committee can order the
posting of security for costs pursuant to the Committee’s inherent powers to preserve

the integrity of the proceeding. The Respond iders that, in the ci of

 

this case, the normal procedure for advance payments under the ICSID Administrative

and Financial Rules is inadequate to guarantee the integrity of the proceedings.

The Respondent refers to the Committee’s power to require the posting of security in
connection with a stay of enforcement — for which, the Respondent explains, there is no
express rule in the ICSID Convention — as an example of the inherent powers of the

Committee.

The Respondent argues that, in the present case, the Committee should exercise its

inherent powers because

“[uJnlike a tribunal facing a new case that does not wish to prejudge
the case before hearing the evidence, here the Committee already has
direct, uncontroverted evidence, [...] demonstrating Claimants’
inability to fund this proceeding with the accompanying unfairness of
making El Salvador, the Centre, and the Committee assume the risk of
expending substantial resources to continue a proceeding that will
either be abandoned or funded by a third party. Moreover, the request
for security for costs justified by this evidence is unrelated to the
merits of Claimants’ application for annulment.”

El Salvador’s Application for Security for Costs, August 10, 2012, 4 33.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

Indeed, the Respondent points out, the Applicants did not make the advance payment
requested by the Centre on August 17, 2011 on time and the Applicants’ failure to do
so in the subsequent period led to the suspension of the proceeding on December 19,

2011, which lasted for nearly seven months.

The Respondent argues that the Applicants initiated an annulment proceeding that they
cannot fund. It claims that evidence shows that the Applicants are in a very difficult
financial situation and that they are seeking to obtain third-party financing.
Accordingly, the Respondent contends, there is a risk that the Applicants will abandon
the proceeding for lack of funding.

While in such circumstances the Respondent ought to be entitled to a reimbursement of
its costs, the Applicants would be without funds to pay the costs and would therefore

be able to ignore any order for costs rendered against them.

According to the Respondent, the amount of security to be posted should be sufficient
to cover all of its fees, costs and expenses, as well as those of the Committee and
ICSID at the end of the proceeding. The Respondent estimates that, in the
circumstances of the case, this amount would be around US$ 2 million. The
Respondent requests that the Committee order that the Applicants post this amount as
security within 30 days of its decision and, if the Applicants fail to do so, that it

discontinue the proceedings.

The Respondent considers that the circumstances would justify discontinuance because
the Applicants’ initiation of annulment proceedings that they knew they could not fund
constitutes an abuse of process. This is particularly so, according to the Respondent,
since the Committee could have discontinued the proceedings after the time limit for

the payment of the advance fees requested by the Centre elapsed on June 19, 2012.
B. The Applicants’ Position

The Applicants contend that, with its application, the Respondent is asking the ad hoc

Committee to create an economic bar to the annulment proceeding.

The Applicants first argue that ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulation 14
“provides a comprehensive mechanism to address the cost of annulment proceedings

by making the applicant solely responsible for making advance payments for the

34,

35.

proceeding upon the request of the Secretary-General”.> They submit that, given the
availability of this mechanism, which includes the power to make supplementary
advance payments, there is no need for the Committee to rely on its inherent powers to
order security for costs.

The Applicants argue that the Respondent’s application is a disguised application for
provisional measures to safeguard the Respondent’s own interests, because, they aver,
the issue of “[s]ecurity for a party’s legal costs is a question of the financial interests of
one party and not the integrity of the proceeding”.’ As such, the application should fail
because pursuant to Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention the Committee does not

have the power to order provisional measures.

The Applicants note that the cases dealing with the subject of integrity of proceedings
have typically addressed issues such as conflicts of interest, basic procedural fairness,
respect for confidentiality and legal privilege, the right of parties to seek advice and to
advance their cases freely and non-aggravation of the dispute. According to the
Applicants, in those cases, “the overriding goal of the exercise of inherent powers was
to ensure due process and facilitate the adjudication of claims”.* They submit that the

circumstances of the present case do not merit an intervention of that kind.

The Applicants contend that “in circumstances like these security for a party’s own
costs has never been granted by an ICSID tribunal or ad hoc Committee”.’ They argue
that the Respondent has failed to provide any relevant precedent that supports its
request. The Applicants refer to the Libananco v. Turkey arbitration, in which the
Tribunal rejected Turkey’s request for security for costs made pursuant to Article 47 of

the ICSID Convention on provisional measures.

Claimants’ Response to El Salvador’s Application for Security for Costs, August 17, 2012, | 23
(emphasis in original).

Ibid., 30.
Ibid, 429.
Ibid., 431.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

The Applicants do not contest the fact that they are in a difficult financial situation,
though they note that they “do not regard themselves as being insolvent”.’ They argue
that the Respondent has contributed to their financial difficulties.

The Applicants insist that they have not acted in bad faith and that their actions do not
constitute abuse of process. They note that they have paid the advance payment which
was asked of them and that they “are, quite simply, doing their best with limited
resources”,”

The Applicants request that the Respondent’s application is denied and that the costs
and expenses associated with addressing the Respondent’s Application for Security for

Costs are assessed against the Respondent.
THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

The Respondent has requested the Committee to issue an order requiring the
Applicants to post security for the estimated costs of this annulment proceeding,
including for the Respondent’s legal costs. The Respondent contends that this order
should be made pursuant to the Committee’s inherent powers to protect the integrity of

the proceeding.

While the parties agree that an international arbitral tribunal has the inherent powers to
order measures to safeguard the integrity of the proceedings, they seem to disagree as
to whether these powers include the ability to order, under the appropriate
circumstances, that one party post security for the other party’s legal costs and/or other

expenses.

In this connection, the Committee also takes note of the Applicants’ argument that the
Respondent’s application seeks only to preserve the Respondent’s interests as opposed
to the integrity of the proceeding as a whole and that, as such, its request is a

“disguised” application for provisional measures and should accordingly be denied,

Ibid, 47.

Claimants’ Rejoinder to El Salvador’s Application for Security for Costs, September 5, 2012,
qis.

42.

43.

44,

45.

46.

since Article 47 on provisional measures does not apply to annulment proceedings.* At
the same time, the Respondent has explicitly indicated that it is not asking for

provisional measures.”

In light of the Respondent’s assertion that it is not asking for provisional measures, the
Committee will not determine whether or not it has the power to order or recommend
provisional measures. The Committee will assess the Respondent’s application only in
the context of the Committee’s inherent powers to safeguard the integrity of the

proceedings.

First, as a preliminary matter, the ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulations
(Regulation 14) and the ICSID Convention (Article 61(2)) establish mechanisms for
the advance payment of expenses and for the apportionment of costs in arbitral and
annulment proceedings. Accordingly, to the extent possible, any issue relating to the
payment of fees or the apportionment of costs that might arise in annulment
pr dings ought to be add d through these mech

 

Second, the exercise of an international tribunal’s inherent powers to safeguard the
integrity of the proceedings is an extraordinary control and is to be resorted to only in

compelling circumstances."

As the guardian of the integrity of the proceeding, the Committee may, in the
appropriate situation, use its inherent powers to order security for costs. However, the
power to order security for costs should be exercised only in extreme circumstances,

for example, where abuse or serious misconduct has been evidenced.

Indeed, in the context of applications for provisional measures, a number of ICSID

tribunals have declined to order security for costs.'' Thus, for example, in Libananco

Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention provides: “The provisions of Articles 41-45, 48, 49, 53
and 54, and of Chapters VI and VII shall apply mutatis mutandis to proceedings before the
Committee”.

El Salvador’s Application for Security for Costs, August 10, 2012, 4.
See, e.g., The Rompetrol Group N.V. v. Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/3), Decision of the
Tribunal on the Participation of a Counsel of January 14, 2010, {§ 14-16.

See, e.g., Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7), Procedural Order
No. 2 of October 28, 1999; Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of
Chile (hereinafter “Pey Casado v. Chile”) (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2), Decision on Provisional
Measures of September 25, 2001; Rachel S. Grynberg, Stephen M. Grynberg, Miriam Z.

47.

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

v. Turkey, the tribunal rejected Turkey’s application for security for costs and noted
that “it would only be in the most extreme case — one in which an essential interest of
either Party stood in danger of irreparable damage — that the possibility of granting

security for costs should be entertained at all”.'?

In the present circumstances, no extreme case presents itself.

The Applicants are experiencing financial difficulties and this they do not deny. These
difficulties did cause them to struggle with meeting the deadline to advance the first
payment as requested by the Centre and this in turn did lead to a stay of the proceeding.
In the end, after having been granted an extension, the Applicants paid the first advance

payment.

However, without more, it cannot be inferred from these facts that the integrity of the

proceeding is endangered.

Further, the advance payments that the Applicants are obligated to make pursuant to
Regulation 14 cover the fees and expenses of both the Committee and the Centre. At

this stage, the costs of the proceeding are adequately covered.

The Committee also notes the Respondent’s arguments that the Applicants are in a
difficult financial position and that, if they abandon the proceedings, the Respondent
might not be able to recover from the Applicants its legal costs, to which it considers it

would be entitled in such circumstances.

At the same time, the Respondent’s request, if granted, might seriously affect the
Applicants’ right to seek annulment of the award. The Committee does not find in the
Respondent’s arguments — which rest on several assumptions ~ a compelling reason to

interfere with Applicants’ right to seek annulment of the award.

 

 

Grynberg and RSM Production Corporation v. G of Grenada i “RSM et
al. v. Grenada”) (ICSID Case No. ARB/10/6), Tribunal’s Decision on Respondent’s
Application for Security for Costs of October 14, 2010.

Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8), Decision
on Preliminary Issues of June 23, 2008, § 57. Similarly, referring to the decision in Pey Casado
v. Chile, the tribunal in RSM et al. v. Grenada noted that “it is simply not part of the ICSID
dispute resolution system that an investor’s claim should be heard only upon the establishment
of a sufficient financial standing of the investor to meet a possible costs award”. See RSM et al.
v. Grenada, Tribunal’s Decision on Respondent’s Application for Security for Costs of October
14, 2010, 45.19.

53.

54.

55.

56.

Overall, the Committee has not been provided with any incontrovertible evidence that
the Applicants’ conduct threatens the integrity of the proceedings, that their conduct

amounts to abuse or that it is pursued in bad faith.

At present, any issues relating to the costs associated with this annulment proceeding
can be properly addressed by the mechanisms under Regulation 14 of the ICSID
Administrative and Financial Regulations and under Article 61(2) of the ICSID

Convention.
DECISION
For the reasons above, the Respondent’s application for security for costs is denied.

No decision on costs is made at this stage.

Paris, France
September 20, 2012

    
  

‘Emmanuel Gaillard (President)

On behalf of the ad hoc Committee

