International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID)

In the Matter of the Arbitration between

COMPANIA DEL DESARROLLO DE SANTA ELENA, S.A.
and

THE REPUBLIC OF COSTA RICA

Case No. ARB/96/1

FINAL AWARD

Date of dispatch to the parties: February 17, 2000

169

170

President:

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Mr. L. Yves FORTIER, C.C., Q.C.

Members of the Tribunal: Professor Sir Elihu LAUTERPACHT, C.B.E., Q.C.

Professor Prosper WEIL

Secretary of the Tribunal: Ms. Margrete Stevens

In Case No. ARB/96/1.

Between:

Compaiiia del Desarrollo de Santa Elena, S.A.
Represented by:
Messrs. Alexander E. Bennett, Kenneth I. Juster, Michael
A. Lee and David B. Bergman
of the law firm Arnold & Porter, as counsel

CLAIMANT
And
The Republic of Costa Rica
Represented by:
Mr. Charles N. Brower, Ms. Abby Cohen Smutny, Ms. Anne
D. Smith Mr. Frank Panopoulos and Mr. Jamie M. Crowe

of the law firm White & Case, as counsel;

RESPONDENT

TABLE OF CONTENTS

A. INSTITUTION OF PROCEEDINGS ...........0.00000005 4*
B. THE FIRST SESSION OF THE TRIBUNAL ........cececeeesereeees 5
C. FACTS GIVING RISE TO ARBITRATION .......ccceceseseseeeseteeseees 7
D. OTHER RELEVANT PRE-ARBITRATION EVENTS ..........0604+ 11
E. THE WRITTEN PHASE ..0..0.ccecececececscsseseeeeeseeeseeeeeneneeeeeneee 13

E THE ORAL PHASE

 

G. POST-HEARING AND OTHER SUBMISSIONS.........:c0sss000+ 22
H. THE DISPUTE IN BRIEP .........cccccceccesccseseseseeseeteeseeeeseneneeseneeee 23
I. THE APPLICABLE LAW ...0....cccccccccecccsceseseseeeeeneeseeeeseneeeeseneeee 24
J. STANDARD OF COMPENSATION .......ccccccseeseseesseeseteeeeneeee 27

K. VALUATION

 

 

 

1) The Date as at Which the Property Must be Valued ...............+ 29
2) Value of the Santa Elena Property as of 5 May 1978... 32
L. INTEREST 35
M. COSTS 39
N. AWARD 39

 

* The pages in the above table of contents refer to the page numbering in the original award.

171

172 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

THE TRIBUNAL
Composed as above,
After deliberation,
Makes the following Award:
A. Institution of Proceedings

1. On 2 June 1995, the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (hereinafter, the “Centre” or “ICSID”)
received a request for arbitration dated 15 May 1995 (hereinafter,
the “Request”) from Compaifiia del Desarrollo de Santa Elena, S.A.
(hereinafter, the “Claimant” or “CDSE”), a Costa Rican corpora-
tion the majority of whose shareholders are citizens of the United
States of America (hereinafter, the “U.S.”).

2. The Request stated that CDSE wished to institute arbitration
proceedings against the Republic of Costa Rica (hereinafter, the
“Respondent” or “Costa Rica”) under the terms of the Convention
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States (hereinafter, the “ICSID Convention”)
to which the U.S. and Costa Rica are Contracting Parties.

3. The Claimant indicated in its Request that a dispute had
arisen in relation to the expropriation by Respondent of a property
known as “Santa Elena” (hereinafter, “Santa Elena” or the “Prop-
erty”) and, in particular, in relation to the compensation owed to
Claimant by Respondent as a result of said expropriation.

4, The Request was received under cover of a letter dated 31
May 1995, in which the Claimant asked that the Request not be
considered as lodged with the Centre until further notice, in order
to pursue consultations with the Respondent. By letter of 19
March 1996, the Claimant informed the Centre that the Request
should be considered as lodged. On 20 March 1996, accordingly,
the ICSID Secretariat acknowledged receipt of the Claimant’s let-
ter of 19 March 1996, and transmitted copy of the same to the
Respondent, together with copy of the Request, its accompanying
documentation and the Claimant's letter of 31 May 1995. On 22
March 1996, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the
Request and notified the parties accordingly.

CASES,

173

The Arbitral Tribunal (hereinafter, the “Tribunal”) was consti-
tuted on 28 May 1997. The Tribunal consists of Mr. L. Yves Fortier
(nominated jointly by the parties) as President, Professor Sir Elihu
Lauterpacht (nominated by Claimant) and Professor Prosper Weil
(nominated by Respondent).

In the absence of any agreed request by the parties to the Tri-
bunal to vary the rules of procedure laid down in the Convention
and the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings, in
effect from 26 September 1984 (hereinafter, the “Arbitration
Rules”), the Tribunal has followed the direction given in Article 44
of the Convention to the effect that the proceedings shall be con-
ducted in accordance with Section 3 of Chapter IV of the ICSID
Convention and the Arbitration Rules.

B. The First Session of the Tribunal

The First Session of the Tribunal was held on 21 July 1997, in
Paris, France, in accordance with, and within the period set out in,
Rule 13(1) of the Arbitration Rules.

At that Session, counsel for both parties confirmed that the
Tribunal had been properly constituted in accordance with the
ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules.

Among the procedural and other matters addressed at the
First Session of the Tribunal, it was confirmed that the language of
the proceedings would be English and that the place of the pro-
ceedings would be Washington, D.C., the seat of the Centre.

It was also confirmed that the proceedings would comprise a
written procedure followed by an oral procedure.

At the First Session of the Tribunal, prior to addressing issues
related to the framework and timing of the written and oral proce-
dures, counsel for the Claimant informed the Tribunal that he had
reason to believe that, while Respondent had not yet made a for-
mal objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, such an objection
might be forthcoming. Counsel for the Respondent confirmed that
no such objection had been filed and that he did not anticipate fil-
ing any such objection on behalf of Costa Rica; he did, however,
state that Respondent retained the right to make such an objec-
tion. The President reminded counsel that, pursuant to Arbitration
Rule 41(1), objections to jurisdiction should be made as early as
possible in the proceedings and, in any event, no later than the

174

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

expiration of the date for the filing of Respondent’s Counter-
Memorial. He further recalled that, under Arbitration Rule 41(2),
the Tribunal could consider, on its own initiative and at any stage
of the proceedings, whether the dispute is within the jurisdiction
of the Centre or within the Tribunal’s own competence. The Presi-
dent then declared that, the matter having thus been brought to
the attention of the Tribunal, it could not be ignored. In order for
the Tribunal to be kept fully informed regarding this issue, the
President directed the parties to provide to the Tribunal copies of
any previous and future correspondence between them concerning
the matter of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Counsel confirmed that
they would provide the Tribunal with copies of all such docu-
ments, as directed by the President.!

Following counsel’s presentations, and after deliberation
among the members of the Tribunal, the President informed coun-
sel of the specific time-limits fixed by the Tribunal for the filing of
the parties’ written procedures:

* 15 January 1998 for the Claimant to file its Memorial;

* 15 June 1998 for the Respondent to file its Counter-Memorial;
* 31 July 1998 for the Claimant to file its Reply; and

* 15 September 1998 for the Respondent to file its Rejoinder.

The Tribunal also set the date of 9 November 1998 for the
commencement of the oral hearing on the merits in Washington,
D.C.

The final matter addressed during the Tribunal’s 21 July 1997
Session concerned a proposal by the parties that the Tribunal
schedule a visit to the site of the Property in Costa Rica that was
the subject of the dispute. After deliberation, the President
informed the parties that the Tribunal would contemplate schedul-
ing a site visit only upon conclusion of the oral hearing, in the
event that it believed then that such a visit would be useful.”

! ‘The parties did provide the Tribunal with copies of these documents but no
objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal was ever made by Respondent.

2 The matter of a possible site visit was considered a number of times by the
Tribunal during the course of the arbitration proceedings. The Tribunal eventually
concluded that a site visit would not be necessary, and no such visit took place.

CASES,

175

C. Facts Giving Rise to Arbitration

The Property is located in Costa Rica's Guanacaste Province,
in the northwest corner of the country. The terrain consists of over
30 kilometres of Pacific coastline, as well as numerous rivers,
springs, valleys, forests and mountains. In addition to its geograph-
ical and geological features, the Property is home to a dazzling vari-
ety of flora and fauna, many of which are indigenous to the region
and to the tropical dry forest habitat for which it is known.

Claimant, CDSE, was formed in 1970 primarily for the pur-
pose of purchasing Santa Elena, with the intention of developing
large portions of the Property as a tourist resort and residential
community. A majority of CDSE shareholders are citizens of the
United States of America. After acquiring the Property for the sum
of approximately U.S. $395,000," CDSE proceeded to design a
land development program and undertook various financial and
technical analyses of the Property with a view to its development.

On 5 May 1978, Costa Rica issued an expropriation decree
for Santa Elena (the “1978 Decree”). In accordance with an
appraisal of the Property conducted by one of its agencies less than
one month earlier, on 14 April 1978, Costa Rica proposed to pay
CDSE the sum of approximately U.S. $1,900,000 (based on the
then-current exchange rate for Costa Rican colones) as compen-
sation for the intended expropriation of the Property.°

The terms of the 1978 Decree are, in many respects, material
to the present arbitration. They should be recited in full:

“Whereas:

1. The current area of the Santa Rosa National Park
is insufficient to maintain stable populations of large fe-
line species such as pumas and jaguars, and that a sub-

3 Memorial, pp. 5 e¢ seg.; Counter-Memorial, pp. 3 et seq.
4 Reply, p. 16, footnote 14.
> Memorial, pp. 1, 7 et seq.

® Counter-Memorial, p. 23. The compensation offered by Costa Rica was in
fact equivalent to U.S. $1,919,492 (elsewhere in its submissions, Respondent uses
the figure U.S. $1,919,487). For the purposes of this Award, this amount is approx-
imated to U.S. $1,900,000.

176

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

stantial area needs to be added to it if it is to carry out
its conservationist objectives.

2. The lands situated to the north of the Santa Rosa
National Park contain flora and fauna of great scientific,
recreational, educational, and tourism value, as well as
beaches that are especially important as spawning
grounds for sea turtles.

3. To meet these objectives, the Government of the Re-
public requires the property that belongs to the Compania
de Desarrollo Santa Elena S.A. registered in the Public
Register, Property Section, District of Guanacaste,
tome 1975, folio 321, entries 2-3, number 24,165, lo-
cated in the fourth district of Santa Elena, canton 10, La
Cruz, province of Guanacaste, which is currently used for
stock breeding and other uses, and has several facilities;
with a total area of 15,800 hectares, with the following
bounds: to the north, the Hacienda Murciélago; to the
south, Pacific Ocean and Santa Rosa National Park; to
the east, the Pan American Highway and the Santa Rosa
National Park; and to the west, the Pacific Ocean.

4. With the above-noted purpose in mind, a note was
sent, dated May 2, 1978, to Mr. James O'Dea Heelan, as
President of the Compania de Desarrollo Santa Elena
S.A., informing him of the state’s purpose.

5. By note of May 5, 1978, Mr. O’Dea Heelan noti-
fied the state of his consent to the expropriation of the
property described above, although in the same commu-
nication he indicated he is not in agreement with the

price offered by the state.
Therefore,
DECREE:

Article 1: Based on law thirty-six, of June 26, 1896,
supplemented by Legislative Decree seventy-eight of

June 24, 1934, the property owned by the Compania de
Desarrollo Santa Elena S.A. described in the third

whereas clause of this decree, is hereby expropriated.

 

CASES,

20.

177

Article 2: The price to be paid for said real property
shall be sixteen million, four hundred fifty thousand co-
lones, all in cash, pursuant to special appraisal
No. 15581-A.V.E. of April 14, 1978, by the General
Bureau of Direct Taxation; this amount shall be provided
by the Family Allocations Program for this purpose.

Article 3: The Attorney General of the Republic is
authorized to formalize the respective deed and register
the real property in the name of the state, under the ad-
ministration of the National Parks Service of the Minis-
try of Agriculture.

Article: It shall take effect as of May 5, 1978.

Done at the Casa Presidencidl. San José. May 5,
1978.”
[emphasis added]

As stated in the 1978 Decree, Claimant advised Respondent
that it had no objection to the expropriation but contested the price
fixed by Respondent.’ CDSE then claimed, as compensation, the
sum of approximately U.S. $6,400,000 (also based on the then-cur-
rent exchange rate for Costa Rican colones), in accordance with an
appraisal of the Property that had been commissioned by CDSE
and conducted by the Chief Appraiser of the Banco de Costa Rica
in February 1978, three months prior to the 1978 Decree.®

The approximately twenty-year period from the date of
Respondent's 1978 Decree until the commencement of the present
arbitration was marked by intermittent inactivity and intensive
legal proceedings between the parties before the Courts of Costa
Rica. These are described in the parties’ written pleadings. While
we have familiarised ourselves with those proceedings, we are of
the view that they need not be detailed here. Suffice it to say that
each party blames the other for the very long delay in resolving the
issue of compensation. In the opinion of the Tribunal, the issue of
blame or fault on the part of one or other of the parties in this

7 Memorial, p. 12, Claimant's Exhibit 14.

8 Memorial, pp. 12-13. The valuation proposed by Claimant in 1978 was in
fact equivalent to U.S. $6,389,991, which is approximated to U.S. $6,400,000 for
the purposes of this Award.

178

21.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

regard does not affect the outcome of the case and need not be
addressed by the Tribunal. What is relevant is that, from the date
of the expropriation until the commencement of the present pro-
ceedings, the amount of compensation to be paid for the Property
remained unresolved.

The Tribunal considers it necessary to underscore the fact
that, for the purposes of the arbitration, neither the size nor the
boundaries of the Property are in dispute. While the Costa Rican
“Public Register, Property Section, District of Guanacaste ... number
24,165”, referenced in the 1978 Decree, in fact registers Santa
Elena as containing 21,252 hectares,’ the 1978 Decree itself
refers to the Property as containing “a total area of 15,800 hectares.”
CDSE has explicitly and repeatedly stated its agreement to abide
by the boundaries and total area referred to in the 1978 Decree for
the purpose of valuing the Property.!° Indeed, as explained in its
written submissions, CDSE bases its claim for compensation and
its calculation of the value of the Property on only 15,210 hectares
of the Property, which excludes approximately 5,400 hectares in the
northwest’! and approximately 590 hectares of the Property that
has either been sold or is subject to squatters’ claims!” and, as a
consequence, “over which CDSE does not currently exert owner-
ship rights.”! CDSE'’s various statements regarding the size of the
Property to be considered in the arbitration, referred to above,
have not been contested by Costa Rica.! Accordingly, the Prop-

9 See generally Memorial, pp. 2-3, 87-90 and 101-107, and Reply, p. 230.
10 Memorial, p. 2 and footnote 2.

11 [pid., pp. 88, 102, 106

12 Ibid. pp. 2, 88.

13 Ibid. p. 107.

14 See Counter-Memorial, p. 28, footnote 159. The Tribunal takes note of
the following statement contained in a letter dated 13 August 1999, addressed to
counsel for Costa Rica by counsel for CDSE:

“We emphasize that CDSE does not intend to retain titled ownership rights,
or any rights of possession, to any of the areas encompassed within Farm No.
24, 165A. CDSE is prepared to convey to the Government all right, title,
interest and possession it enjoys with respect to all areas encompassed within
Farm No. 24, 165A upon full payment of the award. Still, it is obvious that
CDSE has not represented, and cannot represent, that it is in a position to
convey possession of the tracts within the registered title for Farm No.

CASES,

22.

23.

24.

179

erty is considered to comprise those 15,210 hectares on which
CDSE bases its claim for compensation.

D. Other Relevant Pre-Arbitration Events

As Costa Rican law provides that property expropriated for a
public purpose must be dedicated to that purpose within ten years,
failing which the original owner may petition for its return,
Respondent issued a decree dated 25 July 1987 expanding the
boundaries of the neighbouring Santa Rosa National Park so as
to incorporate the Santa Elena Property.!>

The matter of compensation thus remained outstanding and,
on 26 February 1993, another appraisal of the Property was con-
ducted on behalf of Costa Rica (the “1993 Appraisal”), which
valued the Property at approximately U.S. $4,400,000 based on
the then-current exchange rate for Costa Rican colones.!

Mention should be made of one aspect of a 1994 U.S. enact-
ment, known as the “Helms Amendment”,!” which prohibits
U.S. foreign aid, including U.S. approval of financing by interna-
tional financial institutions, to a country that has expropriated
the property of a U.S. citizen or corporation at least 50% owned
by U.S. citizens, where the country in question has not:

“(A) returned the property,

(B) provided adequate and effective compensation (...) as
required by international law,

(C) offered a domestic procedure providing prompt, adequate
and effective compensation in accordance with interna-
tional law, or

(D) submitted the dispute to arbitration under the rules of
the [ICSID Convention] or other mutually agreeable

binding international arbitration procedure.

24,165A for which compensation is not sought, namely, the approximately

5,400 hectares of land in the northwest section of the Property within what
is now Murcielago National Park or the several small tracts occupied by
squatters or sold by CDSE.”

'S Counter-Memorial, pp. 24-25 and accompanying footnotes.
16 Counter-Memorial, p. 27 and footnote 153.

17 22 USC sec. 2378 a. (30 April 1994). See the discussion in Respondent's
Counter-Memorial, pp. 37 to 39 and accompanying footnotes.

180

26.

27.

28.

29.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

This enactment was invoked against the Republic of Costa
Rica in connection with the Santa Elena case, with the result that a
U.S. $175,000,000 Inter-American Development Bank loan to
Costa Rica was delayed at the behest of the U.S. until Costa Rica
consented to refer the Santa Elena case to international arbitration.

By letter dated 21 March 1995, Costa Rica consented to arbi-
tration proceedings before an ICSID tribunal. CDSE filed its own
consent, subject to further confirmation from Respondent that it
considered Claimant to have met the ICSID jurisdictional require-
ment of majority ownership by U.S. citizens, on 31 May 1995. On
19 March 1996, as indicated above, this question having been
resolved, CDSE formally registered its consent to this proceeding.

E. The Written Phase

As ordered by the Tribunal, Claimant duly filed its Memorial
on 15 January 1998. The Memorial was not accompanied by any
supporting documentation.!

In its Memorial, Claimant submitted that the central purpose
of the arbitration is to determine the compensation owed by
Respondent to Claimant for the expropriation of the Property. As
such, the core issue to be resolved is the value of the Property
which, in turn, requires a determination of the appropriate valua-
tion methodology. While Claimant's Memorial also chronicled the
history of CDSE’s ownership of the Property, from the time of its
purchase through the tortuous legal wrangling in Costa Rica, the
bulk of the Memorial, and the thrust of Claimant’s case, related to
the issue of valuation. As regards applicable law, Claimant argued
that the dispute is to be resolved in accordance with Costa Rican
law which, in this instance, is not incompatible with principles of
international law relating to expropriation.

Claimant requested, in its Memorial, an award in the amount
of U.S. $41,200,000, with interest and other amounts, as fair and
full compensation for the expropriation of the Property. This valu-

18 Th the following paragraphs we summarise in very brief form the parties
principal submissions. Because these summaries draw on an overall appreciation of
each party's case, no citations are necessary. Later in this Award, where particular alle-
gations, arguments and evidence are considered, specific references to the parties’
pleadings are provided.

CASES,

30.

31.

32.

33.

34,

181

ation was determined on the basis of the current fair market value
of the Property, as calculated by Claimant’s experts, principally Mr.
Steven Beauchamp of Landauer Associates, Inc., whose opinions are
referred to in the Memorial. The amount requested included a value
of $39,000,000 for the approximately 4,200 hectares of land deemed
most suitable for tourist-related development (referred to in these
proceedings as the “prime land”) and U.S. $2,200,000 for the
approximately 11,000 hectares of additional land.

Shortly after the filing by Claimant of its Memorial, the
Respondent filed with the Tribunal an application for issuance of a
Partial Award or, in the alternative, for issuance of a Partial Award
on Agreed Terms, with respect to the valuation of a portion of the
Property regarding which the Claimant, in its Memorial, appeared
to accept as the basis of its valuation the figures used by the
Respondent in its own 1993 Appraisal. The Respondent also
sought an Order that Claimant be precluded from submitting any
further evidence whatsoever, whether documentary, testimonial or
otherwise “except as permitted within the proper scope of its Reply
Memorial”. Alternatively, the Respondent sought from the Tribu-
nal an Order compelling Claimant immediately to submit all testi-
monial evidence, including any expert opinion on Costa Rican law, as
well as any other evidence on which it relied in support of its claim.
The relief sought by the Respondent was opposed by Claimant.

Following Respondent's applications and Claimant's opposi-
tion, there ensued a lengthy series of submissions to the Tribunal
on these issues by both parties.

After deliberation, the Tribunal, on 8 April 1998, issued a
unanimous Order denying Respondent's applications.!

As ordered by the Tribunal, the Respondent duly filed its
Counter-Memorial with supporting documentation on 15 June
1998.

In its Counter-Memorial, Respondent concurred with Claim-
ant that the core issue to be resolved is the amount of compensa-

19 After the issuance of the Tribunal’s 8 April 1998 Order, and indeed through-
out the written and oral phases of these proceedings, the Tribunal was called upon to
deal with a series of procedural applications at the behest of both parties. The Tribunal
thus issued a number of procedural orders and many more decisions and directions.
Since none of these procedural orders or other decisions of the Tribunal have any
impact on the present Award, it is not necessary to review and summarise them here.

182

35.

36.

37.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

tion owed to Claimant for the expropriation of the Property, to be
determined on the basis of an appropriate valuation. Respondent
then offered a review of Costa Rica’s history of environmental
commitment and of the ecological uniqueness and importance of
the Santa Elena site, as well as a discussion of the legal and political
background to the parties’ dispute, prior to turning to the key mat-
ter of valuation.

Respondent submitted that, under international law, which, it
asserted, the parties had agreed was applicable to the dispute,
Claimant is entitled to compensation on the basis of the fair mar-
ket value of the Property as of the date of its expropriation on
5 May 1978. That amount, as determined by the 14 April 1978
appraisal conducted by Costa Rica and referred to in the 1978
Decree, is U.S. $1,919,492. The Respondent further submitted
that, were Costa Rican law found to apply, valuation of the Prop-
erty would be based on its current fair market value taking into
account the existing environmental legislation that would signifi-
cantly restrict, if not prohibit outright, the commercial develop-
ment of Santa Elena. On the basis of the opinion of its expert,
KPMG, Respondent stated that that value is U.S. $2,965,113.68.
Respondent went on to challenge, in detail, the methodology and
calculations employed by Claimant in its Memorial. Respondent
also submitted that, in the event that interest is applicable to the
Award, international law supports an award of simple interest only,
at a nominal rate.

As ordered by the Tribunal, Claimant filed its Reply Memo-
rial on 21 August 1998, with supporting documentation. °

In its Reply, CDSE argued, inter alia, that the long delay in
determining the compensation owed to it under the 1978 Decree
had been caused by Costa Rica. It also disputed Respondent's con-
tentions as regards the applicable law and argued that, since the
parties had never agreed as to the law applicable to the dispute,
international law could only apply where it is found to conflict
with the law of Costa Rica. As regards the means of valuing the
Property, Claimant submitted that it is entitled to receive the cur-
rent fair market value of the Property without regard to any legisla-

20 The date for the filing by Claimant of its Reply Memorial had originally
been fixed for 31 July 1998. That date was vacated and changed by the Tribunal to
21 August 1998, following representations by Claimant.

CASES,

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

183

tion, regulation or other government acts subsequent to the 1978
Decree.

On the basis of an updated appraisal prepared by Mr. Beau-
champ, CDSE claimed the reduced sum of U.S. $40,337,750 as
compensation. In reply to Respondent’s argument concerning
interest, CDSE claimed that, if the Property were to be valued as of
5 May 1978, it would be entitled to receive compound interest on
that amount, as of that date.

As ordered by the Tribunal, the Respondent filed its Rejoinder
Memorial and accompanying documentation on 23 October
1998.7!

In its Rejoinder, Costa Rica defended its actions during the
period between the date of the 1978 Decree and the commence-
ment of this arbitration. It reiterated that international law applies
to the dispute, with the result that compensation should be
awarded on the basis of value of the Property as of 5 May 1978,
as calculated in Respondent’s valuation at that time. As regards
the present value of the Property, in the event that Costa Rican
law is found to apply, Respondent emphasized that Claimant
had completely ignored the physical, legal and financial obsta-
cles to development that significantly diminish the value of the
Property. Respondent reiterated that the sum of approximately
U.S. $1,900,000 represented, in 1978, and represents today, the
full amount of compensation owed Claimant.

Shortly thereafter, the date set for the commencement of the
oral hearing, to wit 19 January 1999, had to be vacated due to the
illness of one of the members of the Tribunal.

After a telephone conference between members of the Tribu-
nal and counsel for the parties, the Tribunal fixed the date of
10 May 1999 for the commencement, in Washington, D.C., of
the oral hearing.

Late in the day, on Friday 7 May 1999, Respondent filed with
the Tribunal an application for provisional measures and for emer-

21 ‘The date for the filing by Respondent of its Rejoinder had originally been
fixed for 15 September 1998, That date was vacated and changed by the Tribunal to
23 October 1998 following representations by the parties. The date for the com-
mencement of the oral hearing on the merits was also changed from 9 November
1998 to 19 January 1999.

184

44,

45.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

gency interim restraining measures. The Respondent’ application
concluded with a request for the following relief:

“To recommend as provisional measures pursuant to
Article 47 of the ICSID Convention:

* That Claimant not engage in any earth-moving activ-
ity for the purpose of constructing new roads on the
Santa Elena property;

That Claimant not remove any vegetation (including
dead vegetation, for example, trees) from the Santa
Elena property other than dead vegetation that has
fallen across roadways that are in use or debris in the
limited areas of the property used by Claimant; and
That Claimant not set, ignite, tolerate, or desist from
making all reasonable attempts to extinguish, any fire
on the Santa Elena property;

To issue an emergency restraining order pursuant to

Article 47 recommending that such measures be taken by
Claimant in the interim pending resolution of this Re-
quest.”

Immediately at the outset of the oral hearing, on Monday
10 May 1999, the Tribunal, having deliberated during the inter-
vening week-end, dismissed Respondent's application.

E The Oral Phase

In accordance with the Tribunal’s directions, each party filed
with the Tribunal, prior to the commencement of the oral hearing,
written statements by its witnesses. On behalf of Claimant, the fol-
lowing seven witnesses appeared and gave evidence during the oral
hearing:

* Mr. Francisco Chacon gave evidence regarding issues of Costa
Rican law pertaining to ownership of the 200-metre strip of coastal
property adjacent to the high tide line under Costa Rica’s Terrestrial
Maritime Zone Law. He concluded, in particular, that CDSE owns
that strip of land, as evidenced by the Property’s chain of title.

Mr. Fernando Guier testified regarding his legal opinion as to Costa

Rican constitutional law and the law of expropriation. He con-
cluded that Costa Rica may not take advantage of its environmental

CASES,

185

laws and regulations subsequent to 1978 in determining the value
of the Property for the purposes of compensation.

Mr. Phillip Bogdal, of Eco-Plan, had conducted a land-use plan-
ning analysis of the Property for the purposes of the appraisal done
for Claimant by Mr. Beauchamp of Landauer Associates, Inc. In
particular, Mr. Bogdal prepared three (3) “conceptual land-use
plans” on the basis of which an overall appraisal could be made. Mr.
Bogdal testified regarding his work and conclusions, and addressed
the criticism levelled by Respondent's expert, KPMG.

Mr. Manrique Lara had conducted an engineering analysis of cer-
tain aspects of the land-use plans developed by Mr. Bogdal that had
been questioned by KPMG. These related to supposed physical
obstacles such as liquefaction, stability, erosion, etc. He gave evi-
dence regarding his conclusion to the effect that the proposed
land-use plans were physically feasible. He also estimated the infra-
structure cost for such things as road and bridge construction, water
supply and waste disposal, etc.

Mr. Alvaro Carballo, a former counsel to various Costa Rican min-
istries and para-governmental organizations, provided an assess-
ment of current Costa Rican environmental law and regulations
and their impact on the development of the Property. He concluded
that such laws and regulations would not preclude development of
the Property along the lines laid out in Mr. Bogdal’s conceptual
plans.

Ms. Fern Kanter, a consultant to the tourism and hospitality indus-
tries, testified as to the potential for tourism development of the
Property, on which Mr. Beauchamp’s appraisal was, in part, based.
Mr. Steven Beauchamp, of Landauer Associates, Inc., is the
author of the so-called “Landauer Appraisal” relied on by Claim-
ant with respect to the current fair market value of the Property:
U.S. $41,200,000, subsequently revised to U.S. $40,337,750. 2
On the basis of the conclusions of Claimant’s other experts,
Mr. Landauer determined, in particular, that the “highest and
best use” of a significant portion of the Property is resort and
tourism-related development, which is, in his opinion, physi-
cally possible, legally permissible and financially feasible.

 

22 See paragraphs 29 and 38 of this Award.

186

46.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

The following eight witnesses gave evidence on behalf of
Respondent during the oral hearing:
Mr. Bruno Stagno Ugarte, a diplomat and advisor to Costa Rica's
Minister of Foreign Affairs, testified as to Costa Rica's efforts to
have the Area de Conservacién Guanacaste, including the Santa
Elena Property, designated as a World Heritage Site, due to its bio-
logical and geological significance.
Professor Daniel Janzen, an academic, provided evidence as to the
“conservation analysis” of the Property conducted by him for
Respondent. His evidence consisted of a comprehensive review of
the ecological features of the Property, many of them unique and, in
his opinion, requiring protection from the sort of development con-
templated by Claimant.
Professor Jorge Cabrera Medaglia testified as to his opinion regard-
ing Costa Rican environmental law, particularly the limitations
imposed on the right to private property and free enterprise in the
context of environmental protection.
Professor Rodrigo Barahona is professor of agrarian and environ-
mental law at the University of Costa Rica, Senior Counsel at
KPMG Legal Services, Respondent's legal experts, and co-author of
the KPMG expert legal opinion relied upon by Respondent. He tes-
tified regarding Costa Rican laws governing expropriation and the
procedure for expropriation under that legislation.
Mr. Juan Carlos Chavarrfa, Managing Partner of KPMG Legal Ser-
vices and, with Professor Barahona, author of Respondent's KPMG
expert legal opinion, testified as to the judicial history of the case,
including the compensation proceedings before the courts of Costa
Rica.
Mr. Jerry Turner is the author of the so-called “KPMG Appraisal”
relied upon by Respondent to determine the value of the Santa
Elena Property and the compensation owed to Claimant. He gave
evidence regarding all aspects of his appraisal, including as regards
the Property’s highest and best use (in his opinion, conservation),
regulatory issues, physical constraints to development, etc. Mr.
Turner also offered commentary and criticism of the Landauer
Appraisal prepared for Claimant by Mr. Beauchamp.
Mr. Craig Zgabay, a senior consultant and appraiser at KPMG, pro-
vided evidence concerning the KPMG appraisal prepared for
Respondent, including as regards the methodologies used by
KPMG to establish the current value of the Property.

CASES,

47.

48.

49.

50.

187

* Ms. Ana Quiros Lara, founding partner of EcoGlobal and partner
in charge of that firm’s consultancy practice in the area of sustain-
able development, gave evidence on EcoGlobal’s role in the conduct
and elaboration of the KPMG appraisal. She also testified regarding
certain of the physical aspects of the Property, as they relate to
Claimant’s development plans.

As scheduled, the hearing commenced on Monday 10 May
1999 in Washington, D.C. As mentioned above, fifteen witnesses
were heard and counsel for the parties presented oral arguments.
The hearing ended late on Friday 14 May 1999.

One matter, in particular, occurred during the course of the
hearing which should be mentioned in the present Award. On
Wednesday 12 May 1999, during his examination-in-chief of Pro-
fessor Daniel Janzen, Mr. Charles Brower, one of counsel for the
Respondent, applied to the Tribunal to file four additional witness
statements by, respectively, Professor Janzen, Mr. Jorge Cabrera
Medaglia, Mr. Jerry Turner and Messrs. Juan Carlos Chavarria and
Rodrigo Barahona on behalf of the KPMG legal group. Claimant
opposed Respondent's application.

Having deliberated, the Tribunal ruled that Respondent's sup-
plemental witness statements would be admitted only to the extent
that they dealt with matters properly to be treated as evidence. The
Tribunal noted that this was consistent with one of its earlier rul-
ings in respect of the admissibility of certain witness statements
that had been filed by Claimant on 15 March 1999.

Subsequent to the Tribunal’s decision, the parties asked for an
adjournment in order to consult with one another on the next
steps to be taken. Later during the day, counsel informed the Tri-
bunal that they had reached agreement on how to proceed with
respect to Respondent’s four supplemental witness statements. The
hearing then continued. A signed copy of the parties’ Agreement
was filed with the Tribunal the next day, 13 May 1999, and was
confirmed by the Tribunal.

23 ‘This Agreement was subsequently modified by a 17 June 1999 amend-
ment between the parties, the terms of which were confirmed by the Tribunal in a
letter to the parties dated 5 July 1999.

188

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

G. Post-Hearing and Other Submissions

During the course of the oral hearing, as well as after its con-
clusion, both parties filed with the Tribunal voluminous submis-
sions and documents identified as follows:

Claimant:

a) Materials Referred to in CDSE’s Opening Statement,
dated 10 May 1999;
b) Materials Referred to in CDSE’s Oral Presentation, dated

10 May 1999;

c) CDSE’s Oral Presentation, dated 13 May 1999;

d) CDSE’s Opening and Closing Statements, dated 25 May
1999.

Respondent:

a) Documents Relied Upon by Respondent at Oral Hearing,
10-14 May 1999;

b) Argument Presented by Respondent at Oral Hearing,
10-14 May 1999.

Further to the parties’ 13 May 1999 Agreement (as amended
on 17 June 1999), each party also submitted to the Tribunal, on
12 July 1999, a Post-Hearing Memorial on Valuation of Conserva-
tion Land.

Finally, at the request of the Tribunal, each party subsequently
submitted its application for an award of costs, legal fees and related
expenses incurred in connection with the present arbitration.

H. The Dispute in Brief

This is, at the end of the day, a case of expropriation in which
the fundamental issue before the Tribunal is the amount of compen-
sation to be paid by Respondent, Costa Rica, to Claimant, CDSE.
While a host of sub-issues were raised by the parties in the context of
the written and oral procedures, both parties agree that such matters
are relevant only insofar as they tend to affect this central issue.

As mentioned above, the Respondent’s right to expropriate
the Property is not in dispute, nor (for the purposes of this Award)
are matters such as the size or the boundaries of the Property.24

24 See paragraph 21 of this Award.

CASES,

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

189

Thus, the sole issue in the present arbitration could not be
more simply stated: What is the amount of compensation now owed
to CDSE for the expropriation of the Property by Costa Rica?

Claimant claims U.S. $41,200,000, revised in its Reply to
U.S. $40,337,750. Respondent states that the compensation owed
Claimant is U.S. $1,900,000.

In its Reply, Claimant refers to a “worst case scenario” and
opines that the combined value of one resort parcel on the
Property and the remaining land could be U.S. $22,200,000.7>
This was increased by Claimant, during the oral hearing, to
U.S. $33,400,000.7°

Respondent, in its Rejoinder, refers to a variety of figures,
ranging from U.S. $395,000 (CDSE’s purchase price for the
Property) to U.S. $10,000,000, and states: “Clearly, the true
market value of Santa Elena lies somewhere within the range cir-
cumscribed by these various figures.”?7

I. The Applicable Law

The law to be applied by the Tribunal to the substance of the
dispute is laid down in Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention as
follows:

“The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with
such rules of law as may be agreed by the parties. In the
absence of such agreement, the Tribunal shall apply the
law of the Contracting State party to the dispute (includ-
ing its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of inter-
national law as may be applicable.”

Claimant posits that the parties to the present arbitration
have not agreed as to the rules of law that shall govern the issues in
dispute. In the absence of such agreement, Claimant argues that it
is the second sentence of Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention
that applies. Thus, it submits:

25 Reply, pp. 221 er seq.

26 Claimant's Closing Statement, p. 34.
27 Rejoinder, p. 81.

190

62.

63.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

i) the Tribunal must apply the law of Costa Rica to the
issues in dispute;

ii) rules of international law are to be applied only in the
event of a lacuna in Costa Rican law or if such law is
inconsistent with the international law principles of
good faith and pacta sunt servanda.

In the present case, there is no such inconsistency, with
the result that the Tribunal should apply Costa Rican
law, though “... the result would be the same if principles
of international law were applied”.”

Respondent submits that international law applies to the mer-
its of the dispute by virtue of the parties’ agreement to that effect.
That agreement, although not in writing or even stated expressly,
finds its sources, according to Respondent, in Costa Rica's
24 March 1995 consent to ICSID jurisdiction and Claimant's
15 May 1995 Request for arbitration. Both of these, argues
Respondent, incorporate a description of the dispute found in cer-
tain reports prepared in the U.S. Senate in virtue of the Helms
Amendment, discussed above,”? which evidence a common desire
to determine the compensation owed Claimant in accordance with
international law, as provided by that statute.*°

Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention does not require that
the parties’ agreement as to the applicable law be in writing or even
that it be stated expressly. However, for the Tribunal to find that
such an agreement was implied it must first find that the substance
of the agreement, irrespective of its form, is clear. Having reviewed
and considered Respondent’s oral and written argument on this
question and analysed the documents to which we have been
referred, including, in particular, the Helms Amendment and
related documents, the Tribunal is unable to conclude that the par-
ties ever reached a clear and unequivocal agreement that their dis-
pute would be decided by the Tribunal solely in accordance with
international law.

iil

?8 Memorial, p. 58. See also Claimant’s Reply Memorial, pp. 61-62, 75 and
Closing Statement, pp. 2-3.

29 See paragraph 24, supra.

3° Counter-Memorial, pp. 34-39 and accompanying notes; Rejoinder,
pp. 18-26; Smutny oral argument, p. 1.

CASES,

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

191

This leaves the Tribunal in a position in which it must rest on
the second sentence of Article 42(1) (“In the absence of such agree-
ment...”) and thus apply the law of Costa Rica and such rules of
international law as may be applicable. No difficulty arises in this
connection. The Tribunal is satisfied that the rules and principles
of Costa Rican law which it must take into account, relating to the
appraisal and valuation of expropriated property, are generally con-
sistent with the accepted principles of public international law on
the same subject. To the extent that there may be any inconsistency
between the two bodies of law, the rules of public international law
must prevail. Were this not so in relation to takings of property,
the protection of international law would be denied to the foreign
investor and the purpose of the ICSID Convention would, in this
respect, be frustrated.

The parties’ apparently divergent positions lead, in substance,
to the same conclusion, namely, that, in the end, international law
is controlling. The Tribunal is satisfied that, under the second sen-
tence of Article 42(1), the arbitration is governed by international
law.

This conclusion is reinforced by the history of the dispute, in
particular the circumstances in which the dispute was submitted to
arbitration and in which the parties’ consent was given, as well as
the language of the Helms Amendment itself, which refers to com-
pensation “.,.as required by international law” and “...in accor-
dance with international law”.?

The question, therefore, boils down to the following: under
international law, what are the applicable principles and rules gov-
erning compensation in a case such as this?

J. Standard of Compensation

As the parties themselves submit, there rests upon the expro-
priating state a duty, in both Costa Rican and international law, to
pay compensation in respect of even a lawful expropriation.

The vocabulary describing the amount of compensation prop-
erly payable in respect of a lawful taking has varied considerably
from time to time. It comprises such words as “full”, “adequate”,

3! See paragraph 24 of the present Award.

192

70.

71.

72.

73.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

“appropriate”, “fair” and “reasonable”. Sometimes, the descriptive
adjective is elaborated by the additional mention of “market
value”.

In the present case, the Tribunal is spared the need to enter
further into any doctrinal discussion of the standard of compensa-
tion because it is common ground between the parties, and the Tri-
bunal agrees, that the compensation to be paid should be based
upon the fair market value of the Property calculated by reference
to its “highest and best use”.

In approaching the question of compensation for the Santa
Elena Property, the Tribunal has borne in mind the following con-
siderations:

— International law permits the Government of Costa Rica to
expropriate foreign-owned property within its territory for a
public purpose and against the prompt payment of adequate
and effective compensation. This is not in dispute between
the parties.

— While an expropriation or taking for environmental reasons
may be classified as a taking for a public purpose, and thus
may be legitimate, the fact that the Property was taken for this
reason does not affect either the nature or the measure of the
compensation to be paid for the taking. That is, the purpose
of protecting the environment for which the Property was
taken does not alter the legal character of the taking for which
adequate compensation must be paid.*? The international
source of the obligation to protect the environment makes no
difference.

Expropriatory environmental measures—no matter how laud-
able and beneficial to society as a whole—are, in this respect, simi-
lar to any other expropriatory measures that a state may take in
order to implement its policies: where property is expropriated,
even for environmental purposes, whether domestic or interna-
tional, the state’s obligation to pay compensation remains.

As mentioned above, there is no dispute between the parties
as to the applicability of the principle of full compensation for the

32 For this reason, the Tribunal does not analyse the detailed evidence sub-
mitted regarding what Respondent refers to as its international legal obligation to
preserve the unique ecological site that is the Santa Elena Property.

CASES,

74.

75.

76.

193

fair market value of the Property, i.e., what a willing buyer would
pay to a willing seller.>>

There is, however, a dispute as to the value of the Property
derived by applying that principle. Specifically, the parties differ
with respect to the date on which the Property was expropriated
and as of which its fair market value is to be assessed, and as to the
value of the Property on that date. This difference of views lies at
the heart of the case, and will be explored in the following section
of our Award, dealing with the crucial issue of valuation.

K. Valuation

On the question of valuation, as noted earlier, the views of the
parties are widely divergent. The Tribunal considers it useful to
summarise the parties’ positions here:

— Claimant states that the fair market value of the Santa Elena
Property, based on its highest and best use in the market
place, is equivalent to its present day value, undiminished by
any expropriatory actions of the Government and, in partic-
ular, by any environmental statutes or regulations enacted after
1978.%4

— Respondent contends that the relevant date at which the fair
market value of the Property is to be assessed is the date of the
expropriation decree, i.e., 5 May 1978.°°

1) The Date as at Which the Property Must be Valued

As is well known, there is a wide spectrum of measures that a
state may take in asserting control over property, extending from
limited regulation of its use to a complete and formal deprivation
of the owner's legal title. Likewise, the period of time involved in
the process may vary—from an immediate and comprehensive tak-
ing to one that only gradually and by small steps reaches a condi-
tion in which it can be said that the owner has truly lost all the
attributes of ownership. It is clear, however, that a measure or series

33 Memorial, pp. 74-77; Counter-Memorial, pp. 42-43.
34 Memorial, pp. 59-60, 81-82.
35 Counter-Memorial, pp. 39-42.

194

77.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

of measures can still eventually amount to a taking, though the
individual steps in the process do not formally purport to amount
to a taking or to a transfer of title. What has to be identified is the
extent to which the measures taken have deprived the owner of the
normal control of his property. A decree which heralds a process of
administrative and judicial consideration of the issue in a manner
that effectively freezes or blights the possibility for the owner rea-
sonably to exploit the economic potential of the property, can, if
the process thus triggered is not carried out within a reasonable
time, properly be identified as the actual act of taking.

There is ample authority for the proposition that a property
has been expropriated when the effect of the measures taken by the
state has been to deprive the owner of title, possession or access to
the benefit and economic use of his property:

‘A deprivation or taking of property may occur under
international law through interference by a state in the
use of that property or with the enjoyment of its benefits,
even where legal title to the property is not affected.

While assumption of control over property by a gov-
ernment does not automatically and immediately justify
a conclusion that the property has been taken by the gov-
ernment, thus requiring compensation under interna-
tional law, such a conclusion is warranted whenever
events de that the owner was deprived of fun-
de l rights of ownership and it appears that this
deprivation is not merely ephemeral. The intent of the
government is less important than the effects of the mea-
sures on the owner, and the form of the measures of con-
trol or interference is less important than the reality of
their impact.”°© [Emphasis added.]

36 Tippetts, Abbett, McCarthy, Stratton v. TAMS-AFFA, Award No. 141-7-2
(June 22, 1984), reprinted in 6 Iran-U.S. Cl. Trib. Rep. 219, 226 (1986), citing 8
Whiteman, Digest of International Law 1006-20; Christie, What Constitutes a Taking
Under International Law? 38 Brit. Y.B. Intl. Law 307 (1962); Gf also the Mariposa
Development Company case decided by the U.S.-Panama General Claims Commission
(6 UNRIAA 390), where the tribunal observes that legislation may sometimes be of
such a character that “...its mere enactment would destroy the marketability of pri-
vate property, render it valueless and give rise forthwith to an international claim.” See
also Claimant's Closing Statement, pp. 13-14.

CASES,

78.

79.

80.

81.

195

Stated differently, international law does not lay down any
precise or automatic criterion, such as the date of the transfer of
ownership or the date on which the expropriation has been “con-
summated” by agreed or judicial determination of the amount of
compensation or by payment of compensation.*” The expropriated
property is to be evaluated as of the date on which the governmen-
tal “interference” has deprived the owner of his rights or has made
those rights practically useless. This is a matter of fact for the Tri-
bunal to assess in the light of the circumstances of the case.>8

Claimant does not really contest this approach. The determina-
tion of the relevant date, so Claimant writes, “...may vary under
different circumstances, thereby affecting the determination of the
actual date of expropriation.”>?

Although the expropriation by the decree of 5 May 1978 was
only the first step in a process of transferring the Property to the
Government, it cannot reasonably be maintained, as Claimant
seeks to do, that this Decree expressed no more than an “inten-
tion” to expropriate*? or that, in 1978, the Government merely
“sought to expropriate”.4! In the circumstances of this case, the
taking of the Property occurred as of 5 May 1978, the date of the
1978 Decree.

As of that date, the practical and economic use of the Prop-
erty by the Claimant was irretrievably lost, notwithstanding that
CDSE remained in possession of the Property. As of 5 May 1978,
Claimant’s ownership of Santa Elena was effectively blighted or
sterilised because the Property could not, thereafter, be used for the
development purposes for which it was originally acquired (and
which, at that time, were not excluded) nor did it possess any sig-
nificant resale value.

37 As maintained by Claimant. See Reply, p. 76, footnote 120.

38 Supra, para. 71. See also World Bank Guidelines, in 2 JCSID Rev-—FIL],
303 (1992).

3° Memorial, p. 79. See also Claimant's Closing Statement, p. 13, referring to
the date on which “the Government's regulatory action essentially renders the for-
cigner’s property rights useless” because “a taking has occurred”.

4° Memorial, pp. 78-82.
4! Reply, p. 19.

196

82.

83.

84.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

As noted in the U.S. Senate Staff Report entitled “Confis-
cated Property of American Citizens Overseas: Cases in Honduras,
Costa Rica and Nicaragua”:

“This odd situation has caused the owners of the land to
lose a great deal of money because they are not allowed to
develop the property as a profit-making, eco-tourism
project, yet they are required to pay for the maintenance of
the property...”

Since the Tribunal is of the view that the taking of the Prop-
erty occurred on 5 May 1978, it is as of that date that the Property
must be valued. There is no evidence that its value at that date was
adversely affected by any prior belief or knowledge that it was about
to be expropriated. Consequently, for the purpose of retrospectively
attributing a value to the Property in 1978, the Tribunal has not
had to consider later appraisals, such as the Government’s 1993
Appraisal or those submitted by the parties in these proceedings.

The significance of identifying the date of taking lies in its
bearing on the factors that may properly be taken into account in
assessing the “fair market value” of the Property—a value which, as
noted, both sides are agreed must be the basis of the present Award.
If the relevant date were the date of this Award, then the Tribunal
would have to pay regard to the factors that would today be present
to the mind of a potential purchaser. Of these, the most important
would no doubt be the knowledge that the Government has
adopted an environmental policy which would very likely exclude
the kind of tourist, hotel and commercial development that the
Claimant contemplated when it first acquired the Property. If, on

2 U.S. Senate, Committee on Foreign Relations, Republican Staff Report
(March 1994), annexed to Respondent's Exhibit 9, p. 27. The following statements in
the evidentiary record are also relevant to this issue. According to a letter dated
18 August 1997, from counsel for CDSE to counsel for Costa Rica: “... the owners of
Santa Elena, while being deprived of the ability to use their property for any effective
commercial purpose have been responsible for maintaining the Property throughout
the many years that the Government of Costa Rica has failed to address the issue of
adequate and just compensation”, (Respondent's Exhibit 42, p. 3.) According to a let-
ter of 14 October 1997 from counsel for CDSE to counsel for Costa Rica: “... during
the last 19 [years] of which Santa Elena has been denied the opportunity to make any
economic use of the property due to the actions of the Government of Costa Rica”.
(Respondent's Exhibit 45).

CASES, 197

the other hand, the relevant date is 5 May 1978, factors that arose
thereafter—though not necessarily subsequent statements regarding
facts that existed as of that date—must be disregarded.

2) Value of the Santa Elena Property as of 5 May 1978

85. As noted earlier,“? Claimant purchased the Santa Elena Prop-
erty in 1970 with the intention of developing it partly as a tourist
resort.

86. It is interesting to note that Respondent’s own 1978 Appraisal

recognizes that the Property, at that time, had a certain potential
for tourism development. In that appraisal, the Tribunal finds
expressions such as:

“a beach with good potential for tourism”;

“it is thought that the coast could be developed for tourism
projects, giving it a special value’;

“beaches and the lands around them where certain tourist
projects may be feasible naa

87. Similarly, the 1993 Appraisal conducted for Costa Rica con-
tained descriptions of portions of the property such as the following:

“could be exploited for tourism”; “excellent prospects for
tourism”; “the Potrero Grande beach is the largest and has
the greatest potential for tourism”;

“well suited for the construction of tourism infrastruc-
ture”;

“Santa Elena is a rural property that combines ingredients
of agriculture, ecology, and tourism amidst great unex-

ploited beauty #45

88. The great difficulty in this case is that, apart from Costa Rica’s
unilateral appraisal of 14 April 1978 and CDSE’s February 1978

43 Supra, para. 16. Memorial, pp. |, 7 et seq.

44 Respondent's Exhibit 6, 1978 Government Appraisal, pp. 3-4. See alo
Reply, pp. 9-10.
45 Respondent's Exhibit 8, 1993 Government Appraisal, pp. 12-15.

198

89.

90.

91.

92.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

valuation, there is no other evidence of what the Property was
actually worth as at the date of expropriation.

We agree with the parties that the Tribunal cannot go back
in time to 1978 to perform its own appraisal of the Property,“
but that we can, and must, “...make some assessment of the two
[1978] appraisals that the parties have provided.”4”

In determining the fair market value of the Property as of the
date of expropriation, 5 May 1978, the Tribunal has proceeded by
means of a process of approximation based on the appraisals
effected by the parties in 1978 and submitted to the Tribunal in
the context of these proceedings, as has been done in several
international arbitrations, as discussed below.48

As regards the type of conclusions that may be drawn from
this sort of evidence, we refer to the reasoning of the Iran-U.S.
Claims Tribunal in the A/G case, where it is stated:

“From what has been stated above, it might be possible to
draw some conclusions regarding the higher and the lower
limits of the range within which the value of the company
could reasonably be assumed to lie. But the limits are
widely apart. In order to determine the value within those
limits, to which value the compensation should be related,
the Tribunal will therefore have to make an approxima-
tion of that value, taking into account all relevant cir-
cumstances in the case.

In the Phillips Petroleum case,” the same Tribunal found that,

46 In Respondent's words (Rejoinder, p. 79, note 464): “...it is impractical, if
not impossible, to appraise a property today for its value 20 years earlier.”

47 Reply, pp. 89-90.

48 See generally John A. Westberg, “Applicable Law, Expropriatory Takings
and Compensation in Cases of Expropriation; ICSID and Iran-United States
Claims Tribunal Case Law Compared” in 1 JCSID Review—FIL], 24 (1993). See also
American International Group, Inc. and American Life Insurance Company v. The
Islamic Republic of Iran and Central Insurance of Iran (Bimeh Markazi Iran), Award
No. 93-2-3, 4 Iran-U.S. C.T.R. 96 (Dec. 19, 1983) [hereinafter “AIG”.

49 AIG, supra, at 109.

5° phillips Petroleum Company Iran v. The Islamic Republic of Iran, The National
Iranian Oil Company, Award No. 425-39-2, 21 Iran-U.S. C.T.R. 79 (June 29, 1989)
hereinafter, “Phillips Petroleum”).

CASES,

93.

94,

95.

199

in deciding the price that a purchaser could be expected to have
been willing to pay for the asset in question at the date the asset
was taken, the Tribunal was required to exercise its own judgment,
taking into account all relevant circumstances, including equitable
considerations:

“The Tribunal recognizes that the determination of the
fair market value of any assets inevitably requires the con-
sideration of all relevant factors and the exercise of judg-
ment.

Lo]

In “Starrett, supra... the Tribunal made various adjust-
ments to the conclusions [of the Tribunal-appointed out-
side expert] and the resulting amounts. The need for such
adjustments is understandable, as the determination of
value by a tribunal must take into account all relevant

circumstances, including equitable considerations.” 51

As discussed above, Costa Rica’s valuation of Santa Elena in
1978 was approximately U.S. $1,900,000.>2 Claimant's 1978
valuation was approximately U.S. $6,400,000.

The Tribunal will, consequently, take as a starting point these
appraisals. It can safely be assumed that the actual and true fair
market value of the Property was not higher than the price asked
by the owners and not lower than the sum offered by the Govern-
ment, i.e., that it was somewhere between these two figures. It can
also safely be assumed that both of these appraisals took account
of, and included, the “potential for tourism development” of the
Property, discussed above.

In the circumstances of this case, making the assessment that
we have been invited to make and having considered the evidence
submitted by the parties and the factors relevant to the value of

5! [bid., at 122, 123, citing Starrett Housing Corporation, Starrett Systems, Inc.,
Starrett Housing International, Inc. v. The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Bank Omran, Bank Mellat, Bank Markazi, Award No. TL 32-24-1, 4 Iran-U.S.
C.T.R. 122, 157 (Dec. 19, 1983) [hereinafter, “Starrett”].

>? See paragraph 17, supra, of this Award and accompanying footnote.

°3 See paragraph 19, supra, of this Award and accompanying footnote.

200

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

the Santa Elena Property in 1978, the Tribunal has determined
that the sum of U.S. $4,150,000 constitutes a reasonable and fair
approximation of the value of the Property at the date of its taking.

L. Interest

As indicated above, Claimant claims that it is entitled to an
award of compound interest on the value of the Property in 1978,
calculated from the date of the expropriation. Respondent argues
that no interest is due or, if interest is due, then Claimant is enti-
tled to simple interest only at a nominal rate.

Even though there is a tendency in international jurispru-
dence to award only simple interest, this is manifested principally
in relation to cases of injury or simple breach of contract. The
same considerations do not apply to cases relating to the valuation
of property or property rights. In cases such as the present, com-
pound interest is not excluded where it is warranted by the circum-
stances of the case.”

First, there are international arbitral decisions where com-
pound interest has been expressly allowed.

Secondly, there are decisions where the possibility of com-
pound interest appears to have been acknowledged, but the cir-
cumstances were not thought to be appropriate for its award.

Thirdly, there is the decision of Chamber I of the Iran-US
Claims Tribunal in the Sylvania Technical Services case?” in which,
although it was stated that “the Tribunal has never awarded com-
pound interest”, the Tribunal specifically declared its intention to
“derive a rate of interest based approximately on the amount that

54 See Flexi-Van v. Iran 9 Iran-US CTR 206 (“Most awards allocate only sim-
ple interest, but occasionally compound interest has been awarded”).

55 Fabiani’s case (Moore's Digest of International Law 4878-4915 (1905)); the
Affaire des Chemins de Fer Zeltweg-Wolfiberg (UN Reports of International Arbitral
Awards, vol. 3, 1795, at 1808 (1934)); Kuwait v. Aminoil (66 International Law
Reports 518, 613 (1982)).

5© Norwegian Shipowners’ Claims (UN Reports of International Arbitral
Awards, vol. 1,307, at 341 (1922); and the observations of Max Huber in Great Brit-
ainv. Spain (Spanish Zone of Morocco) (UN Reports of International Arbitral Awards,
vol. 2, 615, 650 (1924).

57 Tran-US Claims Tribunal Reports, vol. 8, 298.

CASES,

101.

102.

201

the successful claimant would have been in a position to have
earned if he had been paid in time and thus had the funds available
to invest in a form of commercial investment in common use in its
own country. Six-month certificates of deposit in the United States
are such a form of investment for which average interest rates are
available from an authoritative official source”.°® The late
Dr. EA. Mann has made the following telling comment on this
passage: “It is not certain whether the Tribunal realized that invest-
ment in six-month certificates of deposit involves earning com-
pound interest”.°?

Fourthly, there are the views of writers of high authority. Dr.
Mann concluded the article just cited as follows: “...it is submitted
that, on the basis of compelling evidence, compound interest may
be and, in the absence of special circumstances, should be awarded
to the claimant as damages by international tribunals”. The Tri-
bunal does not consider that the expression by Dr. Mann of his
conclusion in terms of “damages” renders it inapplicable in the
present case. While it is true that the taking by Costa Rica of the
Claimant’s Property was not initially unlawful, so that no question
of damages then arose, the fact remains that there is no substantive
distinction to be drawn, so far as the Claimant is concerned,
between an entitlement to damages and his entitlement to com-
pensation. CDSE is entitled to the full present value of the com-
pensation that it should have received at the time of the taking.
Conversely, the taking state is not entitled unjustly to enrich itself
by reason of the fact that the payment of compensation has been
long delayed.

Finally, reference may be made to the scholarly treatment of
the subject by Professor Gaetano Arangio-Ruiz, Special Rapporteur
of the UN International Law Commission on State Responsibility.
After close consideration of the authorities he concluded as fol-
lows: “The Special Rapporteur is therefore inclined to conclude
that compound interest should be awarded whenever it is proved

58 Tran-US Claims Tribunal Reports, 13, 199.

5° “Compound Interest as an Item of Damage in International Law’
Studies in International Law (1990), 380.

6 Tbid., p. 385.

» Further

202

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

that it is indispensable in order to ensure full compensation for the
damage suffered by the injured State”.°

In other words, while simple interest tends to be awarded
more frequently than compound, compound interest certainly is
not unknown or excluded in international law. No uniform rule of
law has emerged from the practice in international arbitration as
regards the determination of whether compound or simple interest
is appropriate in any given case. Rather, the determination of inter-
est is a product of the exercise of judgment, taking into account all
of the circumstances of the case at hand and especially consider-
ations of fairness which must form part of the law to be applied by
this Tribunal.

In particular, where an owner of property has at some earlier
time lost the value of his asset but has not received the monetary
equivalent that then became due to him, the amount of compensa-
tion should reflect, at least in part, the additional sum that his
money would have earned, had it, and the income generated by it,
been reinvested each year at generally prevailing rates of interest. It
is not the purpose of compound interest to attribute blame to, or
to punish, anybody for the delay in the payment made to the
expropriated owner; it is a mechanism to ensure that the compen-
sation awarded the Claimant is appropriate in the circumstances.

In the instant case, an award of simple interest would not be
justified, given that since May 1978, i.e., for almost twenty-two
years, CDSE has been unable either to use the Property for the
tourism development it had in mind when it bought Santa Elena
or to sell the Property. On the other hand, full compound interest
would not do justice to the facts of the case, since CDSE, while
bearing the burden of maintaining the property, has remained in
possession of it and has been able to use and exploit it to a limited
extent.

Consequently, Claimant is entitled to an award of compound
interest adjusted to take account of all the relevant factors.

On the basis of the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal
determines that the compensation payable to Claimant, compris-
ing principal and interest to the date of the Award, shall be
U.S. $16,000,000.

61 Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 1989, Vol. II, Part 1, p. 30.

CASES,

108.

109.

110.

1.

203

M. Costs

As noted above, further to a request from the Tribunal the
parties submitted, after the oral hearing, their respective submis-
sions with respect to attorneys’ fees and other costs and expenses
incurred by them in connection with the arbitration.

Taking into consideration the circumstances of the case, the
Tribunal decides that each party shall bear the expenses incurred by
it in connection with the arbitration, and that the costs of the pro-
ceeding, including the fees and expenses of the members of the Tri-
bunal and the charges for the use of the facilities of the ICSID,
shall be borne by them in equal shares.

Inasmuch as the parties have advanced to the ICSID equal
deposits in respect of, and adequate to pay, the costs of the pro-
ceeding, no monetary award of costs is required.

N. Award.

For all of the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal unanimously

DECIDES :

1. Respondent, The Republic of Costa Rica, shall pay to Claim-
ant, Compafifa del Desarrollo de Santa Elena, S.A., the sum of
U.S. $16,000,000 by way of compensation for the expropria-
tion of the Property that took place on 5 May 1978.

2. Full payment of the amount of this Award shall be made by
Respondent, in accordance with the terms set forth below,
within 21 days of the date of this Award.

3. In the event that full payment of the amount of this Award is
not made within 21 days hereof, simple interest on the said
sum of U.S. $16,000,000 shall be payable by Respondent, at
the rate of six percent per annum as of the date hereof until
the date of payment.

4. Full payment of the amount of this Award shall mean the pay-
ment by Respondent of the sum of U.S. $16,000,000, with
post-award interest thereon, if any, to Crestar Bank, 1445
New York Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20005 (bank
routing number 054000522), for trust account of Arnold &
Porter for benefit of Compania del Desarrollo de Santa Elena,
S.A., and the confirmed receipt thereof by said Crestar Bank.

. Upon full payment of the amount of this Award, each of the

ww

204

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Claimant and Defendant shall take all measures necessary,
including any type of protocolization that may be required, for
the registration in the name of the Republic of Costa Rica of
the 15,210 hectares of the Property on the basis of which the
Property has been valued. Upon counsel for Claimant, Arnold
& Porter, and counsel for Respondent, White & Case, each cer-
tifying in writing to Crestar Bank that the aforesaid measures
have been taken, Crestar Bank shall release to CDSE the
amount originally deposited to the benefit of CDSE, together
with any interest thereon that has accrued while the amount has
been held in the trust account. Thereafter, neither party shall
have any further claim against the other in respect of the whole
or any part of the Property or any matter relating thereto, in
particular in respect of the approximately 5400 hectares in the
northwest and approximately 590 hectares of the Property sold
by CDSE or occupied by squatters which have not been valued
in determining the compensation owed Claimant, and all issues
or claims relating to compensation for the expropriation of the
Property and the transfer of ownership thereof shall be consid-
ered to be fully and finally resolved.

. Each party shall bear the expenses incurred by it in connection

with the arbitration. The costs of the proceeding, including the
fees and expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the
charges for the use of the facilities of the ICSID, which have
been covered by equal advance deposits by both parties, shall be
borne by the parties in equal shares.

L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C.
President

Sir Elihu Lauterpacht, C.B.E., QC. Professor Prosper Weil

Arbitrator Arbitrator

