INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR

SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

 

Compaifiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. & Vivendi Universal

Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3)

 

DECISION ON THE CHALLENGE TO THE PRESIDENT
OF THE COMMITTEE

Introduction

1. On 21 November 2000, an ICSID Tribunal consisting of Judge
Francisco Rezek, President, Judge Thomas Buergenthal and Mr. Peter
Trooboff unanimously dismissed a claim brought by Compafifa de Aguas
del Aconquija S.A. and its parent company, now Vivendi Universal (“the
Claimants”) against the Argentine Republic. On 20 March 2001, the
Claimants requested annulment of the award pursuant to Article 52 of the
ICSID Convention. Under Article 52 (3), the Chairman of the Adminis-
trative Council appointed three members of the Panel of Arbitrators, the
undersigned and Mr. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C., as an ad hoc Committee to
consider the request. The three members agreed that Mr. Fortier would be
the President of the Committee.! At its first session in Washington on 21
June 2001, all members made declarations in terms of Rule 6 of the Arbi-
tration Rules. Mr. Fortier qualified his declaration in one respect, and the
Respondent reserved the right to challenge him. Subsequently it did so.

' On the election of the President by members of an ad hoc Committee see C.H. Schreuer,
The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2001) pp.
1013-1014 ($345).

168

DECISION ON THE CHALLENGE TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE COMMITTEE 169

Chapter V of the Convention is entitled “Replacement and
Disqualification of Conciliators and Arbitrators”. Article 56 provides that
once a Commission or Tribunal has been constituted and has begun its
proceedings, its composition shall remain unchanged, subject to contin-
gencies such as the death, incapacitation or resignation of a member. Arti-
cles 57 and 58 of the Convention deal with the procedure to be followed
in case of a proposal to disqualify any member of a Commission or
Tribunal. In particular Article 58 states that a proposal to disqualify a
conciliator or arbitrator is to be decided “by the other members of the
Commission or Tribunal . . . provided that where those members are
equally divided, or in the case of a proposal to disqualify a sole conciliator
or arbitrator, or a majority of the conciliators or arbitrators, the Chairman
shall take that decision”. Arbitration Rule 9 deals with issues of disqualifi-
cation of arbitrators in further detail.

3. Chapter V does not refer to disqualification of the members of
ad hoc Committees. Nor does Article 52. Article 52 (4) stipulates that:

“The provisions of Articles 41-45, 48, 49, 53 and 54, and of
Chapters VI and VII shall apply mutatis mutandis to pro-
ceedings before the Committee.”

Chapter V is not mentioned, although it deals with questions that could well
arise with respect to the membership of Committees. However Rule 53,
which is entitled “Rules of Procedure”, states:

“The provisions of these Rules shall apply mutatis mutandis
to any procedure relating to the interpretation, revision or
annulment of an award and to the decision of the Tribunal
or Committee.”

The effect is to apply the procedure referred to in Arbitration Rule 9 to
proposals to disqualify any member of a Committee. Pursuant to Rules 9 and
53, the undersigned were called on promptly to decide on the Respondent's
proposal.

4, Before doing so Mr. Fortier made an explanation of his position
in terms of Rule 9 (3). This was circulated to the Parties, who were given
a brief period to comment on it. The Claimants made no observations. By

170 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

letter of 12 September 2001 the Respondent confirmed its earlier challenge
and made certain additional observations, which are discussed below.

Competence of Members of the Committee to Decide on a
Disqualification Proposal

5. An initial question concerns our competence to decide on the
proposal. Although neither Party raised the issue, it might be argued that
the failure of Article 53 (4) of the Convention to refer to Chapter V or
to apply it to the disqualification of members of ad hoc Committees was
deliberate. If so, the Administrative Council was arguably incompetent to
achieve by a Rule what the Convention itself specifically did not achieve
and thus by implication precluded. It is necessary to consider this ques-
tion before turning to the circumstances of the present case.

6. The rule-making powers of the Administrative Council are set
out in Article 6 of the Convention. This provides, inter alia, that:

“(1) Without prejudice to the powers and functions vested
in it by other provisions of this Convention, the
Administrative Council shall:

“(c) adopt the rules of procedure for conciliation and
arbitration proceedings (hereinafter called the
Conciliation Rules and the Arbitration Rules);

“The decisions referred to in sub-paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and
(f) above shall be adopted by a majority of two-thirds of the

members of the Administrative Council.

“(2) The Administrative Council may appoint such com-
mittees as it considers necessary.

“(3) The Administrative Council shall also exercise such
other powers and perform such other functions as it
shall determine to be necessary for the implementation
of the provisions of this Convention.”

DECISION ON THE CHALLENGE TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE COMMITTEE 171

The Council consists of one representative of each Contracting State

(Article 4).

7. Itis not entirely clear from the Convention whether annulment
requests and proceedings pursuant to such requests under Article 52 come
within the term “arbitration proceedings” in Article 6 (1) (c), or whether
they are to be considered as distinct. There are indications both ways. On
the one hand annulment proceedings occur before a separate ad hoc
Committee, separately constituted; on the other hand, the role of the
Committee is narrowly defined and could be seen an ancillary to the arbi-
tration function of ICSID as a whole. Nothing turns on this, however,
since in any event the Council has power under Article 6 to regulate the
procedures to be applied on a request for annulment, procedures which are
only skeletally set out in Article 52. In particular it would have such power
under Article 6 (3), on the basis that to establish orderly procedures for
dealing with annulment requests can plainly be regarded as “necessary for
the implementation of the provisions of this Convention”. No doubt any
such Rules must be consistent with the terms of the Convention and with
its object and purpose. But subject to this, the judgement whether they are
necessary is a matter for the Council.

8. Article 52 (3) provides that no member of an ad hoc Committee
can have been a member of the Tribunal which rendered the award. In
addition no member may have the same nationality as any of the members
of the Tribunal or of either Party or have been nominated to the Panel of
Arbitrators by either of the States concerned. This covers some issues
relating to the independence of members of ad hoc Committees but it does
not do so exhaustively. Although such members must be Panel members
(and may therefore be presumed to have the general qualities required),
they may still have or have had particular links with the parties to an annul-
ment proceeding which would disqualify them from sitting. Yet it is not
clear that the Chairman of the Administrative Council would have
inherent power to decide such issues in the absence of any article or rule to
that effect. It would clearly be appropriate for the Administrative Council
under Article 6 (3) to provide a procedure for challenging the appointment
of an ad hoc Committee member. It seems equally clear that the Council
has actually done so. Although Arbitration Rule 9 itself refers to Article 57
of the Convention (which does not apply to disqualification of Committee
members), Rule 9 is sufficiently self-contained and can be given effect
without relying on powers expressly conferred by the Convention itself on

172 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

other bodies. There can be no doubt as to the competence of the Admin-
istrative Council to apply the Arbitration Rules mutatis mutandis to
proceedings relating to the interpretation, revision or annulment of an
award, since this can clearly be seen as “necessary for the implementation
of the provisions of this Convention”. Nor—if such a characterisation is
relevant—is there any difficulty in describing proceedings on a request for
disqualification, including the identification of those who will make the
decision, as procedural questions for the purposes of Rule 53.

9. The intention of the Administrative Council to apply Arbitra-
tion Rule 9 to the membership of ad hoc Committees can be inferred from
the history of the Rules. Rule 53 of the initial Arbitration Rules of 1968
provided that:

“Chapter II to V (excepting rules 39 and 40) of these Rules
shall apply mutatis mutandis to any procedure relating to the
interpretation, revision and annulment of an award, and
Chapter VI shall similarly apply to the decision by the Tri-
bunal or Committee.””

Rule 39 concerned provisional measures; Rule 40, ancillary claims. These
corresponded to Articles 46 and 47 of the Convention, which likewise were
not applied by Article 52 (4) to annulment proceedings. Apart from these
two Rules, the only significant exclusion from former Arbitration Rule 53
was Chapter I, which dealt with the establishment of the Tribunal, and
which included the procedures for dealing with challenges. In 1984, the
Administrative Council adopted a new set of Arbitration Rules, including
Rule 53 in the terms set out above. The substantial effect of new Arbitration
Rule 53 as compared with its predecessor was to apply mutatis mutandis the
provisions of Chapter I and of Rules 39 and 40 to annulment procedures. We
are informed that Parties to the Convention, who were given the opportunity
to comment on the new Rules, made no comments on Rule 53. The new
Rules were adopted without debate or dissent.?

10. Thus it can be inferred that the intention of the Council in 1984

was to apply all the Arbitration Rules, so far as possible, to annulment

2 For the text of the 1968 Arbitration Rules see 1 JCSID Reports p. 63.
3 See ICSID Annual Report 1985, p. 18.

DECISION ON THE CHALLENGE TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE COMMITTEE 173

proceedings, including Rule 9. In our view the only reason why the proce-
dure laid down in Arbitration Rule 9 could not be applied to members of
ad hoc Committees mutatis mutandis would be if to apply such a procedure
was inconsistent with the Convention, having regard to its object and
purpose. We see no reason to regard it as such.

11. As to the object and purpose of the Convention, there is no diffi-
culty. Ad hoc Committees have an important function to perform in rela-
tion to awards (in substitution for proceedings in national courts), and
their members must be, and appear to be, independent and impartial. No
other procedure exists under the Convention, expressly or impliedly, for
deciding on proposals for disqualification. The only question then is
whether it is literally inconsistent with the terms of the Convention, given
that Chapter V is not applied by Article 52 to annulment, for the Rules to
step in and make equivalent provision. Admittedly, the catalogue of provi-
sions incorporated by reference in Article 52 (4) appears a considered one.
The provisions incorporated are not only concerned with the powers of
Committees. They apply to a range of questions, including the status of
decisions made. On the other hand the matter of disqualification might
simply have been overlooked, and other aspects of Chapter V are clearly apt
to be applied to ad hoc Committees.

12. The point is noted as follows by Schreuer’s Commentary:

“the application of Arbitration Rules 8-12 to annulment
proceedings is only possible on the assumption that the
omission of the Convention’s Chapter V from the list of pro-
visions in Art. 52(4) was unintentional. If the omission of
Arts. 56-58 from Art. 52(4) is interpreted as a deliberate
exclusion, it is not permissible to reintroduce these Articles
under the guise of the corresponding Arbitration Rules... If
this were otherwise, one could introduce the procedures for
interpretation, revision and annulment in respect of deci-
sions on annulment by way of applying the pertinent Arbi-
tration Rules, a result that is clearly not intended by the
Convention.”4

4 CH. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (Cambridge, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2001) p. 1042 ($422).

174 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

But as Schreuer also notes,” the travaux préparatoires of the Convention do
not suggest that there was any particular reason for excluding the applica-
tion of Chapter V. It appears that no State party at the time of the adoption
of Arbitration Rule 53 suggested any such reason. That Rule was adopted
unanimously and was treated by the Members of the Administrative
Council as uncontroversial. In the circumstances, the unanimous adoption
of Arbitration Rule 53 can be seen, if not as an actual agreement by the
States parties to the Convention as to its interpretation, at least as
amounting to subsequent practice relevant to its interpretation.®

13. For all these reasons, we accept that Arbitration Rule 53 was
within the competence of the Administrative Council under Article 6 (3)
of the Convention, to the extent that it applies Chapter V mutatis mutandis
to proposals to disqualify any member of an ad hoc Committee.

The Question of Disqualification

14. We turn then to the particular question raised by the challenge
to Mr. Fortier. The governing standard here is not in doubt. It is set forth
in Article 14 of the Convention, which is applied to members of annul-
ment Committees by Article 57 of the ICSID Convention. Article 14
provides as follows:

“(1) Persons designated to serve on the Panels shall be per-
sons of high moral character and recognized compe-
tence in the fields of law, commerce, industry or
finance, who may be relied upon to exercise indepen-
dent judgment. Competence in the field of law shall be
of particular importance in the case of persons on the
Panel of Arbitrators.”

Neither Mr. Fortier’s moral character nor his competence in the field of law
have been questioned by the Respondent. The issue centres only on the
question of his independence and impartiality with respect to the parties
to the dispute, specifically the Claimants, i.e. on whether he “may be relied
upon to exercise independent judgment”.

5 Ibid., p. 1039 ($412).
© Cf. Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1969, Art. 31 (3).

DECISION ON THE CHALLENGE TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE COMMITTEE 175

15. Arbitration Rule 6, as applied to ad hoc Committees by Arbitra-
tion Rule 53, requires from each of the members a declaration that there is
to the best of their knowledge no reason why they should not serve, and a
“statement of . . . past and present professional, business and other rela-
tionships (if any) with the parties”. In his statement of 18 June 2001, Mr.
Fortier advised that one of the partners in his law firm Ogilvy Renault had
been engaged by Vivendi’s predecessor, Compagnie Générale des Eaux, to
advise on certain matters relating to taxation under Quebec law. Mr.
Fortier had had no personal involvement in the work, which was wholly
unrelated to the present case.

16. In response to certain questions put by the Respondent at the
first session, Mr. Fortier affirmed that the remuneration involved was de
minimis. He subsequently provided a memorandum from his firm stating
that the work done for Vivendi S.A. had “always been very limited and, in
relative terms, is inconsequential to our firm’s total billing”. The respon-
sible tax partner of the firm provided a further memorandum outlining in
general terms the nature of the work done and specifying the fees charged.
According to this statement, fees of approximately $216,000 had been
billed, of which the great majority (approximately $204,000) concerned
work done in the period 1995-1999. The work was done for Vivendi S.A.
but on instructions from a United States law firm which was acting gener-
ally in the matter. The work remaining to be done by Ogilvy Renault in
respect of the matter was trivial; it concerned only the winding up of the
arrangements in question and would involve fees of not more than $2000.
The partner undertook that he would not accept any further instructions
from Vivendi S.A. until after the completion of this Committee's mandate.

17. In its statement of 12 September 2001 the Respondent noted
that the retainer from Compagnie Générale des Eaux was a continuing one
and stated that the amounts charged on that retainer since 1995 “cannot
be considered by the Republic of Argentina as de minimis”. It also stressed
the importance of the present proceedings. In these circumstances it
affirmed its challenge under Article 14 of the Convention. It had originally
relied, inter alia, on the following provisions of the Code of Ethics for
International Arbitrators (International Bar Association, 1987):

Rule 3.1: The criteria for assessing questions relating to bias
are impartiality and independence. Partiality arises where an

176 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

arbitrator favours one of the parties, or where he is preju-
diced in relation to the subject-matter of the dispute.
Dependence arises from relationships between an arbitrator
and one of the parties, or with someone closely connected
with one of the parties.

Rule 3.2: Facts which might lead a reasonable person, not
knowing the arbitrator’s true state of mind, to consider that
he is dependent on a party create an appearance of bias. The
same is true if an arbitrator has a material interest in the out-
come of the dispute, or if he has already taken a position in
relation to it. The appearance of bias is best overcome by full
disclosure as described in Article 4 below.

Rule 4 establishes, in effect, the obligation of arbitrators to declare all facts
or circumstances that may give rise to justifiable doubts.

18. Consistently with this Code of Ethics, Arbitration Rule 6 of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules, which is directly applicable here, imposes the
obligation to declare “past and present professional, business and other
relationships (if any) with the parties”. The fundamental principle is that
arbitrators shall be and remain independent and impartial; in terms of
Article 14 (1) of the Convention, they must be able to be “relied on to exer-
cise independent judgment”. Exactly the same principle applies to the
members of ad hoc Committees. The role of the other members of this
Committee is to determine whether there is “a manifest lack of the qualities
required by paragraph (1) of Article 14”.

19. Certain initial points should be made. First, although various
legal entities within the Vivendi group have been mentioned (Compagnie
Générale des Eaux, Vivendi S.A., Vivendi Universal), it does not appear
that there is any relevant distinction between them for present purposes.
Accordingly we approach the question on the basis that one of the claimant
companies, or at any rate a company within the Vivendi group, is a client
of Mr. Fortier’s law firm in an as yet uncompleted matter. The great bulk
of the work was done before the present proceedings were commenced and
only a minor amount of work remains to be done. Mr. Fortier at no stage
has had any personal involvement with the work or with the Claimant
companies in relation thereto, and the work done bears no relationship to
the present dispute.

DECISION ON THE CHALLENGE TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE COMMITTEE 177

20. Secondly, a question arises with respect to the term “manifest
lack of the qualities required” in Article 57 of the Convention. This might
be thought to set a lower standard for disqualification than the standard
laid down, for example, in Rule 3.2 of the IBA Code of Ethics, which refers
to an “appearance of bias”. The term “manifest” might imply that there
could be circumstances which, though they might appear to a reasonable
observer to create an appearance of lack of independence or bias, do not do
so manifestly. In such a case, the arbitrator might be heard to say that,
while he might be biased, he was not manifestly biased and that he would
therefore continue to sit. As will appear, in light of the object and purpose
of Article 57 we do not think this would be a correct interpretation.

21. Decisions on a proposal to disqualify an arbitrator under Article
57 have been made in two previous cases. In the Amco Asia case, the
Respondent challenged the Claimant’s party-appointed arbitrator, Mr.
Rubin, on a number of grounds. Prior to his appointment as arbitrator (but
after the commencement of the arbitration) Mr. Rubin had personally
given a limited amount of tax advice to the principal shareholder in the
Claimant company. His law firm had also, prior to the commencement of
the arbitration, had a profit sharing arrangement with the lawyers acting
for the Claimants. During the period of that arrangement neither the
shareholder nor the Claimant had been clients of either law firm. In their
unpublished decision of 14 June 1982,” the other two arbitrators (Profes-
sors Goldman and Foighel) first affirmed by reference to the object and
purpose of the Convention, that. . .

“an absolute impartiality . . . of all the members of an arbi-
tral tribunal, is required, and it is right to say that no dis-
tinction can and should be made, as to the standard of
impartiality, between the members of an arbitral tribunal,
whatever the method of their appointment.”®

But they went on to say that this requirement did not preclude the appoint-
ment as an arbitrator of a person who has had, before his appointment, some
relationship with a party, unless this appeared to create a risk of inability to

7 ICSID Case ARB/81/1, Amco Asia Corp. v. Republic of Indonesia, Decision on the
proposal to disqualify an arbitrator, of 24 June 1982, unpublished.

8 As cited by M. Tupman, “Challenge and Disqualification of Arbitrators in International
Commercial Arbitration”, JCLQ, v. 38, 1989, p.26 at p. 45.

178 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL,

exercise independent judgment. In this context, in their view, the existence
of some prior professional relationship in and of itself did not create such a
risk “whatever the character—even professional—or the extent of said rela-
tions.”? As to Article 57, they laid stress on the term “manifest”, which in
their view required “not a possible lack of the quality, but . . . a highly prob-
able one.”! On this basis they rejected the challenge. In their view, legal
advice (with a fee, in 1982, of Can$450) given by someone who had never
been “regular counsel of the appointing party” was minor and had no bearing
on the reliability of the arbitrator; nor could the links between the two law
firms “create any psychological risk of partiality”.!! Thus Mr. Rubin's lack of
reliability was not manifest; indeed, in their view, it was not even reasonably

apprehended.

22. The decision has been strongly criticized.!? To the extent that it
concerned a personal relationship of legal advice given by the arbitrator to
a party or toa related person after the dispute in question had arisen, it can
in our view only be justified under the de minimis exception. That the
advice was given on an unrelated matter, though a relevant factor, can
hardly be sufficient. The fact remains that a lawyer-client relationship
existed between the claimant and the arbitrator personally during the
pendency of the arbitration; this must surely be a sufficient basis for a
reasonable concern as to independence, unless the extent and content of
the advice can really be regarded as minor and wholly discrete.

23. The second decision under Article 57 was given on 19 January
2001 in the Zhinvali case, which is still pending. There the challenge was
based on the existence of occasional, purely social, contacts between the
arbitrator in question and an executive instrumental in the claimant's
investment. The other two arbitrators stressed the absence of any profes-
sional or business relationship between the arbitrator and the person
concerned, and concluded that to suggest that a merely occasional personal
contact could manifestly affect the judgment of an arbitrator, in the

° Ibid.
10 Ibid.
1 bi
1 Ibid., p. 51.

 

DECISION ON THE CHALLENGE TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE COMMITTEE 179

absence of any further facts, was purely speculative.!? They accordingly
dismissed the challenge.

24. On the crucial question of the threshold test, the travaux
préparatoires of Article 57 give little guidance. Schreuer says only that the
requirement that the lack of impartiality must be manifest “imposes a rela-
tively heavy burden of proof on the party making the proposal”.!4 Some
guidance is however to be obtained from general authorities in the field of
international arbitration. According to Fouchard, Gaillard & Goldman,
the existence of business relations between an arbitrator and one of the
parties does not necessarily lead to the existence of a relationship of depen-
dency that would justify a challenge.!° They note, realistically, the large
number of possibilities that exist for arbitrators to have or have had some
“professional contact” with the parties. In this respect, an illustrative case
is that of Philipp Brothers,‘© where it was stressed that a professional party
could not be allowed to challenge en bloc all other professionals within his
or her milieu. The authors also refer to an ICC arbitration where counsel
acting for one of the parties belonged to the same firm as the president of
the arbitral tribunal. The Paris Cour d‘appel held that belonging to such an
“association of interests” as a large law firm with multiple divisions and
specializations does not imply economic dependency sufficient to justify
disqualification.!”

25. Itis not necessary to consider the implications of the term “mani-
fest” in Article 57 for cases in which there is any dispute over the facts,
since there is none in the present case. On the one hand it is clear that that
term cannot preclude consideration of facts previously undisclosed or
unknown, provided that these are duly established at the time the decision
is made. On the other hand, the term must exclude reliance on speculative

13 ICSID Case ARB/00/1, Zhinvali Development Ltd. v. Republic of Georgia, Decision on
Respondent's Proposal to Disqualify Arbitrator, 19 January 2001 (Davis Robinson, Seymour J.
Rubin), unpublished.

14 Schreuer, Commentary, p. 1200, §16, and see ibid., p. 1199, $14 for a review of the
travaux. On the meaning of the term “manifestly” in Arts. 36 (3) and 52 of the Convention see
ibid., pp. 458-460, §§45-47, pp. 932-936, §§137-146, respectively. It is implicit in what we
have said that the term may have a different meaning in these different contexts.

'5 Traité d'arbitrage commercial international, Paris, Litec, 1999, pp. 584.

16 TEI Paris, 28 October 1988 and 29 June 1989, Rev. arb. 1990, p. 497.

1 Judgment of 28 June 1991, Rev. arb. 1992, p. 568, reported by P. Bellet; cited by
Fouchard, Gaillard & Goldman, pp.584-585.

180 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

assumptions or arguments—for example, assumptions based on prior and
in themselves innocuous social contacts between the challenged arbi-
trator and a party. But in cases where (as here) the facts are established
and no further inference of impropriety is sought to be derived from
them, the question seems to us to be whether a real risk of lack of impar-
tiality based upon those facts (and not on any mere speculation or infer-
ence) could reasonably be apprehended by either party. If (and only if)
the answer is yes can it be said that the arbitrator may not be relied on to
exercise independent judgment.!8 That is to say, the circumstances actu-
ally established (and not merely supposed or inferred) must negate or
place in clear doubt the appearance of impartiality. If the facts would lead
to the raising of some reasonable doubt as to the impartiality of the arbi-
trator or member, the appearance of security for the parties would disap-
pear and a challenge by either party would have to be upheld. Once the
other arbitrators or Committee members had become convinced of this
conclusion, there would no longer be room for the view that the defi-
ciency was not “manifest”.

26. Turning to the facts of the present case, it is true that a partner
of Mr. Fortier’s had (and still has) the Claimants or one of their affiliates
as a client. But we do not think that this, in and of itself, is enough to
justify disqualification in the circumstances of this case. Relevant on the
other hand are the following facts: (a) that the relationship in question was
immediately and fully disclosed and that further information about it was
forthcoming on request, thus maintaining full transparency;!? (b) that Mr.
Fortier personally has and has had no lawyer-client relationship with the
Claimants or its affiliates; (c) that the work done by his colleague has
nothing to do with the present case; (d) that the work concerned does not
consist in giving general legal or strategic advice to the Claimants but
concerns a specific transaction, in which Ogilvy Renault are not the lead
firm; (e) that the legal relationship will soon come to an end with the
closure of the transaction concerned.

18 For examples of the application of a test of this kind to diverse facts see e.g. AT & T
Corporation v. Saudi Cable Co. {2000] 2 Lloyd’s Rep. 127; In re Medicaments and Related Classes
of Goods (No. 2) [2001] 1 WLR 700.

19 Mr. Fortier declined, in our view reasonably, to provide details of his overall remuner-
ation with Ogilvy Renault. Disclosure of that information, confidential to him and his partners,
was not necessary in order to decide on the proposal for disqualification.

DECISION ON THE CHALLENGE TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE COMMITTEE 181

27. In these specific circumstances we see no reason to regard Mr.
Fortier’s independence as in any way impaired by the facts disclosed. We
therefore do not need to rely on any de minimis rule as a basis for our
conclusion. We note that the Respondent does accept in principle the exist-
ence of such a rule.?° While we agree with the Respondent that the amount
of fees earned in the transaction since its inception is not de minimis, it is
the case that only a small amount will have been charged for the last stages
of the work, in the period 2000-2002. This is the relevant period for the
purposes of the present annulment request. If necessary, the de minimis rule
would have provided a further basis for rejecting the proposal for disqual-
ification.

Conclusions

28. To summarise, we agree with earlier panels which have had to
interpret and apply Article 57 that the mere existence of some professional
relationship with a party is not an automatic basis for disqualification of an
arbitrator or Committee member. All the circumstances need to be consid-
ered in order to determine whether the relationship is significant enough
to justify entertaining reasonable doubts as to the capacity of the arbitrator
or member to render a decision freely and independently. In the present
case, for the reasons given above, the continuing relationship between
another partner of Ogilvy Renault and Vivendi is not significant enough
for this purpose. Accordingly the proposal for disqualification submitted
by the Respondent must be dismissed.

Professor James Crawford SC Professor José Carlos Ferndndez Rozas

3 October 2001

20 See above, paragraph 17.

