[Date of dispatch to the parties: July 3, 2002]

International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes

(ICSID)

 

In the Matter of the Annulment Proceeding
in the Arbitration between

COMPANIA DE AGUAS DEL ACONQUIJA S.A.
and

VIVENDI UNIVERSAL
(formerly COMPAGNIE GENERALE DES EAUX)

Claimants
v.
ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
Respondent
Case No. ARB/97/3

 

DECISION ON ANNULMENT

 

90

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

page
THE ANNULMENT PROCEEDINGS ................555 1
THE TRIBUNALS AWARD ......... 0.000 e eee eee eee 3
(1) | The Tribunal’s Findings on Jurisdiction ................ 7
(2) The Tribunal’s Findings on the Merits ................. 8
(a) The Federal Claims : : a)
(b) The Tucuman Claims ..........00 00000 e eee eee 11
THE COMMITTEBR’S ANALYSIS ............. 00000 e eee 18
(1) _ Relevant Provisions of the France-Argentina BIT ........ 19
(a) Definition of “Investor” and “Investment” ......... 19
(b) Local Remedies and Their Relation to Arbitration
under the BIT... 0.0.2.0... cee eee eee 21
(c) Scope and Application of Substantive Provisions
ofthe BIT 2.00... eee eee 24
(2) Role of Annulment Under the ICSID Convention . . 25
(3) The Grounds of Annulment . 28
(a) The Tribunal’s Jurisdictional Finding ... : . 29
(b) The Tribunal’s Finding on the Merits............. 31
(i) Serious departure from a fundamental
rule of procedure: Article 52(1)(d) ... 1.6.6.6. 31
(ii) Manifest excess of powers: Article 52(1)(b) . . 33
(iii) Failure to state reasons: Article 52(1)(e) ........ 44
COSTS 2... ccc eee eee ee 45

CASES.

President: Mt. L. Yves FORTIER, C.C., Q.C.

Members of the Professor James R. CRAWFORD, S.C., FB.A.
ad hoc Committee: Professor José Carlos FERNANDEZ ROZAS
Secretary of the Committee: Mr. Alejandro A. Escobar

In Case No. ARB/97/3

BETWEEN:

Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and
Vivendi Universal (formerly Compagnie Générale des Eaux)
(“Claimants”)

Represented by:

Judge Stephen M. Schwebel,

as counsel

Mr. Bernardo M. Cremades

of the law firm B. Cremades y Asociados, as counsel

Mr. Daniel M. Price and Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov
of the law firm Powell, Goldstein, Frazer & Murphy LLR
as counsel

Mr. Luis A. Erize

of the law firm Abeledo Gottheil Abogados, as counsel
Mr. Ignacio Colombres Garmendia

of the law firm Ignacio Colombres Garmendia & Asociados,
as counsel

And

Argentine Republic (“Respondent”)

Represented by:

Dr. Rubén Miguel Citara, Dr. Ernesto Alberto Marcer,
Mr. Hernan M. Cruchaga and Mr. Carlos Ignacio Suarez

Anzorena
of the Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién, as counsel

92 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

THE AD HOC COMMITTEE

After deliberation,

Makes the following Decision:

A. THE ANNULMENT PROCEEDINGS

1. On 20 March 2001, Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. (“CAA”)
and Compagnie Générale des Eaux (“CGE”; CGE and CAA are referred to,
collectively, as “Claimants”) filed with the Secretary-General of the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) an
application in writing (the “Application”) requesting the partial annulment of
an Award dated 21 November 2000 (the “Award”) rendered by the Tribunal in
the arbitration between Claimants and Respondent.!

2. The Application was made within the time period provided in Article
52(2) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States (the “ICSID Convention”). The
Application sought partial annulment of the Award on three of the five
grounds set out in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention, specifically: the
Tribunal had manifestly exceeded its powers; there had been a serious depar-
ture from a fundamental rule of procedure; and the Award failed to state the
reasons on which it was based.

3. The Application was registered by the Secretary-General of ICSID on
23 March 2001. In accordance with Rule 50(2) of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”), the Secretary-
General transmitted a Notice of Registration to the parties on that date and
also forwarded to the Respondent copies of the Application and accompany-
ing documentation. Thereafter, in accordance with Article 52(3) of the ICSID
Convention and at the request of the Secretary-General, the Chairman of the
Administrative Council proceeded to appoint an ad hoc Committee (the
“Committee”).

4. The Committee was subsequently duly constituted—composed of

Professor James R. Crawford, Professor José Carlos Fernandez Rozas and Mr.
L. Yves Fortier—and the parties were so notified by the Secretary-General on

| The text of the award is published at 40 ILM 426 (2001).

CASES. 93

18 May 2001, in accordance with Rule 52(2) of the Arbitration Rules. On 25
May 2001, the Secretary of the Committee informed the parties that Mr. L.
Yves Fortier had been designated President of the Committee.

5. The first meeting of the Committee was held at the seat of ICSID, in
Washington, D.C., on 21 June 2001. At that meeting, all members made dec-
larations in terms of Rule 6 of the Arbitration Rules. Mr. Fortier qualified his
declaration in one respect, and the Respondent reserved the right to challenge
him. Subsequently it did so, pursuant to Articles 14 and 57 of the ICSID
Convention and Arbitration Rule 53. The challenge concerned Mr. Fortier’s
disclosure that one of the partners in his law firm had been engaged by CGE
to advise on certain specific matters relating to taxation under Quebec law. Mr.
Fortier had had no personal involvement in the work, which was wholly unre-
lated to the present case and which did not involve a general retainer. After
receiving written statements from the parties, the other two members of the
Committee, by a decision of 24 September 2001, dismissed the challenge.

6. In accordance with the procedural timetable laid down by the
Committee at its meeting of 21 June 2001, the parties filed their respective
Memorials on 20 August 2001 and on 12 November 2001. Claimants’
Memorial was accompanied by an Expert Opinion prepared by Professor
Christoph H. Schreuer, and Respondent filed an Expert Opinion rendered by
Professor Arthur T. von Mehren. Claimants thereafter submitted a Reply on
10 December 2001. Respondent filed a Rejoinder on 8 January 2002.

7. A two-day hearing in this annulment proceeding was held at the seat
of ICSID on 31 January and 1 February 2002, at which counsel for both par-
ties presented their arguments and submissions, and responded to questions
from the members of the Committee. The parties subsequently made obser-
vations to the English and Spanish transcripts made of the hearing, which have
been taken into account by the Committee.

8. In the absence of any agreed request by the parties to vary the rules of
procedure laid down in the ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules, the
annulment proceeding was at all times conducted in accordance with the
applicable provisions of Section 3 of Chapter IV of the ICSID Convention
and the Arbitration Rules.

2 Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention provides: “The provisions of Articles 41-45, 48, 49, 53
and 54, and of Chapters VI and VII [of the Convention, dealing with arbitration proceedings) shall
apply mutatis mutandis to proceedings before the Committee.”

94 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

B. THE TRIBUNALS AWARD

9. The dispute underlying the arbitration arose out of certain alleged acts
of the Argentine Republic and its constituent Province of Tucumdén that,
according to Claimants, caused the termination of a thirty-year concession
contract (the “Concession Contract”) entered into by Tucuman and CAA on
18 May 1995. In the arbitration, Claimants asserted that all of these acts were
attributable to the Argentine Republic under international law and, as such,
violated Argentina’s obligations under the Agreement between the
Government of the Argentine Republic and the Government of the Republic
of France for Reciprocal Protection and Promotion of Investments of 3 July
1991 (the “BIT”).3 Relevant provisions of the BIT are set out later in this
decision.

10. The Award that is the subject of the present annulment proceeding
was rendered on 21 November 2000. In the Award, the Tribunal rejected the
objections to its jurisdiction raised by the Argentine Republic. Having upheld
its jurisdiction, the Tribunal nonetheless dismissed the claim.

11. In order to provide relevant background and context to the present
decision, and before proceeding to consider the detailed findings of the
Tribunal and the grounds for annulment to which those findings are said to
give rise, the Committee can do no better than recite the Tribunal’s own
“Introduction and Summary”:

A. Introduction and Summary

This case arises from a complex and often bitter dispute asso-
ciated with a 1995 Concession Contract that a French compa-
ny, Compagnie Générale des Eaux, and its Argentine affiliate,
Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija, S.A. (collectively referred
to as “Claimant” or “CGE”), made with Tucumdn, a province
of Argentina, and with the investment in Tucumén resulting
from that agreement. The Republic of Argentina (“Argentine

3 Signed 3 July 1991; entered into force 3 March 1993; United Nations Treaty Series, vol. 1728,
p. 282 (French text). The BIT provisions quoted, in English, in the present decision are drawn from the
official United Nations English translation: United Nations Treaty Series, vol. 1728, p. 298. Appendix 1
to the Tribunal’s Award of 21 November 2001 is the source of the English translation of the provisions
of the Concession Agreement referred to herein: 40 ILM 426 (2001), pp. 449-451.

CASES.

Republic”) was not a party to the Concession Contract or to
the negotiations that led to its conclusion....

The Concession Contract...makes no reference to either the
BIT or ICSID Convention or to the remedies that are available
to a French foreign investor in Argentina under these treaties.
Articles 3 and 5 of the BIT provide that each of the
Contracting Parties shall grant “fair and equitable treatment
according to the principles of international law to investments
made by investors of the other Party,” that investments shall
enjoy “protection and full security in accordance with the prin-
ciple of fair and equitable treatment,” and that Contracting
Parties shall not adopt expropriatory or nationalizing measures
except for a public purpose, without discrimination and upon
payment of “prompt and adequate compensation.” Article 8 of
the Argentine-French BIT provides that, if an investment dis-
pute arises between one Contracting Party and an investor
from another Contracting Party and that dispute cannot be
resolved within six months through amicable consultations,
then the investor may submit the dispute either to the nation-
al jurisdiction of the Contracting Party involved in the dispute
or, at the investor's option, to arbitration under the ICSID
Convention or to an ad hoc tribunal pursuant to the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law.

Article 16.4 of the Concession Contract between CGE and
Tucuman provided for the resolution of contract disputes,
concerning both its interpretation and application, to be sub-
mitted to the exclusive jurisdiction of the contentious admin-
istrative courts of Tucumdén. While this case presents many
preliminary and other related questions, the core issue before
this Tribunal concerns the legal significance that is to be
attributed to this forum-selection provision of the Concession
Contract in light of the remedial provisions in the BIT and the
ICSID Convention. This question bears both on the jurisdic-
tion of the Centre and the competence of this Tribunal under
the ICSID Convention and on the legal analysis of the merits
of the dispute between CGE and the Argentine Republic.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

When CGE invoked the jurisdiction of ICSID in reliance on
the terms of the BIT and the ICSID Convention and sought
damages of over U.S. $300 million, the Argentine Republic
responded that it had not consented to submission of the dis-
pute for resolution under the ICSID Convention. Because of
the close relationship between the jurisdictional issue and the
underlying merits of the claims, the Tribunal decided that it
would not be able to resolve the jurisdictional question with-
out a full presentation of the factual issues relating to the mer-
its. Accordingly, the Tribunal, after receiving memorials from
the parties and hearing oral argument, joined the jurisdiction-
al issue to the merits.

For the reasons set forth in this Award, the Tribunal holds that
it has jurisdiction to hear the claims of CGE against the
Argentine Republic for violation of the obligations of the
Argentine Republic under the BIT. Neither the forum-selec-
tion provision of the Concession Contract nor the provisions
of the ICSID Convention and the BIT on which the
Argentine Republic relies preclude CGE’s recourse to this
Tribunal on the facts presented.

With respect to the merits, CGE has not alleged that the
Republic itself affirmatively interfered with its investment in
Tucuman. Rather, CGE alleges that the Argentine Republic
failed to prevent the Province of Tucumén from taking certain
action with respect to the Concession Contract that,
Claimants allege, consequently infringed their rights under the
BIT. CGE also alleges that the Argentine Republic failed to
cause the Province to take certain action with respect to the
Concession Contract, thereby also infringing Claimants’ rights
under the BIT. In addition, CGE maintains that international
law attributes to the Argentine Republic actions of the
Province and its officials and alleges that those actions consti-
tute breaches of the Argentine Republic’s obligations under the
BIT.

While CGE challenged actions of Tucuman in administrative
agencies of the Province, CGE concedes that it never sought,
pursuant to Article 16.4, to challenge any of Tucuman’s actions
in the contentious administrative courts of Tucumén as viola-

CASES.

tions of the terms of the Concession Contract. CGE maintains
that any such challenge would have constituted a waiver of its
rights to recourse to ICSID under the BIT and the ICSID
Convention.

The Tribunal does not accept CGE’s position that claims by
CGE in the contentious administrative courts of Tucumdn for
breach of the terms of the Concession Contract, as Article 16.4
requires, would have constituted a waiver of Claimants’ rights
under the BIT and the ICSID Convention. Further, as the
Tribunal demonstrates below, the nature of the facts support-
ing most of the claims presented in this case make it impossi-
ble for the Tribunal to distinguish or separate violations of the
BIT from breaches of the Concession Contract without first
interpreting and applying the detailed provisions of that agree-
ment. By Article 16.4, the parties to the Concession Contract
assigned that task expressly and exclusively to the contentious
administrative courts of Tucumén. Accordingly, and because
the claims in this case arise almost exclusively from alleged acts
of the Province of Tucuméan that relate directly to its perform-
ance under the Concession Contract, the Tribunal holds that
the Claimants had a duty to pursue their rights with respect to
such claims against Tucumén in the contentious administrative
courts of Tucumén as required by Article 16.4 of their
Concession Contract.

CGE presented certain additional claims regarding allegedly
sovereign actions of Tucumén that Claimants maintained were
unrelated to the Concession Contract. CGE asserted that these
actions of the Province gave rise to international responsibility
attributable to the Argentine Republic under the BIT as inter-
preted by applicable international law. Furthermore, CGE
alleged that the Argentine Republic was also liable for its fail-
ures to perform certain obligations under the BIT that
Claimants submitted gave rise to international responsibility
independent of the performance of Tucumdn under the
Concession Contract. The Tribunal finds that many of these
other claims arose, in fact, from actions of the Province relat-
ing to the merits of disputes under the Concession Contract
and, for that reason, were subject to initial resolution in the
contentious administrative tribunals of Tucuman under Article

98 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

16.4. To the extent such claims are the result of actions of the
Argentine Republic or of the Province that are arguably inde-
pendent of the Concession Contract, the Tribunal holds that
the evidence presented in these proceedings did not establish
the grounds for finding violation by the Argentine Republic of
its legal obligations under the BIT either through its own acts
or omission or through attribution to it of acts of the Tucumén
authorities.4

12. In the final section of its Award, after reviewing the procedural histo-
ty of the arbitration,” summarising the facts and respective legal positions of
the parties® and explaining its reasoning with respect to both its jurisdiction”
and the merits,® the Tribunal disposed of Claimants’ case in the following
terms:

G. Award

The Tribunal herewith dismisses the claims filed by the
Claimants against the Republic of Argentina.?

13. Before considering the grounds for annulment presented to the
Committee, it is necessary to set out in some greater detail the Tribunal’s rea-
soning both as to its jurisdiction and regarding the merits of the claim.

(1) The Tribunal’s Findings on Jurisdiction

14. The core of the Tribunal’s reasoning in support of its jurisdictional
finding is contained in paragraphs 49 to 54 of the Award. The Tribunal found
as follows:

(a) Claimants’ claims concerning the actions of the federal government of
Argentina as well as those of the provincial authorities of Tucuman are

4 Award, Part A., pp. 1-3; 40 ILM 426 (2001), pp. 427-429 (Footnotes omitted).
5 Award, Part B., paras. 1-23; 40 ILM 426 (2001), pp. 429-433.

© Award, Part C., paras. 24-39; 40 ILM 426 (2001), pp. 433-435.

7 Award, Part D., paras. 40-55; 40 ILM 426 (2001), pp. 435-439.

8 Award, Part E., paras. 56-92; 40 ILM 426 (2001), pp. 439-446.

9 Award, Part G., p. 35; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 447. Part F. of the Award, paras. 93-96, contains
the Tribunal’s assessment and determination regarding the allocation of the costs and fees associated with

the arbitration: 40 ILM 426 (2001), pp. 446-447.

CASES. 99

properly characterised as claims arising under the BIT, and not as con-
tractual claims under the Concession Agreement.!°

(b) Under international law, the acts of organs of both the central govern-
ment and provincial authorities are attributable to the state—in this
case, the Argentine Republic—with the result that Argentina cannot
rely on its federal structure as a means of limiting its treaty obliga-
tions.!!

(c) Article 25(3) of the ICSID Convention is intended to allow for con-
stituent subdivisions or agencies of a state party to the ICSID
Convention to be subject to ICSID jurisdiction and to be parties to
ICSID cases, in their own right and in their own name, where they
have so consented and the Contracting State in question has approved.
Article 25(3) neither limits the scope of the state's international
responsibilities in accordance with normal rules of attribution nor
qualifies the jurisdiction of an ICSID tribunal over that state. In the
present case, it does not restrict the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the
Argentine Republic pursuant to the BIT, and there is no question of
the Province of Tucuman itself being a party to the arbitration in its

own name.!?

(d) Similarly, Article 16(4) of the Concession Contract—which provides
that “[f]or purposes of interpretation and application of this Contract
the parties submit themselves to the exclusive jurisdiction of the
Contentious Administrative Tribunals of Tucuman’—does not, and
indeed could not, exclude the jurisdiction of the Tribunal under the
BIT. Claimants’ claims “are not subject to the jurisdiction of the con-
tentious administrative tribunals of Tucumdén, if only because, ex
hypothesi, those claims are not based on the Concession Contract but
allege a cause of action under the BIT.”!3

10 Award, para. 50; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 438.

11 Award, para. 49; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 437.

2 Award, para. 51; in para. 52, the Tribunal supports this conclusion by reference to the travaux
of Article 25; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 438.

3 Award, para. 53; 40 ILM 426 (2001), pp. 438-439 (footnote omitted). This conclusion is sup-
ported inter alia by reference to the decision of the ICSID Tribunal in Lanco International Inc v.
Argentine Republic (Preliminary Decision on Jurisdiction of 8 December 1998), 40 ILM 457 (2001).

100 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

714 insti-

15. The Tribunal went on to state that “[b]y this same analysis,
tuting proceedings against the Province of Tucumén before the contentious
administrative tribunals for breach of the Concession Contract would not
have been “the kind of choice by Claimants of legal action in national juris-
dictions (7.e., courts) against the Argentine Republic that constitutes the ‘fork
in the road’ under Article 8 of the BIT, thereby foreclosing future claims under
the ICSID Convention.”!>

(2) The Tribunal’s Findings on the Merits

16. In considering the Tribunal’s findings on the merits, it is necessary to
distinguish between what the Tribunal referred to as, on the one hand, claims
“based directly on alleged actions or failures to act of the Argentine
and, on the other hand, claims relating to conduct of the
Tucuméan authorities which are nonetheless brought against Argentina and
“rely...upon the principle of attribution.”!7 For the purposes of this decision,
these two categories of claims will be referred to, respectively, as the “federal
claims” and the “Tucumén claims.”

17. Although, as mentioned above, the Tribunal expressly “dismisse[d] the
claims filed by Claimants against the Republic of Argentina,”!® what it actu-
ally did—and did not do—was much disputed between the parties. According
to the Respondent, the Tribunal carefully considered and, as stated in its
Award, dismissed all of Claimants’ claims on the merits. According to

14 Referring to the analysis contained in paras. 53-54 of the Award (40 ILM 426 (2001), pp. 438-
439) and summarized at para. 14(d) of this decision.

15 Award, para. 55; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 439. Strictly speaking, this passage did not constitute
part of the Tribunal’s findings on jurisdiction, though it flowed from its analysis of the jurisdictional sit-
uation. We return to it later in this decision.

16 Award, para. 50; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 438.

17 Ibid. The terminology employed by the Tribunal in this regard is not entirely happy. All inter-
national claims against a state are based on attribution, whether the conduct in question is that of a cen-
tral or provincial government or other subdivision. See ILC Articles on Responsibility of States for
Internationally Wrongful Acts, annexed to GA Resolution 54/83, 12 December 2001 (hereafter “ILC
Articles”), Articles 2(a), 4 and the Commission's commentary to Article 4, paras. (8)-(10). A similar
remark may be made concerning the Tribunal’s later reference to “a strict liability standard of attribu-
tion” (Award, para. 63; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 440). Attribution has nothing to do with the standard
of liability or responsibility. The question whether a state’s responsibility is “strict” or is based on due
diligence or on some other standard is a separate issue from the question of attribution (cf. ILC Articles,
Ants, 2, 12). Ie does not, however, appear that either of these terminological issues affected the reasoning
of the Tribunal, and no more need be said of them.

18 Award, Part G., p. 35; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 447.

CASES. 101

Claimants, the Tribunal never actually considered the merits of their BIT
claims at all, and by purporting to dismiss those claims without effectively
considering them on their merits, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.
Further, Claimants submit, even if it could be said that the Tribunal did con-
sider their claims on the merits, it nonetheless failed to give any reasons for dis-
missing them. There is thus a fundamental difference between the parties as to
the manner in which the Tribunal’s decision is to be characterised.

(a) The Federal Claims

18. The Tribunal dealt with the federal claims—that is, claims arising from
alleged conduct on the part of the federal authorities of the Argentine
Republic—in paragraphs 83-90 and 92 of the Award.

19. It began by noting that on only one occasion—in a letter dated 5
March 1996—did Claimants ever raise the issue, as against the federal author-
ities directly, of a breach of the BIT.!? The Tribunal noted that nowhere in the
letter did Claimants “ask Argentine officials to take any particular action relat-
ing to the Concession Contract or the pending differences between Claimants
and the authorities of Tucumdn.”?° Accordingly the Tribunal determined that
“[t]he record contains no evidence that Argentine officials ever failed to take
any specific action that the Claimants requested.””!

20. The Tribunal nonetheless went on to deal with the federal claims in
some detail. It surveyed the range of “legal and political means” which, accord-
ing to Claimants, the federal authorities should have used “to protect
Claimants’ rights.”? These included: commencing legal proceedings against
Tucumén in a federal court (para. 87); exercising financial (para. 88) and polit-
ical (para. 89) leverage over the province; and notifying Tucumdan that its con-
duct was in breach of the BIT (para. 90).

21. Representative of this discussion is the treatment of potential legal
action by the federal government, in a federal court, designed “to compel
Tucumén to comply with the BIT.”?3 The Tribunal acknowledged (but

19 Award, para. 83; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 444.
2” Ibid.

21 Award, para. 84; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 444.
22 Award, para. 86; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 445.
23 Award, para. 87; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 445.

102 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

declined to resolve) the contested issue of Argentine law as to whether a federal
court action would lie against a province for breach of a treaty. It observed that
recourse to the Tucumén tribunals was available to Claimants (or at least to
CAA) under the terms of the Concession Contract. It concluded by holding:

On the facts presented, the Tribunal finds that there was no
action of the Province of Tucumén that, absent such a local
court proceeding [viz. under Article 16(4) of the Concession
Agreement], so obviously violated the BIT as to require the
Argentine government to seek a legal remedy against the
Province in the Argentine courts nor, for that matter, did the
Claimants ever specify any such action to the Argentine
Republic.”4

22. The Tribunal’s overall conclusion regarding the federal claims was as
follows:

In conclusion, the Tribunal finds that the record of these pro-
ceedings does not provide a basis for holding that the
Argentine Republic failed to respond to the situation in
Tucuman and the requests of the Claimants in accordance
with the obligations of the Argentine government under the

BIT.?°
(b) The Tucumdén Claims

23. Claimants’ claims arising from the alleged conduct of Tucumdan and its
officials are discussed in paragraphs 57-82 and 91 of the Award.

24, After some initial discussion of the arguments of the parties regarding
the so-called “strict liability standard of attribution” (paras. 57-61), the
Tribunal declared that it would resolve the case not by answering any general
question as to whether treaty provisions “impose a strict liability standard on
a central government for actions of a political subdivision,” but rather by
analysing “the specific allegations on which the Claimants base their claims
and their legal significance in light of the terms of the Concession Contract

%4 Ibid.
25 Award, para. 92; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 446.

CASES. 103

and the BIT.”6 It then proceeded to analyse what Claimants had identified as
“four categories of ‘acts of the Province attributable to [Respondent] that vio-
lated Claimants’ rights under the BIT.”?7

25. The first category of alleged BIT violations by Tucumén concerned
“{alcts that resulted in a fall in the recovery rate.”?8 These included a decision
by the Ombudsman, in December 1996, which was said to have deprived
CGE of “their right to cut off service to non-paying customers,” as well as cer-
tain decisions of a local regulatory authority, ERSACT, which were said to
have “forced a reduction in the tariff and thereby created uncertainty as to
what invoices had to be paid.” In respect of all these decisions, the Tribunal
found that “Claimants never challenged in the courts of Tucumdén any of these
actions of the administrative agencies of Tucumén relating to implementation
of the Concession Contract.””?

26. Under this first category of impugned conduct, the Tribunal also con-
sidered Claimants’ allegations concerning public statements by provincial leg-
islators and others purportedly urging customers not to pay their water bills.
The Tribunal remarked that those allegations concerned “a highly disputed
issue of fact, i.e., whether Tucuman authorities organized a campaign for non-
payment of invoices issued by Claimants”; but it determined that “[i]n any
event, this non-payment issue relates to the grounds for non-payment under
the Concession Contract,” and, as with the administrative decisions discussed
above, the Tribunal found that “Claimants failed to challenge any of these acts
in the Tucumdn courts.”3°

27. The second category of Tucumdn conduct allegedly in violation of
Claimants’ rights under the BIT concerned “[a]cts that unilaterally reduced
the tariff rate.”! These were found to comprise essentially the same acts
referred to in the first category, and the Tribunal determined that, as with the

26 Award, para. 62; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 440. Thus, as mentioned above (see note 17), the con-
fusion inherent in the phrase “strict liability standard of attribution” seems to have no operative effect in
the Award.

27 Award, para. 63; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 440.

28 Award, paras. 65-66; 40 ILM 426 (2001), pp. 440-441.
29 Award, para. 65; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 440.

30 Award, para. 66; 40 ILM 426 (2001), pp. 440-441.

31 Award, para. 67; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 441.

104 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

impugned conduct comprising the first category, they “were never challenged
in the Tucuman courts.”>?

28. With respect to the third category of alleged Tucumén breaches of the
BIT, which concerned certain “[a]buses of regulatory authority,”>? the
Tribunal again noted that “CGE never challenged in the Tucumén courts the
interpretation that the Tucumdn agencies gave to the provisions of the
Concession Contract bearing on this issue.”34

29. The fourth category of alleged BIT violations by Tucumén concerned
certain “[dJealings in bad faith.”3> A number of examples were given, includ-
ing conduct by the provincial Governor designed to alter unilaterally “the
terms of the second renegotiated agreement that was submitted to the
Tucumaén legislature” in the period March-August 1997 (paras. 70-71). After
briefly reviewing the factual differences between the parties on this point
(para. 72), the Tribunal observed that this aspect of the dispute related solely
to the parties’ efforts to conclude a negotiated settlement. It stressed that, as
Claimants themselves acknowledged, Tucumén was not “legally obligated to
modify the Concession Contract” (para. 73). After noting that Argentina itself
was involved in attempts to resolve the impasse, the Tribunal held that “on the
evidence presented, the Tribunal does not find the basis for holding the
Argentine Republic liable for actions of the Tucumdn authorities.”>°

30. Three additional allegations were made by Claimants in support of
their claim of bad faith. One concerned certain fines imposed on Claimants
for poor water quality allegedly discovered during water testing by Tucumén.

32 Ibid.

33 Award, paras. 68-69; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 441.

34 Award, para. 68. In para. 69, the Tribunal sidestepped a factual dispute as to whether “the ERS-
ACT intervention” was a legitimate administrative intervention or was politically motivated, to the detri-
ment of Claimants, noting again that “Claimants never brought any legal challenge in the courts of
Tucumén [in respect] of the ERSACT intervention on the ground that such action violated the rights of
CGE under the Concession Contract.” See 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 441.

35 Award, paras. 70-76; 40 ILM 426 (2001), pp. 441-442.

36 Award, para. 73; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 442. This conclusion is repeated in para. 82 of the
‘Award: 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 444.

CASES. 105

Argentina argued that the fines were authorised by the Concession Contract,
and were in any event never collected; Claimants asserted that the fines were
politically motivated and were intended to induce it to modify the Concession
Contract, thus amounting to an abuse of power. For its part, the Tribunal con-
cluded that “[s]ince none of the fines were ever enforced against Claimants,
the Tribunal cannot base a finding of bad faith dealings on this alleged action,
particularly when the dispute concerning its justification appears to depend in
significant part on an interpretation of the Concession Contract that the par-
ties thereto agreed would be decided by the Tucumén courts.”5” Similarly, as
regards the other acts of Tucumén allegedly committed in bad faith, the
Tribunal concluded that “the parties disagree over the meaning and applica-
bility of the pertinent provisions of the Concession Contract, as well as over
the underlying facts.”>*

31. The Tribunal’s conclusions, drawn from its analysis of these “four cat-
egories” of Tucumén acts, are summarised in paragraphs 77-84 of the Award.

32. The Tribunal opens this section of its Award with the statement that
“it is apparent that all of the...actions of the Province of Tucumén on which
the Claimants rely... .are closely linked to the performance or non-performance
of the parties under the Concession Contract.” It concludes that “all of the
issues relevant to the legal basis for these claims against Respondent arose from
disputes between Claimants and Tucumdan concerning their performance and
non-performance under the Concession Contract.” These findings lead to
the Tribunal’s central conclusion:

 

(T]he Tribunal holds that, because of the crucial connection in
this case between the terms of the Concession Contract and
these alleged violations of the BIT, the Argentine Republic
cannot be held liable unless and until Claimants have, as
Article 16.4 of the Concession Contract requires, asserted their
rights in proceedings before the contentious administrative

37 Award, para. 74; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 442.

38 Award, para. 75; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 442. The Tribunal also referred summarily to the post-
termination conduct of the parties, specifically Claimants’ allegations that they were forced to continue
to provide services under the Concession Contract while the provincial authorities continued to obstruct
their attempts to collect charges from their customers (para. 76). The Tribunal only summarised the
arguments made by the parties in this regard.

39 Award, para. 77; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 443.

40 Bid.

  

106

33.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

courts of Tucumdn and have been denied their rights, either
procedurally or substantively.“!

The Tribunal went on to make a number of additional findings

port of this overarching conclusion:

{G]iven the nature of the dispute between Claimants and the
Province of Tucumén, it is not possible for this Tribunal to
determine which actions of the Province were taken in exercise
of its sovereign authority and which in the exercise of its rights
as a party to the Concession Contract.... To make such deter-
minations the Tribunal would have to undertake a detailed
interpretation and application of the Concession Contract, a
task left by the parties to that contract to the exclusive juris-
diction of the administrative courts of Tucuman.”?

There is no allegation before the Tribunal that the courts of
Tucuman were unavailable to hear such claims or that they
lacked independence or fairness in adjudicating them.*3

Because the Tribunal has determined that on the facts present-
ed the Claimants should first have challenged the actions of
the Tucumén authorities in its administrative courts, any claim
against the Argentine Republic could arise only if Claimants
were denied access to the courts of Tucumén to pursue their
remedy under Article 16.4 or if the Claimants were treated
unfairly in those courts (denial of procedural justice) or if the
judgment of those courts were substantively unfair (denial of
substantive justice) or otherwise denied rights guaranteed to
French investors under the BIT by the Argentine Republic.‘4

41 Award, para. 78; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 443.

“2 Award, para. 79; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 443.
‘3 Ibid.
“4 Award, para. 80; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 443.

in sup-

CASES. 107

The Tribunal emphasizes that this decision does not impose an
exhaustion of remedies requirement under the BIT because
such requirement would be incompatible with Article 8 of the
BIT and Article 26 of the ICSID Convention.

In this case, however, the obligation to resort to the local
courts is compelled by the express terms of Article 16.4 of the
[Concession Contract] and the impossibility, on the facts of
the instant case, of separating potential breaches of contract
claims from BIT violations without interpreting and applying
the Concession Contract, a task that the contract assigns
expressly to the local courts.4°

34. Two further points should be noted. The first concerns Article 10 of
the BIT, on which Claimants had relied to avoid the apparently preclusive
effect of Article 16(4) of the Concession Contract. Article 10 provides that:

Investments which have been the subject of a specific under-
taking by one Contracting Party vis-a-vis investors of the other
Contracting Party shall be governed, without prejudice to the
provisions of this Agreement, by the terms of this undertaking,
in so far as its provisions are more favourable than those laid
down by this Agreement.

35. In a footnote, the Tribunal declared:

Article 10 protects rights granted to an investor under a special
agreement if such rights are more favorable to the investor than
those granted under the BIT. The question here is not whether
one or the other is more favorable, but whether the Tribunal is
in a position, on the facts of this case, to separate the breach of
contract issues from violations of the BIT, considering that the
parties to the Concession Contract have agreed to an exclusive
remedy in the Tucumén courts for the determination of the
disputed contractual issues which are not governed by the
BIT.“

45 Award, para. 81; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 444.
46 Award, para. 78, note 20; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 449

108 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

36. The second point concerns the Tribunal’s explanation of why, in its
view, the so-called “fork in the road” provision of Article 8(2) of the BIT has
no application to Claimants in the circumstances of this case. Article 8(2) pro-
vides in relevant part that, “[o]nce an investor has submitted the dispute to the
courts of the Contracting Party concerned or to international arbitration, the
choice of one or the other of those procedures is final.” In the Tribunal’s view,
recourse by Claimants to the contentious administrative courts of Tucumén
would not have precluded them from subsequently bringing claims before an
ICSID tribunal in accordance with the BIT, ie., it would not have amounted
to a final “choice of one or the other of those procedures” within Article 8(2).
The Tribunal addressed this question twice, in paragraphs 55 and 81 of the
Award.

37. In paragraph 55, the Tribunal announced this conclusion with the
prefatory words “[b]y this same analysis.” The analysis in question is found in
paragraphs 53 and 54, where, after analysing the decision in the Lanco case,
the Tribunal stated:

53. ... In this case the claims filed by CGE against
Respondent are based on violation by the Argentine Republic
of the BIT... As formulated, these claims against the
Argentine Republic are not subject to the jurisdiction of the
contentious administrative tribunals of Tucumdn, if only
because, ex Aypothesi, those claims are not based on the
Concession Contract but allege a cause of action under the
BIT.

54. Thus, Article 16.4 of the Concession Contract cannot be
deemed to prevent the investor from proceeding under the
ICSID Convention against the Argentine Republic on a claim
charging the Argentine Republic with a violation of the
Argentine-French BIT.

55. By this same analysis, a suit by Claimants against Tucumén
in the administrative courts of Tucumén for violation of the
terms of the Concession Contract would not have foreclosed
Claimant from subsequently seeking a remedy against the
Argentine Republic as provided in the BIT and ICSID
Convention. ..47

“7 40 ILM 426 (2001), pp. 438-439 (emphasis added, footnote omitted)

CASES. 109

38. As these passages show, the Tribunal interpreted Article 8(2) as apply-
ing only to claims of a breach of the BIT, and not to purely contractual or
other claims within the jurisdiction of the administrative courts of Tucumén,
even if those claims overlapped with the claims for breach of the BIT. In other
words, in the view of the Tribunal, the fork in the road set out in Article 8(2)
is limited in its application to claims which explicitly “allege a cause of action
under the BIT” or which “[charge] the Argentine Republic with a violation of
the Argentine-French BIT”; it does not apply in the circumstance of claims
“based on the Concession Contract” or to “a suit by Claimants... for violation
of the terms of the Concession Contract.”

39. That this is the correct interpretation of the Tribunal’s ruling as to
Article 8(2) is reinforced by the discussion contained in footnote 19, at para-
graph 53 of the Award, where the Tribunal explicitly rejected Respondent's
contention that the Tucumén courts would have had jurisdiction over “a claim
against the Argentine Republic based on the BIT.” It gave two reasons: first,
“the Argentine Republic could have engaged in conduct or failed to act in vio-
lation of its obligations under the BIT even if Tucumén were not in violation
of the Concession Contract”; and second, “the Tucuman courts do not have
jurisdiction over such a suit [against the Argentine Republic] absent consent
by Respondent.” The underlying assumption is, again, that for a claim before
the Tucumén courts to be covered by Article 8(2), it would have to be “based
on the BIT.”

40. The Tribunal returned to the question in paragraph 81 of its Award:

That is why the Tribunal rejects Claimants’ position that they
had no obligation to pursue such local remedies against the
Province or that, in the event of a denial of justice of [sic]
rights under the BIT, that any such legal action in the
Tucuman courts would have waived their right to resort to
arbitration against the Argentine Republic before ICSID
under the BIT.48

41. The Tribunal’s stated rationale for rejecting Claimants’ position is “the
impossibility, on the facts of the instant case, of separating potential breaches
of contract claims from BIT violations without interpreting and applying the
Concession Contract, a task that the contract assigns expressly to the local

48 Ibid. p. 444.

110 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

courts.” The Tribunal appears to have considered that, because Claimants’
contract and treaty claims could not be separated, a distinct claim “based on
the BIT” was impossible in the circumstances of the case, at least prior to sub-
mission of the dispute to the provincial courts.

42. Thus, it seems that the Tribunal’s conclusion that the fork in the road
was never reached in this case is based on an interpretation of Article 8(2)
which limits its application exclusively to claims alleging a breach of the BIT,
that is, to treaty claims as such.

43. The Tribunal returned to consider the Tucumén claims in paragraph
91 of the Award, which addresses Claimants’ allegations regarding hostile and
concerted “action by officials, legislative and executive.” In this regard, the

Tribunal said:

In addition to pointing out that the legislators on whose
actions the Claimants rely were opponents of the governing
party in Tucumén at the time that the disputes arose under the
Concession Contract, Respondent presented a point by point
refutation of the other evidence upon which Claimants rely for
these allegations. After carefully reviewing the extensive
memorials and testimony, the Tribunal finds that the record in
these proceedings regarding these allegations does not establish
a factual basis for attributing liability to the Argentine
Republic under the BIT for the alleged actions of officials of
Tucumén.“?

Cc. THE COMMITTEE'S ANALYSIS

44, Before proceeding to analyse the Tribunal’s reasoning in more detail,
with a view specifically to assessing the validity of the grounds of annulment
raised by the parties, it is necessary to say something about the France-
Argentina BIT of 3 July 1991, and about the role of annulment panels and the
scope of their powers.

® Ibid, p. 446.

CASES. lil

(1) Relevant Provisions of the France-Argentina BIT

45. The Agreement between the Government of the Argentine Republic
and the Government of the Republic of France for Reciprocal Protection and
Promotion of Investments was signed by France and Argentina at Paris on 3
July 1991 and came into force on 3 March 1993.>° It deals, inter alia, with the
following matters relevant to the present proceeding.

(a) Definition of “Investor” and “Investment”

46. Article 1(1) contains a broad definition of the term “investment,”
which includes: “Shares, issue premiums and other forms of participation,
albeit minority or indirect, in companies constituted in the territory of either
Contracting Party,” which are invested in accordance with the law of the
Contracting Party before or after the entry into force of the BIT.>!

47. The term “investor” is defined in Article 1(2). It is stated to apply to:
(a) individuals; (b) bodies corporate having the nationality of one of the
Contracting Parties, and also to

(c) Any body corporate effectively controlled, directly or
indirectly, by nationals of one Contracting Party, or by bodies
corporate having their registered office in the territory of one
Contracting Party and constituted in accordance with that
Party’s legislation.**

48. Atthe time the Concession Contract was signed and the initial invest-
ment was made, the shareholding in CAA was divided between CGE, a
Spanish company, Dragados y Construcciones Argentina S.A. (Dycasa), and
an Argentine company, Benito Roggio e Hijos S.A. (Roggio), none of which
had a controlling shareholding in CAA. When the letter of 5 March 1996 was
written, Dycasa maintained its interest in CAA, hence the letter referred not
only to the Argentine-France BIT but also to a BIT between Spain and
Argentina. Subsequently, in June 1996, CGE acquired Dycasa’s shareholding
and thus had effective control of CAA within the meaning of Article 1(2)(c)

5° Above, note 3.
51 BIT, Article 1(1)(b).
2 BIT, Article 1(2)(0).

112 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

of the Argentine-French BIT at the time the arbitration proceedings were
commenced.

49. Notwithstanding these facts (on which there seems to be no dispute
between the parties) the Tribunal held, in a footnote, that “CAA should be
considered a French investor from the effective date of the Concession
Contract.” The Respondent claims that this finding was unsupported by any
reasons and was in fact contradicted by uncontested evidence before the
Tribunal. According to the Respondent, CGE was not the controlling share-
holder at the time when most of the alleged BIT violations occurred, and CAA
was accordingly not an “investor” for the purposes of the BIT at that time.

50. In common with other BITs, Article 1 clearly distinguishes between
foreign shareholders in local companies and those companies themselves.
While the foreign shareholding is by definition an “investment” and its hold-
er an “investor,” the local company only falls within the scope of Article 1 if it
is “effectively controlled, directly or indirectly, by nationals of one Contracting
Party” or by corporations established under its laws. In accordance with these
provisions, which determine the scope of operation of the BIT, issues might
well arise where there has been a transfer of control of a local company from a
shareholder of one nationality to a shareholder of another. For example, if
Dycasa had a Spanish treaty claim prior to March 1996, questions might arise
as to how that claim could be later transferred to a French company, or as to
how CGE could have acquired a French treaty claim in respect of conduct
concerning an investment which it did not hold at the time the conduct
occurred and which at that time did not have French nationality. At least, such
questions might affect the quantum of recovery, but they might have further
and even more basic legal consequences. But while it is arguable that the
Tribunal failed to state any reasons for its finding that “CAA should be con-
sidered a French investor from the effective date of the Concession Contract,”
that finding played no part in the subsequent reasoning of the Tribunal, or in
its dismissal of the claim. Moreover it cannot be argued that CGE did not have
an “investment” in CAA from the date of the conclusion of the Concession
Contract, or that it was not an “investor” in respect of its own shareholding,
whether or not it had overall control of CAA. Whatever the extent of its
investment may have been, it was entitled to invoke the BIT in respect of con-
duct alleged to constitute a breach of Articles 3 or 5. It is also clear that CGE
controlled CAA at the time the proceedings were commenced, so that there

53 Award, para. 24, note 6; 40 ILM 426 (2001), pp. 447-448.

CASES. 113

was no question that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction over CAA as one of
Claimants in the arbitration. In the circumstances, and for the purposes of the
present proceedings, the Committee does not need to reach any conclusion on
the precise extent of CAA’s and CGE’s treaty rights at different times.

(b) Local Remedies and Their Relation to Arbitration under
the BIT

51. The role and effect, if any, of local remedies available to the investor
under the France-Argentina BIT are addressed in Article 8 of the BIT, which
is central to this case, and in certain articles of the ICSID Convention, espe-
cially Article 26.

52. In accordance with Article 26 of the Convention, consent to ICSID
arbitration involves consent “to the exclusion of any other remedy.” A
Contracting State may qualify its consent by requiring, as a pre-condition to
arbitration, “the exhaustion of local administrative or judicial remedies.”
Argentina did not impose such a pre-condition when it agreed to Article 8 of
the BIT. Accordingly it is common ground (and the Tribunal so held) that the
exhaustion of local remedies rule does not apply to claims under the BIT.

53. Article 8 of the BIT expressly gives investors a choice of forum. Article
8 provides in full as follows:

1. Any dispute relating to investments made under this
Agreement between one Contracting Party and an investor of
the other Contracting Party shall, as far as possible, be settled
amicably between the two parties concerned.

2. If any such dispute cannot be so settled within six months
of the time when a claim is made by one of the parties to the
dispute, the dispute shall, at the request of the investor, be
submitted:

¢ — Either to the domestic courts of the Contracting Party
involved in the dispute;

* — Or to international arbitration under the conditions
described in paragraph 3 below.

114 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

Once an investor has submitted the dispute to the courts of the
Contracting Party concerned or to international arbitration,
the choice of one or the other of these procedures is final.

3. Where recourse is had to international arbitration, the
investor may choose to bring the dispute before one of the fol-
lowing arbitration bodies:

¢ The International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID), established by the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
National of other States opened for signature in
Washington on 18 March 1965, if both States Parties to
this Agreement have already acceded to the Convention.
Until such time as this requirement is met, the two
Contracting Parties shall agree to submit the dispute to
arbitration, in accordance with the rules of procedure of
the Additional Facility of ICSID;

¢ An ad hoc arbitral tribunal established in accordance with
the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

4, The ruling of the arbitral body shall be based on the pro-
visions of this Agreement, the legislation of the Contracting
Party which is a party to the dispute, including rules govern-
ing conflict of laws, the terms of any private agreements con-
cluded on the subject of the investment, and the relevant prin-
ciples of international law.

5.  Arbitral decisions shall be final and binding on the par-
ties to the dispute. [Footnote omitted.]

54. Two initial points may be made about these provisions. First, it is evi-
dent that the term “national jurisdictions” as used in Article 8(2) (“juridictions
nationales”/“jurisdiciones nacionales” in the authentic French and Spanish
texts; “domestic courts” in the UNTS English translation) refers to all the
courts and tribunals of the Contracting Parties, and not just to those at the
federal level. In a treaty between a unitary and a federal state, such as France
and Argentina respectively, one would not expect any disparity in the applica-
tion of a phrase such as “national jurisdictions”: all French courts and tribunals
are national, as are, for the purposes of the BIT, all courts and tribunals of

CASES. 115

Argentina. The relevant distinction, as Article 8(2) makes clear, is between
“national” and “international” tribunals, not between “national” and “provin-
cial” courts. Thus, there is no disparity between the phrases “national jurisdic-
tions [#.e., courts]” and “jurisdictions [courts] of the Contracting Party” as
used in the two paragraphs of Article 8(2). In consequence, the contentious
administrative courts of Tucumdn are to be considered as national courts
falling within the scope of Article 8(2).4

55. Secondly, Article 8 deals generally with disputes “relating to invest-
ments made under this Agreement between one Contracting Party and an
investor of the other Contracting Party.” It is those disputes which may be sub-
mitted, at the investor's option, either to national or international adjudica-
tion. Article 8 does not use a narrower formulation, requiring that the
investor’s claim allege a breach of the BIT itself. Read literally, the require-
ments for arbitral jurisdiction in Article 8 do not necessitate that the Claimant
allege a breach of the BIT itself: it is sufficient that the dispute relate to an
investment made under the BIT. This may be contrasted, for example, with
Article 11 of the BIT, which refers to disputes “concerning the interpretation
or application of this Agreement,” or with Article 1116 of the NAFTA, which
provides that an investor may submit to arbitration under Chapter 11 “a claim
that another Party has breached an obligation under” specified provisions of
that Chapter. Consequently, if a claim brought before a national court con-
cerns a “dispute relating to investments made under this Agreement” within
the meaning of Article 8(1), then Article 8(2) will apply.>> In the Committee’s
view, a claim by CAA against the Province of Tucumén for breach of the
Concession Contract, brought before the contentious administrative courts of
Tucuman, would prima facie fall within Article 8(2) and constitute a “final”
choice of forum and jurisdiction, if that claim was coextensive with a dispute
relating to investments made under the BIT.

(c) Scope and Application of Substantive Provisions of the BIT

56. Claimants’ case before the Tribunal was based on Articles 3 and 5 of
the BIT, which deal, respectively, with “fair and equitable treatment according

 

54 Alehough counsel for the Respondent contended otherwise before the Committee, the issue
does not appear to have been the basis for the Tribunal’s ruling on Article 8(2). See above, paras. 35-41,
where the Committee summarises its understanding of the Tribunal’ reasoning on this point

55. CE. Waste Management, Inc. v. Mexico (No. 1), 40 ILM 56 (2001) at p. 68 (para. 28).

   

 

116 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

to the principles of international law” and with “measures of expropria-
tion...or any other equivalent measure.”

57. Article 3 provides that:

Each Contracting Party shall undertake to accord in its terri-
tory and maritime zone just and equitable treatment, in accor-
dance with the principles of international law, to the invest-
ments of investors of the other Party and to ensure that the
exercise of the right so granted is not impeded either de jure or

de facto.

58. Article 5 provides that:

1. Investments made by investors of one Contracting Party
shall be fully and completely protected and safeguarded in the
territory and maritime zone of the other Contracting Party, in
accordance with the principle of just and equitable treatment
mentioned in article 3 of this Agreement.

2. The Contracting Parties shall not take, directly or indi-
rectly, any expropriation or nationalization measures or any
other equivalent measures having a similar effect of disposses-
sion, except for reasons of public necessity and on condition
that the measures are not discriminatory or contrary to a spe-
cific undertaking.

Any such dispossession measures taken shall give rise to
the payment of prompt and adequate compensation the
amount of which, calculated in accordance with the real value
of the investments in question, shall be assessed on the basis of
a normal economic situation prior to any threat of disposses-
sion.

The amount and methods of payment of such compen-
sation shall be determined not later than the date of disposses-
sion. The compensation shall be readily convertible, paid with-
out delay and freely transferable. It shall yield, up to the date
of payment, interest calculated at the appropriate rate.

3. Investors of either Contracting Party whose investments
have suffered losses as a result of war or any other armed con-
flict, revolution, state of national emergency or uprising in the

CASES. 7

territory or maritime zone of the other Contracting Party shall
be accorded by the latter Party treatment which is no less
favourable than that accorded to its own investors or to
investors of the most-favoured nation.

59. Both these Articles refer to an international law standard, expressly or
by clear implication. The protection afforded under both Articles is extended
to “investments made by investors.”

60. Again itis evident that a particular investment dispute may at the same
time involve issues of the interpretation and application of the BIT’s standards
and questions of contract. Article 8(4), by expressly empowering the Tribunal
to base its ruling on the provisions of the BIT as well as on the terms of any
private agreements concluded on the subject of the investment, clearly
acknowledges that possibility. So too does Article 8(2), which contemplates
that the very same dispute may be submitted either to the domestic courts of
the Contracting Party (to be determined in accordance with the domestic law
of that State), or to international arbitration (to be determined in accordance
with the applicable law identified in Article 8(4)).

(2) The Role of Annulment Under the ICSID Convention

61. It is against this background that the Committee has to consider the
grounds for annulment relied on before it. Before doing so, however, some
brief remarks on the role of annulment in the ICSID system are necessary.

62. Although the issue of the proper role of an annulment committee in
the ICSID system must necessarily inform the analysis and the conclusions of
this Committee, relatively little needs to be said about the issue for the reason
that there seems to be little disagreement between the parties. Claimants and
Respondent agree that an ad hoc Committee is not a court of appeal and that
its competence extends only to annulment based on one or other of the
grounds expressly set out in Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. It also
appears to be established that there is no presumption either in favour of or
against annulment,*® a point acknowledged by Claimants as well as
Respondent.

56 Cf. MINE y. Guinea, Decision on Annulment of 22 December 1989, (1989) 4 ICSID Rep. 79
at p. 86 (paras. 4.09-4.12); and see also C. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (Cambridge,
Cambridge Unversity Press, 2001) (hereafter “Schreuer”), at pp. 902-3.

118 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

63. No doubt the Committee must take great care to ensure that the rea-
soning of an arbitral tribunal is clearly understood, and must guard against the
annulment of awards for trivial cause. But where a tribunal has “manifestly
exceeded its powers” or has committed “a serious departure from a fundamen-
tal rule of procedure’—both grounds for annulment under Article 52 of the
ICSID Convention and both relied on by Claimants in this proceeding—the
matter is by definition not trivial.

64. A greater source of concern is perhaps the ground of “failure to state
reasons,” which is not qualified by any such phrase as “manifestly” or “serious.”
However, it is well accepted both in the cases and the literature that Article
52(1)(e) concerns a failure to state any reasons with respect to all or part of an
award, not the failure to state correct or convincing reasons.°” It bears reiter-
ating that an ad hoc committee is not a court of appeal. Provided that the rea-
sons given by a tribunal can be followed and relate to the issues that were
before the tribunal, their correctness is beside the point in terms of Article
52(1)(e). Moreover, reasons may be stated succinctly or at length, and differ-
ent legal traditions differ in their modes of expressing reasons. Tribunals must
be allowed a degree of discretion as to the way in which they express their rea-
soning.

65. In the Committee’s view, annulment under Article 52(1)(e) should
only occur in a clear case. This entails two conditions: first, the failure to state
reasons must leave the decision on a particular point essentially lacking in any
expressed rationale; and second, that point must itself be necessary to the tri-
bunal’s decision. It is frequently said that contradictory reasons cancel each
other out, and indeed, if reasons are genuinely contradictory so they might.
However, tribunals must often struggle to balance conflicting considerations,
and an ad hoc committee should be careful not to discern contradiction when
what is actually expressed in a tribunal’s reasons could more truly be said to be
but a reflection of such conflicting considerations.

66. Finally, it appears to be established that an ad hoc committee has a cer-
tain measure of discretion as to whether to annul an award, even if an annul-
lable error is found. Article 52(3) provides that a committee “shall have the
authority to annul the award or any part thereof,” and this has been interpret-

57 See Schreuer, pp. 984-1008.

CASES. 119

ed as giving committees some flexibility in determining whether annulment is
appropriate in the circumstances.°® Among other things, it is necessary for an
ad hoc committee to consider the significance of the error relative to the legal
rights of the parties. This question, as it applies in the circumstances of the
present case, is addressed below.

67. Another question, which was debated between the parties in this case,
is whether an ad hoc committee is limited to the grounds for annulment relied
on by a Claimant, or whether the Respondent may itself raise additional
grounds for annulment. In their Application, Claimants sought only the par-
tial annulment of the Award, on three grounds: (1) that the Tribunal mani-
festly exceeded its powers; (2) that there had been a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure; and (3) that the Award failed to state the rea-
sons on which it is based.®? The Respondent not only resisted each of these
contentions, it further argued that ifany of them were to be upheld, the Award
as a whole should be annulled, on the grounds either that the Tribunal had no
jurisdiction at all, or that there was a fundamental contradiction in the
Tribunal’s reasoning as between that part which dealt with jurisdiction and
that part which dealt with the merits. By way of reply, in their written plead-
ings, Claimants argued that what they called Respondent’s “counterclaim” for
annulment of the Award as a whole was inadmissible, on the ground that it
was out of time and that Article 52 made no provision for counterclaims.

68. The Committee agrees with Claimants that a counterclaim for annul-
ment, that is, a claim which is not raised by the party concerned as a separate
request in accordance with Article 52(1) of the Convention, is inadmissible.
But it does not follow that a party, such as Respondent in the present case, may
not present its own arguments on questions of annulment, provided that those
arguments concern specific matters pleaded by the party requesting annul-
ment, in this case the Claimants. In the opinion of the Committee, a party to
annulment proceedings which successfully pleads and sustains a ground for
annulment set out in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention cannot limit the
extent to which an ad hoc committee may decide to annul the impugned
award as a consequence. Certain grounds of annulment will affect the award
as a whole—for example, where it is demonstrated that the tribunal which ren-
dered the award was not properly constituted (Article 52(1)(a)). Others may

58 §
4.09-4.10.
59 Application, para. 3; see also para. 2 of the present decision.

 

Schreuer, pp. 1018-1023, with references to the authorities, especially MINE at paras.

120 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

only affect part of the award. An ad hoc committee is expressly authorised by
the Convention to annul an award “in whole or in part” (Article 52(3)).

69. | Thus where a ground for annulment is established, it is for the ad hoc
committee, and not the requesting party, to determine the extent of the annul-
ment. In making this determination, the committee is not bound by the appli-
cant’s characterisation of its request, whether in the original application or oth-
erwise, as requiring either complete or partial annulment of the award. This is
reflected in the difference in language between Articles 52(1) and 52(3), and
it is further supported by the travaux of the ICSID Convention. Indeed,
Claimants in the present case eventually accepted this view.

70. In seeking in the alternative the annulment of the jurisdictional por-
tion of the Award, the Respondent was not making a late annulment applica-
tion by way of a counterclaim—a procedure which, as Claimants correctly
asserted, is not contemplated by Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. Rather
it was arguing that if Claimants’ position on the merits were to be upheld,
either under Article 52(1)(b) or 52(1)(e), the effect must necessarily be to
bring down the whole Award. That position was entirely open to the
Respondent. It in no way entailed what would have been an inadmissible
counterclaim for annulment on new grounds.

(3) The Grounds of Annulment

71. The Committee accordingly turns to the grounds for annulment
themselves. Since, as explained above, the grounds validly pleaded by the
Respondent extend to the Tribunal’s holding on jurisdiction, it is appropriate
to consider first the issue of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

(a) The Tribunal’s Jurisdictional Finding

72. The Committee has already summarised the grounds on which the
Tribunal upheld its jurisdiction. The Tribunal gave extensive reasons for doing
so, and these reasons are not in themselves contradictory. Tt is true that
Respondent argued, in the alternative, that there was a contradiction between
those reasons and the reasons given by the Tribunal concerning the merits. But
Argentina also argued that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction in any event. If this

6 With the possible exception of the matter concerning Dycasa’s shares, referred to above, para.

48.

CASES. 121

is right, it was a manifest excess of power for the Tribunal to proceed to con-
sider the merits, and the whole Award must be annulled. Accordingly, the
question of failure to give reasons, including possibly contradictory reasons,
does not arise so far as the Tribunal’s jurisdictional finding is concerned.

73. For its part, however, the Committee has no difficulty accepting each
of the four propositions, summarised in paragraph 14 above, on the basis of
which the Tribunal held that it had jurisdiction and that its jurisdiction
extended to the Tucuman claims.

74. In particular, the Committee agrees with the Tribunal in characterising
the present dispute as one “relating to investments made under this
Agreement” within the meaning of Article 8 of the BIT. Even if it were neces-
sary in order to attract the Tribunal’s jurisdiction that the dispute be charac-
terised not merely as one relating to an investment but as one concerning the
treatment of an investment in accordance with the standards laid down under
the BIT, it is the case (as the Tribunal noted) that Claimants invoke substan-
tive provisions of the BIT.

75. The Committee likewise agrees that the fact that the investment con-
cerns a Concession Contract made with Tucumén, a province of Argentina
which has not been separately designated to ICSID under Article 25(1), does
not mean that the dispute falls outside the scope of the BIT, or that the invest-
ment ceases to be one “between one Contracting Party and an investor of the
other Contracting Party” within the meaning of Article 8(1) of the BIT.

76. This being so, the fact that the Concession Contract referred contrac-
tual disputes to the contentious administrative courts of Tucuman did not
affect the jurisdiction of the Tribunal with respect to a claim based on the pro-
visions of the BIT. Article 16(4) of the Concession Contract did not in terms
purport to exclude the jurisdiction of an international tribunal arising under
Article 8(2) of the BIT; at the very least, a clear indication of an intention to
exclude that jurisdiction would be required.

77. The Lanco decision, cited by the Tribunal, supports its finding of juris-

diction.®! In that case the contract at issue, which involved an agency of the
federal government of Argentina, contained an exclusive jurisdiction clause

6! 40 ILM 457 (2001), cited by the Tribunal in its Award, para. 53.

122 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

referring contractual disputes to a federal contentious administrative tribunal.

The Lanco Tribunal held:

[T]he stipulation of Article 12 of the Concession Agreement,
according to which the parties shall submit to the jurisdiction
of the Federal Contentious-Administrative Tribunals of the
City of Buenos Aires, cannot be considered a previously agreed
dispute-settlement procedure. The Parties could have foreseen
submission to domestic or international arbitration, but the
choice of a national forum could only lead to the jurisdiction
of the contentious-administrative tribunals, since administra-

tive jurisdiction cannot be selected by mutual agreement.®

78. But in any event the Lanco Tribunal denied that an exclusive jurisdic-
tion clause could exclude ICSID jurisdiction, relying in particular on Article
26 of the ICSID Convention. It said:

§39 A State may require the exhaustion of domestic remedies
as a prior condition for its consent to ICSID arbitration. This
demand may be made (i) in a bilateral investment treaty that
offers submission to ICSID arbitration, (ii) in domestic legis-
lation, or (iii) in a direct investment agreement that contains
an ICSID clause. The ARGENTINA-U.S. Treaty does not
provide at any point for the exhaustion of domestic remedies,
and the Argentine Republic, for its part, has not alleged that
there is any such domestic legislation. The only requirement
that the ARGENTINA-U.S. Treaty does provide for is the
period of six months that is required for turning to ICSID
arbitration.

§40 In our case, the Parties have given their consent to ICSID
arbitration, consent that is valid, there thus being a presump-
tion in favor of ICSID arbitration, without having first to
exhaust domestic remedies. In effect, once valid consent to
ICSID arbitration is established, any other forum called on to
decide the issue should decline jurisdiction. The investor’s con-
sent, which comes from its written consent by letter of
September 17, 1997, and its request for arbitration of October
1, 1997, and the consent of the State which comes directly

82 40 ILM 457 (2001), p. 466 (§ 26).

CASES. 123

from the ARGENTINA-U.S. Treaty, which gives the investor
the choice of forum for settling its disputes, indicate that there
is no stipulation contrary to the consent of the parties... In
effect, the offer made by the Argentine Republic to covered
investors under the ARGENTINA-U.S. Treaty cannot be
diminished by the submission to Argentina's domestic courts,
to which the Concession Agreement remits.%

79. Indeed, Lanco was a stronger case on the facts than the present, as
regards the effect of an exclusive jurisdiction clause, since the foreign claimant
in Lanco was actually a party to the exclusive jurisdiction clause at issue, unlike
CGE here.

80. _ Forall these reasons, the Respondent's request that the Tribunal’s juris-
dictional finding be annulled must be rejected.

(b) The Tribunal’s Findings on the Merits

81. Claimants relied on three grounds set out in Article 52 of the ICSID
Convention as supporting its request for partial annulment. The Committee
will deal with these in turn.

(i) Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure: Article
52(1)(d)

82. The first of these grounds concerns the claim that “there has been a
serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure” (Article 52(1)(d)).
Claimants argued that the Tribunal had departed from a fundamental rule of
procedure in that its eventual decision, notably as to the dismissal of the
Tucuman claims on grounds related to Article 16(4) of the Concession
Contract, concerned a question not adequately canvassed in argument.

3 Thid, SS 39-40.

4 See also Salini Costruttori SpA v. Kingdom of Morocco, \CSID, jurisdictional decision, 23 July
2001, reported in 129 Journal de droit international 196 (2002), with note by Gaillard, ibid., p. 209. This
was a construction dispute focusing on the amount payable under a contract with a local jurisdiction
clause, The Tribunal held that provisions in the BIT concerning measures of expropriation or national-
ization “ne saurait étre interprétée dans le sens d’une exclusion de tout grief d’origine contractuelle du
champ de application de cet article” (p. 209, para. 59), and further that, notwithstanding the local juris-
diction clause, “le Tribunal arbitral demeure compétent pour les violations du contrat quii constituerait
en méme temps, & la charge de I’Etat une violation de Accord bilatéral” (p. 209, para. 62).

124 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

83. | The Committee cannot find in the record of the arbitration, including
the Award, any basis for Claimants’ allegations in this regard. Under Article
52(1)(d), the emphasis is clearly on the term “rule of procedure,” that is, on
the manner in which the Tribunal proceeded, not on the content of its deci-
sion. In the opinion of the Committee, the Tribunal proceeded with abundant
care. It considered the issue of jurisdiction first, and it decided, in the exercise
of its discretion, to join that issue to the merits of the dispute. It then consid-
ered the merits at length and rendered a densely reasoned award.

84. Claimants contend the Tribunal’s decision came unannounced, and
that they had no opportunity to present arguments on the decision to dismiss
their claim on the merits on grounds related to Article 16(4) of the Concession
Contract. It may be true that the particular approach adopted by the Tribunal
in attempting to reconcile the various conflicting elements of the case before
it came as a surprise to the parties, or at least to some of them. But even if true,
this would by no means be unprecedented in judicial decision-making, either
international or domestic, and it has nothing to do with the ground for annul-
ment contemplated by Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention. In fact, the
Tribunal had already determined that the questions of jurisdiction and merits
were closely linked, and it had joined the two. Moreover, in its questioning
and especially its request for post-hearing briefs, the Tribunal clearly indicated
that it had concerns as to how to reconcile Article 8 of the BIT and Clause
16(4) of the Concession Contract.

85. From the record, it is evident that the parties had a full and fair oppor-
tunity to be heard at every stage of the proceedings. They had ample oppor-
tunity to consider and present written and oral submissions on the issues, and
the oral hearing itself was meticulously conducted to enable each party to pres-
ent its point of view. The Tribunal’s analysis of issues was clearly based on the
materials presented by the parties and was in no sense ultra petita. For these
reasons, the Committee finds no departure at all from any fundamental rule
of procedure, let alone a serious departure.

(ii) Manifest excess of powers: Article 52(1)(b)

86. I is settled, and neither party disputes, that an ICSID tribunal com-
mits an excess of powers not only if it exercises a jurisdiction which it does not
have under the relevant agreement or treaty and the ICSID Convention, read
together, but also if it fails to exercise a jurisdiction which it possesses under

CASES. 125

those instruments.® One might qualify this by saying that it is only where the
failure to exercise a jurisdiction is clearly capable of making a difference to the
result that it can be considered a manifest excess of power. Subject to that qual-
ification, however, the failure by a tribunal to exercise a jurisdiction given it by
the ICSID Convention and a BIT, in circumstances where the outcome of the
inquiry is affected as a result, amounts in the Committee's view to a manifest
excess of powers within the meaning of Article 52(1)(b).

87. No doubt an ICSID tribunal is not required to address in its award
every argument made by the parties, provided of course that the arguments
which it actually does consider are themselves capable of leading to the con-
clusion reached by the tribunal and that all questions submitted to a tribunal
are expressly or implicitly dealt with. In the present case, Claimants contend
that, far from considering their claims concerning breach of the BIT prior to
purportedly dismissing them, the Tribunal actually declined to decide
Claimants’ allegations since it considered that, in order to do so, it would have
had to address issues which, according to the Concession Contract, fell with-
in the exclusive jurisdiction of the Tucumén courts. Claimants argue that if the
Tribunal was wrong as regards this approach—that is, if the Tribunal erred in
finding that it could not consider the BIT claims, in the circumstances—it
failed to exercise its treaty jurisdiction, a jurisdiction which it had itself upheld.
On that assumption, its failure to do so could also be said to be manifest.

88. With these preliminary comments in mind, the Committee turns to
the substance of Claimants’ request for partial annulment of the Award on the
ground of manifest excess of powers. In doing so, it is necessary to distinguish
between the Tribunal’s treatment of the federal claims and the Tucumén
claims.

The federal claims

89. An initial point concerns Claimants’ argument that there was a breach
of the BIT by reason of the actions and omissions of ministers and officers of
the federal government of the Argentine Republic—the so-called “federal
claims.” As the review of the Tribunal’s reasoning set out at paragraphs 18-22
above demonstrates, the Award clearly evidences a certain reliance on Article
16(4) of the Concession Contract even as to the federal claims; and the
Tribunal’s interpretation of the obligations incumbent on the federal authori-

6 Schreuer, pp. 937-938.

126 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

ties under the BIT emerges more by implication from its treatment of the facts
than as a result of any detailed analysis. However, in the opinion of the
Committee, it is nonetheless clear that the Tribunal carefully considered the
federal claims on the facts, and that it rejected those claims. The Tribunal
committed no excess of power, manifest or other, so far as the federal claims
are concerned.

90. Claimants submit that, even if the Tribunal could be said to have con-
sidered the federal claims on their merits, its consideration was vitiated in that
the Tribunal’s handling of the federal and Tucuman claims was interdepend-
ent. Specifically, Claimants argue that if Tucuméan’s actions did in truth con-
stitute a breach of the BIT, then Respondent was under a far more stringent
obligation to respond and to correct the situation than the Tribunal found
applied to it. Claimants contend that the Tribunal—always with its mind set
on Article 16(4)—failed to consider this alternative. In the opinion of the
Committee, it is true, as mentioned in the preceding paragraph, that Article
16(4) did obtrude into the Tribunal’s analysis of the federal claims to some
degree. However, the Tribunal did not suggest that Claimants were in any
sense obliged to pursue their federal claims in any domestic court or tribunal.
It held, rather, that the federal authorities could reasonably have regarded the
dispute as contractual in character, and that the extent of any federal obliga-
tion to react could reasonably have been influenced by this perception.

91. As to the Tribunal’s findings of fact, there is no basis under Article 52
of the ICSID Convention for this Committee to disagree. The Tribunal found
that the Argentine federal authorities responded to Claimants’ initiatives, that
they sought to resolve the problem and in fact took reasonable steps to do so,
that they did not fail to do anything requested of them and that they were
never themselves charged, directly, with any breach of the BIT. As to the
Tribunal’s findings of law, it may be that the Award lacks a detailed analysis of
the relevant BIT provisions, as Claimants contend. Yet the gist of the
Tribunal’s reasoning is clear enough. On its face, Article 3 of the BIT impos-
es no more than an obligation on the Argentine Republic to take appropriate
care. And the Tribunal’s findings, taken together, are more than sufficient to
provide a basis for the Tribunal’s clear conclusion that the federal claims were
not sustainable, and that there had been no breach of Article 3 as a result of
any federal act or omission. Moreover the Committee does not consider that
the Tribunal’s dismissal of Claimants’ federal claims was so intimately linked

66 Award, para. 87; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 445.

CASES. 127

to its decision regarding the Tucumén claims, and to its alleged failure to exer-
cise its jurisdiction with respect to the latter, that the Tribunal’s determination
of the federal claims must fall in the event that its decision on the Tucumdn
claims is annulled.

92. For these reasons, Claimants’ request for partial annulment of the
Award in relation to the Tribunal’s determination of the federal claims is
rejected.

The Tucumdn claims

93. The second question in relation to Article 52(1)(b) is whether the
Tribunal, having validly held that it had jurisdiction over the Tucumdan claims,
was entitled nonetheless to dismiss them as it did. Claimants, for their part,
submit that the Tribunal did not so much dismiss the Tucumén claims as
decline to address them. They argue that the only reason those claims were dis-
missed was that they were held to be substantially identical with claims against
Tucumdén under the Concession Contract, which the Tribunal found it could
not determine, and that the Tribunal’s refusal to decide the Tucumén claims
on this basis was a manifest excess of powers. The Respondent argues that,
assuming the Tribunal had jurisdiction over these claims, it acted correctly in
dismissing them on the basis of Article 16(4) of the Concession Contract, but
that in any event this was not the only reason for dismissal since the Tribunal
did consider the Tucuméan claims on their merits.

94. In dealing with these issues, it is necessary first to consider the rela-
tionship between the responsibility of Argentina under the BIT and the rights
and obligations of the parties to the Concession Contract (especially those
arising from Article 16(4), the exclusive jurisdiction clause); and secondly, to
consider precisely what the Tribunal decided with respect to the Tucumén
claims.

95. As to the relation between breach of contract and breach of treaty in
the present case, it must be stressed that Articles 3 and 5 of the BIT do not
relate directly to breach of a municipal contract. Rather they set an independ-
ent standard. A state may breach a treaty without breaching a contract, and
vice versa, and this is certainly true of these provisions of the BIT. The point is
made clear in Article 3 of the ILC Articles, which is entitled “Characterization
of an act of a State as internationally wrongful”:

128 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

The characterization of an act of a State as internationally
wrongful is governed by international law. Such characteriza-
tion is not affected by the characterization of the same act as
lawful by internal law.

96. In accordance with this general principle (which is undoubtedly
declaratory of general international law), whether there has been a breach of
the BIT and whether there has been a breach of contract are different ques-
tions. Each of these claims will be determined by reference to its own proper
or applicable law—in the case of the BIT, by international law; in the case of
the Concession Contract, by the proper law of the contract, in other words,
the law of Tucuméan. For example, in the case of a claim based on a treaty,
international law rules of attribution apply, with the result that the state of
Argentina is internationally responsible for the acts of its provincial authori-
ties.°” By contrast, the state of Argentina is not liable for the performance of
contracts entered into by Tucumén, which possesses separate legal personality
under its own law and is responsible for the performance of its own contracts.

97. The distinction between the role of international and municipal law in
matters of international responsibility is stressed in the commentary to Article
3 of the ILC Articles, which reads in relevant part as follows:

(4) The International Court has often referred to and applied
the principle. For example in the Reparation for Injuries case, it
noted that “[a]s the claim is based on the breach of an inter-
national obligation on the part of the Member held responsi-
ble... the Member cannot contend that this obligation is gov-
erned by municipal law.” In the ELS/ case, a Chamber of the
Court emphasized this rule, stating that:

 

“Compliance with municipal law and compliance with
the provisions of a treaty are different questions. What
is a breach of treaty may be lawful in the municipal law
and what is unlawful in the municipal law may be
wholly innocent of violation of a treaty provision. Even
had the Prefect held the requisition to be entirely jus-
tified in Italian law, this would not exclude the possi-
bility that it was a violation of the FCN Treaty.’

© See above, paras. 16, 23-33, 43.

CASES.

Conversely, as the Chamber explained:

“...the fact that an act of a public authority may have
been unlawful in municipal law does not necessarily
mean that that act was unlawful in international law, as
a breach of treaty or otherwise. A finding of the local
courts that an act was unlawful may well be relevant to
an argument that it was also arbitrary; but by itself,
and without more, unlawfulness cannot be said to
amount to arbitrariness... Nor does it follow from a
finding by a municipal court that an act was unjusti-
fied, or unreasonable, or arbitrary, that that act is nec-
essarily to be classed as arbitrary in international law,
though the qualification given to the impugned act by
a municipal authority may be a valuable indication.’

(7) The rule that the characterization of conduct as unlawful
in international law cannot be affected by the characterization
of the same act as lawful in internal law makes no exception for
cases where rules of international law require a State to con-
form to the provisions of its internal law, for instance by apply-
ing to aliens the same legal treatment as to nationals. It is true
that in such a case, compliance with internal law is relevant to
the question of international responsibility. But this is because
the rule of international law makes it relevant, e.g. by incor-
porating the standard of compliance with internal law as the
applicable international standard or as an aspect of it.
Especially in the fields of injury to aliens and their property
and of human rights, the content and application of internal
law will often be relevant to the question of international
responsibility. In every case it will be seen on analysis that
either the provisions of internal law are relevant as facts in
applying the applicable international standard, or else that
they are actually incorporated in some form, conditionally or
unconditionally, into that standard.

68 Commentary to Article 3, paras. (4), (7) (footnotes omitted). The passages from the ELSI case,
quoted in para. (4) of the commentary, are to be found at IC] Reports 1989 at p. 51, para. 73, and p.
74, para. 124,

130 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

98. In a case where the essential basis of a claim brought before an inter-
national tribunal is a breach of contract, the tribunal will give effect to any
valid choice of forum clause in the contract. For example in the Woodruff
case,” a decision of an American-Venezuelan Mixed Commission in 1903, a
claim was brought for breach of a contract which contained the following
clause:

Doubts and controversies which at any time might occur in
virtue of the present agreement shall be decided by the com-
mon laws and ordinary tribunals of Venezuela, and they shall
never be, as well as neither the decision which shall be pro-
nounced upon them, nor anything relating to the agreement,
the subject of international reclamation.

99. The Commission in that case held that Woodruff was bound by this
clause not to refer his contractual claim to any other tribunal. At the same
time, the exclusive jurisdiction clause did not and could not preclude a claim
by his government in the event that the treatment accorded him amounted to
a breach of international law:

[Whereas certainly a contract between a sovereign and a citi-
zen of a foreign country can never impede the right of the
Government of that citizen to make international reclamation,
wherever according to international law it has the right or even
the duty to do so, as its rights and obligations can not be
affected by any precedent agreement to which it is not a party;

But whereas this does not interfere with the right of a cit-
izen to pledge to any other party that he, the contractor, in dis-
putes upon certain matters will never appeal to other judges
than to those designated by the agreement, nor with his obli-
gation to keep this promise when pledged, leaving untouched
the rights of his Government, to make his case an object of
international claim whenever it thinks proper to do so and not

© That is, unless the treaty in question otherwise provides. See, e.g., Article I(1) of the Claims
Settlement Declaration of 19 January 1981, 1 Jran-U.S. Claims Tribunal Reports p. 9, which overrode
exclusive jurisdiction clauses concerning United States courts but not Iranian courts: see the cases cited
by C.N. Brower & J.D. Brueschke, The Inan-United States Claims Tribunal (The Hague, Martinus
Nijhoff, 1998) pp. 60-72. The Committee does not need to consider whether the effect of Article 8 of
the BIT is to override exclusive jurisdiction clauses in contracts underlying investments to which the BIT
applies.

7 Reports of International Arbitral Awards, vol. 1X, p. 213.

CASES. 131

impeaching his own right to look to his Government for pro-
tection of his rights in case of denial or unjust delay of justice
by the contractually designated judges;...7!

100. The Commission accordingly dismissed the claim “without prejudice
on its merits, when presented to the proper judges,” on the ground that “by
the very agreement that is the fundamental basis of the claim, it was with-
drawn from the jurisdiction of this Commission.””

101. On the other hand, where “the fundamental basis of the claim” is a
treaty laying down an independent standard by which the conduct of the par-
ties is to be judged, the existence of an exclusive jurisdiction clause in a con-
tract between the claimant and the respondent state or one of its subdivisions
cannot operate as a bar to the application of the treaty standard.”> At most, it
might be relevant—as municipal law will often be relevant—in assessing
whether there has been a breach of the treaty.

102. In the Committee’s view, it is not open to an ICSID tribunal having
jurisdiction under a BIT in respect of a claim based upon a substantive provi-
sion of that BIT, to dismiss the claim on the ground that it could or should
have been dealt with by a national court. In such a case, the inquiry which the
ICSID tribunal is required to undertake is one governed by the ICSID
Convention, by the BIT and by applicable international law. Such an inquiry
is neither in principle determined, nor precluded, by any issue of municipal
law, including any municipal law agreement of the parties.

103. Moreover the Committee does not understand how, if there had been
a breach of the BIT in the present case (a question of international law), the
existence of Article 16(4) of the Concession Contract could have prevented its
characterisation as such. A state cannot rely on an exclusive jurisdiction clause
in a contract to avoid the characterisation of its conduct as internationally
unlawful under a treaty.

 

73 Te is not necessary for the Committee to pronounce on the content of the standard laid down
in the BIT, in particular Article 3. It may be that “mere” breaches of contract, unaccompanied by bad
faith or other aggravating circumstances, will rarely amount to a breach of the fair and equitable treat-
ment standard set out in Article 3. The Tribunal did not, however, offer any interpretation of Article 3,
nor seek to base itself on this consideration.

132 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

104. The Respondent argues that, even if the Tribunal had jurisdiction, and
even if it could not decline to exercise that jurisdiction by reference to the
exclusive jurisdiction clause in the Concession Contract, this was not what the
Tribunal did. According to the Respondent, it emerges clearly from the Award
that the Claimants had no arguable case for a breach of Articles 3 or 5 of the
BIT and that, at best, their claim was one for breach of contract: the issue of
a treaty claim could only arise in the event that the contentious administrative
tribunals of Tucumdn denied Claimants justice, substantively or procedurally.

105. The question thus becomes how to characterize the Tribunal’s deci-
sion. In considering that question, the Committee does not believe that it is
material either that CGE was not a party to the Concession Contract or that
the parties to the Concession Contract were CAA and the Province of
Tucuméan, as opposed to CAA and the federal government. If the Tribunal was
right in saying that it could not consider any allegation of breach of treaty
which required it to interpret or apply the Concession Contract, then it is
arguable that CGE could be in no better position than CAA. It is also arguable
that this conclusion should apply even though CAA’s contractual commitment
was to a province, since the acts of that province form the nub of the claim.
But it is one thing to exercise contractual jurisdiction (arguably exclusively
vested in the administrative tribunals of Tucumdn by virtue of the Concession
Contract) and another to take into account the terms of a contract in deter-
mining whether there has been a breach of a distinct standard of internation-
al law, such as that reflected in Article 3 of the BIT.

106. Claimants made a series of allegations as to the conduct of Tucumén,
much of which, they claim, involved measures taken in bad faith. Such action
included alleged instances of: acts of the Ombudsman and other regulatory
authorities; incitement of consumers, by legislators and others, not to pay their
water bills; unauthorized tariff changes; the incorrect imposition of fines
(never in fact collected) for allegedly deficient water quality; incorrect invoic-
ing for municipal and provincial water taxes; conduct relating to the “black
water” problem, which was blamed on CAA, but which CAA denied was its
fault; unilateral changes by the provincial Governor to the second renegotiat-
ed agreement; and various post-termination conduct. This conduct, they con-
tend, amounted on the whole to concerted action by the Tucumén authorities
to frustrate the concession.

107. The Tribunal expressed views on some of these allegations, but by no
means all. For example, in paragraph 82 of the Award, the Tribunal took the

CASES. 133

view that the unilateral changes to the renegotiated agreement did not amount
to a breach of the BIT because there was no legal duty to revise the concession
contract.”4 In paragraph 91, under the general heading “Failure of the
Argentine Republic to Respond to Actions of Tucumén Officials,” the
Tribunal concluded that “the record...does not establish a factual basis for
attributing liability to the Argentine Republic under the BIT for the alleged
actions of officials of Tucumdn.””> In its context the latter passage is not
unequivocal; it suggests that the Tribunal had in mind earlier discussion of the
“strict liability standard of attribution,” and the reference to “alleged action” is
troublesome: it is in the end unclear whether the Tribunal rejected the
Claimants allegations of fact or whether they held that the allegations, though
potentially made out, were not sufficient to “attribute liability” to the federal
government.

108. But however this may be, it is clear from the core discussion of the
Tucumén claims, at paragraphs 77-81 of the Award, that the Tribunal declined
to decide key aspects of the Claimants’ BIT claims on the ground that they
involved issues of contractual performance or non-performance. The Tribunal
itself characterised these passages, in paragraph 81, as embodying its “decision”
with respect to the Tucuman claims.

109. A key passage in this regard is found in paragraph 79, where the
Tribunal said:

{G]iven the nature of the dispute between Claimants and the
Province of Tucumén, it is not possible for this Tribunal to
determine which actions of the Province were taken in exercise
of its sovereign authority and which in the exercise of its rights
as a party to the Concession Contract considering, in particu-
lar, that much of the evidence presented in this case has
involved detailed issues of performance and rates under the
Concession Contract.’°

110. This passage calls for two remarks. First, it is couched in terms not of
decision but of the impossibility of decision, the impossibility being founded

74 Award, para. 82; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 444.
75 Award, para. 91; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 446.
76 Award, para. 79; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 443.

134 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

on the need to interpret and apply the Concession Contract.” Yet under
Article 8(4) of the BIT the Tribunal had jurisdiction to base its decision upon
the Concession Contract, at least so far as necessary in order to determine
whether there had been a breach of the substantive standards of the BIT.
Second, the passage appears to imply that conduct of Tucuman carried out in
the purported exercise of its rights as a party to the Concession Contract could
not, a priori, have breached the BIT. However, there is no basis for such an
assumption: whether particular conduct involves a breach of a treaty is not
determined by asking whether the conduct purportedly involves an exercise of
contractual rights.”

111. For these reasons, and despite certain passages of the Award in which
the Tribunal seems to go further into the merits, the Committee can only con-
clude that the Tribunal, in dismissing the Tucumén claims as it did, actually
failed to decide whether or not the conduct in question amounted to a breach
of the BIT. In particular, the Tribunal repeatedly referred to allegations and
issues which, it held, it could not decide given the terms of Article 16(4) of the
Concession Contract, even though these were adduced by Claimants specifi-
cally in support of their BIT claim.7? Moreover, it offered no interpretation
whatsoever either of Article 3 or of Article 5 of the BIT, something which was
called for if the claims were to be dismissed on their merits.

112. It is not the Committee’s function to form even a provisional view as
to whether or not the Tucumdn conduct involved a breach of the BIT, and it
is important to state clearly that the Committee has not done so. But it is

77 See also the Tribunal’s summary, cited in para. 11 above, where the Tribunal said it was “impos-
sible...to distinguish or separate violations of the BIT from breaches of the Concession Contract with-
out first interpreting and applying the detailed provisions of that agreement.”

78 See ILC Articles, commentary to Article 4, para. (6), commentary to Article 12, paras. (9)-(10).
See also C. Amerasinghe, “State Breaches of Contracts with Aliens and International Law,” American
Journal of International Law, vol. 58 (1964), p. 881, at pp. 910-912: “The general proposition that,
where a state performs an act which is prohibited by a treaty to which it is a party, it will be responsible
for a breach of international law to the other party or parties to the treaty requires no substantiation. In
accordance with the same principle, an act which constitutes a breach of contract would be a breach of
international law, if itis an act which that state is under an obligation not to commit by virtue of a treaty
to which it and the national state of the alien are parties’; R. Jennings & A. Watts, Oppenheim’
International Law (9th edn.) (Harlow, Longman, 1992), p. 927: “It is doubtful whether a breach by a
state of its contractual obligations with aliens constitutes per se a breach of an international obligation,

 

unless there is some stich additional element as denial of justice, or expropriation, or breach of treaty, in
which case it is that additional element which will constitute the basis for the state's international respon-
sibility.”

79 Award, paras. 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81; 40 ILM 426 (2001), pp. 440-
444,

CASES. 135

nonetheless the case that the conduct alleged by Claimants, if established,
could have breached the BIT. The claim was not simply reducible to so many
civil or administrative law claims concerning so many individual acts alleged
to violate the Concession Contract or the administrative law of Argentina. It
was open to Claimants to claim, and they did claim, that these acts taken
together, or some of them, amounted to a breach of Articles 3 and/or 5 of the
BIT. In the Committee’s view, the Tribunal, faced with such a claim and hav-
ing validly held that it had jurisdiction, was obliged to consider and to decide
it. Although the Tribunal expressed conclusions on certain aspects of the
claim, it never expressed a conclusion as to the claim as a whole, still less did
it assess Claimants’ case against the requirements of Article 3 or 5 of the BIT.

113. In the light of Article 8 of the BIT, the situation carried risks for
Claimants. Having declined to challenge the various factual components of its
treaty cause of action before the administrative courts of Tucumdn, instead
choosing to commence ICSID arbitration—and having thereby, in the
Committee’s view, taken the “fork in the road” under Article 8(4)—CAA took
the risk of a tribunal holding that the acts complained of neither individually
nor collectively rose to the level of a breach of the BIT. In that event, it would
have lost both its treaty claim and its contract claim. But on the other hand it
was entitled to take that risk, with its associated burden of proof. A treaty cause
of action is not the same as a contractual cause of action; it requires a clear
showing of conduct which is in the circumstances contrary to the relevant
treaty standard. The availability of local courts ready and able to resolve spe-
cific issues independently may be a relevant circumstance in determining
whether there has been a breach of international law (especially in relation to
a standard such as that contained in Article 3). But it is not dispositive, and it
does not preclude an international tribunal from considering the merits of the
dispute.

114. It should be stressed that the conduct complained of here was not
more or less peripheral to a continuing successful enterprise. The Tucumén
conduct (in conjunction with the acts and decisions of Claimants) had the
effect of putting an end to the investment. In the Committee’s view, the BIT
gave Claimants the right to assert that the Tucumdn conduct failed to comply
with the treaty standard for the protection of investments. Having availed
itself of that option, Claimants should not have been deprived of a decision,
one way or the other, merely on the strength of the observation that the local
courts could conceivably have provided them with a remedy, in whole or in
part. Under the BIT they had a choice of remedies.

136 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

115. For all of these reasons, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal
exceeded its powers in the sense of Article 52(1)(b), in that the Tribunal, hav-
ing jurisdiction over the Tucumdan claims, failed to decide those claims. Given
the clear and serious implications of that decision for Claimants in terms of
Article 8(2) of the BIT, and the surrounding circumstances, the Committee
can only conclude that that excess of powers was manifest. It accordingly
annuls the decision of the Tribunal so far as concerns the entirety of the
Tucuman claims.

(iii) Failure to state reasons: Article 52(1)(e)

116. In view of the foregoing conclusion, it is unnecessary to consider the
further ground of annulment relied on by Claimants, viz., that in dismissing
the claim the Tribunal failed to state the reasons on which its decision was
based. As to the federal claims, the Committee has already concluded that rea-
sons for the dismissal of those claims were given. As to the Tucumén claims,
in the Committee's view the Tribunal gave very full reasons for the step it took,
viz., the dismissal of those claims without any overall consideration of their
merits. The question of failure to state reasons would only arise if one took the
view that the Tribunal actually did reach a conclusion adverse to Claimants
under Articles 3 and 5 in respect of the Tucumén claims as a whole—a view
the Committee has already rejected. Accordingly, nothing more needs to be
said on this ground of annulment.

D. COSTS

117. The Tribunal made no order for costs, and required Claimants and
Respondent to share equally the costs of ICSID. It observed that the dispute
raised “a set of novel and complex issues not previously addressed in interna-
tional arbitral precedent relating to the interplay of a bilateral investment
treaty, a Concession Contract with a forum-selection clause and the ICSID
Convention.”*? It noted that both parties had prevailed to some extent. These
considerations apply equally to the present phase of the proceedings.
Claimants have succeeded in part, but only in part. Moreover, Argentina was
entitled to take the position it took, which itself raised a difficult and novel

80 Award, para. 95; 40 ILM 426 (2001), p. 447.

CASES. 137

question of public importance concerning ICSID and the operation of invest-
ment protection agreements on the model of the BIT.

118. In the light of the importance of the arguments advanced by the par-
ties in connection with this case, the Committee considers it appropriate that
each party bear its own expenses incurred with respect to this annulment pro-
ceeding, and that the parties bear equally all expenses incurred by the Centre
in connection with this proceeding, including the fees and expenses of the
members of the Committee.

E. DECISION
119. For the foregoing reasons, the Committee DECIDES:
(a) The Tribunal rightly held that it had jurisdiction over the claims.

(b) The Tribunal committed no annullable error in its rejection of the fed-
eral claims (claims concerning the conduct of federal authorities) on
the merits, and that rejection is accordingly res judicata.

(c) The Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by not examining the
merits of the claims for acts of the Tucumén authorities under the BIT
and its decision with regard to those claims is annulled.

(d) Each party shall bear its own expenses, including legal fees, incurred in
connection with this annulment proceeding.

(e) Each party shall bear one half of the costs incurred by the Centre in
connection with this annulment proceeding. Accordingly, the
Argentine Republic shall reimburse the Claimants one half of the total
costs incurred by the Centre in connection with this annulment pro-
ceeding once the amount has been determined by the Secretariat of the
Centre.

138 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Done in English and Spanish, both versions being equally authoritative.

 

L. YVES FORTIER, C Qc.
President of the Committee

 

Professor JAMES R. CRAWFORD, Professor JOSE CARLOS FERNANDEZ ROZAS
Member Member

