ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT
DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDING BETWEEN

CONOCOPHILLIPS PETROZUATA B.V.

CONOCOPHILLIPS HAMACA B.

CONOCOPHILLIPS GULF OF PARIA B.V.
CLAIMANTS

  

and

BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
RESPONDENT

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

 

DECISION ON THE PROPOSAL TO DISQUALIFY
L. YVES FORTIER, Q.C., ARBITRATOR

 

Issued by

Mr. Eduardo Zuleta
Professor Andreas Bucher

SECRETARY OF THE TRIBUNAL
Mr. Gonzalo Flores

Date: July 26, 2016

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

THE PARTIES’ REPRESENTATIVES

Representing the Claimants:

Mr. Brian King
Mr. Elliot Friedman
Ms. Lauren Friedman
Mr. Sam Prevatt
Mr. Lee Rovinescu
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP
601 Lexington Avenue, 31st Floor
New York, NY 10022
United States of America
and
Mr. Jan Paulsson
Mr. Gaétan Verhoosel
Mr. Luke Sobota
Three Crowns LLP
1 King Street
London EC2V 8AU
United Kingdom

Representing the Respondent:

Dr. Reinaldo Enrique Mufioz Pedroza
Viceprocurador General de la Reptiblica
Mr. Felipe Daruiz
Procuraduria General de la Reptiblica
Paseo Los Ilustres c/e Av. Lazo Marti
Ed. Sede Procuraduria General de la
Reptiblica, Piso 8
Urb. Santa Ménica
Caracas 1040
Venezuela
and
Mr. George Kahale, III
Mr. Benard V. Preziosi, Jr.
Ms. Miriam K. Harwood
Mr. Fuad Zarbiyev
Ms. Arianna Sanchez
Ms. Lilliana Dealbert
Mr. Simon Batifort
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
101 Park Avenue
New York, NY 10178
United States of America
and
Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle, S.C.
Rubén Dario 281, Pisos 8 & 9
Col. Bosque de Chapultepec
11580 Mexico, D.F.
Mexico
and
Mr. Fernando A. Tupa
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle, S.C.
25 de Mayo 555 p. 1
Edificio Chacofi
C1002ABK Buenos Aires
Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND ......cccssssssssessessesseesecseeecenceneeneeneeneeneeneeneeneceneene 4
THE TRIBUNAL’S REASONS. ....ccsssssssssssesssssessessesssesscensencencencenceneeneenecseesncenes 10
COSTS 12
DECISION. 12

 

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

A. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

1. The Decision issued on March 15, 2016, on the Respondent’s fifth proposal for
disqualification of Mr. Yves L. Fortier of February 26, 2016, summarizes, by reference to
previous decisions, the earlier phases of the proceeding up to March 2016 (the “Decision
on the Fifth Proposal for Disqualification”).' This proposal was rejected for the reasons

set out in that decision.

2. On April 22, 2016, the Tribunal was reconstituted, with Mr. Eduardo Zuleta being
appointed by the Chairman of the Administrative Council, following Judge Kenneth

Keith’s resignation on March 21, 2016.

3. On May 6, 2016, the reconstituted Tribunal decided, inter alia, to divide the hearing
on quantum into two phases, the first of which was scheduled to be held in Washington,
D.C. on August 15 through 19, 2016. The second phase was scheduled for February 21
through February 25, 2017, also in Washington, D.C.

4. On July 22, 2016, Mr. Fortier asked the Centre to convey the following message to

the parties and to Mr. Zuleta and Prof. Bucher (the “Two Members’):

Mesdames, Gentlemen,

A few days ago, I received from the ICSID Secretariat a letter from counsel for the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21, Fabrica De
Vidrios Los Andes, C.A. and Owens-Illinois De Venezuela, C.A. v. The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, accompanied by two attachments. I enclose copy of that
letter and the attachments. I also enclose a reply to counsel for the Respondent in
that case dated 15 July 2016 from Ms Marisa Planells-Valero, ICSID Secretary of
that tribunal.

Talso enclose my letter of explanations to Ms Planells-Valero dated 22 July which
Ms Planells- Valero has now forwarded to the parties in ICSID Case No. ARB/12/21
and to the other members of that tribunal.

As the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is also the Respondent in ICSID Case No.

ARB/07/30 and as I am also a member of that Tribunal, I have asked the ICSID
Secretary of that Tribunal to send to the parties and the other members of that

' See Decision on the Fifth Proposal for Disqualification, { 1-12.

4

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

Tribunal my letter of today’s date to Ms Planells-Valero and all documents therein
referred to.

These circumstances do not in any way cause my reliability for independent
judgment to be questioned by any party to the instant proceeding but, in view of the
history of this arbitration, I thought I should make the present disclosure.
[attachments omitted]

The explanations to which Mr. Fortier referred are transcribed below:

Dear Marisa,

T have seen the Respondent’s letter of 8 July 2016 with two annexes addressed to
you. I have also seen your email of 14 July addressed to the parties, the
Respondent’s communication of 14 July and your reply of 15 July. I am happy to
provide the following explanations.

I recall that I resigned as a partner of Norton Rose OR LLP on 31 December 2011
and that I then severed definitively my professional relationship with that firm. As
of 1 January 2012, I commenced my practice as a sole and independent
international arbitrator with Cabinet Yves Fortier. When I left Norton Rose OR
LLP, I was sitting as an arbitrator (Chairman or party-appointed) on many arbitral
tribunals. I then had two secretaries, Ms. Linda Tucci (“Linda”) and Ms. Chantal
Robichaud (“Chantal”), working exclusively for me. They had both been working
with me for many years.

In order to ensure that I could continue my busy practice as an international
arbitrator after 31 December 2011 with the least possible disruption, I asked Linda
and Chantal if they would be prepared to continue to work with me at Cabinet Yves
Fortier. They accepted as long as they could continue to participate in all insurance
and other benefits to which they were entitled with Services OR LP/SEC (see
below).

Services OR LP/SEC is a distinct legal entity set up by Norton Rose OR LLP for
the purpose of providing staff and administrative support services to Norton Rose
OR LLP. When I resigned as a partner of Norton Rose OR LLP, I entered into a
service arrangement with Services OR LP/SEC with respect to the services of Linda
and Chantal at the Cabinet Yves Fortier as of 1 January 2012.

Accordingly, Linda and Chantal followed me physically to the Cabinet Yves Fortier
where they worked exclusively for me as of 1 January 2012. They continued to be
paid by Services OR LP/SEC who, every month, presented me with an invoice
representing the amount of their salaries and the cost of their incidental benefits. I
have settled these monthly invoices with Services OR LP/SEC since 1 January
2012.

6.

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

Chantal left my Cabinet in July 2013. I then hired Myriam Ntashamaje (“Myriam”)
in August 2013 under the same arrangement as Chantal as I wanted her to have the
same treatment as Linda. Since that time, Myriam has worked and continues to
work exclusively for the Cabinet Yves Fortier. As I did in Chantal’s case, I
reimburse Services OR LP/SEC every month for her salary and the cost of all her
incidental benefits.

Myriam has never worked for Norton Rose Fulbright and is not an attorney. She is
a secretary who assists me clerically in my arbitration files including the present
one. The entry in her LinkedIn profile is inaccurate. Her own electronic signature
on her email communications on my behalf or on behalf of my colleague, Ms Annie
Lespérance, is very clear. It reads as follows:

Myriam Ntashamaje Legal assistant to The Hon. L. Yves Fortier, P.C., CC, OQ,
QC and Ms. Annie Lespérance

To be clear, Me Annie Lespérance, whom the parties met in April at the Paris
hearing, is the only lawyer who works with me at the Cabinet Yves Fortier. She is
remunerated directly by me.

T hope these explanations answer to their satisfaction the questions which counsel
for the Respondent put to the ICSID Secretary, Ms Marisa Planells-Valero, on 8
July 2016.

Yours sincerely,

Yves Fortier QC

Montreal, 22 July 2016

On the same day, Respondent proposed the disqualification of Mr. Fortier (the

“Proposal’), as follows:

We have just received the attached communication from Mr. Fortier disclosing his
arrangement with Services OR LP/SEC, which Mr. Fortier says is an entity
organized by Norton Rose OR LLP “for the purpose of providing staff and
administrative support services to Norton Rose OR LLP.” As we understand it, in
this manner, Mr. Fortier’s staff remain paid by Services OR LP/SEC and receive
the insurance and other benefits offered to other Norton Rose personnel. We further
understand from Mr. Fortier’s disclosure that he is billed monthly by Services OR
LP/SEC for the cost of his staff’s salaries and benefits. We do not understand how
this arrangement could even be possible without an affiliation between the firms,
but in any event it seems obvious that the arrangement provides Mr. Fortier with
the substantial benefits of allowing him to retain and hire new staff while relieving
him of the burden and substantial additional cost involved in setting up an
equivalent benefits plan for Cabinet Yves Fortier.

6

7.

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

Frankly, with all that has transpired in this case, we find this disclosure now to be
shocking. We are disturbed both by the substance of the disclosure, which one
would have thought would have been more appropriately made long ago, and by
the extremely uncomfortable position we are now in, less than one month before
the hearing Respondent has been asking for since September 2013. Much as
Respondent is looking forward to that long awaited hearing, it is not prepared to
waive any part of its objections to Mr. Fortier's serving as arbitrator in this case.

We are therefore again constrained to propose the disqualification of Mr. Fortier
pursuant to Articles 14(1) and 57 of the ICSID Convention, unless of course he
voluntarily resigns. We see no reason to repeat any of the factual background or
legal arguments of the prior challenges, which we incorporate herein by reference.
We urge Mr. Zuleta and Prof. Bucher to decide this challenge as soon as possible.
If the decision is to reject the challenge, the August hearing dates should be
preserved. If the decision is made to uphold the challenge, we understand that an
unfortunate consequence would be to postpone the August hearing, but in that event
we would be in favor of rescheduling to the earliest possible dates.

We deeply regret that we have been placed in this situation, but have no choice but
to pursue this course because we sincerely believe that Mr. Fortier should not
continue to serve on this Tribunal and Respondent must be assured that it will not
face any argument of waiver in the event of any subsequent proceedings if it does
not now make this proposal. [footnote omitted]

Upon receipt of this Proposal, the Secretary of the Tribunal confirmed that, in

accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6), the proceeding was suspended until a

decision was taken with respect to the Proposal.

8.

terms:

By letter of the same day, the Claimants objected to the Proposal in the following

We write in opposition to the Respondent’s seventh proposal to disqualify Mr.
Fortier as arbitrator in this proceeding, and ninth arbitrator challenge overall,
submitted today.

The challenge can and should be disposed of immediately, without any further
briefing. The Respondent has not even attempted to articulate a colorable basis for
its latest disqualification proposal, instead invoking “all that has transpired in this
case.” What has in fact transpired is that Venezuela has raised six frivolous
challenges to Mr. Fortier, each rejected either unanimously by the unchallenged
Tribunal Members, or by the Chairman of the Administrative Council. In
particular, the apparent basis of the new challenge — Mr. Fortier’s alleged
connection to Norton Rose Fulbright — has already been dismissed on multiple
occasions.

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

The only “new fact” alleged is that Mr. Fortier has used Services OR LP/SEC as a
service provider for purposes of paying compensation to two secretaries at his
independent law office, Cabinet Yves Fortier. Mr. Fortier has explained, without
contradiction, that this is an arms-length administrative arrangement. This “fact” is
therefore entirely inconsequential: it does not call Mr. Fortier’s impartiality into
question in any way, much less could it satisfy the high standard for disqualification
that this Tribunal has rightly established. The Claimants therefore respectfully
request that the unchallenged Members of the Tribunal reject the proposal
summarily so that this latest distraction does not interfere with the Parties’ hearing
preparations.

The Claimants also request an immediate award of all the costs they have incurred
in responding to Venezuela’s baseless challenges, which the Claimants will
quantify immediately upon receipt of the unchallenged Members’ decision. If ever
a costs order were justified, it is here — where the Respondent, a serial abuser of the
challenge mechanism, has continued to recycle allegations that have already been
rejected on multiple occasions. [footnotes omitted]

On July 23, 2016, Respondent replied to Claimants’ letter as follows:

We agree with Claimants that no further briefing is required on the pending
proposal to disqualify Mr. Fortier. We only wish to remind Claimants that they
previously argued against disqualification of Mr. Fortier on the ground that he had
severed all financial and professional ties to Norton Rose. They boldly asserted the
following on October 25, 2011: "As of December 31, 2011, Maitre Fortier will
therefore have no financial or professional ties to Norton Rose. . . . Maitre Fortier
will have thus severed all financial ties to Norton Rose prior to the merger between
Norton Rose and Macleod Dixon set to take place on January 1, 2012." It is hard to
reconcile that with Mr. Fortier's latest disclosures. Claimants may not appreciate,
or more likely simply wish to ignore, the obvious financial benefits the previously
undisclosed "service" arrangement has provided to Mr. Fortier, but that does not
change the facts. A small firm with few employees is not able to offer the same
benefits package at the same cost as a large firm, and the additional savings
resulting from not having to hire staff to design and administer employee benefits
plans is significant, as anyone with experience in these matters knows.

We are offended at Claimants' continued accusations concerning these challenges.
They act is if we are responsible for the non-disclosures of continuing relationships
between Mr. Fortier and Norton Rose. While Claimants are not concerned about
each new revelation, Respondent certainly is. As we explained in our letter of
yesterday, we sincerely regret that this latest disclosure has put us in the position of
again having to challenge Mr. Fortier, but Respondent cannot be placed in the
position of having to sit back and accept what it considers to be unacceptable and
tisk waiver of its strong objection to Mr. Fortier's continued service on this
Tribunal. We join Claimants in requesting an expedited decision on the challenge.

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

10. Having reviewed the parties’ submissions, the President of the Tribunal consulted
with Professor Bucher and informed the parties on July 23, 2016, that (i) the Proposal
would be decided on the basis of the communications already received; (ii) Mr. Fortier
would have until noon Monday, July 25, 2016, to furnish any additional explanation he
may wish to make in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(3); and (iii) the dates of

the August hearing would be maintained, pending the outcome of the Proposal.

11. As scheduled, on July 25, 2016, Mr. Fortier provided his explanations pursuant to
ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(3), as follows:

Gentlemen,

In accordance with the schedule which you established, I now provide you with
very brief additional explanations.

1) As to the facts, they are set out in my e-mail of 22 July to Ms Marisa Planells-
Valero in ICSID Case No. ARB /12/21 which is part of the record together with all
documents therein referred to.

2) I note that the Respondent in its letter of 22 July 2016 proposing my
disqualification suggests that I should "voluntarily resign[s]".

3) I see no reason to resign from this Tribunal. The service arrangement between
Cabinet Yves Fortier and Services OR LP/SEC with respect to the services of my
secretaries since 1 January 2012 does not in any way cause my reliability for
independent judgment and impartiality in the present case to be put into question.

Respectfully,

Yves Fortier

13.

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

THE TRIBUNAL’S REASONS

The Two Members recall that:

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Articles 57 and 14(1) of the ICSID Convention do not require proof of
actual dependence or bias; rather, it is sufficient to establish the appearance

of dependence or bias;

The standard to be applied to Respondent’s Proposal is whether a reasonable
third person, with knowledge of all the facts, would conclude, on an
objective basis, that the challenged arbitrator is manifestly lacking in the
ability to act impartially (Article 14 read with Article 57 of the ICSID

Convention);

The allegation that serves as the basis for the challenge, assuming it can be
established, must be capable of being related to the present case, that is, that
the particular facts must give rise to a manifest lack of independence and

impartiality in this case; and

A non-disclosure does not in itself result in disqualification. The IBA
Guidelines, endorsed by an ICSID decision on this point, provide that non-
disclosure cannot make an arbitrator partial or lacking in independence; it

is only the facts and circumstances that he did not disclose that can do so.

The facts on which the Proposal relies concern an arrangement under which the

company “Services OR LP/SEC” pays the salaries and the cost of incidental benefits of

two staff members working for the Cabinet Yves Fortier (Ms. Linda Tucci and Ms. Chantal

Robichaud, the latter being replaced in August 2013 by Ms. Myriam Ntashamaje).

Services OR LP/SEC invoices Cabinet Yves Fortier for the corresponding amounts on a

monthly basis. Cabinet Yves Fortier has paid the invoices to Services OR LP/SEC since 1

January 2012. Services OR LP/SEC is also providing such service to Norton Rose OR LLP.

14.

Respondent does not dispute the fact that Services OR LP/SEC is a distinct legal

entity. Respondent submits, however, that the provision of services both to Norton Rose

10

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

 

OR LLP and to the Cabinet Yves Fortier could not “be possible without an affiliation
between the firms”. Respondent does not, however, provide evidence or support of any
nature for the alleged affiliation. The Proposal is therefore based only on the fact that the
Cabinet Yves Fortier receives services relating to the employment of two of its staff
members that are of the same nature as the services provided by the same company to

Norton Rose OR LLP.

15. Respondent alleges that the arrangement provides Mr. Fortier with the “substantial
benefits of allowing him to retain and hire new staff while relieving him of the burden and
substantial additional cost involved in setting up an equivalent benefits plan for the Cabinet
Yves Fortier”. Even assuming this to be correct, Respondent does not show in any way
why and in what respect such advantages and benefits may have any effect on Mr. Fortier’s
activity as arbitrator in this case. The mere fact that Mr. Fortier’s Cabinet and Norton Rose
OR LLP have recourse to the same provider of services in respect of the administration of
employment matters relating to their respective staff does not reveal any ties or influence
between the two firms in respect of their legal work and responsibilities. Respondent does

not conclude otherwise.

16. More significantly, the Two Members cannot see how the facts relating to those
services provide support for the proposition that such an indirect and purely administrative
tie with Norton Rose would lead a reasonable third person with knowledge of those facts
to the conclusion that Mr. Fortier is manifestly lacking in the ability to act impartially

between the parties in the present arbitration.

17. Respondent invokes in support of its new Proposal the “factual background” and
“legal arguments” of its prior challenges, which it declares to “incorporate herein by
reference”. However, Respondent does not cite new facts requiring the Two Members to
reconsider facts already considered in the earlier requests for disqualification, much less
indicates how this alleged new facts relate to the facts in prior challenges to Mr. Fortier. In
this regard, the Two Members cannot accept that they can be seized with a ‘cumulative
record’ of this and all prior proposals for Mr. Fortier’s disqualification. The Two Members

are seized only with the Proposal made on July 22, 2016. The Proposal does not allege new

11

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

facts requiring them to reconsider the facts alleged in relation to prior requests for

disqualification.
Cc. COSTS
18. The Two Members see no reason to depart from the standard practice of

determining costs issues at the end of the proceeding.

D. DECISION

19. For the foregoing reasons, the Two Members:

(1) decide to dismiss the Proposal made by the Respondent to disqualify Mr. Yves

Fortier as Arbitrator, and

(2) decide to defer the application made by the Claimants for an order for costs to a

later stage in the proceedings.

[signed] [signed]
Mr. Eduardo Zuleta Professor Andreas Bucher

