FRANKFURT
Houston

CurTis, MALLET-PREVOST, COLT & MOSLE LLP

ISTANBUL

ATTORNEYS AND COUNSELLORS AT LAW TELEPHONE 212-696-6000

MILAN 101 ParK AVENUE FACSIMILE 212-697-1559
Www .CURTIS.COM

New York, New York 101 78-006!
Pari

S
WasHINGTON, D.C

September 8, 2013

Rt. Hon. Justice Sir Kenneth J. Keith, K.B.E.
Prof. Georges Abi-Saab
Maitre Yves Fortier, Q.C.

Re: Conocophillips Petrozuata B.V., Conocophillips
Hamaca B.V. and Conocophillips Gulf of Paria B.V. v.
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

Dear Members of the Tribunal:

We have carefully reviewed the Decision on Jurisdiction and the Merits, dated
September 3, 2013 (the “Decision”), and of course agree with certain important findings and
conclusions that were reached by the three members of the Tribunal unanimously. For example,
it is difficult to argue with the unanimous conclusion of the Tribunal that jurisdiction does not
exist under Article 22 of the Venezuelan Law on the Promotion and Protection of Investments, a
conclusion that excludes the bizarre US$10 billion claim of the parent entity, ConocoPhillips
Company, for alleged loss of U.S. tax credits, which undoubtedly would have been rejected even
if jurisdiction had existed. Likewise, we believe that the unanimous conclusion of the three
arbitrators that all of the fiscal measures taken by the Republic were covered by Article 4 of the
Netherlands-Venezuela bilateral investment treaty (the “Dutch Treaty”) and therefore excluded
from this case is well founded. We also note that those non-discriminatory and reasonable
measures would not have given rise to any claim even if Article 4 had not been applicable
inasmuch as they were perfectly lawful exercises of the State’s sovereign powers.

However, we regret to have to inform the Tribunal that we are at a loss to
understand the part of the Decision in which the Tribunal’s unanimity was broken, in particular
the finding of two of the three members on the issue of good faith negotiation of compensation
for the 2007 nationalization. The view of the two arbitrators on this point is based largely on
certain misapprehensions which we explain below and is unsustainable both as a matter of fact
and as a matter of law. Indeed, while everyone knew that the amount of compensation for the
2007 nationalization was in dispute, the Republic’s good faith in negotiations was never even
contested by Claimants.

curtis, “PREVOST, COLT & MOSLE LLP Rt. Hon. Justice Sir Kenneth J. Keith, K.B.E
ATTORNEYS AND COUNSELLORS AT Law Prof. Georges Abi-Saab

Maitre Yves Fortier, Q.C.

Page 2 September 8, 2013

We look forward to receiving the opinion of Professor Abi-Saab, but in the
meantime we request a hearing specifically to address the issue of good faith negotiation and the
relevance of the compensation formulas agreed at the outset of the Petrozuata and Hamaca
projects as fundamental conditions of their authorization. That hearing is both essential for the
quantum phase and necessary as a matter of fundamental due process. An issue as important as
the one on which this Tribunal was not unanimous should not be decided except on the basis of a
full record of facts and legal principles that are clear to all, which is not the case now.

With respect to the issue of good faith negotiation, we note the following for the
record:

1. The majority decision is based entirely on the contention that Respondent
did not negotiate compensation in good faith, which in turn is based on what the majority
considers to be a lack of evidence concerning Respondent’s position in the compensation
negotiations. At the same time, the Tribunal has taken pains at the end of the Decision to
“emphasise” that “it does not at this stage make a finding in respect of the relevance, if
any, of the compensation formulas included in the Petrozuata and Hamaca Association
Agreements to the determination of the quantum of compensation payable in this case”
(paragraph 402). We do not understand how it is possible to find that the Republic did
not negotiate in good faith when the relevance of the compensation formulas to the fair
market value analysis has not yet even been decided. If those formulas are in fact
relevant, and the voluminous evidence not even discussed in the Decision shows that they
certainly are,! then how could the Republic possibly be found to be in bad faith for

 

' See, e.g., Ex. R-92, Petrozuata Authorization, Sixteenth Condition (“The Association Agreement shall include
provisions tl low Maraven to compensate the other parties . . . all without diminishing in any way the sovereign
power to legislate, inherent in the very existence of the national, state and municipal legislative powers”) and
Eighteenth Condition (“[I]n no case do they in and of themselves give rise to liability on the part of the Republic of
Venezuela, which could only arise in the event that such liability were to be assumed through a valid express legal
act of its authorities.”); Ex. C-67, Strategy for Venezuela, Conoco Venezuela Strategy Management Team, January
1994, p. 23 (“Conoco should not be surprised, if Venezuela (like other countries) finds some way to put an upside
cap on project economics.”); Ex. R-101, Letter from David Griffith, Conoco Inc., to Joffre Rodriguez, Maraven,
dated February 8, 1994 (proposing a “sliding scale” compensation formula); Ex. R-102, April 1994 Steering
Committee Presentation (describing how sliding scale formula addresses ie that “Gov't can take away
); Ex. R-22, Petrozuata i it, Section 9.07 ion provisions); Ex. C-75,
Petrozuata Offering Cir Circular, p. 72 (compensation for adverse governmental actions, including expropriation, is
“limited by reference to an average price of Brent Crude Oil deflated annually to 1994 in the world market” and, if
damages exceed US$75 million in any year, compensation is limited to “the greater of 25% of the actual economic
damage and the amount resulting from the Brent Crude Oil calculation”); Ex. Hamaca Authorization,
Nineteenth Condition (“The Association Agreement .. . shall not impose any obligation on the Republic of
Venezuela or restrict its exercise of sovereign rights”) and Twenty-First Condition (“The Association Agreement
will include provisions that allow for the compensation of Participants .... In no case will it be understood that the
application of these mechanisms limits, affects or restricts in any way the power of the governmental bodies to adopt
measures pursuant to the Constitution and applicable Laws.”); Ex. C-110, May 1996 Phillips Presentation, p. 43
(“No stability clause”); Ex. C-22, Hamaca Association Agreement, Article XIV (compensation provisions):
Respondent’s Closing Skeleton, pp. 9-17, 28-31.

       

 

 

  
  

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

curtis, “PREVOST, COLT & MOSLE LLP Rt. Hon. Justice Sir Kenneth J. Keith, K.B.E
ATTORNEYS AND COUNSELLORS AT Law Prof. Georges Abi-Saab

Maitre Yves Fortier, Q.C.

Page 3 September 8, 2013

having offered an amount which, according to Claimants themselves, exceeds the amount
resulting from the formulas? And even if the formulas are ultimately determined for
some reason to be irrelevant notwithstanding all the evidence to the contrary in this case,
how does that translate into a finding of bad faith? With all due respect, there simply is
no way to reconcile the emphatic statement in paragraph 402 of the Decision that the
Tribunal has not determined the impact of the compensation formulas with an affirmative
finding of bad faith negotiation.

2. As the Tribunal observed, the parties did enter into a Confidentiality
Agreement, but what the Tribunal apparently did not recall was that the agreement only
covered discussions after November 2007.2 The Decision points out that the
Confidentiality Agreement did not prevent Respondent from discussing certain of
ConocoPhillips’ settlement offers made in June and August 2007 (paragraph 400). That
is true, but the reason is the date the confidentiality commitment became effective. With
respect to discussions prior to that date, Respondent was free to respond to Claimants’
allegations and to show, based on Claimants’ own offers, that their demand in this case
was far removed from reality, but neither Respondent nor Claimants were at liberty to
discuss the settlement discussions that took place after November 27, 2007.2 That
explains the lack of testimony regarding the progress of the compensation negotiations
after that date. The Republic cannot accept the notion that the failure to breach
confidentiality may be taken as proof of bad faith. Nor can the absence of evidence
under such circumstances be turned into a presumption or inference of bad faith. That
would be a most troublesome and unprecedented decision under any system of law.

3. There also seems to be some confusion concerning the distinction between
the migration discussions and the compensation discussions following ConocoPhillips’
exit from the projects in June of 2007. ConocoPhillips alleges that the Republic offered
unreasonable terms for the migration, even though other companies, including its own
partners in the Hamaca and Corocoro projects, Chevron and Eni, were able to negotiate
satisfactory terms and successfully migrate to the mixed company structure, accepting
terms that ConocoPhillips flatly rejected. The point here is not to debate the
reasonableness of the parties’ positions in the migration discussions. ConocoPhillips was
free not to accept the migration, but the Republic was also not obligated to conform the
migration to ConocoPhillips’ wishes. Refusing to accede to ConocoPhillips’ demands

2 The issue of when confidentiality became applicable arose at the closing argument during questioning by the
Tribunal. Respondent explained as follows: “What happened, Judge, is they drafted a memorandum of
understanding before the confidentiality agreement. We decided to put it in because they had some outrageous
i about our positions in the negotiation, things that were not true. And as a matter of fact, when they wanted
the Confidentiality Agreement, we made very clear that it would only apply as of November . . . , and this predates
that.” Hearing Transcript, pp. 3705-3706 (Respondent’s Closing).

 

   

> Annex 1 (attached hereto), E-mail exchange in January 2008, highlighting that the Confidentiality Agreement
would apply only to negotiations after November 27, 2007.

curtis, “PREVOST, COLT & MOSLE LLP Rt. Hon. Justice Sir Kenneth J. Keith, K.B.E
ATTORNEYS AND COUNSELLORS AT Law Prof. Georges Abi-Saab

Maitre Yves Fortier, Q.C.

Page 4 September 8, 2013

during the migration process is not the same as bad faith negotiation, just as refusing to
accede to ConocoPhillips’ exorbitant demands for compensation after the migration
process does not constitute bad faith.*

4. With respect to the compensation negotiations following ConocoPhillips’
exit from the projects, the record shows that there were many compensation meetings
over a long period of time, as confirmed by Mr. Goff in his testimony.” The question
raised by this testimony is: What was ConocoPhillips doing all that time if in fact
Venezuela’s position was so outrageous as to constitute bad faith? The only logical
conclusion from the undisputed fact that ConocoPhillips stayed at the negotiating table
for so long is that it considered the Republic to be negotiating in good faith, as the
Republic has done with all other international oil companies and other companies whose
interests have been nationalized. Both the record of this case and the public record,
including of settlements reached with companies after the June 2010 hearing, makes this
point clear.®

5. To the extent that the Tribunal considers it necessary to see some evidence
of negotiations post-Confidentiality Agreement, it can refer to the reports of statements
made (notwithstanding ConocoPhillips’ confidentiality commitments) by both Mr. Goff,
ConocoPhillips’ lead negotiator, and Mr. Lyons, published after the June 2010 hearing.

* The majority states that three letters sent by Claimants on April 12, 2007, recounting discussions at meetings in
March 2007 concerning ConocoPhillips’ participation in the migration process and scenarios for compensation
depending upon whether ConocoPhillips continued in the projects or exited, were not answered by Respondent
(Decision, {J 380, 391, 393). However, the very next day, Dr. Mommer wrote a letter that was hand-delivered to
ConocoPhillips’ office in Caracas, stating that ConocoPhillips “has interpreted and distorted our conversations in
such a manner that it calls into ‘question whether it wishes to continue participating in the process” and that
ConocoPhillips “is more interested in trying to build a procedural case than in concluding in a satisfactory manner
the process of migration.” Annex 2 (attached hereto), Letter from Bernard Mommer, Vice Minister of
Hydrocarbons, to Albert Roy Lyons, ConocoPhillips, dated April 13, 2007.

  

     
 

5 Hearing Transcript, p. 684 (“Q. Now, you were also heavily involved in the negotiations for compensation; isn’t
that right? A. Well, I have--I mean I signed a Confidentiality Agreement regarding-- Q. And I don’t want you to
reveal any of it. I just want to know whether you were involved in those discussions. A. I--I have been involved in
discussions. Q. And they went on for a long time. A. They went on for a long time.”). It was Mr. Goff, not Mr.
Lyons, as the Tribunal seems to have understood, who was ConocoPhillips’ lead negotiator, although
ConocoPhillips’ CEO, Mr. Mulva, also met several times with Minister Ramirez.

© Counter-Memorial, {| 112-117, 274, n. 211; Rejoinder, {| 238-244, 374; Hearing Transcript, pp. 336-337
(Respondent's Opening). In a proceeding in the High Court of Justice in London relating to one of the other
upgrading projects initiated by an ExxonMobil subsidiary, the Court stated: “There has been a change of
government since the Association Agreement was made. The new government strongly disagrees with previous
policy. It has condemned the previous policy, and spoken of the need for change, in strong terms. [This] has not
prevented the negotiation of mutually acceptable arrangements with the vast majority of foreign oil interests,” and
concludes by saying “I doubt — this can properly be described as a case involving a lack of compensation
Annex 3 (attached hereto), Mobil Cerro Negro Limited v. Petroleos de Venezuela S.A., High Court of Justice, 2008
EWHC 532, {{[ 55, 137.

 

 

 

 

   

curtis, “PREVOST, COLT & MOSLE LLP Rt. Hon. Justice Sir Kenneth J. Keith, K.B.E
ATTORNEYS AND COUNSELLORS AT Law Prof. Georges Abi-Saab
Maitre Yves Fortier, Q.C.

Page 5 September 8, 2013

In an April 2008 cable, the U.S. Embassy in Caracas reported on a conversation with
Mr. Goff, stating:

According to Goff, CP [ConocoPhillips] has two basic claims: a
claim for compensation for its expropriated assets and a claim
based on the progressive expropriation of the underlying assets.
Goff stated the BRV [Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela] has
accepted that fair market value is the standard for the first claim.
He said the BRV has moved away from using book value as the
standard for compensation and has agreed on a fair market
methodology with discount rates for computing the compensation
for the expropriated assets. However, given the recent increase in
oil prices, the fair market value of the assets has increased. As
for the claim based on the progressive expropriation of the assets,
Goff said the claim was on top of the fair market value of the
assets. CP has proposed a settlement number and the BRV
appears to be open to it. Goff added that CP also plans on
increasing the settlement number for the second claim due to
recent increases in oil prices.’

This report not only shows that Respondent was negotiating fair market value, but it also
reflects ConocoPhillips’ view that it was automatically entitled to any benefits of post-
nationalization price increases based on the assumption that the nationalization was
unlawful, not due to any bad faith negotiation but for other reasons.* Another U.S.
Embassy cable from May 2008 reports on conversations with Roy Lyons, who apparently
was giving his impressions to the Embassy of discussions with Dr. Mommer and other
negotiators and expressing “optimism that a deal will be made” based on “the statements
and actions of the Venezuelan negotiators.”” We do not endorse everything reported in
these cables, but the notion that the Republic did not negotiate in good faith because it
never discussed fair market value is patently false, as both ConocoPhillips and the U.S.
Government are fully aware.

7 Annex 4 (attached hereto), Cable dated April 4, 2008, ConocoPhillips Briefs Ambassador on Compensation
Negotiations, "ff 4-5.

® As this Tribunal has unanimously found, that assumption was incorrect. Except for the issue of bad faith
negotiation, which is negated by Mr. Goff’s statement to the U.S. Embassy as well as the other point i
letter, this Tribunal has unanimously held that the nationalization was lawful. That nec:
ConocoPhillips had no basis for insisting on valuation as of any date other than the date of nationalization. Yet
ConocoPhillips insisted on its erroneous view that fair market value meant it could benefit from any post-
nationalization price incre “On top of” that, it inflated its demand by disregarding the 1 regime that was
applicable to all other companies. How can that be good faith negotiation and Respondent's position not be?

    

    

    

° Annex 5 (attached hereto), Cable dated May 23, 2008, Update on ConocoPhillips Negotiations, | 9.

Rt. Hon. Justice Sir Kenneth J. Keith, K.B.E

CURTIS, MALLET-PREVOST, COLT & MOSLE LLP

ATTORNEYS AND COUNSELLORS AT Law Prof. Georges Abi-Saab
Maitre Yves Fortier, Q.C.

Page 6 September 8, 2013

6. The fact is that settlement could not be reached in this case not only

because ConocoPhillips refused to recognize the compensation formulas agreed at the
outset of the upgrading projects, but also because ConocoPhillips had its own vision of
fair market value, which included, in addition to constantly revised figures based on
short-term price increases, valuation based on a fiscal regime that did not exist, without
any consideration of either the extraction tax or the 50% income tax that all other
companies were paying. The Republic obviously did not and could not accept the
principle that valuation should be based on a fiscal regime unique to ConocoPhillips and
inapplicable to the petroleum industry at large. We have noted the comment in paragraph
393 of the Decision that Venezuela did not know at that time that the fiscal measures
would be excluded from this case. That may be true, but it is certainly not true that the
Republic had any doubt as to the legality of its fiscal measures, whether or not the
Tribunal were to hold that the claims based on the fiscal measures were to be excluded
under Article 4 of the Dutch Treaty. As demonstrated at the hearing, the fiscal measures
were non-discriminatory and not in violation of any stabilization commitment
whatsoever, a point this Tribunal also noted in the Decision (paragraphs 350-351). No
one can seriously argue that, regardless of what ConocoPhillips thought of the fiscal
measures, the Republic had any doubt that they were perfectly lawful exercises of its
sovereign authority. Nor can there be any question as to the reasonableness of the
Republic’s position that any calculation of fair market value, wholly apart from the
question of the compensation formulas, would have to be based on the fiscal regime as it
existed at the time of the nationalization and as was applicable to all other companies
operating in the petroleum industry in Venezuela.’

The majority seemed influenced by the dearth of evidence concerning
exactly what role the compensation formulas played in the compensation discussions.
The Republic cannot fathom that point for two reasons. First, ConocoPhillips was
obviously aware of the Republic’s position on the relevance of the formulas. Indeed,
Claimants themselves have never disputed that point. Throughout the hearing in our
case, ConocoPhillips’ witnesses and counsel tried to explain away the compensation
provisions, arguing, for example, that they could not be the appropriate remedy for
conduct such as “burning down the house,”!! but no witness and no counsel ever said that
the Republic considered those provisions irrelevant. Second, while there is also no doubt
that, as Mr. Goff told the U.S. Embassy, the Republic was willing to consider the fair

   

‘© Claimants argued that the Republic acted in bad faith when taking the fiscal measures. See Claimants’ Memorial
on the Merits, {| 338. That point was fully addressed by Respondent in its memorials and at the hearing. The
Tribunal stated in paragraph 358 of the Decision that Claimants did not respond to our review of the cases, and
added: “Counsel for the Respondent referred to that review and its understanding of the cases; he also contended,
citing relevant authorities, that government officials are presumed to be acting in good faith. The Respondent came
back to the good faith issue in the final rounds, when the matter was otherwise the subject of only limited attention.”
The “relevant authorities” to which we referred, and to which Claimants could not respond, are equally applicable to
the actions of those negotiating compensation on behalf of the Government.

" Hearing Transcript, pp. 30-31, 165-170 (Claimants’ Opening), 736-738 (McKee).

     

 

 

 

curtis, “PREVOST, COLT & MOSLE LLP Rt. Hon. Justice Sir Kenneth J. Keith, K.B.E
ATTORNEYS AND COUNSELLORS AT Law Prof. Georges Abi-Saab

Maitre Yves Fortier, Q.C.

Page 7 September 8, 2013

market value of the investments without considering the compensation formulas in the
interest of attempting to reach an amicable settlement in good faith, that does not mean
that the formulas were irrelevant or that the Republic ever conceded that point. Again, it
would be a strange result to penalize a party willing to show flexibility in confidential,
good faith discussions by interpreting such flexibility as a waiver of its legal rights under
the basic terms and conditions governing the projects in question. As we pointed out in
our February 28, 2012 letter to the Tribunal, even the U.S. Embassy was aware of the
significance and operation of the compensation formulas. An Embassy cable from May
18, 2006 reported on the compensation mechanism as follows:

According to the partner at the Venezuelan firm, the strategic
associations do not have a legal basis to fight the income tax
increases or the new extraction tax. An ExxonMobil executive
also told Petatt [the Embassy Petroleum Attache] on May 17 that
his firm did not believe it had a legal basis for opposing the tax
increases. The attorney stated, however, that each of the strategic
association agreements has some form of indemnity clause that
protects them from tax increases. Under the clauses, PDVSA will
indemnify the partners if there is an increase in taxes. However,
in order to receive payment, a certain level of economic damage
must occur. In order to determine the level of damage, the
indemnity clauses contain formulas that, unfortunately, assume
low oil prices. Due to current high oil prices, it is highly unlikely
that the increases will create significant enough damage under the
formulas to reach the threshold whereby PDVSA has to pay the
partners.

If the U.S. Embassy understood in 2006 the relevance of the compensation provisions,
there can hardly be any doubt that the Republic also understood it, particularly inasmuch
as Dr. Mommer had written about this subject since the 1990s, as documented in his
witness statement and as he testified in this case."

2 Annex D (attached to the Letter of Respondent dated February 28, 2012), Cable dated May 18, 2006,
Temperature Rises for Strategic Associations, released August 30, 2011, 5. The relevant time period should be the
period of the negotiation and authorization of the projects in the 1990s, as that was when the terms and conditions of
the projects, including the amount of compensation to be granted for expropriation and other governmental action,
were established. Nevertheless, the Tribunal will note that the description of the compensation provisions in the
U.S. Embassy’s 2006 cable matches all other evidence in the record regarding the compensation provisions,
including ConocoPhillips’ own testimony and documents and both the testimony of Dr. Mommer at the hearing and
his writing on the subject in the 1990s. See Mommer Direct Testimony, Appendix 6, Bernard Mommer, Venezuela,
Politica y Petréleos (Cuadernos del Cendes, Year 16, N° 42, September-December 1999), p. 23.

 

'S Mommer Supplemental Testimony, {4 24-28.

Rt. Hon. Justice Sir Kenneth J. Keith, K.B.E

CURTIS, MALLET-PREVOST, COLT & MOSLE LLP
a

TTORNEYS AND COUNSELLORS AT Law Prof. Georges Abi-Saab
Maitre Yves Fortier, Q.C.

Page 8 September 8, 2013

8. Even without going through the details of the discussions that were

covered by the Confidentiality Agreement, the Decision itself makes clear that
ConocoPhillips was willing to settle for US$6.5 billion (approximately 20% of the
ridiculous amount Claimants sought in this proceeding), a point we are able to discuss
because it was before the Confidentiality Agreement, while Claimants themselves say
that they were offered US$2.3 billion, before considering Corocoro (paragraph 389 of the
Decision). Appropriately, the record does not show other proposals of Respondent, but
even Claimants’ own characterization of Respondent’s proposal far exceeds our
unrefuted calculations under the compensation formulas. We are unable to understand
how an offer that Claimants themselves allege was made and actually exceeded what
Claimants would be owed under the agreed compensation provisions could possibly
demonstrate bad faith, unless the compensation provisions are irrelevant, and the
Tribunal has emphasized that it has made no finding on that point. Moreover, even if the
Tribunal were, contrary to all the evidence in the record, to deem the compensation
formulas irrelevant in determining compensation, it is simply incomprehensible that a
party could be held to be in bad faith for offering more than what is required by the terms
of provisions that at least might reasonably be considered relevant. As the Tribunal is
aware, we believe that not only can a reasonable argument be made as to the relevance of
those provisions, but the record in this case is clear that they were the very basis on which
the Hamaca and Petrozuata projects were authorized.’

 

9. We also point out that the amount that Claimants say was offered as early
as March of 2007 is actually more than the amount that our experts have calculated as the
true net present value of Claimants’ interests (approximately US$1.8 billion) even
without considering the impact_of the compensation provisions. '° Claimants have not
challenged that valuation, which is calculated as of the date of the nationalization, June
26, 2007, with the then existing fiscal regime in place; they have refused to even submit a
2007 valuation in this case and have insisted on disregarding the existing fiscal regime.
‘We understand that reasonable persons may disagree with the exact amount our experts
have calculated, but no one can seriously argue that any of the assumptions underlying
our calculation, including price scenario, discount rate, production and cost projections,
and fiscal regime, were made in bad faith, and the Tribunal has not found anything of the
kind. In fact, the Tribunal will recall that Claimants studiously avoided challenging our
experts at the 2010 hearing, not wanting to engage them, even going out of their way to
make clear that they were not asking any serious questions on what are obviously key
quantum issues.'® On the technical side, Claimants even refused to cross examine a key
witness despite having insisted that he travel to The Hague and sit for weeks waiting to

Seen. 1, supra.
'S Second Brailovsky/Wells Report, | 194, Table 18.
‘© Hearing Transcript, pp. 3093-3096 (Claimants’ Closing); Respondent's Closing Skeleton, pp. 34-35.

curtis, “PREVOST, COLT & MOSLE LLP Rt. Hon. Justice Sir Kenneth J. Keith, K.B.E
ATTORNEYS AND COUNSELLORS AT Law Prof. Georges Abi-Saab
Maitre Yves Fortier, Q.C.

Page 9 September 8, 2013

testify.'” When questioned about these tactics, Claimants vigorously defended their right
not to ask questions. That may be so, but given the professionalism exhibited in the
economic and technical reports submitted by Respondent and the documentation
supporting them, as well as the lack of any serious challenge on the substance of the
reports by Claimants at the hearing, it is not even plausible to argue that our expert
evaluations are in bad faith. Yet they show a 2007 fair market value even without
consideration of the compensation formulas which is less than what Claimants say was
offered by the Republic. We cannot understand how any offer in excess of our experts’
good faith and professionally done calculations, made in an effort to arrive at an amicable
settlement, could possibly be considered bad faith. On the contrary, an offer in excess of
a good faith, professional valuation is by definition a good faith offer.

10. The majority seems to attach some significance to the fact that Claimants
in their Memorial said that an offer of US$2.3 billion was no more than 5% of the real
value of their investments (paragraph 390 of the Decision). But apart from the obvious
fact that Claimants’ 5% statement was utter nonsense, Professor Abi-Saab correctly
pointed out at the hearing that what existed in this case was simply a disagreement over
the amount of compensation.'* Disagreements about the amount of compensation do not
render an expropriation unlawful and are hardly proof of bad faith. If Claimants’
surrealistic calculations are the standard of good faith, and if the adequacy of
Respondent’s offers are to be judged against Claimants’ demands, then one wonders why
we even bother to have hearings at all.'° One need only refer to the closing argument of
Claimants’ counsel in July 2010 to illustrate the absurdity of judging good faith by
Claimants’ demands. After agreeing with us that disagreements over compensation do
not render a nationalization unlawful, counsel for Claimants nevertheless went on to
assert that “an offer of Fair Market Value would have been of the order of seven to 10
times the amount of the offer actually made.””” Ten times US$2.3 billion, the offer
Claimants say was made to them in March 2007, happens to be US$23 billion, which is
more than the absurd amount Claimants are claiming in this case (excluding the
nonsensical claim of ConocoPhillips Company for U.S. tax credits) using the price
increases after 2007 and disregarding the existing fiscal regime. It is also approximately
four times the amount ConocoPhillips offered to settle for in August 2007. Claimants’

" Hearing Transcript, pp. 2280-2286 (on the refusal to examine Mr. Cardona). See also Respondent’s Closing
Skeleton, p. 25.

'S Hearing Transcript, pp. 3416-3418 (between Arbitrator Abi-Saab and counsel for Claimants).

'° One also wonders how an offer in the amount Claimants say was made by the Republic could be considered bad
faith and Claimants’ demands in this case of US$31 billion not be so considered. Note that Claimants’ assertion that
the offer of US$2.3 billion was no more than 5% of the real value of their interests means that they believe the value
was US$46 billion, even more than their indefensible demand in this case. Such assertions cannot be taken
seriously.

 

°° Hearing Transcript, p. 3514 (Claimants’ Closing).

curtis, “PREVOST, COLT & MOSLE LLP Rt. Hon. Justice Sir Kenneth J. Keith, K.B.E
ATTORNEYS AND COUNSELLORS AT Law Prof. Georges Abi-Saab

Maitre Yves Fortier, Q.C.

Page 10 September 8, 2013

position that the Republic was required to offer as compensation the surrealistic amount
of US$23 billion in order for the nationalization to be considered lawful is indefensible.!

11. The Tribunal may also recall that the compensation that Claimants say
was offered by Venezuela in March 2007 for their interests in Petrozuata and Hamaca is
in line with Claimants’ own October 2006 valuations, which are in the record:

a. Venezuela’s March 2007 offer to pay US$1.1 billion for Claimants’
interest in Petrozuata is very close to ConocoPhillips’ internal US$1.12
billion valuation developed only 6 months earlier.” It is impossible to
understand how an offer for an amount that is virtually the same as
Claimants’ own valuation of its interest in late 2006 can be conceived as the
product of bad faith negotiation.

b. The offer that Claimants say was made to them for the
ConocoPhillips interest in the Hamaca project, US$1.2 billion, is higher

 

2! ‘The substance of this discussion was outlined on the final day of closing arguments, in which Respondent pointed
out the following: “Now, there has been a lot of talk here about what is the nature of the compensation discussions,
and they keep saying that all we offered was Book Value and that our offer was way too low, and I just don’t know
how one goes about addressing this other than let’s look at what actually happened. Let’s look at what we do know.
We can’t tell you everything because there are confidentiality agreements, but let's look at what we do know. We
do know that Dr. Mommer has testified that we offered and did discuss compensation in good faith. ... [W]e have
shown you in good faith what we believe the Market Value is of these assets, and we’ve told you the impact of the
compensation provisions. And I don’t want to tell you where we came down in the offers but they seem to think that
anything remotely resembling what we’ve showed you is actually [a] good faith value is a ridiculous offer. Well,
the cases simply don’t bear that out. The facts don’t bear that out. We, in good faith, believe that we are right. And
I think if you look at the record the way it stands today--we are going to go through some of tl unless you were to
say that we had an obligation to value these properties without any fiscal changes which we believe were all
perfectly lawful, with their extraordinarily high price scenario, is kind of a bootstrapping argument. They’re saying
the value is high because the valuation date should be moved. But if we’re right, the valuation date shouldn’t be
moved, and what we were talking about when we were discussing compensation was June 2007 value, not when the
price of the oil [is] $144. And by the way, the price could very well go down do $40 tomorrow. I hope not, but it’s
possible. We also know that their $30 billion request is absolutely absurd. We know that they offered to settle
somewhere between $6 - and $7 billion.... At least that’s our good-faith interpretation of it. They’ve never
actually refuted that. Judge Fortier asked where is this in the record? It’s in Dr. Mommer’s affidavit. And it’s also
in the exhibits to Dr. Mommer’s affidavit. You have to do a little calculating and yes, but it’s not that far off. That
figure is a lot closer to our figure than it is to $30 billion. So I ask: Who is being unreasonable in this case? We also
know that there were over a year of intensive negotiations. They didn’t reach fruition. But it seems to me, my
experience is, if I’m sitting down with somebody for over a year and they are acting in bad faith, making ridiculous
offers, I don’t keep coming back to the table everyday, waiting for them to make a serious offer. That’s not what
happened. There is simply no basis in the record in this case for viewing thi: n unlawful expropriation or
confiscation.” Hearing Transcript, pp. 3977-3979 (Respondent’s Closing).

” See Third Brailovsky/Wells Report, {{{ 67-68 (citing Ex. C-474, ConocoPhillips RCAT Group, Building
Production Capacity Reserves/Loss of Reserve Area COP, October 2006, slide 17). Apparently, the internal
ConocoPhillips valuation was based upon the production and cost figures that ConocoPhillips was using as of that
time, which were shown at the hearing to have been overly optimistic.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

     

 

  

 

 

curtis, “PREVOST, COLT & MOSLE LLP Rt. Hon. Justice Sir Kenneth J. Keith, K.B.E
ATTORNEYS AND COUNSELLORS AT Law Prof. Georges Abi-Saab

Maitre Yves Fortier, Q.C.

Page 11 September 8, 2013

than the value reflected in the Petrolera Ameriven Hamaca Economic
Model, dated October 30, 2006, which was the basis for the production and
cost figures used by Claimants’ experts. That model calculated the net
present value of the entire Hamaca project, before considering repayment of
debt, at US$3.012 billion.”* Based upon this valuation, Claimants’ 40%
interest, after taking into account its 40% share of the project’s US$774
million in debt as of year-end 2006.74 was approximately US$895 million.
Again, there is simply no way of reconciling these undisputed facts with the
notion that Venezuela’s March 2007 offer was the product of bad faith
negotiation.

12. The Tribunal seems to be under the mistaken impression that the Republic
was not offering any compensation for Corocoro. That is flatly untrue. As Dr. Mommer
testified, the parties were understandably focusing their discussions on the two upgrading
projects with the greater value.> As already demonstrated in Respondent’s experts
reports, Corocoro’s value was negligible, a point well understood by both sides. The
fact that the negotiation had not advanced on Corocoro does not mean that the Republic
denied the principle of compensation for Corocoro.”” It simply means that the parties
concentrated on the larger projects and saw no point in spending time on the relatively
insignificant amount that would be due for Corocoro under any compensation standard
until the larger issues were resolved.

13. With respect to the compensation provisions in the Hamaca and Petrozuata
projects, we have noted that the majority has focused exclusively on whether or not they
played a role in the compensation negotiations. Frankly, we do not understand that. The
Tribunal did not mention any of the extensive evidence referred to in our Memorials
showing that those compensation provisions were the basis for the authorization of the
projects in the first place.”* Nor did the Tribunal mention the report from the U.S.
Embassy in 2006 clearly explaining the operation of those provisions, which we pointed

° See Ex. LECG-129, Petrolera Ameriven Hamaca Economic Model, October 30, 2006, p. 551. The cost and
production figures used in the model appear to have been based upon the 2006 Hamaca Business Plan which, as
demonstrated at the hearing, was also overly optimistic.

4 Id., p. 487.
°5 Hearing Transcript, pp. 1862-1863 (Mommer).
6 Second Brailovsky/Wells Report, J 193.

 

 

27 ConocoPhillips’ April 12, 2007 letter acknowledges that although ConocoPhillips had not yet received an offer for
Corocoro, at the March 29, 2007 meeting “[w]e were informed at the time that such an offer would be forthcoming

..” Ex. C-241, Letter from Roy Lyons, ConocoPhillips, to Rafael Ramirez, Minister of the Popular Power for
Energy and Petroleum, and others, dated April 12, 2007. It further states that “any cash compensation component
would be relatively small as such asset is not currently in production . .

 
  

 

8 Seen. 1, supra.

curtis, “PREVOST, COLT & MOSLE LLP Rt. Hon. Justice Sir Kenneth J. Keith, K.B.E
ATTORNEYS AND COUNSELLORS AT Law Prof. Georges Abi-Saab

Maitre Yves Fortier, Q.C.

Page 12 September 8, 2013

out in our post-hearing letters to the Tribunal.” Given the wealth of evidence in the
record on the compensation provisions, including Claimants’ own documents from the
relevant time period (the period of negotiation and authorization of the projects), and
given the testimony at the hearing which confirmed that those provisions were an “upside
cap on project economics,” we fail to understand how it is possible to penalize
Respondent for attempting in good faith to settle a claim by considering compensation in
excess of what was actually owed under those compensation provisions. In effect, the
Tribunal is stating that if the Republic had offered only the amount required by the
compensation formulas and not a penny more, it would have been acting in good faith,
but since it agreed to consider more than that amount in a good faith effort to reach an
amicable settlement, it should be penalized. That conclusion is unsustainable.

14. We have noted an earlier passage from the Tribunal’s Decision, in which
all three members of the Tribunal concurred and with which we fully agree, stating: “It
will do that bearing in mind how rarely courts and tribunals have held that a good faith or
other related standard is breached. The standard is a high one” (paragraph 275, emphasis
added). As stated in one well-known case: “A finding of the existence of bad faith
should be supported not by disputable inferences but by clear and convincing evidence
which compels such a conclusion.”*! A monograph on good faith in international law,
referring to the decision quoted above, explains the high burden of proof a claimant
would have in proving bad faith negotiations: “The Tacna-Arica Case remains an
important case on the /egal duty to negotiate in good faith, even if it also provides an
example of how difficult it may be to convince a Tribunal of the bad faith of a State in a
long and complex series of negotiations... . Nothing short of a demonstrable wilful
refusal to proceed with negotiations, or an unjustified failure even to consider reasonable
proposals, will probably suffice for a failure to negotiate in good faith.”*? If that in fact is
the standard, we do not understand how the Tribunal can take the extraordinary step of
inferring bad faith based on the lack of evidence concerning negotiations done under the

» See | 7, supra.
*° Respondent's Closing Skeleton, p. 11.

5! Annex 6 (attached hereto), Tacna-Arica Question (Chile, Peru), Opinion and Award dated March 4, 1925, 2
R.LA.A. 921 (2006), p. 930. See also Annex 7 (attached hereto), Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret VE Sanayi A. $. v.

Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No ARB/03/29, Award dated August 27, 2009, {143 (holding that “the
standard for proving bad faith is a demanding one, in particular if bad faith is to be established on the basis of
circumstantial evidence”); Annex 8 (attached hereto), Chemtura Corporation (formerly Crompton Corporation) v.

Government of Canada, Ad Hoc NAFTA Arbitration under UNCITRAL Rules, Award dated August 2, 2010, {[ 137
(stating that “the standard of proof for allegati of bad faith or disi zt is a ding one”).

This high threshold explains why findings of breach of good faith have been so rare. Writing about the International
Court of Justice, a distinguished commentator observed that “the Court will be slow to accuse a State in its judgment
of bad faith.” Annex 9 (attached hereto), Hugh Thirlway, The Law and Procedure of the International Court of
Justice 1960-1989: Part Three, BRITISH YEARBOOK OF INTERNATIONAL LAW | (1991), p. 18.

 

 

> Annex 10 (attached hereto), J. F. O'Connor, Good FAITH IN INTERNATIONAL LAW (Dartmouth Publishing
Company 1991), pp. 100-101.

curtis, “PREVOST, COLT & MOSLE LLP Rt. Hon. Justice Sir Kenneth J. Keith, K.B.E
ATTORNEYS AND COUNSELLORS AT Law Prof. Georges Abi-Saab
Maitre Yves Fortier, Q.C.

Page 13 September 8, 2013

protection of a Confidentiality Agreement, and we in any event do not understand how
the willingness to negotiate compensation in excess of that required by the formulas in
the interest of avoiding litigation and maintaining good relations could possibly be
confused with bad faith. While we think the record in this case definitively negates that
conclusion, Claimants obviously cannot meet their extraordinary burden of proof on this
issue. Indeed, the fact that one distinguished member of the Tribunal has dissented on
this point itself should indicate that this is not one of those “rare” cases to which the
Tribunal referred earlier, which are rare because they involve conduct so bad that any
reasonable person would be able to come to the conclusion of bad faith.

15. Finally, the majority’s reasoning on the Chorzéw Factory decision is
difficult to follow. The majority seems to acknowledge that the Chorzéw Factory
standard of compensation does not apply where the expropriation would be lawful but for
the payment of compensation (paragraphs 340-343).°* It then goes on to find no basis for
unlawfulness here other than lack of compensation. If Chorzéw Factory is to be applied,
the valuation date cannot be anything other than the date of taking. This part of the
Decision actually refers to a case in which one of the two arbitrators of the majority here
was acting as President of the tribunal, Santa Elena v. Costa Rica, distinguishing that
case on the ground that it involved a lawful expropriation. But in Santa Elena,
compensation was not granted until twenty years after the expropriation, and the offers of
the parties showed that Costa Rica offered only one-third of the amount requested by the
claimant. According to Claimants in this case, the amount offered by the Republic as
early as March of 2007 was US$2.3 billion, which is more than one-third of the amount
Claimants sought in August of 2007. We fail to understand how the expropriation in
Santa Elena could be considered lawful and the nationalization here considered unlawful
due to alleged bad faith negotiation, especially since the Tribunal here has unanimously

*3 At the closing, Claimants’ counsel agreed with this point, but then went on to assert that “an offer of Fair Market
Value would have been of the order of seven to 10 times the amount of the offer actually made.” Hearing
Transcript, p. 3514 (Claimants’ Closing).

 

* Moreover, even if the expropriation had been unlawful for reasons other than lack of compensation, that would
not automatically mean that the valuation date should be the date of the award. Claimants themselves will argue that
the valuation date would be the date of taking if it is higher than the date of the award, and, notwithstanding the
increases in crude oil prices since 2007, other factors, including increased costs and production declines, may offset
the price rise. The point here is not to argue quantum, a lengthy and highly technical exercise, but to highlight the
questions of principle. It should be noted that, in any event, if the date of the award means the date of the final
award in this case, it is difficult to see how there can be a valuation as of that date. This is not a simple case
involving the valuation of a piece of real estate. It will undoubtedly take this Tribunal many months to a
parties’ experts reports, quantum witne: and arguments after the last quantum submi ns. Given the vola
of oil prices and other factors, it is a virtual certainty that whatever decision is reached whenever it is reached will
not be based on a valuation as of the date of the award.

 

 
      

 

*5 Ex, CL-38, Compaiiia del Desarrollo de Santa Elena, S.A. v. The Republic of Costa Rica, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/96/1, Final Award dated February 17, 2000, 14 ICSID REVIEW — FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL 169
(2000) (“Santa Elena”).

 

cction. Gin aaa Sat eee Rt. Hon. Justice Sir Kenneth J. Keith, K.B.E
ATTORNEYS AND COUNSELLORS AT Law Prof. Georges Abi-Saab
Maitre Yves Fortier, Q.C.

Page 14 September 8, 2013

found that, the issue of compensation aside, the nationalization in this case was lawful in
all respects.*°

The Tribunal will recall that over the past year we have suggested on many
occasions a short hearing to address any points of concern. Given the split in the Tribunal, it is
clear that good faith negotiation was a point of concern that needed to be addressed. We await
the opinion of Professor Abi-Saab, which we will examine carefully upon receipt, but we now
formally request that as soon as practicable thereafter, a limited and focused hearing be held to
review the foregoing and the issue of the relevance of the compensation provisions, which the
Tribunal left open in the Decision. We believe that somehow with the passage of time the
memory of what happened at the 2010 hearing seems to have faded. It is also clear that the
Tribunal was under certain misapprehensions with respect to the parties’ confidentiality
commitments and the progress of the negotiations after the migration. Before proceeding to a
subsequent phase which may prove even longer than the first, we think we deserve clarification
and explanation of the points raised in this letter, and we believe it is also fair for the Tribunal to
have the opportunity to examine these issues with the benefit of all facts and of focused
argument so that it will be in a position to address cogently the points which now cry out for
elucidation.

Very truly yours,

Diep. Hieber

George Kahale, III

°° In paragraph 342 of the Decision, the majority states that “in Santa Elena, the valuation submissions by the Parties
and the tribunal’s assessment related only to the date of taking,” but counsel to respondent in Santa Elena wrote an
article making clear that claimant in that case had argued that the expropriation was “unlawful in failing up to that
point to provide any compensation to CDSE, and the consequence of such an unlawful taking under international
law was that CDSE would be entitled to the greater of (1) the value of the Property at the date of the taking, or (2) its
value subsequent to the date of taking and directly prior to the date of the Award.” Annex 11 (attached hereto),
Charles N. Brower and Jarrod Wong, General Valuation Principles: The Case of Santa Elena, in INTERNATIONAL
INVESTMENT LAW AND ARBITRATION: LEADING CASES FROM THE ICSID, NAFTA, BILATERAL TREATIES AND.
CUSTOMARY INTERNATIONAL LAW 747 (T. Weiler, ed., Cameron May 2005), p. 761. In fact, a review of the Santa
Elena decision makes clear that the valuation submissions did not relate only to the date of taking. As the tribunal in
Santa Elena stated: “On the question of valuation, as noted earlier, the views of the parties are widely divergent.
The Tribunal considers it useful to summarise the parties’ positions here: Claimant states that the fair market value
of the Santa Elena Property, based on its highest and best use in the market place, is equivalent to its present day
value, undiminished by any expropriatory actions of the Government and, in particular, by any environmental
statutes or regulations enacted after 1978. Respondent contends that the relevant date at which the fair market value
of the Property is to be assessed is the date of the expropriation decree, i.e., 5 May 1978.” Ex. CL-38, Santa Elena,
q75.

57 We expect Claimants to voice loud opposition to our request, but we do not expect much in the way of a
substantive reply to the points raised above for the simple reason that there is no substantive reply. That in itself
will speak louder than any pro forma opposition.

