INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.
In the arbitration proceeding between
CONOCOPHILLIPS PETROZUATA B.V.
CONOCOPHILLIPS HAMACA B.V.
CONOCOPHILLIPS GULF OF PARIA B.V.
THE CLAIMANTS
Vv.

BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
THE RESPONDENT

ICSID CasE No. ARB/07/30

 

DECISION ON RESPONDENT’S REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION

 

Members of the Tribunal
Judge Kenneth Keith, President
Mr L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC
Professor Georges Abi-Saab

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr Gonzalo Flores

Date: 10 March 2014

THE PARTIES’ REPRESENTATIVES

CLAIMANTS’ REPRESENTATIVES

Mr Jan Paulsson

Bahrain World Trade Centre

East Tower, 37th Floor

PO Box 20184

Manama

Bahrain

and

Mr Nigel Blackaby

Mr D. Brian King

Mr Alexander A. Yanos

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
601 Lexington Avenue, 31st Floor
New York, NY 10022

United States of America

and

Ms Lucy F. Reed

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
11th Floor Two Exchange Square
Hong Kong

and

Professor James Crawford, SC
Whewell Professor of International
Law

Matrix Chambers

Griffin Building, Gray’s Inn

London WCIR SLN

United Kingdom

RESPONDENT’S REPRESENTATIVES

Dr Manuel Enrique Galindo
Procurador General (E) de la Reptiblica
Procuraduria General de la Reptiblica
Paseo Los Ilustres c/e Av. Lazo Marti
Ed. Sede Procuraduria General de la
Reptblica

Piso 8

Urb. Santa Monica

Caracas 1040

Venezuela

and

Mr George Kahale, IIT

Ms Miriam K. Harwood

Mr Mark H. O’ Donoghue

Mr Benard V. Preziosi, Jr.

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
101 Park Avenue

New York, NY 10178

United States of America

and

Ms Gabriela Alvarez-Avila

Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle, S.C.
Rubén Dario 281, Pisos 8 & 9

Col. Bosque de Chapultepec

11580 Mexico, D.F.

Mexico

Page |1
A. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

1. On 2 November 2007, Claimants submitted to the International Centre for Settlement
of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or “the Centre”) a Request for Arbitration against the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (““Venezuela” or “the Respondent’) pursuant to Article
36 of the ICSID Convention. On 13 December 2007, the Secretary-General of ICSID
registered the Request for Arbitration in accordance with Article 36(3) of the ICSID

Convention.

2. The Tribunal was constituted on 23 July 2008. Its members were Judge Kenneth
Keith, President, appointed by the Chairman of ICSID Administrative Council pursuant to
Article 38 of the ICSID Convention; Mr L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC, appointed by the
Claimants; and Sir Ian Brownlie, CBE, QC, appointed by the Respondent. On 1 February
2010, the Tribunal was reconstituted, with Professor Georges Abi-Saab being appointed by

Respondent, following Sir Ian Brownlie’s passing.

3. On 3 September 2013, the Tribunal issued a Decision on Jurisdiction and the Merits,
concluding as follows:
“.,.For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal decides as follows:
a. It does not have jurisdiction under Article 22 of the Investment Law and
accordingly the claims by ConocoPhillips Company are dismissed; and
b. It has jurisdiction under Article 9 of the Bilateral Investment Treaty over:
i. the claims brought by ConocoPhillips Petrozuata BV, ConocoPhilips
Hamaca BV and ConocoPhillips Gulf of Paria BV in respect of (1)
the increase in the income tax rate which came into effect on 1

January 2007 and (2) the expropriation or migration; and

ii. the claims brought by ConocoPhillips Petrozuata BV and
ConocoPhillips Gulf of Paria BV in respect of the increase in the

extraction tax in effect from 24 May 2006.

c. All claims based on a breach of Article 3 of the BIT are rejected.

d. The Respondent breached its obligation to negotiate in good faith for
compensation for its taking of the ConocoPhillips assets in the three

projects on the basis of market value as required by Article 6(c) of the BIT.
e. The date of valuation of the ConocoPhillips assets is the date of the Award.
f. All other claims based on a breach of Article 6(c) of the BIT are rejected.

g. All other questions, including those concerning the costs and expenses of
the Tribunal and the costs of the parties’ determination are reserved for

future determination.

Items (a), (b)(i), (b)(ii), (c), (f) and (g) above have been decided unanimously by
the Tribunal. Items (d) and (e) have been decided by majority, with Arbitrator

Georges Abi-Saab, dissenting.”

4. On 8 September 2013, counsel for Respondent submitted a letter requesting a
clarification and further explanations from the Tribunal regarding certain findings in the
Decision on Jurisdiction and the Merits (“the September 8 letter”). In its letter, counsel
for Respondent also requested “a limited and focused hearing” to address the specific

issues raised.

5. Counsel for the Claimants replied to the September 8 letter on 10 September 2013.
Claimants opposed Respondent’s requests and proposed instead a briefing schedule for

submis

 

ions on quantum.

6. On 11 September 2013, Respondent submitted further comments, to which
Claimants replied on 12 September 2013. Additional comments were received from

Respondent on 12, 16 and 23 September 2013 and from Claimants on 23 September 2013.

7. By letter of 1 October 2013, the Tribunal fixed a schedule for the parties to file
submissions on: (i) the Tribunal’s power to reconsider the Decision on Jurisdiction and the

Merits of 3 September 2013; and (ii) a possible scheduling for guantum briefs.

8. In accordance with the schedule, the Parties simultaneously filed briefs on 28

October and 25 November 2013

B. PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS

9. So far as the first matter set out in paragraph 7 is concerned, this decision is limited
to answering the question whether the Tribunal has the power which the Respondent would
have it exercise. The decision does not address the grounds the Respondent invokes for
reconsidering the part of the Decision which it challenges and the evidence which it sees as

supporting those grounds. The power must be shown to exist before it can be exercised.

10. The Parties referred to a number of provisions of the ICSID Convention and the
ICSID Arbitration Rules, as well as to commentaries, matters of principle and decisions of

various international courts and tribunals. It is convenient to set out the relevant ICSID

 

provisions at this stage:

Convention, Article 43

Except as the parties otherwise agree, the Tribunal may, if it deems it necessary
at any stage of the proceedings,

(a) call upon the parties to produce documents or other evidence, and

(b) visit the scene connected with the dispute, and conduct such
inquiries there as it may deem appropriate.

Convention, Article 44

Any arbitration proceeding shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of this Section and, except as the parties otherwise agree, in
accordance with the Arbitration Rules in effect on the date on which the parties
consented to arbitration. If any question of procedure arises which is not
covered by this Section or the Arbitration Rules or any rules agreed by the
parties, the Tribunal shall decide the question.

Convention, Article 53

(1) The award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be subject to
any appeal or to any other remedy except those provided for in this Convention.
Each party shall abide by and comply with the terms of the award except to the
extent that enforcement shall have been stayed pursuant to the relevant
provisions of this Convention.

(2) For the purposes of this Section, “award” shall include any decision
interpreting, revising or annulling such award pursuant to Articles 50, 51 or 52.

Arbitration Rules, Rule 38(2)

(2) Exceptionally, the Tribunal may, before the award has been rendered,
reopen the proceeding on the ground that new evidence is forthcoming of such

3

a nature as to constitute a decisive factor, or that there is a vital need for
clarification on certain specific points.

11. The Respondent pla

 

‘§ major emphasis on Article 44 of the Convention and in
particular on its second sentence. That provision, it says, recognises the well-established
principle that tribunals have inherent powers to make decisions regarding the conduct of

proceedings going beyond the specific rules under which they are constituted provided that

 

such dec

 

ons do not contradict those specific rules. It quotes a well known commentator:
“An ICSID tribunal’s power to close gaps in the rules of procedure is declaratory of the
inherent power of any tribunal to resolve procedural questions in the event of lacunae”.
In support of the proposition that under Article 44, or the inherent powers reflected in it,
the Tribunal has power to reconsider the Decision, it cited a number of cases. The

Tribunal will return to them.

 

12. The Respondent also contends that a tribunal that is still in s

 

sion can always revise

an interim one rendered

 

its “interim” and “preliminary” decisio: It sees the Decision

 

far before the closure of proceedings. Under article 44 of the Convention, it says, the

Tribunal remains free to examine evidence up to the time it renders its award.>

13. In relation to ICSID Arbitration Rule 38(2) which enables the tribunal to reopen even
a closed proceeding before an award is rendered on the ground that new evidence is
forthcoming or certain points must be clarified, the Respondent quotes this passage from

the ICSID official commentary:

“Closure of the proceeding is considered to be without prejudice to the
discretionary power of the Tribunal to re-open it on its own initiative or on
motion of either party. However, paragraph (2) emphasises the exceptional
character of re-opening. Since the new evidence, or the need for clarification,
may require both further written and further oral procedures, it is the
‘proceeding’ that may be re-opened.”*

 

‘ First Brief of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela Pursuant to the Tribunal’s request of October 1, 2013, of 28

October 2013 19 (“Respondent’s First Brief”), quoting C. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention, Second Edition (2009), p.
880.
2 Second Brief of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela Pursuant to the Tribunal’s request of October 1, 2013, of
25 November 2013 4{{2,13 and 25 (“Respondent’s Second Brief”).

5 Id. 425, quoting C. Schreuer supra note 1 p. 650.

+ ICSID REGULATIONS AND RULES (ICSID 1975), Commentary to Rule 38(2), Ex. R-320 to Respondent's First
Brief, at footnote 35.

14. The Respondent continues in these terms: “if an ICSID Tribunal has the power to
reopen even a closed proceeding, there can be no question that it has the power to

reconsider an interim decision rendered far before the closing of the proceedings.”°

15. The Claimants submit in respect of Article 44 of the Convention that it “is no licence

for a Tribunal to adopt procedures at variance with the ICSID system”?

and that “gap-
filling cannot be used to overcome an express prohibition in the ICSID Convention and the

ICSID Arbitration Rules.”’ That prohibition is seen as arising from article 53: “the

 

ordinary meaning of this provision favors the finality of decisions on merit
Further, “when the ICSID Convention provides that there are no appeals, it means that
there are no appeals ... [T]he limited review that is permissible is reserved for after the
final award is issued.”” While the Claimants recognised that Article 53 does not explicitly
prohibit Parties from appealing decisions rendered in an intermediate phase, that does not
mean that there is a “gap” in the rules to be filed using Article 44. “There is an outright

prohibition that Venezuela seeks to elide.””"”

16. The Claimants next submit that to grant the Respondent the relief it seeks would treat
the Parties unequally. For instance, had the Respondent prevailed on jurisdiction or the
merits, the Tribunal would have issued an award dismissing the claim and the Claimants

would have had no right of appeal.'!

17. Further, the Claimants submit that the Respondent’s analogy to the power to reopen
under Rule 38(2) is groundless; the stage which that provision refers to has passed: the

ues submitted to it.'?

 

Tribunal has rendered a decision resolving the merits i:

18. By contrast to the Respondent’s characterisation of the decision as interim or
preliminary, the Claimants see it as having res judicata effect and challengeable only

through the post award remedies provided for in Articles 49 to 52 of the Convention.'* It

 

Respondent's First Brief 18; Respondent’s Second Brief 25.

Claimants’ Submission on Respondent's Application for Reconsideration of the Decision on Jurisdiction and the
Merits and Suspension of the Quantum Proceedings of 28 October 2013 (“Claimants’ First Brief”) 9.

7 Claimants’ First Brief (4.

6

  

 

8 Id. {10.
° Id. Jl.
0 Id. 13.
a Id. 414.
e Id. {5.
13

Claimants’ Second Submission on Respondent's Application for Reconsideration of the Decision on Jurisdiction
and the Merits, and Suspension of the Quantum Proceedings {4 (“Claimants’ Second Brief”).

5

points out that the relief the Respondent is seeking is unprecedented in ICSID practice.'*
The ICSID system, they say, “forbids appeal entirely, and restricts even the extraordinary
review mechanisms provided for in the Convention until after a final award is issued.”'> It

provides this background:

That is not the result of accident or oversight. Unlike other systems of
international arbitration, the drafters of the Convention consciously chose to
permit only one instrument called an award and to defer any remedies until
after its issuance.

The Convention’s drafters expressly contemplated, for example, that Tribunals
could issue decisions on jurisdictions prior to the award. They just as
consciously rejected proposals to permit applications for the annulment or
challenge of jurisdictional decisions. Among the reasons for this deliberate
choice was to avoid the “unfortunate” circumstance of “openfing] endless
possibilities of one Party to frustrate or delay the proceedings”. Thus decisions
— be they on jurisdiction or the merits — are meant finally to settle a subset of
issues that are later incorporated in the final award, and may then, and only
then, be subject to review as part of the award.

The drafters of the Convention themselves stressed “[T]he binding character of
any decision by [an arbitral tribunal] on preliminary questions or merits.”'®

Cc. ANALYSIS

19. The Tribunal begins with the elements of the question which it is to answer. The
question relates to the “Decision of 3 September 2013”. It does not relate to an award,
which, in terms of the Convention, is the form of the decision reached at the end of the
whole proceeding; as the second issue put to the Parties in the letter of 1 October 2013
confirms, the proceeding has still to reach that stage. Accordingly, the provisions of
Article 53 of the Convention, within a Section headed Recognition and Enforcement of the
Award, which provides that “[T]he Award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be
subject to any appeal or to any other remedy except for those provided for in the
Convention”, are not directly applicable. There are the further points that what the
Respondent is seeking is not an “appeal” but a “reconsideration” and not by a distinct
appeal body, but by the original tribunal. While those points may also indicate that Article

53 is inapplicable, given the limited meaning of the word “Award” in the Convention, the

my
Is
16

Id. {9 and footnote 6.
Md.

Id. {§10-12, CL-269, History of The ICSID Convention, Volume II-1, at 408 (1968).

6

Tribunal need not address them. But the fact that Article 53 and other provisions in
Section 5 of Part IV of the Convention do not apply in a direct sense does not mean that it

may not be relevant in a more general sense. The Tribunal will return to that matter.

20. As noted, the Respondent characterises the Decision as “interim” or “preliminary”

 

and, accordingly, capable of being reconsidered, perhaps on an informal basis. The only
reason suggested in its submissions is the temporal one: a further stage in the proceedings,
relating to quantum, remains. The Decision does not however take an interim or
preliminary form in respect of the matters on which it rules. To the contrary, the Tribunal:
(i) in paragraph 262 “concludes that it does not have jurisdiction under Article
22 of the Investment Law”; one consequence is that it does not have
jurisdiction over certain tax matters (para. 263);

(ii) in paragraphs 281, 286 and 289 finds that certain objections to jurisdiction
under the BIT fail (see also para. 290);

(iii) in paragraph 332 “concludes” that certain measures do not fall within the
scope of Article 3 of the BIT;

(iv) in paragraph 343 “concludes” that if the taking was unlawful, the date of
valuation is in general the date of the Award;

(v) in paragraph 352 finds that the part of the claim based on “undertakings”
fails;
(vi) in paragraph 359 finds that the single taking contention fails;

(vii) in paragraph 401 concludes that the Respondent breached its obligation to
negotiate in good faith on the basis of market value.

Under the heading The Tribunal’s Decision, paragraph 404 begins with these words.

“For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal decides as follows:. . .”

The paragraph then lists seven matters, including those listed above.

21. Those decisions in accordance with practice are to be incorporated in the Award. It
is established as a matter of principle and practice that such decisions that resolve points in

dispute between the Parties have res judicata effect. “They are intended to be final and not

 

to be revisited by the Parties or the Tribunal in any later phase of their arbitration

proceedings.”!”

22. Do the provisions of the Convention and Rules to which the Respondent referred
make any difference to that position? The Tribunal does not think so, for two reasons.
The first is that those provisions are about procedural matters. Article 44 of the ICSID
Convention makes explicit the tribunal’s powers to address procedural issues not dealt with
in the Convention or the Rules. And ICSID Arbitration Rule 38(2) has a much more
limited function. Their essentially procedural character appears from the cases on which
the Respondent relied. Those concerning Article 44 were about stay, allowing amicus
curiae submissions and participation of counsel.'* Article 44, it is frequently said, is
designed to enable gaps in the procedure to be filled. It cannot be seen as conferring a

broad unexpressed power of substantive decision.

23. That gap filling character of the provision relates to the second reason for the
Tribunal’s conclusion that those procedural provisions cannot be the source of a power to
reconsider. The overall structure and the detailed provisions of the ICSID Convention
were plainly designed to provide for review or actions in respect of decisions of a tribunal
only once the Award was rendered. There is no gap to be filled by the power proposed
here. Section 3 of Part IV of the ICSID Convention sets out the Powers and Functions of
the Tribunal, with nothing among its provisions even hinting at such a power. Section 4
deals succinctly with the Award itself. And it is only in Section 5 that powers are
conferred on the Tribunal to interpret and revise the Award and on an ad hoc Committee to
annul an Award on prescribed grounds. It is in those ways and those alone that decisions
such as that in September 2013 can be questioned, changed or set aside. Those various
post-award remedies are, of course, available to both Parties. Those provisions and that
structure exclude the possibility of the proposed powers of reconsideration being read into
the Convention. That reading of the Convention is also supported by the drafting history

mentioned above (paragraph 18).

"" Electrabel S.A. v. Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB 07/19), Decision on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law and Liability

of 30 November 2012 10.1.

s Respondent's First Brief, footnotes 42 and 43.

D. DECISION

24. For the foregoing reasons, the majority of the Tribunal concludes that it does not

have the power to reconsider the Decision of 3 September 2013, with Professor Georges

Abi-Saab dissenting.

25. The following schedule for quantum briefs is fixed:

The Claimants shall file a Memorial on Quantum (including all supporting
evidence and legal authorities) within ten (10) weeks from the date of the

present Decision;

Respondent shall file a Counter-Memorial on Quantum within ten (10)
weeks from their receipt of Claimants’ full Memorial on Quantum

(including all supporting evidence and legal authorities);

Claimants shall file a Reply on Quantum within four (4) weeks from their
receipt of Respondent’s full Counter- Memorial on Quantum (including all

supporting evidence and legal authorities); and

Respondent shall file a Rejoinder on Quantum within four (4) weeks from
their receipt of Claimants’ full Reply on Quantum (including all supporting

evidence and legal authorities).

The Tribunal will fix a date for a hearing on quantum, in consultation with

the parties, in due course.

26. Costs are reserved for future determination.

[signed]

For the Majority of the Tribunal

Kenneth Keith

President of the Tribunal

