INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE ARBITRATION PROCEEDING BETWEEN

CONOCOPHILLIPS PETROZUATA B.V.

CONOCOPHILLIPS HAMACA B.

CONOCOPHILLIPS GULF OF PARIA B.V.
CLAIMANTS

 

 

and

BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA
RESPONDENT

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

 

DECISION ON RESPONDENT’S REQUEST FOR

RECONSIDERATION OF THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION OF 10 MARCH 2014

 

Members of the Tribunal
Judge Kenneth J. Keith

Professor Andreas Bucher
Mr. L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC

SECRETARY OF THE TRIBUNAL
Mr. Gonzalo Flores

Date: 9 February 2016

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

THE PARTIES’ REPRESENTATIVES

Representing the Claimants:

Mr. Brian King
Mr. Elliot Friedman
Ms. Lauren Friedman
Mr. Sam Prevatt
Mr. Lee Rovinescu
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer US LLP
601 Lexington Avenue, 31st Floor
New York, NY 10022
United States of America
and
Mr. Jan Paulsson
Mr. Gaétan Verhoosel
Mr. Luke Sobota
Three Crowns LLP
1 King Street
London EC2V 8AU
United Kingdom

Representing the Respondent:

Dr. Reinaldo Enrique Mujfioz Pedroza
Viceprocurador General de la Reptiblica
Mr. Felipe Daruiz
Procuraduria General de la Reptiblica
Paseo Los Ilustres c/e Av. Lazo Marti
Ed. Sede Procuraduria General de la
Reptiblica, Piso 8
Urb. Santa Ménica
Caracas 1040
Venezuela
and
Mr. George Kahale, III
Mr. Benard V. Preziosi, Jr.
Ms. Miriam K. Harwood
Mr. Fuad Zarbiyev
Ms. Arianna Sanchez
Ms. Lilliana Dealbert
Mr. Simon Batifort
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP
101 Park Avenue
New York, NY 10178
United States of America
and
Ms. Gabriela Alvarez-Avila
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle, S.C.
Rubén Dario 281, Pisos 8 & 9
Col. Bosque de Chapultepec
11580 Mexico, D.F.
Mexico
and
Mr. Fernando A. Tupa
Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle, S.C.
25 de Mayo 555 p. 1
Edificio Chacofi
C1002ABK Buenos Aires
Argentina

POO we

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
THE DECISION OF 10 MARCH 2014
THE NEW APPLICATION FOR RECONSIDERATION .......ccccsssssssssssesesssssensseeneenene 3
ANALYSIS 6
DECISION 15

 

iii

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

A. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

1. On 2 November 2007, Claimants submitted to the International Centre for
Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) a Request for Arbitration
against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (“Venezuela” or “the Respondent”)
pursuant to Article 36 of the ICSID Convention. On 13 December 2007, the Secretary-
General of ICSID registered the Request for Arbitration in accordance with Article 36(3)

of the ICSID Convention.

2. The Tribunal was constituted on 23 July 2008. Its members were Judge Kenneth
Keith, President, appointed by the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council pursuant
to Article 38 of the ICSID Convention; Mr L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC, appointed by the
Claimants; and Sir Ian Brownlie, CBE, QC, appointed by the Respondent. On | February
2010, the Tribunal was reconstituted, with Professor Georges Abi-Saab being appointed

by Respondent, following Sir Ian Brownlie’s passing.

3. On 3 September 2013, the Tribunal issued a Decision on Jurisdiction and the

Merits, concluding as follows:

(...) For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal decides as follows:

a. It does not have jurisdiction under Article 22 of the Investment Law and
accordingly the claims by ConocoPhillips Company are dismissed; and

b. It has jurisdiction under Article 9 of the Bilateral Investment Treaty over:

i. the claims brought by ConocoPhillips Petrozuata BV, ConocoPhilips
Hamaca BV and ConocoPhillips Gulf of Paria BV in respect of (1) the
increase in the income tax rate which came into effect on 1 January 2007
and (2) the expropriation or migration; and

ii. the claims brought by ConocoPhillips Petrozuata BV and
ConocoPhillips Gulf of Paria BV in respect of the increase in the
extraction tax in effect from 24 May 2006.

c. All claims based on a breach of Article 3 of the BIT are rejected.
d. The Respondent breached its obligation to negotiate in good faith for

compensation for its taking of the ConocoPhillips assets in the three projects
on the basis of market value as required by Article 6(c) of the BIT.

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

e. The date of valuation of the ConocoPhillips assets is the date of the Award.
f. All other claims based on a breach of Article 6(c) of the BIT are rejected.

g. All other questions, including those concerning the costs and expenses of
the Tribunal and the costs of the parties’ determination are reserved for
future determination.

Items (a), (b)(i), (b)(ii), (c), (f) and (g) above have been decided unanimously by
the Tribunal. Items (d) and (e) have been decided by majority, with Arbitrator
Georges Abi-Saab, dissenting.!

4. On 8 September 2013, counsel for Respondent submitted a letter requesting a
clarification and further explanations from the Tribunal regarding certain findings in the
Decision on Jurisdiction and the Merits (“the September 8 letter”). In its letter, counsel
for Respondent also requested “a limited and focused hearing” to address the specific issues

raised.

5. Counsel for the Claimants replied to the September 8 letter on 10 September 2013.
Claimants opposed Respondent’s requests and proposed instead a briefing schedule for

submissions on quantum.

6. On 11 September 2013, Respondent submitted further comments, to which
Claimants replied on 12 September 2013. Additional comments were received from

Respondent on 12, 16 and 23 September 2013 and from Claimants on 23 September 2013.

7. By letter of 1 October 2013, the Tribunal fixed a schedule for the parties to file
submissions on: (i) the Tribunal’s power to reconsider the Decision on Jurisdiction and the
Merits of 3 September 2013; and (ii) a possible scheduling for quantum briefs. The parties

duly submitted two rounds of written pleadings.
B. THE DECISION OF 10 MARCH 2014

8. The Tribunal stated in its Decision of 10 March 2014 that so far as the matter set

out in paragraph 7 is concerned “this decision is limited to answering the question whether

' Decision on Jurisdiction and the Merits, 3 September 2013, para. 404.

2

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

the Tribunal has the power which the Respondent would have it exercise. The decision
does not address the grounds the Respondent invokes for reconsidering the part of the
Decision which it challenges and the evidence which it sees as supporting those grounds.

The power must be shown to exist before it can be exercised”.”

9. It then set out the arguments of the parties based on the provisions of the ICSID
Convention and the ICSID Arbitration rules as well as commentaries, matters of principle

and decisions of various international courts and tribunals.

10. Having considered those arguments, the Tribunal concluded that it did not have the
power to reconsider the Decision on Jurisdiction and the Merits, with Professor Georges
Abi-Saab dissenting. It was implicit in the Tribunal’s Decision that the Respondent’s

Request was dismissed.
Cc. THE NEW APPLICATION FOR RECONSIDERATION

11. Professor Georges Abi-Saab resigned on 20 February 2015 with immediate effect.
On 10 August 2015 the Tribunal was reconstituted, with Professor Andreas Bucher being

appointed by the Chairman of the Administrative Council.

12. On that same day, 10 August 2015, the Respondent submitted an “Application for
Reconsideration of the Tribunal’s Decision of March 10, 2014 (the Majority

Reconsideration Decision), which denied Respondent’s Request for Reconsideration of the

Tribunal’s [September 3, 2013 Jurisdiction and Merits Decision]”.* The Respondent

recalled that it had, immediately following that Majority Merits Decision, applied for

reconsideration, pointing out

certain obvious factual, legal and logical errors the correction of any one of which
would require a change in the majority’s conclusions on the issue of good faith
negotiations. Of particular relevance to this Application, Respondent pointed out
that cables from the U.S. Embassy released after the hearing in this case in 2010,
which reported on the briefings made by the chief ConocoPhillips negotiators to

2 Decision of 10 March 2014 on Respondent’s First Request for Reconsideration (“Decision of 10 March
2014”), para. 9.

Respondents’ Application for Reconsideration of the Tribunal’s Decision of March 10, 2014
(“Respondent’s Second Application for Reconsideration”), pp 1-2.

3

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

the U.S. Embassy in Caracas, left no doubt that the representations made by
ConocoPhillips to the Tribunal regarding Respondent’s supposed unwillingness to
negotiate fair market value had been completely false, and that it was in fact
ConocoPhillips which was seeking compensation ‘on top of the fair market value
of the assets.’ Since the majority had relied on Claimants’ misrepresentations in
reaching its conclusion on bad faith negotiation, Respondent assumed that the
Tribunal would want to reconsider the Majority Merits Decision to avoid an
obvious gross miscarriage of justice. That assumption was based on the premise
that every tribunal has the power to correct its own decision while the case is still
pending before it and should exercise that power if its decision were indeed based
on patently false representations. (footnote omitted)*

13. The Respondent sets out the conclusion of the Tribunal and quotes four paragraphs
from Professor Abi-Saab’s dissent.> It concludes the substance of its submission as

follows:

In making this Application, Respondent stresses that the issue for decision at this
stage is a narrow one. It is not necessary for this Tribunal now to revisit the merits
of the Majority Merits Decision. What is necessary is for this Tribunal to determine
whether, assuming that Claimants did make material misrepresentations to the
Tribunal as to Respondent’s willingness to negotiate fair market value, the Tribunal
did, and still does, have the power to reconsider the Majority Merits Decision. A
negative answer to this question would mean that there are no circumstances under
which a tribunal can reconsider its own decision in a case still pending before it,
irrespective of material misrepresentations made to it and, indeed, presumably
irrespective of any other egregious conduct. That is a principle that cannot be
sustained under any legal system.°

It requested a hearing on the application.
14. On 12 August 2015, the Claimants responded in these terms:

The application is frivolous and dilatory. Venezuela has not even attempted to
articulate a legal basis for the admissibility of a request to reconsider a
reconsideration decision — because there is none. The Tribunal’s 10 March
Decision considered and rejected the same arguments that Venezuela now raises.

+ Respondent’s Second Application for Reconsideration, pp. 2-3.

5 See Prof. Abi-Saab’s Dissenting Opinion to the Decision on the Respondent’s Request for Reconsideration,
paras 64-67.

© Respondent’s Second Application for Reconsideration, p. 6.

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

It has res judicata effect and may not be revisited or reviewed in any way prior to
the rendering of the final Award.”

The Claimants requested that the Tribunal dismiss the Respondent’s application forthwith

and promptly reschedule the final hearing.

1S.

Later that same day, the Respondent commented by recalling its earlier letter:

...no system of justice can tolerate a rule that a tribunal cannot correct its own
decision, no matter how egregious the circumstances, in a case still pending before
it. Surely one cannot argue that an interim decision proven to be based upon
corruption, intimidation or coercion cannot be reconsidered. The same is true for a
decision shown to be based upon material misrepresentations.’

  

In support of its contention that res judicata did not apply here — there is no final award

and the same proceeding continues — it quoted from the Sabotage Cases:

16.

 

The petition, in short, avers the Commission has been misled by fraud and collusion
on the part of witnesses and suppression of evidence on the part of some of them.
The Commission is not functus officio. It still sits as a court. To it in that capacity
are brought charges that it has been defrauded and misled by perjury, collusion, and
suppression. No tribunal worthy of its name or of any respect may allow its
decision to stand if such allegations are well-founded. Every tribunal has inherent
power to reopen and to revise a decision induced by fraud. If it may correct its own
errors and mistakes, a fortiori it may, while it still has jurisdiction of a cause, correct
errors into which it has been led by fraud and collusion.’

 

On 13 August 2015 the Claimants stated that their letter of the previous day

provided a complete answer to the Respondent’s points in its later letter. They “consider

that further debate is neither necessary nor appropriate

17.

> 10

On 15 August 2015, the parties were advised that the Tribunal “is currently

considering Respondent’s application, including its request for a hearing, and will revert

7 Claimants’ letter of 12 August 2015, p. 1.

* Respondent’s letter of 12 August 2015, para. 1.
° VII United Nations Reports of International Arbitral Awards 160 (2006), pp. 189-190.

‘0 Claimants’ letter of 13 August 2015, p. 1.

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

to the parties in due course. The Tribunal considers that no further submissions are needed

at this point.”!!

18. On 9 November 2015, the Respondent submitted a proposal to disqualify L. Yves
Fortier QC as arbitrator. In terms of Rule 9(6) of the Arbitration Rules, the proceeding was
suspended until 15 December 2015 when the proposal was dismissed. The Tribunal then
gave the Respondent the opportunity to comment on a letter of 8 December 2015 submitted
by the Senior Vice President Legal, General Counsel and Corporate Secretary of
ConocoPhillips which the Respondent did on 8 January 2015. The Tribunal also gave the
parties the opportunity to comment by 22 January 2016 on an article discussing the March
2014 Decision brought to its attention by Counsel for the Respondent.!?_ Each party

provided that comment.

19. In the light of that additional material, subsequent decisions and the earlier
arguments submitted to it, the Tribunal has given further consideration to the powers it may

possess in respect of the application now before it.
D. ANALYSIS

20. The Tribunal begins by noting that the parties in their exchanges in August did not
elaborate to any great extent on the arguments they had made in relation to the earlier
application for reconsideration. It accordingly returns to those arguments as well as to the

material and arguments made and becoming available subsequently.

21. The Tribunal undertakes this inquiry without prejudice to the contention, raised by
the Claimants, that the Decision of 10 March 2014 is itself res judicata and cannot be re-

examined.

22. The Respondent in 2013 in support of its submission that the Tribunal had power

to reconsider the 2013 Decision on Jurisdiction and the Merits invoked Articles 43 and 44

'! ICSID’s letter of 15 August 2015, p. 2.

'2.Charles N. Brower and Paula F.Henin, “Chapter 5: Res judicata” in Meg N. Kinnear , Geraldine R. Fischer,
etal. (eds), Building International Investment Law: The First 50 Years of ICSID, (Kluwer Law International;
Kluwer Law International 2015) (the “Article on Res Judicata”) pp. 55 - 69.

6

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

of the Convention, together with the inherent power of the Tribunal to make decisions
regarding the conduct of proceedings going beyond the specific rules under which it is
constituted, and Rule 38(2) of the Arbitration Rules. It also referred to commentaries,
matters of principle and decisions of various international courts and tribunals. It placed

major emphasis on Article 44 and particularly on its second sentence:

Article 44

Any arbitration proceeding shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
this Section and, except as the parties otherwise agree, in accordance with the
Arbitration Rules in effect on the date on which the parties consented to arbitration.
If any question of procedure arises which is not covered by this Section or the
Arbitration Rules or any rules agreed by the parties, the Tribunal shall decide the
question.

23. The power to which the second sentence refers is a power to decide on a question
of procedure not covered by the Convention, the Arbitration Rules or any rules agreed by
the parties. According to a leading commentator on the ICSID Convention, the power is
declaratory of the inherent power of any tribunal to resolve procedural questions in the
event of lacunae.'? The commentary continues in these terms: “In exercising this power,
the Tribunal may not go beyond the framework of the Convention, the Arbitration Rules
and the parties’ procedural agreements but must primarily attempt to close any apparent
gaps through the established methods of interpretation ...”.!* The procedural character of
the power appears not only in the very terms of Article 44 but also in the use that has been
made of that power; that commentary instances decisions about time limits, production of
documents, suspension when other arbitral processes are pending, publicity to be given to
proceedings and the grant of amicus curiae status.'> These are matters related to “the
conduct of the proceedings”, to use the wording of Rule 19 of the Arbitration Rules. Does
the power stated in Article 44 contain within it a power to reconsider rulings, in effect by
a rehearing, which it has made on jurisdiction and on aspects of the merits? Does such a

power concern “a question of procedure” or “the conduct of the proceedings”? It appears

'3.©, Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, Second Edition (2009), p. 688.
4 Ibid.
'S Tid, pp. 689-707.

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

to the Tribunal to be a very different power. It is a power of a substantive kind. The
ordinary meaning of Article 44 read by itself does not appear to the Tribunal to include the

power which the Respondent seeks.

24. The Tribunal also recalls that throughout the preparation of the text of the
Convention those responsible for the drafting emphasized that the Arbitration Rules to be
made by the Administrative Council under Article 6(1)(c) of the Convention and referred
to in Article 44 would not deal with matters of substance.'° They would not in general be
concerned with matters of great importance.'’ That conforms with the role and character
of rules of procedure adopted by bodies other than the court or tribunal and to be applied
by them. That being so, it would be remarkable were the residual power of the tribunal in
respect of matters of procedure or the conduct of the proceeding — a power at the fourth
level, below the Convention, the Arbitration Rules and rules agreed by the parties — to

include the power which the Respondent invokes here.

25. The provision is of course to be read in context and by reference to purpose as many
court and tribunal decisions, often referring to Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention
on the Law of Treaties, have long made clear. That process of interpretation may be related
in this case to “the framework” provided by the Convention to recall the words of a leading
commentator'® or in the words of another ICSID tribunal rejecting a motion for
reconsideration, “the clear structure of the Convention and the Arbitration Rules”!? The
Tribunal recalls that the International Court of Justice in an early ruling interpreting a
treaty, in that case the Charter of the United Nations, considered that “ the structure of the
Charter” fully confirmed the conclusions to which the Court was led by the text of the

provision before it.”

'6 History of the ICSID Convention, vol Il, pp. 111, 214, 249, 331, 357 and 571-2.
" Ibid, p. 79.
'8 See para 23 above.

"© Perenco Ecuador Ltd. v. The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador
(Petroecuador), ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6, Decision on Ecuador’s Reconsideration Motion, 10 April 2015
(the “Perenco Ecuador Decision”), para 80.

 

 

  

2 Competence of the General Assembly regarding admission to the United Nations, 1950 ICJ Reps 4, 8-9.

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

26. The Convention contains a carefully constructed set of provisions for the
interpretation, revision and annulment of the Award — Articles 50-52, constituting Section
5 of Chapter IV — Arbitration. Those provisions are followed by Article 53, the first

provision of Section 6, headed Recognition and Enforcement of the Award:

Article 53

(1) The award shall be binding on the parties and shall not be subject to any appeal
or to any other remedy except those provided for in this Convention. Each party
shall abide by and comply with the terms of the award except to the extent that
enforcement shall have been stayed pursuant to the relevant provisions of this
Convention.

(2) For the purposes of this Section, “award” shall include any decision
interpreting, revising or annulling such award pursuant to Article 50, 51 or 52.

It is convenient to mention at this stage Article 48(3) of the Convention:
Article 48

(3) The award shall deal with every question submitted to the Tribunal, and shall
state the reasons upon which it is based.

In the 2014 Decision, the Tribunal said that the decisions included in the 2013 Decision in
accordance with practice are to be incorporated in the Award.”! This is required, as Article
48(3) recognizes, since the Award given at the end of the process must deal with every
question submitted to the Tribunal. The required reasons are also to be incorporated, at
least by reference.” The Tribunal notes that in the process of the drafting of what became
Article 48(3) the text was amended to emphasise that the tribunal in its award was to deal

with every issue presented.”

27. In addition to the provisions regulating interpretation, revision and annulment is
article 49(2) which enables a party within 45 days to request the Tribunal to decide any

question which it omitted to decide and to rectify any clerical, arithmetical or similar error

2! Decision of 10 March 2014, para. 21.

% See also Schreuer, op. cit, pp. 538 and 829-30 — to the extent that preliminary decisions are decisive for
the outcome they must be reflected in the award.

3 History of the ICSID Convention, vol I, pp 610, 632-633 and 849.

9

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

in the award. The Tribunal notes the limits of all those powers — to correct error, to
interpret, to revise by reference to new facts, to annul on limited grounds. This last power,
in contrast to the other three, is not to be exercised by the tribunal itself but by a separately
constituted ad hoc committee of three persons. Those specifically prescribed powers are
reflected in the final phrase of the first sentence of Article 53(1): the award, which, as the
Tribunal has just said, is to incorporate the earlier decisions, is binding and not subject to
appeal or any other remedy except those provided for in this Convention. Nowhere is there
any suggestion that the Tribunal might be able, before completing the award which may
then be subject to that range of processes explicitly provided for in careful detail, to re-

examine parts of its decision in effect by way of a rehearing or an appeal.

28. It is convenient to consider at this point the arguments based on the inherent powers
or jurisdiction of the Tribunal. As indicated, Article 44 may be seen as reflecting those
powers, while making them express. The Tribunal has already noted practical instances of
the exercise of such powers which fall within the scope of Article 44 in any event.* They
are of a quite different order from the broad power of substantive reconsideration which
the Respondent invokes in this case. It is true that in three cases the International Court of
Justice has spoken in general terms about its duty to safeguard its judicial function and to
maintain its judicial character.?> Those cases, however, are not directly on point since they
were decided on the basis that there was no live dispute in issue before the Court which
accordingly had nothing before it to decide in terms of its function of deciding disputes; in
one case circumstances had arisen which rendered any adjudication devoid of purpose”

and in the other two the disputes between the parties no longer existed.2’ Further, the

> See para. 23 above.

°8 Case concerning the Northern Cameroons (Cameroon v United Kingdom) Preliminary Objections,
Judgment of 2 December 1963; 1CJ Reports 1963, pp. 15, 29, 31, 38; Nuclear Tests (Australia v France),
Judgment, 1974 ICI Reports, pp. 253, 259 and Nuclear Tests (New Zealand v France) Judgment, 1974 ICJ
Reports, pp. 457, 463.

26 1963 ICJ Reports, pp. 33-34
27 1974 ICJ Reports, pp. 270-272 and 475-477.

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

judgments of the Court were final and binding and, in the circumstances of each case, the

post judgment processes of interpretation and revision appear not to have been available.

29. The agreement and rules establishing and regulating the work of the Commission
and its Umpire who decided the Sabotage cases (which, it will be recalled, the Respondent
again cited in its present application)* contain nothing comparable to Articles 49-52 of the
ICSID Convention.”? Moreover, as the Umpire recorded, the Commission had in its
practice repeatedly reopened and corrected decisions to accord with the facts and the

applicable legal rules.*°

30. The Tribunal returns to the context of the Convention or its framework or structure.
Even if in principle the inherent powers or jurisdiction of this tribunal were capable of
extending to a power such as that invoked here, in the words of a decision of another ICSID
tribunal cited earlier, “the clear structure of the Convention and the Arbitration Rules
cannot be overridden by a general appeal to inherent powers”.*!

31. In its 2014 Decision, the Tribunal in support of its proposition that the 2013
Decision had the character of res judicata quoted from an earlier decision. It now takes
the opportunity to quote the relevant passage accurately and in full; in the Electrabel S.A.
v Republic of Hungary Decision on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law and Liability, the tribunal

noted:

This Decision is made in regard only to the first phase of these arbitration
proceedings, relating to extant issues of jurisdiction and liability; and it is not made
in regard to any issue of quantum (including interest). Although necessarily
described as a ‘Decision’ and not an ‘Award’ under the ICSID Convention and
ICSID Arbitration Rules, the several decisions and reasons contained in this

28 See para 15 above.

2° VII United Nations Reports of International Arbitral Awards, p. 13 and VIII United Nations Reports of
International Arbitral Awards, pp. 469-477.

8 VII United Nations Reports of International Arbitral Awards, p. 188.

| Perenco Ecuador Decision, para 80.

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

Decision are intended by the Tribunal to be final and not to be revised by the Parties
or the Tribunal in any later phase of these arbitration proceedings.**
To the same or similar effect are two other ICSID cases cited by the Perenco Ecuador
tribunal along with the relevant passage of the Tribunal’s 2014 Decision in support of its

proposition that

There is ample prior authority in support of the view [that] once the tribunal decides
with finality any of the factual or legal questions put to it by the parties, as was the
case in the Decision on Remaining Issues of Jurisdiction and Liability, such a
decision becomes res judicata [citing CMS Gas Transmission v Argentine Republic
ICSID ARB 01/8, May 12 2005, para 126 and Waste Management Inc v United
Mexican States (Waste Management II) ICSID Case No. ARB (AF)/00/3, para
45.]

32. It is convenient to mention at this stage the recent award in Quiborax SA and Non
Metallic Minerals SA v Plurinational State of Bolivia. The tribunal in that case had made
a Decision on jurisdiction in 2012, a Decision which, it said, “forms an integral part of this
Award”.*> At the merits stage the Respondent raised a new objection to jurisdiction. The

tribunal said that

Only the allegation of an illegality that was unknown to [the Respondent] during
the jurisdictional phase may justify reopening the matter at the merit stage
(emphasis added).*°

33. The tribunal then stated that the Respondent had all the necessary elements at the
jurisdictional phase to advance the arguments in issue but had not done so. “As such, the
objection could be rejected outright.”?’ But due to the gravity of the accusation the tribunal

considered it and the related evidence and found that it was inconclusive. Accordingly it

® Electrabel S.A. v. Republic of Hungary, 1CSID Case No. ARB/07/19, Decision on Jurisdiction, Applicable
Law and Liability, 30 November 2012, para 10.1. See also Award, 25 November 2015, para 2.

3 Perenco Ecuador Decision, para. 43.

* Quiborax SA and Non Metallic Minerals SA v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/06/2,
Award, 16 September 2015.

38 Ibid, para. 51.
% Ibid, para. 130.
57 Tid, para. 132.

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

dismissed that argument.** That ruling does not in any way question the binding character
of the earlier rulings or their res judicata effect. Later in its award the tribunal turns to
other objections to jurisdiction, objections which the Respondent had not made at the

jurisdictional phase. The tribunal dealt with these objections in this way:

The jurisdictional phase concluded with the Decision on Jurisdiction, in which the
Tribunal established that it had jurisdiction over the claims of Quiborax and NMM.
The Tribunal finds that there is no reason that can justify reopening the
jurisdictional issues at this stage, assuming this were at all possible. It therefore
denies the Respondent’s new jurisdictional objections (emphasis added).*?

Again, the tribunal gives no support at all to the proposition that there may be limits to the

binding force of earlier jurisdictional decisions or their res judicata effect.

34. In its comment of 22 January 2016 and in support of its argument that res judicata
does not override “the search for truth and substantive justice”, the Respondent quotes a
“key passage” from the Article to which it had referred the Tribunal.*° That passage begins

as follows:

[W]hen tribunals have attributed res judicata effect to a decision they previously
issued in the same proceedings, they have also considered themselves to possess
what Professor Abi-Saab calls a “specific power” to revisit such decision under
certain limited and exigent circumstances, such as where new material evidence
emerges calling into question the correctness of their prior findings. As such, it
may not be right to suggest, as the majority in ConocoPhillips v Venezuela did, that
the question of a tribunal’s power to revisit its own findings can be considered in
isolation from the context of that very request (...)*!

38 Tbid, paras 132-134.
8 Ibid, paras 538-541.
“0 See para. 18 above.

41 Article on Res Judicata, pp. 68-69.

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

The Tribunal notes however that the cases to which the authors refer*? do not support that
proposition; in each case, even if the tribunals did consider the asserted grounds, they do

not identify any power to reconsider the issues and all applications failed.

35. The Perenco Ecuador tribunal, this Tribunal notes, said that it had little difficulty
in expressing its general agreement with the approach taken by the majority in the 2014
Decision.** It is true that it did consider the grounds that had been invoked in support of
the application for reconsideration in its case but as it made clear at the end of its decision
rejecting the application it concluded that it had no power to engage in the exercise
requested of it, namely to issue a decision amending its decision on remaining issues of
jurisdiction and liability. Its examination of the grounds was “purely for illustrative
purposes and without prejudice to its decision that it does not have the power to reopen and
reconsider its findings in the manner for which Ecuador has contended”.*+

36. The Respondent in support of its earlier application also claimed that the “interim”
or “preliminary” character of the 2013 Decision enabled reconsideration. It has not
elaborated on that contention and accordingly the Tribunal does no more than recall its
earlier rejection of that argument.** The Tribunal also does not see the essentially
procedural character of Article 43 of the Convention and Rule 38(2) of the Arbitration
Rules as supporting the existence of the power of substantive decisions which the
Respondent invokes. Moreover, those provisions would not have been applicable in their
own terms; the Tribunal has no reason to exercise the power to call evidence provided in
Article 43(a), and in terms of Rule 38(2), the proceedings had not been declared closed.

On the role of Rule 38(2) the Tribunal also expresses its general agreement with what the

* See Article on Res Judicata, pp. 68-69, fins 73 and 76. The Article cites Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine, ICSID
Case No. ARB/02/18, Award, 26 July 2007, paras 5 and 98; CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine
Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/O1/8, Award, 12 May 2005, para. 126; Jan de Nul N.V. and Dredging
International N.V. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, CSID Case No. ARB/04/13, Award, 6 November 2008, paras.
121-130; and Saipem S.p.A. v. People’s Republic of Bangladesh, 1CSID Case No. ARB/05/7, Award, 30 June
2009, para. 94.

  

8 Perenco Ecuador Decision, para. 81.
+4 Perenco Ecuador Decision, para. 97.

+5 See Decision of 10 March 2014, para. 20.

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

Perenco Ecuador tribunal says about that provision.*© The Tribunal notes that the

Respondent did not seek support for its power of reconsideration from Rule 19.

37. The Tribunal has approached this matter, as have the parties, in terms of seeking
the existence and source of the power the Respondent would have it exercise.*” It is not a
matter of finding a rule prohibiting the existence or exercise of such a power. That power

has to be found to exist.

E. DECISION

38. Accordingly, the Tribunal, by a majority, dismisses the application made by the
Respondent for the reconsideration of its Decision on Respondent’s Request for

Reconsideration of 10 March 2014, with Professor Andreas Bucher dissenting.

 

[Signed]
Mr L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC Professor Andreas Bucher
Arbitrator Arbitrator

[Signed]

Judge Kenneth J. Keith
President

* Perenco Ecuador Decision, paras 67-73.

47 See para. 7 above.

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

Note by Arbitrator Kenneth Keith and Arbitrator Yves Fortier

1. We add this note as a comment on Part III of the dissenting opinion of Arbitrator

Andreas Bucher.

2. The Respondent’s Application which is to be decided by the Tribunal is “for
Reconsideration of the Tribunal’s Decision of March 10, 2014 (the Majority
Reconsideration Decision...)”. The Respondent stressed that “the issue for decision at this
stage is a narrow one. It is not necessary for this Tribunal now to revisit the merits of the
Majority Merits Decision” (see para 13 above for the remainder of that passage). Given
the limited scope of the Application before the Tribunal we cannot see that the passage of

Arbitrator Bucher’s dissent headed “The Tribunal’s Decision” is relevant.

3. We also need to make it clear that we do not interpret the 2013 Decision in the way
Arbitrator Bucher does. Nor indeed do the Parties, as he indeed recognises (paras 17-19
of his opinion). The Tribunal ruled that the Respondent had acted unlawfully by reference
to Article 6(c) of the BIT. That requires that the measures be taken against just

compensation. The Tribunal said this about that provision:

The requirements [in Article 6(c)] for prompt payment and for interest recognise,
in accordance with the general understanding of such standard provisions, that
payment is not required at the precise moment of expropriation. But it is also
commonly accepted that the Parties must engage in good faith negotiations to fix
the compensation in terms of the standard set, in this case, in the BIT, if a payment
satisfactory to the investor is not proposed at the outset. (para 362)

Having reviewed the evidence and the Parties’ submissions, the Tribunal concluded that
the Respondent had breached its obligation to negotiate in good faith for compensation for
its taking of the assets on the basis of market value as required by the BIT (para 401). It

included that conclusion in its Decision (para 404(d)).

With respect, Arbitrator Bucher errs when he writes in paragraph 11 of his dissenting

opinion that the Claimants made no claim in their Request for Relief for a declaration that

16

ICSID Case No. ARB/07/30

Respondent breached its obligation to negotiate in good faith for compensation based on
market value. In their Request for Relief, the Claimants asked the Tribunal for a
declaration “that Venezuela has breached ... Article 6 of the Treaty by unlawfully
[emphasis added] expropriating ...” their investments in Venezuela. This is precisely what

the majority found in paragraph 404(d) of the Decision.

 

[Signed] [Signed]
Mr L. Yves Fortier, CC, QC Judge Kenneth J. Keith
Arbitrator President

