Continental Casualty Company
(Claimant)

Vv.
The Argentine Republic
(Respondent)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9)
(Annulment Proceeding)

 

Decision on the Application for Partial Annulment of Continental Casualty
Company and the Application for Partial Annulment of the Argentine Republic

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C., President
Mr. Christer Séderlund, Arbitrator
Judge Bola A. Ajibola, Arbitrator
Assistant to the ad hoc Committee: Dr. Christopher Staker

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee:
Ms. Anneliese Fleckenstein

Representing Continental Casualty Representing the Argentine Republic:
Company:

Dra. Angelina Maria Esther Abbona
Mr. Barry Appleton Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacién
Appleton & Associates Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién
International Lawyers Posadas 1641
77 Bloor Street West, Suite 1800 CP 1112 Buenos Aires
Toronto, Ontario M5S 1M2 Argentina
Canada

Date of dispatch to the parties: September 16, 2011

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

TABLE OF ABBREVIATED REFERENCES ...........c.cccececscsesesceceseseeteeeeeteneaeaesneneaeees 3
iF INTRODUCTORY MATTERS 7
A. Introduction 7
B. The dispute 13
C. The grounds for annulMent ..........ccsccesesesssesseerseeesseecessnsseesseeenneneeseeee 24

 

(a) Introduction
(b) The role of an ad hoc annulment committee.
(c) Manifest excess of powers (Article 52(1)(b)) ... ”
(d) Serious departure from fundamental rule of procedure (Article 52(1)(d))
30
(e) Failure to state reasons (Article 52(1)(e)) ..
CONTINENTAL’S APPLICATION FOR ANNULMENT.
A. Failure to decide Continental’s claim for loss after the state of
t ity was over 34
(a) Introduction
(b) Arguments of the parties
(c) The Committee’s views.
B. Failure to determine Continental’s expropriation claim in relation to the
LETEs 54
(a) Introduction 54
(b) Arguments of the parties 56
(c) The Committee’s views. 61
C. Alleged breach of Article V of the BIT
(a) Introduction
(b) Arguments of the parties
(c) The Committee’s views..

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

ARGENTINA’S APPLICATION FOR PARTIAL ANNULMENT . 91
A. Background 91
B. Arguments of the partie: 91
C. The Committee’s ViOWS .......cccsesssseesssneesssssssssssensneesseneseseseseeanenaranaes 100
COSTS. 111
DECISION 114

TABLE OF ABBREVIATED REFERENCES

Case law

Azurix Annulment Decision Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No

CDC Annulment Decision

CMS Annulment Decision

CMS Award

Duke Annulment Decision

Enron Annulment Decision

Fraport Annulment
Decision

Helnan Annulment
Decision

Kléckner Annulment
Decision

LG&E Award

ARB/01/12 (Annulment Proceeding), Decision on the
Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic,
September 1, 2009

CDC Group pic v. Republic of Seychelles, |CSID Case
No. ARB/02/14, Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine
Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Decision on
Annulment, September 25, 2007

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Award, May 12,
2005

Duke Energy International Peru Investments No. 1,
Limited v. Republic of Peru, \CSID Case No ARB/03/28
(Annulment Proceeding), Decision of the ad hoc
Committee, March 1, 2011

Enron Creditors Recovery Corp. and Ponderosa
Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No
ARB/01/3 (Annulment Proceeding), Decision on the
Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic,
July 30, 2010

Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v.
Republic of the Philippines, \CSID Case No ARB/03/25
(Annulment Proceeding), Decision on the Application
for Annulment of Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services
Worldwide, December 23, 2010

Heinan International Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of
Egypt, ICSID Case No ARB/05/19 (Annulment
Proceeding), Decision of the ad hoc Committee, June
14, 2010

Kléckner Industrie-Aniagen GmbH et al v. United
Republic of Cameroon & Société Camerounaise des
Engrais, Decision on Annulment, May 3, 1985

LG&E Energy Corp. v. Argentine Republic, |CSID Case
No. ARB/02/1, Award, July 25, 2007

MCI Annulment Decision

MINE Annulment Decision

Mitchell Annulment
Decision

MTD Annulment Decision

Rumeli Annulment
Decision

Sempra Annulment
Decision

Vivendi First Annulment
Decision

Vivendi Second
Annulment Decision

Wena Hotels Annulment
Decision

Argentina
Argentina’s Application

Award

M.C.I. Power Group L.C. and New Turbine Inc. v.
Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No ARB/03/6
(Annulment Proceeding), Decision on Annulment,
October 19, 2009

Maritime International Nominees Establishment v.
Republic of Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4,
Decision on Annulment, December 22, 1989

Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo,
ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7, Decision on Annulment,
November 1, 2006

MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic
of Chile, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/7, Decision on
Annulment, March 21, 2007

Republic of Kazakhstan v. Rumeli Telekom A.S. and
Telsim Mobil Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S., \CSID
Case No ARB/05/16 (Annulment Proceeding), Decision
of the ad hoc Committee, March 25, 2010

Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No ARB/02/16 (Annulment Proceeding),
Decision on the Argentine Republic's Application for
Annulment of the Award, June 29, 2010

Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi
Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002

Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi
Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s
Request for Annulment of the Award Rendered on 20
August 2007, August 20, 2010

Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID

Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on Annulment, February
5, 2002

Other references
The Argentine Republic
See paragraph 11

The Award to which the Application for Annulment in

BIT

CDs

Centre

CNA

CNA ART
Committee
Continental
Continental’s Application
Corralito

Corralon

Decree 1387
Decree 1735/04
Decree 214

Decree 260/02
Decree 471/02
Decree 644/02
Emergency Law
expropriation clause

fair and equitable
treatment clause

First Rosen Report

the present proceedings relates: Continental Casualty
Company v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/03/9, Award, September 5, 2008

Treaty between the United States of America and the
Argentine Republic Concerning the Reciprocal
Encouragement and Protection of Investment, signed
November 14, 1991; entered into force October 20,
1994

See paragraph 51

Investment

International Centre for Settlement of

Disputes

See paragraph 44

See paragraph 44

See paragraphs 5, 6, 8-10 and 13-14
Continental Casualty Company
See paragraph 1

See paragraph 52

See paragraph 54

See paragraph 50

See paragraph 63

See paragraph 55

See paragraph 56

See paragraph 57

See paragraph 59

See paragraph 53

See paragraph 64(d)

See paragraph 64(b)

See paragraph 238

GGLs
The Hearing
ICSID

ICSID Arbitration Rules

ICSID Convention

ILC Articles

LETEs

pesification

principle of necessity
Second Rosen Report
transfers clause

the Treaty

Tribunal

umbrella clause
USD, U.S. dollar, U.S.$

Vienna Convention

See paragraph 50
See paragraph 32

International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes

Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
Between States and Nationals of Other States, March
18, 1965, 575 U.N.T.S. 159

International Law Commission, Draft articles on
Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful
Acts, Yearbook of the International Law Commission,
2001, vol. Il (Part Two); annex to General Assembly
resolution 56/83 of 12 December 2001, and corrected
by document A/56/49(Vol. 1)/Corr.4

See paragraph 51

See paragraph 53

See paragraphs 115-116

See paragraph 159

See paragraph 64(c)

The BIT (q.v.)

The tribunal which rendered the Award (q.v.) to which
the Continental’s Application (q.v.) and Argentina’s
Application (q.v.) in the present annulment proceedings
relate

See paragraph 64(a)

United States dollar

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Vienna, May
23, 1969; 1155 U.N.T.S. 331

I INTRODUCTORY MATTERS

Introduction

On January 2, 2009, Continental Casualty Company (“Continental”) filed with
the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (the “Centre” or
“ICSID”) an application in writing (“Continental’s Application”) requesting the
partial annulment of the Award of September 5, 2008 (the “Award”), rendered
by the tribunal (the “Tribunal”) in the arbitration proceeding between

Continental and the Argentine Republic (“Argentina”).

Continental's Application was made within the time period provided in Article
52(2) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States (the “ICSID Convention’).

On January 14, 2009, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID registered
Continental's Application and sent a copy to Argentina.

On March 13, 2009, the Centre informed the parties of the ensuing
recommendation to the Chairman of the Administrative Council of the
appointment of Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C., from Australia, Judge Mohamed
Shahabuddeen, from Guyana, and Mr. Christer Sdderlund, from Sweden, to the
ad hoc Committee, each of whom was designated to the ICSID Panel of
Arbitrators by their respective countries.

By letter of March 19, 2009, in accordance with Rule 52(2) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, the parties were notified by the Centre that an ad hoc
Committee (the “Committee”) had been constituted, composed of Dr. Gavan
Griffith Q.C., Judge Mohamed Shahabuddeen and Mr. Christer Séderlund. On
the same date the parties were informed that Mr. Tomas Solis, Counsel, ICSID,
would serve as Secretary of the Committee.

On March 20, 2009, the Centre informed the parties of the designation of Dr.
Gavan Griffith Q.C. as President of the Committee.

On April 22, 2009, the Committee held a first session by telephone conference.

On May 13, 2009 the Centre informed the parties of the resignation of Judge
Shahabuddeen for health reasons and notified the parties of the vacancy on the
ad hoc Committee and of the suspension of the proceeding.

On May 20, 2009, the Centre informed the parties of the ensuing
recommendation to the Chairman of the Administrative Council of the
appointment of Judge Bola A. Ajibola of Nigeria designated by Nigeria to the
ICSID Panel of Arbitrators.

By letter of June 3, 2009, the Centre informed the parties that the ad hoc
Committee was reconstituted composed of Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C. (Australian),
President; Judge Bola A. Ajibola (Nigerian); and Christer Séderlund (Swedish).

On 5 June 2009, Argentina filed with the Centre an application in writing
(‘Argentina’s Application”) requesting the partial annulment of the Award and
a stay of enforcement of the Award.

On June 8, 2009, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID registered Argentina's
Application, and notified the parties of the provisional stay of enforcement of the

award.

By letter of June 9, 2009, the Centre informed the parties that the Chairman of
the Administrative Council had appointed the same ad hoc Committee to

consider Argentina’s Application.

By letter of June 10, 2009, the Centre informed the parties that the ad hoc
Committee was constituted composed of Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C. (Australian),
President; Judge Bola A. Ajibola (Nigerian); and Christer Séderlund (Swedish).
The parties were further informed that the Committee would hear Argentina’s
application for partial annulment in conjunction with the pending Application for
Annulment by the Claimant.

On June 29, 2009, Continental presented a submission on Argentina's
application for stay of enforcement of the Award. On the same date, Argentina
submitted its observations on the continued stay of enforcement of the Award.

20.

21.

On July 2, 2009, at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C., a procedural
meeting was held in relation to both Continental’s Application and Argentina’s
Application. In the case of Argentina’s Application, this meeting constituted the
Committee’s first session. At the meeting, the Committee asked the parties
whether they agreed to retain the services of an assistant, Dr. Christopher
Staker, in addition to the Secretary of the Committee. Argentina and the
Claimants agreed to Dr. Staker’s appointment by letters dated October 19, 2009
and January 27, 2010, respectively.

In the course of presenting its arguments at the July 2, 2009 meeting,
Continental raised a preliminary objection that Argentina’s Application was not
made within the time limit stipulated in Article 52(2) of the ICSID Convention
and was therefore outside the jurisdiction of the Committee. It was agreed and
decided that Continental was within 14 days from the July, 2 2009 meeting to
file a written submission setting out its preliminary objection, that Argentina was
to file its response within 30 days from receipt of Continental's submission, and
that both parties reserved their right to request leave from the Committee for
further procedures concerning Continental's submission on its preliminary
objection.

On July 16, 2009, Continental filed an objection to Argentina’s Application.

On August 21, 2009, Argentina submitted a response to Continental's objection
to Argentina’s Application.

Upon analysis of each party's position, on October 23, 2009, the Committee
issued a decision on the Argentina’s application for a stay of enforcement of the
award, determining that the stay of enforcement of the Award would continue
throughout the proceeding; and a decision on Continental’s preliminary
objection to the Argentina’s Application, rejecting Continental’s objections and
reserving the issue of costs until the end of the annulment proceeding.

On October 30, 2009, Continental filed a memorial on annulment with regard to
its application for partial annulment.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

On December 22, 2009, Argentina filed a memorial on annulment with regard to
its application for partial annulment.

On January 26, 2010, the parties were informed that Mr. Tomas Solis had
accepted a position outside the Centre and that Ms. Anneliese Fleckenstein, ,
ICSID, would be appointed to serve as Secretary of the Committee.

On March 3, 2010, Argentina filed a counter-memorial on annulment with regard

to Continental’s Application.

On April 28, 2010, Continental filed a counter-memorial on annulment with
regard to Argentina’s Application.

On May 7, 2010, Continental filed a reply on annulment with regard to its
application for partial annulment.

On July 2, 2010, Argentina filed a reply on annulment with regard to its
application for partial annulment.

On July 16, 2010, Argentina filed a rejoinder on annulment with regard to
Continental's Application.

On September 7, 2010, Continental filed a rejoinder on annulment with regard
to Argentina’s Application.

Pursuant to the Committee’s directions, on November 1, 2010, each party

provided a statement of the findings and orders sought by that party.

After consulting with the parties, the Committee determined the order of address
by the parties at the hearing, which was communicated to the parties on
November 2, 2010.

From November 8 to 10, 2010, a hearing for Continental's Application and
Argentina’s Application (the “Hearing”) was held at the seat of the Centre in
Washington, D.C. Present at the Hearing were:

(1) | The Committee:

Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C., President

Judge Bola A. Ajibola
Mr. Christer Séderlund;

Assistant to the Committee: Dr Christopher Staker

ICSID Secretariat: Ms. Anneliese Fleckenstein, Secretary of the
Committee

Representatives of Continental:

Mr. Rick Ehlers, Vice-President & Associate General Counsel,
Continental Casualty

Mr. Barry Appleton, Appleton & Associates International Lawyers

Mr. Martin Endicott, Appleton & Associates International Lawyers

Mr. Kyle Dickson-Smith, Appleton & Associates International Lawyers

Ms. Mona Devi Davies, Appleton & Associates International Lawyers

Mr. Ugljesa (Ugo) Popadic, Appleton & Associates International Lawyers

Ms. Sue Ki, Appleton & Associates International Lawyers

Mr. Martin Paul Kocandrle, Appleton & Associates International Lawyers

Ms. Juliet Rebecca French, Appleton & Associates International Lawyers

Ms. Ke-Ying Andrea See (Andrea See), Appleton & Associates

International Lawyers
Ms. Evgheni Gusilic, Appleton & Associates International Lawyers

Representatives of Argentina:

Dr. Horacio Diez, Deputy Treasury Attorney General

Dr. Gabriel Bottini, National Director of International Affairs and
Controversies, Office of the Treasury Attorney General

Dr. Ignacio Torterola, Liason PTN/ICSID

Dr. Silvina Gonzalez Napolitano, Counsel, National Direction of
International Affairs and Controversies, Office of the Treasury
Attorney General

Go

r. Alejandro Turyn, Counsel, National Direction of International Affairs
and Controversies, Office of the Treasury Attorney General

1

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

Dr. Verdnica Lavista, Counsel, National Direction of International Affairs
and Controversies, Office of the Treasury Attorney General
Dr. Mariana Lozza, Counsel, National Direction of International Affairs
and Controversies, Office of the Treasury Attorney General
Mr. Nicolas Duhalde, Counsel, Office of the Treasury Attorney General
By letters dated December 8, 2010, Continental submitted a statement of its
costs in the proceedings, as well as a document entitled “Issues before
Continental Tribunal: Summary of References made by Continental at
November 8-10, 2010 Annulment Hearing” and three decisions of the Tribunal
in the Pope & Talbot v. Canada case.

By acommunication dated December 9, 2010, Argentina submitted a statement
of its costs in the proceedings.

By a communication to the Committee dated December 16, 2010, Argentina
requested leave to file a response to Continental’s submission dated December
8, 2010.

By a communication to the Committee dated December 16, 2010, Continental

opposed Argentina’s request.

By a communication to the Committee dated December 17, 2010, Argentina
renewed its request for leave to file a reply to Continental's submission of
December 8, 2010, on the basis that Continental's submission went beyond a
mere list of references that had been requested by the Committee at the
Hearing.

On December 21, 2010, the parties were advised that the Committee was of the
view that Continental’s request en passant at the Hearing to be permitted to
give references to the Committee of issues relevant to its Application for
Annulment and a copy of the Pope & Talbot v. Canada case may be
characterized as limited leave for a post-hearing submission. The Committee
took the view that procedural fairness accordingly demanded that Argentina be
permitted to respond to those two issues within 14 days.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

1

On January 4, 2011, Argentina filed its comments on the additional submissions
of Continental dated December 8, 2010.

The Committee declared the proceedings closed on September 8, 2011.

During the course of the proceedings, the Members of the Committee
deliberated by various means of communication and have taken into account all
pleadings, documents and evidence before them.

The dispute

The nature of the dispute between Continental and Argentina that was the
subject of the Award, as found by the Tribunal, was in summary as follows.

Continental is a company incorporated under the law of the State of Illinois,
United States of America.

CNA Aseguradora de Riesgos del Trabajo S.A. (“CNA ART” or “CNA’), a
company incorporated in Argentina in 1996, provides workers compensation
insurance services in Argentina. Continental claimed’ that with the privatisation
in Argentina of the workers’ accident insurance sector in 1996, Continental
acquired a 70% interest in CNA, and subsequently increased its participation to
virtually 100% in 2000.

Continental further claimed? that CNA, like other insurance companies,
maintains a portfolio of investment securities in order to earn a return on its
capital, consisting mainly of “low-risk assets such as cash deposit, treasury bills
and government bonds”, and that with minor exceptions, investments were
required to be in Argentina. Continental additionally claimed® that Argentina’s
Superintendent of Insurance (SSN) lays down criteria for insurance companies
such as CNA concerning the ratio of reserves they have to hold and the types of
investment they may make.

See Award § 16.
See Award § 16.
See Award § 130.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

In 2001-2002, Argentina suffered a severe economic crisis. The history of that
economic crisis, and the measures adopted by the Government of Argentina to
seek to address it, are described in the Award, in particular, at paragraphs 100
to 159. At paragraph 108 of the Award, the Tribunal said that “Argentina’s crisis
of 2001-2002 has been described both as ‘one of the worst economic crises in
its history’ and ‘among the most severe of recent economic crises’ worldwide”.

Continental's claim was that certain of the measures adopted by the
Government of Argentina in response to this economic crisis caused loss to
Continental in breach of Argentina’s obligations under the bilateral investment
treaty between Argentina and the United States of America (the “BIT”).*

Prior to the economic crisis, under Argentina’s Convertibility Law, the Argentine
peso was freely convertible with the U.S. dollar at parity.°

According to Continental, from about 2001, CNA held a portfolio of low risk U.S.
dollar denominated assets in Argentina to a value of U.S.$ 100,998,000.° This
was said to be the result of a conscious decision by CNA’s management to
convert peso denominated assets into U.S. dollar denominated assets due to
concerns about the possible devaluation of the peso,’ and Continental claimed
that “CNA ART’s policy of shifting its portfolio to U.S. dollar denominated assets
involved a deliberate choice to forego the higher yields of peso-denominated
assets in favor of the greater capital security of U.S. dollar assets”.®

With the developing economic crisis, Argentina adopted Decree 1387 on
November 1, 2001 (“Decree 1387”). This provided inter alia for the voluntary
swap of Government bonds for Government Guaranteed Loans (“GGLs”). CNA
decided to take advantage of this offer. Although the GGLs had longer
maturities and lower interest rates than the Argentine Government bonds held
by CNA, there were a number of advantages associated with entering into a

Treaty between the United States of America and the Argentine Republic Concerning the
Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investment, signed November 14, 1991; entered into
force October 20, 1994.

See Award 9§ 105, 230.

See Award § 18.

See Award 9§ 18, 131-132.

See Award § 132, quoting Continental's Memorial in the proceedings before the Tribunal, para. 26
ff.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

swap, in particular in relation to legal security. The GGLs were denominated in
U.S. dollars and their governing law was Argentinean law.

Following this swap, CNA’s investment portfolio included GGLs totalling USD
17,295,320 at market value, Argentine Government Treasury Bills (“LETEs”)
totalling USD 2,805,000 at market value, term deposits (“CDs”) held at full
branch international banks and subsidiaries of international banks totalling USD
63,510,278, and a U.S. dollar cash account at Citibank also used for operational
purposes. According to the Claimant, 92% of its portfolio of investments was
expressed in U.S. dollar denominated assets. '°

The next significant measure adopted by Argentina was Decree 1570 of
December 1, 2001, known as the “Corralito’. This decree limited cash
withdrawals from bank accounts and prohibited transfers of funds out of the
country with the exception of certain current transactions."

The following month Argentina adopted Public Emergency Law 25.561 of
January 6, 2002 (the “Emergency Law”). This proclaimed a public emergency
under Article 76 of the Argentine Constitution. It provided for the abolition of the
convertibility regime, and for the abolition of the pegging of the peso to the U.S.
dollar, and for forced conversion into pesos of all U.S. dollar denominated
financial instruments, indebtedness and contracts (“pesification’). It also
granted extensive extraordinary powers in the above matters to the
Government."

Resolution 6 of January 9, 2002, known as the “Corralon’, rescheduled
maturity dates and reduced interest rates for all demand term deposits within
the banking system (both in pesos and U.S. dollars). CNA‘s term deposits with
various banks were subject to this measure. '?

Decree 214 of February 3, 2002 (“Decree 214”) provided for the conversion into

pesos of “all obligations to pay money expressed in dollars” (compulsory

See Award 9§ 121, 133-135.
See Award 135.
See Award J§ 100, 124, 126, 137-140.
See Award 9§ 100, 137, 141.
See Award § 137, 139, 143.

56.

57.

58.

59.

pesification). Contracts between private persons and debts owed to financial
institutions were converted at the rate of 1:1. U.S. dollar deposits within the
banking system were converted at the rate of 1.40 peso for each dollar
(‘asymmetric” pesification), and granted an indexation to compensate for future
inflation (“CER”). CNA’s cash deposits with its banks were also subject to this

measure.'*

Decree 260/02, effective February 11, 2002 (“Decree 260/02”), abolished this
dual system of pesification. On the date it came into force, the exchange rate
depreciated to 1.8 peso per U.S. dollar. The peak devaluation was reached on
June 25, 2002 (almost 4 pesos to a dollar). Later, the exchange rate stabilized
around three pesos for one U.S. dollar.'®

On March 8, 2002, Decree 471/02 (“Decree 471/02”) converted all U.S. dollar
denominated government debt, “the law applicable to which is only Argentine
law,” into pesos (pesification) at the rate of 1 U.S. dollar to 1.4 pesos. The U.S.
dollar denominated LETEs and GGLs held by CNA were thereby converted into
pesos. The pesified instruments were to be indexed at the CER rate and would

earn a reduced interest.'®

One effect of this particular measure was that, since the peso value of these
holdings had increased by 40%, the balance sheet of CNA showed a capital
gain, as was the case of all companies in the same situation. This capital gain
was taxed at the statutory rate.'”

Decree 644/02 of April 18, 2002 (“Decree 644/02”) requested the holders of
GGLs to accept their conversion in pesos and a reduction in their original
security in order to receive payment. Holders that did not accept these
conditions would receive back the bonds they had handed in for the swap. CNA
opted to continue to hold the GGLs as the bonds they had swapped for them

were in default."

See Award 9§ 137, 144.
See Award § 137, 142.
See Award 9§ 137, 145.
See Award ¥ 145.

See Award 9§ 137, 146.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

Resolution 73 of April 25, 2002 deferred payment of the public debt of the
national Government to December 31, 2002 “or until financing thereof has been
completed if the latter is completed before that date.” Although GGLs were not
subject to the deferral, interest payments due in April, May, June and July 2002
were only made on August 8, 2002.'°

Decree 905 of May 31, 2002 offered U.S. dollar denominated bonds (BODEN
2012) in exchange for the term deposit dollars that had been pesified by Decree
214. It also provided a choice as to the receipt of BODEN 2012 for depositors
in financial institutions in distress, including a bank where CNA held term
deposits. CNA opted for converting these deposits into USD 4,470,900 worth of
BODEN 2012.”°

Decree 739 of March 28, 2003 provided for an elaborate scheme of “partial
thawing” of the bank freeze, involving amongst other matters the distribution of
further bonds. Continental complained that these bonds were not issued on the
due dates and that payments of the initial interest were delayed.”'

Decree 1735/04 of December 2004 (“Decree 1735/04”) offered a swap of the
LETEs and several other securities in default, against newly issued securities.
CNA did not accept this conversion, since it would have received in exchange
“only U.S.$ 0.30 per dollar and would have been required to waive its rights”
and to accept long maturities on bonds from a Government “that had
demonstrated its willingness to repeatedly default on its debt”.

In January 2003, Continental commenced ICSID arbitration proceedings against
Argentina, alleging that measures taken by Argentina in respect of Continental’s
investment in CNA breached Continental's rights as investor under the BIT.
Continental invoked in particular the provisions in the BIT that:

(a) each Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into with
regard to investments (Article II(2)(c) of the BIT) (the “umbrella clause’);

See Award 147.

See Award § 149.

See Award ¥ 150.

See Award {| 151, quoting Continental's Reply Memorial in the proceedings before the Tribunal,
para 78.

65.

66.

67.

(b) investment shall at all times be accorded fair and equitable treatment, shall
enjoy full protection and security and shall in no case be accorded
treatment less than that required by international law (Article II(2)(a) of the
BIT) (the “fair and equitable treatment clause’);

(c) each Party shall permit all transfers related to an investment to be made
freely and without delay into and out of its territory (Article V of the BIT)
(the “transfers clause”); and

(d) investments shall not be expropriated or nationalized either directly or
indirectly through measures tantamount to expropriation or nationalization
except, amongst other conditions, upon payment of prompt, adequate and
effective compensation (Article IV of the BIT) (the “expropriation clause’).

Continental claimed compensation for the damages said to have been suffered
in consequence of these breaches of the BIT.

In the Award, the Tribunal considered that measures taken by Argentina to deal
with the 2001-2002 economic crisis were capable of falling within the scope of
Article XI of the BIT, which provides that:

This Treaty shall not preclude the application by either Party

of measures necessary for the maintenance of public order,

the fulfillment of its obligations with respect to the

maintenance or restoration of international peace or security,

or the Protection of its own essential security interests.
Specifically, the Tribunal found, at paragraph 179 of the Award, that the crisis
which Argentina faced in the latter part of 2001, and which continued into 2002,
was covered by the application of Article XI, and that “Measures that would
have been otherwise in breach of the Treaty could be lawfully implemented by
Argentina in that crisis, provided that all other requirements are respected, first

of all that of actual ‘necessity””.

The Tribunal considered that each of the measures taken by Argentina
complained of by Continental satisfied the requirements of Article XI, other than
Decree 1735/04 of December 2004 (paragraph 63 above).

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

The Tribunal found that there was no breach of the transfers clause in Article V
of the BIT because the transfers that Continental claimed that it was prevented
from making were not transfers of a kind to which Article V applied 23

The Tribunal found that the imposition of capital gains tax on the increase in the
peso value of assets following their pesification (paragraphs 57-58 above) did
not breach either the fair and equitable treatment clause or the expropriation
clause. The Tribunal found that the currency of Argentina was the peso and
that CNA’s corporate accounts were expressed in pesos, and that the increase
in peso value was properly considered a capital gain, subject to the general
applicable tax regime.”4

Except in relation to Decree 1735/04, the Tribunal found that there had been no
violation of the fair and equitable treatment clause by virtue of Article XI of the
BIT.

In relation to Decree 1735/04, the Tribunal found that there had been a breach
of the fair and equitable treatment clause in relation to the restructuring of the
LETEs.”© It found that there was no such breach in relation to the pesification of
the LETEs because the pesification was covered by Article XI of the BIT.” The
Tribunal reached this conclusion in respect of Decree 1735/04 in the light of its
late date when Argentina’s financial conditions were evolving towards normality,
the reduced percentage of the original value of the debt that Argentina
unilaterally offered to recognise, and the condition that any other rights including
those under the BIT would be waived.”® The Tribunal found that the loss
sustained by Continental to be made good by Argentina in relation to the
restructuring of the LETEs was USD 2.8 million.”

Except in relation to Decree 1735/04, the Tribunal found that there had been no
violation of the expropriation clause, by virtue of Article XI of the BIT. In relation
to Decree 1735/04, the Tribunal considered that having already decided the

See Award 9§ 237-245.
See Award 9§ 267-270.
See Award § 246-266.
See Award J§ 220-222.
See Award 4 265.
See Award 221.
See Award § 265.

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

30
at

claim under Article |I(2)(a) of the BIT, there was no need to pronounce further
on the alternative claim under Article IV of the BIT.°°

The Tribunal found that there had been no breach of the umbrella clause. The
Tribunal considered that except as regards the GGLs, the obligations which
Continental alleged to have been breached were not covered by the umbrella
clause. In so far as the GGLs might have been covered by the umbrella clause,
the Tribunal found that Article XI of the BIT was applicable.°'

The Tribunal accordingly found that the only claim of breach of the BIT on which
Continental prevailed was that referred to in paragraph 71 above. The Tribunal
awarded Continental damages of USD 2.8 million with interest.

Both parties now apply for partial annulment of the Award.

In their November 1, 2010 statements (see paragraph 30 above) the parties
requested the Committee to make the following findings and orders.

In respect of Continental’s Application, Continental requests that the Committee:

(1) pursuant to Articles 52(1)(b) and 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention,
annuls the finding of the Tribunal and associated reasoning that the
Argentine Republic may rely on Article XI of the Treaty to preclude its
liability and obligation to compensate Continental;

(2) pursuant to Articles 52(1)(b), 52(1)(d), and 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention, annuls the finding of the Tribunal and any possible
associated [sic] in relation to Continental's claim for compensation for
unfair treatment and breach of the terms of its financial instruments and
other assets (other than the LETEs) after the period in which Article XI
was held to apply;

(3) pursuant to Articles 52(1)(b), 52(1)(d) and 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention, annuls the finding of the Tribunal and associated reasoning
that, as regards the application of Art. XI of the Treaty, Continental bore

See Award 9§ 271-285.
See Award 9§ 286-303.

20

the burden of proving that the Argentine Republic had alternative
measures reasonably available and was required to do so beyond
reasonable doubt;

‘4) pursuant to Articles 52(1)(b) and 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention,
annuls the finding of the Tribunal and associated reasoning in relation to
Continental’s claim under Article V of the Treaty;

5) pursuant to Articles 52(1)(b), 52(1)(d) and 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention, annuls the finding of the Tribunal and associated reasoning
in relation to Continental’s claim in respect of the LETEs under Article IV
of the Treaty;

6) consequently to (1)-(5) above, annuls the decision of the Tribunal in
paragraphs 320 (A), (C) and (D) of the Award;

7) confirms that the decision of the Tribunal in paragraph 320(B) of the
Award is not affected by the annulment of paragraph 320(A);

8) decides that the Argentine Republic shall bear all of the expenses
incurred by the Centre in connection with this annulment proceeding,
including the fees and expenses of the members of the Committee;

9) decides that the Argentine Republic shall bear Continental’s litigation
costs and expenses with respect to this annulment proceeding, including
Continental’s costs of legal representation.

Argentina for its part requests that the Committee find that:

(1) the Tribunal did not fail to decide Continental’s claim for loss after the
“State of Necessity” was over;

(2) the Tribunal did not fail to apply the right principle of burden of proof;

(3) the Tribunal did not fail to determine Continental's expropriation claim in
relation to the LETEs;

21

78.

(4)

the Tribunal did not fail to state reasons in relation to the alleged breach
of Article V (Transfer of Funds) of the Treaty.

In respect of Argentina’s Application, Argentina requests that the Committee
find that:

(1)

the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and failed to state the
reasons on which the Award was based regarding the restructuring of the
Argentine Republic’s (domestic and foreign) sovereign debt;

the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in deciding on an extremely
complex issue without relying upon any evidence and without stating the
reasons why it reached its conclusions;

the fact that the Tribunal, without evidence, has described and decided
on Argentina’s payment capacity, the “unilateral” nature of the swap offer,
the amount offered to the holders by means of the swap, and the
limitation on future claims, and the fact that such completely unfounded
descriptions have been used as grounds to state that Argentina violated
the BIT entail such arbitrariness that it amounts to a manifest excess of
powers;

in addition, the Tribunal failed to state the reasons on which the Award
was based in considering that Argentina violated Article II(2)(a) of the BIT
by restructuring the LETEs (Award paragraphs 264-265) and that the
Argentine Republic could not invoke the defence provided for by Article
XI of the BIT or the state of necessity under customary international law;

the Tribunal clearly contradicted itself and manifestly exceeded its
powers in stating that the default is protected under Article XI of the BIT,
but then determining that the solution to such default entailed a
substantive loss, without providing any reason why the offer made by
Argentina to escape default was unreasonable;

such lack of evidence caused the Tribunal to manifestly exceed its
powers and fail to state the reasons on which the Award and the

22

Decision on Rectification were based regarding Claimant's uninterrupted
holding of the LETEs as from their acquisition until the time of the alleged
collection;

(7) the Tribunal also exceeded its powers when making unfounded
determinations regarding the LETEs in respect of which the parties did
not discuss during the hearing or the proceeding, and even an alert
reader would not be able to understand the manner in which the Tribunal
arrived at the conclusions drawn regarding the restructuring of the
LETEs;

Argentina therefore requests the Committee to find:

(1) that the Tribunal failed to state reasons and manifestly exceeded its
powers in relation to its conclusions regarding Argentina’s debt
restructuring;

(2) that pursuant to Article 52 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration
Rule 50, the Award rendered on September 5, 2008 in this case be
partially annulled, in particular paragraphs 220-222, 264-266 and 320(B),
exclusively with regard to the determination that Argentina’s restructuring
of the LETEs was in breach of the BIT, and that Argentina could not avail
itself of the defence based on Article XI of the BIT or on the state of
necessity in customary international law, and the subsequent decision to
award a compensation on that basis (together with the relevant portion of
the Decision on Jurisdiction);

(3) that the other provisions and paragraphs of the Award remain
unchanged; in effect, as the Tribunal was right in finding that Argentina’s
actions were protected under Article XI of the BIT, the severable parts of
an Award which are not annulled shall remain in full force, as expressly
provided in Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention;

(4) that Continental Casualty Company pay all the expenses and costs
arising out of this annulment proceeding, plus any interest accrued
thereon.

23

Continental for its part requests that the Committee find and order that:

(1)

the Argentine Republic’s Application for Annulment is dismissed in its
entirety;

the Argentine Republic shall bear all of the expenses incurred by the
Centre in connection with this annulment proceedings, including the fees
and expenses of the members of the Committee;

the Argentine Republic shall bear Continental's litigation costs and
expenses with respect to this annulment proceeding, including

Continental’s costs of legal representation;

pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration
Rule 54(3), the stay of enforcement of the Award ordered by the
Committee is its decision of October 23, 2009 is terminated.

c. The grounds for annulment

(a)

Introduction

79. Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention provides as follows:

(1) Either party may request annulment of the award by an
application in writing addressed to the Secretary-General
on one or more of the following grounds:

(a) that the Tribunal was not properly constituted;

(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;

(c) that there was corruption on the part of a member of
the Tribunal;

(d) that there has been a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure; or

(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on
which it is based.

80. In the present annulment proceedings, both parties invoke the grounds in Article

52(1)(b) and (e) in their applications, and Continental additionally invokes the
ground in Article 52(1)(d).

24

81.

82.

83.

32

(b) The role of an ad hoc annulment committee

An ICSID award is not subject to any appeal or to any other remedy except
those provided for in the ICSID Convention.** In annulment proceedings under
Article 52 of the ICSID Convention, an ad hoc committee is thus not a court of
appeal, and cannot consider the substance of the dispute, but can only
determine whether the award should be annulled on one of the grounds in
Article 52(1).°°

As was for instance stated in the MTD Annulment Decision, annulment has a
limited function since a committee:

... cannot substitute its determination on the merits for that of
the tribunal. Nor can it direct a tribunal on a resubmission how
it should resolve substantive issues in dispute. All it can do is
annul the decision of the tribunal: it can extinguish a res
judicata but on a question of merits it cannot create a new
one. A more interventionist approach by committees on the
merits of disputes would risk a renewed cycle of tribunal and
annulment proceedings of the kind observed in Kléckner and
AMCO.* [footnote omitted]

The Committee is also in agreement with the MC/ Annulment Decision that:

... the role of an ad hoc committee is a limited one, restricted
to assessing the legitimacy of the award and not its
correctness. ... The annulment mechanism is not designed to
bring about consistency in the interpretation and application
of international investment law. The responsibility for ensuring
consistency in the jurisprudence and for building a coherent
body of law rests primarily with the investment tribunals. They

ICSID Convention, Article 53(1).

M.C.1. Power Group L.C. and New Turbine Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No ARB/03/6
(Annulment Proceeding), Decision on Annulment, October 19, 2009 (“MC/ Annulment Decision”)
q 24; Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No ARB/01/12 (Annulment Proceeding),
Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic, September 1, 2009 (“Azurix
Annulment Decision”) § 41; Republic of Kazakhstan v. Rumeli Telekom A.S. and Telsim Mobil
Telekomunikasyon Hizmetleri A.S., \CSID Case No ARB/05/16 (Annulment Proceeding), Decision
of the ad hoc Committee, March 25, 2010 (“Rumeli Annulment Decision”) 9 70-73, 96; Enron
Creditors Recovery Corp. and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, |CSID Case No
ARB/01/3 (Annulment Proceeding), Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine
Republic, July 30, 2010 (“Enron Annulment Decision”) § 63; Duke Energy International Peru
Investments No. 1, Limited v. Republic of Peru, ICSID Case No ARB/03/28 (Annulment
Proceeding), Decision of the ad hoc Committee, March 1, 2011 (“Duke Annulment Decision”) {|
89, 96, 165, 213-214, 216(b).

MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/7,
Decision on Annulment, March 21, 2007 (“MTD Annulment Decision”) 54; quoted in Enron
Annulment Decision § 64. See also Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No ARB/05/16 (Annulment Proceeding), Decision on the Argentine Republic's Application for
Annulment of the Award, June 29, 2010 (“Sempra Annulment Decision”) 73.

25

84.

85.

86.

are assisted in their task by the development of a common

legal opinion and the progressive emergence of “une

jurisprudence constante”...°°
Notwithstanding this, in relation to matters which fall within the competence of
an ad hoc committee to decide, it is in the Committee’s view to be expected that
the ad hoc committee will have regard to relevant previous ICSID awards and
decisions, including other annulment decisions, as well as to other relevant
persuasive authorities. Although there is no doctrine of binding precedent in the
ICSID arbitration system, the Committee considers that in the longer term the
emergence of a jurisprudence constante in relation to annulment proceedings

may be a desirable goal.

It has been observed that while it has been a frequent feature of ICSID
annulment applications to submit that one and the same aspect of an award
constitutes a manifest excess of powers, a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure and a failure to state reasons, Article 52(1) is
carefully divided into separate clauses, each dealing with a separate ground for
annulment. Thus, if a party wishes to contend that a single aspect of an award
constitutes simultaneously more than one ground for annulment under Article
52(1), “it must identify separately how the very different considerations involved
in each of these enquiries are nevertheless provoked by the same aspect of an
impugned award’ .°°

(c) Manifest excess of powers (Article 52(1)(b))

This ground of annulment will exist where the tribunal lacked jurisdiction, for
instance because the dispute is not covered by the arbitration agreement. This
ground of annulment may also exist where the tribunal disregards the applicable
law or bases the award on a law other than the applicable law under Article 42
of the ICSID Convention.°”

MCI Annulment Decision § 24.
Duke Annulment Decision §§ 91-92.
Azurix Annulment Decision § 45-46, 136, and the earlier case law there cited; Enron Annulment
Decision § 67; Rumeli Annulment Decision 78.

26

87.

88.

89.

Additionally, it is an express requirement of Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention that:

the error must be “manifest”, not arguable, and a
misapprehension (still less mere disagreement) as to the
content of a particular rule is not enough.

In the present case, the submissions of Continental on the scope of this ground
of annulment included the following:

Another basic requirement is that the Tribunal must exercise
its power properly. Its power must be exercised in good faith
and for the purpose intended, taking into account all relevant
considerations while ignoring all irrelevant considerations;
and with a demonstrable rational connection between those
considerations and the Tribunal’s determination of each of the
questions submitted to it. To fail to do so is an abuse of
power and thereby to manifestly exceed its power.°°

Continental further submitted that where the applicable law is an investment
treaty, it amounts to a failure to apply the applicable law for the Tribunal to apply

one provision of the treaty, but to fail to apply or to consider the application of

40

other relevant provisions of the treaty. Continental also contended that it

amounted to a failure in this case for the Tribunal to apply a provision of the

applicable BIT (in this case, Article XI), but to fail to consider relevant principles

41

of public international law.“' An additional submission of Continental was that it

amounts to a manifest error of law for the Tribunal to fail to have regard to the
different legal effect of two different provisions of the BIT.*? Indeed, Continental

MTD Annulment Decision § 47 quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision § 48; also MC/ Annulment
Decision §§ 49, 51, 55; Azurix Annulment Decision § 64-69; Rumeli Annulment Decision § 78;
Enron Annulment Decision § 69; Duke Annulment Decision 9 98-99, 160, 182.

Hearing transcript, November 8, 2010, p. 24.

For instance, Hearing transcript, November 8, 2010, pp. 29-32 (contending that the Tribunal in this
case failed to apply Article X of the BIT), p. 59 (contending that the Tribunal failed to apply Article
11(1) of the BIT). Continental submitted in this respect: “... [the Tribunal] was required to apply all
of the Treaty. It was not allowed to pick and choose like a bit of a smorgasbord. You can’t just go
to the buffet and pick what you like. You have to apply the whole Treaty.” (ibid., p. 55). Also
Hearing transcript, November 9, 2010, p. 261: “Did the Tribunal fail to apply the law that it was
required to apply? That is the simple test of annulment. And in this case, it is clear that the
Tribunal failed to apply Article X of the Treaty”.

For instance, Hearing transcript, November 8, 2010, pp. 32-33 (contending that the Tribunal failed
to apply “well-known principles of international law such as proportionality, duration and
reasonableness”, p. 34 (contending that it “cannot be an application of Article XI when [the Tribunal
has] missed an integral part of the test that is required in its application”), pp. 38-40 (contending
that the Tribunal failed to take any position on the relationship between Article XI of the BIT and the
customary international law principles reflected in Articles 25, 27, 30 and 31 of the ILC Articles).

For instance, Hearing transcript, November 8, 2010, pp. 65-66 (contending, in relation to what
Continental submitted was the different basis for calculating damages for breaches of the

27

90.

91.

goes further to suggest that if the Tribunal, in interpreting a provision of the BIT,
refers by analogy to a provision of the GATT regime, it will be a manifest excess
of powers for the Tribunal to refer to the inappropriate GATT provision.*®

lt appears to the Committee that these contentions overstate the effect of Article
52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention to the extent that, if accepted, an annulment
proceeding would be reconstituted as an appellate proceeding. In any event,
the Committee considers that Continental’s submission reaches beyond a
proper construction of the effect of Article 52(1)(b). For instance, although
Continental acknowledged that “it is not for this annulment Committee to decide
whether the Tribunal was right or wrong”,** at one point counsel for Continental
submitted that: “The Tribunal got the test wrong. They got the law wrong and
that is the test. That's what they did wrong”.“© Counsel for Continental also
argued, for instance, that “the Tribunal failed to properly address the
international law rules on treaty interpretation including the Vienna Convention”,
in that the Tribunal “took into account irrelevant provisions in its interpretation
while completely ignoring the mandatory provisions of the Treaty’.“° The
Committee considers that erroneous application of principles of treaty
interpretation is also in itself an error of law, rather than a manifest excess of
powers, at least where the error relates to the substantive issue before the
Tribunal for decision, rather than to an issue of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

In the Committee’s view, it will amount to a non-application of the applicable law
for a tribunal to apply, for instance, the law of State X to determine a dispute
when the applicable law is in fact the law of State Y or public international law.
However, if the applicable law is the law of State X, and if the tribunal in fact
applies the law of State X, it is not the role of an annulment committee to
determine for itself whether the tribunal correctly identified all of the provisions

 

expropriation clause and fair and equitable treatment clause respectively, that the Tribunal “flagged,
in fact, the difference, and then ... just ignored it”).

For instance, Hearing transcript, November 8, 2010, pp. 42-45 (contending that “the Vienna
Convention principles do not permit reference to irrelevant materials like GATT Article XX”, that the
relevant GATT provision analogous to Article XI of the BIT is GATT Article XXI rather than GATT
Article XX, and that “[b]y relying on [GATT] Article XX, the Tribunal simply applied the wrong legal
standard addressing a very different legal context and in a very different Treaty”).

Hearing transcript, November 8, 2010, p. 40.

Ibid., p. 74,

Ibid., p. 87,

28

92.

93.

of the law of State X that were relevant to the case before it, or whether the
tribunal gave adequate consideration to each of those specific provisions and to
the relationship between them, since this would be to venture into an enquiry
into whether the tribunal applied the law correctly. Questions as to the
relevance of particular provisions of the applicable law, and of their legal effect
and interaction with other provisions of the applicable law, go to the substantive
legal merits of the case and are within the power of a tribunal to decide. A
tribunal’s decision on such questions cannot amount to a manifest excess of

power.

Where a tribunal fails to give any consideration at ail to a particular provision of
the applicable law, the logical inference is that the tribunal implicitly did not
consider it to be relevant. For the tribunal to take such a view, rightly or
wrongly, even merely by implication, is an exercise of the tribunal's power, and
not an excess of power. Provided that the tribunal:

(a) applies the applicable law (be it a treaty, or general international law, or
the law of a particular State), and

(b) gives reasons for its decision on all of the questions presented to it for
decision,

the tribunal is not required to deal expressly with every provision of the
applicable law that a party has invoked in its argument, and a fortiori, provisions
that the parties did not invoke in their arguments before the tribunal.*”

In some cases it may be an annullable error if a tribunal fails to consider a
specific provision of the applicable law. For instance, suppose that a claimant
brings a claim for damages under provision A of an investment treaty, and the
respondent State specifically pleads in response that it has a defence to the
claim under provision B of the treaty. In this case, it may well be an annullable
error for the tribunal to find that there has been a breach of provision A, and to

Christoph Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2 edn 2009) (“Schreuer
Commentary’), p. 964 | 226: “... the inadvertent oversight of a detail in the law is one of the most
common legal errors. A pars pro toto argument holding that disregard of one provision amounts to
non-application of the law does not appear tenable. Partial non-application and erroneous
application are indistinguishable.” See also Duke Annulment Decision 144.

29

94.

95.

96.

award damages to the claimant, without giving any consideration at all to the
potential application of the defence in provision B.

However, in such a case the annullable error most appropriately would be
characterised as either a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure (if it is determined that the tribunal allowed the claimant’s claim
without even considering the defence raised by the respondent), or a failure to
state reasons for the decision (if it can be determined that the tribunal rejected
the defence invoked by the respondent but failed to give reasons for doing so).
The failure to consider provision B would be unlikely of itself to constitute a
manifest excess of power by reason of failure to apply the applicable law, as the
tribunal has nonetheless applied the investment treaty, which is the law that it
was required to apply.

(d) Serious departure from fundamental rule of procedure (Article
52(1)(d))

As was stated in the Vivendi First Annulment Decision:

... [u]nder Article 52(1)(d), the emphasis is clearly on the term

“rule of procedure,” that is, on the manner in which the

Tribunal proceeded, not on the content of its decision.®
For this ground of annulment to be established, the rule of procedure in
question must be “fundamental”.*® Furthermore, the departure from that rule of
procedure must be “serious” in the sense that it “must have caused the Tribunal
to reach a result substantially different from what it would have awarded had

Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, |CSID

Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002 (“Vivendi First Annulment Decision”) J
83, quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision § 49, Enron Annulment Decision 70.

Azurix Annulment Decision § 50; Enron Annulment Decision § 70; Maritime International Nominees
Establishment v. Republic of Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4, Decision on Annulment,
December 22, 1989 (“MINE Annulment Decision”) {J 5.05 and 5.06; MTD Annulment Decision
49. It has been said that not all rules of procedure contained in the ICSID Arbitration Rules would
fall under this concept, which is “intended to denote procedural rules which may properly be said to
constitute ‘general principles of law’, insofar as such rules concern international arbitral procedure”:
Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines, \CSID Case No
ARB/03/25 (Annulment Proceeding), Decision on the Application for Annulment of Fraport AG
Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide, December 23, 2010 (“Fraport Annulment Decision”) {|
186-187.

30

97.

98.

such a rule been observed’,® or in the sense that it was “such as to deprive a

party of the benefit or protection which the rule was intended to provide”.®'

The Committee agrees with the statement in the Azurix Annulment Decision that
“it is not a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure for a tribunal
to decline to consider an issue that it considers to be irrelevant, merely because
one of the parties considers it to be important’.©* As observed above, a failure
by a tribunal to consider one of the questions submitted to it for decision, such
as a specific defence raised by the respondent, may in certain circumstances
amount to a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure. However,
no fundamental rule of procedure requires a tribunal to give express
consideration to every argument or issue advanced by a party in support of its
position in relation to a particular question.

(e) Failure to state reasons (Article 52(1)(e))

Failure to deal with questions submitted to the tribunal has been considered by
previous ad hoc annulment committees to be a failure to state reasons for
purposes of this provision. On the other hand, while a tribunal has a duty to
deal with each of the questions submitted to it (Article 48(3) of the ICSID
Convention), it is not required to comment on all arguments of the parties in
relation to each of those questions. It was said in the Enron Annulment
Decision that “/t is not the role of an annulment committee to examine
meticulously the reasoning of the tribunal on a given issue to check that every
point raised by a party has been given a clear answer’,™ and that:

... the tribunal is required only to give reasons for its decision
in respect of each of the questions. This requires the tribunal

Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, |CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on

Annulment, February 5, 2002 (“Wena Hotels Annulment Decision”) {| 58; quoted in Azurix
Annulment Decision § 51. Enron Annulment Decision § 71.

MINE Annulment Decision § 5.05; quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision § 52. Also Enron
Annulment Decision § 71.

Azurix Annulment Decision § 244.

MCI Annulment Decision §§ 66-67; Enron Annulment Decision 9§ 72, 222. Also Helnan
International Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No ARB/05/19 (Annulment
Proceeding), Decision of the ad hoc Committee, June 14, 2010 (“He/nan Annulment Decision”)
49 36-37.

Enron Annulment Decision § 110.

99.

100.

101.

to state its pertinent findings of fact, its pertinent findings as to
the applicable legal principles, and its conclusions in respect
of the application of the law to the facts. If the tribunal has
done this, the award will not be annulled on the basis that the
tribunal could have given more detailed reasons and analysis
for its findings of fact or law, or that the tribunal did not
expressly state its evaluation in respect to each individual
item of evidence or each individual legal authority or legal
provision relied upon by the parties, or did not expressly state
a view on every single legal and factual issue raised by the
parties in the course of the proceedings. The tribunal is
required to state reasons for its decision, but not necessarily
reasons for its reasons.°°

Furthermore, even in cases where a tribunal has failed to deal with a question
submitted to it, the appropriate remedy may not be an application for annulment,
but rather, an application to the tribunal for a supplementary decision, pursuant
to Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention.*®

It is generally accepted that this ground for annulment only applies in a clear
case when there has been a failure by the tribunal to state any reasons for its
decision on a particular question, and not in a case where there has merely
been a failure by the tribunal to state correct or convincing reasons. In the
MINE Annulment Decision it was said that:

[T]he requirement that an award has to be motivated implies
that it must enable the reader to follow the reasoning of the
Tribunal on points of fact and law. It implies that, and only
that. The adequacy of the reasoning is not an appropriate
standard of review under paragraph 1(e)...

In the Committee's view, the requirement to state reasons is
satisfied as long as the award enables one to follow how the
tribunal proceeded from Point A. to point B. and eventually to
its conclusion, even if it made an error of fact or of law. This
minimum requirement is in particular not satisfied by either
contradictory or frivolous reasons.°

Furthermore, the tribunal’s reasons “may be implicit in the considerations and

conclusions contained in the award, provided they can be reasonably inferred

Enron Annulment Decision § 222.

MCI Annulment Decision §{ 68-69; Enron Annulment Decision { 73.

MINE Annulment Decision { 5.08-5.09, quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision § 53 and Enron
Annulment Decision 4 74, 221.

32

from the terms used in the decision’.®® In the Wena Hotels Annulment Decision,
it was further said that:

It is in the nature of this ground of annulment that in case the
award suffers from a lack of reasons which can be challenged
within the meaning and scope of Article 52(1)(e), the remedy
need not be the annulment of the award. The purpose of this
particular ground for annulment is not to have the award
reversed on its merits. It is to allow the parties to understand
the Tribunal’s decision. If the award does not meet the
minimal requirement as to the reasons given by the Tribunal,
it does not necessarily need to be resubmitted to a new
Tribunal. If the ad hoc Committee so concludes, on the basis
of the knowledge it has received upon the dispute, the
reasons supporting the Tribunal’s conclusions can be
explained by the ad hoc Committee itself.°

102. The Committee agrees with the ad hoc committee in the Vivendi First

Annulment Decision, which stated that:

[I]t is well accepted both in the cases and the literature that
Article 52(1)(e) concerns a failure to state any reasons with
respect to all or part of an award, not the failure to state
correct or convincing reasons. ... Provided that the reasons
given by a tribunal can be followed and relate to the issues
that were before the tribunal, their correctness is beside the
point in terms of Article 52(1)(e). Moreover, reasons may be
stated succinctly or at length, and different legal traditions
differ in their modes of expressing reasons. Tribunals must be
allowed a degree of discretion as to the way in which they
express their reasoning.

In the Committee’s view, annulment under Article (52)(1)(e)
should only occur in a clear case. This entails two conditions:
first, the failure to state reasons must leave the decision on a
particular point essentially lacking in any expressed rationale;
and second, that point must itself be necessary to the
tribunal’s decision. It is frequently said that contradictory
reasons cancel each other out, and indeed, if reasons are

Wena Hotels Annulment Decision § 81, quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision § 54; also CMS Gas
Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Decision on Annulment,
September 25, 2007 (“CMS Annulment Decision”) § 127, quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision
q56 and Enron Annulment Decision § 75. See also Rumeli Annulment Decision {| 83, stating that “if
reasons are not stated but are evident and a logical consequence of what is stated in an award, an
ad hoc committee should be able to so hold”, but that “if such reasons do not necessarily follow or
flow from the award’s reasoning, an ad hoc committee should not construct reasons in order to
justify the decision of the tribunal”.

Wena Hotels Annulment Decision § 83, quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision § 54 and Enron
Annulment Decision § 77. However, an annulment proceeding cannot cause an entire reopening of
a case, and it is not for an ad hoc committee “to intrude into the legal and factual decision-making
of the Tribunal”: Fraport Annulment Decision § 272.

33

genuinely contradictory so they might. However, tribunals
must often struggle to balance conflicting considerations, and
an ad hoc committee should be careful not to discern
contradiction when what is actually expressed in a tribunal’s
reasons could more truly be said to be but a reflection of such
conflicting considerations.©° [footnote omitted]

103. The Committee adds that for genuinely contradictory reasons to cancel each
other out, they must be such as to be incapable of standing together on any
reasonable reading of the decision. An example might be where the basis for a
tribunal’s decision on one question is the existence of fact A, when the basis for
its decision on another question is the non-existence of fact A. In cases where
it is merely arguable whether there is a contradiction or inconsistency in the
tribunal’s reasoning, it is not for an annulment committee to resolve that
argument. Nor is it the role of an annulment committee to express its own view
on whether or not the reasons given by the tribunal are logical or rational or
correct.

I. CONTINENTAL’S APPLICATION FOR ANNULMENT

A. Failure to decide Continental’s claim for loss after the state of necessity
was over

(a) Introduction

104. The Tribunal rejected all but part of one claim made by Continental on the basis
that the measures adopted by Argentina that caused the claimed losses were
within the scope of Article XI of the BIT.

105. The first ground on which Continental seeks partial annulment of the Award is
that:

The Tribunal failed to apply the governing law of the dispute
by holding that the applicability of Article XI of the Treaty
meant that Argentina was not required to pay compensation

°° Vivendi First Annulment Decision { 64-65, quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision § 55 and Enron

Annulment Decision § 76. See also Rumeli Annulment Decision § 82.

* See paragraphs 42-74 above.

34

106:

107.

108.

to the Applicant for measures taken during the economic
difficulties, even after the economic difficulty was over.©

. Continental contends that in the proceedings before the Tribunal, Continental

had argued that even if the Tribunal were to find that Article XI of the BIT were
applicable, Argentina was still required to compensate Continental and cease its
actions in breach of the BIT once any threat to Argentina’s essential security
interests or public order had passed, and once continuation of those measures
could no longer be justified under Article XI of the BIT.

Continental contends that:

Despite having jurisdiction to do so, the Tribunal failed to
determine this claim in manifest excess of their powers within
the meaning of Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention
and/or failed to give reasons for any determination of this
claim within the meaning of Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention.™

(b) | Arguments of the parties
Continental argues, inter alia, that:

(a) Relevant international law establishes that an exceptions provision
cannot continue to justify breaches of a treaty commitment when the
required situation or condition no longer exists.®

(b) | The Tribunal made a specific factual finding that Argentina’s economic
emergency was over on December 9, 2004, and, as a result, Argentina
was from that time no longer able to rely upon a state of necessity to
justify actions that would otherwise violate its Treaty obligations. The
Tribunal further stated that Argentina’s return to international financial

Continental’s Application, paragraph 2(b).

Continental’s Memorial on Annulment, paragraphs 57-59, referring to Continental's Reply Memorial
in the proceedings before the Tribunal, paragraphs 360-364.

Continental's Memorial on Annulment, paragraph 60.

Referring to United States - Import Prohibition on Certain Shrimp and Shrimp Products (Recourse
to Article 21.5 by Malaysia) (2001), WT/DS58/RW (Panel Report) at paras. 6.1-6.2; US-Tuna
(1982) GATT 4.6; United States - Standards for Reformulated and Conventional Gasoline (29
April 1996) WT/DS2/AB/R (Report of the Appellate Body) p. 22; Phillips Petroleum Co. Iran v. Iran,
Iran - United States Claims Tribunal, Case No. 39, Award 425-39-2, 29 June 1989, 21 lran-US CTR
79, 78-82; CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/8,
Award, May 12, 2005) 9 382, 392.

35

markets occurred in September 2004. As a result, the Tribunal ruled
that Argentina’s actions with respect to its LETEs were not consistent
with its Treaty obligations.®” However, the Tribunal failed to address the
resumption of normal economic conditions on the remaining investments

in the Continental's portfolio.

(c)  Argentina’s refusal to pay the amounts due under the original terms of the
financial instruments is a continuing breach that could not be justifiable
after the state of necessity has passed.

(d) The Tribunal has thus rendered an Award that has allowed the
emergency conditions to continue in perpetuity with respect to the
majority of the Applicant's investments, which is an absurd and unfair
result at odds with international jurisprudence on exceptions clauses such
as Article x1.°°

(e) The Tribunal itself found that “None of the measures reinstated the
‘status quo ante” and that measures introduced by Argentina to
reestablish normal conditions in the financial market “failed to give any
sufficient satisfaction to CNA or Continental; on the contrary, certain of

these Measures are challenged by the Claimant as having caused further

damage to its subsidiary in breach of the BIT’

(f) Nothing in the Tribunal’s reasoning suggests that Argentina established
that it could not, within a certain time frame, fully restore the value of
Continental’s investment that had been impaired by measures adopted
during the “state of necessity” period. There is no doubt that Argentina

Referring to Award § 159 and footnote 335.

Referring to Award § 221.

Referring to International Law Commission, Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for
Internationally Wrongful Acts, with commentaries (2001), pp. 138-145; SGS Société Générale de
Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of Philippines, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/6, Decision of the Tribunal on
Objections to Jurisdiction, January 29, 2004, § 167; Philis v. Greece (18989/91) (European
Commission on Human Rights) (October 12, 1994), at section title “The Law’, J 1; U. Dierckx v.
Belgium (11966/86) (European Commission on Human Rights), Sur la Recevabilite de la requéte
(December 8, 1988) at p.7; United Parcel Service v. Canada, UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, Award,
May 24, 2007, 28.

Continental argues by way of analogy that if an exception like Article XI justified the State in
requisitioning an investor's factory during an insurgency, the continuation of that situation could not
be justified under the exception once the insurgency is over.

Referring to Award § 148.

36

has the power and fiscal capacity to honour the original terms of the
financial instruments now that the emergency period has passed, nor is
there any doubt that Argentina continues to refuse to pay on the basis of
unilateral measures imposed during the state of necessity.

Continental's claim for its continuing post-“state of necessity” period loss
(including its claim based on customary international law as reflected in
Article 27 of the ILC Articles’') merited serious and detailed consideration
but received none whatsoever.

The Tribunal reasoned that Article XI was to be understood in the context
of Article XX GATT 1947, but failed to acknowledge that there is a /ex
specialis in the GATT concerning exceptions for economic crisis-based
measures (Article XII). The Tribunal also failed to consider that while
Article XI refers to security interests, these are dealt with not under Article
XX of the GATT but Article XXI. In determining whether a particular
measure was necessary, the Tribunal failed to consider the legal
standard in the GATT applicable to balance-of-payments-based

measures.”

The Tribunal failed to apply general principles of treaty interpretation,
including the principle of effectiveness, notwithstanding Continental's
specific submissions on this issue. The Tribunal took no position on the
relationship between Article XI of the BIT and Article 25 of the ILC
Articles, except in the case of the LETEs. The Tribunal did not consider
the principles of customary international law reflected in Articles 27, 30
and 31 of the ILC Articles, which are essential legal elements that need to
be applied in conjunction with Article XI. Article XI of the BIT does not
itself state that its effect is to exempt Argentina totally from all
responsibility for any breach under the BIT, and Article XI does not permit
the Tribunal to ignore other provisions of the BIT. In general international

law, “necessary” is understood as incorporating a need for proportionality,

International Law Commission, Draft articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful
Acts, annex to General Assembly resolution 56/83 of 12 December 2001, and corrected by
document A/56/49(Vol. 1)/Corr.4 (“ILC Articles”).

Referring to General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (1947), Article XII(2)(b).

37

73
74

and the Tribunal failed to consider whether the measures affecting
Continental were being eased or removed promptly, as they were no
longer necessary because of the abatement of the crisis. The Tribunal
was required to apply the customary international law test of
proportionality at various points in time.

Applying the correct onus and standard of proof are fundamental legal
requirements of a valid award. It is established international law that the
party relying on an exceptions clause bears the onus of proving that it
applies. The Tribunal apparently understood” the proposition that
measures need not be indispensable in order to be “necessary” within the
meaning of an exception clause as placing the onus on Continental to
prove that Argentina’s measures were not necessary. This amounts to a
reversal of the burden of proof under international law which places a
burden on Argentina to prove on a balance of probabilities the elements
of the defence it was invoking. The Tribunal’s analysis of whether
Argentina’s measures were necessary consists of the Tribunal assessing
and rejecting Continental's arguments,” and the Tribunal nowhere
suggests that Argentina has met the burden of proof on necessity.

The Tribunal’s failure to apply the correct burden of proof was of material
significance because there was expert evidence that suggested a
difference of expert views on what was or was not in fact a reasonably

available alternative.

The manner of the Tribunal’s reasoning suggests that it also applied the
wrong standard of proof, requiring Continental to prove that there were
reasonably available alternatives beyond a reasonable doubt. The mere
existence of some evidence that put in question whether the alternatives
suggested were reasonably available was apparently sufficient for the
Tribunal to conclude that Argentina’s chosen measures were necessary.

Referring to Award § 193ff.
Referring to Award  200ff.

38

109.

(m) The Tribunal either failed to consider Continental's claim for its post-
“state of necessity” period loss and associated arguments, or if it did
consider them, failed to give “reasons for its rejection as an indispensable
component of the statement of reasons on which its conclusion was
based”, and ignored a decisive argument that it was required to
address.”°

(n) | The Award in this case is inconsistent with the LG&E Award, which found
that under Article XI of the BIT, once the emergency situation has been
overcome, “the State is no longer exempted from responsibility for any
violation of its obligations under the international law and shall reassume
them immediately’.”°

Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

(a) The Tribunal never applied the state of necessity doctrine, so there was
no reason for the Tribunal to determine what happened upon termination
of the state of necessity. The Tribunal said that it would first analyse
Article XI as its application “may be such as to render superfluous a

o 77

detailed examination of the defense of necessity”.“” That ultimately
proved to be the case.

(b) The Tribunal clearly distinguished between the doctrine of state of
necessity and Article XI of the Treaty,”® which shows that the Tribunal did
not confuse the two concepts.”

(c) The Tribunal concluded that each of the measures complained of by

Continental were within the scope of Article XI,°° except for the

81

restructuring of Treasury Bills (LETEs),”' which the Tribunal expressly

Referring to MINE Annulment Decision § 6.101; Schreuer Commentary at 1020.

Referring to LG&E Energy Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Award, July 25,
2007, (‘LG&E Award”) J§ 228, 261, 265, 266.

Referring to Award § 162.

Referring to Award, Part IV.A, especially {4 163-168.

Distinguishing Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets L.P., \CSID Case No. ARB/01/3, Award,
May 22, 2007 and Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/16,
Award, September 28, 2007, which, Argentina argues, did confuse the two concepts.

Referring to Award 9§ 231-233.

Referring to Award § 220.

39

stated also did not fall within the scope of the customary international law
doctrine of state of necessity.”

Continental’s argument is misplaced, since the application of Article XI
entails that there is no breach of the Treaty whatsoever, whereas the
application of the state of necessity doctrine presupposes the existence
of a Treaty violation.

An ICSID Tribunal is not bound to follow the decisions of Tribunals in
other cases, and failure to do so does not mean that it has failed to
decide on the matters on which it had to. The Award is in any event
consistent with the CMS Annulment Decision.

It was not the case that the Tribunal required Continental to prove its
case without demanding that Argentina meet its burden of proof.
Argentina presented a great deal of evidence to the Tribunal indicating
that Article XI was applicable to the facts, and Argentina ultimately proved
that it was.

The Award explained and applied in an accurate and correct fashion the
standard of proof in relation to Article XI of the BIT.** Because
Argentina’s position was that there was no other alternative measures
that it could have taken, the Tribunal had to analyse the issues by
reference to the alternative measures that Continental claimed could
have been taken by Argentina. The Award first correctly established that
Argentina discharged its obligation to prove that it was acting under the
protection of Article XI after considering that each of the requirements set
forth in the BIT had been met, and subsequently analyzed the arguments
and evidence provided by Continental, which were deemed to be
insufficient. The Tribunal took into consideration and rendered a decision
on each of the alleged alternatives, bearing in mind the evidence
produced.®° Continental cannot specifically identify any part of the Award

Referring to Award § 222.

Referring to CMS Annulment Decision 9129-131.
Referring to Award 9196.

Referring to Award 9 220-222.

40

110.

111.

in which the Tribunal has incorrectly applied the principles governing the
burden of proof—which would not in any event amount to a ground for
annulment.

(h) — The Tribunal determined, in application of Article XI, that the pesification
of the economy and the other related measures were valid and lawful
measures which produced their effects at the time when they were
adopted. The measures had their effects at the time when implemented,
notwithstanding the survival of the legal relationships arising out of those
contracts. They are not continuing acts, in the same way as the
continuing detention of a hostage.

(i) Article XI of the BIT does not require measures to be temporary in nature,
unlike the provisions of article 27(1) of the Draft Articles of the ILC with
respect to the situations which preclude wrongfulness, such as the state
of necessity.

(j) The cases relied on by Continental refer to facts which are very different
from those upon which the Tribunal had to render its decision in the
Award.

(c) |The Committee’s views

In this ground for annulment, Continental refers to an argument that it advanced
in the proceedings before the Tribunal, in paragraphs 360 to 364 of its Reply
Memorial, dated 17 August 2006. Continental's argument is, in essence, that
the Tribunal failed to consider or decide upon this argument at all, and that this

failure amounted to an annullable error.
The relevant paragraphs of Continental's Reply Memorial read as follows:

5. In the Alternative, Any Threats To Argentina’s
Essential Security Interests or To Public Order Have
Passed

360. Even if Article XI does disrupt the BIT parties’ obligation
to compensate, Argentina must still compensate the Investor

a

and cease its actions in breach of the Treaty because any
threat to Argentina’s essential security interests or public
order has passed. In rejecting Argentina’s argument that
Argentina could rely on Article XI of the US-Argentina BIT to
avoid compensating the Claimant, the CMS Tribunal found
that ‘fe]ven if the plea of necessity were accepted,
compliance with the obligation would reemerge as soon as
the circumstance precluding wrongfulness no longer existed,
which is the case at present.’”°

361. Indeed, the CMS Tribunal states that Professor
Slaughter confirmed this view during her cross-examination
before that Tribunal.

362. The view of Argentina’s expert and the CMS Tribunal on
this point is consistent with the ordinary meaning of Article XI.
The Article preserves the application of measures necessary
for the maintenance of public order or to protect essential
security interests; the Article says nothing about the
application of measures no longer necessary for the
maintenance of public order or to protect essential security
interests.

363. The view of Argentina’s expert and the CMS Tribunal on
this point is also consistent with “relevant rules of international
law applicable in the relations between the parties.” Article
27(a) of the ILC Articles captures the customary international
law rule, supported by the ICJ in the Rainbow Warrior and
Gabéikovo-Nagymaros cases, that a state must comply with
its international obligation as soon as the circumstances
precluding wrongfulness no longer exist.* The Edwards
Report confirms that the economic circumstances on which
Argentina relies to invoke Article XI no longer exist.

364. Argentina has accepted that its economy has improved.
The Commentary to Article 27 of the ILC Articles clarifies that
states invoking the defense of necessity must fulfill their
obligations to the extent that the circumstances giving rise to
the defense have changed.** Article 27 of the ILC Articles,
therefore, obliges Argentina to pay compensation in light of
the improvement in Argentina’s economy.

$69 See Part Two, Section V(C) above.
%°" See Part Two, Section VI(B)(4) above.

$62 CMS v. Argentina, Award at para. 382. (Claimant's Book of Authorities,
Tab CLA 85).

63 CMS v. Argentina, Award at para. 392: “The answer to this question by
the Respondent's expert clarifies the issue from the point of view of both
its temporary nature and the duty to provide compensation: while it is

42

112.

113.

difficult to reach a determination as long as the crisis is unfolding, it is
possible to envisage a situation in which the investor would have a claim
against the government for the compliance with its obligations once the
crisis was over; thereby concluding that any suspension of the right to
compensation is strictly temporary, and that this right is not extinguished
by the crisis events.” (Claimant's Book of Authorities, Tab CLA 85).

%64 See section V of this Reply Memorial.

%65 Edwards Report at paras. 143-146 and para. 147: “The crisis situation
created in late 2001 and early 2002, is now past history. Indeed, with the
relaxation of restrictions on deposit withdrawals during the first half of
2003, the crisis was over.”

66 J Crawford, The International Law Commission's Articles on State
Responsibility at 189. The Commentary says the “words ‘and to the
extent’ [in Article 27(a)] are intended to cover situations in which the
conditions preventing compliance gradually lessen and allow for partial
performance of the obligation.” (Claimant's Book of Authorities, Tab CLA
132).

Continental does not refer to any other part of the proceedings before the
Tribunal where Continental advanced this argument. However, the Committee
notes that the argument does appear to have been reflected in at least two
other paragraphs of Continental’s Reply Memorial:

Argentina’s Counter-Memorial acknowledges that the
economy has now recovered and that the conditions that
Argentina relies upon to justify its measures no longer prevail.
Yet, Argentina fails to draw the logical conclusion from this
state of affairs - that its default on its public debt should be
cured and deposit holders should be fully compensated for
the contiscatory pesification of their deposits. (Continental’s
Reply Memorial, para 106 (footnote omitted).)

The Argentine economy has now recovered from its former

condition. The defences invoked by Argentina, even if they

were properly made out, would still require compensation to

be paid in these circumstances (Continental’s Reply

Memorial, para 407).
The only specific reference in the Award to this particular argument of
Continental appears to be in the final sentence of paragraph 64, where the
Award refers to paragraph 106 of Continental’s Reply Memorial (quoted above)
and paraphrases Continental's argument as follows: “Since Argentina’s
economy has now fully recovered, the Claimant concludes in this respect that
‘deposit holders should be fully compensated for the confiscatory pesification of
their deposits”.

43

114

115.

. The Tribunal’s main findings on the legal effect of Article XI of the BIT are
contained in paragraphs 160 to 169 of the Award. In these paragraphs, the
Tribunal made findings of law in respect of the differences between Article XI of
the BIT and the principle of necessity under customary international law. In the
proceedings before the Tribunal, it was not disputed by either party that Article
25 of the ILC Articles codified the customary international law principles,®° and
the Tribunal proceeded on this basis.®”

Article XI of the BIT is quoted in paragraph 66 above. Article 25 of the ILC
Articles provides as follows:

1. Necessity may not be invoked by a State as a ground for
precluding the wrongfulness of an act not in conformity
with an international obligation of that State unless the
act:

(a) Is the only way for the State to safeguard an
essential interest against a grave and imminent
peril;

and

(b) Does not seriously impair an essential interest of
the State or States towards which the obligation
exists, or of the international community as a
whole.

2. In any case, necessity may not be invoked by a State as
a ground for precluding wrongtulness if:

(a) The International obligation in question excludes
the possibility of invoking necessity; or

(b) The State has contributed to the situation of
necessity®®
The principle of customary international law which this provision was accepted
as codifying is referred to below for convenience as the “principle of necessity”.
Article 27 of the ILC Articles then adds as follows:

The invocation of a_ circumstance precluding
wrongfulness in accordance with this chapter is without
prejudice to:

Award § 165, footnote 238.

Award {| 165 (although the Tribunal’s comments in footnote 238 may suggest that the Tribunal itself
refrained from expressly pronouncing on the point).

Award § 303.

44

116.

117.

118.

119.

(a) compliance with the obligation in question, if and
to the extent that the circumstance precluding
wrongfuiness no longer exists;

(b) the question of compensation for any material loss
caused by the act in question.
The Tribunal found two main differences between Article XI of the BIT and the
principle of necessity.

First, the Tribunal found that the principle of necessity can be invoked in any
context against any international obligation (other than a norm ius cogens).
Because of this, the Tribunal considered that the principle of necessity is of an
“exceptional nature”,°° and “can only be accepted on an exceptional basis”,°°
and that its application is subject to “strict conditions’.°' On the other hand,
Article XI of the BIT was considered to be a specific provision which could
potentially apply only to the particular investment protection obligations in the

bilaterally agreed BIT itself.°* Because of this, the Tribunal considered that
Article XI of the BIT “is not necessarily subject to the same conditions of

application as the plea of necessity under general international law’ °°

It is clearly implicit from this that the Tribunal was contemplating that the
potential application of Article XI of the BIT was not necessarily subject to the
same ‘strict conditions” as the application of the principle of necessity.
However, the Tribunal did go on to say that the customary international law
principle of necessity might nonetheless be relevant to its interpretation.**

Secondly, the Tribunal considered that the effect of the application of Article X|
of the BIT was different to the effect of the principle of necessity. The Tribunal
described the effect of Article XI of the BIT as follows:

The consequence would be that, under Art. XI, such
measures would lie outside the scope of the Treaty so that
the party taking it would not be in breach of the relevant BIT
provision. A private investor of the other party could therefore

Award 9 167, footnote 244, quoting the ILC Commentary to Article 25 of the ILC Articles.
Award §§ 167, footnote 244, quoting Ci gy s Project (Hungar ), Jud
1.C.J. Reports 1997, p. 7, at p. 40, para. 51.

Award 9 166 and 167.

Award § 167.

Award § 167.

Award § 168.

45

120.

121.

122.

95

not succeed in its claim for responsibility and damages in
such an instance, because the respondent party would not
have acted against its BIT obligations since these would not
be applicable, provided of course that the conditions for the
application of Art. XI are met. In other words, Art. XI restricts
or derogates from the substantial obligations undertaken by
the parties to the BIT in so far as the conditions of its
invocation are met. In fact, Art. XI has been defined as a
safeguard clause; it has been said that it recognizes
“reserved rights,” or that it contemplates “non-precluded”
measures to which a contracting state party can resort.®®

. The difference in this effect of the application of Article XI of the BIT and of the
application of the principle of necessity was explained by the Tribunal in
footnote 236 of the Award as follows:

This Tribunal is thus minded to accept the position of the Ad
Hoc Annulment Committee in the ICSID case CMS v.
Argentina, where it states: “Article XI is a threshold
requirement: if it applies, the substantive obligations under
the Treaty do not apply. By contrast, Article 25 is an excuse
which is only relevant once it has been decided that there has
otherwise been a breach of those substantive obligations”
(CMS Annulment Decision, para. 129). On the one hand, if
Art. XI is applicable because the measure at issue was
necessary in order to safeguard essential security interest,
then the treaty is inapplicable to such measure. On the other
hand, if a State is forced by necessity to resort to a measure
in breach of an international obligation but complying with the
requirements listed in Art. 25 ILC, the State escapes from the
responsibility that would otherwise derive from that breach.

Subsequently, in footnote 241 of the Award, the Tribunal quoted from one of the
reports of the Special Rapporteur produced in the course of the ILC’s work on
the ILC Articles, to the effect that “when a State invokes the state of necessity, it
has full knowledge of the fact that it deliberately chooses a procedure that does
not abide an international obligation’. The Tribunal then added that “This is an
argument that would not be applicable to the invocation of Art. XI’.

At footnote 242 of the Award, the Tribunal again proceeded to state that it
agreed with paragraphs 129 to 134 of the CMS Annulment Decision. Paragraph
129 of the CMS Annulment Decision was already referred to in footnote 236 of
the Award, quoted above. The full text of that paragraph is as follows:

Award § 164 (footnotes omitted).

46

The Committee observes first that there is some analogy in
the language used in Article XI of the BIT and in Article 25 of
the ILC’s Articles on State Responsibility. The first text
mentions “necessary” measures and the second relates to the
“state of necessity’. However Article XI specifies the
conditions under which the Treaty may be applied, whereas
Article 25 is drafted in a negative way: it excludes the
application of the state of necessity on the merits, unless
certain stringent conditions are met. Moreover, Article XI is a
threshold requirement: if it applies, the substantive obligations
under the Treaty do not apply. By contrast, Article 25 is an
excuse which is only relevant once it has been decided that
there has otherwise been a breach of those substantive
obligations.

123. At footnote 242 of the Award, the Tribunal then proceeded further to state that it
disagreed with the position taken at paragraph 55 of the Mitchell Annulment
Decision. In the latter, it was stated in relation to a similarly worded provision in
a different bilateral investment treaty that:

Article X(1) of the Treaty is a provision relating to the causes

for exemption from liability, or, in other words, a provision

which precludes the wrongfulness of the behavior of the State

in certain exceptional circumstances, and not a provision

which delimits the scope of application of the Treaty [footnote

omitted].
By expressly disagreeing with this paragraph of the Mitchell Annulment
Decision, the Tribunal in the present case by necessary implication took the
position that Article XI of the BIT does delimit the scope of application of the
BIT.

124. The Committee considers it abundantly clear from the Award that the Tribunal
considered that where the host State takes a measure of the kind referred to in
Article XI of the BIT, the substantive obligations under the BIT simply do not
apply to that measure. The logical consequence of this conclusion is that the
measure cannot amount to a violation of any provision of the BIT.

125. The Tribunal found that Article XI applied to relevant measures taken by
Argentina in this case because they were taken “in the face of the social and
economic crisis”,°° and found that they “were sufficient in their design to address
the crisis and were applied in a reasonable and proportionate way at the end of

8 Award q 233.

47

126.

127.

7
98

2001-2002"*” However, while the Tribunal reached this conclusion in respect of
the measures taken by Argentina in 2001-2002, it reached a contrary conclusion
in relation to the restructuring of the LETEs through Decree 1735/04, a measure
that was adopted in December 2004. One of the reasons for finding that Article
XI did not apply to Decree 1735/04 was that by that time “Argentina’s financial
conditions were evolving towards normality’ .°®

It is true that the Tribunal does not expressly address the question of whether
Argentina could have any responsibility under the BIT in respect of the 2001-
2002 measures once the economic crisis was over. However, the Committee is
satisfied that the Tribunal’s position on this issue is sufficiently implicit from a
reading of the Award as a whole, and in the particular light of the passages
referred to above. As the Tribunal found that the BIT was simply inapplicable to
the 2001-2002 measures by virtue of Article XI, due to the crisis then prevailing,
it must be understood as implicit that the Tribunal was of the view that Argentina
was under no obligation to compensate Continental for having taken those
measures, once the crisis was over. If it is the case, as the Tribunal found, that
the BIT was simply inapplicable to the 2001-2002 measures by virtue of Article
XI, due to the crisis then prevailing, then it would follow that those measures
cannot be a violation of the BIT, even if their consequences continue to be felt
after the crisis is over. Whether the measures were temporary or permanent,
and in either case, whether the temporary or permanent effects continued to be
felt after the period of crisis was over, was considered by the Tribunal not to be
material. If, as the Tribunal found, those measures were within the scope of
Article XI, the logical conclusion would be that the BIT did not apply to the
continuing consequences of those measures even after the end of the economic
Crisis.

The argument advanced in paragraphs 360 to 364 of Continental's Reply
Memorial in the proceedings before the Tribunal, quoted at paragraph 111
above, relies primarily on Article 27 of the ILC Articles. However, the Tribunal
expressly found, as set out above, that the effect of the application of Article XI
of the BIT is different to the effect of the application of Article 25 (and by logical

Award § 232.
Award § 221(a).

48

128.

129.

implication, of Article 27) of the ILC Articles. The argument in Continental’s
Reply Memorial also relies on paragraphs 382 and 392 of the CMS Award.°?
However, the findings of the tribunal in the CMS Award were subsequently
criticised by the ad hoc committee in the CMS Annulment Decision. The ad hoc
committee in that case said with reference to the CMS Award that:

... the Tribunal evidently considered that Article XI was to be

interpreted in the light of the customary international law

concerning the state of necessity and that, if the conditions

fixed under that law were not met, Argentina's defense under

Article XI was likewise to be rejected.’
The CMS Annulment Decision also went on to criticise the CMS Award for
“simply assuming that Article XI and Article 25 are on the same footing”,'°' and
for failing to recognise that “Article XI and Article 25 are substantively
p12

differen As set out above, the Tribunal in the present case expressly

agreed with paragraphs 129 to 134 of the CMS Annulment Decision.

It may have been preferable for the Tribunal to deal with this argument
expressly. However, its failure to do so might be explained by the fact that the
only part of the proceedings before the Tribunal that Continental has referred to
in which this argument was advanced consisted of several relatively brief
paragraphs in its Reply Memorial. On the basis of the material before it, it does
not appear to the Committee that this was a major argument of Continental in
the proceedings before the Tribunal. Continental's Reply Memorial was some
155 pages long, of which this argument occupied some two pages.
Continental’s initial Memorial in the proceedings before the Tribunal, dated 27
April 2004, which was some 70 pages long, does not appear to raise this
argument at all.

It has not been suggested to the Committee that the argument was raised in
Continental’s original request for arbitration. Continental has not provided the

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Award, May
12, 2005 (“CMS Award”).
CMS Annulment Decision § 124. The ad hoc committee said that the tribunal “evidently
considered” this, because although the tribunal's reasoning had been “inadequate” and “could
certainly have been clearer”, both parties had understood the award in this sense, and the tribunal’s
reasoning was found to be sufficiently implicit (ibid, at 1] 124-127).
CMS Annulment Decision § 131 (and see {§ 128-136 generally).
CMS Annulment Decision § 130.

49

130.

131.

132.

103

104

105

Committee with transcripts of oral argument before the Tribunal in which this
argument is advanced. The Tribunal’s failure to address the argument more
directly might therefore well be a result of the limited degree of prominence with
which this argument was advanced by Continental in the proceedings before the
Tribunal.

Furthermore, some of the authorities relied on by Continental in relation to this
ground of annulment appear not to have been cited by Continental in its
Memorial or Reply Memorial in the proceedings before the Tribunal.'®? Other
authorities appear to have been cited by Continental before the Tribunal in
relation to different arguments.’ In any event, the Tribunal is not required to
cite or expressly deal with every authority cited to it in relation to a particular
argument. It certainly cannot be expected to consider authorities that have not
been cited to it in relation to a particular argument.

Whatever the reasons for the Tribunal’s omission to deal with this argument
more directly, the Committee is satisfied that the Tribunal’s reasons for rejecting
the argument are “implicit in the considerations and conclusions contained in
the award’ (see paragraph 102 above). The Committee rejects the contention
that the Tribunal failed to state reasons, within the meaning of Article 52(1)(e) of
the ICSID Convention, for not accepting the argument in paragraphs 360 to 364
of Continental's Reply Memorial.

The Committee also considers that the Tribunal, in reaching the conclusion that
it did, did not fail to apply the applicable law. The Committee is of the view that
the law applicable to the Claimant’s claims was the ICSID Convention, the BIT
and applicable international law,"°> and that this is the law that the Tribunal
applied.

For instance, United States - Import Prohibition on Certain Shrimp and Shrimp Products (Recourse
to Article 21.5 by Malaysia) (2001), WT/DS58/RW (Panel Report); United States - Standards for
Reformulated and Conventional Gasoline (29 April 1996) WT/DS2/AB/R (Report of the Appellate
Body).

For instance, Phillips Petroleum Co. Iran v. Iran, Iran - United States Claims Tribunal, Case No. 39,
Award 425-39-2, 29 June 1989, 21 Iran-US CTR 79, 78-82, which is cited in paragraph 245 of
Continental’s Memorial before the Tribunal in support of the proposition that the assessment of
damages by a tribunal can take into account opportunity loss.

See Enron Annulment Decision {§ 139, 225 and 246 and the authorities there cited.

50

133. Continental argues that the Tribunal erred in its analysis of the law of the GATT-
WTO. However, the Tribunal was clearly not purporting to apply that body of
law, but merely took it into account as relevant to determining the correct
interpretation and application of Article XI of the BIT.'°° Even if it could be
established by Continental that the Tribunal reached an erroneous interpretation
of Article XI of the BIT based on an erroneous understanding of GATT-WTO
law, that would amount only to an error of law, which is not a ground of
annulment (see paragraphs 88 above).

134. Continental also argues that the Tribunal applied the incorrect burden of proof
and standard of proof.'” Thus, in paragraph 67 of Continental’s Memorial on
Annulment it is argued:

Furthermore, following its review of WTO case law, the
Tribunal apparently understood the proposition that measures
need not be indispensable in order to be “necessary” within
the meaning of an exception clause as placing the onus on
Continental to prove that Argentina’s measures were not
necessary. This amounts to a reversal of the burden of proof
under international law. It was for Argentina to prove on the
balance of probabilities the elements of the defence it was
invoking. The Tribunal’s analysis of whether Argentina’s
measures were necessary consists of the Tribunal assessing
and rejecting Continental’s arguments. At no point does the
Tribunal ever suggest or state that Argentina has met the
burden of proof on necessity; the question for the Tribunal is
whether Continental proved that the measures are not
necessary. At paragraph 204 of the Award, for example, the
Tribunal’s statement that “[t]he evidence does not permit the
Tribunal to conclude” is a clear indication that it had reversed
the applicable burden of proof. This is in itself a ground for
annulment amounting to a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure within the meaning of Article
52(1)(d) and/or the manifest excess of power within the
meaning of Article 52(1)(b). [Footnotes omitted.]

135. The Committee notes that the ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules
contain no provisions with respect to the burden of proof or standard of proof.
Accordingly, there cannot be any requirement that a tribunal expressly apply a

108 See especially Award J§ 192-195.

107 This argument was not raised in Continental's Application. In Continental’s Memorial on
Annulment, this argument was raised in connection with Continental's ground of annulment that the
Tribunal failed to decide Continental's claim for loss after the state of necessity was over, and the
argument is dealt with in that context in the present decision. In Continental's Reply Memorial on
Annulment, it was presented as a separate ground of annulment.

51

136.

137.

108

particular burden of proof or standard of proof in determining the dispute before
it. Indeed, the tribunal is not obliged expressly to articulate any specific burden
of proof or standard of proof and to analyse the evidence in those terms, as
opposed simply to making findings of fact on the basis of the evidence before it.

In any event, the Committee does not accept Continental’s suggestion that “ The
Tribunal’s analysis of whether Argentina’s measures were necessary consists of
the Tribunal assessing and rejecting Continental’s arguments” or that “the
question for the Tribunal is whether Continental proved that the measures are
not necessary.”' Even if it could be argued to be an annullable error, such as
a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, for a tribunal to place
the burden on a claimant to disprove the applicability of a defence, rather than
on the respondent to establish the defence, the Committee is not persuaded
that this is what occurred in the present case.

The Tribunal dealt with the applicable legal standard for determining whether a
measure was “necessary” within the meaning of Article XI of the BIT in
paragraphs 189-195 of the Award. The Tribunal reached its initial conclusion of
fact in paragraphs 196-197 of the Award, in which it found that:

... According to these principles, the next step for us is to
assess whether the Measures contributed materially to the
realization of their legitimate aims under Art. XI of the BIT,
namely the protection of the essential security interests of
Argentina in the economic and social crisis it was facing.
More specifically, whether the Measures were apt to and did
make such a material or a decisive contribution to this end.

.. In light of the analysis we have carried out above, we
believe that this was the case. In general terms, within the
economic and financial situation of Argentina towards the end
of 2001, the Measures at issue (the Corralito, the Corralon,
the pesification, the default and the subsequent restructuring
of those debt instruments involved here) were in part
inevitable, or unavoidable, in part indispensable and in any
case material or decisive in order to react positively to the
crisis, to prevent the complete break-down of the financial
system, the implosion of the economy and the growing threat
to the fabric of Argentinean society and generally to assist in
overcoming the crisis. In the Tribunal’s view, there was

Continental’s Memorial on Annulment, para 67.

52

138.

139.

140.

undoubtedly “a genuine relationship of end and means in this
respect.” [Footnotes omitted.]
That conclusion was clearly based on all of the findings of the Tribunal in Part V
of the Award (paragraphs 100 to 159), which in turn were based on the
Tribunal’s assessment of the evidence in the case as a whole.

The Tribunal then said at paragraph 198 that it would proceed specifically to
consider the further questions:

(a) whether there were alternatives to the measures taken by Argentina, not
in breach of the BIT, that might have been available when the Measures
challenged were taken and that would have yielded equivalent
results/relief; and

(b) | whether Argentina could have adopted at some earlier time different
policies, that would have avoided or prevented the situation that brought
about the adoption of the measures challenged.

These further questions were then considered by the Tribunal at paragraphs
200 to 222, and 223 to 230, of the Award respectively. In these paragraphs
(especially paragraphs 200 to 205 of the Award), the Tribunal deals with certain
specific alternative measures that Continental claimed could have been adopted
by Argentina to deal with the crisis, and (especially paragraph 223) with specific
measures that Continental claimed could have been adopted by Argentina to
have prevented the crisis. These alternatives having been specifically raised by
Continental, they were unsurprisingly expressly considered by the Tribunal.
The Committee does not see any basis for suggesting that by doing so, the
Tribunal thereby placed the burden of proof on Continental.

The Committee is not persuaded that the Tribunal applied a standard of proof of
“beyond reasonable doubt”, as Continental contends. No particular standard of
proof is prescribed by the ICSID Convention or the Arbitration Rules, and the
Tribunal did not articulate any particular standard of proof that it was applying.
The Committee is not persuaded that the Tribunal made its finding otherwise
than upon its own evaluation of the evidence in the case as a whole. That was
consistent with the ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules. Even if there was,

53

141.

142.

143.

144.

145.

109
110

as Continental contends, “a difference of competent views on what was or was
not in fact a reasonably available alternative”, that difference was one for the
Tribunal to resolve on the evidence. Dissatisfaction with the Tribunal’s finding
of facts in this respect cannot amount to an annullable error.

Finally, the argument that the Award is inconsistent with the LG&E Award
clearly cannot establish an annullable error. The Tribunal was not bound by
previous decisions of other ICSID Tribunals. Even if it were assumed that
another ICSID Award were correct on a particular issue of law and that the
Award was wrong, that would be merely an error of law. Error of law is not a
ground of annulment, and it is therefore not for the Committee to determine
whether the Tribunal applied the law correctly.

The Committee finds it unnecessary to express any view on whether “a manifest
error of law may, in an exceptional situation, be of such egregious nature as to
amount to a manifest excess of powers”,'® since even if it may, the Committee

is not persuaded that there has been any such manifest error in this case.

The Committee concludes that this ground of annulment must therefore be
rejected.

Failure to determine Continental’s expropriation claim in relation to the
LETEs

(a) Introduction

As has been observed, while the Tribunal reached the conclusion that the
measures taken by Argentina in 2001-2002 were outside the scope of the BIT
by virtue of Article XI, it reached a contrary conclusion in relation to the
December 2004 measures for the restructuring of the LETEs.''°

Having found that Article XI was not applicable to these December 2004
measures, the Tribunal then proceeded to consider whether those measures
violated any of the substantive provisions of the BIT which had allegedly been

See paragraph 88 above.
See paragraphs 42-74 above.

54

146.

invoked by Continental. At paragraphs 264 and 265 of the Award, the Tribunal
found that the December 2004 measures for the restructuring of the LETEs
were in breach of the fair and equitable treatment clause of the BIT (Article

I(2)(a)).

In relation to this part of its request for annulment, Continental argued that in the
proceedings before the Tribunal it claimed that the December 2004 measures
for the restructuring of the LETEs were a breach not only of the fair and
equitable treatment clause, but also of the expropriation clause of the BIT
(Article IV). In relation to this latter claim, the Tribunal said at paragraph 285 of
the Award as follows:

Before concluding, we recall that we have found above that
the restructuring of the LETEs held by CNA was not covered
by the defense of necessity both under the BIT and the
principles of customary international law and caused
substantial loss to the Claimant. This has led the Tribunal to
hold that the restructuring as concerns CNA was in breach of
the Fair and Equitable Treatment of Art. Il (2)(a) of the BIT
and that Claimant is entitled to indemnification for that loss in
the form of damages. Continental has claimed that the
restructuring and its implementation constitute at the same
time an expropriation and has asked indemnification under
either provision of the BIT in an amount corresponding to the
original dollar nominal value of those LETEs. Having already
decided the same issue under Art. II(2)(a) BIT, we do not
need to pronounce further on the alternative claim of violation
of Art. IV submitted by the Claimant.

147. The second ground on which Continental seeks partial annulment of the Award

is that:

After finding that Argentina had breached its obligation to
provide fair and equitable treatment with respect to the
Applicant’s investment in Argentine Government Treasury
Bills (known as “LETEs’), the Tribunal refused to answer the
Applicant’s question of whether Argentina owed the Applicant
compensation for its expropriation of the same investments
even though the amount of compensation mandated by the
Treaty for such an expropriation would have been different
than the standard applied for a breach of fair and equitable
treatment under the Treaty.'"'

148. Continental contends that:

m1

Continental's Application, paragraph 2(c).

55

(b)

In its Award, the Tribunal wrongly construed the Article
I(2)(a) and Article 1V(1) claims as made in the alternative.
The Tribunal’s consequent failure to apply Article 1V(1) and to
determine the expropriation claim in relation to the LETEs
placed before it by Continental is a manifest excess of powers
within the meaning of Article 52(1)(b) and/or a failure to state
reasons within the meaning of Article 52(1)(e). This failure
had a very significant impact because Article |V(1) provides a
specific formula for the calculation of damages for
expropriation. This formula would have led to Continental
being awarded significantly higher damages."'

Arguments of the parties

149. Continental argues, inter alia, that:

114

(a)

At paragraph 272 of the Award, the Tribunal sets out its understanding
that Continental claimed that its property had been expropriated by (1)
the pesification of [CNA’s] U.S. dollar denominated deposits and
securities at a much below market exchange rate; (2) the restructuring of
the GGLs at terms that did not reflect their acquisition value; and (3) the
fact that the LETEs have been deprived of their value after CNA had not
accepted the “unreasonable” terms of their restructuring offered by
Argentina on May 31 and September 16 of 2002.''% The Tribunal
rejected the first two of these claims by virtue of its interpretation of
Article XI of the BIT,""* and this ground of annulment relates principally to
the Tribunal’s finding in relation to the third.

In the proceedings before the Tribunal, Continental accepted that
compensation due for breaches of Article IV and Article II(2)(a) would not
be cumulative. However, Continental made clear that it sought the higher
amount of compensation due under the expropriation clause (Article

‘2 Continental's Memorial on Annulment, paragraph 79 (footnote omitted).
Referring to Award § 272.
Referring to Award § 275.

56

118
116
117
118

\v).'"5 Continental argued that damages for expropriation are measured

at the date of expropriation, without the benefit of hindsight.'"®

Continental claimed that the compensation due in the event that
Argentina was found to have expropriated the LETEs to be some USD
633,000 more than that which would be due if Argentina was found to
have breached the fair and equitable treatment provision in respect of the
LETEs (USD 4,126,000 as against USD 3,493,000).""”

Article IV of the BIT establishes a standard of compensation for
expropriation, which is different to other types of compensatory damages.
Under the BIT, the Tribunal was required to fix the date of the
expropriation, and determine its value at that time using information only
available at that time. The Tribunal did not do this.

Although the question of the different basis of assessing damages for
expropriation contrary to the BIT was expressly before the Tribunal, it
simply ignored the question and failed to consider or apply the BIT.

At paragraph 285 of the Award, the Tribunal stated that Continental was
seeking indemnification “under either provision of the BIT in an amount
corresponding to the original dollar nominal value of those LETEs”
(emphasis added), and that having decided the issue under the fair and
equitable treatment clause, the Tribunal did “not need to pronounce
further on the alternative claim’ under the expropriation clause.

However, Continental did not plead or otherwise argue the Article II(2)(a)
and Article IV(1) claims in the alternative, but on the contrary asked the
Tribunal to declare that Argentina breached both provisions
individually.'"8

Continental was entitled to make independent claims in respect of the
LETEs under both the fair and equitable treatment clause and under the

Referring to Award {J 22, 77, 275; Continental's Reply Memorial, paragraph 380.
Referring to paragraphs 17 of the Second Rosen Report.

Referring to Continental's Reply Memorial, paragraph 379.

Referring to Continental's Reply Memorial, paragraphs 379, 380, 408.

57

150.

119

120

expropriation clause. A finding on the former does not render a finding on
the latter unnecessary, especially as Continental claimed a significantly
higher amount of damages in respect of the latter.

The Tribunal’s consequent failure to determine the expropriation claim in
relation to the LETEs is a manifest excess of powers within the meaning
of Article 52(1)(b) and/or a failure to state reasons within the meaning of
Article 52(1)(e).""°

The Tribunal’s failure to determine the expropriation claim is also a

serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.

Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

(a)

The Award analysis should be interpreted as a whole, complementary to
the rest of the decision. Continental bases its argument solely on
paragraph 285 of the Award, isolating it from the rest of the content of the
Award and distorting the findings of the Tribunal with respect to this

issue.

At paragraph 265, the Tribunal found that the breach of the fair and
equitable treatment clause related only to the restructuring of the LETEs,
and that the pesification of the LETEs generally fell within Article XI of the
BIT.

In the proceedings before the Tribunal, Continental's expropriation claim
related to the pesification of the LETEs and the default on the LETEs;
Continental did not claim before the Tribunal that the expropriation claim
related to the restructuring of the LETEs."*° The Tribunal found that
Article XI of the BIT applied to the pesification of the LETEs and the
default on the LETEs. Thus, the expropriation claim was basically
covered by Article XI.

Referring to Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, |ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7,
Decision on Annulment, November 1, 2006 (“Mitchell Annulment Decision”) {| 21; CDC Group plc v.
Republic of Seychelles, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/14, Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005 (“CDC
Annulment Decision”) {| 70.

Referring to Continental’s Memorial on Annulment, quoting paragraph 188 of Continental's
Memorial on the Merits.

58

121

At paragraphs 276 and 284, the Tribunal distinguished between types of
measures that amount to expropriation and types of measures that do

not.

The Tribunal found that the restructuring of the LETEs was inconsistent
with the fair and equitable treatment clause,’ but did not find that there
was any expropriation, which finding would have been inconsistent with
its previous finding that the pesification of the LETEs was permitted
under Article XI.

It is evident that the Tribunal found that there had been no expropriation
of the LETEs in terms of Article IV, which always continued being held by
Continental’s subsidiary. Paragraph 285 refers to “the restructuring of
the LETEs held by CNA’. It is inconceivable that the Tribunal would
accept the validity of a measure adopted by a State with regard to an
investor's asset, while considering, at the same time, that such asset has

been expropriated by another of the measures under consideration.

Paragraph 254 considered the difference between an expropriation and a
breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard. The restructuring of
the LETEs involved an offer to start repaying the debt securities in
default. Regardless of any assessment of such restructuring which might
be carried out, that measure could have never amounted to expropriation
in accordance with the Tribunal’s analysis.

In paragraph 285 of the Award, the Tribunal found it unnecessary to
examine again the issue of the restructuring of the LETEs, as the issue
had already been dealt with in the treatment of the fair and equitable
treatment clause.

Even if Continental did not argue the Article II(2)(a) and Article IV(1)
claims in the alternative, it was open to the Tribunal itself to regard the

claims as alternative per se.

Referring to Award 9 220-222.

59

(j) The Tribunal’s conclusions on this matter are fully grounded and any
attentive and bona fide reader could understand them. There has been
no manifest excess of power or departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure or failure to state reasons.

(k) | The Committee should reject in limine Continental's contention that there
was a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, as this
contention was raised for the first time in Continental’s Reply Memorial in
the annulment proceedings. Continental does not even state what the
tule of procedure that has allegedly been departed from is, let alone
provide reasons for such claim.

(I) Continental did not argue before the Tribunal that the standard of
compensation for expropriation is different to the standard of
compensation under the fair and equitable treatment clause. Rather,
Continental argued that the principle in the Chorzow Factory case‘?
applied to both.'? This is the principle that the Tribunal applied in
assessing damages for breach of the fair and equitable treatment clause
in respect of the restructuring of the LETEs. Continental itself
acknowledged that it was not asking for an accumulation of damages
under both the fair and equitable treatment clause and the expropriation
clause.

(m) _ In Article IV of the BIT there is a reference to “fair market value”, but that
is a condition for an expropriation being legal, rather than a standard of
compensation for illegal expropriation.

(n) In Continental's Memorial on the Merits, the damages it claimed for
expropriation of the LETEs was in fact a smaller amount than the
damages claimed for breach of the fair and equitable treatment clause in
respect of the LETEs. In the second round of submissions before the
Tribunal, the damages claimed in respect of expropriation became
greater than the damages claimed for breach of the fair and equitable

122 Referring to Permanent Court of International Justice, Chorzéw Factory case, Merits, 1928, Series

ANo. 17, p. 47.

128 Referring to Continental's Memorial on the Merits, paragraph 236.

60

151.

152.

153.

154.

treatment clause, but this was only because of the calculation of interest.
In Continental's claim, the interest rate was applied from an assumed
date of expropriation of 8 March 2002. However, calculating interest from
this date is inconsistent with the Tribunal’s finding that the pesification
and default were covered by Article XI, and that there was no breach of
the BIT until November-December 2004.

(0) The Tribunal had a discretion, which it exercised, to apply an interest rate
different to the rate requested by Continental.

(p) | The Tribunal thereby gave detailed consideration to the expropriation
claim.

(c) |The Committee’s views

The Committee considers that the Award must be understood in the light of
what was argued before the Tribunal by the parties.

Paragraph 369 of Continental’s Merits Reply Memorial stated the following, with
respect to the amount of damages Continental was claiming:

Calculation of the Claimant’s damages from Argentina’s
breaches of the Treaty is straightforward. But for Argentina’s
actions in breach of the Treaty, the Claimant would have
received the value of the principal and interest payable on
CNA ART’s financial securities in accordance with their terms.
The Claimant would have received the value of its US dollar
deposits and the value of its government loans at the agreed
rate of interest.

Paragraph 371 stated:

The Claimant’s damages are simply the value of CNA ART’s

financial securities but for Argentina’s actions in breach of the

Treaty minus the value of those securities given Argentina’s

actions.
At paragraph 375, Continental stated that Argentina had not challenged the
principle that “an award of damages must compensate the Investor so that the
Investor is in the position it would have enjoyed “but for” Argentina’s unlawful
acts”, and cited the Chorzow Factory case as one authority for that principle.

61

155. Paragraph 376 stated:

For the purposes of the Investor's claims for breaches of the
BIT’s fair and equitable treatment, free transfers and
obligations observance articles, events occurring since
Argentina’s unlawful actions influence the value of CNA
ART’s assets but for those actions. For example, in assessing
the interest that the Investor would have earned on its
matured certificates of deposit, but for Argentina’s breach of
the fair and equitable treatment obligation, Mr. Rosen applies
actual interest rates since the breach.

156. Paragraph 377 added:

157.

158. The damages sought by Continental, and the basis on which they were

124

Article 1V(1) of the US-Argentina BIT prevents this Tribunal
from applying such subsequent information by requiring that
compensation on expropriation “shall be equivalent to the fair
market value of the expropriated investment immediately
before the expropriatory action was taken ...” Accordingly,
Article 1V(1) of the BIT requires the Tribunal to assess the
value of expropriated investments using only information
available immediately before the expropriation. [Footnote
omitted.]

Paragraph 380 further added:

calculated, were set out in a “Reply Report” of Howard N. Rosen, dated August
14, 2006 (the “Second Rosen Report”),'~ which was submitted to the Tribunal
by Continenta

(a)

... if the Tribunal finds that both of these expropriation and fair
and equitable treatment/full protection and _ security
obligations have been violated for a given asset, it should
award only the higher of the two calculations. [Footnote
omitted.]

1,'25 and which relevantly stated as follows:

Paragraphs 80 and 85 indicated that it proceeded on the basis that as at
December 31, 2001, CNA held USD 3.3 million in U.S. dollar
denominated LETEs, and that but for the “Events”, '7° by March 31, 2006
they would have earned an additional USD 192,400, such that their value

on the latter date would have been approximately USD 3.5 million.

1 “Reply Report” of Howard N. Rosen, dated August 14, 2006.

25 See, e.g., Award | 76, 77 and footnote 357.

126

On the meaning of the “Events”, see further paragraphs 238 and 240 below.

62

159.

160.

161.

162.

(b) | Paragraph 86 explained that it was considered that the value of the
LETEs on March 31, 2006, given the Events, was USD 2.78 million.

(c) Paragraph 87 then explained that the claimed loss due to pesification
was the difference between the “expected value” that the LETEs would
have had but for the Events, and the “expected value” given the Events
(USD 3.5 million minus USD 2.78 million, which was said to be
approximately USD 716,000). It was further explained that the claimed
loss due to default was USD 2.78 million, being the “current defaulted

value”.

(d) | Schedule 3 set out in tabular form the “Calculation of Loss on Treasury
Bills (LETEs)”. It accordingly stated that the total loss from pesification
(rounded) was USD 716,000, and that the loss due to default (rounded)
was USD 2,777,000. The total loss on the LETEs was stated to be the
sum of these two figures, USD 3,493,000.

Schedule 9 of the Second Rosen Report set out in tabular form a “Calculation of

Investment Loss Due to Expropriation”.

In relation to the LETEs, this schedule indicated that the amount expropriated
was USD 3.3 million, and indicated that this figure was “per Schedule 3”. That
amount was stated in the Second Rosen Report to be the value of the US dollar
denominated LETEs held by CNA as at December 31, 2001. Schedule 3
indicated that this was the “Maturity value of T-bills at date of pesification”.

Paragraph 54 of the Second Rosen Report stated that “We have assumed that
CNA-ART’s ... Treasury Bill assets [LETEs] were expropriated on March 8, 2002
being the dates that these assets were first impacted by Argentina’s measures”.
March 8, 2002 was the date of pesification of the LETEs by Decree 417.

Schedule 9 of the Second Rosen Report indicated that the claimed damages for
expropriation of the LETEs included, in addition to their claimed USD 3.3 million
value as at March 8, 2002, an additional amount of USD 825,937, stated in
footnote (1) to represent interest at 5.6 per cent from March 8, 2002 to March
31, 2006.

63

163.

164.

165.

166.

The Committee considers it important to note that the damage calculations
presented in the First and Second Rosen Reports are based on the “Events”
undertaken by Argentina in 2001 and 2002, and that they do not take into
account any economic implications of the adoption of Decree 1735/04 (quite on
the contrary, as is indicated below: the swap constituted by Decree 1735/04
was expressly disregarded).

At paragraph 272 of the Award, the Tribunal sets out its understanding that
Continental claimed that its property had been expropriated by (1) the
pesification of [CNA’s] U.S. dollar denominated deposits and securities at a
much below market exchange rate; (2) the restructuring of the GGLs at terms
that did not reflect their acquisition value; and (3) the fact that the LETEs have
been deprived of their value after CNA had not accepted the “unreasonable”
terms of their restructuring offered by Argentina on May 31 and September 16
of 2002.

At paragraph 275 of the Award, the Tribunal said that it:
... notes that most of the allegations brought by the Claimant
under the heading of expropriation (breach of Art. IV of the
BIT) are substantially the same and are addressed to the
same Measures impugned as breaches of the fair and
equitable standard of Art. (Il)(2)(a) of the BIT. We have
already found that the defense of necessity under the BIT is
available to Argentina as concerns most claims of breach that
Continental has raised against the Measures, namely the
pesification of dollar-denominated deposits and the
restructuring of the GGL’s. [Footnote omitted.]
The Committee considers it sufficiently implicit from the Award, as a whole, that
the Tribunal was of the view that even if there had been an expropriation of the
LETEs within the meaning of the expropriation clause, that expropriation would
have occurred either on March 8, 2002 (pesification) as claimed by Continental,
or, additionally or alternatively, on April 25, 2002 (default), and that this took
place at a time when Argentina could avail itself of the Article XI exception in the
BIT. This is reinforced, for instance, by paragraph 266 of the Award, where the
Tribunal says that “save for the LETEs, the Tribunal considers that the
invocation of necessity by Argentina under Art. X! of the BIT is applicable to all

64

other claims by the Claimant for breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment
standard by Argentina’s Measures’.

167. Having reached that conclusion in paragraph 275, the Tribunal followed the
logical consequence of holding that this was covered by Article XI at the time
when any expropriation action was undertaken: “Having already decided the
same issue under Art. II(2)(a) BIT, we do not need to pronounce further on the
alternative claim of violation of Art. |1V submitted by the Claimant’.

168. The Tribunal ultimately found that the pesification was not contrary to the BIT by
virtue of Article XI, but found in relation to the LETEs that Article XI was not
applicable to “the conditions of their restructuring in December 2004"'’ (that is,
Decree 1735/04). At paragraph 305 of the Award, the Tribunal stated:

The Claimant submits it has suffered as to LETEs losses
amounting to U.S$700,000 due to pesification and to
U.S$2,800,000 “due to the further default and revocation of
contractual rights.” For the reason stated above, the Claimant
is entitled to be compensated only for the latter amount that
corresponds to its capital loss. The Claimant is accordingly
entitled to payment of compensation in the principal sum of
U.S.$2,800,000. [Footnote omitted.]

169. Thus, the amount of damages ultimately awarded by the Tribunal was the

amount claimed by Continental to be, following the pesification, the “expected
value” or “current defaulted value” of the LETEs on March 31, 2006.

170. Continental’s ground of annulment focuses particularly on paragraph 285 of the
Award, in which the Tribunal states that:

. Continental has claimed that the restructuring and its
implementation constitute at the same time an expropriation
and has asked indemnification under either provision of the
BIT in an amount corresponding to the original dollar nominal
value of those LETEs. Having already decided the same
issue under Art. II(2)(a) BIT, we do not need to pronounce
further on the alternative claim of violation of Art. IV submitted
by the Claimant.

171. Continental contends that this sentence assumes that the Claimant asked for
identical amounts of damages in respect of the alleged breach of the fair and
equitable treatment clause and in respect of the alleged breach of the

7 Award q 264.

65

172.

173.

174.

128

expropriation clause. Continental argues that in fact it had sought higher
damages in respect of the alleged breach of the expropriation clause, and that it
had claimed before the Tribunal that if there had been a breach of both clauses,
the Tribunal “should award only the higher of the two calculations”.'° Thus,
according to Continental, even after the Tribunal found that there had been a
breach of the fair and equitable treatment clause by virtue of Decree 1735/04,
the Tribunal still had to consider whether there had been a breach of the
expropriation clause, in order to determine whether Continental was entitled to
the higher level of damages claimed in respect of the latter.

However, if, as the Committee considers to be implicit from the Award, the
Tribunal found that any expropriation would have occurred in 2002 at a time
when Article XI applied to the measures in question, that provides an answer to
the question whether Decree 1735/04 was a measure amounting to an
expropriation. If the LETES had already been expropriated in 2002, they could
not be expropriated again in 2004 by Decree 1735/04. It follows that any
expropriation in 2002 was not a breach of the expropriation clause, by virtue of
Article XI, and that there was no expropriation in 2004. It was thus immaterial
whether higher damages would have been awarded for a breach of the
expropriation clause had there been any such breach, and the Tribunal did not
need to decide this question.

In view of this reading of the Award, the reference to “an amount corresponding
to the original dollar nominal value of those LETEs” in paragraph 285 of the
Award cannot be given an independent reading that would call for an
examination also of Argentina's liability under Article IV in the context of Decree
1735/04, which liability, as the Tribunal, found, was precluded by operation of
Article XI of the BIT.

Furthermore, even though it is not necessary to decide this question, the
Committee considers it apparent from the Award that even if the Tribunal had
hypothetically found Decree 1735/04 itself to amount to an expropriation (in
addition to a breach of the fair and equitable treatment clause), it would not

Paragraph 380 of Continental's Reply on the Merits.

66

175.

176.

177.

178.

have awarded any higher damages for the breach of the expropriation clause
than it did for the breach of the fair and equitable treatment clause.

The fact that the Second Rosen Report claimed higher damages for the former
than for the latter cannot have been material. As explained above, the
quantification of the claimed damages in the Second Rosen Report was
premised on Continental’s view that expropriation occurred in 2002. That

analysis would not apply to an expropriation occurring in 2004.

In considering the interest on the damages awarded for the breach of the fair
and equitable treatment clause, at paragraph 315 of the Award, the Tribunal
said that “As regards the commencement date for compound interest, since
Decree 1735/04 restructuring the LETEs was issued in December 2004, the
Tribunal fixes January 1, 2005 as the initial date to this purpose”. In the
Committee’s view, it is sufficiently implicit from the Award that the Tribunal
considered that if it had found Decree 1735/04 to constitute a breach also of the
expropriation clause, it would have found the date of expropriation to be
January 1, 2005.

The damages awarded by the Tribunal in respect of the breach of the fair and
equitable treatment clause was the amount claimed by Continental to be the
“expected value” or “current defaulted value” of the LETEs in March 2006. No
reason has been advanced to suggest that this amount was lower than the
“expected value” or “current defaulted value” on January 1, 2005. To this the
Tribunal added interest from January 1, 2005.

The Committee regards it as sufficiently implicit from the Award, as a whole,
that the Tribunal was of the view that even if Decree 1735/04 were to be found
to be an expropriation of the LETEs in addition to a breach of the fair and
equitable treatment clause in respect of the LETEs, the amount of damages in
respect of each breach would have been the same. As the Tribunal said at
paragraph 285, it was therefore logically the case that “Having already decided
the same issue under Art. II(2)(a) BIT, we do not need to pronounce further on
the alternative claim of violation of Art. |V submitted by the Claimant’.

67

179.

180.

181.

182.

Hence, the Committee is satisfied that the Tribunal thereby sufficiently dealt with
the issue of expropriation. When the Award is read as a whole in the light of the
submissions made to the Tribunal, the reasoning in the Award is sufficiently
clear.

It follows that the Committee is satisfied that the Tribunal thereby applied the
applicable law (in particular, the provisions of the BIT itself). In the
circumstances, the Committee considers that the error contended for by
Continental is merely an alleged error of law, or a disagreement with the
findings of the Tribunal, which does not constitute an annullable error.

For these reasons, this ground of annulment must be rejected.

Alleged breach of Article V of the BIT

(a) Introduction

This ground of annulment relates to the claim made by Continental in the
proceedings before the Tribunal under Article V of the BIT, which provides as
follows:

Article V

1. Each Party shall permit all transfers related to an
investment to be made freely and without delay into and out
of its territory. Such transfers include: (a) returns; (b)
compensation pursuant to Article IV; (c) payments arising out
of an investment dispute; (d) payments made under a
contract, including amortization of principal and accrued
interest payments made pursuant to a loan agreement
directly related to an investment; (e) proceeds from the sale
or liquidation of all or any part of an investment; and (f)
additional contributions to capital for the maintenance or
development of an investment.

2. Except as provided in Article IV paragraph 1, transfers shall
be made in a freely usable currency at the prevailing market
rate of exchange on the date of transfer with respect to spot
transactions in the currency to be transferred. The free
transfer shall take place in accordance with the procedures
established by each Party; such procedures shall not impair
the rights set forth in this Treaty.

68

3. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2,
either Party may maintain laws and regulations (a) requiring
reports of currency transfer; and (b) imposing income taxes
by such means as a withholding tax applicable to dividends or
other transfers. Furthermore, either Party may protect the
rights of creditors, or ensure the satisfaction of judgments in
adjudicatory _ proceedings, through the — equitable,
nondiscriminatory and good faith application of its law.

183. As has been referred to at paragraph 52 above, one of the measures adopted
by Argentina to deal with the economic crisis was Decree 1570 of December 1,
2001 (referred to as the “Corralito”), which limited cash withdrawals from bank
accounts and prohibited transfers of funds out of the country with the exception

of certain current transactions. '°

184. In the proceedings before the Tribunal, one of the claims of Continental was as
follows:

The Claimant complains that CNA was prevented from
transferring to the U.S. at par free funds amounting to
U.S.$19,000,000 by Decree 1570 of 2001 (Corralito) which
forbade withdrawals from banks and transfers of funds (which
CNA had converted in dollars) out of Argentina. The amount
of damages it claims as the loss from devaluation of those
funds equivalent to U.S.$14,631,000. Continental claims that
this prohibition breached its right as an investor to effect “all
transfers related to an investment” provided for by Art. V of
the BIT. According to Continental, the proposed transfer
concerned “proceeds from the sale or liquidation of all or any
part of an investment” (Art. V(1) (e)), based on the following
reasoning: “Continental’s shares in CNA ART are definitely an
investment protected under the BIT. The transfer of the asset
of an investment is a transfer related to an investment.
Transfers of U.S. dollar term deposits on maturity are also
‘proceeds from the liquidation of...part of an investment.”"°°

185. This claim was rejected by the Tribunal in paragraphs 237 to 245 of the Award.
The Tribunal found that the transfer that Continental claimed it would have
made if the Corralito had not prevented it was not a transfer “related to an
investment” of the kind to which Article V of the BIT applied, and then
concluded:

As a consequence Argentina has committed no breach of Art.
V of the BIT to the detriment of the Claimant, so that the

129 See Award 4 100, 124, 126, 137-140.

180 Award { 237 (footnotes omitted).

69

latter's claim in this respect must be and is rejected by the
Tribunal. This conclusion makes it unnecessary for the
Tribunal to examine the subordinate arguments of the Parties:
namely (a) whether in view of the acute foreign exchange
crisis Argentina was encountering, Argentina was allowed,
notwithstanding its obligations under Art. V BIT to introduce
the exchange restrictions of Decree 1570, based on Art. XI of
the BIT, on the IMF Agreement or under customary
international law; (b) whether the Claimant cannot invoke Art.
V because neither itself (Continental) nor CNA ever decided
to make, or asked to be authorized to effect the transfers at
issue; and (c) whether the derogations allowed under the
Corralito would have made those transfers possible.'*'

186. Continental seeks annulment of the Tribunal’s rejection of this claim under

131
132
133

Article V of the BIT, contending that the Tribunal both manifestly exceeded its
powers within the meaning of Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention in
rejecting this claim, and failed to state reasons for its Award within the meaning
of Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention. Specifically, Continental claims
that:

(a) “... [t]he Tribunal failed to apply the governing law with respect to
Argentina’s obligations to protect transfers of foreign investors under
Article V of the Treaty, and, as a result, the Tribunal failed to properly

apply the terms of the Treaty’;'°* and

(b) “... the Tribunal ignored the express provisions of the Treaty which afford
protection to transfers essential for the ‘maintenance’ of investments. In
addition, instead of focusing on the Treaty requirement of whether the
transfer at issue was “related to” an investment, the Tribunal also based its
analysis on an irrelevant consideration, the fact that capital movements are
not investments in-and-of-themselves. As a result, not only did the Tribunal
totally ignore the express wording of the governing Treaty, but again it also
failed to provide any coherent reasoning to explain its approach”.'°*

Award § 245 (footnotes omitted).
Continental's Application {J 2(d).
Continental's Application J] 23.

70

187.

134
135

(b)

Arguments of the parties

Continental argues, inter alia, that:

(a)

The Tribunal failed to provide comprehensible reasons for its conclusion
that the transfer at issue did not “relate to an investment’ and fell outside
the protection of Article V.'** Nowhere in Article V of the BIT is it required
that a transfer be an investment in itself. Rather, Article V requires
merely that the transfer be “related to an investment”, which the transfer
in question undoubtedly was.

There is nothing in the language of the BIT, nor of any other relevant
legal instrument including the Articles of the IMF and related IMF norms
or the GATS, that limits directly or indirectly the transfers covered under
Article V to transfers required to satisfy “a payment obligation of CNA,
commercial, financial or other, or involve a transfer of funds to some
different entity’.'°°

These novel and unexplained restrictions introduced by the Tribunal are
contradicted by paragraph 240 of the Award, where the Tribunal says
that Article V is for the protection of transfers “essential for, or typical to
the [inter alia] ... maintenance ... of investments” and for the “protection
... of property of all kinds”, and paragraph 241 of the Award, where the
Tribunal says that the funds in question in this particular case were “part
of [the] investor's existing investment” and that the purpose of the
transaction was to “protect them from the impending devaluation”, as well
as the finding in paragraph 242 that the transfer was “clearly a legitimate
operation from a business point of view’. On the basis of these findings,
the Tribunal had no choice in law or logic but to conclude that Argentina
had breached Article V of the BIT.

The statement in paragraph 241 of the Award that the transfer in question
does not fall within any of the categories referred to in paragraph 240 of
the Award is a bland assertion and a bare postulate, without any

Referring to Award § 244.
Referring to Award § 242.

71

136

137
138
139
140

141

supporting reasoning.'*° The key statement in paragraph 241 contradicts
and does not follow from that in paragraph 240.

(e) The reasons given by the Tribunal are “so inadequate that the coherence
of the reasoning is seriously affected’,'*’ and are incomprehensible and
contradictory,'°° and incoherent, and the Tribunal refers to nothing to
support its assertions.

(f) The Tribunal was required to apply the whole of the BIT. Article V was
modified by a Protocol to the BIT, and Article XIV(4) of the BIT provides
that the Protocol is an integral part of the BIT. Article 10 of the
Protocol’? is a most favoured nation (MFN) clause with respect to
transfers. Despite the evidence before the Tribunal about the better
treatment for transfers of investments of other nationals,'“° nowhere in
the Award did the Tribunal apply this part of the governing law to the less
favourable treatment of Continental with respect to transfers.

(g) | The Argentina-Chile BIT provides that transfers cannot be held up for
more than two months, and the Argentina-United Kingdom BIT contains
no exception at all in respect of the essential security interests of the host
State. This was the treatment that the Tribunal had to consider under the
governing law of the arbitration. The Tribunal failed to apply Article 10 of
the Protocol to the BIT which was an annullable manifest excess of
power, and gave no reason for its failure to apply the governing law.

(h) | The same question was raised by Continental as a violation of the MFN
provision in Article II(1) of the BIT."!

Referring to Vivendi First Annulment Decision 9§ 64-65; Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH et al v.
United Republic of Cameroon & Société Camerounaise des Engrais, Decision on Annulment, May
3, 1985 (“Kléckner Annulment Decision”) J 144.

Referring to Mitchell Annulment Decision § 21.

Referring to CDC Annulment Decision § 70.

The text of Article 10 of the Protocol to the BIT is set out in paragraph 215 below.

Continental says that it made reference in the proceedings before the Tribunal to the better
treatment provided to investors from Chile under the terms of the Argentina-Chile BIT, and to
investors from the United Kingdom under the terms of the Argentina-United Kingdom BIT.

Referring to Argentina's Merits Memorial paras 5 and 6.

72

(i) Continental did assert MFN obligations in the proceedings before the
Tribunal, and the Tribunal failed to consider or rule on the evidence of
better treatment given to investors of other States, and failed to give
reasons for not doing so.

(i) There was evidence before the Tribunal that Continental did intend to

? The evidence was that Continental

make the transfer in question."
intended to sell certificates of deposit and transfer the proceeds out of
Argentina. The certificates of deposit were an “investment” within the
meaning of Article | of the BIT. The Tribunal failed to apply Article | of the
BIT to the certificates of deposit indirectly held by Continental, and this

failure to apply the BIT is an annullable error.

(k) | The Tribunal’s finding in paragraph 205 of the Award, that Article XI of
the BIT justified the Corralito, must be limited to aspects of the Corralito
other than those which restricted Continental’s ability to make the
transfer, since the Tribunal expressly stated at paragraph 245 of the
Award that it was not deciding whether or not the exchange rate
restriction in the Corralito was justified by Article XI.

188. Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

(a) Continental attempts to turn this application for annulment into an appeal
against the Award.

(b) | Continental seeks to challenge the Tribunal’s conclusion that the transfer
in question did not entail a “transfer related to an investment”, and even
suggests other criteria on the basis of which the Tribunal should have
reached a different conclusion, but does not and cannot state that the
Tribunal failed to interpret and apply the standard set by the BIT (whether
or not there was a “transfer related to an investment”). An annulment
proceeding is not open to any party who merely disagrees with a
Tribunal’s way of interpreting and applying a provision of the applicable

‘2 Referring to a witness statement of Mr Sametier, chief financial officer of Continental's Argentine

subsidiary.

73

143,

145,

law. Continental’s arguments are mere disagreements, even over factual

conclusions.

Continental takes out of context a statement made by the Tribunal. The
Tribunal explained in detail when a transfer is considered to be related to
an investment, and why this specific requirement was not met in this

particular case.'“°

Continental also cites out of context paragraphs of the Vivendi First

Annulment Decision,’

which provide precisely the contrary of what
Continental contends, and which were used in the Azurix Annulment
Decision'*® where it was stated that Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Award
“concerns a failure to state any reasons with respect to all or part of an

award, not a failure to state correct or convincing reasons”.

The Tribunal’s reasons for rejecting Continental’s claim under Article V of
the BIT are contained not only in paragraphs 237 to 245 of the Award,
but also in other paragraphs including paragraphs 54, 82, 124, 131, 132,
138 to 140, 202 and 205. In particular, in paragraph 205 of the Award,
the Tribunal concluded that the Corralito was justified under Article XI of
the BIT. This finding renders this ground of annulment moot, because
even if the Committee were to annul the part of the Award rejecting
Continental’s claim under Article V, it would have no practical effect.

Article V of the BIT applies to “transfers related to an investment’. If
there is no “transfer related to an investment’, Article V is inapplicable,
and everything else becomes moot, including Continental's arguments in
respect of MFN provisions. The Tribunal applied the correct law (Article
V of the BIT), interpreted that provision to determine what transfers were
covered by that provision, and stated the reasons for its decision (that
there was no “transfer related to an investment’ and that the provision
therefore did not apply). What the Tribunal subsequently said in
paragraphs 243-244 of the Award concerning IMF, GATT or GATS

Referring to Award 9§ 241-242.
Referring to Vivendi First Annulment Decision {§ 64-65.
Referring to Azurix Annulment Decision § 55.

74

146
147

provisions was merely confirmatory of what the Tribunal decided, and did
not form the basis of the decision, such that this could have no effect on
the rest of the Award.'“°

There was no contradiction between the Tribunal’s finding in paragraph
240 of the Award as to the kind of transfers to which Article V applies,
and its finding that the transfer in this case was not “related to an
investment’. The Tribunal did not find that the transfer was necessary to
protect the funds from the impending devaluation. The Tribunal
expressly stated that “As Argentina correctly points out, there is no
cogent evidence in the evidential record that the Claimant intended
actually to shift its funds out of Argentina at the time of the Corralito”.'4”
In annulment proceedings, Continental cannot request the Committee to
revise the evidence put before and considered by the Tribunal.

In the proceedings before the Tribunal, Continental relied on the MFN
provision in relation to the word “delay” in Article V of the BIT, claiming
that while the BIT did not define “delay”, the Argentina-Chile BIT
contained an obligation to permit transfers within two months. However,
the issue of delay does not arise if, as the Tribunal found, Article V of the
BIT is inapplicable on the ground that there has been no transfer “related

to an investment.

Apart from this, Continental did not rely on MFN obligations in relation to
the scope of operation of Article V of the BIT.

The Tribunal’s Award with regard to the issue of Article V of the BIT is
perhaps the most thorough and complete analysis to have ever been
made in relation to the subject. The Tribunal did not fail to state reasons,
and it is possible to follow the Tribunal’s reasoning. The Tribunal’s
assertions in paragraphs 240 and 241 of the Award are not contradictory,
but contain a logical and consistent reasoning.

Referring to Heinan Annulment Decision.
Referring to Award footnote 367.

75

189.

190.

191.

192.

193.

194.

148,

(k) In any event, there was no evidence on record that Continental actually
intended or wanted to transfer anything out of Argentina.

(c) |The Committee’s views

The Tribunal explicitly distinguished in its reasons between two different effects
of the Corralito, namely the introduction of bank deposit freezes, and the
introduction of a prohibition of the transfer of funds abroad and their exchange
in freely convertible and transferable currencies.'“°

The Committee considers that the Tribunal did not make any finding that the
second effect of the Corralito, preventing the transfer of funds abroad, was
justified by Article XI of the BIT. This is abundantly clear from a number of
paragraphs of the Award.

Paragraphs 201 to 205, under a heading “/n respect of the Corralito (the
imposition of the bank freeze in December 2001)” (emphasis added), found that
the bank freeze introduced by the Corralito was justified by necessity under
Article XI of the BIT. Paragraph 205 stated that separate consideration would
be given subsequently to the question of the restrictions on transfers imposed
by the Corralito.

In paragraph 245, the Tribunal ultimately concluded that it did not have to
consider whether the restrictions on transfers imposed by the Corralito were
justified by Article XI, in view of the Tribunal’s rejection of Continental's Article V

claim on other grounds.

Paragraph 319 noted that in contrast to most of Continental’s claims, the

dismissal of the Article V claim was not on Article XI grounds.

The Committee therefore cannot accept Argentina’s submission that even if the
Tribunal’s rejection of the Article V claim was tainted by annullable error, this
would make no practical difference because the Tribunal concluded in any
event that the Corralito was justified under Article XI of the BIT. The Tribunal

In particular, Award § 137(i) and (ii); also for instance §§ 100, 124.

76

195.

196.

197.

198.

149

did not decide this question one way or the other, and this is not a question that
can be considered or decided by the Committee in annulment proceedings.

The Tribunal also said, at paragraph 245, that in view of the basis on which it
had dismissed the Article V claim, it did not need to examine the question
“whether the Claimant cannot invoke Art. V because neither itself (Continental)
nor CNA ever decided to make, or asked to be authorized to effect the transfers
at issue”, or the question “whether the derogations allowed under the Corralito
would have made those transfers possible”.'*° These two questions arose from
arguments made by Argentina in response to the Article V claim, as referred to
for instance in paragraphs 52, 84 and 238 of the Award. These questions also
cannot now be determined by the Committee in annulment proceedings.

As the Tribunal did not decide these questions, and as they cannot be
determined by the Committee in annulment proceedings, they are not directly
relevant to the present annulment proceedings. Rather, the issue for the
Committee is whether the way in which the Tribunal did reject the Article V claim
was tainted by annullable error. The decision by the Tribunal not to decide
questions that were unnecessary for it to decide is not itself an annullable error.
In the event of the annulment of the Tribunal’s rejection of the Article V claim,
these questions might need to be decided by a Tribunal in any resubmission
proceedings, but that would be a matter for the Tribunal in that event.

The Tribunal’s particular reasons for rejecting Continental's claim under Article

V of the BIT are set out in particular in paragraphs 237 to 245 of the Award.

After setting out the parties’ positions in relation to the Article V claim at

paragraphs 237 and 238, at paragraph 239, the Tribunal then said that:

It is noted that although the Tribunal did not decide these two issues, it did state at footnote 367 as

follows: “As Argentina correctly points out, there is no cogent evidence in the evidential record that
the Claimant intended actually to shift its funds out of Argentina at the time of the Corralito. Up to
then, the Claimant had made the deliberate choice of keeping its funds in Argentina (see above

para. 132), converting them from pesos into dollar-denominated instruments.. CNA thus acted as “a
good corporate citizen” of Argentina and did not participate in the capital flight of the second part of
2001 which lead to the imposition of the Corralito.” It also stated at footnotes 197 and 368 as

follows: “The Central Bank (BCRA) was empowered to authorize certain other transactions with the

exterior and did so in the following months. From September 2002 onwards, exports of funds under
certain ceilings have been gradually admitted (Claimant's Memorial, para. 34)”.

77

The first issue here is to determine whether the transfer that
Continental claims it would have made if the Corralito had not
prevented it, falls within those “transfers related to an
investment’ which the Parties to the BIT undertook in Art. V to
permit “freely and without delay into or out of its territory.”

The Tribunal then went on to state that “This type of provision is a standard
feature of BITs”, and that:

... the guarantee that a foreign investor shall be able to remit
from the investment country the income produced, the
reimbursement of any financing received or royalty payment
due, and the value of the investment made, plus any accrued
capital gain, in case of sale or liquidation, is fundamental to
the freedom to make a foreign investment and an essential
element of the promotional role of BITs. [Footnote omitted.]

The Tribunal then added that:
This explains moreover the detailed list of permitted transfers
that most BITs set forth. On the other hand, the Treaty terms
show that such freedom is not without limit. [Footnote
omitted.]
The Tribunal’s reference to “the detailed list of permitted transfers that most
BITs set forth’ was clearly intended to apply to the BIT in the present case. The
“detailed list” in the BIT is in Article V(1), which states, in relation to the
“transfers” to which it applies, that:
Such transfers include: (a) returns; (b) compensation
pursuant to Article IV; (c) payments arising out of an
investment dispute; (d) payments made under a contract,
including amortization of principal and accrued interest
payments made pursuant to a loan agreement directly related
to an investment; (e) proceeds from the sale or liquidation of
all or any part of an investment; and (f) additional
contributions to capital for the maintenance or development of
an investment.
The words “Such transfers include” suggest that the list that follows those words
is non-exhaustive. However, at paragraph 239, the Tribunal considered that
this list of permitted transfers nonetheless indicates that the freedom of transfer
“is not without limit’. \n the last sentence of paragraph 242, the Tribunal also
stated that although the BIT is not limited to transfers made by the investor itself
and may include transfers made by a subisidiary, that “does not mean that any
trans-border movement of funds by such subsidiary is ‘related to an

investment”.

78

200.

201.

202.

The Committee considers it logical for the Tribunal to begin its consideration of
the Article V claim by determining the types of “transfers related to an
investment” to which Article V applies, and this is what the Tribunal did in
paragraphs 239 and 240 of the Award. At paragraph 240, the Tribunal said:

The first issue is to determine which transfers are “related to
the investment.” This is important since in respect of those
transfers the U.S. BITs “prohibit virtually all restrictions,” thus
limiting the Parties’ prerogatives under customary
international law to impose currency exchange restrictions.
Guidance is to be found in the detailed (though non-
exclusive) list in Art. V(1) and the purpose identified above of
this kind of provision. Protected transfers are those essential
for, or typical to the making, controlling, maintenance,
disposition of investments, especially in the form of
companies; or in the form of debt, service and investment
contracts, including the making, performance and
enforcement of contracts; the acquisition, use, protection and
disposition of property of all kinds, including intellectual and
industrial property rights; and the borrowing of funds, to name
the kind of investments and associated activities mentioned in
Art. | of the BIT more relevant to this issue. [Footnote
omitted.]

The wording of this long last sentence is derived from the definitions of
“investment” and “associated activities” in Article l(a) and (e) of the BIT. The
use of the word “including” before the wording taken from the definition of
“associated activities” indicates that the Tribunal regarded such “associated
activities” as included within the more general expression “making, controlling,
maintenance, disposition of investments”. \n essence, in this paragraph the
Tribunal finds that “Protected transfers are those essential for, or typical to the
making, controlling, maintenance, disposition of investments’. The remaining

wording of that paragraph is illustrative of what is meant by that expression.

In following paragraphs 241 to 245, the Tribunal considered the application of
this interpretation to the circumstances of this case:

241. The type of transfer at issue here does not fall into any
of these categories, nor specifically does it represent the
“proceeds from the sale or liquidation of all or any part of an
investment.” It was merely a change of type, location and
currency of part of an investor's existing investment, namely a
part of the freely disposable funds, held short term at its
banks by CNA, in order to protect them from the impending

79

devaluation, by transferring them to bank accounts outside
Argentina.

242. The transfer did not correspond to, nor was it required to
satisfy any payment obligation of CNA, commercial, financial
or other; nor would it involve the transfer of ownership of the
funds involved to some different entity. It was clearly a
legitimate operation from a business point of view,
permissible under the convertibility regime of Argentina until
the Corralito. This does not mean that it would fall within the
“transfers related to an investment” under Art. V. The fact that
the BIT does not limit these transfers to those made by the
foreign investor itself and that these transfers may be made
by the local subsidiary, in favor of its parent company as well
of other entities (thus in case of payment of royalties,
payments related to loans received etc.), does not mean that
any trans-border movement of funds by such subsidiary is
“related to an investment.”

243. Both parties have relied also on the IMF provisions and
the connected principles of the multilateral regulation of
international payments in support of their position. As is well
known, the IMF distinguishes between current transactions
and capital movements. The “avoidance of restrictions on
current payments” (Art. VIll), except with the approval of the
Fund, is a “general obligation” of IMF members, adhered to
by their vast majority that do not avail themselves of the
transitional regime of Art. XIV. It reflects one of the key
purposes of the Fund, ‘to assist in the establishment of a
multilateral system of payments in respect of current
transactions” as stated in Art. | (iv), as was the case of
Argentina when its currency was freely convertible. On the
other hand, capital movements may be subject to exchange
controls by individual members, inter alia in view of their
possible speculative nature and destabilizing effects on
national economies.

244. The above distinction is of limited assistance here,
because transfers “related to an investment” listed in and
allowed by Art. V of the BIT includes both current transactions
and capital movements: Art. V may be considered a lex
specialis in respect of the IMF regime and more liberal than
the latter. In any case, capital movements are defined a
contrario by the definition of “current transactions” in Art. XXX
of the Fund. Not all capital movements are in themselves
“investments,” such as direct investments or portfolio
investments listed in Art. V of the BIT. In the IMF terminology
and classification, widely accepted beyond the Fund’s ambit,
the movement of capital at issue here was or would have
been more specifically a short-term deposit abroad, a

80

transaction which may be subject to tighter controls than
direct or portfolio investment transactions. This confirms the
Tribunal in its conclusion that the transfer which the Claimant
complains it could not carry out because of the Corralito,
namely a short-term placement out of Argentina of the
equivalent of $19,000,000, was not a transfer related to an
investment protected by Art. V of the BIT.

245. As a consequence Argentina has committed no breach
of Art. V of the BIT to the detriment of the Claimant, so that
the latter's claim in this respect must be and is rejected by the
Tribunal. This conclusion makes it unnecessary for the
Tribunal to examine the subordinate arguments of the Parties:
namely (a) whether in view of the acute foreign exchange
crisis Argentina was encountering, Argentina was allowed,
notwithstanding its obligations under Art. V BIT to introduce
the exchange restrictions of Decree 1570, based on Art. XI of
the BIT, on the IMF Agreement or under customary
international law; (b) whether the Claimant cannot invoke Art.
V because neither itself (Continental) nor CNA ever decided
to make, or asked to be authorized to effect the transfers at
issue; and (c) whether the derogations allowed under the
Corralito would have made those transfers possible.
[Footnotes omitted.]

203. These paragraphs are to be read in the light of preceding paragraphs 130 to
132 that set out the relevant facts of this case, based on Continental’s
memorial:

130. As explained by the Claimant,'®* CNA ART, like other
insurance companies, maintains a portfolio of invested
securities in order to earn a return on its capital, reserves and
other funds. CNA has a history of making conservative
investments, so that its “portfolio consists mainly of low-risk
assets, such as cash deposits, treasury bills and government
bonds.” These investments derive from its business activity,
its capital, reserves and undistributed profits. The proceeds of
its insurance business drive from the underwriting of its
policies; the clients of CNA are business companies that
satisfy their statutory and contractual obligations to cover their
employees against worker's risks. CNA’s insurance
operations are regulated by two Argentine state agencies: the
Superintendent of Insurance (SSN), which regulates the
financial aspects of the business, while the handling of
workers’ compensation claims and services (such as medical
treatment, etc.) is regulated by the Superintendent of Workers
Compensation of the Ministry of Labor (SRT). More
specifically, SSN lays down criteria for insurance companies
such as CNA concerning the ratio of reserves they have to
hold and the types of investment they may make.

81

131. The business of CNA was successful. As explained by
Claimant, its premiums “have consistently been among the
highest in the market. CNA ART also maintained the highest
reserves and investments per insured worker in the
market.”"® Furthermore, “[pJrior to March 2001, CNA ART’s
investment portfolio was primarily in assets denominated in
Argentinean pesos. At the time, pesos were fully convertible
to U.S. dollars at a one to one exchange rate. However, CNA
ART’s management was concerned about the risk of
devaluation. As a result, CNA ART’s senior management
prepared an analysis of the options available to CNA ART to
heage the risk of devaluation. These options consisted of:

i) maintaining the portfolio in peso denominated assets, which
were earning a much higher return than comparable dollar
denominated assets;

ii) transferring all of CNA ART’s assets in excess of minimum
capital requirements out of Argentina to be held by CNA; and

iii) moving CNA ART’s investment portfolio to lower return
U.S. dollar assets with greater credit worthiness."

132. As to the option of moving capital out of Argentina, “CNA
ART's management made a recommendation to its American
controlling shareholder that it should not transfer assets out of
Argentina at that time, but that it should choose to invest
assets within Argentina in low risk U.S. dollar denominated
assets.”"°” CNA management accepted this recommendation
so that its investment agent CADISA (Citicorp Administradora
de Inversiones S.A.) “was then instructed to liquidate peso
denominated cash deposits, treasury bills and bonds as they
matured and to reinvest the proceeds in U.S. dollar
denominated assets.”' Thus, “CNA ART’s policy of shifting
its portfolio to U.S. dollar denominated assets involved a
deliberate choice to forego the higher yields of peso-
denominated assets in favor of the greater capital security of
U.S. dollar assets.”"° As against capital flight, this was of
course a socially responsible policy by Continental and CNA.

184 Claimant’s Memorial, para.15 ff.

185 Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 16, footnote 33.

186 Claimant’s Memorial, paras. 19-20.

187 Claimant’s Memorial, para. 21.

188 Claimant's Memorial, para. 22. The Claimant explains further
that, in addition, CADISA was instructed to move cash
deposits out of Argentinian owned banks and into either the
local subsidiaries of international banks or, preferably, into
full branches of international banks. These steps were meant
to improve the credit worthiness of its investment portfolio

82

and to protect it from currency risk and credit risk. Cash
deposits at full branch banks earned a lower return than at
other banks but there was little credit risk associated with
them (Claimant’s Memorial, paras. 22-24).

189 Claimant’s Memorial, para. 24.

204. At paragraphs 133 to 136, the Tribunal added, again with reference to what was

205.

claimed in Continental’s pleadings, that CNA decided to take advantage of
Argentina’s offer through Decree 1387 of November 1, 2001, to exchange
certain bonds for GGLs, that instructions were given to CADISA on November
29, 2001 for the swap of certain bonds for GGLs, and that by early December
2001, CADISA had “/argely completed the re-balancing of CNA ART investment
portfolio”, following which it held “a conservative portfolio of investments”, 92 %
of which was expressed in USD denominated assets (as compared to 21 % in
July 2001).

In this context, Continental’s Article V claim before the Tribunal was expressed
in paragraphs 65-66 of its Reply Memorial in the proceedings before the
Tribunal:

By late 2001, CNA ART had approximately $19.8 million in its
portfolio in excess of capital requirements. It had considered
transferring these funds back to the United States, but kept
them in the country, re-invested in US dollar securities. In
particular, by December 2001, the funds available for transfer
were all in term deposits in Argentine banks. These deposits
were to mature between mid-December 2001 and early
February 2002. ... Had CNA ART been free to transfer these
assets, it would have avoided the pesification of deposits that
occurred on February 3, 2002.
The Committee does not consider that the first sentence of paragraph 241 and
first sentence of 242 may be read as necessarily suggesting that Article V would
apply to the transfers only if they “correspond{ed] to” or were “required to satisfy
any payment obligation of CNA, commercial, financial or other’ or if they “would
. involve the transfer of ownership of the funds involved to some different
entity’, or if they were “proceeds from the sale or liquidation of all or any part of
an investment’. |t appears to the Committee that the Tribunal here was merely
giving examples of the main types of transfers that could be said to be “transfers
... essential for, or typical to the making, controlling, maintenance, disposition of
investments’. It contrasted this type of transfer to what it considered to be the

83

207.

209.

210.

appropriate characterisation of the transfer in the present case, namely a mere
“change of type, location and currency of part of an investor's existing
investment, namely a part of the freely disposable funds, held short term at its
banks by CNA”.

In the Committee’s view, it is sufficiently clear from paragraph 241 of the Award
that the Tribunal considered that Article V of the BIT, properly interpreted, did
not apply to a mere “change of type, location and currency of part of an
investor's existing investment’, and it is clear, from paragraphs 241 and 242,
that the Tribunal considered this to be so, on the proper construction of the
Treaty, regardless of whether the “change of type, location and currency of part
of an investor's existing investment’ was “a legitimate operation from a business
point of view”, and regardless of whether its purpose was “to protect them from
... impending devaluation, by transferring them to bank accounts outside [the
host State]’.

Hence, on first impression, the Committee considers it apparent that the
Tribunal applied the applicable law, and gave reasons for its decision. It
determined what it considered to be the scope of protection afforded by Article
V and it found that even if the facts as claimed by Continental were correct, the
transactions that it claimed to have been prevented from making would not have
fallen within any of the categories of transactions protected by Article V as
correctly interpreted. It therefore gave a reasoned rejection of the Article V
claim, without the need to consider whether or not the facts claimed by
Continental were established.

Continental also argues, on annulment, that the proposed transfer concerned
funds that were “proceeds from the sale or liquidation of all or any part of an
investment’, within the meaning of Article V(1)(e).

This argument was expressly referred to in paragraph 237, and was expressly
rejected in paragraph 242. The Tribunal clearly considered that a “change of
type, location and currency of part of an investor's existing investment” was not
a transfer of “proceeds from the sale or liquidation of all or any part of an
investment’ for purposes of Article V.

84

211.

212.

213.

214.

150

Continental also argues that the Tribunal found, in paragraph 244 of the Award,
that a transfer protected by Article V must “in itself’ be an investment, when
there is nothing in the wording of Article V itself to support this conclusion.

In this regard, paragraphs 243 and 244 in fact deal with arguments of the
parties'® in relation to the Article V claim that had relied on “/MF provisions and
the connected principles of the multilateral regulation of international payments
in support of their position”. The Tribunal noted that under IMF provisions there
was an obligation of “avoidance of restriction on current payments” but that
“capital movements” may be subject to exchange controls. The Tribunal said
that it found the distinction in IMF provisions between “current payments” and
“capital movements” to be of limited assistance since transfers protected by
Article V of the BIT could include both. It noted that in that respect, the BIT was
“lex specialis in respect of the IMF regime and more liberal than the latter’. It
added that “Not all capital movements are in themselves ‘investments’, such as

direct investments or portfolio investments listed in Art. V of the BIT’.

The Committee considers that this last sentence cannot be read as suggesting
that the Tribunal found that a transfer protected by Article V must “in itself’ be
an investment. The Tribunal addressed directly the types of transfers to which
Article V applies in paragraphs 240 and 241, and they contain no such
suggestion. By paragraph 242, the Tribunal had determined that the transfer in
issue in the present case did not fall within any of the categories to which Article
V applied, and paragraphs 243 and 244 were concerned with explaining,
additionally, why the distinction in IMF provisions between “current transactions”
and “capital movements” was of limited assistance to determining the scope of
application of Article V. This was said to be because Article V could apply to
both “current transactions” and “capital movements”, and because a capital

movement was not necessarily an investment within the meaning of the BIT.

On any rational reading of the Award as a whole, the Committee considers that
it could not be concluded that the Tribunal rejected the Article V claim on the
ground that the transfer in question was not in itself an investment.

Furthermore, even if the Tribunal had rejected the claim on this basis, and even

Referred to in Award § 82, 238.

85

215.

216.

217.

151
152

if it were assumed that the Tribunal erred in so doing, this would be an error of

law within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, and not an annullable error.

Continental also refers to paragraph 242 of the Award, in which the Tribunal
said that the transfer in this case “did not correspond to, nor was it required to
satisfy a payment obligation of CNA, commercial, financial or other; nor would it
involve the transfer of ownership of the funds to some different entity’.''
Continental argues that there is nothing in the language of the BIT, nor of any
other relevant legal instrument, that limits directly or indirectly the transfers
covered under Article V to transfers required to satisfy “a payment obligation of
CNA, commercial, financial or other, or involve a transfer of funds to some
different entity’.

In addition to its observations above on this issue, the Committee does not
consider that this sentence, in paragraph 242, of itself may be considered the
basis of the Tribunal’s decision. It is clear to the Committee on reading the
relevant paragraphs of the Award as a whole that the Tribunal considered
Article V to be inapplicable because the transfer in question was “merely a
change of the type, location and currency of part of an investor's existing
investment, namely a part of the freely disposable funds, held short term at its
banks by CNA” (paragraph 241). Despite finding concepts in the IMF regime to
be of limited assistance, at paragraph 244, the Tribunal considered that the
transfers in this case, in IMF terms, would be “a short-term deposit abroad, a
transaction which may be subject to tighter controls than direct or portfolio
investment transactions’. \n support of this proposition, it cited in footnote an
IMF publication for the proposition that “When States commit themselves to
allow capital investments, they focus especially on direct investments and
reserve the right not to liberalise short term monetary placements abroad of the
type discussed here”.

Hence, the Tribunal found that Article V did not apply to a mere change of type,
location and currency of part of an existing investment, such as a short term
monetary placement abroad. The rationale for interpreting Article V in this way

Referring to Award § 242.
Referring to Award § 242.

86

218.

219.

220.

is found in paragraph 239, which explains that the freedom of transfer is not
without limit, and that ultimately the rationale of the provision can be summed
up as being “fo ensure that at the end of the day, a foreign investor will be able
to enjoy the financial benefits of a successful investment’. \n the subsequent
paragraph 240, the Tribunal indicated that in interpreting the words “related to
the investment” in Article V, “Guidance is to be found in ... the purpose

identified above for this kind of provision”.

The Tribunal plainly considered that the transfer in the present case was not the
kind of transfer that needed to be protected to give effect to this rationale. It
distinguished such transactions which were excluded from the operation of
Article V from other transactions that were within the scope of Article V, such as
a transfer “to satisfy a payment obligation ..., commercial, financial or other’ or
a “transfer of ownership of the funds to some different entity’ (paragraph 242) or
the transfer of the proceeds of sale or liquidation of all or part of an investment
(paragraph 241), or the kinds of transactions referred to in paragraph 240.

The Committee considers it sufficiently clear what the Tribunal decided, and the
basis on which it so decided, and that the decision was based on the Tribunal’s
view of the correct interpretation of Article V of the BIT, which was the governing
legal provision.

Continental further argues that on the basis of the Tribunal’s findings in
paragraphs 240 and 242 of the Award, “the Tribunal had no choice in law or
logic but to conclude that Argentina had breached Article V of the BIT’.
Continental argues that in paragraph 240, the Tribunal says that Article V
protects transfers for the “protection ... of property of all kinds”, and that in
paragraph 241, the Tribunal found that the funds in question in this case were
“part of [the] investor's existing investment”, and that the intended purpose was
to “protect them from the impending devaluation”. In effect, Continental argues
that it is inconsistent for the Tribunal to find in paragraph 240 that protected
transfers include those for the “protection ... of property of all kinds”, but to find
that it did not include the transfer in this case which the Tribunal expressly
found, in paragraph 242, to have the purpose to protect funds forming part of

the investment from devaluation.

87

221.

222.

223.

153
154

As has been observed above, the phrase “the acquisition, use, protection and
disposition of property of all kinds including intellectual and industrial property
rights” is taken from the definition of “associated activities” in Article 1(1)(e) of
the BIT. The Tribunal said in paragraph 240 that protected transfers are those
“essential for, or typical to”, inter alia, “the acquisition, use, protection and
disposition of property of all kinds”. \n finding that the transfer in this case was
not a transfer “related to the investment” for purposes of Article V, it is evident
that the Tribunal considered that, even if its purpose was to protect funds
forming part of the investment from impending devaluation, this was not a
transfer essential for, or typical to “the ... protection ... of property” within the
meaning of that phrase as used by the Tribunal in paragraph 240. The
Committee sees no inherent contradiction between paragraphs 240 and 242 in
the way claimed by Continental.

Continental claims that the statement in paragraph 241 (to the effect that the
transfer in question does not fall within any of the categories referred to in
paragraph 240 of the Award) is a bland assertion and a bare postulate by the

% For the reasons stated, the

Tribunal, without any supporting reasoning.'®
Committee disagrees. The Committee is satisfied that the rationale of the
Tribunal’s decision is sufficiently discernible from a reading of the relevant
paragraphs of the Award, as indicated above. It considers that the Award
“enables one to follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to point B. and
eventually to its conclusion” and that the reasons are not “contradictory or

154

frivolous”,’>" or incoherent as claimed by Continental.

Continental also claims that the Tribunal failed to apply the applicable law in
failing to apply Article 10 of the Protocol to the BIT that provides:

10. The Parties note that the Argentine Republic has had and
may have in the future a debt-equity conversion program
under which nationals or companies of the United States may
choose to invest in the Argentine Republic through the
purchase of debt at a discount.

The Parties agree that the rights provided in Article V,
paragraph 1, with respect to the transfer of returns and of

Referring to Vivendi First Annulment Decision 9 64-65; Kiéckner Annulment Decision § 144.
See paragraph 101 above.

88

224.

225.

226.

227.

proceeds from the sale or liquidation of all or any part of an
investment, remain or may be, as such rights would apply to
that part of an investment financed through a debt-equity
conversion, modified by the terms of any debt-equity
conversion agreement between a national or company of the
United States and the Government of the Argentine Republic,
or any agency or instrumentality thereof.

The transfer of returns and of proceeds from the sale or
liquidation of all or any part of an investment shall in no case
be on terms less favorable than those accorded, in like
circumstances, to nationals or companies of the Argentine
Republic or any third country, whichever is more favorable.

It is the last paragraph of this article that is relevant to this argument of

Continental.

Unlike the preceding paragraph, this final paragraph does not state expressly
whether it contains an agreement between the parties on the interpretation of
Article V of the BIT, or whether it establishes a free-standing obligation,
additional to Article V.

To the extent that this provision establishes a free-standing obligation,
additional to Article V, any consideration of the application of this provision
would be separate to the consideration of the application of Article V. It does
not appear that Continental ever made a claim in the arbitration proceedings for
damages for breach of Article 10 of the Protocol. If it did, and if the Tribunal
failed to consider it, Continentals remedy would have been to request the
Tribunal under Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention to give an additional
decision, dealing with the Article 10 claim. The Tribunal’s failure to decide one
claim could not be a ground for annulling its decision with respect to a separate
Article V claim which it did decide.

To the extent that the third paragraph of Article 10 of the Protocol establishes
the parties’ agreement of the interpretation of Article V of the BIT, it can logically
only be of relevance in circumstances where Article V itself applies. In effect,
the Tribunal found that Article V applies to “all transfers related to an
investment’, that the transfer that Continental claimed to have been prevented

from making was not a “transfer related to an investment’, and that Article V

89

228.

229.

230.

231.

155

was therefore inapplicable. In these circumstances it is not apparent to the
Committee how Article 10 of the Protocol could have been of relevance.

Even if Continental did rely on Article 10 of the Protocol in its arguments before
the Tribunal in respect of the Article V claim, the Committee is not persuaded
that this reliance was such a prominent or fundamental basis of Continental's
Article V claim that the Tribunal’s failure to mention Article 10 made it
impossible to see how the Tribunal “proceeded from Point A. to point B. and
eventually to its conclusion”.

While a tribunal has a duty to deal with each of the questions (“pretensiones”)
submitted to it, it is not required to comment on all arguments of the parties in
relation to each of those questions. The question submitted to the Tribunal
was whether there had been a breach of Article V. The Tribunal’s failure to
comment on any arguments of Continental based on Article 10 of the Protocol,
or on claims of more favourable treatment under BITs between Argentina and
other States, did not in the Committee’s view mean that there was a failure of
the Tribunal to state reasons for its decision on the Article V point.

The Committee is not persuaded that the Tribunal failed to apply the applicable
law, or failed to give reasons for its decision, in respect of Continental's claim
under Article V of the BIT.

In relation to this ground of annulment, Continental argued in its Application for
Annulment that “the Tribunal failed to properly apply the terms of the Treaty’,
and that “the Tribunal ignored the express provisions of the Treaty’ and that
“Tribunal totally ignore[d] the express wording of the governing Treaty’. The
Committee recalls that alleged error of fact or alleged error of law are not
grounds of annulment under Article 52 of the Convention. The applicable law
was the BIT, the ICSID Convention, and international law generally. The
Tribunal applied Article V of the BIT to determine Continental’s claim under that
provision, and gave reasons for its decision. Whether or not the Tribunal
decided the claim correctly is not a matter to be determined by an annulment

committee.

See paragraph 99 above.

90

232.

234,

235.

156

For these reasons, the Committee concludes that this ground of annulment is
rejected. As a consequence, the Committee denies Continental’s application for
annulment of all parts of the dispositif of the Award with the exception of para.
320(b), and all of Continental’s requests for annulment of findings of the

Tribunal and associated reasoning referred to in paragraph 77 above.

Ml. ARGENTINA’S APPLICATION FOR PARTIAL ANNULMENT

Background

Argentina seeks annulment of the part of the Award that was adverse to
Argentina, namely that the finding that Argentina’s restructuring of the LETEs
effected by Decree 1735/04 was in breach of the BIT.

In its application for partial annulment, Argentina invokes the grounds in Article
51(1)(b) — manifest excess of powers — and Article 51(1)(e) — failure to state
reasons — respectively, of the ICSID Convention.

Arguments of the parties
Argentina argues, inter alia, that:
Alleged manifest excess of powers

(a) | The Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in failing to explain why it
concluded (i) that the swap offer in Decree 1735/04 was “late”; (ii) that
the original value of the LETEs was “reduced” by the swap offer; (iii) that

 

the offer was “unilateral”, and (iv) that the condition that any other right
should be waived if the swap offer was accepted was unreasonable. '©°

(b) Argentina’s was the largest sovereign debt restructuring in history,
involving a swap of over USD 100 billion comprising more than 152 types
of securities held by hundreds of thousands of creditors around the world,

Referring to Award 221 (citations omitted).

91

and the fairness of that process could not be resolved in a mere two
paragraphs in the Award.

The Tribunal’s conclusion that the swap offer was “late” implies that, due
to the characteristics of the operation, the offer should have been made
earlier, or that Argentina was in a position to make it earlier. Such a
conclusion would involve extremely challenging assessments of the
complexity of the operation which had to be carried out in order to
determine whether it was feasible to conduct it within a shorter term, the
evolution of Argentina’s situation at both an economic and a political-
institutional level in order to determine whether the country would have
been in a position to make an offer before it actually did, and so forth.
The Award does not deal with these issues or with any other issue which
might serve as basis for the conclusion that the date of the swap was
“late”.

The Tribunal’s conclusion that the original value of the debt that
Argentina offered to recognize was “reduced” implies that, under similar
circumstances of debt restructuring, the offer should have been better or
that Argentina was in a position to make a better offer. Again, such a
conclusion would involve extremely complex assessments of Argentina’s
actual payment capacity throughout a considerable number of years, the
situations experienced in other comparable debt restructuring processes
and the offers made therein, and so forth. The Award again fails to
address these issues or any other issue which might serve as basis for
the conclusion that the value of the offer made by Argentine was
“reduced”.

The Tribunal’s conclusion that the December 2004 swap offer in Decree
1735/04 was “unilateral” would require an analysis of the complex swap
process, which lasted for approximately three years, in order to
determine the steps involved in the preparation of the offer, the measures
taken by the Government, the degree of participation of the creditors, and
other critical factors.

92

(f) The Award provides no explanation why requiring the waiver of other
claims as a condition for accepting the swap offer was unreasonable.

(g) | The Tribunal determined in an arbitrary and groundless manner that the
restructuring of the LETEs violated the BIT, and was not protected by
Article XI of the BIT or by the defence of necessity, by simply postulating
that Article XI and the defence of necessity were inapplicable due to (i)
the late date in which the swap was offered, when Argentina’s financial
conditions were evolving towards normality; (ii) the reduced percentage
of the original value of the debt that Argentina unilaterally offered to
recognize; and (iii) the condition that any other rights would be waived,
which entailed also waiving the protection of the BIT.'°”

(h) By holding that the restructuring of its public debt violated the BIT “where
they implied a waiver of all rights by the holders, who were being
subjected to a substantial loss of their investment, in addition to having
been previously subjected to losses due to pesification’, the Tribunal
clearly contradicted itself and manifestly exceeded its powers, in finding
that the restructuring entailed a substantial loss of Continental's
investment (a matter which was not even raised in the proceeding), and
in linking this conclusion to an occurrence that was already protected
under Article XI of the BIT. The Tribunal also contradicted itself in stating
that the default was protected under Article XI of the BIT'®® and the
defence of necessity, but then determining that the solution to such
default entailed a substantial loss without discussing or providing any
reason why the restructuring of the LETEs to escape default was
unreasonable.

Alleged failure to state reasons

(i) The Tribunal failed to state reasons for its three main conclusions relating
to the LETEs, namely “(a) the late date in which the swap was offered,

when Argentina’s financial conditions were evolving towards normality;

157

150 Referring to Award 221 (citations omitted).

Referring to Award § 217.

93

159

(b) the reduced percentage of the original value of the debt that Argentina
unilaterally offered to recognize; and (c) the condition that any other
tights would be waived, which entailed also waiving the protection of the
BiT.”"®

The Tribunal did not provide reasons for stating that Argentina's financial
conditions were evolving towards normality or explain the manner in
which they affected the restructuring (conducted in a situation of default
which, on the contrary, had been declared as protected by the BIT as a
non-precluded measure pursuant to Article XI). Neither did the Tribunal
explain how Argentina's restructuring offer was evaluated nor why such
offer was determined to be unilateral or why “the condition that any other
rights [regarding the restructuring] would be waived” entailed a violation
of the BIT.

The Tribunal failed to deal with substantial questions submitted by
Argentina in this regard, such as the argument in its Counter-Memorial
that:

Under the debt restructuring, the Argentine
Government offered to swap all Argentine government
debt securities issued before 31 December 2001, on
default for new bonds with an extended term and for a
minor principal and/or interest value but adjusted to
Argentina’s payment capacity. The offer was accepted
by the holders of 76.1% of bonds eligible for the swap.
It should be noted that Section 32 of Decree No.
905/02 provided that the holders of Argentine Treasury
bonds outstanding by 3 February 2002, denominated
in US dollars, governed by Argentine law and pesified
(as in the case of LETEs) would be allowed to convert
those bonds into the original currency at the exchange
rate applicable to the conversion into pesos (under the
same conditions as those in effect as of February 3,
2002) in the event that they took part in any invitation
made by Argentina to swap their debt securities or
loans. It is noteworthy that, on the one hand,
Continental believes that it has sustained damages
because CNA ART has not received any payments on
the LETEs, when in fact the payment deferral was
announced for the entire government debt issued

Referring to Award § 221.

94

before 31 December 2001, and not only for the debt

securities held by CNA ART."©
It was also Argentina’s argument that “[flor swap purposes, the holders of
LETEs could select an instrument denominated in Argentine pesos. The
foreign exchange rate to be used to determine the nominal value of the
new bond was fixed at ARS/USD 2.9175, equivalent to the market rate.
The new securities included the capital adjustment per the consumer
price index”.

(I) The Tribunal not only failed to deal with all these questions but also failed
to deal with other questions which were not addressed during the hearing
or otherwise in the proceeding,'™' yet it made unfounded determinations
regarding the LETEs. The Tribunal reached these conclusions without
providing any reason for them. Not even an attentive reader of the
Award would be able to understand, even through inference, the manner
in which the Tribunal arrived at the conclusions drawn regarding the
December 2004 Offer.

Continental's title to the LETEs

(m) The LETEs are registered in an electronic account and Continental
should have provided evidence that the securities concerned were not
transferred at any time from their acquisition. Such lack of evidence
caused the Tribunal to manifestly exceed its powers and fail to state the
reasons on which the Award and the Decision on Rectification were
based in respect of the Claimant’s uninterrupted ownership of the LETEs.

Non ultra petita

(n) — The Tribunal concluded that the restructuring of the LETEs constituted a
breach of the fair and equitable standard and awarded Continental
damages on that basis. However, Continental never asked the Tribunal

160 Referring to Argentina’s Counter-Memorial, paras 721-725. Argentina claims that the Tribunal

similarly failed to deal with and appreciate the importance of other aspects of its position, such as
its Counter-Memorial, paras 51, 398, 717, 400, 401 and 419.

Referring to Argentine Republic's Memorial on the Merits: Counter-Memorial (Exhibit AR 5),
Rejoinder (Exhibit AR 7), First and Second AGM Report (Exhibit AR 6 and 8, respectively) and
Stenographic Transcripts of the Hearing in both languages (A RA 90).

95

to conclude that the restructuring of the LETEs was contrary to the fair
and equitable treatment clause. Indeed, Argentina raised the issue of the
restructuring as a defence.

(0) | Continental only ever claimed that the default and pesification of the
LETEs were a breach of the BIT. Decree 1735/04 which provided for the
restructuring of the LETEs was adopted after the proceedings before the
Tribunal had commenced and after Continental's Memorial on the merits
before the Tribunal had been filed. Even after Decree 1735/04 had been
adopted, Continental did not seek to argue that the restructuring of the
LETEs was a breach of the BIT. Even if, procedurally, it might have been
possible for Continental to add a new claim during the course of the
proceedings before the Tribunal to allege that the restructuring was a
breach of the BIT, it did not do so. Argentina never defended itself
against this claim, because Continental never put it forward.

(p) The decision on the restructuring of Argentina’s sovereign debt was ultra
petita, as it was never put forward by Continental, and was never
responded to by Argentina. This constitutes a manifest excess of powers
as well as a failure to provide reasons.

(q) Continental never filed a claim under the BIT related to the Argentine
debt restructuring carried out in 2004 and 2005; it never raised before the
Tribunal the question of whether that claim was included in the claim
brought with the Tribunal, and Argentina never defended itself or
explained its position on whether the debt swap violated the BIT or not,
simply because that claim had not been made. The granting of a claim
that had never been made by the Claimant was a manifest excess of
powers and a failure to state reasons.

(r) The case of Pope & Talbot v. Canada does not assist Continental.
236. Continental argues, inter alia, that:

Alleged manifest excess of powers and alleged failure to state reasons

96

162

163
164

The Award is well-founded insofar it deals with the restructuring of the
LETEs and fully explains the Tribunal’s finding that Argentina could not
rely on Article X! of the BIT or the necessity defence under customary
international law in this respect. The Tribunal’s conclusions were clearly
reasoned and based on the evidence. The Tribunal did not engage in
any excess of powers, let alone any manifest excess, nor did it fail to

state reasons for its conclusions.

The Tribunal accepted Continental’s submission that the restructuring of
the LETEs constituted a breach of the fair and equitable standard,‘
having regard to the fact that Argentina offered only USD 0.30 per dollar,
that Continental would have been required to waive its rights and that
Continental would have also been required to accept long maturities on
bonds from a government that had demonstrated its willingness to
repeatedly default on its debt.

The Tribunal rightly rejected the defences raised by Argentina based on
Article XI of the BIT and necessity under customary international law in
respect of the December 2004 Offer, by reason of the late date on which
it was offered, the reduced percentage of the original value of the debt,
and the condition that any other rights would be waived.

The Tribunal clearly explained its conclusion that the offer was made at a
“late date” by reference to its finding that by that time “Argentina’s
financial conditions were evolving towards normality”.'°° It further
explained this finding by referring to its earlier findings that Argentina had
“re-entered the international financial market by filing a prospectus
concerning the future issuance of debt securities up to more than U.S.$
12 billion." This finding was consistent with the Tribunal’s related
findings that Argentina’s financial situation “improved slowly but
progressively from the end of 2002”, that “[tjhe regular functioning of the
democratic institutions was re-established with the general elections held

In Continental's own application for partial annulment, Continental maintains that the Tribunal
should have considered whether it also constituted unlawful expropriation.

Referring to Award § 221.

Referring to Award § 159 and footnote 336.

97

165
166
167
168

on May 25, 2003 when Nestor Kirchner was duly elected president of
Argentina’, and that “the improved balance of payment situation enabled
Argentina to repay in a short time-span all of the sizeable amounts
outstanding to the IMF, in 2005 (SDR 2,417 billion) and January 2006
(SDR 6,655 billion)”.'© The Tribunal logically and reasonably concluded
that by December 2004, Argentina could not rely on either Article XI of
the Treaty or the customary international law defence of necessity
because financial conditions in the country were normalizing.

The Tribunal also assessed Continental's evidence that it did not accept
the restructuring of the LETEs since it would have received “only U.S.$
0.30 per dollar”."® This is consistent with the Tribunal’s earlier indication
that “the new instruments offered in exchange were worth only about

” The Tribunal also

30% of the original securities in dollar terms.”"®
contrasted the fact that Argentina repaid the amounts due to the IMF with
the fact that “the swap finally offered to foreign bondholders entailed a
‘haircut,’ that is a reduction of the face value of thir bonds, of about 70%,

if not more.”

The Tribunal rightly held that the restructuring of the LETEs was
“unilateral” in that it was imposed by Argentina, rather than the product of
balanced negotiations. On the basis of the evidence before it, including
the terms of the restructuring of the LETEs itself, the Tribunal accepted
Continental's position that the offer to restructure was a “coercive, take-it-
or-leave-it offer’.

Argentina cannot raise new arguments in the annulment proceeding that
it failed to raise before the Tribunal.

The Tribunal concluded that the terms of the restructuring of the LETEs
were unreasonable, “notably where they implied a waiver of all rights by
the holders, who were being subjected to a substantial loss of their

Referring to Award, §§ 152, 157 and 159.
Referring to Award § 220.

Referring to Award § 159.

Referring to Award footnote 231.

98

169
170
171
172

investment, in addition to having been previously subjected to losses due

to pesification”.‘©°

Considering the substantial losses incurred by the
bondholders, the Tribunal found it unreasonable to require them to waive
all rights of action in return for a swap worth only USD 0.30 per dollar of

their original LETEs holding.

(i) The Tribunal held the waiver requirement to be unreasonable because:
(i) there was no risk of double recovery by December 2004; (ii) the
investors were being subjected to a substantial loss of their investment,
in addition to having been previously subjected to losses due to
pesification; and (iii) the term did not meet the requirements of either
Article XI or the customary international law defence of necessity.

Continental's title to the LETEs

(i) The Tribunal found that CNA bought the first LETEs on 25 September,
2001 and the second LETEs on 18 October 2001. The LETEs had been
issued under Resolution 4/5 of January 2001.' This finding alone
confirms Continental's title to the LETEs.

Non ultra petita

(k) | The Tribunal acted entirely within its powers and clearly put forth its
reasons by identifying “the issue as being whether Argentina’s default
and subsequent restructuring of the Claimant’s investment was fair and

171

equitable”.'”'_ Thus, the Tribunal found,'” correctly, that Argentina’s

treatment of the LETEs was unfair and inequitable.

(I) The restructuring offer was just another symptom of the unfair and
inequitable treatment. It was a declaration that holders of LETEs either
could accept 30 percent of the value of their LETEs or would never
receive anything. That was what the Tribunal fixed upon in terms of
making its decision. The attempted restructuring in December 2004

Referring to Award § 264.

Referring to Award footnote 195.
Referring to Award § 256.

Referring to Award 9 263 and 264.

99

237.

238.

239.

240.

brought Argentina’s modification of the terms of the LETEs into even
sharper relief. Continental’s original complaint in its Merits Memorial was
sufficient to encompass further treaty-inconsistent actions taken by
Argentina, as well as breaches that were ongoing. The restructuring of
the LETEs thus formed part of Continental's claims.

(m) In Pope & Talbot v Canada case, the Tribunal found that new actions
taken by Canada after the investor had filed its statement of claim, while
not specifically pleaded, were covered by the broad wording of the
original claim as pleaded. The fairness and reasonableness of the
restructuring of the LETEs was an issue placed before the Tribunal by
Continental in its pleadings.

The Committee’s views

Argentina’s complaints as developed in its submissions have focused on the
Tribunal’s conclusion that Argentina could not rely on Article XI of the BIT or the
defence of necessity under customary international law to preclude Argentina’s
liability under the fair and equitable treatment clause in relation to the LETEs.

Argentina contends that its invocation of Article XI and the customary
international law principle of necessity was summarily dismissed by the Tribunal
in paragraph 221 of the Award, with cursory references to the “late date” of the
offer in Decree 1735/04, the “reduced percentage” of the original value of the
LETEs and the “waiver requirement” as a condition of the offer.

Argentina invokes two annulment grounds in relation to this challenge, namely
manifest excess of powers (Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention) and failure
to state reasons (Article 52(1)(e)).

In relation to Article 52(1)(b) Argentina contends that the Tribunal determined
this matter in an arbitrary and groundless manner by simply postulating the non-
application of Argentina’s defences rather than satisfying the minimum
requirement for the Tribunal’s exercise of its powers that it bases its conclusions
on the parties’ arguments. Argentina contends that the Tribunal failed to

100

241.

242.

243.

244,

appreciate the exceptional complexity of the Argentinean financial crisis and the
country’s efforts to come to grips with this extremely difficult situation with its far-
reaching repercussions for the welfare of the entire population and the threats
posed to the fabric of the Argentine society. Argentina contends that this
involved exceedingly complex issues, and that matters could not be determined
by the Tribunal without an in-depth review of all pertinent factors.

In relation to Article 52(1)(e), Argentina’s objection is that the summary
references in paragraph 221 of the Award to the offer to restructure the LETEs
in December 2004 being “late”, “reduced” and “unilateral”, lack any satisfactory
rationale and are therefore deficient in conveying any reasoned content.

In the course of the Hearing, Argentina also raised a further argument, to the
effect that the Tribunal’s decision on this point was ultra petita. Argentina
maintains that Continental never requested the Tribunal to find that the offer to
restructure the LETEs made in Decree 1735/04 was a breach of the BIT. In the
circumstances, Argentina maintains that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its
powers by awarding damages on a basis other than that which was claimed by
the Claimant.

Argentina additionally contends that the Award is illogical, in that Argentina’s
default on the LETEs had occurred in 2002, at a time when the Tribunal found
that Article XI of the BIT applied to the measures taken by Argentina to deal with
its economic crisis. Thus, it is said, the Tribunal found that Argentina’s default
on the LETEs in 2002 was not a breach of the BIT. Argentina argues that it
therefore flies in the face of logic for the Tribunal to find that the subsequent
adoption of Decree 1735/04 in 2004 could be a breach of the BIT, given that this
Decree improved the position of LETEs holders by offering them a restructuring
that provided them with 30% of the original value of the LETEs on which they
would otherwise have received nothing.

The Committee considers that the starting point in addressing these arguments
is to identify what it was that Continental claimed, and what the Tribunal
decided.

101

245.

246.

247.

173
174
178
176
177
178

179

It is relevant that Continental’s Memorial in the proceedings before the Tribunal
was filed in April 2004, prior to the adoption of Decree 1735/04. In relation to
the LETEs, Continental’s claim in the proceedings before the Tribunal had two
aspects.’ The first related to the pesification of the LETEs in March 2002 by
Decree 471. The second related to the default on the LETEs. According to
Continental's Memorial, “The LETEs matured on March 15, 2002, but CNA ART
did not receive any payment on that day. The default of these LETEs continues
to this day’.

Continental provided an expert report of Mr. Howard Rosen dated April 27, 2004
(the “First Rosen Report”), which quantified the losses claimed by Continental
as a result of the actions taken by Argentina complained of by Continental.
These actions of Argentina are referred to in that report as the “Events”, which
are defined in paragraph 9 of that report to begin with Decree 1570 in
December 2001, and to end with Decree 644 in April 2004. The definition of the
“Events” did not of course extend to Decree 1735/04, which had not yet been
adopted at the time of the First Rosen Report.

Decree 1735/04 had been adopted by the time Continental's Reply Memorial
was filed in August 2006. At paragraphs 78-79 of the Continental’s Reply
Memorial, reference was made to Decree 1735/04, but only for the purpose of

refuting Argentina’s argument that Continental should have accepted the offer

5

contained in that Decree.'”© However, Continental’s claim in respect of the

LETEs remained in effect a complaint as to the pesification of the LETEs,'”° and
the default on the LETEs since March 2002.‘ Continental claimed that as a

result of the default on the LETEs, it had received “nothing at all”,'”° and that the

value of the LETEs was “nothing”.'”°

Continental’s Memorial in the proceedings before the Tribunal, paragraphs 44-45.

Quoted in Award footnote 207.

Referred to in Award § 151 and footnote 219.

Continental’s Reply Memorial in the proceedings before the Tribunal, paragraph 224.

Continental’s Reply Memorial in the proceedings before the Tribunal, paragraphs 229-230.
Continental’s Reply Memorial in the proceedings before the Tribunal, paragraph 370, quoted in
Award { 76.

Continental’s Reply Memorial in the proceedings before the Tribunal, paragraph 389, referred to in
Award footnote 437.

102

248.

249.

250.

251.

180

Continental subsequently submitted the Second Rosen Report dated August 14,
2006 (see paragraph 159 above), updating the quantification of losses claimed
by Continental. (The quantification of the loss in relation to the LETEs as set
out in the Second Rosen Report has already been set out in paragraph 159
above.) This report set out what it claimed would have been the value of the
LETEs but for the “Events”, and the “expected value” or “current defaulted
value” of the LETEs given the “Events”. Paragraph 1 of this report defined
“Events” to have the same meaning as in the First Rosen Report (such that it
did not include Decree 1735/04). It set out separately the losses arising as a
result of the pesification of the LETEs, and the losses arising as a result of the
default on the LETEs.

The Tribunal found that the pesification of the LETEs was a measure that fell
within the scope of Article XI of the BIT, and that Argentina was therefore not
liable under the BIT to compensate Continental for losses arising as a result of
the pesification. The Tribunal therefore concluded, in relation to Continental's
claim in respect of the LETEs, as follows:

The Claimant submits it has suffered as to LETEs
losses amounting to U.S$700,000 due to pesification
and to U.S$2,800,000 “due to the further default and
revocation of contractual rights.” For the reason stated
above, the Claimant is entitled to be compensated only
for the latter amount that corresponds to its capital
loss. The Claimant is accordingly entitled to payment of
compensation in the principal sum _— of
U.S.$2,800,000.'®°

It is apparent that the Tribunal was granting Continental’s claim in part. It did
not award the claimed losses in respect of pesification, but did award the
claimed losses in respect of “further default and revocation of contractual
rights”.

However, even in respect of the claimed losses in respect of “further default’,
the Tribunal allowed the claim in part only. Continental claimed that the default

Award § 305 (footnote omitted).

103

252.

254.

255.

181

occurred in March 2002, when the LETEs matured. The Tribunal found on the
other hand that the date of default was the later date of January 1, 2005.'°"

In the course of reaching this conclusion, the Tribunal considered the
significance of Decree 1735/04.

In paragraphs 220-222 and 264-266 and footnote 350 of the Award, the
Tribunal found that Article XI of the BIT did not apply to Decree 1735/04, on the
basis that by the time of its adoption in December 2004, “Argentina’s financial
situation was evolving towards normality’. This meant that Argentina could not
rely on Decree 1735/04 as a justification for its subsequent failure to observe
the original terms of the LETEs.

The Committee notes in this respect that the Award does not specify a date on
which Argentina’s economic crisis ended. That is understandable, because an
economic crisis of this nature does not normally have an abrupt termination on a
particular day. Paragraphs 152 to 159 of the Award deal with the evolution of
the situation from the apogee of the crisis in the second half of 2002, until
January 2006 when repayment of all sizable amounts outstanding to the IMF
had been completed. On the Committee’s reading of the Award, the Tribunal
did not find that Argentina’s economic crisis had necessarily “ended” by
December 2004, when Decree 1735/04 was adopted. Rather, its finding was
that by December 2004, the economic situation had sufficiently evolved
“towards normality” that the particular measures contained in Decree 1735/04
could not in all of the circumstances then prevailing be considered “necessary”
for purposes of Article XI of the BIT.

In paragraphs 265 and 285 of the Award, the Tribunal indicates that the
restructuring of the LETEs provided for in Decree 1735/04 was itself a breach of
the fair and equitable treatment clause. From a reading of the Award as a
whole, it is clear that the reasons for this were the same as reasons for
concluding that Article XI did not apply, namely that in circumstances where it
was no longer necessary to do so in order to deal with the economic crisis, the

Award § 315.

104

256.

257.

258.

259.

182

Decree unilaterally offered to recognise only 30 percent of the value of the
LETEs, and only on condition that rights under the BIT were waived.

Argentina argues that this finding is illogical, since Argentina was absolved of
liability for its default on the LETEs in 2002 by virtue of Article XI of the BIT,
such that the offer in Decree 1735/04 in 2004 improved the position of LETEs
holders. Even were this one possible reading of the Award, where it is merely
arguable whether an award contains an inconsistency, it is not for an annulment
committee to determine that the correct reading of the award is one which
contains an annullable error.'®* If two possible readings of an award are fairly
open, where one would contain an annullable error and the other would not, the
latter reading should be assumed to be what a tribunal intended.

The Committee considers that it is implicit in the Award that the Tribunal
considered that prior to Decree 1735/04 the LETEs had not already been
rendered worthless by measures to which Article XI applied. If the obligations
under the LETEs had been restructured by a permanent measure to which
Article XI applied, then such measure would continue to apply even after the
economic crisis had ended, as the Tribunal for instance found in relation to the
pesification of the LETEs. However, as Article Xl was found not to apply to
Decree 1735/04, it is implicit in the Tribunal’s decision that if Decree 1735/04
had never been adopted, at some point Continental would have had a BIT claim
in respect of default on the LETEs if the default had continued indefinitely, since
not all rights under the LETEs had been permanently abrogated by a measure
to which Article XI applied.

It is implicit that the Tribunal regarded Decree 1735/04 as having effectively
abrogated the remaining rights of LETEs holders who, like Continental, did not
accept the offered restructuring. The result was that Decree 1735/04 itself was
found by the Tribunal to constitute a breach of the BIT, for which Argentina was
liable to pay damages.

The Committee therefore does not consider that there is any inherent
contradiction in the reasoning of the Tribunal.

See paragraph 104 above.

105

260.

261.

262.

Argentina complains further that the Tribunal’s reasons for finding that Article XI
of the BIT did not apply to Decree 1735/04 were too brief. Argentina argues
that the question of what measures were “necessary” to deal with the economic
crisis is enormously complex, and that the Tribunal dealt with it in a brief two
paragraphs of the Award. It is said that this was arbitrary, amounting to a
manifest excess of powers, or a failure to give reasons for the decision.

The fact that reasons may have been short is not in the Committee’s view a
meaningful criterion for determining whether the discussion offered by a tribunal
falls short of its duty to state reasons.'®? Furthermore, in determining whether
the reasons given for a conclusion on a particular question are sufficient, is it
necessary not to look in isolation at the particular paragraphs of the award
dealing specifically with that question. Those paragraphs must always be read
together with the award as a whole. In the present case, the Award contained a
long discussion of the factual background to the Argentinean economic crisis,
detailing the course of events from the late 1990s to the middle of the first
decade of the 21°" century.'** The Tribunal’s conclusions specifically relating to
the default on the LETEs and Decree 1735/04 must be understood in the light of
the circumstantial framework which the Tribunal obviously took into

consideration when reaching its conclusions.

The Tribunal could only decide the questions before it on the basis of the
evidence and submissions placed before it by the parties. On the basis of that
evidence and those submissions, the Tribunal was required to determine
whether Article XI of the BIT applied to various measures that were taken by
Argentina from the beginning of the economic crisis. On the basis of that
evidence and those submissions, the Tribunal held that Article XI applied in
relation to various of those measures taken in 2001 and 2002, but was satisfied
that it did not apply to Decree 1735/04. The Committee considers that the
Award, when read as a whole, “enables one to follow how the tribunal
proceeded from Point A. to point B. and eventually to its conclusion’. The
Committee is not persuaded that this is a “clear case” of reasons that “leave the
decision on a particular point essentially lacking in any expressed rationale’.

183 See paragraphs 99-102 above.

184

Award {| 100-159.

106

263.

264.

265.

267.

185
186

187

Even if the reasons are stated succinctly and even if Argentina may not be
persuaded by them, there has been no failure to state reasons.

At the Hearing before the Committee, Argentina for the first time raised a further
argument as the basis for annulment of the Tribunal’s finding in respect of the
LETEs, namely that the Tribunal had awarded damages ultra petita, that is to
say, on a ground which had not been invoked by Continental. Argentina says
that this is because Continental never advanced a claim before the Tribunal that
Decree 1735/04 amounted to a breach of the BIT.

In respect of this argument, the Committee observes that even where a Tribunal
does grant a claim which is ultra petita, this will only amount to an annullable
error where one of the grounds of annulment in Article 52(1) of the ICSID
Convention is applicable. In its Application for Annulment in these proceedings,
the only grounds of annulment invoked by Argentina were failure to state
reasons and serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.
Argentina's Memorial on Annulment similarly invoked these two grounds only,
as did Argentina’s Reply on Annulment. At the Hearing, Argentina ultimately

relied on the same two grounds. "®

For the reasons given above, the Committee is satisfied that the Tribunal did
give sufficient reasons for its decision in this respect.

Furthermore, even if it is assumed that it is an excess of powers for a tribunal to
decide a claim ultra petita, this will only be a ground of annulment under Article

52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention if the excess of powers is “manifest”.

It has been said that “It is generally understood that exceeding one’s powers is

‘manifest’ when it is ‘obvious by itself’ simply by reading the Award, that is, even

prior to a detailed examination of its contents”,"®° and that this ground of

annulment requires that the excess of power should be “textually obvious”’'®”

The Committee considers that even if it were to be accepted that the Tribunal

Hearing transcript, November 9, 2010, pp. 222-224.

Repsol YPF Ecuador SA v. Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), \CSID Case
No. ARB/01/10, Decision on the Application for Annulment, 8 January 2007 4. 36.

Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, |\CSID Case No. ARB/02/7, Decision of the Ad hoc Committee on
the Application for Annulment of Mr. Soufraki, 5 June 2007 94. 38-40.

107

268.

18
189

exceeded its powers in this case by finding a breach of the BIT on an ultra petita
basis, the excess of powers was not “manifest” in this sense. In order to
establish whether there was any excess of powers in this case it is necessary to
engage in a careful review of the arguments that have been advanced by the
parties in the underlying arbitral proceedings. Even if there were said to be an
excess of powers, the Committee does not consider that it is “obvious by itself”,

or “textually obvious”.

Argentina did not expressly argue that the making of an ultra petita
determination by a tribunal amounts to a serious departure from a fundamental
rule of procedure, within the meaning of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID
Convention. The Committee has nonetheless considered whether it is
empowered, under the principle of jura novit curia, to determine whether
Argentina’s non ultra petita argument establishes a ground of annulment under
Article 52(1)(d).

The Committee considers that in its consideration of this issue, it must have
regard to the stage at which Argentina raised the non ultra petita argument. At
the Hearing, Continental expressed its view that Argentina had not presented
this argument in its written submissions and that, for this reason, the argument
raised by Argentina at the Hearing was “technically inadmissible”. Argentina
contended for its part that the matter of ultra petita had, in fact, been raised in
Argentina’s written submissions.’ Argentina referred to the following

passages in its submissions:

In the Award, the Tribunal reached severe conclusions
regarding the restructuring of the Argentine debt
without taking into consideration the evidence and
arguments presented by the parties, which were
merely not mentioned as grounds for such
conclusions."®°

The Tribunal failed to state the reasons for its decision
on this matter as regards certain questions submitted
by the parties and, particularly, by the Argentine

® Hearing transcript, November 9, 2010, pp. 346-347.
Argentina’s Memorial on Annulment, para 24.

108

270.

271.

272.

273.

Republic, and failed to deal with other questions which
were not addressed at the hearing or during the course
of written proceedings, yet it made unfounded
determinations concerning the restructuring of the
LETES.'*°

Continental, for its part, argued that these references in Argentina’s written
annulment pleadings were merely “some obscure and oblique passages”'®!
which were so subtle that they could not possibly be said to have raised the non
ultra petita argument before the Hearing. Continental therefore took the view

that the non ultra petita argument was “technically inadmissible”.'°

Notwithstanding that position, Continental proceeded to argue why the
Tribunal’s dealing with the December 2004 Offer did not constitute a manifest
excess of powers or a failure to state reasons. No request for dismissal was
made by Continental, and no ruling on the matter was rendered by the ad hoc
Committee.

The Committee agrees with Continental’s view that Argentina cannot be said to
have invoked properly the non ultra petita argument prior to the Hearing. The
Committee was in the circumstances ultimately prepared to consider the
argument. However, in the circumstances, the Committee is not prepared to go
further, and to consider of its own motion, under the principle of jura novit curia,
whether there may have been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure.

For the sake of completeness it may be added that the Parties at the Hearing
discussed the implications of invoking events taking place after the
commencement of proceedings on the basis of an earlier investment arbitration
case, Pope & Talbot v Canada. However, as Argentina did not reject the
possibility that such subsequent events could be taken into account on condition
that they were properly argued, there is no reason for the Committee to discuss

the Parties’ argument in relation to this prior NAFTA case.

190 Argentina's Reply Memorial on Annulment, para 30.

192

Hearing transcript, November 10, 2010, p. 425.
Hearing transcript, November 10, 2010, p. 425.

109

274.

275.

276.

277.

278.

279.

193

Based on the above, the Committee finds no basis to annul the Award (to the
extent requested by Argentina) on the basis of Argentina's ultra petita argument.

The Committee therefore finds no annullable error in the Tribunal’s decision
partially to allow Continental’s claim in respect of the LETEs.

Argentina raised an additional issue in its application for partial annulment. In
the Award, Argentina was declared liable to compensate Continental “subject to
the Claimant first procuring the surrender of all LETEs held by its subsidiary, not
previously tendered to and accepted by Argentina’. This provision of the
dispositive part of the Award was later the object of an application for
rectification of the Award by Continental, pointing out that the securities in
question were “maintained by the Argentine Ministry of Finance in an electronic
register’ and that it was not, therefore, feasible to surrender any physical

certificates.

The Tribunal, in dealing with Continental’s request for rectification, noted that
“the Claimant did not supply any evidence that ‘the LETEs acquired on 25
September and 18 October [2001] remained uninterruptedly in possession of
Claimant's subsidiary up to the present date”.'°° However, the Tribunal held
that such evidence would not be necessary as the LETEs were clearly
identified. Argentina argues that this finding was a manifest excess of powers
or a failure to state reasons, as Continental “should have demonstrated, by
means of the relevant account statement, that the LETEs concerned were not

transferred at any time as from their acquisition” .

The Committee is satisfied that the Tribunal’s conclusion that “additional
evidence of such continuous possession would be superfluous” was a
conclusion that the Tribunal was entitled to make and it does not attest to any
manifest excess of powers or failure to state reasons.

Consequently, the Committee denies Argentina’s request for annulment of
paragraph 320(b) of the Award, and all of Argentina’s requests for annulment of

Rectification of the Award of 23 February 2009, para 10.

110

281.

282.

283.

194

195

196

findings of the Tribunal and associated reasoning referred to in paragraph 78
above.

Iv. COSTS

For the reasons given above, the Committee has rejected the respective
applications for annulment of Continental and Argentina in their entirety. It
follows that the Tribunal’s ruling in the Award on the costs of the proceedings
before the Tribunal stands.

As to the costs of the present annulment proceedings, under Article 61(2) of the
ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 47(1)(j), read in conjunction with
Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 53, the
Committee has a discretion to determine how and by whom shall be paid the
expenses incurred by the parties in connection with the proceedings, the fees
and expenses of the members of the Committee and the charges for the use of
the facilities of the Centre.

The Committee notes that there are suggestions in some decisions on

applications for annulment that the normal practice in annulment proceedings,

regardless of the outcome,'®*

195

is to order that each party shall bear its own

and to order that the parties shall bear equally the costs of the
196

costs

annulment proceedings.

A different approach was taken in the Azurix Annulment Decision. The ad hoc
committee in that case did follow the practice of ordering that each party should

Azurix Annulment Decision §§ 369-370 and Enron Annulment Decision §§ 419-420, giving
references; Rumeli Annulment Decision § 183. This general rule has been said to be subject to a
possible exception in cases where the annulment application was “fundamentally lacking in merit’.
Other recent decisions adopting this practice include Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and

Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on the Argentine

Republic’s Request for Annulment of the Award Rendered on 20 August 2007, August 20, 2010
(“Vivendi Second Annulment Decision”) § 268; Fraport Annulment Decision 283-285; Helnan
Annulment Decision, dispositif, Rumeli Annulment Decision § 184; Duke Annulment Decision 94
266-268.

Other recent decisions adopting this practice include Vivendi Second Annulment Decision § 269;
Fraport Annulment Decision § 286; Helnan Annulment Decision, dispositif,.

111

284.

286.

bear its own litigation costs and expenses. '?”

However, in relation to the
expenses incurred by the Centre in connection with the proceedings, including
the fees and expenses of the members of the ad hoc committee, it was
concluded that the normal rule should be for a wholly unsuccessful applicant for
annulment carry the burden of the whole of the costs, but that this normal rule
could be departed from where exceptional circumstances so justify.'°° In the
circumstances of that case, a departure from the general rule was found not to
be justified.'®° A similar approach was taken in the MC/ Annulment Decision?”

and the Duke Annulment Decision.2"

In the Enron Annulment Decision, a case where an annulment application
succeeded only in part, it was considered that it would be appropriate, in the
circumstances and in the light of previous annulment decisions, for the costs of
the proceedings to be borne equally by the parties,” and for each party to bear
its own litigation costs.2°

In the present case, applications for partial annulment of the Award were made
by both parties. Each party has been entirely unsuccessful in their applications,
and no part of the Award has been annulled. Whilst inclined to the approach
noted in paragraph 283 above, in these circumstances the Committee
concludes that it is appropriate, in the light of previous annulment decisions, for
the costs of the proceedings to be borne equally by the parties, and for each
party to bear its own litigation costs.

During these annulment proceedings, the Committee ordered pursuant to Article
52(5) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(1) and (2) that the
stay of enforcement of the Award will continue in effect for the duration of these
annulment proceedings.2** Pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(3) that stay

Azurix Annulment Decision § 380. Rumeli Annulment Decision 4 184

Azurix Annulment Decision {§ 371-378.

Azurix Annulment Decision § 379.

MCI Annulment Decision § 88.

Duke Annulment Decision §§ 263 and 265 (on the basis that Peru, the party unsuccessfully
applying for annulment, had stated that it was not requesting to be reimbursed for any portion of the
ICSID costs that it had already advanced).

Enron Annulment Decision § 424.

Enron Annulment Decision § 425.

See the Committee’s “Decision on Argentina’s Application for a Stay of Enforcement of the Award”
of October 23, 2009.

112

automatically terminates on the date on which the present decision on the
respective applications for annulment of Continental and Argentina is rendered.

113

Vv. DECISION

For the reasons given above, the Committee:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

6)

dismisses in its entirety the application for annulment of
Continental Casualty Company;

dismisses in its entirety the application for partial annulment of the
Argentine Republic;

decides that each Party shall bear one half of the costs incurred by
the Centre in connection with these annulment proceedings,
including the fees and expenses of the members of the Committee;

decides that each Party shall bear its own litigation costs and
expenses incurred with respect to these annulment proceedings,
including its costs of legal representation;

decides pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID
Arbitration Rule 54(3) that the stay of enforcement of the Award
ordered by the Committee in its decision of 23 October 2009 is
terminated.

114

[signed]

Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C.
President of the ad hoc Committee

 

[signed] [signed]
Judge Bola Ajibola Mr. Christer S6derlund
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee

115

