Continental Casualty Company
(Claimant)

v.
The Argentine Republic
(Respondent)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9)
(Annulment Proceeding)

 

Decision on Argentina’s Application for a Stay
of Enforcement of the Award

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C., President
Judge Bola A. Ajibola
Mr. Christer Séderlund

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee: Mr. Tomas Solis

Assistant to the ad hoc Committee: Dr. Christopher Staker

Representing the Claimant: Representing the Respondent:
Mr. Barry Appleton Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino
Appleton & Associates International Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Lawyers Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
77 Bloor Street West, Suite 1800 Posadas 1641

Toronto, Ontario M5S 1M2 C1112ADC Buenos Aires

Canada Argentina

Introduction

1. On 5 June 2009, the Argentine Republic (“Argentina”) filed with the Secretary-
General of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(‘ICSID” or the “Centre”) an application in writing (“Argentina's Application” or
“Argentina’s Application for Annulment”) requesting the partial annulment of the
Award of 5 September 2008 (the “Award”) rendered by the tribunal (the
“Tribunal”) in the arbitration proceeding between Continental Casualty Company

(“Continental”) and Argentina.

2. In Argentina’s Application, Argentina seeks annulment of the Award on two of
the five grounds set forth in Article 52(1) of the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (“the ICSID
Convention”), specifically claiming that:

(a) the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers; and
(b) the Award failed to state the reasons on which it was based.

3. Argentina’s Application also contained a request, under Article 52(5) of the
ICSID Convention and Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (the “ICSID Arbitration Rules’), for a stay of
enforcement of the Award until Argentina’s Application for Annulment is
decided.

4. The Committee’s decision of October 23, 2009 sets out the procedural history to

that date of Argentina’s Application for Annulment."

5. On 29 June 2009, in accordance with a request made by the Committee in a
letter of 12 June 2009, Argentina and Continental both filed written submissions
in relation to Argentina’s request for a continuation of the stay of enforcement of
the Award. Oral submissions were presented by both parties on Argentina’s

request at the preliminary procedural consultation meeting held in Washington

“Decision on the Claimant's Preliminary Objection to Argentina’s Application for Annulment” of 23
October 2009 [J] 4-15.

on 2 July 2009. In accordance with a direction given by the Committee, on 2
October 2009 Argentina filed further written submissions in relation to its
request and Continental confirmed that it had no need to make further

submissions.

The Members of the Committee have deliberated by various means of
communication, and have taken into consideration the parties’ entire written and
oral arguments and submissions on Argentina’s request for a stay of
enforcement of the Award.

The parties’ submissions
Argentina argues, inter alia that:

(a) In general, a stay should be granted under Article 52(5) if requested.”
Since the beginning of the history of the ICSID Convention, no ad hoc
Committee has failed to grant a stay of enforcement of the award.° There

Referring to Enron Creditors Recovery Corp. & Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3) (Annulment Proceeding), Decision on the Claimants’ Second Request
to Lift Provisional Stay of Enforcement of the Award (Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules), 20
May 2009 (“Enron Second Stay Decision”), {] 6.b.

Referring to Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador)
(ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/10), Procedural Order No. 1, December 22, 2005 (“Repso/ Stay
Decision”), | 9; Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No.
ARB/81/1), Ad hoc Committee Decision on the Application for Annulment, May 16, 1986, 25 /LM
1439 (1986); 1 Int'l Arb. Rep. 649 (1986); 12 Y.B. Com. Arb. 129 (1987); 89 LL.R. 514 (1992); 4
ICSID Rep. 509 (1993) (“Amco | Annulment Decision”) ] 8; Amco Asia Corporation and others v.
Republic of Indonesia (\CSID Case No. ARB/81/1), Interim Order No. 1, March 2, 1991, 9 /CSID
Rep. 59 (2006) (“Amco II Stay Decision”) {| 9; Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt
(ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision on Application for Annulment, 8 December 2000, J] 10;
Maritime International Nominees Establishment (“MINE”) v. Republic of Guinea (ICSID Case No.
ARB/84/4), Interim Order No. 1 on Guinea's Application for Stay of Enforcement of the Award,
August 12, 1988 (“MINE Stay Decision”) | 28; CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8), Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a
Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, September 1, 2006 (“CMS Stay Decision”) {| 58;
Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7), Decision on the
Stay of Enforcement of the Award, November 30, 2004 (“Mitchell Stay Decision”) {| 23; CDC Group
ple v. Republic of the Seychelles (\CSID Case No. ARB/02/14), Decision on Whether or Not to
Continue Stay and Order, July 14, 2004 (“CDC Stay Decision”) | 23; MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and
MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile (\CSID Case No. ARB/O1/7), Decision on the Respondent's
Request for a Continued Stay of Execution, June 1, 2005 (“MTD Stay Decision”) {| 37; Azurix Corp.
v. Argentine Republic (I\CSID Case No. ARB/01/12), Decision on the Argentine Republic's Request
for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, December 28, 2007 (“Azurix Stay Decision”) J]
45. Enron Corporation & Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/01/3), Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of
the Award (Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules), 7 October 2008 (“Enron First Stay Decision”) at

are no exceptional circumstances in this case under which the stay
should not continue. The grounds for annulment invoked by Argentina
and their seriousness and merit show that Argentina’s annulment request
is serious and not dilatory.

(b) | The fact that Continental’s Application for Annulment seeks annulment of
the same portions of the Award that gave rise to Argentina’s Application
for Annulment militates in favour of continuing the stay of enforcement of
the Award until the Committee definitively settles the questions raised by

both parties to this proceeding.

(c) Continental will suffer no harm as a consequence of the continued stay of
enforcement since if the Award is finally upheld the interest accrued
during the annulment proceedings would compensate Continental for the
time it had to wait to collect the Award.*

(d) There is no risk of non-compliance with the Award by Argentina if it is not
annulled. Argentina’s legal system guarantees compliance with
Argentina's treaty obligations and ICSID awards,° and Argentina has

historically complied with decisions of international tribunals.®

 

48; Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3) (Annulment Proceeding), Decision on the Argentine Republic's
Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award rendered on 20 August 2007 (Rule 54
of the ICSID Arbitration Rules), 4 November 2008 (“Vivendi Stay Decision”); Sempra Energy
International v. Argentine Republic (\CSID Case No. ARB/02/16), Decision on the Argentine
Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, March 5, 2009 (“Sempra
First Stay Decision”) J 117; Enron Second Stay Decision at 21.

Relying on Award {] 320 and referring to CMS Stay Decision {| 39; MTD Stay Decision {| 36; Azurix
Stay Decision ¥ 40.

Referring to the Constitution of Argentina, Article 75(22); CMS Stay Decision Jf] 38, 41, 45; Azurix
Stay Decision {J 38-38; Argentine Supreme Court of Justice, 7 July 1992, Ekmekdjian, Miguel
Angel v. Sofovich, Gerardo et al, Rulings: 315:1503, Recital Nos. 18-19; Gomez Gomez, Alfredo;
Gonzalez, Sebastian Ignacio on extradition, Argentine Supreme Court of Justice, 16 October 2001,
File G. 1. XXXVI, pp. 6, 9; Martin y Cia. v. National Government, Argentine Supreme Court of
Justice (1963) and Esso S.A. v. National Government, Argentine Supreme Court of Justice (1968);
and contrasting Republic of Paraguay v. Gilmore, 523 U.S. 371, 376 (1998).

Referring to Maqueda v. Argentina Case, Inter-American Court of Human Rights (series C) No. 18,
Resolution of 17 January 1995; Garrido and Baigorria v. Argentina case, |Inter-American Court of
Human Rights (series C) No. 26, Judgement of 2 February 1996; Cantos v. Argentina case, Inter-
American Court of Human Rights (series C) No. 97, Judgment of 28 November 2002; Bulacio v.
Argentina case, Inter-American Court of Human Rights (series C) No. 100, Judgement of 18
September 2003; Bulacio v. Argentina case, Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Resolution on
supervision of judgement compliance of 17 November 2004.

(e)

(g)

(h)

(i)

()

Those who argue that Argentina is in default of its international
obligations under the ICSID Convention point only to the CMS Award.’
However, CMS has refused to follow the administrative formalities under
Argentine law for a final decision of a local court to be paid, as provided
for by Article 54 of the ICSID Convention. Furthermore, CMS’s rights
under the CMS Award were transferred to a third party.

In any event, Continental bears the burden of proof to show that
Argentina will not comply with its international obligations under the

Award if the damages portion of the Award is not annulled.

Allowing enforcement of the Award would have systemic consequences,
and would bring about serious harm to States’ trust in the investment

arbitration mechanism under the ICSID Convention.®

Argentina should not be required to provide any financial security as a
condition for the continuation of the stay. Such a requirement is contrary
to the object and purpose and spirit of the ICSID Convention,® the text
and negotiating history of which does not foresee the possibility of
requiring that a party seeking annulment post a guarantee. '° The
requirement of a guarantee has been incorrectly imported from the

commercial arbitration practice.

Requiring a guarantee as a condition of a stay of enforcement impairs the
use of the protection of the annulment mechanism contained in the ICSID
Convention."" The right of either party to request annulment cannot be
restricted. '2

Requiring a guarantee as a condition of a stay of enforcement would

place Continental in a more favourable situation than it is now and than it

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (\CSID Case No. ARB/01/8), Award, 12

May 2005.

Referring to Azurix Stay Decision {| 32.

Referring to Azurix Stay Decision JJ 34-35.

Referring to MINE Stay Decision | 20.

Referring to Azurix Stay Decision {| 32.

Referring to Schreuer at 904; Mitchell Stay Decision {| 40.

()

(m)

(n)

(0)

(p)

was prior to the filing of Argentina’s Application for Annulment,"? since “it
converts the undertaking of compliance under Article 53 of the convention
into a financial guarantee and avoids any issue of sovereign immunity
from enforcement, which is expressly reserved by Article 55 of the

Convention”. "4

Both Continental and Argentina have applied for annulment of the Award,
and requiring the provision of a financial guarantee would penalise one of
the parties while favouring the other."

It is not the task nor the jurisdiction of ICSID annulment committees to
secure compliance with awards should annulments not be granted.

It would be extremely costly for Argentina to access an adequate financial

guarantee.

It would be very difficult, if not impossible, for Argentina to recover the
amount of the Award if it were partially annulled,"® since as long as
Argentina would have a right to retrieve those amounts such right could
be attached by other unrelated creditors of Argentina.'”

The posting of a bank guarantee is unnecessary since the Argentine
domestic legal system already guarantees compliance with the Award. In
any event, Continental should bear the burden of proof that there are
circumstances requiring that an additional guarantee be furnished. '®

Argentina will comply in good faith with its obligations under the ICSID
Convention, but requires ICSID award creditors to follow the same
formalities that are followed by any creditor of a final judgment of a local
court in Argentina, a position that is consistent with Articles 53 and Article

Referring to MINE Stay Decision {| 22; Mitchell Stay Decision {J 34, 40; MTD Stay Decision {| 30;

CMS Stay Decision {| 39; Azurix Stay Decision | 43; Enron Second Stay Decision {| 45.

Citing CMS Stay Decision {| 39; and referring to MINE Stay Decision {J 23-24, and MTD Stay
Decision {| 30.

Referring to Mitchell Stay Decision {| 40; Azurix Stay Decision 31.

Relying on Mitchell Stay Decision {| 24; CMS Stay Decision J 38.

Relying on Enron Second Stay Decision {| 39.

Referring to Azurix Stay Decision {| 37.

54 of the ICSID Convention.'® Several countries have provisions similar
to Argentina’s legal framework and adopt the same rationale that

Argentina has adopted.”°
Continental argues, inter alia that:

(a) | Continental is prepared to accede to Argentina's request with respect to
the stay, provided that Argentina posts security in the form of payment

into escrow, a bond or bank guarantee or some other negotiable security.

(b) | The established practice of ICSID annulment committees is to grant a
stay only on payment of the compensation ordered into an escrow or trust
account or on the posting of a bond or some other form of negotiable

security.?"

(c) | Argentina’s assertion of no harm to Continental if the stay is ordered
without security rests on the assumption that Argentina will ultimately
satisfy its obligations under the award. However, Argentina is notorious
for failing to comply with ICSID arbitral awards,” and the requirement of

security is clearly and compellingly warranted in this case.

(d) Argentina has repeatedly reaffirmed that it will not comply with its
obligations under article 53 of the ICSID Convention unless and until
enforcement action is taken under article 54.7° However, under Article 53
of the ICSID Convention and Article VII(6) of the Treaty between the
United States of America and the Argentine Republic Concerning the
Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investment”4 (the “BIT”),
Argentina is required to carry out without delay the provision of any award

Referring to MTD Stay Decision {J 31-32; CMS Stay Decision ff] 40-41; Vivendi Stay Decision.
Arbitration (International Investment Disputes) Act of the United Kingdom, 1966, section 1(8);
Exempt Resolution No. 1891 of the Government of Chile, Ministry of Justice, of 9 July 2008;
International Arbitration Act (Act No. 136 of 1974 as amended) (Australia); Arbitration (International
Investment Disputes) Act (Act No. 39 of 1979) (New Zealand); Arbitration (International Investment
Disputes) Amendment Act (Act No. 52 of 2000) (New Zealand).

Referring to AMCO / Stay Decision, especially | 8; Vivendi Stay Decision, especially J] 45-46;
Sempra Stay Decision, especially J] 52-53, 67-76, 102, 104, 110, 112; Wena Stay Decision,
especially {| 6; MINE Stay Decision; Repso/ Stay Decision, especially {| 10; CDC Stay Decision.
Referring to |. Peterson, “Argentine Crisis Arbitration Awards Pile Up, but Investors Still Wait for
Payout”, Focus Europe, June 25, 2009.

Referring to Sempra First Stay Decision ff] 10, 52-53.

Signed November 14, 1991; entered into force October 20, 1994.

(e)

(g)

(h)

without the award creditor having to submit to any agency of the state
party to enforce the award as envisaged by Article 54 of the ICSID
Convention.

The guarantee would not place Continental in a better situation than it
would otherwise be in a case where Argentina were to comply with its
obligations under Article 53.25 Posting security is simply intended to
assure that Argentina ultimately complies with its obligations, and serves
as a counterbalance to the fact that the award creditor is prejudiced by a

stay.”®

The possibility that other creditors of Argentina might attach Argentina’s
right to receive the security it has posted in the event that its application
for annulment is granted should not be a relevant factor. The fact that
Argentina has other creditors which have not been paid should make the
requirement to post security more likely rather than less likely.

However, if Argentina were ordered to deposit the full amount of the
award plus interest into an escrow or trust account administered by the
World Bank, this would avoid the potential problem of attachment by
unrelated creditors of Argentina as the World Bank is exempt from that

type of attachment.

This would also avoid what Argentina claims would be the very high cost
of other forms of security.

Continental does not seek to annul the portion of the Award awarding
Continental USD 2.8 million in damages for breach of the fair and
equitable treatment obligation in the BIT.

Referring to Sempra First Stay Decision J] 46, 47, 102-103, 95.

26

Referring to Mitchell Stay Decision 33.

c. Relevant provisions

9. Article 52 of the ICSID Convention provides:

(1)

(9)

Either party may request annulment of the award by an
application in writing addressed to the Secretary-General

The Committee may, if it considers that the
circumstances so require, stay enforcement of the award
pending its decision. If the applicant requests a stay of
enforcement of the award in his application, enforcement
Shall be stayed provisionally until the Committee rules on
such request.

10. Articles 53 to 55 of the ICSID Convention provide:

Article 53

(1)

The award shall be binding on the parties and shall not
be subject to any appeal or to any other remedy except
those provided for in this Convention. Each party shall
abide by and comply with the terms of the award except
to the extent that enforcement shall have been stayed
pursuant to the relevant provisions of this Convention.

(2) For the purposes of this Section, "award" shall include
any decision interpreting, revising or annulling such
award pursuant to Articles 50, 51 or 52.

Article 54

(1) Each Contracting State shall recognize an award

rendered pursuant to this Convention as binding and
enforce the pecuniary obligations imposed by that award
within its territories as if it were a final judgment of a court
in that State. A Contracting State with a federal
constitution may enforce such an award in or through its
federal courts and may provide that such courts shall
treat the award as if it were a final judgment of the courts
of a constituent state.

11.

(2) A party seeking recognition or enforcement in the
territories of a Contracting State shall furnish to a
competent court or other authority which such State shall
have designated for this purpose a copy of the award
certified by the Secretary-General. Each Contracting
State shall notify the Secretary-General of the
designation of the competent court or other authority for
this purpose and of any subsequent change in such
designation.

(3) Execution of the award shall be governed by the laws
concerning the execution of judgments in force in the
State in whose territories such execution is sought.

Article 55

Nothing in Article 54 shall be construed as derogating from the
law in force in any Contracting State relating to immunity of that
State or of any foreign State from execution.

Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules applies to the present case and provides:

Stay of Enforcement of the Award

(1) The party applying for the interpretation, revision or
annulment of an award may in its application, and either
party may at any time before the final disposition of the
application, request a stay in the enforcement of part or
all of the award to which the application relates. The
Tribunal or Committee shall give priority to the
consideration of such a request.

(2) If an application for the revision or annulment of an
award contains a request for a stay of its enforcement,
the Secretary-General shall, together with the notice of
registration, inform both parties of the provisional stay of
the award. As soon as the Tribunal or Committee is
constituted it shall, if either party requests, rule within 30
days on whether such stay should be continued; unless it
decides to continue the stay, it shall automatically be
terminated.

(3) If a stay of enforcement has been granted pursuant to
paragraph (1) or continued pursuant to paragraph (2),
the Tribunal or Committee may at any time modify or
terminate the stay at the request of either party. All stays
shall automatically terminate on the date on which a final

decision is rendered on the application, except that a
Committee granting the partial annulment of an award
may order the temporary stay of enforcement of the
unannulled portion in order to give either party an
opportunity to request any new Tribunal constituted
pursuant to Article 52(6) of the Convention to grant a
stay pursuant to Rule 55(3).

(4) A request pursuant to paragraph (1), (2) (second
sentence) or (3) shall specify the circumstances that
require the stay or its modification or termination. A
request shall only be granted after the Tribunal or
Committee has given each party an opportunity of
presenting its observations.

(5) The Secretary-General shall promptly notify both parties
of the stay of enforcement of any award and of the
modification or termination of such a stay, which shall
become effective on the date on which he dispatches
such notification.

The Committee’s views

Continental maintains that there is a substantial risk of non-compliance with the
Award by Argentina in the event that it is not annulled. In this respect, the
Committee notes that at the 2 July 2009 first session, a representative of
Argentina stated Argentina’s position that in order for Continental to obtain
payment of the Award, it would be necessary for Continental to follow the
formalities applicable to enforcement in Argentina of final judgments of
Argentine courts, pursuant to Article 54 of the ICSID Convention. The
Committee notes that in three other cases, ad hoc committees have found that
this position of Argentina is inconsistent with Argentina’s obligation under Article
53 of the ICSID Convention to carry out without delay the provisions of the
award without the need for enforcement action under Article 54 of the ICSID
Convention.2” The Committee agrees with the conclusions in those earlier
cases in respect of the obligation of the award debtor under Article 53 of the
ICSID Convention. For similar reasons, the Committee concludes that because

Argentina continues to maintain the same position in the present proceedings

27 Enron First Stay Decision {{] 54-85; Vivendi Stay Decision ff] 31-37; Sempra First Stay Decision ff]

32-53.

28

29

notwithstanding the findings of the ad hoc committees in those three other
cases, there is, in the event that the Award is not annulled, no prospect that
Argentina will comply with its obligation under Article 53 of the ICSID

Convention to abide by and comply with its obligation under Article 53.7%

The Committee finds this to be a fundamentally important consideration in
determining whether to impose a condition of security as a requirement for any
stay of enforcement. However, even so, that consideration is not of itself
necessarily conclusive as the Committee must base its decision entirely on the

relevant circumstances.

A distinguishing feature of the present case is that each of Continental and
Argentina has made applications for annulment of the Award. Of course
Continental has not sought annulment of that part of the Award which was in
Continental’s favour, and which Continental seeks to be at liberty to enforce in
the event that the stay of enforcement is terminated. Nevertheless, in the
Committee’s view, it would not in general be appropriate for an award to be
enforced in circumstances where neither of the parties considers the award to
be final with extant applications for Annulment having been made for the entire
Award. This is a factor to which the Committee gives particular weight in
deciding whether it is necessary or appropriate to impose a condition of security

for any continuation of the stay.

Another matter to which the Committee has regard is the amount of the Award.
The Tribunal determined that Argentina is liable to pay Continental
compensation of USD 2.8 million, which is but a fraction of the amount of USD
46 million that was claimed by Continental in the proceedings before the
Tribunal.”9 In the Committee’s view, the fact that the Award is for such a small
proportion of the amount that would still remain in dispute in the event that
Continental’s own Application for Annulment were to succeed, and for such a
small amount by comparison with other ICSID awards, remains a further

Enron First Stay Decision {| 101; Enron Second Stay Decision {| 21-29; Sempra First Stay
Decision {| 104; Vivendi Stay Decision {| 45; Sempra First Stay Decision {| 22.
Award ¥| 19.

relevant circumstance to be taken into account where the party opposing a stay

of enforcement is itself also an applicant for annulment.

Having considered all of the arguments of the parties, and all of the
circumstances as a whole, the Committee concludes that in consideration of the
exceptional circumstances of this annulment proceeding, consisting in the
combination of the relatively small amount of the Award and the presence of
cross applications for annulment, practical considerations may allow a
continued stay of the enforcement of the Award pending the conclusion of the

annulment proceedings without imposing any condition of security.

DECISION

Pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54(2) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, the ad hoc Committee determines that the stay of enforcement

of the Award will continue in effect for the duration of these annulment

proceedings.

Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C.
President of the ad hoc Committee
On behalf of the Committee

Melbourne, 23 October 2009

