Continental Casualty Company
(Claimant)

v.
The Argentine Republic
(Respondent)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9)
(Annulment Proceeding)

 

Decision on the Claimant’s Preliminary Objection to
Argentina’s Application for Annulment

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C., President
Judge Bola A. Ajibola
Mr. Christer Sdderlund
Secretary of the ad hoc Committee: Mr. Tomas Solis

Assistant to the ad hoc Committee: Dr. Christopher Staker

Representing the Claimant: Representing the Respondent:
Mr. Barry Appleton Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino
Appleton & Associates International Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Lawyers Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
77 Bloor Street West, Suite 1800 Posadas 1641

Toronto, Ontario M5S 1M2 C1112ADC Buenos Aires

Canada Argentina

Introduction

On 5 June 2009, the Argentine Republic (“Argentina”) filed with the Secretary-
General of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(‘ICSID” or the “Centre”) an application in writing (“Argentina's Application” or
“Argentina’s Application for Annulment”) requesting the partial annulment of the
Award of 5 September 2008 (the “Award”) rendered by the Tribunal (the
“Tribunal”) in the arbitration proceeding between Continental Casualty Company

(“Continental”) and Argentina.

In Argentina’s Application, Argentina seeks annulment of the Award on two of
the five grounds set forth in Article 52(1) of the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (“the ICSID

Convention”), specifically claiming that:
(a) the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers; and
(b) the Award failed to state the reasons on which it was based.

Argentina’s Application also contained a request, under Article 52(5) of the
ICSID Convention and Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (the “ICSID Arbitration Rules”), for a stay of
enforcement of the Award until Argentina’s Application for Annulment is
decided.

The Acting Secretary-General of ICSID registered Argentina’s Application on 8
June 2009, and on the same date, in accordance with Rule 50(2) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, transmitted a Notice of Registration to the parties. The parties
were also notified that, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(2), the

enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed.

By letter of 9 June 2009, in accordance with Rule 52(2) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, the parties were notified by the Centre that an ad hoc Committee had
been constituted to consider Argentina’s Application, composed of Dr. Gavan
Griffith Q.C., a national of Australia, Judge Bola A. Ajibola, a national of Nigeria,

and Mr. Christer Sdderlund, a national of Sweden (“the Committee”).

On 29 June 2009, in accordance with a request made by the Committee in a
letter of 12 June 2009, Argentina and Continental both filed written submissions
in relation to Argentina’s request for a continuation of the stay of enforcement of
the Award.

Communications of the parties dated 29 June 2009 respectively addressed the
provisional agenda for the preliminary procedural consultation meeting.
Continental supplemented its communication by a further letter dated 30 June
2009.

On 2 July 2009, at the headquarters of the World Bank in Washington, the
preliminary procedural consultation meeting was held in relation to Argentina’s
Application for Annulment and in relation to the separate application for
annulment filed by Continental (“Continental’s Application” or “Continental's
Application for Annulment”) which was registered on 14 January 2009. In the
case of Argentina’s Application, this meeting constituted the Committee's first
session, the first session in relation to Continental’s Application having already
been held by telephone conference on 22 April 2009.

At the 2 July 2009 meeting, the parties confirmed their agreement that the
Committee had been properly constituted to hear both Continental's Application
and Argentina’s Application. The parties further confirmed that they had no
objections to its Members. Copies of the Committee Members’ declarations
concerning Argentina’s application were distributed by the Secretary at the end
of the meeting. Several issues of procedure were agreed and decided at the
meeting. Subsequently, the parties addressed the Committee with their
respective arguments concerning the question of the continuation of the stay of
enforcement of the Award. During the session, the Committee put questions to
the parties.

In the course of presenting its arguments at the 2 July 2009 meeting,
Continental raised a preliminary objection that Argentina’s Application was not
made within the time limit stipulated in Article 52(2) of the ICSID Convention
and was therefore outside the jurisdiction of the Committee. It was agreed and
decided that Continental was within 14 days from the 2 July 2009 meeting to file

a written submission setting out its preliminary objection, that Argentina was to
file its response within 30 days from receipt of Continental’s submission, and
that both parties reserved their right to request leave from the Committee for
further procedures concerning Continental's submission on its preliminary

objection.

On 16 July 2009, Continental filed a written submission on its preliminary

objection.

On 21 August 2009, Argentina filed its written response to Continental’s

submission on the preliminary objection.

By a letter dated 31 August 2009, Continental requested the Committee to
direct Argentina to provide Continental with the English language version of
certain documents referred to in Argentina’s response that were not available to
Continental, namely documents from annulment proceedings in other ICSID
cases involving Argentina, and to grant Continental leave to file a reply

submission, if necessary, after receipt of those documents.

By an e-mail dated 17 September 2009, Argentina submitted copies of the
documents requested by Continental, noting that one of the requested
documents was produced only in its Spanish original as no English translation

existed.

On 21 September 2009, Continental filed observations on Argentina’s response
to Continental’s submission on the preliminary objection.

The Members of the Committee have deliberated by various means of
communication, and have taken into consideration the parties’ entire written and
oral arguments and submissions on Continental's preliminary objection.

The parties’ submissions
Continental argues, inter alia, that:

(a) | Pursuant to Article 52(2) of the ICSID Convention, the 120 day time limit
for an application for annulment applies in all cases other than in cases of
alleged corruption on the part of a Tribunal member, and no such
allegation of corruption has been made in the present case.

(b) | The Award was rendered and issued to the parties on 5 September 2008.
Pursuant to Regulation 29 of the ICSID Administrative and Financial
Regulations, the 120 day time limit under Article 52(2) of the ICSID
Convention for an annulment application was therefore Sunday 4 January
2009, resulting in a filing deadline of Monday 5 January 2009. However,
Argentina’s application for annulment was not filed until 5 June 2009, 150
days after expiry of the 120 day period for applications for annulment.

(c) ICSID Arbitration Rule 50(3)(b) provides that the Secretary-General shall
refuse to register an application for annulment if it is not made “within 120
days after the date on which the award was rendered (or any subsequent
decision or correction)”. Argentina’s Application was so registered, but
the determination of whether an annulment application complies with the
terms of the ICSID Convention rests with the Committee and not with the

Secretary-General.'

(d) It is a general principle of interpretation in international law that
exceptions to a treaty obligation are construed restrictively (exceptio est
strictissimae applicationis). Annulment is an extraordinary remedy that
amounts to a general exception to the final and binding effect of an ICSID
award under Article 53 of the ICSID Convention. As an exception to
finality, the availability of annulment must be interpreted and applied

strictly, and be limited to extraordinary circumstances. Annulment is not

Relying on Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No.
ARB/81/1), Ad hoc Committee Decision on the Application for Annulment, 16 May 1986, 25 /LM
1439 (1986); 1 Int'l Arb. Rep. 649 (1986); 12 Y.B. Com. Arb. 129 (1987); 89 LL.R. 514 (1992); 4
ICSID Rep. 509 (1993) 47; C. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (Cambridge
University Press, 2001) (“Schreuer’) at 109 { 333.

to be encouraged as a routine step to be taken by a party that has lost a

case to assist in delaying or avoiding payment of an award.

(e) The ICSID Arbitration Rules are subsidiary to the ICSID Convention and
cannot be read in any way that is contrary to the proper interpretation of
the ICSID Convention itself.

(f) Properly understood in a manner consistent with a strict interpretation,
the extension of time in Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention for making
an annulment application in cases where there is an application for
rectification of the award is limited to an annulment application related to
determinations made in the rectification decision, or to a finding that has
been rectified in the rectification decision, since only in that case does the
applicant for annulment have to consider new legal points in relation to its
annulment application which justify the extra time.” Any other
interpretation opens the floodgates to dilatory and obstructive conduct on

the part of award debtors.°

(g) In the instant case Argentina’s Application for Annulment only challenges
determinations made in the original Award and findings of the Tribunal
that are entirely unrelated to the rectification, and Argentina’s Application
is therefore out of time. Argentina, in waiting for such a long period to file
its annulment application, is dilatory.

Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

(a) In accordance with Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention, Argentina’s
Application for Annulment was properly filed on 5 June 2009, 102 days
after the Tribunal’s Decision on Rectification of the Award of 23 February
2009.

(b) Nothing in Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention, nor in any other
provision of the ICSID Convention or ICSID Arbitration Rules, makes the

extension of the time limit for submitting an application for annulment

Referring to History of the ICSID Convention, Vol |l, Part 2, at 988 J] 49.
Referring to Schreuer at 894.

conditional on the application for annulment being related to
determinations made in the rectification decision or in the supplementary
decision. Continental is trying to amend the ICSID Convention.

(c) The negotiating history of the ICSID Convention confirms this.* Also,
when explaining the content of what is now ICSID Arbitration Rule 50, the
ICSID Secretariat did not make any distinctions between applications for
annulment that relate to determinations made in the rectification decision
and applications for annulment that do not.®

(d) | Given the very severe consequence that follows non-compliance with the
120-day deadline for annulment applications, and the uncertainties that
may arise as to whether a request for annulment is or is not related to the
rectification decision or to the supplementary decision, the drafters of the
ICSID Convention decided to adopt a clear rule in this regard, namely
that a decision on rectification or a supplementary decision generally
extends the time limits for requesting revision or annulment, regardless of
whether or not the application for revision or annulment addresses

questions dealt with in that decision.®

(e) In the present case the Acting Secretary-General reviewed Argentina’s
Application and found that it was duly and timely submitted because
otherwise the Acting Secretary-General would have refused to register
the application in accordance with Article 50(3)(b)(i) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules. Although this determination does not bind the
Committee, it should be accorded considerable weight.

(f) A certain delay in the proceeding is a normal consequence of the

rectification and supplementation process under Article 49 of the ICSID

Referring to Summary Proceedings of the Legal Committee Meeting, 10 December 1964,
afternoon, SID/LC/SR/21 (11 January 1965), in History of the ICSID Convention, Vol Il, Part 2, at
881, 884.

Referring to 1968 ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings with Explanatory Notes
prepared by the ICSID Secretariat, Note E to Arbitration Rule 49, 1 /CS/D Rep. 63, 110.

Referring to Schreuer at 854; UNCTAD, Course on Dispute Settlement: ICSID - 2.8 Post-Award
Remedies and Procedures, at 8, U.N. Doc. UNCTAD/EDM/Misc.232/Add.7 (2003) (prepared by
Wang Dong).

20.

21.

7

Convention.” In the present case, Continental itself caused the delay it
complains about, since Continental was the first to request a rectification
or supplementation of the Award which was decided by the Tribunal at

the same time as Argentina’s request for rectification.

(g) It is not an accurate to state that the right of annulment is an “exception”
or “extraordinary remedy” as it is a specific right provided for in the ICSID
Convention that has the particular feature of protecting the “integrity of

the ICSID arbitration system”.®

The Committee’s views

Article 51(2) of the ICSID Convention provides that an application for annulment
shall be made within 120 days after the date on which the award was rendered
(with an exception, that is immaterial to the present proceedings, in cases

where annulment is requested on the ground of corruption).

Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention states that:

The Tribunal upon the request of a party made within 45 days
after the date on which the award was rendered may after
notice to the other party decide any question which it had
omitted to decide in the award, and shall rectify any clerical,
arithmetical or similar error in the award. Its decision shall
become part of the award and shall be notified to the parties in
the same manner as the award. The periods of time provided
for under paragraph (2) of Article 51 and paragraph (2) of
Article 52 shall run from the date on which the decision was
rendered.

It is not disputed by the parties that in the present case the Tribunal gave a
decision under Article 49(2) rectifying the Award on 23 February 2009. It is not
disputed by the parties that Argentina’s Application for Annulment was filed well
within 120 days of that rectification decision. It is similarly not disputed by the
parties that Argentina’s Application was not filed within 120 days of the date on
which the original Award was rendered.

Referring to Schreuer at 855.

Referring to Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7),
Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 30 November 2004, [ 40.

Continental argues that Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention only extends the
time limit for an annulment application where the annulment application relates
to determinations made in the rectification decision. Continental's position is that
even if a rectification decision has been given by the Tribunal under Article
49(2), the time limit for an annulment application remains 120 days from the
original Award, and not 120 days from the rectification decision, in cases where
the annulment application relates to determinations in the original award that
were not affected by the rectification decision. Argentina on the other hand
argues that in cases where a rectification decision is given under Article 49(2) of
the ICSID Convention, that provision applies to extend the time limit for the
making of any application for annulment, whether or not the application relates

to matters in the award that were affected by the rectification decision.

The Committee considers that this issue is one of interpretation of Article 49(2)
of the ICSID Convention. In interpreting that provision, the Committee applies
the principles in Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties (the “Vienna Convention”).° These provisions reflect the customary
international law rules of treaty interpretation as they already existed at the time
that the text of the ICSID Convention was adopted. '°

Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention state:

Article 31
General rule of interpretation

1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance
with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the
treaty in their context and in the light of its object and
purpose.

2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a
treaty shall comprise, in addition to the text, including its
preamble and annexes:

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was
made between all the parties in connection with
the conclusion of the treaty;

Vienna, May 23, 1969; 1155 U.N.T.S. 331.

E.g., Enron Corp and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3),
Decision on the Argentine Republic's Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 7
October 2008, ¥] 25.

25.

26.

(b) — any instrument which was made by one or more
parties in connection with the conclusion of the
treaty and accepted by the other parties as an
instrument related to the treaty.

3. There shall be taken into account, together with the
context:

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties
regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the
application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the
treaty which establishes the agreement of the
parties regarding its interpretation;

(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in
the relations between the parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is
established that the parties so intended.

Article 32
Supplementary means of interpretation

Recourse may be had to supplementary means of
interpretation, including the preparatory work of the treaty and
the circumstances of its conclusion, in order to confirm the
meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or to
determine the meaning when the interpretation according to
article 31:

(a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or

(b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or
unreasonable.
For purposes of Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention, the Committee
considers that the plain meaning of Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention is
abundantly clear: where a rectification decision is given under Article 49(2) of
the ICSID Convention, the period of time provided for under Article 52(2) of the
ICSID Convention runs from the date of the rectification decision, rather than

from the date of the original award.

The Committee considers that there is nothing in the context or objects and
purposes of the ICSID Convention that would require this provision to be

27.

28.

29.

understood as having a completely different meaning to what it plainly says. If
Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention had intended to establish separate time
limits for different categories of annulment applications, depending on whether
or not an annulment application relates to a matter affected by a rectification
decision, it would have said so. It may well be that good reasons could be
advanced in favour of adopting such an approach. However, there are no doubt
equally good reasons that could be advanced against adopting such an
approach. For instance, it could lead to the inconvenience of a single application
for annulment having to be split into two separate applications for annulment
subject to different time limits, in cases where a party seeks annulment both of
parts of an award that were affected by the rectification decision and parts that
were not. Such an approach might also lead to unnecessary arguments about
whether or not an application for annulment relates to matters that were affected
by a rectification decision.

Ultimately, it was a matter for the drafters of the ICSID Convention to determine
which approach to adopt, and the approach that was adopted is the one that is
embodied in the clear language of Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention. The
Committee does not consider that it would in any way be inconsistent with the
object and purpose of the ICSID Convention to interpret this provision in
accordance with its plain meaning.

The Committee therefore does not consider that there is any need to resort to
supplementary means of interpretation in accordance with Article 32 of the
Vienna Convention: the interpretation in accordance with Article 31 of the
Vienna Convention is neither ambiguous nor obscure, nor one that leads to a
result which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable. The Committee considers
that the wording of Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention is clear and that it is
entirely reasonable for the ICSID Convention to maintain a single time limit for
all annulment applications in cases where there is a rectification decision,
regardless of whether or not the rectification decision affects the part of the
award that is sought to be annulled.

In any event, even if the Committee were to consider supplementary means of

interpretation, no supplementary means of interpretation to which the

11

30.

31.

32.

33.

"1

Committee has been directed would, in the Committee’s view, require Article
49(2) of the ICSID Convention to be given any interpretation other than its plain

meaning.

The Committee finds nothing in the ICSID Arbitration Rules that would affect its
conclusions above, and in any event, the ICSID Arbitration Rules cannot prevail
over the terms of the ICSID Convention.

The Committee therefore rejects Continental's preliminary objection.

Costs

Argentina requests the Committee to order Continental to pay for all expenses
and costs arising out of its preliminary objection, including the fees and
expenses of the members of the Committee, the charges for the use of the
facilities of the Centre, the fees and expenses incurred by Argentina and any
other expenses incurred in connection with Continental’s preliminary objection,

with interest.""

The Committee considers it appropriate to reserve issues of costs until the end

of these annulment proceedings.

Relying on ICSID Convention, Article 61(2).

DECISION

Pursuant to Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 41(4) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, the Committee overrules Continental’s preliminary objection
that Argentina’s Application for Annulment was not filed within the applicable
time limit under the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rules.

The issue of the parties’ costs of the proceedings relating to Continental’s

preliminary objection is reserved until the end of these annulment proceedings.

S Coy

Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C.
President of the ad hoc Committee
On behalf of the Committee

Melbourne, 23 October 2009

