International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
1818 H Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433, U.S.A.
Telephone: (202) 458-1534 Faxes: (202) 522-2615/2027
Website: www.worldbank.org/icsid

CERTIFICATE

Continental Casualty Company

Argentine Republic

(ICSID Case No ARB/03/9)

I hereby certify that the attached is a true copy of the English version of the Award of the
Arbitral Tribunal in the above case, dated September 5 2008, rendered in the English and
Spanish languages.

Nassib G. Ziadé
Acting Secretary-General

Washington, D.C., September 5, 2008

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

WASHINGTON, D.C.
IN THE PROCEEDINGS BETWEEN
CONTINENTAL CASUALTY COMPANY
(CLAIMANT)

AND

THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC
(RESPONDENT)

Case No. ARB/03/9

AWARD

Members of the Tribunal
Prof. Giorgio Sacerdoti, President
Mr. V.V. Veeder, Arbitrator
Lic. Michell Nader, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal

Tomas Solis

Representing the Claimant
Messrs. Barry Appleton,
Robert S. Wisner and
Hernando Otero

Appleton & Associates
International Lawyers
Toronto, Ontario M5S 1M2

Representing the Respondent

Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina
Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino

Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina
Buenos Aires

Argentine Republic

Date of dispatch to the parties: September 5, 2008

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

Page
I. Summary of the Procedure 1
The initial phase of the proceedingS 00.0.0... neeeeee ese eeteteeeteeeeeeeeeeesnenenes 1
IL. The Jurisdictional Phase 6
A. Generally 6
B. Argentina’s specific objections to jurisdiction...........ccc cece eeeeeeteeeeeeeeeeeeeee 6

C. The Claimant’s counter-arguments....

 

 

 

 

D. The Tribunal’s conclusion on the objections to jurisdiction... 15
III. The Procedure Leading to the Award on the Merits .........:sccseseesesesseesseessensens 16
A. Argentina’s arguments 16
B. The Claimant’s arguments 22
C. Argentina’s counter-ar; 28
IV. Preliminary Issue 35

 

 

A. Continental’s request to add CNA ART as a Claimant...
B. Tribunal’s Conclusion 35
V. Factual Background 37

A. The economic evolution of Argentina from the introduction of the
convertibility regime (1991) to the crisis (2001).

 

a) General overview 37

b) The Deterioration of the financial and economic situation of
Argentina in 2001 until Decree 1570 of December 1 (Corralito) ...

 

(i) The events and economic policy initiatives that punctuated the
deterioration of the situation of Argentina
(ii) The actions undertaken by CNA / Continental as to its investments

in 2001 56

 

c) The Measures adopted by Argentina during the crisis, specifically
those challenged by the Claimant ......cccccccsecssvesesee sees eeteseeneseeeseesseeseeenees 60

B. Subsequent measures by Argentina in 2002-2003 relevant to the present
dispute... 65

C. Relevant economic, financial and political developments in Argentina after

 

the crisis 66
VI. Necessity: Argentina’s Defence based on Article XI of the BIT and on State of
Necessity under International LaW ........:ssesesssesssessecseecsecsecsesseeseeseee 70

A. Differences between the two Defences........

 

B. Whether Argentina’s crisis in 2001-2002 qualifies under Article XI in that it
involved the “maintenance of public order” and/or the protection of Argentina’s
“essential security interests” 75

 

C. Whether the Invocation of Article XI is “self-judging”

D. Whether the measures challenged were “necessary” in order maintain public

 

 

 

order and protect essential security interests of Argentina... cece 84
@) The applicable Standard w..cececccccccccccssesecceseeseseeneseenseseneeeesesesieeseneaseneees 84
b) Application of the Standard ...cececcccccccsescceeeeessseessssessseeneseesseesseesseenets 87
(i) Alternatives that might have been available when the challenged
measures were taken 89
(a) In respect of the Corralito (the imposition of the bank freeze in
December 2001) 89
(b) In respect of the devaluation of the peso 92
(c) In respect of the pesification of the U.S. dollar-denominated contracts
and deposi 94

 

(d) In respect of the suspension of payments, default and rescheduling of
the governmental financial instruments held by CNA .
(ii) Whether Argentina could have adopted at an earlier time different
policies that would have avoided or prevented the situation that

 

 

 

 

 

brought about the adoption of the challenged measures..............ccccseeeeees 99

E. The effect of the applicability of Article XT... eee eeneneeeneneeeteeees 103

(i) In general 103

(ii) Has Argentina contributed to necessity? .........cccce eee eens 104

VII. Specific Claims of Breaches 106
A. Claim of breach of Article V (Freedom of Transfer)..........::cccscceseeseeeereeeeeeee 106

B. Claim of breach of Article II (2)(a) (Fair and Equitable Treatment)................. 110

a) In general 110

b) Capital gain tax 119

C. Claim of breach of Article IV (Prohibition of Direct and Indirect
Expropriation) 120

D. Claim of Breach of Article II (2)(c) (‘Umbrella clause”)

 

 

 

 

VIII. Conclusions of the Tribunal 134
A. Calculation of Interest 134
B. Apportionment of the arbitral COStS ....0....ecceeeceeecesee eee eeeeeeeeneneneeeeeeeeneteeees 138
IX. Decision of the Tribunal 140
X. Index of Cases 142

 

XI. Abbreviations 145

I. Summary of the Procedure
The initial phase of the proceedings

1. On January 17, 2003, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID or “the Centre”) received a Request for Arbitration against the
Argentine Republic (hereinafter “the Respondent” or “Argentina”) from Continental
Casualty Company (hereinafter “the Claimant” or “Continental”), a company
incorporated under the law of the State of Illinois, United States of America. The
Request concerned Continental’s investment in CNA Aseguradora de Riesgos del
Trabajo S.A. (“CNA ART” or “CNA”), an insurance company incorporated in Argentina,
which Continental claims to wholly own, and Argentina’s alleged breaches of
Continental’s rights as investor under the 1991 Treaty between the United States of
America and the Argentine Republic concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and
Protection of Investment (the “Argentina—U.S. Bilateral Investment Treaty” or the

“BIT”).!

2. In its request, Continental invoked Argentina’s advance consent to arbitration under
the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of
other States (the “ICSID Convention” or “the Convention”) in the Argentina—U.S.

Bilateral Investment Treaty.

3. By letter dated January 28, 2003, Continental supplemented its request, attaching a
copy of a letter dated January 15, 2003 with its consent to arbitration in accordance with
the procedures set out in the BIT, and a power of attorney authorizing the law firm of

Appleton & Associates to represent it in these proceedings.

4. On January 29, 2003, the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (Institution
Rules), acknowledged receipt and transmitted a copy of the request to the Argentine

Republic and to the Argentine Embassy in Washington, D.C.

1 Signed on November 14, 1991, entered into force since October 20, 1994.

5. By letter of March 14, 2003, the Centre requested Continental to provide: (i) further
information regarding the steps taken to resolve the dispute through consultation and
negotiation, as foreseen in Article VII(2) of the BIT; and (ii) confirmation that the dispute
had not been submitted to the local courts of Argentina or any previously agreed dispute
settlement procedures, in accordance with Article VII(3)(a) of the BIT. Continental

responded by letter of March 17, 2003.

6. By letter of May 2, 2003, the Centre further asked Continental to clarify whether
the condition set forth in the BIT that six months should elapse between the date in which
the dispute arose and the submission of the request for arbitration had been fulfilled.

Claimant responded by letter of May 5, 2003.

7. On May 22, 2003, the Acting Secretary-General of the Centre registered the
request, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention. On the same date, the Acting
Secretary-General, in accordance with Institution Rule 7, notified the parties of the
registration of the request and invited them to proceed, as soon as possible, to constitute

an Arbitral Tribunal.

8. | More than sixty days elapsed since the date of registration without the parties being
able to agree on the number of arbitrators that would comprise the tribunal in this case or
on the method for their appointment. Accordingly, on July 22, 2003, the Claimant
requested that the tribunal be constituted in accordance with Article 37(2)(b) of the
ICSID Convention (i.e., a Tribunal comprising three arbitrators, one appointed by each

party, and the third, presiding arbitrator, to be appointed by agreement of the parties).

9. On August 20, 2003 the Argentine Republic appointed Licenciado Michell Nader, a
Mexican national, as an arbitrator. On August 22, 2003, the Claimant appointed Sir Elihu

Lauterpacht, a national of the United Kingdom, as an arbitrator.

10. Also on August 22, 2003, more than ninety days having elapsed since the date of
registration, Continental, invoking Article 38 of the ICSID Convention, requested that the

Chairman of ICSID Administrative Council appoint the president of the tribunal.

11. With the agreement of both parties, the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative
Tribunal appointed Professor Giorgio Sacerdoti, an Italian national, as the President of
the Arbitral Tribunal. On October 6, 2003, the Acting Secretary-General, in accordance
with Rule 6(1) of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (Arbitration Rules),
notified the parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the

Tribunal was therefore deemed to have been constituted on that date.

12. The first session of the Tribunal was held, with the agreement of the parties, on
January 29, 2004, at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C. During the session the
parties expressed their agreement that the Tribunal had been properly constituted in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention and the ICSID

Arbitration Rules and that they did not have any objections in this respect.

13. During the first session the parties agreed on a number of procedural matters
reflected in written minutes signed by the President and the Secretary of the Tribunal.
Among others, it was agreed that, in accordance with Arbitration Rule 22, the languages
of the proceedings would be English and Spanish. The Claimant would file its pleadings
in English and Argentina would file its pleadings in Spanish, with a subsequent courtesy
translation into English. Also, the Tribunal, after consultation with the parties fixed the
following schedule for the written phase of the proceedings: the Claimant would file a
memorial on the merits within ninety (90) days from the date of the first session; the
Respondent would file a counter-memorial on the merits within ninety (90) days from its
receipt of the Claimant’s memorial; the Claimant would file a reply within forty-five (45)
days from its receipt of the counter-memorial; and the Respondent would file a rejoinder

within forty-five (45) days from its receipt of the Claimant’s reply.

14. During the first session it was noted that were Argentina to raise objections to
jurisdiction, it may do so within the ninety (90) days time limit fixed for the filing of its
counter-memorial on the merits. In that case, the proceedings on the merits would be
suspended in accordance with Arbitration Rule 41(3) and the Claimant would file its

counter-memorial on jurisdiction within forty-five (45) days from its receipt of the

Argentine Republic’s objections to jurisdiction. The Tribunal would thereafter, in

consultation with the parties, fix a date for a hearing on jurisdiction.

15. On April 27, 2004, the Claimant filed its Memorial on the Merits with
accompanying documentation. The Claimant expanded therein the content of its Request

for Arbitration, dealing with the “Facts of the Claims” and the “Legal Argument.”

16. As indicated by the Claimant in its briefs, Continental is a company incorporated in
Illinois, in the U.S., and is a subsidiary of CNA Financial Inc. (CNA), “a leading
financial services provider which has its head offices in Chicago.” Continental owns and
controls CNA ART, which “is one of Argentina’s leading providers of workers
compensation insurance services.” CNA ART was incorporated in Argentina in 1996
under the name of “OMEGA Aseguradora de Riesgos del Trabajo Sociedad Anémima.”
In June of 1997, Continental acquired a 70% interest in this company and increased its
participation to practically 100% (precisely 99.9995%) in December 2000. Thereupon,
Omega changed its name into CNA ART.

17. CNA ART, like other insurance companies, maintains a portfolio of investment
securities in order to earn a return on its capital, consisting mainly of “low-risk assets
such as cash deposit, treasury bills and government bonds.” Under Argentinean
regulations of CNA’s insurance operation, “such capital must be invested within

Argentina, with minor exceptions.”

18. According to the Claimant, prior to March 2001, the CNA investment portfolio was
primarily in assets denominated in Argentine pesos, which were at the time fully
convertible to U.S. dollars at a one to one exchange rate. In order to hedge the risk of
devaluation, CNA’s management decided to invest assets within Argentina in low risk
U.S. denominated assets. As a result of various investment operations, CNA held
thereafter a portfolio of cash accounts, certificates of deposit, T-bills, Government bonds

and Government loans (GGLs) for a U.S. value of $100,998,000.

19. Continental indicates that “[c]ommencing in December 2001, Argentina enacted a

series of decrees and resolutions that destroyed the legal security of the assets held by

CNA ART. These measures frustrated CNA ART’s ability to hedge against the risk of

the devaluation of the peso.” Claimant refers to “Argentina’s restrictions on transfers out

of its territory;” to “rescheduling of cash deposits;” to “pesification of U.S. dollar

deposits;” to “pesification and default on its debt obligations,” as well as to other
measures. Continental indicates that due to these measures (collectively referred to as
“Argentina’s Capital Control Regime”), as an investor in Argentina, it has suffered an
absolute loss in value of its assets of U.S. $46,412,000; in addition it is or was unable due

to the “Bank Freeze” to access its investments in Argentina.

20. From a legal point of view, Continental asserts that it is protected under the BIT as
“a U.S. investor with an investment in Argentina,” its protected investment being namely
CNA ART. Continental claims that by the conduct and acts summarily referred to above,
Argentina has failed to meet its existing bilateral investment treaty obligations owed to it
as a USS. investor in Argentina. Continental claims that Argentina has violated, at least,

the following provisions of the BIT:

(i) the requirement to observe obligations required by Art. II(2)(c) of the
BIT;

(ii) the requirement to provide treatment in accordance with international
law, including fair and equitable treatment and full protection or
security, as required by Art. II(2)(b) of the BIT, as well as MFN
treatment under Art. II(2)(a);

(iii) the requirement to permit all transfers relating to an investment
without delay, set out in Art. V of the BIT; and

(iv) the requirement to pay compensation upon acts of expropriation, set
out in Art. IV of the BIT.

21. In view of the facts and arguments set out in its Memorial, the Claimant submitted
that “owing to these violations of the BIT, individually and in combination, the Investor
is entitled to compensation in an amount equal to the full amount of the damages suffered

2
as a consequence.

2. Decision on Jurisdiction, paras. 22-27.

22. Based on an “Independent Valuators Report” it submitted to the Tribunal,
Continental assessed its losses as follows: i) for the violation of contracts obligation, not
less than U.S.$31 million; ii) for the violation of expropriation obligations, not less than

U.S.$38 million?

II. The Jurisdictional Phase
A. Generally

23. On June 29, 2004, Argentina filed a Memorial with objections to jurisdiction.
Thereupon, by a letter of July 12, 2004, the Tribunal confirmed the suspension of the
proceedings on the merits in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(3).
Consequently, the proceedings continued on the issue of jurisdiction in accordance with

the agreed procedural calendar.

B. Argentina’s specific objections to jurisdiction

24. Argentina’s specific objections to jurisdiction were the following:

(i) “Argentina has not given its consent to submit to this arbitration;”

(ii) “The dispute submitted by Claimant does not comply with the
requirements of the Convention or those under the U.S.-Argentina
BIT,” particularly as to (a) the existence of a legal dispute and as to (b)
the requirement that the legal dispute arises directly out of an
investment;

(iii) | “The company may not file a claim because the claim is premature ‘or
not ripe’ ;”

(iv) | “Continental’s lack of action to submit a dispute to this Tribunal: the
ius standi.

25. Under its first objection, Argentina took the position that it had not given its consent
to ICSID arbitration with regard to the present dispute. Accordingly, it “insist[ed] on the
need to examine the extent of the consent by the Argentine State to submit to the ICSID
system” by examining, according to the principles of interpretation of treaties under
international law, the relevant clauses of both the ICSID Convention and the Argentina-

US. BIT.

3 Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits, paras. 250-254.

26. Within its second objection, Argentina pointed out that it gave its consent under the
BIT “only for those cases that — complying with requirements of the Washington
Convention - are encompassed within the Treaty’s scope of application.” Argentina
referred to three basic and essential requirements that restrict the jurisdiction of the

arbitral tribunal pursuant to Art. 25(1) of the ICSID Convention:

a. the existence of a legal dispute;

b. directly arising out of an investment;

c. between a Contracting State and a National of another Contracting
State.

27. As to requirement (a), Argentina submitted, based among other things on the
travaux préparatoires of the ICSID Convention, that the dispute must be about “rights
and obligations,” about legal titles and not some “undesirable consequences” that have
not as the proximate cause the host State’s conduct in respect of its investment. In
Argentina’s view in this case the Claimant was not submitting a legal claim within those
requirements because it “is not the holder of the legal rights that it alleged have been

breached by the Argentine Republic.”

28. As to requirement (b), Argentina submitted that the legal dispute must arise directly
out of the investment in that “the measure or measures alleged as in violation of the U.S.-
Argentina BIT must be specifically addressed to the investments.” Argentina considered

that the word “directly” in Art. 25(1) “may also be translated as specifically.... The

 

measure must be addressed to the investment. Universal measures addressed to the
general public cannot be considered by ICSID Tribunals. That would be to judge a

public policy and not a legal conflict.”

29. Argentina considered accordingly that in order for jurisdiction to be established
“Continental must show which specific obligations, vis-a-vis the Claimant were breached
by Argentina through its devaluation of the Peso, the establishment of a new exchange

rate and the temporary pesification of the tariffs.”

30. In Argentina’s view, the only position that the Claimant was able to assert is its
position as shareholder of CNA. According to Argentina, however, this position does not
enable Continental to claim in the circumstances impairment to its “legal rights born out
of the ownership of shares” due to Argentina’s measures. Argentina submitted further
that also the damages suffered by the investor must be direct, that is grounded on an
action that “specifically impairs a legal right born out of the ownership of the shares.”
This requirement that those damages result from an interference with a right and not with
a mere interest of the shareholders, be they minority or majority shareholders, was not

met either in the present case, according to Argentina.’

31. Under its third objection to jurisdiction, Argentina considered that Continental’s
claim is not ripe — in legal terms and not just from a policy point of view — because the
alleged damages constantly fluctuate since Argentina’s negotiations with foreign
creditors are not yet over; therefore, a claim based on indirect consequences that may
have affected foreign shareholders of an Argentine corporation cannot be submitted
before an arbitral tribunal under the BIT. Moreover, according to Argentina, this would
be contrary to a proper interpretation of the BIT: “[s]hould it be admitted that this is
applicable to the contractual relations governed by local law and submitted to the
jurisdiction of the local courts, the scope of application of the BIT would be unlawfully

extended.”*

32. Finally, Argentina maintained that the dispute did not fall within the scope of the
application of the BIT for different reasons, all related to the definition of “investment”
suggested by Argentina as being the correct one under the Treaty. It is Argentina’s view
that the Claimant “has presented a claim founded on the loss in value of its investment
represented by the acquisition of shares in an Argentinean corporation - CNA ART,” and
that the foreign investor has alleged “that its interests have been impaired by commercial
and financial decisions taken in the framework of a shares investment business made
within Argentina.” Argentina submits further that the purchase of shares in that Argentine

corporation is a business subject to Argentina’s law, which is also the law applicable to

4 Decision on Jurisdiction, paras. 35-40

5 Decision on Jurisdiction, para. 49.

the interest in those shares and more generally to the existing legal relationship between
the Claimant and CNA. In view of the above, Argentina concludes that “the claimant has
not proved that the Argentine State has issued any measure addressed directly to that

acquisition of shares.”

33. Argentina further indicated that since the investment of the Claimant consisted in
shares of an Argentine company, while the measures affected the Argentinean
corporation of which the Claimant is a shareholder, the lack of the required relationship
between the dispute brought and the investment in accordance with the BIT resulted in a
lack of jurisdiction on the “indirect claim,” which is the subject matter of this dispute.
This is because the situation here is that of a shareholder making a claim in connection to
assets or circumstances related to the entity where it has interests, in disregard therefore
of the acknowledged principle that the partners and the corporation are different legal
persons. Argentina concluded that while the definitions of investment in the BIT are
broad, CNA - whose interests have been affected - “does not qualify either as an investor

or as an investment pursuant to the mentioned international instrument.”°

C. The Claimant's counter-arguments

34. In conformity with the procedural time table, the Claimant submitted its Counter-
memorial on jurisdiction on July 30, 2004. Continental requested the Tribunal to reject
the objections of Argentina and to affirm the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. The Claimant
argued generally in the first place that the “Proper Approach to a Jurisdictional
Challenge” requires that the Tribunal determine whether the pleadings have disclosed a

prima facie claim.

35. Specifically, in respect of the first and second jurisdictional objections of Argentina,
the Claimant maintained that the dispute is a “legal dispute” because it arises from a
conflict of rights rather than a conflict of interests. More specifically, according to the
Claimant, the dispute at issue “concerns the different views of the Claimant and
Argentina on questions of legal rights and obligations in connection with the existence of

an investment, and the effects this may have on Argentina’s obligations to honor debt

6 Decision on Jurisdiction, paras. 51-52.

instruments, to preserve the Claimant’s property rights in the cash deposits and its right

under the BIT to transfer capital.”

36. Moreover, according to the Claimant, the requirement that a dispute must arise
“directly” from an investment does not imply that the measure challenged must be
“specifically” addressed at the business concerned. The Claimant submitted that for
jurisdictional purposes, it is enough that the impugned measures prima facie adversely
affect the Claimant’s investment, so that the Tribunal is competent to examine whether

those measures are in breach of specific commitments given to the investor.’

37. The Claimant also opposed Argentina’s third objection to jurisdiction that the claim
was not ripe. The Claimant recalled that in a previous decision an ICSID Tribunal had
stated that the perspective of negotiations between Argentine authorities and a company
owned by foreign investors and/or those investors were immaterial in order to determine
the jurisdiction of the ICSID tribunal. The Claimant took the position that the principles
relied on by Argentina in support of this objection do not affect the jurisdiction of the
present Tribunal, which depends on the claim satisfying the requirements of Art.25 of the

ICSID Convention and of the BIT.*

38. As far as the fourth objection to jurisdiction is concerned, the Claimant considered
that it is “now well settled that an investor may bring an investor-state claim under the
BIT for measures interfering with the legal rights of its Argentine subsidiary and not just
for measures affecting the investor’s shares in the subsidiary.” The Claimant concludes
on this point that “the ability of shareholders to claim for damages suffered by the
company in which they hold shares,” in any case when the protected investor is a
controlling shareholder (as here), is well settled in jurisprudence and cannot be open to

challenges at the jurisdictional stage.’

39. On August 6, 2004, Sir Elihu Lauterpacht resigned as an arbitrator in this case due

to health conditions. Following Professor Sacerdoti’s and Licenciado Nader’s consent to

7 Decision on Jurisdiction, paras. 45-46.
8 Decision on Jurisdiction, para. 50

9 Decision on Jurisdiction, paras. 53-54.

Sir Elihu’s resignation and in accordance with Arbitration Rule 10, the proceedings were
suspended until the vacancy created by Sir Elihu’s resignation was filled. In accordance
with Arbitration Rule 11(1), the Secretary of the Tribunal invited Continental to appoint a
new arbitrator in replacement of Sir Elihu. By letter of September 14, 2004, the Claimant
appointed Mr. V.V. Veeder, a national of the United Kingdom as an arbitrator. The
proceedings were resumed in October 14, 2004, following Mr. Veeder’s acceptance of

his appointment.

40. By letter of December 16, 2004, the Tribunal proposed to the parties dates for
holding the hearing on jurisdiction. The hearing was held, with the agreement of the
parties, on February 1, 2005 at the seat of the Centre in Washington D.C. Messrs. Barry
Appleton, Robert Wisner, Hernando Otero, Nick Gallus, Ali Ghiassi and Ms. Asha
Kaushal from the law firm of Appleton & Associates, International Lawyers of Toronto
Canada, and Ms. Sally Narey, General Counsel, Continental, attended the hearing on
behalf of the Claimant. Ms. Cintia Yaryura and Ms. Maria Victoria Vitali from the
Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina, Mr. Marcelo Massoni, from the Embassy
of Argentina in Washington, D.C. and Mr. Roberto Bado from the Ministry of Economy
of the Argentine Republic, attended the hearing on behalf of the Respondent. During the
hearing, Messrs. Appleton and Wisner addressed the Tribunal on behalf of Continental.
Ms. Yaryura and Vitali addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Argentine Republic. The

Tribunal posed questions to the parties, as provided in Arbitration Rule 32(3).

41. Subsequent to the hearing, the Tribunal received a communication from the
Claimant pointing to recent ICSID decisions on jurisdiction issued in cases involving
Argentina, and an answer from Argentina raising objections as to the relevance of those
decisions. The Tribunal informed the parties, through the Secretariat, on July 20, 2005
that “it believes it is empowered to take judicial notice of such published decisions.
However, in accordance with due process principles, the Tribunal is of the opinion that
should it consider necessary for its decision on jurisdiction to specifically rely on points
raised and discussed in those decisions, it should give an opportunity first to the parties to
comment on those possibly relevant points. The Tribunal would accordingly do so

should the situation envisaged occur.”

42. On February 22, 2006, the Tribunal issued its Decision on Jurisdiction, '° rejecting
the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction and holding that the present dispute is within

the jurisdiction of ICSID and the competence of the Tribunal.

43. In view of the objections raised by Argentina, the Tribunal considered that it had to
ascertain, for the sole purpose of determining its competence under the ICSID
Convention and the Argentina-U.S. BIT, whether the criteria that define disputes for the
purpose of the ICSID jurisdiction under those two instruments had been met. These

criteria are:

a. that the dispute is between Argentina (as a contracting party to ICSID and
the BIT) and a national of the U.S.A., as defined in the BIT;

b. that the dispute is a “legal” dispute (Art. 25(1) ICSID Convention);

c. that said legal dispute arises “directly” out of an investment (Art. 25(1)
ICSID Convention);

d. that said dispute is “an investment dispute” within the meaning of Art. VII
of the BIT, namely “arising out or relating to...(c) an alleged breach of
any right conferred or created by this Treaty with respect to an
investment;” and

e. that such investment is of the type covered under the BIT in accordance

with the definition of “investment” found in Art.I(1)(a) of the BIT."

44. Before starting its examination on the basis of the parties’ documentation and
arguments, the Tribunal found it appropriate to outline the proper methodology to resolve
the jurisdictional challenge. The Tribunal asserted that “[i]n order to determine its
jurisdiction, the Tribunal must consider whether the dispute, as presented by the
Claimant, is prima facie, that is, at a summary examination, a dispute that falls generally
within the jurisdiction of ICSID and specifically within that of an ICSID Tribunal
established to decide a dispute between a U.S. investor and Argentina under the BIT. [...]

The object of the investigation is to ascertain whether the claim, as presented by the

10 Available at: http://www investmentelaims.com,

 

11 Decision on Jurisdiction, para. 58.

Claimant, meets the jurisdictional requirements, both as to the factual subject matter at
issue, as to the legal norms referred to as applicable and having been allegedly breached,
and as to the relief sought.! For this purpose, the presentation of the claim as set forth
by the Claimant is decisive. The investigation must not be aimed at determining whether

the claim is well founded, but whether the Tribunal is competent to pass upon it.”
45. The Tribunal continued:

As to the facts of the case, the presentation of the Claimant is fundamental:
it must be assumed that the Claimant would be able to prove to the
Tribunal’s satisfaction in the merit phase the facts that it invokes in
support of its claim. This does not mean necessarily that the “Claimant’s
description of the facts must be accepted as true,’ without further
examination of any type. The Respondent might supply evidence showing
that the case has no factual basis even at a preliminary scrutiny, so that the
Tribunal would not be competent to address the subject matter of the
dispute as properly determined. In such an instance, the Tribunal would
have to look to the contrary evidence supplied by the Respondent and
should dismiss the case if it found such evidence convincing at a summary
exam.? (Footnotes omitted)

46. Turning to the first requirement defining disputes for the purpose of ICSID
jurisdiction, namely that concerning the disputing parties, the Tribunal acknowledged that
Argentina was not disputing that the Claimant, Continental Casualty Company, was a
juridical person having the nationality of another Contracting State in conformity with
Art. 25(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention. More specifically, Argentina was not disputing
that the Claimant met moreover the requirements of being a U.S. company under the

BIT."*

47. With respect to the requirement that the dispute be of a “legal” nature, the Tribunal
considered decisively the fact that the Claimant invoked specific legal acts and provisions
as the foundation of its claim. In fact, the Claimant indicated that certain measures taken
by Argentina have affected its legal rights stemming from contracts, legislation and the
BIT. The Claimant further indicated specific provisions of the BIT granting various

13 Decision on jurisdiction, paras. 61-64.

14 Decision on jurisdiction, para. 65.

types of legal protection to its investments in Argentina, that in its view have been
breached by those measures. The Tribunal then “concluded that the Claimant had made
legal claims against Argentina, so that the Tribunal was presented with a legal dispute
within its jurisdiction.”"°

48. With respect to the requirement that the dispute arises “directly” out of an
investment, the Tribunal dismissed the objection of the Respondent according to which
the measures impugned by the Claimant were general measures taken by Argentina in
case of emergency and affecting all the sectors of its economy and not “specifically”
addressed against Continental’s investments. The Tribunal, on the contrary, considered
satisfied the jurisdictional requirement at issue since, in the first place, from a textual
point of view the term “specific” cannot be considered as a synonym of “directly.” A
measure of the host State can affect directly an investment, so that the dispute as to the
international legality of that measure arises directly out of that investment, even if the
measure is not specifically aimed at that investment. The Tribunal then considered that
“Tt]he requirement that the dispute arises directly from an investment is surely met when,
as in the present case, the Claimant challenges some measures of the host State that
affected directly the investment, in that they were applicable and were applied to such an
investment. There is no doubt that the measures of Argentina described by the Claimant
brought about, immediately and directly, an unfavorable change of the legal and
economic regime applicable to the assets in Argentina that Continental indicates
represented its investment in that country, in breach — according to Continental - to

Argentina’s obligations under the Bit.”

49. With respect to the requirement concerning the definition of the investment under
the BIT (i.e. the ius standi of the Claimant), the Tribunal dismissed the objection of the
Respondent according to which the Claimant had submitted an “indirect” claim as
shareholder, for damages suffered by the company that represents its investment. The
Tribunal acknowledged that “[t]he question whether under a BIT, such as the one at issue

here, a controlling or even a minority foreign shareholder can bring a suit for the damages

15 Decision on Jurisdiction, paras. 66-69.

16 Decision on Jurisdiction, paras. 70-73,

suffered by the local company, in which it hold shares, caused by expropriation or other
measures affecting directly the economic rights of the shareholders, is a key legal issue in
many disputes brought under BITs.” It then proceeded by interpreting the BIT provision
containing the definition of the investments covered by the Treaty and came to the
conclusion that “the treaty protection is not limited to the free enjoyment of the shares,
[...] It also extends to the standards of protection spelled out in the BIT with regard to the
operation of the local company that represents the investment.” Moreover, “the specific
listing” in the BIT provision at issue “of various ‘associated activities’, which typically
pertain to FDI, indicates that in case of acquisition of a company established in the other

country the scope of its application is not merely limited to the ownerships of the shares.”

D. The Tribunal’s conclusion on the objections to jurisdiction

50. The Tribunal concluded that the Claimant, as a corporate investor in an Argentinean
company, enjoyed ius standi under the BIT, “even assuming that the measures taken by
Argentina and challenged by Continental as having breached its treaty rights were
addressed and affected primarily or essentially the assets, investments, activities of the
wholly owned subsidiary of Continental in Argentina.” In view of certain statements by
the Claimant that the measures taken by Argentina “violated specific commitments in
treaties, legislation and contracts” such as those “made by Argentina to CNA ART in
GGLs and LETEs,” the Tribunal recalled that “it is the concurrent denunciation of an
alleged breach of a legal commitment stemming from the BIT that brings these actions or
measures within the purview of our jurisdiction, not the alleged breach of contractual or

legislative provisions per ser

51. Finally, with respect to the alleged lack of jurisdiction because the claim was
premature or “not ripe,” the Tribunal rejected this objection as being without foundation
for the following reasons: first of all, “[t]he claim of Continental cannot be considered to
be without content because the measures challenged as being in breach of the BIT have
not yet been enacted (so that they would be non-existent) or have not yet been applied.

This is clearly not the case here.” Then, “the possible uncertainty as to the final amount

17 Decision on Jurisdiction, paras. 76-86 and 90.

of the damages cannot represent a bar to jurisdiction, especially since the Claimant has
petitioned for a declaratory judgment.” Finally, the existence of ongoing negotiations
with local companies or the foreign shareholders (which are however disputed by the
Claimant) cannot represent a bar to the introduction or furtherance of an international

claim such as the one at issue.”!*

III. The Procedure Leading to the Award on the Merits

52. Once the jurisdiction of the Tribunal had been affirmed, proceedings resumed on
the merits in accordance with Procedural Order No. 1, issued on the same day as the
Decision on Jurisdiction. Since the Claimant had already filed its Memorial on the merits
(on April 27, 2004), the Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial on the merits on May 8,
2006.

A. Argentina’s arguments

53. In its Counter-Memorial on the Merits of May 8, 2006, Argentina starts with the
factual examination of the economic context in which the measures complained of by the
Claimant were taken. In Argentina’s view, the State “faced a terminal situation and had to
forcibly change the economic plan of the country as a result of the devaluation of the
local currency.”!” “The crisis became an emergency situation when it turned into an
institutional, social and economic collapse of unprecedented seriousness and depth in the
country’s history.””° “The financial system was on the verge of collapse. The Central
Bank reserves had dropped significantly and, even if by the end of December 2001 the
exchange rate in effect was formally still 1 peso = dollar 1, before the Emergency Law
was passed, in practice the peso had already been devaluated.””! “The sovereign debt
service difficulties faced by the Government were also evident, and by the end of
December 2001 the Argentine Republic had no choice but to suspend payment of its

sovereign debt obligations with private holders.””” “The social situation was dreadful and

18 Decision on Jurisdiction, paras. 91-93.
19 Argentina’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 21. (hereinafter, Counter-Memorial),
20 Counter-Memorial, para. 23,
21 Counter-Memorial, para. 24.

22 Counter-Memorial, para. 25,

the unemployment rate was above twenty per cent (20%) of the active population.”??
Argentina maintains that “[t]he Emergency Law,” passed on January 6, 2002, “is not the
cause of the economic emergency but a regulatory consequence intended to cure through
realistic measures the existing state of necessity;”~* [...] “The Emergency Law only
provided the institutional framework for a situation already existing in practice: the 1 to 1
peso-dollar convertibility had disappeared.””° Argentina then describes in turn the
economic, the social, the political and the institutional aspects of what it defines as a

“collapse” of the State.

54. In its Counter—Memorial on the merits, Argentina opposes the claims advanced by
Continental. First of all, it maintains that it allowed, at all times, transfers in connection
with investments in accordance with Article V of the BIT. In this respect, Argentina
observed that “[dJuring a short period of time, BCRA authorization was required for that
purpose, but neither CONTINENTAL nor CNA ART ever asked for such authorization.”
Moreover, according to the Respondent, “the actions brought into question by
CONTINENTAL, which did not prevent them from transferring funds anyway, are
expressly authorized by article XI of the BIT, which entitles a signatory State to take
‘measures necessary for the maintenance of public order... or the protection of its own

essential security interests’.”?°

55. Secondly, as far as the alleged violation of Article IV of the BIT concerning
expropriation is concerned, Argentina considers the claim inadmissible since the
measures complained of did not affect Continental’s investment value. Argentina
maintains that “[t]he existence of an expropriation regarding such investment is
impossible, as long as, after the adoption of measures that CONTINENTAL qualifies as
expropriation and in spite of the fact that the Argentine Republic underwent the most
serious economic crisis in its history, such investment is nowadays worth three times its

value before the crisis, in U.S. dollars.”2”. In fact, “CONTINENTAL does not base its

23 Counter-Memorial, para. 26.

 

24 Counter:

 

flemorial, para. 30.

25 Counter

 

flemorial, para. 33,

26 Counter:

 

lemorial, para. 161

27 Counter-Memorial, para, 271

claim upon a reduction in its investment value, the shareholding in CNA, but on alleged
reductions in the value of CNA investments and on measures that could have affected
such investments.””* Additionally, in Argentina’s view, the Claimant “confusedly
invokes a de facto expropriation of certain contractual rights pertaining to CNA [...]
Continental cannot make claims for alleged damages to CNA investments but only for
damages to its investment, i.e. shareholding in CNA.””? According to Argentina, this
claim should be dismissed since, firstly, “neither CNA nor CONTINENTAL have ever
claimed before Argentine courts a redress of their allegedly affected contractual rights;”*°
secondly, such rights or investments were not substantially affected in spite of the
terminal crisis in the Argentine Republic, but “had a financial performance, on average,
higher than the one they would have obtained provided they had been invested at a free
from risk rate.” Finally, Argentina describes the evolution of CNA Art throughout the

crisis*! and concludes as follows:

1. - In the hard road towards restoring the country’s economic and
financial situation to normal, different options were available to the
holders of deposits made with financial institutions.

2. - The holders of deposits had to state whether they wanted to choose any
of the options offered by the Argentine Government, which varied
according to the progress of the recovery of the country’s economic,
financial and social situation.

3. - That being so, three options were available to CNA ART in order to
get back its deposited amounts, and it decided to go for the third of them.

4. - Through the option chosen by CNA ART, it had access to the release
of its rescheduled deposits receiving also “BODEN 2013” bonds for the
difference between the original face value of the Rescheduled Deposit
adjusted by CER as of April 1, 2003 and the value of the dollar in the
exchange market as of the same date.

5. - CNA ART was able to recoup its deposited amounts thanks to the
options offered by the Argentine State, as it prevented the financial system
from falling apart [...]

28 Counter-Memorial, para. 280.
29 Counter-Memorial, para. 301
30 Counter-Memorial, para. 302

31 Counter-Memorial, para. 321 ff

6.- Notwithstanding the option exercised by CNA ART, it should be noted
that financial institutions could offer enhancements on the conditions
established for the return of rescheduled deposits, such as bringing forward
the schedule of payments, prepayments or acknowledgement of higher
interest rates. If the banks with which CNA ART made the deposits
offered no enhancement, this is attributable only to those banks and
ultimately to CNA ART, which is responsible for choosing the financial
institutions with which the deposits were made.*2

56. Thirdly, Argentina opposes the claim concerning the alleged violation of article
II(2)(b) of the BIT according to which a foreign investment has to be accorded treatment
in accordance with international law, including fair and equitable treatment and full
protection and security. Argentina submits that “investments made by CONTINENTAL,
as it happens with the remaining foreign investments, have been considered in

a: . 933
accordance with international law.

According to Argentina, “the fair and equitable
treatment standard (as well as the remaining treatment standards), in connection to which
CONTINENTAL invokes its violation, must be compulsorily applied considering
especially the circumstances under which such measures were adopted.” “Nobody can
deny that the Argentine Republic experienced (and it still does) a ‘dramatic economic
situation’.”. No one can deny that when adopting the measures nowadays
CONTINENTAL questions, the Argentine authorities had in mind the interests of almost
40 million inhabitants of the Argentine Republic, obviously including the interests of
investors. Within such a context, the allegation made by CONTINENTAL should be
considered inadmissible as regards the violation of the standards of treatment.”*°
Argentina furnishes in any case its evaluation of the standards of treatment provided for
by Art. II of the BIT and comes to the conclusion “that investments made by
CONTINENTAL, as it happens with the remaining foreign investments, have been

936

considered in accordance with international law. Argentina therefore concludes that:

32 Counter-Memorial, para.369.
33 Counter-Memorial, para. 492
34 Counter-Memorial, para. 494.
35 Counter-Memorial, para. 499

36 Counter-Memorial, para. 501 ff

a) At all times CONTINENTAL’s investment was granted fair and equitable
treatment in accordance with international law.

b) The fair and equitable treatment is the minimum international treatment,
understanding that the latter is a standard which means _reasonability,
proportionality and no discrimination.

c) The measures alleged to be infringing are proportional to the situation in which
they were passed, and they are reasonable. The reasonability of such measures
was based on the re-establishment of a balance among all the economic agents
of society. The measures were not inconsistent because not only did they take
into account the whole society, but also they re-adapted the circumstances to
the prevailing economic situation.*”

57. Finally, Argentina opposes the alleged violation of Article II(2)(c) of the BIT
regarding the requirement to observe “obligations entered into with regard to
investments.” In this respect, Argentina maintains not to have violated any commitment
towards the Claimant. The Respondent gives its assessment of “umbrella clauses” under
international law, especially in light of arbitral practice and then proposes its
interpretation of the umbrella clause of the BIT between Argentina and the U.S.
According to Argentina, the umbrella clause of the BIT “is intended to protect the
commitments assumed by the Argentine Republic towards foreign investors protected by
the BIT, not contractual obligations.” Thus, according to Argentina, it would not apply to
the dispute at issue since “it does not apply to contracts entered into between CNA ART

and the Argentine Republic.”* 8

58. In case the Tribunal should conclude for a violation of the articles of the BIT

invoked by the Claimant, Argentina invokes Art. XI of the BIT in order to justify the

  

measures it adopted to face the severe crisis, which affected the country.” In this context,
Argentina also invokes Art. IV(3) of the BIT, which regards the protection of foreign
investors suffering losses “owing to war or other armed conflict, revolution, state of
national emergency, insurrection, civil disturbance or other similar events.” This
provision requires the contracting parties to apply a non-discriminatory treatment

(according either to the Most Favored Nation or to the National Treatment principles) to

37 Counter

 

norial, para. 625.
38 Counter-Memorial, para. 689 ff
39 Counter-Memorial, para. 737 ff

20

the foreign investor “as regards any measures [they] adopt in relation to such losses.”*°

As to Art. XI of the BIT, first of all Argentina claims that a “bona fide invocation of
Article XI of the BIT should be sufficient for the Tribunal to dismiss the claims made by
the Claimant under such BIT, as both parties to the Treaty accorded that each State had
the exclusive right to decide whether its own measures were covered by such Article”!
Argentina submits that since its measures were necessary “for the maintenance of public
order” and also “for the protection of [its] own essential security interests” they “could
never amount to a violation of the BIT or give rise to international liability on the part of

the Argentine Republic.”

59. Argentina then asserts the “constitutionality of the state of necessity and emergency
under Argentine law.” “In accordance with the provisions of Sections 76 and 99(3) of
the Constitution, an economic emergency is one of the situations expressly contemplated
in the Constitution.” “Subsidiarily,” the Argentine Republic invokes the application of
the state of necessity under international law to the present case “should the Tribunal
consider that the provisions of articles IV(3) and XI of the BIT are not applicable to this
controversy.” In this respect, Argentina claims that all the requirements associated with
the customary rule on the State of Necessity, as codified by the ILC in its works on State
responsibility and specifically in Art. 25 of its draft articles on the subject matter, were
satisfied in the present dispute. Namely, that “the State did not contribute to the state of
necessity;” that “[t]he actions taken were the only way to safeguard an essential interest
from grave and impending danger;” and that “no essential interest has been affected of
the State or States in connection with which the obligation exists, or the community as a
whole.”“° Moreover, according to Argentina, “[w]ith respect to the treatment afforded by
the Argentine Republic to foreign investors in the context of the state of emergency, [...]

such treatment was not less favorable than the one afforded to nationals (who stoically

40 Counter-Memorial, para. 739.
41 Counter-Memorial, para. 743.
42 Counter-Memorial, para. 744.
43 Counter-Memorial, para. 794.
44 Counter-Memorial, para. 801

45 Counter-Memorial

  
 

46 Counter-Memorial,

21

suffered the crisis) and other investors, regardless of their citizenship.” Argentina refers

to its arguments on the standards of treatment mentioned here above.””

60. In its Counter-Memorial, Argentina does not address the issue of the damage that
Continental claims to have suffered as a consequence of Argentina’s alleged breaches.
Argentina filed, however, an evaluation Report dated March 20, 2006 by AGM Finanzas
(signed by Daniel Marx and José M.Echagiie) according to which CNA ART, and hence
Continental, has suffered no damages due to Argentina’s measures. On the contrary,
according to this Report, both in terms of pesos and in terms of U.S. dollars, the value of

CNA had increased considerably from November 2001 to March 2006.

B. The Claimant's arguments

61. On July 26, 2006 the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No.2 to settle certain
questions regarding the submission of evidence to the Tribunal. Thereupon, the Claimant
filed its Reply on August 17, 2006 and the Respondent filed its Rejoinder on October 20,
2006.

62. In its Reply dated August 17, 2006, the Claimant furnishes a descriptive context of
the policies enacted by Argentina in the period preceding the crisis in order to show the
Respondent’s contribution to the crisis itself. Specifically, the Claimant points out that
“Argentina failed to adopt policies to support its currency board.” “Prior to 2001,
Argentina made a number of serious policy mistakes [...] In particular: the lack of fiscal
discipline and the failure to address deep rooted labor market and trade restrictions
“which in the end “created a lack of credibility.” “Instead, Argentina could have
implemented economic policies that would have supported the ability of the currency

board to withstand an economic recession.”“*

63. The Claimant, moreover, contests Argentina’s allegation that “this Tribunal should
deny recovery on the grounds that CNA ART voluntarily maintained assets in a country

with high sovereign risk.” The Claimant contests the behavior taken by the Respondent,

47 Counter-Memorial, paras. 848-850.
48 Claimant's Reply on the Merits, at paras. 32-36, (hereinafter, Continental Reply).

49 Continental Reply, para.50.

22

which “promised to refrain from interference with Bank Deposits, then froze and pesified

9950. 51

them; promised to honor its government debt, then defaulted on and pesified it.

According to the Claimant, “[t]hese measures impugned the BITs provisions on

expropriation, fair and equitable treatment, contracts observance and transfers.”

64. The Claimant points out to a number of factual elements in order to contest the
alleged necessity of the specific measures taken by Argentina to overcome the crisis.
The Claimant stresses that “in any event, the devaluation of the peso per se is not being
challenged in this arbitration, only the subsequent pesification of U.S. dollars
denominated contracts... an unusual and extraordinary measure.” The Claimant adds that
“To]ther countries have pursued devaluation successfully without interfering with the
property and contract rights of the holders of U.S. dollar-denominated contracts” by
following alternative approaches.™* The Claimant further submits that the impugned
measures themselves “inflamed social unrest” and that “their stated rationale has long
since disappeared.” Since Argentina’s economy has now fully recovered, the Claimant
concludes in this respect that “deposit holders should be fully compensated for the

confiscatory pesification of their deposits.”*°

65. As to the applicable legal standards under the BIT, the Claimant then refers back
and elaborates further the arguments it had already developed in its Memorial on the
Merits in order to establish the violation by Argentina of the various articles of the BIT
that the Claimant had invoked in its previous submissions. Continental addresses first, its
claims that Argentina breached Art. II(2)(c) of the BIT concerning the obligation to
observe contractual obligations.*° Furthermore, “[iJn the alternative, should this Tribunal
determine that Article II(2)(c) applies only to obligations Argentina may have entered

into with claimants (rather than ‘with regard to investments’),” the Claimant indicates

50 Continental Reply, para.53.
51 Continental Reply, para.70.

52 Continental Reply, para81

53 Continental Reply, paras. 84-109,
54 Continental Reply para. 92, 94.
55 Continental Reply para. 106.

56 Continental Reply, para. 137 ff.

23

that “then CNA ART directly makes an ancillary claim for breach of this obligation.”*”

According to the Claimant, this ancillary claim would be allowed under the terms of Art.
25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, which “enables a locally incorporated company that is
subject to foreign control to claim as if it were a national of the other contracting Party,”
provided that the contracting parties have so agreed. In the Claimant’s view, the required

agreement is to be found at Art. VII(8) of the BIT itself, which provides as follows:

For purposes of an arbitration held under paragraph 3 of this
Article, any company legally constituted under the applicable
laws and regulations of a Party or a political subdivision
thereof but that, immediately before the occurrence of the
event or events giving rise to the dispute, was an investment
of nationals or companies of the other Party, shall be treated
as a national or company of such other Party in accordance
with Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.58

66. Asa matter of procedure, Continental claims that the Tribunal is empowered to add

CNA ART as a claimant pursuant to Article 46 of the ICSID Convention.”

67. Secondly, Continental reasserted its claim about the violation of the obligation to
compensate following an act of expropriation, provided for by Art. IV of the BIT. The
Claimant argues that “CNA ART’s assets are protected from expropriation;” that
“legislation extinguishing intangible property rights is an expropriation;” and that
“Argentine law continues to consider the measures as an expropriation.” Continental
points out to Argentina’s Supreme Court decisions Smith and San Luis that declared
“Decree 1570 to be unconstitutional on the grounds that it was an unreasonable measure,
lacking in proportionality between the deprivation of property rights and the objective of
averting the crisis;” and “the pesification of bank deposits through Decree 214 to be
unconstitutional.” Those cases “were based on Article 17 of the Argentine Constitution

which provides that:

57 Continental Reply, para.142.
58 Continental Reply, paras. 143-144.
59 Continental Reply, para. 147.
60 Continental Reply, para. 167,

24

The right to property is inviolable and no inhabitant of the
Nation can be deprived of it except by judicial decision founded
in the law.®!

68. The Claimant observes that “the Intangibility Law specifically declared that bank

deposits were vested property rights entitled to the protections of Article 17."

69. Thirdly, Continental reaffirms its claim about the violation of the obligation to treat
the foreign investor according to the international law standard of treatment, provided for

by Art. II(2)(a) of the BIT. This Article provides that:

Investment shall at all times be accorded fair and equitable
treatment, shall enjoy full protection and security and shall in no
case be accorded treatment less than that required by
international law.

70. According to the Claimant, the article obliges Argentina “to provide a stable legal

163

and business environment””” and “to protect the investor’s legitimate expectations.”

71. Finally, as to the obligation to permit free transfers, provided for by Art. V of the

BIT, Continental asserts that “Article V Protects Transfers of CNA ART’s Assets”® and

that “Article V proscribes any interference with the transfer of CNA ART’s Assets.”

72. According to the Claimant, in the light of what it considers to be the legal import of
the BIT provisions it relies upon, Argentina breached its treaty obligations through

Decree 1570 (Corralito);" by pesification of bank deposits through Decree 214; by

61 Continental Reply, para. 168.
{62 Continental Reply, para. 169.

63 Continental Reply, para. 181 ff.

64 Continental Reply, para. 188 ff

65 Continental Reply, para. 193 ff.

(66 Continental Reply, para. 199 ff.

67 Continental Reply, paras. 216-219. Breach of the freedom of transfers; obligation to pay compensation for expropriated investments; obligation to
provide fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security

‘68 Continental Reply, paras. 221-223. Breach of the obligation to pay compensation for expropriating investments.

25

pesification of government debt through Decree 471: by the unilateral rescheduling of

deposits and default on debt.”

73. The Claimant denies that Argentina could rely on the defense of necessity. On the
one hand, the conditions required by the customary rule on the State of Necessity are not
satisfied in the present case; on the other hand, it argues that Art. XI of the BIT cannot be
applied. As to the customary international law defense of necessity, Continental argues
that “Argentina has failed to satisfy any of the cumulative elements of the defense of
necessity.””! According to the Claimant, Argentina was not threatened by a grave and
imminent peril to an essential interest, such as the existence of the State; Argentina’s
actions were not “the only means to safeguard itself from the grave and imminent peril to
its essential interest,” since other means consistent with the BIT were available to it; and
Argentina contributed to the state of necessity. Finally Continental considers that “[e]ven
if Argentina can successfully invoke the defense of necessity, Argentina must
compensate the Claimant.”

74. As to Art. XI, Continental denies in the first place that the provision is self-judging,
relying on the various means of interpretation of international treaties. Furthermore,
Continental asserts that the requirements provided for by Art. XI have not been met: the
correct interpretation of concepts like “essential security interests” and “public order”
leads Continental to deny that such values were threatened when Argentina adopted the
measures complained of by the Claimant.” Continental also denies that the measures
adopted by Argentina in order to protect such values were “necessary” in light of the

correct interpretation of Article x1.”

75. Continental concludes that, should the Tribunal find that Art. XI of the BIT is

applicable in the present case, “Argentina must still compensate the investor.”

69 Continental Reply, para. 224. Breach of the obligation to provide fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security: breach of the
expropriation obligations; breach of the obligation to observe its obligations.

70 Continental Reply, paras. 225-229. Breach of articles V, IV, 11(2)(c) and I1(2)(a) of the BIT.

rental Reply, paras. 236-257

rental Reply, paras. 258-263

rental Reply, paras. 325-343

 

jental Reply, paras. 344-352.
75 Continental Reply, paras. 353-364.

26

Continental asserts further that Argentina cannot rely on Article TV(3) to avoid such
compensation. “Regardless of whether Argentina faced circumstances falling within the
scope of Article IV(3), the Investor does not claim Argentina has compensated foreigners

and locals unequally and, therefore, Article IV(3) is irrelevant to this claim.””°

76. In the last part of its Reply, the Claimant develops its arguments concerning the
amount of damages it has suffered from Argentina’s breaches of the Treaty. According to
the Claimant, this “calculation ... is straightforward. But for Argentina’s actions in
breach of the Treaty, the Claimant would have received the value of the principal and
interest payable on CNA ART’s financial securities in accordance with their terms. The
Claimant would have received the value of its U.S. dollar deposits and the value of its

government loans at the agreed rate of interest.”””

Instead, “[a]s a consequence of
Argentina’s breaches, the Claimant received a fraction of this value. The Claimant
received financial securities pesified at a confiscatory exchange rate and certificates of
deposit and government loans with unilaterally reduced rates of interest. In the case of the
LETEs, the Claimant received nothing at all.””* Continental challenges Argentina’s claim
that the Claimant suffered no damage. Based on the Reply Report of its expert Mr.
Rosen, Continental argues that the “AGM’s conclusion that the Claimant has suffered no
damages” based “on the alleged growth of CNA ART’s overall equity since Argentina
took its measures in breach of the Treaty” is based on a “completely inappropriate”

methodology.”

77. Quite to the contrary, the Claimant asserts it has suffered substantial losses /
damages. It has included in its Reply the following table reproduced from the Rosen
Reply Report, which summarizes the Investor's damages from Argentina's breaches of the

BIT:

76 Cont

 

ental Reply, paras. 365-368,
77 Continental Reply, para. 369.
78 Continental Reply, para. 370.
79 Continental Reply, para. 373

27

 

 

Losses Due to

 

Fair and

Equitable Contracts
Expropriation Treatment Observance Transfers

 

 

Schedule 1

Cash $ 1,395,000 $ 449,000 $ $

Treasury Bills (Letes) 4,126,000 3,493,000 3,493,000

Public Loans (GGLs) 12.193.000 11.937.000 —_11.937.000

Certificates of Deposit 17.533.000 5.609.000 14,631,000
35,247,000 21,488,000 — 15,430,000 14,631,000

Incremental Capital 11,165,000 11,165,000 4,904,000 n/a

Taxes

 

Total Losses $ $
$ 46,412,000 32,653,000 20,334,000 _$ 14,631,000

 

C. Argentina’s counter-arguments

78. In its Rejoinder of October 20, 2006, Argentina replies to the arguments that the
Claimant has developed in its Reply. First of all, Argentina opposes the Claimant’s
attempt to introduce a new party into the arbitration (CNA ART), at this late stage of the
proceedings and requests that it be rejected as inadmissible and contrary to Art. 36(2) of
the ICSID Convention® and Arbitration Rules. “Argentina will not argue at this point
whether CNA ART can invoke Article 25(2)(b) in fine of the ICSID Convention or
whether it complies with the requirements expressed in Article VII(8) of the BIT,” since
“Tt]hese are matters which affect the claim’s admissibility and the Tribunal’s competence
(apart from other jurisdiction-related and/or preliminary issues that might come up in
connection with CNA ART), which Argentina has the right to address as exceptions to
the Centre’s jurisdiction or the Tribunal’s competence in view of Rule 41 of the
Arbitration Rules. As to the merits, Argentina claims that introducing CNA ART at this

point would also seriously violate Argentina’s right of defense in various ways. The right

80 Argentina points out that Art. 36(2) of the ICSID Convention provides that the request to institute arbitration proceedings “shall contain information

    

nter alia “the identity of the parties.

28

 

for a party to submit an additional claim under Art. 46 of the Convention does not include

in Argentina’s view the right to introduce additional parties into the proceedings.*!

79. Secondly, Argentina insists on its description of the context “in which the measures
applied during the collapse in 2001 were taken,” reiterating that what the country suffered

1982

was a “collapse that goes beyond an economic crisis.””~ In particular, Argentina stresses

that “measures taken were necessary to counteract the effects of the crisis” and that “the
challenged measures were not the cause of the social unrest.”*?

80. Next, Argentina then resumes its arguments against the claims raised by the
Claimant. Firstly, Argentina reiterates that it cannot have expropriated Continental’s
investment since “the value of CNA ART’s equity increased by almost threefold-
measured in U.S. dollars- than what it was worth before the crisis.”** In fact, “the
Claimant grounds its claim not in the decrease in the value of its investment (the interest
in CNA ART) but alleged decreases in the value of CNA ART’s investments and the
measures that would have affected such investments.”*°

81. Secondly, “Argentina confirm[ed] the grounds presented in its Counter-Memorial
and restates that it granted CONTINENTAL a treatment in conformity with the
provisions of Article II.2(a) and (b) of the BIT at all times.”*° Argentina reiterates its
position already stated in its Counter-Memorial according to which “the fair and
equitable treatment standard should be applied taking special consideration of the special
circumstances in which the challenged measures were adopted.”*’ Argentina maintains
that “at no time (had it) stopped meeting its treatment obligations during the course of the
crisis.”** According to Argentina “[t]he fair and equitable treatment standard does not
have as an objective to guarantee an objective and immutable right to the stability of the
juristic order where the investment is carried out. On the contrary it should be interpreted
82 Argentina Rejoinder, para. 30.

83 Argentina Rejoinder, para. 31 ff. and 83 ff.

84 Argentina Rejoinder, para. 115.

85 Argentina Rejoinder, para. 121.

86 Argentina Rejoinder, para. 213.

87 Argentina Rejoinder, para. 219.
88 Argentina Rejoinder, para. 221

29

as including the basic powers of the States of maintaining public order and facing
emergencies.” Argentina adds that “[a]nother interpretation would turn the BITs into an
insurance policy that would make the State respond in light of any situation regardless of

the external circumstances motivating the State’s acts.”

82. Thirdly, Argentina reiterates that it did not violate Art. V of the BIT in regard to
transfers. First of all, Argentina claims that Art. V concerns only foreign investors and
not local subsidiaries as CNA ART. Argentina draws support for this position from the
Claimant’s request to “legitimize CNA ART as a party in this controversy.””° Argentina
further argues that Art. V does not prevent “specific regulations for balance-of-payment
difficulties” in view of Art. XI of the BIT and the “standards established in multilateral
agreements which both Argentina and the United States -the parties involved in the BIT
applicable in this arbitration- have signed,” with specific mention of GATT, GATS and
the IMF.”! Argentina also claims that its regulations of monetary transfers conform with
international customary law, as a manifestation of the exercise of monetary sovereignty
by States, in view of the severe difficulties in its balance-of-payment.”” Therefore
Argentina adds that “if CONTINENTAL wanted to make transfers abroad of money
derived from revenues and dividends, they could be made by previously requesting the
authorization from the corresponding authority, i.e., the BCRA.”*> However, Argentina
submits that Art. V(1)(e) “protects transfers of the proceeds of the sale or liquidation of
all or any part of an investment” but that this was not the case since CNA ART and not

“CONTINENTAL was the holder of the bank deposits.”**

83. Next, Argentina opposes again the Claimant’s argument about the alleged violation
of Art. II(2)(c) of the BIT. Firstly, it maintains that it had never “adopted any
commitment towards CONTINENTAL.” According to Argentina, Continental “intends to

*turn’ a claim of contractual nature which is not its own into a claim for violations of the

89 Argentina Rejoinder, para. 224.
90 Argentina Rejoinder, para, 294.

Argentina Rejoinder, para .295,

 
 
 

centina Rejoinder, para 297,
Argentina Rejoinder, para 306.

94 Argentina Rejoinder, para.308

30

BIT.”®> Continental’s claim on this ground should thus be considered inadmissible since
“CONTINENTAL is acting on its own behalf, on the basis of an alleged violation of
rights which are entitled to CNA ART. CONTINENTAL is not acting on behalf of CNA
ART.” Argentina points out “the contractual nature of the claim,” opposing

“CONTINENTAL/’s extensive interpretation” of Art. II (2)(b) of the BIT.”

84. As to Art. XI of the BIT, Argentina points out that it “requested the Tribunal to
apply Article XI of the BIT to this dispute...notwithstanding the fact that the measures
under analysis did not violate any BIT standard.”** Argentina submits that Art. XI of the
BIT and the customary rule on the State of Necessity are two different rules since they
come from “autonomous sources of international law,” namely treaty and customary law
respectively.” Argentina adds that, contrary to Continental’s assertions, the Report by
professors Slaughter and Burke White — submitted as expert’s testimony by Argentina —
does not support the opinion that “Article XI is /ex specialis within the customary /ex

generalis of the state of necessity.”

85. Argentina then opposes the Claimant’s interpretation of Art. XI of the BIT. With
regard to the reference to the “essential security interests,” Argentina contests the
argument according to which it would “comprise only the external threats against the
country.”!°! On the contrary, according to Argentina, “the terms ‘essential security
interests’ should be interpreted in a broad manner and they include crises as the one
suffered by the Argentine Republic.”! Argentina also opposes the Claimant’s views that
the term “public order” in Art. XI, has to be assimilated with the concept of public order
[ordre public] under private international law.'3 According to Argentina, on the contrary,

“within the concept of public order” are to be included “at least the protection of public

95 Argentina Rejoinder, para. 314.
96 Argentina Rejoinder, para. 317.

Argentina Rejoinder, para. 329-331

 
 

Argentina Rejoinder, para. 365.
99 Argentina Rejoinder, para. 367,
100 Argentina Rejoinder, para. 376,

 

tina Rejoinder, para. 390.
102 Argentina Rejoinder, para. 396.

103 Argentina Rejoinder, para. 402.

31

security and other powers included within the State’s police power.”!™ Finally, Argentina
submits that the term “necessary” contained in Art. XI of the BIT must be interpreted in
line with the GATT-WTO case-law, under which “necessary” is not synonymous of

“indispensable.” 105

86. As far as the issue of compensation is concerned, Argentina opposes Continental’s
allegation that “even if the requirements under Article XI were fulfilled with respect to
this case, the Argentine Republic should compensate it.” According to Argentina, on the
contrary, if Art. XI is applicable to the dispute at issue no compensation is due since

“there is no treaty violation.”!

87. Argentina also reiterates its position that application of Art. XI of the BIT is self-
judging. Finally, as to the invocation of the State of Necessity under customary
international law, Argentina challenges Continental’s reliance on the CMS v. Argentina
ICSID award and invokes instead the decision in the LG&E v. Argentina case. Argentina
reiterates that “the measures were the only means of safeguarding an essential interest

from a serious and imminent peril.”"”

88. Argentina then specifies its defense based on the customary rule on the State of
Necessity contended in its Counter-Memorial, in the alternative with respect to the one
based on Art. XI of the BIT. Argentina concludes that all the requirements associated
with the customary rule were satisfied in the present case, contrary to the Claimant’s

allegations. 108

89. In the final pages of its Rejoinder, Argentina deals with Continental’s request of
compensation for the damage it has suffered, denying that the investor suffered any
damage based on the Max & Echagiie Report.! Finally, Argentina denies Continental’s

argument that a forcible effect of pesification was to “trigger additional tax liabilities for

ntina Rejoinder, para. 408.
nntina Rejoinder, paras. 409-419,
ntina Rejoinder, paras. 420-422.
ntina Rejoinder, para. 481

 

ntina Rejoinder, paras. 454-465; 481-491
109 Argentina Rejoinder, para. 498 ff.

32

CNA ART.” According to Argentina, the income tax that was applied to all residents of
Argentina does not constitute an expropriatory act and was not discriminatory, nor

extraordinary or punitive. Ho

90. On November 13, 2006, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 deciding the
schedule for the Hearing to be held from November 27 to December 3, 2006; requiring to
the disputing parties some additional information in order to fill a Chronological Table of
the relevant events and measures at issue in the present dispute; asking the parties to send
to the Secretary of the Tribunal a list of persons who would be attending the hearing as
counsel, party representatives, witnesses and experts. The parties complied with those
requests. The Hearing on the Merits took place from November 27 to December 3, 2006
at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C. At the hearing the Claimant was represented
by: Messrs. Barry Appleton, Robert Wisner, Hernando Otero, Nick Gallus and Ms. Asha
Kaushal of the law firm of Appleton & Associates International Lawyers. The
Respondent was represented by the Office of the Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Argentina, in person of the Procurador Mr. Oswaldo César Guglielmino assisted by: Mr.
Jorge Barraguirre, Ms. Cintia Yaryura, Mr. Fabian Markaida, Mr. Gabriel Bottini, Mr.
Ignacio Torterola, Ms. Maria Victoria Vitali, Mr. Nicolas Duhalde, Ms. Veronica Lavista,
Mr. Diego Brian Gosis, and Mr. Norberto Ariel Martins. The witnesses and experts
presented by the Claimant’s counsel for oral examination were: Gary J. Owcar; César
Bunge; Kenneth Vandevelde; Howard Rosen; Sebastian Edwards. Mr. Samitier was also
present as party representative for Continental. The following witnesses and experts
testified on behalf of the Argentine Republic: Roberto Frenkel & Mario Damill; Eduardo
Ratti; Federico Molina; Roberto Fortunati; Augusto Belluscio; A.M. Slaughter & B.
White; Daniel Marx & José M. Echagiie. Each party cross-examined the witnesses and

experts of the other party as far as they requested.

91. Pursuant to the Procedural Direction of the Tribunal dated December 12, 2006, the
Claimant and the Respondent filed their Post-Hearing Briefs on January 22, 2007.
Afterwards, the Claimant and the Respondent filed their Post-Hearing Replies on March

9, 2007. Both parties presented their Statements of Costs on April 10, 2007. In the above-
110 Argentina Rejoinder, para. $31 ff.

33

mentioned Procedural Direction the Tribunal also indicated that it would decide together
with the merits the admissibility of the “ancillary claim” advanced by the Claimant in its

Reply and opposed by Argentina concerning the addition of CNA ART as a claimant.

92. Thereafter, the Tribunal declared the file closed to the parties on May 11, 2007. On
June 25, 2007 Argentina wrote to the Tribunal asking that the Tribunal take into account
as “a decisive factor for the resolution of the present dispute” an attached letter of the
U.S. Department of State to former Legal Advisor Abraham Soafer (filed by a Claimant
against Argentina in another ICSID dispute against Argentina in a pending arbitration
under the U.S.-Argentina BIT) where the U.S. Department of State states, inter alia, that
“.,..the position of the U.S. Government is that the essential security language in our
FCN treaties and Bilateral Investment treaties is self-judging [...].”. The Claimant asked
the Tribunal “to ignore this untimely material” adding that “even if the Tribunal decides
to consider the document, it sheds no greater light on the meaning of the essential

security interests provision in the Argentina-U.S. treaty.”

93. The Tribunal answered to the parties on July, 6, 2007 admitting the document (and
allowing the Claimant to comment in writing on it) notwithstanding the file had been
declared closed to the parties, stating various reasons justifying that it “represents a rare
exception to the above mentioned ruling.”!"! The Claimant duly filed its comments on
July 16, 2007, restating its position that this standard “Employment Ethics Letter” by the
Department of State was irrelevant, since it “is not a letter about the meaning of the
Argentine-U.S. BIT,” does not evidence any agreement between the Contracting Parties
to the BIT that Article XI is self-judging, is irrelevant under the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties, and is generally far from a “decisive factor for the resolution of the

dispute” contrary to Argentina’s claim,'!?

94. The Tribunal declared the proceedings closed in accordance with ArbitrationRule

38 on April 24, 2008.

  

111 Three reasons were given in the Tribunal’s letter, namely “i. The document was not reasonably available to the Respondent until after the written

and oral phases of these arbitration proceedings; ii, It addresses an issue in these proceedings on which both parties have submitted much material

 

already; and iii. It is not a document which, as now introduced, can cause any material prejudice to the Claimant as a matter of procedure.
112 Among its supporting documents, the Claimant included the Award on the merits rendered in the case of Enron Corporation Ponderosa Assets, L.P.

v. Argentine Republic, rendered on May 22, 2007 (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3).

34

IV. Preliminary Issue
A. Continental’s request to add CNA ART as a Claimant

95. In its Reply Continental has submitted that the “Umbrella Clause” of Art. II (2)(c)
of the BIT also applies to obligations entered by the host State “with an investment” of
the protected covered investor, thus here CNA. Continental has also submitted that
“should this Tribunal determine that Article II (2)(c) applies only to obligations
Argentina may have entered into with claimants (rather than “with regard to
investments”), then CNA ART makes directly an ancillary claim for breach of this
obligation.”! 8 According to Continental, this ancillary claim is permissible under Art. 25
(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, which is referred to at Art. VII (8) of the BIT.!* Asa
matter of procedure, Continental claims that the Tribunal “is empowered to add CNA
ART as a claimant pursuant to Article 46 of the ICSID Convention” which establishes the
competence of an ICSID Tribunal to “determine any incidental or ancillary claims or
counterclaims arising directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute provided that they
are within the scope of the consent of the parties and are otherwise within the jurisdiction

of the Centre.”

96. Argentina opposes the introduction of a new party mid-way through these pending
arbitration proceedings, as being contrary to various provisions of the ICSID Convention
and related procedural rules. Argentina also submits that the introduction of such a new

party would adversely affect its position as a respondent and its rights of defense.'!

B. Tribunal’s Conclusion

97. The Tribunal recognizes that Art. VII (8) of the BIT could allow CNA to initiate
separate arbitration proceedings against Argentina on the basis of Art. 25 (2)(b) of the
ICSID Convention. It is also correct that Art. 46 of the ICSID Convention permits a
tribunal to determine additional claims to be introduced in pending proceedings, subject
113 Claimant's Reply, paras. 138 and 142.

114 “For the purpose of an arbitration held under paragraph 3 of this Article, any company legally constituted under the applicable laws and regulations

of a Party or any political subdivision thereof but that, immediately before the occurrence of the event or events gi

 

ie to the dispute, was an

 

investment of nationals or companies of the other Party, shall be treated as a national or company of such other Party in accordance with Article 25(2)(b)
of the ICSID Convention.”

115 Argentina’s Rejoinder, paras. 12-18.

35

to any agreement otherwise between the parties (of which none exists here). However
these are two very different procedures. We fail to see how Art. 46 of the ICSID
Convention allowing the introduction of an additional claim in a pending dispute between
the same disputant parties could possibly justify the introduction into that arbitration of
an additional third person with its own new claim, moreover at a late stage of the
proceedings. An “incidental or additional claim” to the principal claim initially submitted
clearly refers in Art. 46 to the relationship of this new claim with those claims already
made in the pending proceedings by the same claimant; that is what “additional” and
“incidental” signify in their ordinary meaning; and Art. 46 does not permit an extension
of the dispute ratione personae. Moreover, as a further relevant factor in this case, the
due process concerns raised by Argentina against the late introduction of a new claimant

and a new claim are well founded in the view of the Tribunal.

98. We observe further that it is not CNA that has asked to be joined in the pending
dispute; it was its parent Continental that purported to add it to the dispute as a co-
claimant, an initiative that finds no support in the ICSID rules. Such an addition of CNA
appears in any case unnecessary in the light of the objectives asserted by the Claimant. If
a contract or other obligation entered into by the host State is found to be covered by Art.
II (2)(c) of the BIT because it was entered into “in regard to investments,”
notwithstanding the fact that it was entered into with the local subsidiary of the foreign
investor, it would be immaterial if, procedurally, the claim is brought by the foreign
investor directly, or by its local subsidiary relying on Art. VII (8) of the BIT in
conjunction with Art. 25 (2)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

99. The Tribunal, for these reasons, rejects the request of the Claimant in the above

respect.

36

V. Factual Background

A. The economic evolution of Argentina from the introduction of the convertibility regime
(1991) to the crisis (2001)

a) General overview

100. All measures (the “Measures’”), which Continental challenges, were enacted by
Argentina during the well-known economic, political and social crisis which the country
experienced during 2001-2002,'!° as a response to that crisis and in attempts to control
and overcome it. In different ways, all the Measures reflected, brought about, formalized
or implemented the abrupt and traumatic abolition of the convertibility regime. The
introduction of bank deposit freezes and of foreign exchange controls (Corralito, Decree
1570 of December 1, 2001) were the first Measures introduced. The Public Emergency
Law 25.561 of January 6, 2002, and Measures adopted thereunder provided for the
official abolition of the convertibility regime and of the connected pegging of the peso
with the U.S. dollar, as well as the forced conversion into pesos of all dollar denominated
financial instruments, indebtedness and contracts (“pesification”). A further set of
Measures adopted under Law 25.561 acknowledged and formalized the default of
Argentina on its internal and external debt and provided subsequently for that debt’s
restructuring with the aim of progressively restoring normal economic and financial
conditions. Certain of these Measures affecting the Claimant have also been challenged

by Continental as being in breach with BITs obligations.

101. Continental, on the one hand, relies on the convertibility regime as representing a
standard of treatment to which it was entitled and the abolition of which, especially as to
how it was carried out through the Measures, breached various BIT provisions to its
financial detriment. On the other hand, Argentina claims that the Measures are justified
because of the “economic, social and institutional crisis precipitated in the Argentine
Republic, which was the gravest of the country’s history,” so to render the context within

which the Argentina’s Measures were adopted absolutely exceptional.'!”

116 The crisis materialized in 2001, but depending on the analysis its beginning has been set in 2000, and its origin even as early as 1998, see IMF,
Evaluation Report. 8.

117 Argentina’s Counter-Memorial, paras. 19-20.

37

102. It is therefore appropriate to summarize at the outset the economic evolution of
Argentina following the introduction of the convertibility regime in 1991 up to the crisis,
including the latter’s causes, with a specific focus on the legal aspects of this regime as
well as on the nature and effects of the various Measures. This part of the Award contains
the factual basis for the Tribunal’s consideration of Argentina’s defense of necessity,

including the availability of alternative measures.

103. In this summary the Tribunal has been much assisted by the Parties’ Counsel and
the Parties’ expert witnesses and related materials. The subject is, of course, vast,
difficult and complex. There is no single comprehensive study or chronology adequate
for the task facing the Parties and the Tribunal in these proceedings. Moreover, each case
addressing Argentina’s crisis, with its different parties, claims and legal texts, raises its
own special issues and particular considerations. Guided by the issues in the present case,
this Tribunal has made its own analysis and arrived at its own decisions based upon the
materials presented by the Parties in these proceedings. However, the Tribunal has
confirmed such analysis and decisions by relying on authoritative and publicly available
reports and studies of an economic and social-political nature, which assist in the
narration of the crisis, its causes and responses. A distinction is made below, as
appropriate, between objective facts and data, contemporary evaluation of the economic
policy pursued by Argentina, and subsequent evaluation based on hindsight, made

retrospectively.

104. As described by the IMF in 2004:

The Convertibility Law, which pegged the Argentine currency to the U.S.
dollar in April 1991, was a response to Argentina’s dire economic situation at
the beginning of the 1990s. Following more than a decade of high inflation
and economic stagnation, and after several failed attempts to stabilize the
economy, in late 1989 Argentina had fallen into hyperinflation and a virtual

economic collapse [.

 

. The new exchange rate regime, which operated like a
currency board, was designated to stabilize the economy by establishing a

hard nominal peg with credible assurances of non reversibility. The new peso

38

(set equal to 10,000 australes) was fixed at par with the U.S. dollar and
autonomous money creation by the central bank was severely constrained,
though less rigidly than in a classical currency board. The exchange rate
arrangement was part of a larger Convertibility Plan, which included a broader
agenda of market-oriented structural reforms to promote efficiency and
productivity in the economy. Various service sectors were deregulated, trade
was liberalized, and anti-competitive price-fixing schemes were removed;
privatization proceeded vigorously, notably in oil, power, and

telecommunications, yielding large capital revenues. [footnotes omitted]!'®

The investment made by Continental in Omega ART (later CNA ART) in 1997 and
completed in 2000 was made in a newly privatized sector (in June 1996), that of workers’
accident insurance.'!? In general, foreign direct investment inflows were sustained after
the convertibility, representing more than 2-3% of GDP from 1995 to 2000 with a peak of
8.46% in the year 1999.'7°

105. In more precise legal terms, the convertibility regime entailed that the national
currency (the peso that replaced the Austral at one peso for each 10,000 Australes on
January 1, 1992) was freely convertible with the U.S. dollar at 1:1, and the external value
of the peso being pegged to the dollar under a currency board type arrangement.'!
Transactions in convertible currencies were permitted. Authorized banks could open

accounts in pesos or foreign currencies so that Argentines and foreigners in Argentina

118 IMF, Evaluation Report, 11. As stated in the Preface to the Report, the Independent Evaluation Office of the IMF (IEO), which authored the report,

   

as created in 2001 to provide objective and independent evaluations on issues relevant to the IMB. It operates independently of IMF management and
at arm’s length from the IMF Executive Board.” The Evaluation Report “evaluates the role of the IMF in Argentina during 1991-2001, focusing
particularly on the period of crisis management from 2000 to early 2002,” ibid. For an acknowledgment of the value of this independent report and

including its criticism to the IMF management of the crisis, see Blustein, 213. As to the effects of the Convertibility Plan, see also World Bank, From

 

Insolvency to Growth, (Country Study) 1993, Claimant’s doc. C-389. Argentina puts in doubt in its Post-Hearing Reply, 20-21, the obj

 

ty of th

 

Report, pointing to the criticism contained in a subsequent “Report of the External Evalu

 

jon of the Independent Evaluation Office” of March 29, 2006

 

(Respondent’s doc. R-294), at p.14. The Tribunal considers this criticism not relevant as to the present description of the evolution of Argentina’s

economy. See also footnote 353 hereunder.

 

119 ART stands for “Aseguratora de Riesgos del Trabajo” (Workers
120 See C

Risks Insurer),

    

imant’s doc. C-392 drawn from the World Bank's World Development Indicators, various

 

121 A publication directed to foreign investors “Argentina Business,” 259, summarized the arrangement as follows: “The Convertibility Law also
transformed the Banco Central de la Republica Argentina (BCRA, the central bank) into a currency board, preventing it from issuing more currency than
can be backed by foreign currency reserves. This prevents the government from creating unbacked currency, ‘running the printing press,’ or monetizing

defi

 

and thus limits inflation, contributing to the stability and integrity of the monetary system.”

39

were allowed to hold and use any currency. This possibility led in time to the
“dollarization” of Argentina’s economy to a notable degree: contracts, especially medium
and long term contracts such as rents, loans, supply contracts were expressed in dollars,
rather than in pesos, and bank deposits were opened and maintained in dollars.
Specifically, a large proportion of the banking system’s assets and liabilities were
denominated in dollars. The level of dollarization, which had been growing steadily since
1991, increased substantially in the second half of 2000: more than 70% of the private
sectors deposits and almost 70% of the banking system credit to private sector were

denominated in dollars by the end of 2000.'7

106. Another feature of the convertibility regime was that, in strict adherence with the
nominalistic principle,'* any indexation mechanism of debts was expressly prohibited,
including in cases of delayed payment by the debtor (mora del deudor). This was in sharp
contrast with the law and practice that had prevailed in Argentina under the previous
monetary regime. In this connection Art. 11 of the Convertibility Law modified Art. 617
and 618 of the Civil Code to the effect that:

a. the obligation to pay a debt in a currency which is not legal tender
in Argentina was considered to be a monetary obligation (new Art.
617);

b. the obligation to pay a sum in a specified type of currency is

satisfied by paying in that type of currency.'4

As a result, debts in dollars had to be repaid in dollars. However, as reported officially by

the IMF, in legal terms “the currency of Argentina is the Argentine peso,” and only the

Lessons from the Crisis, 21, showing indicators from 1990 to 2000. According to Claimant's doc. C-190 (National Bureau of Economie research

 
 

Paper No.10015 of 2003), Argentina had a “very high” degree of dollarization, with a score of 20, preceded by smaller economies such as
Ecuador (25), Bolivia (22) and Uruguay (21).

123 Art. 7 of the Convertibility Law N° 23928 of March 1991, which also provides that a debtor of a given amount in pesos, satisfies his obligation by

  

remitting at the date due that nominal quantity. As is well-known, nominalism indicates that a given currency is legal tender by sovereign will and must

  

be accepted to satisty debts and as means of exchange for its face value, irrespective of its purchase power, notably over time, or its loss of ex:
value in terms of foreign currencies (i.e. devaluation), without the sovereign incurring thereby an international responsibility. See Mann, 463; D. Carreau,
Souveraineté et coopération monétaire internationale, 1970, 73.

124 The parties have disputed the exact import of those provisions as discussed hereafter. According to the Claimant, Art. 617 and 619 not only entitled

the debtor to discharge its obligation in foreign currency in that currency but “gave creditors the right to refuse payment that was not in the agreed upon

 

currency” (Post-Hearing Brief, para. 20). Argentina claims that those obligations could be discharged also in pesos at the current exchange rat.

40

peso. “Transactions in convertible currencies are permitted, and contracts in these
currencies are legally enforceable, although the currencies are not legal tender.”
Accordingly, companies’ accounts, including those of CNA, were always expressed in

pesos only.

107. There have been many descriptions of the evolution of Argentina’s economy under
the Convertibility Plan from what have been described as the “boom years,” to the first
deterioration of the country’s performance in the second half of 1998, and thereafter to
the intensification of Argentina’s problems in 2000, ultimately leading to the crisis and
the abandonment of the convertibility regime in early January 2002. The Tribunal
considers that a useful overview of this evolution relevant for the subsequent legal
analysis is set forth in the relevant pages of the “Overview of Economic Developments,
1991-2001,” found in the IMF Independent Evaluation Office Report “The IMF and
Argentina: 1991-2001” published in 2004, 11-13.'°°

There was a marked improvement in Argentina’s economic performance
under the Convertibility Plan, particularly during its early years. Inflation,
which was raging at a monthly rate of 27 percent in February 1991,
declined to 2.8 percent in May 1991; on an annual basis, inflation fell to
single digits in the summer of 1993 and remained low (or even negative)
from 1994 to the end of the convertibility regime in early 2002. The
overall fiscal balance of the federal government improved significantly
from the previous years, with an average budgeted deficit of less than 1%
of GDP during 1991-98.

Growth performance was impressive through early 1998, except for a brief
set back in 1995 when Argentina was adversely affected by the Mexican
crisis. For 1991-98, GDP growth averaged nearly 6 percent a year,
vindicating the market-oriented reforms introduced in the early 1990s.
Attracted by a more investment-friendly climate, there were large capital
inflows in the form of portfolio and direct investments. '77 During 1992-99,
Argentina received more than $100 billion in net capital inflows, including
over $ 60 billion in gross foreign direct investments.

125 IMF

 

entina, Status Under IMF Articles of Agreements: Article VII Position as of January 31, 1999 (Claimant's doc. C-377) at p. 32; IMF

 

Argentina, Status Under IMF Articles of Agreements: Article VIII, Position as of December 31, 1999 (Claimant’s doc. C-378), at p.33; IMF Argentina,

Status Under IMF Articles of Article VII, Position as of December 31, 2000 (Claimant's doe. C-379), at p.34.

 

126 See Claimant's doc. C-149 and Respondent's doc. R-207. References in the text to Tables and Boxes of the Report and footnotes have been omitted.

   

127 onclusion of Bilateral Invest in 1990. In 1992 the first BITs entered

      

it Treaties was part of this policy. Argentina signed its first thre

 

  

into force for Argentina. At the end of 2001 Argen

 

\d signed 58 BITs in total, among which the one with the US at issue in the pres

 

4l

The resilience of the convertibility regime was severely tested by the
Mexican crisis in 1995. In response, Argentina launched a rigorous
adjustment program under IMF financial support consisting of strong
fiscal action and structural reform. When the peg survived and a V-shaped
recovery ensued, this was widely interpreted as evidence of the
convertibility regime’s robustness and credibility. Favorable external
circumstances also contributed to this outcome. This was a period in
which the U.S. dollar was relatively weak, so the peg did not entail a loss
of competitiveness, particularly given the improvements in productivity.
Tariff reductions achieved under MERCOSUR also helped promote
exports, particularly to Brazil, Argentina’s largest trading partner. Capital
flows to emerging markets were strong in the mid-1990s and Argentina
was a major beneficiary. Argentina was relatively unaffected by the
outbreak of the East Asian crisis in 1997; it quickly returned to the
international capital markets in December of that year.

In October 1998, the performance of Argentina received the attention of
the world when President Carlos Menem shared the podium of the Annual
Meetings with the IMF Managing Director, who characterized “the
experience of Argentina in recent years” as “exemplary.” The Managing
Director further remarked: “Argentina has a story to tell the world: a story
which is about the importance of fiscal discipline, of structural change,
and of monetary policy rigorously maintained.”

As it happened, Argentina’s performance deteriorated from the second half
of 1998, owing to adverse external shocks, including a reversal in capital
flows to emerging markets following the Russian default in August 1998;
weakening of demand in major trading partners, notably in Brazil; a fall in
oil and other commodity prices; general strengthening of the U.S. dollar
against the euro; and the 70 percent devaluation of the Brazilian real
against the U.S. dollar in early 1999. Real GDP fell by over 3 percent in
the second half of 1998, there was a mild pickup in economic activity in
the second half of 1999, spurred by increasing government spending in the
run-up of the October presidential elections, but this was not sustained and
GDP declined by 3 % percent for 1999 as a whole. The economy never
recovered through the end of the convertibility regime.

The economic slowdown, coupled with the election-driven surge in public
spending in 1999, had important implications for fiscal solvency.
Argentina’s consolidated fiscal balance had been in deficit throughout the
1990s except in 1993, but the magnitude was not large. Consolidated
public sector debt, however, increased more rapidly because of the
periodic recognition of off-budget liabilities, including the court-ordered
payments of past pension benefits, which averaged over 2 percent of GDP
a year during 1993-99. Even so, the rise in the debt-to-GDP ratio was
modest as long as growth remained high, and there was even a small
decline in the ratio from 1996 to 1997. The situation changed in 1999,
when growth decelerated and the public finances deteriorated sharply. The

42

debt-to-GDP ratio rose from 37.7 percent of GDP at end-1997, to 47.6
percent at end-1999, an increase of 10 percentage points in just two years.
The ratio would eventually reach 62 percent at end of 2001.

Argentina’s problems intensified in 2000, when growing solvency
concerns over the cumulative increase in public debt was exacerbated by
the continued appreciation of the U.S. dollar and a further drying up of
capital flows to emerging market economies. These developments would
normally require a smaller current account deficit and a depreciation of the
real exchange rate, but the convertibility regime placed severe limitations
on the ability of Argentina to achieve this adjustment in a manner that
could avoid recession. Argentina initially sought to restore market
confidence by negotiating a SBA with the IMF, which it indicated would
be treated as precautionary.

Market confidence did not recover as expected and market access was
effectively lost later in the year, leading Argentina to seek an
augmentation of IMF support. From December 2000 to September 2001,
the IMF made a series of decisions to provide exceptional financial
support to Argentina, which ultimately amounted to SDR 17 billion,
including the undrawn balance under the existing arrangement. However,
stabilization proved elusive. The augmentation announced in December
2000 and formally approved in January 2001 had a favorable effect, but it
was short-lived. Pressure built up again as it became evident that political
support for the agreed measures was lacking and program targets were
unlikely to be met.

From the spring of 2001, the authorities took a series of measures in quick
succession, including: an announced plan to change the anchor of the
convertibility regime from the U.S. dollar to an equally weighted basket of
the dollar and the euro (the switch to take effect only when the two
currencies reached parity); a series of heterodox industrial or protectionist
policies (called “competitiveness plans”) involving various  tax-
exemptions measures in sectors most adversely affected by the recession;
and an exchange of outstanding government bonds totaling $30 billion in
face value for longer maturity instruments (the so-called mega-swap).
Many of these measures, which were taken without consultation with the
IMF, were perceived by the markets as desperate or impractical and served
to damage market confidence.

Despite these initiatives and the financial support of the IMF, market
access could not be restored, and spreads on Argentine bonds rose sharply
in the third quarter of 2001. Amid intensified capital flight and deposit
runs, capital controls and a partial deposit freeze were introduced in
December 2001. With Argentina failing to comply with the fiscal targets,
the IMF indicated that it could not clear the disbursement scheduled for
December. At the end of December, following the resignation of President
Fernando De La Ria the country partially defaulted on its international

43

obligations. In early January 2002, Argentina formally abandoned the

convertibility regime and replaced it with a dual exchange rate system.
108. Argentina’s crisis of 2001-2002 has been described both as “one of the worst
economic crises in its history” and “among the most severe of recent economic crises”
worldwide.'* It resulted in a massive default of public debt both domestic and
international, the latter involving U.S.$141 billion. “The immediate macroeconomic
consequences of the crisis were severe. Real GDP fell by about 10% in 2002, bringing
the cumulative decline since 1998 to almost 20%.'” Inflation peaked at a monthly rate of
about 10% in April 2002, driven by liquidity provisions from the central bank to banks
experiencing deposit withdrawals, but then declined, averaging around 40% for the year
as a whole.'*” More generally the crisis was characterized by severe deflation, a decline
in domestic prices as a consequence of the peso overvaluation and the deterioration of the
competitiveness of the economy.'*! The stock index of Buenos Aires lost more than 60%
from 1998 to 2002.'? More important than any of these economic indicators, the crisis

lead to substantial social and personal hardship, including the youngest and most

 

vulnerable members of the populations: the unemployment rate rose to above 20% in
2002; and per capita expenses fell off about 74%.'3 “The poverty level increased to
54.3% of the urban population of the country and the indigence level reached 24.7%.

Between October 1998 and October 2002, the poverty level was doubled, whereas the

 

128 See respectively Lessons from the Crisis, 1, and IMF, Evaluation Report, 8. Argentina’s default on its $141 billion external default in late December

e Scott, 575,

 

2001 was the largest sovereign default, S
129 Cf. Lessons from the Crisis, 38. According to data supplied by Argentina (Argentina's Counter-Memorial, 63-65), not challenged by the Claimant,

the GDP decrease was even worse, from US$300 billion in mid-98 to US

   

0 billion in the first quarter of 2002. Argentina observes furth

 

(djuring the

    

first quarter of 2002 GDP fell 16.3% in relation to the same period of the previous

  

; which implies a fall worse than that suffered in the crack of th

  

30’s in the United S

  

tes” relying also on a statement by US Unders Counter-

 

cretary of State for Latin American Affairs Otto Reich. (Argentina's

 

Memorial, 64)
130 Cf. Lessons from the Crisis, 38, noting also that: “[rleflecting the effects of the exchange rate depreciation on foreign-currency denominated debt, the
issuance of debt to compensate banks for the asymmetric pesoization, and the accumulation of arrears, the public debt ratio more than doubled from 63%
of GDP at the end of 2001 to about 135 % of GDP at end-2002.

131 Argentina points out that several economic observers had suggested, already in 1999 (Warburg Dillon Read and Paul Krugman), again in 2000
(Floyd Norris in the New York Times) and at the beginning of November 2001 (Paul Krugman, Michel Mussa, Argentina's Counter-Memorial p. 203)
that in order to overcome this overvaluation and make Argentina’s economy internationally competitive again, Argentina might have to abandon the fixed
exchange rate and put an end to dollarization. According to Prof. S. Edwards Report filed by Claimant, however, by the year 2000, Argentina’s terms of
trade were back to their 1997 le

   

temporary decline between 1997 and 2000 was mild compared to other large Latin American countries (see

Claimant's Reply, para. 38). According to the IMF, Evaluation Report, 66 , “a deeper and more systematic analysis of the conditions facing Argentina

  

would have lead to the conclusion that, in 2000, Argentina fixed exchange rate could not be sustained for long.
132 Argentina’s Counter-Memorial, para. 73.

133 Argentina’s Counter-Memorial, para. 105.

44

indigence level increased 358%,” most of the increase having taken place from May 2001
on,'*4 Argentina also points out to other aspects of the social crisis due to the
“impossibility of the State to provide the necessary conditions for harmonious
development of society as set forth in the Argentine Constitution,” due to the gradual
deterioration of the State as regards fulfillment of security and health duties.'*> The
political effects of this massive economic and social crisis, were “the political
demonstrations, riots and looting in December 2001 which led to an abrupt end of De La
Rtia’s government” and the vacuum in the political power that followed his
resignation.'*° Argentina has concluded from its recapitulation of those events that “the
effective control of the government on the territory was seriously endangered, with
presidents coming one after the other and riots causing tens [sic] of deaths throughout the

87 itself

country, which entails in turn that the existence of the Argentine Government
was at risk.”'** The Tribunal accepts this characterization of the gravity of the crisis

confronting Argentina at this particular time.

b) The Deterioration of the financial and economic situation of Argentina in 2001 until
Decree 1570 of December I (Corralito)

109. Having thus presented an overview of the developments of Argentina’s economy
from 1991 to 2001-2002 in general terms, we will here address more specifically the

events of the year 2001-2002. 139

134 Argentina’s Counter-M arket indicators.

 

norial, para. 78-79 based on published labour

 

 

135 Argentina’s Counter-Memorial, para. 81

 

Among other effects, medical services had to be interrupted to thousand of AIDS patients at the

beginning of 2002; malnutrition especially in children increased and disease spread. A “sanitary emergency” until the end of 2002 was declared by Law

 

590 on May 15, 2002. Two special social programs for the most needed were introduced in the course of 2002, the Plan for Unemployed Persons in
charge of a Family (Plan Jefas y Jefes de Hogar Desocupados), and the Federal Food Emergency Program (Programa de Emergencia Alimentaria
Nacional).

136 Argentina's Counter-Memorial, para. 132. A vivid personal account of this situation was given in the oral testimonies of Judge Belluscio (see para.

ind 6

 

127) and of Mr. Eduardo A. Ratti who was Legal and Administrative Secretary of the Ministry of the Economy between the beginning of January
May, 2002, in charge of the coordination of the Drafting Committee for the Emergency Law and of Decree 214/02 (see Transcript of the Hearing of

November 30, 2006, at p. 809 £1),

 

nal Spanish text: “la e

 

tencia misma del Estado Arges

 

138 Argentina’s Counter-Memorial, para. 138.

 

139 This timeline is based on a chronological table of relevant events supplied by the Parties to the Tribunal prior to the hearing on the merits, pursuant to
the Tribunal’s request and to the Parties’ documents referred therein; on Appendix II of Lessons from the Crisis, “Chronology of Key Developments in

2001-2002" (used as a source where no other indication is given), and on Hornbeck, (see Claimant's doc. C-189).

45

(i) The events and economic policy initiatives that punctuated the deterioration of the
situation of Argentina

110. In March 2000 the IMF approved a Stand-By Arrangement with Argentina
providing an amount equivalent to SDRs 5.4 billion. In its First Review and periodic

4 released in December

consultation under Art. IV of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement
2000, the IMF noted that the economy had slowed down again in 2000, that it continued
to adjust to the external shocks it suffered in 1998-99 through domestic cost and price
deflation, that competitiveness had improved, that there had been a further decline in

nominal wages. '4!

The Review underlined that the “fiscal program for 2000 was designed
to comply with the Fiscal Responsibility Law approved by the Argentine Congress in
September 1999, and aimed at reducing the deficit of the federal government... To this
end, the authorities early in the year enacted a sizable tax package..., and budgeted a cut
in non-interest expenditures equivalent to almost 1 percent of GppP'... The program
envisaged a reduction of the overall public sector deficit (including the provinces).” The
Review further mentioned that since the effects of the tax package had not materialized
due to the sluggish recovery of the economy resulting in a growing shortfall in tax
revenues, the authorities had announced in May [2000] “a sizable package of additional
spending cuts including a 12-15 percent cut in salaries of civil servants earning more than
Arg. $ 1,000 per month”... “The program also envisaged that the fiscal adjustment effort
at the federal level would be complemented by improvements in the finance of the
provinces, which are responsible for nearly half of total public sector expenditure.”!3
The Review further noted “[p]rogress was made along a broad front in the structural

reform area” pointing out to Labor Market Reform, Health Care, Tax Administration. Maa

140 See IMF, First Re

 

nw “[ulnder Art. IV of the IMB’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A

 

staff team visits the information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic development and policies,”

 

untry, collects economic and fin
ibid, Annex to the Rewiew “Public Information Notice,” footnote 1
141 Ibid, 4-5.

142 Se iginal footnote 4: “It is difficult to make budget cuts without affecting the appropriation for socially important programs. During 1995-99,

  

no less than

   
 

of the federal public spending, net of interest payments and transfers to provinces was directed to broadly defined social programs
including social security, health, education, and the social safe
143 Ibid, 8-9.

144 Ibid, 12-13.

46

111.

Certain sentences are worth quoting from the “Public Information Notice” annexed

to the IMF Report, reporting the conclusion of the IMF Executive Board of September

15, 2000:

112.

Executive Directors welcomed the authorities’ strong ownership of, and
demonstrated commitment to, their economic program, and the significant
progress made so far in improving the fiscal position at both the federal
and provincial level, despite cyclical adverse conditions, and in
implementing structural reforms (...)

While recognizing these concerns, Directors concurred with the
authorities’ view that, within the framework of the convertibility regime,
the resumption of sustainable growth depended crucially on credible
further progress in fiscal consolidation and structural reform. (...)
Directors noted that the convertibility regime, together with a strong
financial system, had served Argentina well in weathering the major
external shocks that had affected it in recent years. They also noted the
strong support of the population for the regime, its demonstrated success in
anchoring inflation expectations, and the high degree of de facto
dollarization in the economy.... Directors considered that, with an
improved competitive position, both the current account and the public
sector deficits on a declining path, and important structural reforms
enacted or under way, the Argentine economy was now in a good

underlying position to resume sustainable growth. '

In its Second Review of January 2001, the IMF staff noted that “the external

environment worsened in the subsequent months, with external financing to emerging

markets nearly drying up. This was compounded by domestic political uncertainties,

which raised doubts about the political governability of the country.(...) The authorities

have responded to these adverse developments by strengthening the growth orientation of

their economic program, through measures aimed at promoting a recovery of investment,

and an accelerated implementation of structural reforms.... “Jn view of the staff, this

145 Annex, 3-4,

47

strategy is appropriate, and deserves the increased financial support of the international
community... A recovery of confidence hinges, in turn, not only on a relatively benign
international environment, but perhaps more importantly, on a demonstrated, unwavering
commitment by the authorities to a rapid and full implementation of their announced

policies.”'*®

113. Based on the IMF staff recommendation, the IMF Executive Board approved on
January 12, 2001 an augmentation of Argentina’s Stand-By Arrangement to an equivalent
of U.S.$14 billion, as part of a broader international support package of almost U.S.$40
billion.'*” “Financial markets initially responded positively to the revised program, but
already by mid February it became evident that the fiscal deficit was about to exceed the
agreed ceiling for the first quarter. Moreover, following the resignation of the finance
minister, his successor was forced out of office in less than two weeks as his planned
budgetary cuts and reform measures failed to find the necessary political backing. Doubts
about the sustainability of the public debt dynamics and the currency board arrangement
resurfaced quickly, evidenced by rising spreads and sizable deposit outflows.”!* Thus on
March 28, 2001, Domingo Cavallo, the author of the Convertibility Plan of 1991, was
appointed Minister of Economy and secured “emergency powers” from Congress.
However, at the end of March 2001 risk-rating agencies lowered Argentina’s long-term
sovereign rating!” On April 26, 2001, the President of the Central Bank was replaced

150

after a clash with the Minister.” On May 1, 2001 Minister Cavallo publicly reaffirmed

that he would stick to convertibility.!*!

28,

 

147 “The proposed mix of and reflects the more

 

esources exceeds the normal 300 per cent of the quota limit of financing under the credit tranche:

 

 

protracted nature of Argenti ancing problem” Ibid, 26. “About $3 billion of IMF support was made available immediately and three additional
tranches of about $1.3 billion were planned to be released during the remainder of 2001 in the context of subsequent reviews. The program sought to
bolster the prospects for economic growth through gradual fiscal consolidation (...) and various structural measures,” through among other things.
elimination of tax disincentives, continued implementation of already approved labour market reforms and deregulation of key sectors, See Lessons from
the Crisis, 35. The IMF support of January 2001 became known as the “blindaje,” that is the “armour plating” of the peso against runs on the peso aimed
at the devaluation or destabilization of Argentina’s currency.

148 Lessons from the Crisis, 35.

149 S&P from BB to B+ and Moody’s from BI to B2, ibid, 48.

150 See Blustein, 123

151 Continental has referred to this public statement as having been an element for CNA’s decision not to transfer liquid funds out of Argentina. In April,

Minister Cavallo had sent to Congress a bill proposing to include the euro in addition to the US dollar in the Convertibility Law.

48

114. On May 21, 2001, the IMF completed its planned Third Review of Argentina’s
Stand-By Arrangement, at a point when the Fund had an outstanding credit of nearly
SDR 5.8 billion and another SDR 6.8 billion scheduled purchase under the arrangement
in place, making Argentina the third largest debtor to the IMF. The Review contained
both favorable and critical evaluations. The IMF underlined “the favorable developments
that followed the agreement on the program and financing package in January” which
were however interrupted in early March by a new crisis. The principal catalyst was
evidence of a major deterioration in the fiscal performance, but internal political
disagreements and increased uncertainty in international markets were contributing

e, 3
factors.'*

Amongst the negative developments, the Report mentioned the increase of the
spread on Argentine bonds, the decline in economic activity and the significance of the
deterioration in the federal government finances.'™ Positive developments mentioned
included the fact that the provincial government deficit for 2000 was slightly lower than
expected, and the improvement of the trade balance in 2000 and in the first quarter of
2001. The Review highlighted the revised economic program of Minister Cavallo,
praised the fact that “[t]he government re-affirmed its commitment to the fiscal targets of
the economic program for 2001;” noted the introduction in April 2001 of a financial
transaction tax “[t]o correct for the prospective large deviation and bring the fiscal
program back on track.”'*> The Review estimated that the new fiscal package has started
to show results, and that the new fiscal measures under the Fiscal Responsibility Law
“will contribute substantially to strengthen fiscal performance in 2002,” also in view of
the fact that the authorities attach great importance to improving the province’s finance
and “are continuing to work with provincial governments to secure a sustained
adjustment of their fiscal position, as contemplated in the federal fiscal pact signed last

November.”

152 IMB, Third Review, 20.
153 IMF, Third Review, 3. “Two thirds of the deviation resulted from a revenue shortfall, in turn explained about evenly by weaker than expected
economic activity and a deterioration in tax compliance,” ibid, 5.

154 The tables included in the IMF, Third Review, at 9, showed the substantive decrease of peso bank deposits, especially after January 2001 against the
continuous increase of US dollar denominated deposits from the beg

155 Ibid, 12.

 

1g of 2000 to January 2001, followed by a modest decrease thereafter.

156 Ibid, 15-16. The Review mentions that in December 2000, “with technical support of the Fund, a strategy was laid out to strengthen tax collection,

and the reform of the pension and health insurance systems that had been hampered by judicial challenges.

49

115. The Review also praised the initiatives taken by the Argentinean Government
within the Competitiveness Law. The IMF Staff’s concluding appraisal was that “[t]he
government has responded to this latest crisis with an effort commensurate with the
gravity of the situation” and regarded “this strategy — consistent with the objectives of the
program supported by the Stand-By Arrangement.”'*” The News Brief of May 21, 2001
announcing the positive completion of the Fund’s Third Argentina Review ended with
the following paragraph: “‘[i]n adopting the new measures, the Argentine authorities
have responded promptly and effectively in difficult circumstances. The strengthened

program deserves the strong support of the international community” KGhler said.'°*

116. At the beginning of June 2001 Argentina’s authorities announced the completion
of the “mega-swap” entailing the voluntary exchange of external Governmental bonds of
a face value of U.S.$29.5 million for longer-term instruments.’ In July 2001, Minister
Cavallo announced a drastic program of fiscal adjustment (zero-deficit plan), which was
promptly approved by Congress. “But by the time the law was approved by Congress at
the end of July, spreads between the peso and U.S. dollar-denominated interest rates had
reached 1,500-2,000 basis points,”"° while the Government was paying a yield of 14.1%

161

to place U.S.$827 million of 90-day paper.” Risk agencies further lowered Argentina’s

debt rate. A likely U.S.$8 billion increase of the Stand-By was announced by the IMF in

 

157 Specifically praised at p. 21 are the authorities’ initiatives “to put in place a package of significant revenue and expenditure measures to bring the

 

program targets” and the fact that they “have introduced a number of tax incenti

 

public finance back to a path consistent with t sand regulatory

 

 

changes aimed at promoting a recovery of investment and sustainable output growth.” It is perhaps striking that ex post facto the IMF, Evaluation Report,
at 5, criticizes “the weak implementation of the program in early 2001 and the adoption — without consultation with the Fund ~ of a series of controversial
‘and market-shaking measures by the authorities after March 2001.”

158 Horst Kohler, currently President of the Federal Republic of Germany, was at the time the Director General of the IMP. In retrospect, the IMF Study

 

Lessons from the Crisis, Appendix Il, dismisses the Third Review as “reprofiling the path for the federal government deficit target during 2001 to

 

‘accommodate the de

   

ons observed during the first quarter.
159 Despite the high turnover of bondholders who participated, the “mega-swap” did not reassure the market and was criticized, especially ex post facto,
for not having helped Argentina to improve its ability to service its debt, while having burdened it with the costs of such an operation, see Blustein, 125

ff; Lessons from the Crisis, 36. Also in June 2001 a package of tax and trade measures, including a trade compensation mechanism for exporters and

 

   

importers of non-energy goods was announced by Minister Cavallo. “This was part of ‘a number of measures aimed at improving competitiveness, with

 

litte effect other than to erode confidence and widen spread further’,” Lessons from Crisis, 35.

160 Cf. Lessons from the Crisis, 36. However, according to a paper of March 25, 2002 by M. Mussa of the Institute for International Economics (and.

 

 

former high official of the IMF), Argentina and the Fund: From Triumph to Tragedy, 29 (Cl 3) “With the Argentine economy already

 
 

in deep recession and spiralling downwards under the pressure of crushing! wssive additional fiscal tightening needed to achieve

 

a zero del

 

t was neither politically acceptable nor economically sensible. By the summer of 2001, the Argentine government was clearly trapped with
no viable avenue of escape.”
161 This corresponds to a spread of about 1,000 basis point (or 10%) in respect of the U.S. dollar, see Lessons from the Crisis, 36, while the even greater

spread between the peso rate and the U.S. dollar rate, notwithstanding convertibility, evidenced the perceived country risk for Argentina, Blustein, 136.

50

August and approved on September 7, 2001, augmenting the total to U.S.$21.6 billion,
while the IMF positively completed its Fourth Review, which entailed a commitment to

disburse further funds in November 2001.

117. As mentioned above, from the end of 2000 and in the course of 2001, Argentina
passed several laws aimed at adopting the structural reforms that the IMF had asked
Argentina to undertake in accordance with the Stand-By conditions. These related to

budgetary discipline against the deficit,!

increases in taxation, fiscal discipline
(including the provinces), labor market flexibility (i.e. reducing employees’ protection
under labor legislation in place), reforming social security and controlling the pensions’
costs, increasing the competitiveness of enterprises and helping exporters. Many of these
provisions were not or could not be carried out effectively, or did not yield the expected
results. Thus tax revenues continued to fall, due also to the economic crisis, while the
promised reform of the central governments revenue-sharing agreement with the
provinces was not concluded.'® The planed labor market reform which entailed
addressing labor market rigidities through “the adjustment of real wages”! was not
completed; on the other hand widespread strikes had taken place specifically to protest
against harsh spending cuts. Many of these reforms, recommended by the Fund consistent
with a market-oriented approach to the structural changes deemed appropriate for a
country like Argentina, met with widespread social opposition, to the point that some
reforms were blocked by the courts.'® The domestic economy of Argentina - which was

in a state of recession since early 2000 - and hence the population of Argentina, had to

162 On July 29, the Congress passed the “Zero Deficit Law” requiring a balanced budget by the forth quarter of 2001; see Hornbeck, 3 (Claimant's doc.
C-189).

163 However under the zero-deficit law Minister Cavallo had cut federal payments to the provinces, leaving them without funds to make necessary
payments and leading some of them to issue their own currency, the patacon, “a disturbing sign of economic anarchism,” Blustein, 161. After the crisis,
comments that “[tJhe most glaring omission was in the fiscal area, where the IMF

as to the IMF policies towards Argentina, Lessons from the Crisis

     

condoned repeated slippages of debt and deficit targets.” Other commentators point out however that the Average Public Revenue ~ GDP Ratios for
Argentina in 1990-2002 (a little more than 20%), although lower than the ratio for industrialized countries, was higher than Brazil's, IMF, World
Economic Outlook, September 2003,

164 This is the terminology used by Lessons from the Crisis, 32, hinting at wage reduction. In any case, the zero-deficit plan entailed cuts in

 

governmental salaries and pensions of up to 139%

165 See the successful judicial challenges to the reforms of the pension and health insurance system mentioned in the IMF Third Review, 17.

51

bear the increasingly heavy burden of adjustment to the maintenance of the exchange rate

and convertibility. 166

118. In fact, throughout this period, the Government of Argentina showed and declared
a staunch commitment to maintaining the convertibility regime in all its features (as was
expected by the international financial community). This was a fundamental element of

the policy of stability pursued by the IMF in agreement with Argentina.'””

119. As decided and announced in August 2001, “[d]espite concerns about the lack of
political support for the measures that would be needed to achieve the zero-deficit target,
the IMF agreed in early September of 2001 to support the new program,” increasing the
support by U.S.$8 billion, disbursing U.S.$5 billion immediately (pledging another

U.S.$3 billion in support of prospective debt restructuring).'®

120. It was in this context that Argentina’s Congress passed the “Intangibility Law,”
promulgated on September 24, 2001, providing, as described concisely by the Claimant,
that “the government would not alter terms of deposits in the banking system.” In
emphatic terms, the law proclaimed in Art. 1 that all deposits in pesos or in foreign
currency were considered “intangible,” that is, the State was prohibited, in all cases, from
changing the terms agreed between the depositors and the financial institution, exchange
them with public debt instruments or other public assets, extend their terms, modify the

agreed interest rate, change the currency of the debt. Art. 3 declared the law to be “of

166 See P. Krugman, Editorial, Reckonings; A Cross of Dollars, New York Times, November 7, 2001: “{u}nfortunately, that old-time economic religion,

   

nce on monetary rectitude at the expense of every other consideration ... more than anything el

 

responsible

 

looming catastrophe ... But austerity has not brought recovery. On the contrary it has worsened the recession, increased social tension and

 

further reduced confidence. The natural answer is to remove the straitjacket: let float...” (Argentina's doc. RA-54). S

 

also Mussa, 49, “it is my

  

view that the Argentine’s government basic decision to combine efforts at macroeconomic stabilization with market-oriented reforms that reversed

 

decades of interventionist policies and protectionism was the right policy approach ... and the spectacular collapse in 2001 is due to the failure of

implementing this strategy sufficiently vigorously ... Others, however, may be inclined to the view that the policies of the so-called Washington

 

Consensus are fundamentally wrong and were doomed from the start to produce a disaster in Argentina.”
167 The IMF Evaluation Report, 21, notes: “repeated public statements by the IMF supportive of Argentina's convertibility regime.” Blustein, 136,
considers that it was thanks to the official visit by U.S. Undersecretary Taylor to Buenos Aires on 3, August 2001, when he visited Argentina's President
at Casa Rosada, that “[{Jhe stage was being set for another IMF rescue that would attempt to preserve convertibility and keep Argentina from violating its
obligations to creditors.”

168 See IMF Evaluation Report, 9. According to Mussa, 30, “[njot only was the procedure unusual, the outcome ~ a Fund disbursement of over $ 6
billion ... with a pledge of $3 billion more to support an unspecified debt restructuring — was extraordinary both in its size and in the lack of reasonable

justification.”

52

public order;” the private rights covered by its Art. 1 “shall be considered acquired rights
99169

and protected under Art. 17 of the Nation’s Constitution.
121. In the mid-term congressional elections held on Octoberl4, 2001 the ruling
coalition obtained less than 25% of the votes; and the opposition Peronist party won
control of both Chambers. In the same month the rating agencies downgraded
Argentina’s debt twice. On October 28, 2001, Minister Cavallo announced that he would
seek voluntary restructuring of all government debt, which was in part carried out

throughout November 2001 170

122. Withdrawal of deposits from the banks developed however at a growing pace and
capital flight increased.'"' While there had been a sustained inflow of foreign direct
investment into Argentina in the years from 1997 to 2000, with a peak in 1999, the flow
almost halted in 2001.'” The fall in official reserves continued downwards to a level

‘3 Tn the meantime the

barely enough to cover domestic currency in circulation.
dollarization of the economy amplified even more,'™ since the public sought refuge in
dollar denominated deposits, savings and financial assets. The spread between “‘on-shore

dollar” and peso interest rate, which was no more than 14% to 2 percentage points on

 

169 See Law 25.466 “Intangibilidad de los Depositos.” Its interesting to note that this legal enactment, on which the Claimant relies and which was put
at as the basis of Argentina's Supreme Court decisions of 2002 and 2003 (holding the Corralito and the Corralon as unconstitutional encroachments on
private property, see footnote 410 hereunder) is nowhere mentioned in the economic literature as having had any relevance or impact within the
management of the economic crisis. Nor is there any mention that the confidence of the public had been thereby reinforced. The continuing flight of
capital out of Argentina would rather point to the contrary.

170 This

 

\s carried out by Decree 1387 of November 1, which among various measures to stimulate economic activity and employment and to reduce

 

the cost of the public debt, provided (at Art. 17 ff.) for the voluntary conversion (swap) of instruments of public debt (bonds) for Guaranteed Loans

(GGL) and/or Guaranteed Bonds (in which Continental participated). At the end of November 2001, the authoriti

 

announced the completion of
domestic debt swaps involving $41 millions (face value) of government bonds and $10 billions at the provincial level.

171 Already in July 2001, USSS billion, or 7% of the total deposits had flown out from the banks, Blustein, 136.

172. US. $ mil 23988 in 1999, 10418 in 2000, 2166 in 2001 (Claimant's doc. C-392),

173 Mussa, 34. Alread!

 

 

at the time of the visit to Arge

 

of U.S. Undersecretary of the Treasury for international affairs to Buenos Aires on August 3,

 

2001, “reserves totalled $20.4 billion, down from $28.8 billion at the beginning of July. At that rate of decline, convertibility was fa
becau:

ing a serious threat,

   

1e system required an ample cushion of reserves to cover the supply of pesos ,” Blustein, 136. “On November 16, following a steady decline that
gained momentum in late October, the reserves dropped at $18.44 billion, almost exactly the same level as immediately before the IMF replenished the

central banks reserves with a

    

bursement of nearly $5 billion in early September ... the inescapable conclusion is that most of the depletion could be

attributed to the st

 

ily inci

 

ing demand for dollars in October and November by people and fin

  

exchanging pesos for greenbacks, many of whom
were shipping the money abroad.” Ibid, 171

174 The degree of dollarization (percentage in dollars of the total banks deposits) went up from 64.3% to 73.6% between the end of 2000 and the end of
2001: see data on percentage of Argentine pesos in U.S. dollars, taken from Eduardo Levy Yeyati, Financial Dollarization: Evaluating the Consequences

(2006) (Claimant's doc. C-382).

53

average prior to 2001 jumped to 40 points in the first part of 2001 while the sovereign

debt spread skyrocketed.'>

123. The general economic situation deteriorated notwithstanding the IMF’s assistance:
actual GDP declined 4.5% in 2001 while the IMF program had forecasted an increase;!”°
unemployment rate grew at 18.3%. By the end of 2001 “both the economy and the public
finances were in deep crisis.”'”” The GDP would have dropped 4.5%; the primary and
overall fiscal position ended up 3% weaker than anticipated in September; the debt-to-

GDP ratio rose above 60%.'*

124. On November 6, 2001, S&P lowered Argentina’s long-term sovereign debt from
CC to SD (Selective Default), thereby implying that the Government was already not in
the condition to meet some of its financial obligations.'” A growing number of
commentators outside Argentina, notably in the international financial press,'*° hinted at
the impossibility for Argentina to maintain the convertibility regime. At the end of this
month the peso started to devalue in the free market of Montevideo. Facing a substantial

run on deposits,'*!

on December 1, 2001 the Government enacted Decree 1570
(Corralito), freezing deposits in the banking system (only pesos 250 withdrawals per

week were admitted) and prohibiting transfers out of the country.

125. This was the first of a series of Measures that Argentina took while the crisis was
developing, culminating in the devaluation of the peso, the pesification of dollar-
denominated assets in Argentina and the default on public debt and its rescheduling, all
of which impacted adversely on the Claimant’s assets, and which it has challenged as

being in breach of the BIT (with the exclusion of the devaluation per se).

175 See Lessons from the Crisis, table at 25,

176 See Lessons from the Crisis, table at 27.

  

177 Ses

 

essons from the Crisis, 37.

178 See Lessons from the Crisis, 36-37.

   

Hornbeck, “November 6: Argentina conducts a second debt swap, exchan;

 

1g $60 billion of bonds with an average interest rate of 11-12% for

 

extended maturity notes carrying only 7% interest rate. International bond rating agencies considered it an effective default.” This is the restructuring in

 

which CNA participated exchanging its bonds for GGL.
180 See for instance Krugman, quoted at footnote 166.
181 On November 30 “A run on the banks b

with central bank re falling by $2 billion in one day.” Hornbeck, CRS-4. According to Lessons

  

 

from the Crisis, 36, “[t]he crisis broke with a run of private sectors deposits, which fell by more than $3.6 million (6 per cent of the deposit base) during

November 28-30.

54

126. The Corralito brought about immediate and severe hardship in the general
population which relied largely on cash for every day transactions, as is the practice in
Argentina’s economy. The crisis worsened also in the social and political dimension. On
December 13, 2001, the Government announced that the unemployment rate had reached
a record level of 18%; trade unions called for nationwide strikes. Supermarket looting
began in various locations; and rioting spread to major cities. The Government declared a
state of siege; and Minister Cavallo resigned. Finally, on December 20, 2001 President de

La Ria “resigns in the wake of continuous rioting, leaving 28 people dead.”

127. It is worth here recording the personal accounts of Judge Augusto Belluscio who
lived through this turbulent period of Argentina’s crisis and appeared as a witness before
the Tribunal. Judge Belluscio was and remains one of the most distinguished and
respected jurists in Argentina. He was an impressive expert witness at the hearing. As a
law professor, he was first appointed a judge in 1965 and served on the Supreme Court of
Argentina from 1983 until his retirement in 2005. In early January 2002, Judge Belluscio
was on leave; but he was called back to the Supreme Court for urgent judicial meetings in
litigation associated with the crisis. It is best to give his account in his own words, as

recorded in the hearing's transcript in English translation:

In the middle of the meeting I received a phone call from the city of Cordoba,
where my in-laws lived, to inform me that a horde or a mob had attacked my in-
laws' home thinking that I was there. There were shouts, "The judge should come
out, the judge should come out," so my father-in-law went out to see what was
happening, and they thought I was him [i.e. Judge Belluscio], and they began to
throw pieces of stone which didn't hit him, but which did do harm to the facade of
the house. He was with - one of his sons was with him, one of my brothers-in-law.
My brother-in-law went out. He tried a dialogue with the mob and get them to

see that it wasn't the judge who was in the house because evidently they wanted to

182 See Hornbeck, CRS-4,

55

attack me, and the response was that he was attacked, he was beaten, and he

suffered a fracture in one finger. Well, this obviously upset me a great deal [8

128. It requires very little imagination to see that if Judge Belluscio had in fact been
present at the family home, this incident could have produced much more serious

consequences for one of Argentina's most senior judicial figures.

(ii) The actions undertaken by CNA / Continental as to its investments in 2001

129. Continental and CNA did not stand idle while the crisis unrolled and the likelihood
of some kind of exchange and financial restriction increased in the course of 2001.
Before addressing the steps undertaken by CNA and Continental, it is useful to describe
the activity carried out by CNA and the nature of its investments and other funds that it

intended to protect against the associated risks.

130. As explained by the Claimant,'** CNA ART, like other insurance companies,
maintains a portfolio of invested securities in order to earn a return on its capital, reserves
and other funds. CNA has a history of making conservative investments, so that its
“portfolio consists mainly of low-risk assets, such as cash deposits, treasury bills and
government bonds.” These investments derive from its business activity, its capital,
reserves and undistributed profits. The proceeds of its insurance business drive from the
underwriting of its policies; the clients of CNA are business companies that satisfy their
statutory and contractual obligations to cover their employees against worker’s risks.
CNA’s insurance operations are regulated by two Argentine state agencies: the
Superintendent of Insurance (SSN), which regulates the financial aspects of the business,
while the handling of workers’ compensation claims and services (such as medical
treatment, etc.) is regulated by the Superintendent of Workers Compensation of the
Ministry of Labor (SRT). More specifically, SSN lays down criteria for insurance
companies such as CNA concerning the ratio of reserves they have to hold and the types

of investment they may make.

183 See Transcript of the Hearing of December 1, 2006, p. 1082.

184 Claimant's Memorial, para.15 ff.

56

131. The business of CNA was successful. As explained by Claimant, its premiums
“have consistently been among the highest in the market. CNA ART also maintained the
highest reserves and investments per insured worker in the market.”!** Furthermore,
“[p]rior to March 2001, CNA ART’s investment portfolio was primarily in assets
denominated in Argentinean pesos. At the time, pesos were fully convertible to U.S.
dollars at a one to one exchange rate. However, CNA ART’s management was concerned
about the risk of devaluation. As a result, CNA ART’s senior management prepared an
analysis of the options available to CNA ART to hedge the risk of devaluation. These

options consisted of:

i) maintaining the portfolio in peso denominated assets, which were earning a

much higher return than comparable dollar denominated assets;

ii) transferring all of CNA ART’s assets in excess of minimum capital

requirements out of Argentina to be held by CNA; and

iii) moving CNA ART’s investment portfolio to lower return U.S. dollar assets

with greater credit worthiness.”'*°

132. As to the option of moving capital out of Argentina, “CNA ART's management
made a recommendation to its American controlling shareholder that it should not
transfer assets out of Argentina at that time, but that it should choose to invest assets
within Argentina in low risk U.S. dollar denominated assets.”'8’? CNA management
accepted this recommendation so that its investment agent CADISA (Citicorp
Administradora de Inversiones S.A.) “was then instructed to liquidate peso denominated
cash deposits, treasury bills and bonds as they matured and to reinvest the proceeds in
USS. dollar denominated assets.”'** Thus, “CNA ART’s policy of shifting its portfolio to

USS. dollar denominated assets involved a deliberate choice to forego the higher yields of

185 Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 16, footnote 33,

 

186 Claimant's Memorial, paras. 19-20.
187 Claimant's Memorial, para. 21
188 Claimant's Memorial, para. 22. The Claimant explains further that, in addition, CADISA was instructed to move cash deposits out of Argentinian

‘owned banks and into eit sant

 

the local subsidiaries of international banks or, preferably, into full branches of international banks. These steps were

 

 

to improve the credit worthiness of its investment portfolio and to protect it from currency risk and credit risk. Cash deposits at full branch banks earned a

lower return than at other banks but there was little credit risk associated with them (Claimant's Memorial, paras. 22-24).

s7

peso-denominated assets in favor of the greater capital security of U.S. dollar assets.” 189

As against capital flight, this was of course a socially responsible policy by Continental

and CNA.

133. As already mentioned, on November 1, 2001, through Decree 1387, Argentina
announced an offer to restructure part of its debt by, amongst other things, offering
certain bondholders the opportunity to exchange their bonds for Government Guaranteed

Loans or “GGLs” (prestamos garantizados).'”°

134. As explained by the Claimant, '! “[a]lthough the GGLs had longer maturities and
lower interest rates than the Argentine government bonds held by CNA ART, there were
a number of advantages associated with entering into a “swap” whereby bonds would be

exchanged for GGLs. These advantages included the following:

i) the GGLs had lower credit risk as they were secured by revenue from a specific
federal tax on financial transactions that was not shared with Argentina’s

provincial governments;

ii) in the event of default by Argentina, unpaid tax obligations could be set off
against amounts owing by Argentina for its failure to pay capital and interest on

the loans;

iii) in the event of default by Argentina, GGL holders could re-swap their GGLs for

the original bonds exchanged in the swap;

iv) the face value of the GGLs could be used to satisfy minimum capital requirements
whereas only the market value could be considered for other securities. This
feature would allow CNA ART to liquidate its other securities and use the

proceeds elsewhere; and

189 Claimant's Memorial, para. 24
190 For details see Lessons from the Criss, 36

191 Claimant's Memorial, para. 26 ff.

58

v) Argentina provided various tax incentives including the ability to write off losses

associated with the original bonds, exempting any capital gains from taxes and

exempting interest payments on the GGLs from taxes.

1192

135. CNA decided to take advantage of this offer. “On November 29, 2001, CNA

instructed CADISA to effect the swap of the following Argentine government bonds for

GGLs:
Bond Face Value (U.S.$)
Global 2017 6,240,000
Bonte 2 6,317,000
Bonte 3 7,900,000
FRB 11,368,000

Guaranteed Loan
Tasa Fija GLI7

Tasa Fija Bonte 02
Tasa Fija Bonte 03

Tasa Variable FRB

The GGLs were denominated in U.S. dollars and their governing law was

Argentinean law. This debt swap allowed CNA ART to maintain its portfolio in

the same U.S. currency while increasing its legal security.'°° By early December

2001, CADISA had largely completed the re-balancing of CNA ART investment

portfolio. The investment portfolio at that time included the following assets

denominated in U.S. dollars:

i) Argentine Government Guaranteed Loans contracts totaling U.S.$17, 295, 320

at market value. CNA ART held four contracts as follows:'"4

Guaranteed Loan Contract (GGL)

GGL Tasa Fija Global 2017

192 This was provided by Decree 1646 of December 12, 2001 (see particualrly Annex I “Contrato de prestamo garantizado” Claimant's doc. C-19.

Witness Statement of Cristian Samitier at para. 22),

193 See Claimant’s Memorial, paras. 27-28.

Market Value

2,966,080

194 GGL official name in Spanish is “Prestamos Garantizados del Gobierno.” These GGLs carried an interest rate of approximately 7%, (see Claimant

Post-Hearing Brief, 33).

59

GGL Tasa Fija Bonte 02 4,417,294
GGL Tasa Fija Bonte 03 4,385,322
GGL Tasa Variable FRB 5,526,624

ii) Argentine Government Treasury Bills (LETEs) totaling U.S.$2,805,000 at

market value. LETEs had much shorter maturities than the GGL contracts. °°

iii) Term Deposits (“CDs”) totaling U.S.$ 63,510,278: these deposits were held at
a range of full branch international banks and subsidiaries of international

banks; and
iv) AUS. dollar cash account at Citibank also used for operational purposes.”

136. The Claimant points out that it thus held a “conservative portfolio of investments,”

92% of which was expressed in U.S. dollar-denominated assets. 196

c) The Measures adopted by Argentina during the crisis, specifically those challenged by
the Claimant

137. In view of the distinct nature and effect of the various Measures, as well as their
separate impact on the assets of CNA, the different allegations of breach of the BIT that
the Claimant raises in respect of each of them and the defense of necessity raised by
Argentina, it is useful for the subsequent legal analysis to distinguish the Measures
according to their nature, features and effects. To that end, it is necessary to distinguish

between:

i) Measures that blocked deposits (temporary bank freeze), severely curtailing the

right to withdraw money (namely Decree 1570 of December 1, 2001, Corralito);

ii) Measures that prohibited the transfer of funds abroad and their exchange in freely

convertible and transferable currencies (same Decree 1570);

195 More ally CNA bought the first LETEs (Letra del Tesoro 90 Vto 15/03/02, that is Treasury Bills 90 due March 15, 2002) on September 25,

  

2001 and the second one on October 18, 2001 see Claimant's Memorial, para. 45. LETEs had been issued under Resolution 4/5 of January 2001

196 Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 33. In contrast 21% of CNA’s portfolio was in dollars in July 2001 (see Claimant's doc. C-24),

60

iii) Measures that terminated the peso convertibility and its pegging to the U.S. dollar
at the fixed exchange rate 1:1 (Emergency Law 25,561 of January 6, 2002 and
Decree 260/02);

iv) Measures that rescheduled term deposits and reduced interest rates (Resolution 6

of January 9, “Corralon”);

v

Pesification (that is forced conversion) of outstanding dollar-denominated
contracts and private or governmental debt, at a rate of 1.40 peso for each nominal
U.S. dollar as to the latter and financial deposits, while in all other cases
conversion occurred at par (Decree 214 of February 3, Decree 471 of March 8,

Decree 644 of April 18, 2002);

vi) Default on and unilateral rescheduling of governmental debt, made official by

Res. 73 of April 25, 2002.

138. Decree 1570 of December 1, 2001 (Corralito), limited by Art. 2(a) cash
withdrawals from bank accounts to pesos 250 or U.S.$250 a week. The Decree, which
was declared to be “of public order,” also prohibited by Art. 2(b) any transfers of funds
out of Argentina with the exception of certain current transactions.'°’ The Decree was
presented as a short term “emergency measure” until the conversion of the public debt
under Decree 1387 would be completed, both in order to avoid any instability in the level
of deposits in the financial system “that could imperil its intangibility recognized by Law
25,466” (the Intangibility Law), and to react to “the fall in the total level of bank deposits
that has manifested itself since February of the current year.” In fact, the blocking was

still in force when devaluation and pesification intervened.

139. Transactions between banks were not prevented by the Corralito. Moreover, the
Central Bank was empowered to issue general and specific derogations; and several were

in fact issued both as to cash withdrawals and foreign exchange transactions. A number

197 The Central Bank (BCRA) was empowered to authorize certain other transactions with the exterior and did so in the following months. From

September 2002 onwards, exports of funds under certain ceilings have been gradually admitted (Claimant’s Memorial, para. 34),

61

of derogations concerned commercial transactions, including transfers for insurance

companies, in order to allow the carrying on of normal business transactions.'*

140. The aim of the Corralito was to prevent further withdrawals from banks and thus
to preserve the stability of the banking system. It was also meant to avoid further runs on
the foreign exchange reserves of the Central Bank. This did not prevent Argentina -
which had become unable to access international credit markets, especially after the
withdrawal of the IMF’s support — from announcing on December 7, 2001 that it could
not guarantee payment of foreign debt, thereby evidencing Argentina’s de facto

199

default.""” While the pesos were de facto inconvertible and were devaluated on exchange

markets outside Argentina, the Ministry of the Economy announced the suspension of all

payments on the external debt on December 24, 2001.7

141. After the resignation of President De La Rtia on December 20, 2001 and the
unsuccessful appointment by Congress of three successive presidents between December
20 and December 30, Senator E. Duhalde was elected President by the Congress to
complete the presidential term, and assumed formal power on January 1, 2002. On
January 6, 2002, “Public Emergency and Reform of the Exchange Regime” Law 25.561
was enacted. The law proclaimed a public emergency in conformity with Art. 76 of the
National Constitution “with respect to social, economic, administrative, financial and

exchange matters,” terminated the peso convertibility system and granted extensive
extraordinary powers in the above matters to the Government. 201 The application of the
Intangibility Law 25,466 was expressly suspended. Articles 617, 619 and 623 of the Civil
Code on monetary obligations were expressly maintained in the text of the Convertibility

Law but “with the exceptions and objectives established in the present law.” Art. 19 of

198 See Arg

 

joc. RA-IIT (

 

Iso footnote 223 and 305). Based on the “Corralon,” by Res. 28, 580 of February 11, 2002 the Superintendent of

 

Insurance (SSN) authorized insurance companies in the workmen’s compensation sector to withdraw up to one million pesos monthly from their cash

deposits for use in their busi

 

operations. (Claimant’s Memorial, para. 41, C!

 

at's doc. C-26). As to derogations from the prohibition of transfers

   

abroad, contrary to Argentina’s position, the Claimant considers that the evidence “demonstrate that the Central Bank did not authorize transfers of any
kind between December 1, 2001 and the end of January 2002,” while thereafter authorizations “were limited to transfers related to foreign trade or other
irrelevant categories,” Post-Hearing Reply, para. 33.

199 See Hornbeck, 4

 

 

200 Comunicado de Prensa (see Argentina's doc. RA 119)

 

201 Those powers were granted until December 10, 2003 but the Law and the emergency regime has been extended several times, last time on December

10, 2007,

62

the Law stated: “[t]he present law is of public order. Nobody can invoke against it

irrevocably acquired rights. Any contrary provision to its content is hereby derogated.”

142. The convertibility regime was initially replaced by a dual exchange system based
on an official exchange rate of 1.4 pesos per dollar for public sector and most trade-
related transactions; all other transactions would take place at prevailing market rates.
Effective February 11, 2002, the dual system was abolished (Decree 260/02). When the
market opened for the first time under a unified regime on February 11, 2002, the
exchange rate depreciated to 1.8 peso per dollar. The peak devaluation was reached on
June 25, 2002 (almost 4 pesos to a dollar). Later, the exchange rate stabilized around

three pesos for one U.S. dollar?”

143. Three days after the enactment of the Emergency Law,” Resolution 6 of January
9, 2002 (““Corralon’’) affected all demand term deposits within the banking system, both
in pesos and dollars, rescheduling maturity dates and reducing interest rates. 204 CNA‘s

term deposits with various banks were subject to this Measure.

144. On February 3, 2002, Decree 214 provided that “all obligations to pay money
expressed in dollars are hereby converted into pesos at one to one” (i.e. compulsory
pesification). However, whilst this applied to contracts between private persons and to
debts owed to financial institutions, dollar deposits within the banking system were
converted at the rate of 1.40 peso for each dollar (i.e. “asymmetric” pesification), plus the
granting of an indexation to compensate for future inflation (“CER”). This concerned

also CNA’s cash deposits with its banks. The Government intervened massively to

 

202

 

1¢ Lessons from the Crisis, 38. See the Table of exchange rates (Claimant's doc. C-52),
203 Based on Art. 9 of the Emergency Law, the Government issued on January 24, 2002 a Decree freezing utility tariffs, a Measure which is at issue in
several ICSID arbitrations brought against Argentina under various BITs.

204 According to the Claimant “[plursuant to Resolution 6, the maturities of CNA’s deposits would be extended to September 23, 2003 and thereafter be
paid out in 24 monthly instalments. In addition, the rescheduling also eliminated the interest rates on the deposits and imposed an annual interest rate of

2% to be paid monthly,”

 

lemorial, par. 36). This “freezing” was eventually lifted in part starting from 2003. As to the authorization to

    

insurance companies to use their liquid funds for business operations, see footnote 198 above.

 

205 According to Lessons from the Crisis, 38, “WU

   

measure was intended to protect firms and households with foreign-currency-denominated debt, but
it merely shifted the burden of the devaluation to the banking system ~ and ultimately to the taxpayer as banks would need to be issued compensation

bonds.” S

 

also Mussa, 36: “[t]he exchange rate for the conversion of dollar-denominated bank deposits, however, set a significantly higher value for
such deposits than the market exchange rate applied for the conversion of dotlar-denominated bank loans — implying huge capital losses and deep

insolveney for Argentine banks.”

63

support the banks in the asymmetric pesification. This scheme would have brought the
banks otherwise to bankruptcy, since they had to “pay back” to depositors 1.40 pesos for

each dollar, while their credits were converted at 1:1. 206

145. On March 8, 2002, Decree 471 converted also all U.S.-dollar denominated
government debt, “the law applicable to which is only Argentine law,” into pesos
(pesification) at the above-mentioned rate of 1 U.S. dollar to 1.4 pesos. The U.S. dollar
denominated LETEs and GGLs held by CNA were thereby converted into pesos. The

pesified instruments were to be indexed at the CER rate and would earn a reduced
207

 

interest.” ’ One effect of this pesification at 1:1.40 on financial holdings was that, since
the peso value of these holdings had increased by 40%, the balance sheet of CNA showed
a capital gain, as was the case of all companies in the same situation. Continental
complains that, although “the value of assets which had been converted was actually less

in real U.S. dollars terms,” this capital gain was taxed at the statutory rate. 208

146. Decree 644 of April 18, 2002 requested the holders of GGLs to accept their

conversion in pesos and a reduction in their original security in order to receive

209

payment.” Holders that did not accept these conditions would receive back the bonds

they had handed in for the swap.”"” These bonds, being in default, CNA did not accept

 

206 The Government issued bonds to banks amounting to about 9 billion pesos, contributing to the increase in public debt from 63% of GDP at end-2001

to about 135% at end-2002, Lessons from the Crisis, 38. According to Blustein, 192, the 1.40 rate was the result of an understanding between th

 

nit and Argentina’s busines:

 

tors, striking a balance between the latter’s interests and the expectations of depositors, “in order to appease

 

 

imant’s Memorial, para. 44. The Claimant points out that “Argentina failed to pay even these reduced amounts when the LETE became due

 

‘The LETEs matured on March 15, 2002, but CNA ART did not receive payment on that day. ‘The default on these LETEs continues on this day”

(ct

nnt’s Memorial, para. 45).

 

208 See Claimant's Memorial, paras. 42-43. Continental submits that: “[t)his additional tax was caused directly by Argentina’s actions and would not

 

have been exigible but for Argentina’s actions” (see particularly Claimant’s Memorial, para. 43),
209 The preamble states i.a. that “[eJertain powers were delegated to the Executive Branch by Law N° 25,561, among other things to proceed to
reorganize the financial, bank and foreign exchange system to create the conditions towards a sustainable economic growth compatible with the

restructuring of the obligation in the course of execution,

 

fected by the new foreign exchange system in place” (English translation supplied by

Claimant, Claimant’s doc. C-31). Law 25.570 of February 27, 2002 had reorganized the financial relations between the Government and the Provinces,

  

by agreement between them, thus eliminating according to the Claimant the guarantee for the payment of the GGLs consisting of certain fiscal revenues,
from the “financial transaction tax” (Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 35).

210 This choice was provided under the original terms of the GGLs in case of default

64

this option; rather it instructed on May 20, CADISA to continue to hold the GGLs on
behalf of CNA. *!!

147. On April 25, 2002, Resolution 73 made the default of Argentina on its public debt
(with some exceptions) official, in that payment of the public debt of the national
government was thereby deferred to December 31, 2002 “or until financing thereof has
been completed if the latter is completed before that date.” 212 Although GGLs were not
subject to the deferral, interest payments due in April, May, June and July 2002 were

only made on August 8, 2002.71

B. Subsequent measures by Argentina in 2002-2003 relevant to the present dispute

148. Starting in the spring of 2002 the Government enacted various Measures aimed at
reestablishing normal conditions in the financial market. None of these Measures
reinstated the “status quo ante,” whilst nonetheless mitigating in some cases losses for
those concerned and representing some steps toward the reinstatement of an orderly
economic, monetary and financial situation on a new basis. These Measures failed to give
any sufficient satisfaction to CNA or Continental; on the contrary, certain of these
Measures are challenged by the Claimant as having caused further damage to its

subsidiary in breach of the BIT.

149. Decree 905 of May 31, 2002 offered dollar denominated bonds (BODEN 2012) in
exchange for the term deposit dollars that had been pesified by Decree 214. It also
provided a choice as to the receipt of BODEN 20127" for depositors in financial
institutions in distress, such as Scotiabank where CNA held term deposits. CNA opted for

converting these deposits into U.S.$ 4,470,900 worth of BODEN 2012. ?!°

150. CNA accepted instead “under protest” the terms of Decree 739 of March 28, 2003

that provided for an elaborate scheme of “partial thawing” of the bank freeze, after a

211 Claimant’s Memorial, para. 46.

212 Claimant's Memorial, para. 51, Claimant’s doc. C-32.

213 Claimant’s Memorial, para. 53.

214 BODEN 2012 stands for “Bonos de Gobierno Nacional en Dollares Estadounitenses Libor 2012.”

215 See Claimant's Memorial, para. 53 . At the same time the Claimant explains that it refused the opportunities offered to depositors to access their
deposits under Decrees 905 of May 31, 2002 and Decree 1836 of September 16, 2002, since this entailed in exchange to accept “unreasonably long-term

bonds” (Claimant’s Memorial, para. 55),

65

further rescheduling of 120 days, earning 2% interest, and the distribution of a BODEN
2013 “to compensate for the difference between the market exchange rate at the date of
the enactment of the Decree and the government imposed rate of 1.4 pesos to the dollar
adjusted by CER.””!° Continental complains that these bonds were not issued on the due
dates and that payments of the initial interest were delayed. It was only on February 11,
2004 that “the government issued BODENs for deposits at ten of the twelve banks at
which CNA had originally held its certificated of deposits” and paid interest in arrears.”!7
151. As to the LETEs, Argentina offered to restructure them through Decree 1735/04 in
December 2004 by offering a swap of these securities, as well as of several others also in
default, against newly issued securities, specifically GDP-linked derivative
instruments.”!* CNA did not accept this conversion, since it would have received in
exchange “only U.S.$ 0.30 per dollar and would have been required to waive its rights”
and to accept long maturities on bonds from a Government “that had demonstrated its

willingness to repeatedly default on its debt”?!

C. Relevant economic, financial and political developments in Argentina after the crisis

152. As mentioned above,” the social and economic crisis reached its apogee in the
second half of 2002, when more than half of the population where forced to live below
the poverty line. The situation improved slowly but progressively from the end of that
year onwards. Even two years later, in 2004, per capita GDP, adjusted for inflation,
remained about 13% below the 1998 level; and in dollar terms it was equivalent to minus
55%."

153. It is worth noting that ultimately the crisis did not affect the functioning of the
democratic constitutional order of Argentina beyond emergency measures enacted on the

basis of the Constitution. Civil liberties were not restricted, nor constitutional guarantees

216 Claimant's Memorial, para. 58.
217 Claimant's Memorial, para. 64.
218 Argentina's Counter-Memorial, paras. 717, 414; see Claimant's Reply, para. 78.

219 Claimant's Reply, para. 78. Argentina indicates that 76.15 % of the holders of eligible securities took part to the swap (Counter Memorial, par. 415).

 

According to Claimant (Claimant's Reply, para. 386) it has suffered as to LETEs losses of US$0.7 million due to pesification and of USS2.8 million “due
to the further default and revocation of contractual rights.”
220 See above para. 107.

221 See Blustein, 204.

66

suspended.”” This is apparent now; but it certainly could not be assumed in late 2001 and

2002.

154. On the other hand, while the crisis affected heavily the financial sector, inflicting
losses on depositors and effecting radical changes to binding contractual relations
resulting from devaluation, pesification, defaults and restructuring, it is also worth noting
that business activity went on without interference from the State, and that it
progressively adjusted to the new conditions, including import-export operations. Major
bankruptcies that had characterized previous economic crises in Argentina, notably those
affecting banks, did not take place after the Government supported the financial system in

the asymmetric pesification.

155. The above finding holds true for the insurance business and specifically for

CNA. CNA’s Annual Report as to June 30, 2003 224 states:

CNA ART has come out very reinforced both economically and financially from
the severe economic crisis that the country has suffered during the last years.
CNA ART enjoys a very solvable economic situation and a very comfortable
financial situation, with an extraordinary degree of liquidity. CNA ART has an
average investment of almost P. 850 for each insured. This amount is almost four
times the average for the other insurers of workmen risks. Moreover only 30% of
CNA ART investments are represented by public debt instruments, while the
market average as to this indicator amounts to almost 50% of the investment
papers. As to the average level of reserves per insured, CNA ART has about P.
270 that is more than the double than the other companies in the market. The net
assets of the Company at the closing of the financial amounts to P. 106,004,253,
so as to allow the company to present a substantial excess (superavit) in respect to

222 Notwithstandi al and public order consequences, the emergency situation proclaimed in Law 25,561 was limited to “social, economic,

 

‘administrative and financial matters.”
223 On the basis of the authorization for withdrawals by insurance companies (Res. 28,580 of February 11, 2002), from April 2002 to March 2003 “CNA
was able to withdraw 10.5 million pesos in total from funds that were originally held by CNA ART in dollar-denominated CDs” (Claimant's Memorial
para. 41).

224 CNA ART Financial Statement, June 30, 2003, at pages 2212-2213 (English translation by the Tribunal). As to the evolution of CNA’s earnings

through the crisis see also footnote 393.

67

the minimum capital, which amounts at said date to 102,626,233, after having the
company obtained during the business year an after taxes profit of P. 39.531.719.
The level of investments of the Company at the closing of the financial year
amounts to P. 195.602.044. The level of reserves and of technical commitments

amounts to P.62.283.313.

156. Towards the end of 2002, Argentina also fell in arrears with its obligations owed to
multilateral financial institutions. Notwithstanding the criticism previously addressed by
the IMF to Argentina after the collapse of the Stand-By, in mid-January 2003 the IMF
resumed its assistance and announced an interim Stand-By Arrangement. The Fund rolled
over obligations due to it and provided liquidity so as to permit Argentina to pay arrears
due to the World Bank and the Inter-American Bank and to service debt becoming due in

the next months.””*>

157. The regular functioning of the democratic institutions was reestablished with the
general elections held on May 25, 2003 when Nestor Kirchner was duly elected president
of Argentina. The country’s economy recovered progressively from the crisis from about
the end of 2002 onwards. GNP grew by more than 8% in 2003, compared to 2002. Fears
of resurgent inflation did not materialize: consumer prices rose less than 4% in 2003
compared with a 40% increase in the previous year. The peso improved against the dollar
from 3.36 at the end of 2002 to less than 3 pesos per dollar at the end of 2003; and it has

remained relatively stable against the U.S. dollar since.

158. The turn-around and the subsequent recovery of Argentina’s economy, its public
finances and its balance-of-payments (leading to a robust rebuilding of its foreign
exchange reserves starting from 2003) have been attributed to a mix of endogenous and
exogenous factors. In variable proportions different observers have pointed to the effect

of Argentina’s own policies and measures (including the unilateral reduction of domestic

 

225 In January 2002 the IMF had

 

nted a one-year extension of US$936 million repayment obligation of Argentina to avoid it falling into arrears with

   

the Fund. While Argentina had initially continued to service its debt to other multilateral agencies, this changed in November 2002 when it fell in arrears

with the World Bank and the IDB (Hornbeck, 5). According to Scott, 577, the Government explained that it could not service such a large amount due

 

ment for At

   

anuary 2003 when the IMF a

 

ounced the interim Stand-By Arr

 
 

until it had IMF help, which was received in mi na shortly before

 

jon of January 24, 2003 on the ground that “an extension can be

 

the elections (Scort, 57). The Fund justif ranted if repayment would cause

 

undue hardship and provided borrower is taking actions to strengthen its balance of payment”

68

226) and external causes, such as the

and external debt by 70% as to some securities’
strength of world commodity markets and the increase of prices for Argentina’s main
exports (grain and soybeans), coupled with the effect of the 70% devaluation of the peso,

rendering Argentina’s economy more competitive. 227

159. In May 2004, Argentina made an offer to its foreign bondholders to pay about 25
cents to the dollar on such debt, leading to partial acceptance (but leading also to
international litigation by creditors not accepting the offer). The settlement of the swap
operation of bonds in default, both domestic and issued abroad was completed in June
2005, with a participation of about 75% of the bondholders, notwithstanding the fact that
the new instruments offered in exchange were worth only about 30% of the original
securities in dollar terms.* In September 2004 Argentina re-entered the international
financial market by filing a prospectus concerning the future issuance of debt securities
up to more than U.S.$12 billion?” By February 2005 Argentina had completed its
various restructuring procedures.”” Finally, the improved balance of payment situation
enabled Argentina to repay in a short time-span all of the sizeable amounts outstanding to

the IMF, in 2005 (SDR 2,417 billion) and January 2006 (SDR 6,655 billion).2*!

16 At the end of 2003 of a total gross debt of US $ 178 billion, 101 billion were in default

 

 

227 While Argentina considers that its various Measures were instrumental in its recovery, the Claimant’

 

ew is that recovery occurred “in spite of,

"$s measures

   

rather than as a result of, Argenti

 

.” Post Hearing Brief, para. 75. The contrast of views is apparent also among qualified economists. Thus

     

Lesson of the Crisis, 38, considers led to stabil

   

that many of the ‘measures of the Government “not only

 

e the situation but complicated any

eventual resolution of the crisi

   

and considers the “asymmetric pesoization” as

 

ally damaging.” On the other hand Calomiris, 2, is of the view
that “the decision to redominate debts, and other dollar-denominated or dollar-indexed contracts, during the devaluation of the peso at the beginning of

2002, was successful in reversing the downward trend in economic activity.” The paper by Prof. Calomiris was handed out to the parties at the first day of

 

and discussed at the

 

the hearing in the mei

 

econd day of the hearing in the merits (see Transcript of the Hearing of November 28, 2006, at p. 406).

 

 

228 Cf. Argentina’s Counter-Memorial, paras. 414-419; see Claimant’s Reply, para. 78. Argentina underlines the complexity of the restructuring of its

 

 

defaulted debt comprising 152 government securities, involving many jurisdictions, various currencies “in the hands of institutional creditors and

hundreds of thousands of individual creditors, both local and international.” (Argentina’s Counter-Memorial, para. 419.7). This could be viewed as the

   

equence of Argentina having tapped a variety of sources of credit to finance itself in previous years,

  

int’s doc. C-89.

230 CNA’s Annual Report as of March 31, 2005. states that Argentina had ceased to be in default on its debt after the completion of the restructuring of

    

its bonds on February 25, 2005 (Claimant’s doc. C-91, at p. 12),

  

231 This has been contrasted with the fact that the swap finally offered to foreign bondholders entailed a “haircut,” that is a reduction of the face value of

their bonds, of about 70%, if not more.

69

VI. Necessity: Argentina’s Defence based on Article XI of the BIT and on State of
Necessity under International Law

160. While Argentina denies primarily having committed any breach of the BIT
through its various Measures challenged by the Claimant, Argentina also relies
subsidiarily on two defenses of a general character that would in its view render in any
event its action entirely lawful. The first such defense is based on Art. XI of the BIT;
and the second on the doctrine of “state of necessity” in customary international law (as
codified by the ILC), “as an exception from illegality and in certain cases even as an

exception from responsibility.” 233

161. The pervasive nature of these general exceptions, which Argentina raises against
all claims of Continental, might be such as to absolve Argentina, in whole or in part, from
the alleged breaches and from the ensuing responsibility to pay damages. This causes the
Tribunal to deal first with these general exceptions rather than starting by examining the

individual claims of breach of specific articles of the BIT submitted by the Claimant.

A. Differences between the two Defences

162. The Tribunal will deal with the arguments based on Art. XI first, both because
Argentina raises it as its first defense, and also because the application of Art. XI in the
present case (if warranted) may be such as to render superfluous a detailed examination
of the defense of necessity under general international law applied to the particular facts
of the present dispute. This is also true with regard to Argentina’s defense based on Art.

TV(3) and its relevancy as to the claims submitted by Continental.

163. Moreover, the content of the two defenses is different. Under Art. XI the
obligations that either Party have undertaken under the Treaty as to the treatment of
investments and investors of the other Party “shall not preclude” the application of
“measures necessary” for the pursuit of three types of national interest listed therein,

namely for:

 

232 Art. XI states that: “[t]is Treaty shall not preclude the application by either Party of measures necessary for the maintenance of public order, the
fulfilment of its obligations with respect to the maintenance or the restoration of international peace or security, or the protection of its own essential
security interests

233, Argentina's Counter-Memorial, para. 817

70

a. the maintenance of public order;

b. the fulfillment of its obligations with respect to the maintenance or restoration

of international peace or security;?*4

c. the protection of its own essential security interests.

164. The ordinary meaning of the language used, together with the object and purpose
of the provision (as here highlighted and interpreted under Article 31 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties) clearly indicates that either party would not be in
breach of its BIT obligations if any measure has been properly taken because it was
necessary, as far as relevant here, either “for the maintenance of the public order” or for
“the protection of essential security interests” of the party adopting such measures. The
consequence would be that, under Art. XI, such measures would lie outside the scope of
the Treaty so that the party taking it would not be in breach of the relevant BIT provision.
A private investor of the other party could therefore not succeed in its claim for
responsibility and damages in such an instance, because the respondent party would not
have acted against its BIT obligations since these would not be applicable, provided of
course that the conditions for the application of Art. XI are met.?** In other words, Art. XI
restricts or derogates from the substantial obligations undertaken by the parties to the BIT
in so far as the conditions of its invocation are met.?*° In fact, Art. XI has been defined as
a safeguard clause; it has been said that it recognizes “reserved rights,” or that it

contemplates “non-precluded” measures to which a contracting state party can resort.”*”

234 According to the Protocol to the BIT “[t}he Parties understand that, with respect to rights reserved in Art. XI” this refers to obligations under the UN
Charter. This item is thus irrelevant in the context of the present arbitration.

235 As Argentina puts it (Argentina’s Counter-Memorial, para. 744) “{t]herefore, this type of measures could never amount to a violation of the BIT or
give rise to international responsibility.”

236 This Tribunal is thus minded to accept the position of the Ad Hoe Annulment Committee in the ICSID case CMS v. Argentina, where it states:

 

“Article XI is a threshold requirement: if it applies, the substantive obligations under the Treaty do not apply. By contrast, Article 25 is an excuse which

 

is only relevant once it has been decided that there has otherwise been a breach of those substantive obligations” (CMS Annulment Decision, para. 129),

 

On the one hand, if Art. XI is applicable because the measure at issue was ne

 

ary in order to safeguard essential

 

eourity interest, then the treaty is,
inapplicable to such measure. On the other hand, if a State is forced by necessity to resort to a measure in breach of an international obligation but

complying with the requirements listed in Art. 25 ILC, the State escapes from the responsibility that would otherwise derive from that breach.

 

 

Vandevelde, 220,

71

165. Art. 25 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility, assuming it to be reflective of

. : 2 . see 93
customary international law, 38 envisages and regulates a different situation?

Art. 25: 1. Necessity may not be invoked by a State as a ground for precluding the
wrongfulness of an act not in conformity with an international obligation of that

State unless the act:

(a) is the only way for the State to safeguard an essential interest against a grave

and imminent peril; and

(b). does not seriously impair an essential interest of the State or States towards

which the obligation exists, or of the international community as a whole.

2. In any case, necessity may not be invoked by a State as a ground for precluding

wrongfulness if:

(a) the international obligation in question excludes the possibility of invoking

necessity; or
(b) the State has contributed to the situation of necessity.

166. Necessity is there taken into account as a “ground for precluding the wrongfulness
of an act not in conformity with an international obligation,” under certain strict
conditions. “The cases show that necessity has been invoked to preclude the
wrongfulness of acts contrary to a broad range of obligations, whether customary or
conventional in origin. It has been invoked to protect a wide variety of interests,

including safeguarding the environment, preserving the very existence of the State and its

people in time of public emergency, or ensuring the safety of a civilian population.”?“°

238 The Parties do not dispute that Art. 25 codifies customary international law in the matter. In fact the ICJ has acknowledged that “the state of necessity
is a ground recognized by customary international law, for precluding the wrongfulness of a fact not in conformity with an international obligation,” ICJ,
Gabcikovo-Nagymaros Project, para. 51. However, the ILC text is not a provision of a multilateral treaty, agreed by signatories States in its exact
formulation but a work of codification, having the nature of a restatement. Thus the ILC articles should not be considered per se as a source of
international law. The General Assembly of the United Nations, in taking note of the Articles presented to it by the ILC, “commends them to the attention

of Governments without prejudice to the question of their future adoption or other appropriate actions” (Resolution 56/83 of December 12, 2001, the

 

‘annex to which contains the text of the ILC articles). See also Sempra Award, 344.
239 See CMS Annulment Decision, para. 130.
240 ILC Commentary to Art. 25, para. 14.

72

Thus an act otherwise in breach of an international obligation (“not in conformity” with
it) is not considered wrongful, and does not therefore entail the secondary obligations
attached to an illicit act, thank to the “exceptional” presence of one of the conditions that
under international law preclude wrongfulness, here necessity.”"!

167. In view of these differences between the situation regulated under Art. 25 ILC
Articles and that addressed by Art. XI of the BIT, the conditions of application are not the
same.” The strict conditions to which the ILC text subjects the invocation of the defence
of necessity by a State is explained by the fact that it can be invoked in any context
against any international obligation. Therefore “it can only be accepted on an
exceptional basis.”"* This is not necessarily the case under Art. XI according to its
language and purpose under the BIT. This leads the Tribunal to the conclusion that
invocation of Art. XI under this BIT, as a specific provision limiting the general
investment protection obligations (of a “primary” nature) bilaterally agreed by the
Contracting Parties, is not necessarily subject to the same conditions of application as the

plea of necessity under general international law.

168. There is a link, however, between the two types of regulation. First of all, they
both intend to provide flexibility in the application of international obligations,
recognizing that necessity to protect national interests of a paramount importance may
justify setting aside or suspending an obligation, or preventing liability from its breach.
Moreover, the practical result of applying the carve-out of Art. XI, rather than the defense
of necessity, may be the same: condoning conduct that would otherwise be unlawful and

thus removing the responsibility of the State. This would also be so if Art. XI is viewed

 

241

 

rawford, Special Rapporteur of the ILC, Second Report on State Responsibility, U.N.A.G., ILC, 51st Session, Geneva July 23, 1999,
Ps PPO po Ps ty. y

AICN.AIM98/Add. 2, 4 State invokes the state of necessity, it has full knowledge of the fact that it deliberately chooses a procedure that does

  

 

not abide an international obligation

 

is an argument that would not be applicable to the invocation of Art. XL

242 The Tris

   

\ccepts in this respect the CMS Annulment Decision, paras. 129-134. We do not share the different position apparently taken by the Ad

 

Hoe Annulment Committee in the ICSID case Mitchell v. Congo. In that Committee’s view, the identical clause in Art. X(1) of the US ~ Congo BIT “is a
provision relating to the causes for exemption from liability or, in other words, a provision that precludes the wrongfulness of the behaviour of the State

in certain exceptional circumstances, and not a provision that delimits that scope of application of the Treaty’

   

* (Mitchell Annulment Decision, para. 55).

 

243 Except those “arising under a peremptory norm of general intemational law.” as stated in Art 26 ILC Articles,
244 See ICI, Gabcikove-Nagymaros Project, para. 51. The ILC Commentary to Art. 25, para. 14, notes “to emphasize the exceptional nature of necessity
and concerns about its possible abuse article 25 is cast in negative language.”

245 See ILC Commentary to Art. 25, par. 21: “fas embodied in Art. 25, the plea of necessity is not intended to cover conduct which is in principle

regulated by the primary obligations.”

73

as a specific bilateral regulation of necessity for purposes of the BIT (thus a kind of /ex

specialis), pre-empting recourse to the more restrictive customary exception of

necessity." These connections may be relevant as to the interpretation of the bilateral

provision in Art XI, in that the customary concept of necessity may be relevant in this

respect. The Tribunal will therefore focus on the analysis of Art. XI and the conditions of

its application, referring to the customary rule on State of Necessity (as enshrined in Art.

25 of the ILC test) only insofar as the concept there used assist in the interpretation of

Art. XI itself.“

169. As to Art. XI, the Parties have expressed different views as to various fundamental

elements relating to its application:

a. Whether the economic political and social crisis, with its specific aspects, in
Argentina during 2001-2002 qualify under Art. XI in that they involved the
“maintenance of public order” and/or the protection of Argentina’s “essential

security interests;

 

b. Whether the invocation of Art. XI is “self-judging,” in the sense that the Party

relying on it has absolute discretion to invoke it;

c. Whether the Measures challenged were “necessary” in order to maintain the
Argentine public order and protect the essential security interests of Argentina

that were at stake;

d. The effect of the application of Art. XI to the evaluation by the Tribunal of the

lawfulness under the BIT of Argentina’s Measures challenged by Claimant.

246 This view is consistent with that expressed by the CMS Annulment Decision, para. 133,

247 Since we are not applying here the customary principle of necessity, we do not have to, nor do we express any view as to whether the necessity

invoked by Argentina in respect of the Measures at issue (except as to the restructuring of the LETES. see paras. 221-222) would also qualify under Art.

25 ILC.

74

B. Whether Argentina’s crisis in 2001-2002 qualifies under Article XI in that it involved
the “maintenance of public order” and/or the protection of Argentina’s “essential
security interests”

170. The Claimant submits that the crisis that Argentina encountered in 2001-2002 does
not qualify under Art. XI, first of all because “the ordinary meaning of ‘security’ is safety

from external threats.””

48 The Claimant considers the adjective “essential” as meaning
nothing less than indispensable, and it concludes “[t]he essential security interest of a
country are, therefore, interest indispensable to keeping the country safe from external
threats.”?? Argentina was obviously never exposed to such an external threat, nor did

Argentina ever suggest it in these proceedings.

171. As to “public order,” the Claimant submits that it is the equivalent of the French

term “ordre public” “which is the civil law equivalent of the common law concept of
‘public policy’.” The Claimant further submits that this is a “special meaning” of the term
public order” that refers, more narrowly, “to measures necessary to maintain the public
policies, laws and morals that define the country’s society.”?! The Claimant concludes
that the Measures it has challenged were obviously not aimed at protecting these values,

which were not threatened by Argentina’s crisis.

172. In contrast, Argentina contends that under Art. XI “the measures necessary for the
maintenance of public order ... include the measures aimed at ensuring internal security
in the face of events such as violent internal upheavals, disturbances, looting and crimes,
extended social tension, or the likelihood of the fundamental order falling apart and the
government loosing actual control over the territory of the State.” Argentina submits that
was exactly the situation prevailing in Argentina when the Measures challenged by the

Claimant were adopted so that this situation “constitutes a national emergency sufficient

: . . 99252

to invoke the protections of Art. XI.

248 Claimant's Reply, para. 326.

249 Claimant's Reply, para. 327

250 In the sense of Art. 31 (4) VCLT, which directs the interpreter to give effect to such special meaning if it is established that the parties so intended.

251 Claimant's Reply, para. 338.

252 Argentina’s Counter-Memorial, para. 745.

75

173. The Tribunal is thus confronted by a narrow interpretation by the Claimant and a
broader definition by Argentina of the terms “public order” and “essential security
interests.” The Tribunal’s view is that the interpretation submitted by the Claimant is far
too narrow and that the emergency situation at issue qualifies in general under Art. XI for

the following reasons.

174. The interpretation offered by the Claimant would in substance exclude an
economic crisis, however serious, from the application of Art. XI. As indicated above, it
submits that “public order” relates to fundamental societal value, such as morality, while
security interest refers to the international security of the State in relation of external
threats. The expression “maintenance of public order” indicates however rather clearly
that “public order’ is intended as a broad synonym for “public peace,” which can be
threatened by actual or potential insurrections, riots and violent disturbances of the peace.
This is the ordinary and principal meaning of “orden pirblico” in the Spanish text of the
BIT, corresponding to the same meaning in the French legal concept of “ordre public” in
public and criminal law. Thus, in the Tribunal’s view, actions properly necessary by the
central government to preserve or to restore civil peace and the normal life of society
(especially of a democratic society such that of Argentina), to prevent and repress illegal
actions and disturbances that may infringe such civil peace and potentially threaten the
legal order, even when due to significant economic and social difficulties, and therefore
to cope with and aim at removing these difficulties, do fall within the application under

Art. XI.

175. As to “essential security interests,” it is necessary to recall that international law is
not blind to the requirement that States should be able to exercise their sovereignty in the
interest of their population free from internal as well as external threats to their security
and the maintenance of a peaceful domestic order. It is well known that the concept of
international security of States in the Post World War II international order was intended
to cover not only political and military security but also the economic security of States

and of their population.?** The Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations” and, even

253 See the famous speech of US President Franklin D. Roosevelt of January 11, 1944, pointing out that a just and durable system of international peace

requires freedom from fear, from hunger and from want, and “a decent standard of living for all individual men and women and children in all nations.”

76

more relevant for the present case, that of the International Monetary Fund support this
approach.”° As noted by the International Law Commission, States have invoked
necessity “to protect a wide variety of interests, including safeguarding the environment,
preserving the very existence of the State and its people in time of public emergency, or

ensuring the safety of a civilian population.””°°

176. It has been submitted in this case that since Art. XI derives from the Model BIT of
the U.S., which in turn derives from the United States’ Friendship Commerce and
Navigation (FCN) standard treaties, special attention should be addressed to this
historical context in interpreting the expressions found in Art. XI and its object and
purpose in general. This appears to be correct; and the Tribunal will therefore assume that
the interpretation based on those antecedents conforming to the plain texts, and the
legislative history of the Model BIT was well known and taken into account when the

parties concluded this BIT.

177. In this respect the Tribunal notes that the Parties’ inquiries into the origin of these
antecedent texts do not support the restrictive view advanced by the Claimant. An
authoritative commentary, whose distinguished author was involved in the drafting of the

USS. BITs for many years, takes the following view?”

United States treaty practice since the Second World War has acknowledged that
the interest in protecting United States investment overseas may be subordinate to
certain other national interests, primarily the interest in protecting the national

security and the health, safety and welfare of the people. Investment-related

 

254 See UN Charter Art. 1 (3) that includes amongst the purposes of UN “to achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of an

economic, social, cultural, or humanitarian character (...)." Moreov.

 

see UN Charter Art. 55 “[w]ith a view to the creation of conditions of stability and

  

well-being which are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination
of peoples, the United Nations shall promote: a. higher standards of living, full employment, and conditions of economic and social progress and
development; (...).”

255 See Art. | (ii) Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund which includes amongst the purposes of the IMF “to contribute thereby to

 

the promotion and maintenance of high levels of employment and real income and to the development of the productive resources of all members as
primary objectives of economic policy.”
256 See ILC, Commentary, at Art. 25, para. 14

257

 

Vandelvelde, 222. During the period 1982 to 1988 the author served as an attorney-adviser in the Office of the Legal Adviser of the US

 

Department of State in charge of BIT negotiations. Prof. Vandevelde supplied an expert opinion in the present dispute on behalf of the

rendered oral testimony (subject to cross-examination) before the Tribunal.

77

treaties thus have had provisions which permit the United States to deny
protection to foreign investment in its territory where necessary to these other
interests. The price paid by the United States for reserving the right to derogate
from investment-related treaties on these grounds has been the recognition of a

corresponding right in its treaty partners.?°*

178. A severe economic crisis may thus qualify under Art. XI as affecting an essential
security interest, in the broad sense described by the Tribunal above. The Tribunal is
comforted in this approach by previous ICSID awards in other arbitrations brought
against Argentina (although perhaps their discussion of the issue does not as clearly
distinguish between the requirements of Art. XI and Art. 25 of the ILC text). Those
ICSID tribunals have recognized, in general terms, that “there is nothing in the context of
customary international law or the object and purpose of the treaty that could on its own

992
17259

exclude major economic crises from the scope of Art. X! even if they have taken a

different evaluation in concreto as to the gravity of the Argentine economic crisis.

179. The review carried out above of basic features of the crisis which Argentina faced
in the latter part of 2001, and which continued into 2002, causes the Tribunal to decide
that such a crisis is covered by the application of Art. XI. Measures that would have been
otherwise in breach of the Treaty could be lawfully implemented by Argentina in that
crisis, provided that all other requirements are respected, first of all that of actual

“necessity.”

180. It is impossible to deny, in the Tribunal’s view, that a crisis that brought about the
sudden and chaotic abandonment of the cardinal tenet of the country’s economic life,

such as the fixed convertibility rate which had been steadfastly recommended and

258 See also ibid at 223 as to th

 

servations of rights involved in the clause”: “United States negotiators sought to draft BIT which provided rigorous

for investors. At the same time, the practical reality is that the United States increasingly has relied upon various forms of economic sanctions

 
  

 
 

+r foreign policy goals. The inclusion of a non-precluded measures provision preserved the flexibility to use economic sanctions .At the same

1s” (emphasis

added).

259 See CMS Award, para. 359. See also LG&E Award, para. 238; Enron Award, para. 332. See also ILA, Resolution on International Monetary Law,

    

Report of the Warsaw Conference 1988, 20-22, dealing with the inability of a State debtor to pay a foreign debt that “will normally have to be considered

      

under the rule of necessity”: “It would appear that the organization of domestic peace, the provision for external security, the maintenance of services

essential for the well-being of the population and the preservation of the environment are essential interests

78

supported for more than a decade by the IMF and the international community; the near-
collapse of the domestic economy; the soaring inflation; the leap in unemployment; the
social hardships bringing down more than half of the population below the poverty line;
the immediate threats to the health of young children, the sick and the most vulnerable
members of the population, the widespread unrest and disorders; the real risk of
insurrection and extreme political disturbances, the abrupt resignations of successive
Presidents” and the collapse of the Government, together with a partial breakdown of
the political institutions and an extended vacuum of power; the resort to emergency
legislation granting extraordinary legislative powers to the executive branch, that all of
this, taken together, does not qualify as a situation where the maintenance of public order
and the protection of essential security interest of Argentina as a state and as a country
was vitally at stake.”>' The fact that Argentina’s Congress declared a “public emergency”
in economic, financial, exchange, social and administrative matters in conformity with
Art. 76 of its Constitution, and enacted a specific “Public Emergency Law” to cope with
the crisis, is powerful evidence of its gravity such as that could not be addressed by
ordinary measures.”°> The protection of essential security interests recognized by Art. XI
does not require that “total collapse” of the country or that a “catastrophic situation” has
already occurred before responsible national authorities may have recourse to its
protection.” The invocation of the clause does not require that the situation has already

degenerated into one that calls for the suspension of constitutional guarantees and

260 Blustein, 1, notes the “tragic spectacle of a succession of five presidents taking office over a mere ten da

   

261 See LG&E Decision on Liability, para. 257: “[t}he essential interests of the Argentine State were threatened in December 2001. It faced an extremely
serious threat to its existence, its political and economic survival, to the possibility of maintaining its essential services in operation and to the
preservation of its internal peace.”

262 Argentina's Counter-Memorial, para. 799 ff

263 In this context, it should not be forgotten that democracy and the rule of law had been re-established in Argentina only twenty years before after the

  

fall of a brutal m jictatorship which had lasted for more than a decade.

 

264 In this respect uunal takes a different view than that expressed in the CMS Award, para, 354. We note that Art. 25 of the ILC Article

 

is more restrictive than Art. XI, admi essential interes

 

recourse to necessity at para, I(a) “to safeguard

   

inst a grave and imminent peril.” S
Special Rapporteur, ILC Yearbook 1980, Il, (1980), para. 12:

 

    

ILC, Report on the 32° Session, Commentary on draft Art. 33 (State of Necessity), R. Ago

 

“{t}he extent to which a given interest is “essential” naturally depends on all the circumstances in which the State is placed in different specific situations;

 

 

id in the abstract,

   

the extent must therefore be judged in the light of the particular case into which the interests enters, rather than be prede

79

fundamental liberties.”°° There is no point in having such protection if there is nothing

left to protect.

181. It may well be that in drafting the model text for Art. XI, the U.S. intended to
protect first of all its own security interests in the light of geopolitical, strategic and
defense concerns, typical of a world power, so as to be able to reserve the right to freeze
assets of foreigners in the U.S. and to resort to unilateral economic sanctions that may
conflict with its BIT obligations. This
provided by Art. XI d:

 

intention would not exclude from the protection

 

‘rent measures taken by the other Contracting Party in relation to
emergency situations affecting essential security interests of a different nature of such
other Contracting Party.” These interests such as “ensuring internal security in the face
of a severe economic crisis with social, political and public order implications”? may
well raise for such a party, notably for a developing country like Argentina,” issues of
public order and essential security interest objectively capable of being covered under
Art. X12° An interpretation of a bilateral reciprocal treaty that accommodates the
different interests and concerns of the parties in conformity with its terms accords with an
effective interpretation of the treaty. Moreover, in the Tribunal’s view, this objective
assessment must contain a significant margin of appreciation for the State applying the
particular measure: a time of grave crisis is not the time for nice judgments, particularly

when examined by others with the disadvantage of hindsight.?”

265 Notwithstanding its political and public order effects, the emergency situation proclaimed in Law 25,561 was limited to “social, economic

 

administrative and financial m:

   

266 Even if invocation of Art. XI is not self-judging so that the propriety of its invocation is not carved out from the competence of an arbitral tribunal
established under Art. VII, the expression “its own security interests” implies that a margin of appreciation must be afforded to the Party that claims in
‘200d faith that the interests addressed by the measure are essential security interests or that its public order is at stake.

267 See Argentina’s Counter Memorial, para. 745,

268 The U.S. poli

 

is to enter into BITs only with developing countries, see Vandevelde, 21

269 See Iran-US Claims Tribunal, Sea-Land Service, Inc., at page 11 ( Argentina’s doc. AL-100) with reference to measures taken in time of civil unrest:

   

well recognized that, in comparable situations of crisis, governmental authorities are entitled to have recourse to very broad powers without
incurring international responsibility.”

270 Argentina (Counter-Memorial, para. 497) points to the case law of the European Court of Human Rights in this respect: “because of their direct

   

knowledge of their society and of its needs, the national authoriti

 

are in principle better placed than the inte

 

ational judge to appreciate what is “in the

 

public interest..” .. the national authorities, accordingly, enjoy a certain margin of appreciation” (ECHR, Jahn and others v. Germany, June 30, 2005). A

 

certain deference to such a discretion when the application of general standards in a specific factual situation is at issue, such as reasonable, necessary,
fair and equitable, may well be by now a general feature of international law also in respect of the protection of foreign investors under BITs, see Yuval

Shany, Towards a General Margin of Appreciation Doctrine in International Law?,16 ENIL, 907-940 (2005).

80

C. Whether the Invocation of Article XI is “self-judging”

182. Having concluded that the crisis of Argentina (in the context of which the
Measures challenged by the Claimant were adopted) qualifies under Art. XI, the Tribunal
is still faced with the conflicting position of the Parties as to the alleged self-judging
nature of the provision. If Art. XI granted unfettered discretion to a party to invoke it, in
good faith, in order to exempt a particular measure which the investor claims has
breached its treaty rights from any scrutiny by a tribunal, then that tribunal would be
prevented from entering further into the merits, after having recognized that an economic

crisis such as the one experienced by Argentina in 2001-2002 qualified under Art. XI.

183. Argentina claims that “[t]he Argentine Republic’s bona fides invocation of Art. XI
of the BIT should be sufficient for the Tribunal to dismiss the claim made by the
Claimant under such BIT, as both parties to the Treaty accorded that each State had the
exclusive right to decide whether its own measures were covered by such Article”! The
United States stated its position expressly, and the Argentine Republic gave its consent to

272
such statements.”””

184. The Claimant rejects this submission. The Claimant notes that the text of Art. XI
does not explicitly include such a restriction (as Argentina itself admits), and that there is
no negotiating record (or at least none presented or known to this Tribunal) that would
evidence an understanding of the Contracting Parties to this effect. To the contrary, the
Claimant points out that the formulation of Art. XI follows closely the FCN model of the
U.S.A, which in terms did not follow the language of Art. XXI of GATT 1947 (although
the content is in part similar). Art. XXI of GATT 1947 specifies that “[nJothing in this
Agreement shall be construed (b) to prevent any contracting party to take action which it

considers necessary for the protection of its essential security interests...”

271 Argentina suggests that, even if the application of Art. XI is self-judging, a tribunal would be empowered to check that recourse to the exception was

made in good faith and claims that itis self evident that in the present case the 1

 

sures were adopted in good faith, As a result, the control by a tribunal

would be substantially more limited than if the provision is found not to be sel

 

ging.

     

272 See Argentina’s Counter Memorial, para. 743. Besides relying on the position allegedly taken by the U.S., which we discuss below, Argentina also

   

relies on a statement by the PC, The Wimbledon, 37 that “{t)hi of its

 

ight of a State to adopt the course which it considers

security and to the maintenance of its integrity, is so essential a right that, in case of doubt, treaty stipulations cannot be interpreted as limiting it.”

81

185. The Parties have argued the point extensively, relying on the expert opinions of
Prof. Kenneth J. Vandevelde for the Claimant and of Prof. Anne-Marie Slaughter for
Argentina, who also testified at the final hearing. Both were impressive experts. Their
basic difference derives from the lack of documentation as to whether the U.S. had taken
the position at the time of the negotiation and signature of the BIT that it considered its
invocation and application as self-judging and therefore not reviewable by an arbitral

tribunal established under Art. VII of the BIT.

186. The position of Argentina is that this was indeed the case: that the U.S. had
informed Argentina of its position and that Argentina had shared it. The position of the
Claimant is that the U.S. had not taken nor expressed such a position at that time. On the
contrary, after the International Court of Justice had rejected in the Nicaragua case the
claim by the U.S. that Art. XXI of the FCN Treaty between the U.S. and Nicaragua
(including identical expressions to those of the BIT) was self-judging,””> the U.S.
abandoned, in any case de facto, such a position. That position was only later resumed by
the U.S. when Russia had asked and obtained during the negotiations of the U.S.-Russia
BIT that the self-judging nature of the exception be inserted into this BIT (Art. 8 Protocol
of U.S.-Russia BIT of 1992).?% Thereafter, the U.S. adopted this interpretation and

finally changed the text of its Model BIT to such effect, but only in 2004.77

187. The Tribunal considers that the Claimant’s position is supported by the limited
evidence available to the Tribunal and conforms to legal principles applicable to treaty
interpretation, applied by the Vienna Convention. The International Court of Justice has
twice interpreted provisions substantially identical (from which the text of Art. XI
derives), as not restricting the ability of a tribunal empowered by the parties to resolve
disputes under the treaty to determine whether the conditions of the “limitation” were
met.?”° This Tribunal finds at most inconclusive the evidence relied upon by Argentina to

support its claim that the U.S. had taken and conveyed to other BIT partners at the time,

273 See ICI, Nicaragua Case, Merit

 

274 This occurred during the negotiations of the US-Russia BIT signed on June 17, 1992 after the conclusion of the negotiations of the US ~ Argentina
BIT signed on November 14, 1991

275 See Art. 18 (1) US 2004 model BIT

276 Besides the Nicaragua case, cited above footnote 273, see ICI, Oil Platform Case, Merits, 43. In the latter case the U.S. did not argue that the

provision was not justiciable, but rather that the Court should grant the U.S. “a measure of discretion.”

82

specifically to Argentina,” its position that recourse to the clause was self-judging.””*
The Tribunal has in any case not been given any evidence of the Argentina’s acceptance
of such a communication?” Although a provision such as Art. XI, as earlier indicated,

28° caution must be

involves naturally a margin of appreciation by a party invoking it,
exercised in allowing a party unilaterally to escape from its treaty obligations in the
absence of clear textual or contextual indications.”*' This is especially so if the party
invoking the allegedly self-judging nature of the exemption can thereby remove the issue,
and hence the claim of a treaty breach by the investor against the host state, from arbitral
review. This would conflict in principle with the agreement of the parties to have disputes
under the BIT settled compulsorily by arbitration, both between an investor and the host

State or between the Contracting Parties, as the case may be.

188. The Tribunal notes finally that the same conclusion, as to the non-self-judging
nature of the recourse to Art. XI, has been reached by the other ICSID arbitral tribunals to
which Argentina has submitted the same defense.?** It has however, like all other
decisions in this Award, first reached its own decisions independently of any such ICSID

awards.

27

 

additional requirement, if met, could have complied with the conditions of Art. 31 VCLT for finding an agreement on a special meaning to a
term (31.4), a subsequent agreement (31.3.a), or a subsequent practice establishing an agreement (31.3.b).

278 The Tribunal has received no evidence supporting the statement by the US State Department, contained in the description of the US model BIT of

 

February 1992 (in any case approved three months after the signing of the US-Argentina BI

1992 thy

in November 2001) submitted to the US Senate on July 30,

 

[wle are careful to note, s.” (See

 

in each negotiation, the self-judging nature of the prot

 

ction of a Party's ¢

 

sential security interes

 

   

documentation conceming the hearing before the Committ

 

on Foreign Relations of the US Senate, August 4, 1992 supplied to the Tribunal by the

Claimant, Cl

 

mant’s doc. C-230, at p. 65). Moreover the Letter of Submittal of the US-Argentina of January 13, 1993 is silent about the self-judging
nature of the essential security interests clause asserted by the Respondent. As to the view expressed by the Department of State in its letter to the former
Legal Advisor A. Sofer in 2006 submitted by Argentina to the Tribunal after the file had been declared closed to the Parties (see paras. 92-93), the
ULS. Government is that the s is self-

statement “...the position of t ential se

  

rity language in our FCN treaties and Bilateral Investment trea

   

judging” is too generic (also because of the absence of any timing) to be considered relevant.

279 Th

 

Tribunal notes that no preparatory work or documentation as to the negotiating history of the Argentina-US BIT had been supplied in this
dispute. It should also be recorded that neither Party wished the Tribunal to invite the U.S. to state its position formally for the purpose of these
arbitration proceedings, one way or the other.

280 This

 

Sone of the objects of

 

ral contacts between the U.S. Department of State and the U.S. Senate at various points in time according to the

 

documentation concerning the hearing before the Committee on Foreign Relations of the US Senate of August 4, 1992, supplied to the Tribunal by

Claimant, cited above footnote 278.

 

‘C-Chicken Cuts, 289.

 

281 “Context” may include circumstantial elements relating to the conclusion of the treaty, see WTO Appellate Body,

282 See specifically CMS Award, paras. 359 and 370; LG&E Award, paras. 212-213; Enron Award, para. 339.

83

D. Whether the measures challenged were “necessary” in order maintain public order
and protect essential security interests of Argentina

a) The applicable standard

189. At this point the Tribunal has to evaluate whether the impugned measures were
“necessary” for the maintenance of public order and the protection of the essential
security interests of Argentina within the meaning of the BIT. Argentina claims that the
actions taken were the only way to safeguard an essential interest from grave and

impending danger?

Argentina submits that “[a]n international tribunal should analyze
this issue with the highest deference and should not arrogate itself the power to establish
what other measures could have been taken instead.”?** In any event, Argentina submits
that “[i]f the measures now brought into question by Continental had not been adopted,
the accelerated drain of deposits and loss of reserves of the Argentine financial system
evidenced since early 2001 would have brought about a widespread collapse of the

Argentine economy, even bigger than the one actually experienced.””**

190. Continental, in contrast, submits that “[t]he ordinary meaning of ‘necessary’ is that
which ‘cannot be dispensed with or done without,’ or, in other words, indispensable.
Under the ordinary meaning of Article XI, Argentina must demonstrate that its measures
were indispensable to the protection of its essential security interests or maintenance of
public order.””*° Thus, it is the Claimant’s opinion that “Argentina must meet a high
threshold in demonstrating that its measures were necessary,” taking into account the
Treaty’s objects to provide a stable framework for investment and to encourage and

: 2
protect investment.”*’

191. To support this conclusion the Claimant relies also on the ILC commentary on Art.
25 (1)(a) stating that the “plea is excluded if there are other (otherwise lawful) means
available, even if they may be more costly or less convenient” (ILC commentary para.

15). This ought to be considered not only as a more precise explanation of the term

283 Argentina's Counter-Memorial, at p. 217,

 

284 Argentina's Counter-Memorial, para. 838.
285 Argentina's Counter-Memorial, para. 840.

286 Claim

 

's Reply, para, 34
287 Claimant's Reply, para. 346.

84

‘necessary’ with regard to invocation of the defense of necessity under customary
international law, but also as a standard applicable in interpreting Art. XI of the BIT. In
the Claimant’s view “if a measure is indispensable to the protection of its essential
security interests or maintenance of public order then it must be the only means to protect
those essential security interests or maintain the public order.””** The Claimant submits
that it has shown to the Tribunal that alternative measures (irrespective of their costs)
were available to Argentina for addressing the national emergency in 2001. It concludes
that “the existence of these alternate measures demonstrates that the measures Argentina

did take were not necessary for the purposes of Article XI of the Bit?

192. The Tribunal is thus faced with the task of determining the content of the concept
of necessity in Art. XI, in order to decide whether the various Measures challenged by the
Claimant were indeed necessary, as a matter of causation. With regard to the necessity
test required for the application of the BIT, for the reasons stated above relating to the
different role of Art. XI and of the defense of necessity in customary international law,
the Tribunal does not share the opinion that “the treaty thus becomes inseparable from the
customary law standard insofar as to the conditions for the operation of the state of
necessity are concerned,” as stated in the Enron Case and submitted also by the
Claimant.” Since the text of Art. XI derives from the parallel model clause of the U.S.
FCN treaties and these treaties in turn reflect the formulation of Art. XX of GATT
1947,”"! the Tribunal finds it more appropriate to refer to the GATT and WTO case law
which has extensively dealt with the concept and requirements of necessity in the context
of economic measures derogating to the obligations contained in GATT, rather than to

- . - . . . 2
refer to the requirement of necessity under customary international law?”

193. With regard to the necessity test for the purposes of application of the general

exception of Article XX of GATT, it is well established that:

288 Claim

 

Reply, para. 350.
289 Claimant's Reply, para. 352.

290 Enron Award, para. 334.

291 Art. XX GATT (and similarly Art. XIV GATS) provides that “...nothing in this Agreement shall be construed to prevent the adoption or
enforcement by any contracting party of measures : (a) necessary to protect public morals; (b) necessary to protect human, animal or plant life or heath:
(d) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations,

292 The Claimant has also referred to the case law under Art. XX of GATT 1947 (Claimant's Reply, para. 348),

85

[...] the reach of the word “necessary” is not limited to that which is
“indispensable” or “of absolute necessity” or “inevitable.” Measures which are
indispensable or of absolute necessity or inevitable to secure compliance certainly
fulfill the requirements of Article XX (d). But other measures, too, may fall
within the ambit of this exception. As used in Article XX (d), the term
“necessary” refers in our view to a range of degrees of necessity. At a one end of
this continuum lies “necessary” understood as “indispensable;” at the other, is
“necessary” taken to mean as “making a contribution to.” We consider that a
“necessary” measure is, in this continuum, located significantly closer to the pole

of “indispensable” than to the opposite pole of simply “making a contribution

9293
0.2%

194. In order to determine whether a measure which is not indispensable, may

nevertheless be “necessary”:

The necessity of a measure should be determined through “a process of weighing
and balancing of factors” which usually includes the assessment of the following
three factors: the relative importance of interests or values furthered by the
challenged measures, the contribution of the measure to the realization of the ends
pursued by it and the restrictive impact of the measure on international

2
commerce.”

195. Within the WTO a measure is not necessary if another treaty consistent, or less
inconsistent alternative measure, which the member State concerned could reasonably be

expected to employ is available:

[...] an alternative measure may be found not to be “reasonable available,”

however, where it is merely theoretical in nature, for instance, where the

293 WTO Appellate Body, Korea-Beef, para. 161. See also ICI, Nicaragua Case, Merits, 282: “the Court emphasizes the importance of the word

 

“necessary” in Art. XX1: the measures taken must not merely be such as tend to protect the essential security interest of the party taking them, but must
be ‘necessary’ for that purpose.

294 Panel Report, EC Tyres, para. 7.104, summing up the Appellate Body case law in Korea-Beef, para. 164; EC- Asbestos, para. 172; US-Gambling,
para. 306; Dominican Republic-Cigarettes, para. 70. Within this weighing and balancing of those various factors, the WTO case law stresses the

assessment of the importance of the int

 

sts or values furthered by the challenged measure.

86

Responding Member is not capable of taking it, or where the measure imposes an
undue burden on that Member, such as prohibitive costs or substantial technical
difficulties. Moreover a “reasonable available” alternative measure must be a
measure that would preserve for the responding Member its right to achieve its
desired level of protection with respect to the objective pursued under paragraph

(a) of Article XIV.7>

b) Application of the standard

196. According to these principles, the next step for us is to assess whether the
Measures contributed materially to the realization of their legitimate aims under Art. XT
of the BIT, namely the protection of the essential security interests of Argentina in the
economic and social crisis it was facing. More specifically, whether the Measures were

apt to and did make such a material or a decisive contribution to this end.”

197. In light of the analysis we have carried out above, we believe that this was the
case. In general terms”’, within the economic and financial situation of Argentina
towards the end of 2001, the Measures at issue (the Corralito, the Corralon, the
pesification, the default and the subsequent restructuring of those debt instruments
involved here) were in part inevitable, or unavoidable, in part indispensable and in any
case material or decisive in order to react positively to the crisis, to prevent the complete
break-down of the financial system, the implosion of the economy and the growing threat
to the fabric of Argentinean society and generally to assist in overcoming the crisis. In the
Tribunal’s view, there was undoubtedly “a genuine relationship of end and means in this

respect.”

198. The Tribunal is also guided by the principles highlighted above in its analysis of

whether Argentina had reasonably available alternatives, less in conflict or more

 

295 WTO Appellate Bod ee also WTO Panel EC-Tyres, 7.211 “[wle do not exclude however that

 

Gambling, 308, referring to Art. XIV GA’
there may be circumstances in which a highly restrictive measure is necessary, if no other less trade restrictive alternative is reasonably available to the

member concerned to achi

 

ve its objectives.
296 See WTO Appellate Body, EC-Tyres, 150.

297 That is without prejudice for the analysis of individual measures developed in the next paragraphs,

298 Ibid. 145. This report has highlighted, at para. 151, the importance of the temporal perspective in the evaluation of necessity: “the results obtained

from certain actions...can only be evaluated with the benefit of time.

87

compliant with its international obligations, “while providing an equivalent contribution

to the achievement of the objective pursued,”””?

to the Measures challenged by
Continental as inconsistent with the BIT. If so, the Measures adopted would be deprived
of a fundamental element underpinning their alleged necessity. The Tribunal will look

accordingly both to:

i) alternatives to the Measures, not in breach of the BIT, that might have been
available when the Measures challenged were taken (thus from November 2001

onwards) and that would have yielded equivalent results/relief; and

ii

whether Argentina could have adopted at some earlier time different policies, that
would have avoided or prevented the situation that brought about the adoption of

the measures challenged.

Tf the result of such additional analysis shows that such alternatives would not have been
reasonably available or would have been impracticable or speculative as to their effects,
the conclusion that the measures were necessary under Art. XI of the BIT would be

confirmed.

199. In evaluating whether these alternatives were in fact reasonably available and
would have avoided the adoption of the challenged Measures, the Tribunal is mindful that
it is not its mandate to pass judgment upon Argentina’s economic policy during 2001-
2002, nor to censure Argentina’s sovereign choices as an independent state. Our task is
more modestly to evaluate only if the plea of necessity by Argentina is well-founded, in
that Argentina had no other reasonable choice available, in order to protect its essential
interests at the time, than to adopt these Measures. If the conclusion upholds this defence,
then Argentina will escape any liability since necessity would exclude a breach of the
BIT’s obligations to the detriment of the Claimant, and/or would exempt Argentina from
responsibility. If not, Argentina would have to face the consequences of its breaches in as
far as Continental’s claims are otherwise upheld. In either case, the Tribunal is not called
upon to make any political or economic judgment on Argentina’s policies and of the
Measures adopted to pursue them. Nor does this entail, retrospectively, a judgment on

299 See WTO Appellate Body, EC-Tyres, para 156.

88

those same grounds that Argentina should not have enacted the Measures that it did

adopt.

(i) Alternatives that might have been available when the challenged measures were taken

(thus at the outbreak and at the height of the crisis in November 2001 — February 2002)

200. The Claimant submits that there were alternatives that Argentina could have
adopted in lieu of: a) the Corralito (the imposition of the bank freeze in December 2001);
b) the devaluation of the peso; c) the pesification of the U.S. dollar denominated contracts
and deposits; and d) the suspension of payments (default) and rescheduling of the

governmental financial instruments held by CNA.

(a) In respect of the Corralito (the imposition of the bank freeze in December 2001)

201. In particular, Continental submits that the Corralito, instead of qualifying as a
necessary reaction to a sudden extraneous fall in bank deposits, aggravated the crisis
because it inevitably caused a deep loss of public confidence. In the Claimant’s words
“Tt]he social discontent triggered by this measure put an end to any further negotiations

730 which

between federal authorities and the Provinces and the multilateral institutions,
would have represented an alternate available measure to avoid the sharp fall in the bank

deposits.

202. The Tribunal recalls the evidence as to the massive falls in bank deposits and the
capital flight out of the country that had occurred in the preceding months and had
amplified in the weeks and days before the imposition of the Corralito, very significantly
depleting Argentina’s reserves.”' The Tribunal notes that the imposition of the bank
freeze is a typical short-term measure used by monetary authorities in order to block
withdrawals from banks and block capital flight. These events occur when the public
loses confidence in the economy and in the ability of the state to maintain freedom of

exchange; bank-runs must then be stopped lest the banks and the country go bankrupt...”

300 Claimant's Reply, para. 87

e para 122 above.

  
 

"TAD, Transfer of Funds, 7: “[ljarge surges of capital outflows can exacerbate a country’s balance-of-payment problems by making it more
difficult for the country to implement adjustment policies that are designed to correct the underlying problems;” ibid, 11: “while restrictions on transfers

will generally not be the preferred means of addressing balance-of-payment crises, in certain circumstances they may be necessary.

89

In the situation of Argentina in the autumn of 2001, the impossibility for Argentina to
maintain convertibility was reasonably foreseeable and was even widely expected; the
need to take strict remedial actions against massive withdrawals from the banks,

widespread requests of exchange of pesos for dollars and capital flight was inevitable.

203. Thus the Corralito has to be viewed in connection with the abandonment of the
conversion of the peso to U.S. dollar at 1:1, which entailed floating of currency and
market-driven devaluation. This was also widely considered inevitable once the IMF had
withdrawn its further support for the reasons highlighted above. It is true that the
imposition of severe restrictions on withdrawals from bank accounts entailed further
hardship, especially as to individuals, families and small businesses. However, the block
affected CNA’s business activity only marginally** because intra-bank operations were
allowed and special authorisations were soon thereafter granted to insurance
companies.*” There was indeed no difference between the position of a local subsidiary
of an American investor, such as CNA, and the position of any other Argentine insurance

company.

204. The evidence does not permit the Tribunal to conclude that “further negotiations
between federal authorities and the Provinces and the multilateral institutions” could have
formed the basis for Argentina obtaining additional external support.*°° First of all, the ex
post facto evaluation indicates that a restructuring of Argentina’s debt without sacrificing
in part creditors’ rights in breach of same (as was finally the case in 2002-2003) was
probably already impossible by 2000.*"” In late 2001, Argentina had already carried out
various restructurings of its debt, both external (through the mega-swap) and domestic

(through the issuance of GGLs), but had not obtained any meaningful relief. The country

303 As mentioned, their need had

 

en anticipated by commentators and institutions outside Argentina; see for instance R. Dombush, The Last Tango,
August 2001, (Claimant's doc. C-114),
304 See footnote 393 infra

  

305 Se

 

Resolucion” 28, 580 of February 11, 2002 (see also footnote 198 and 223),
306 Sce also Scott, 576: “{eltitics of the IMF said that it should have led a bailout like that for Mexico, infusing $50 billion that would jump start the

economy. The Bush administration, far from allowing this, had prevented the IMF in December 2001 from advancing the stand-by funds, once again

 

trying to get tough on the expansion of official and multilateral debt and its contribution to creditor moral hazard.”

 

307 See infra para. 208. Lessons from the Crisis, 34, indicates that already in 2000 a large depreciation should have been accompanied by “a preventive
sovereign debt restructuring which would have provided both sufficient liquidity and net present value relief; this would have necessarily entailed a

sovereign default. Even more so an involuntary debt restructuring, with reduction in the present value of the debt” in 2001, Lessons from the Crisis, 36.

90

was precluded from further voluntary restructuring by its loss of credibility in the world
financial markets and the withdrawal of the Fund’s support. Consultations and
negotiations cannot be considered per se an alternative measure to urgent legislative or
administrative action of general application such as a bank freeze. This is even more true
when taking account of the level of public order protection and protection of its own
essential security interests that a State manages to achieve with such prohibitions.
Moreover, in this regard it can even be questioned whether consultations and negotiations
can be considered as “measures” at all, due to their uncertain results.°"° In any case, when
the Government was able to strike a financial and fiscal deal with the provinces, in the
midst of the crisis towards the end of February 2002, this entailed leaving to the
provinces about 30% of the proceeds of the financial tax. These proceeds had been
specifically earmarked as a guarantee to GGLs holders in case of default, a measure
complained of by Continental as having affected its own rights, at least indirectly by

rendering recourse to this guarantee impossible.*?

205. To conclude, for the Tribunal the Corralito was justified by necessity within the
meaning of this BIT, in any case as far as a company like CNA was affected by it. The
block was adequate and effective in respect of its legitimate aims to prevent further fall in
bank deposits that would have brought about the banks’ bankruptcy, as well as the
exhaustion of the country’s reserves. Continental also complains mostly of the Corralito
because it prevented CNA from transferring out of the country funds available in
Argentina to CNA. This raises a different point. We will address later the issue whether
such international transfers of funds are and would have been guaranteed by Art. V of the
BIT. Subject to that, we conclude here that the Corralito was necessary to prevent exactly

that outflow of funds to which Continental would have contributed, according to its own

 

308 See WTO Appellate Body, US-Gambling, para. 317.
309 “Federal State-Provinces Agreement on the Financial Relation and Basis for the Federal Revenue Sharing System” of February 27, 2002, referred to

in Decree 64/2002 on the restructuring of GGLs, (Argentina's doc. R-31).

91

statements, an outflow that would have undermined Argentina’s essential security

interests.*"°

(b) In respect of the devaluation of the peso

206. With regard to the devaluation of the peso that Argentina claims was necessary,
together with the pesification, in order to cope with the economic public emergency, the
Claimant submits that: “[t]his argument is doubly flawed. First, devaluation was not
inevitable. Second, Argentina could have devaluated the peso without unilaterally
altering the terms of contracts denominated in U.S. dollars.”*'! The Claimant dealt
extensively with these arguments, relying on the written opinion and the testimony of its

expert witness, Prof. S. Edwards.

207. Continental does not challenge devaluation per se and recognizes that the BIT
does not guarantee foreign investors and their investments against devaluation, nor does

2
3!2 There was however a close

it claim that devaluation breached per se its treaty rights.
connection between the devaluation of the peso and the decision to pesify bank deposits
and government debt. The pesification was an integral part of the scheme of abandoning
convertibility and letting the peso float, ie. to devalue against the US dollar. The
Claimant when challenging the necessity of the pesification suggests alternatives that

would have avoided in its view the very need for devaluing the peso.

208. In the Claimant’s submission, Argentina could have avoided devaluation either
through (a) a voluntary debt exchange or (b) “full dollarization” of the economy.*!? The
Tribunal has not received evidence that would sustain either argument. As to voluntary
debt exchange (alternative (a)), we have recalled that Argentina had already pursued this
policy: Argentina had entered into swaps both as to its foreign debt (“megaswap” of
Spring 2001) and domestic debentures, namely through the restructuring of part of the

government’s debt by issuing in November 2001 GGLs in exchange, a swap in which

310 See Nussbaum, Money in the Law, National and International, 1950, 476, “{rlestrictions to safeguard a country’s balance of payment, however,

  

constitute acts of self-preservation” legitimate even in the teeth of a MEN clause. The situation is otherwise where the differentiation is not justified by
311 Claimant's Reply, para. 89.
312 Claimant's Reply, para. 92.

313 Claimant's Reply, para. 91

92

also CNA took part.>!4 Both operations were ineffective in lessening the burden on
Argentina’s finances and in restoring the public’s confidence. With the Fund refusing
further support to Argentina, there was no realistic possibility for the Government at a
later date, towards the end of 2001, to conclude a voluntary exchange that would have

fully respected the depositors’ rights in dollar terms, while also avoiding devaluation.

209. As to “full dollarization” (alternative (b)), that is, replacing physically the pesos in
circulation with dollar bills and adopting the U.S. dollar as legal tender, the
overwhelming evidence before us indicates that this was a purely theoretically and
thoroughly impractical solution, never really envisaged by the various relevant actors,
considering that Argentina alone would not have been in the position to pursue it. Such a
full dollarization had never been tried before for a large economy, such as that of
Argentina, and that would have required massive financial and logistical support by the
U.S. Government.*! That support was not available. Commentators have also considered
that, even if implemented, full dollarization would not have solved Argentina’s problems,

nor restored confidence in its debt sustainability.*!°

210. Thus neither solution can be considered as an alternative to devaluation that could
have been reasonably pursued by Argentina with any probable chances of success. For
the purpose of the present legal evaluation, devaluation has thus to be considered
inevitable in view of the economic unsustainability of the parity with the U.S. dollar, and
because of the run on deposits and the flight from the peso which had made the Corralito

317
necessary.

314 In order to make Argentina’s debt sustainable, a debt reduction of 30% to 40% was considered to be necessary within the Fund in Autumn 2001,
Blustein, 167; see also Lessons from the Crisis, 36, “[alt this stage, serious consideration should already have been given to an involuntary debt
restructuring,

315 Thi

 

vas conceded by Prof. S. Edwards who supported this full dollarization in his oral testimony. See also J. Sachs, “Duhalde’s Wrong Turn,

Financi

 

nes, USA Edition, Jan. 11, 2002 (according to whom dollarization should have been accompanied by massive devaluation), Claimant's doc.
C-ILS; Scott, 576, cited. footnote 306 above (as to the refusal of the US Government to approve further financial support to Argentina at the end of

2001); Lessons from the Crisis, 34, excluding that full dollarization might have been a solution in Argentina’s situation of rec

 

ion already in 2000.

  

316 Against the support expressed by Prof. S. Edwards for this solution as an expert witness for the Claimant, Argentina referred to the same expert's

   

¢ of dollarization,” Financial Times May 11, 2001 (Argent

 

Iso Lessons from the Crisis, 30.

 

317 See Calomiris, 1: “thé

 

onsistency between persistent fiscal deficits and recession, on the one hand, and the inflexible currency regime of

“convertibility,” on the other hand, became increasingly apparent to market observers from 1999 through 2001. By the end of 2001, given the political

93

(c) In respect of the pesification of the U.S. dollar-denominated contracts and deposits

211. The main argument of the Claimant is that Argentina could have let the peso
devalue and terminate convertibility, whilst leaving unaffected the denomination in dollar
of the deposits and especially of the financial instrument issued in dollars within
Argentina. The Claimant submits that many countries had similar levels of
“dollarization” during similar currency crisis, but that “[o]nly Argentina chose the highly
unusual route of mandatory de-dollarization, i.e. pesification of contracts — deposits, debt
and utility tariffs.”*"*

212. Argentina in turn submits that, in view of the level of dollarization of the financial
sector, it would have been impossible after the devaluation of the peso of more than
300% to satisfy claims denominated in dollars by converting them at the market rate. The
debtor would have gone bankrupt and a massive bail-out of the banks would have been
required far beyond the possibilities of Argentina’s strained public finances. Moreover,
this would have caused widespread imbalances and unjustified discrimination between
those depositors which had converted their peso in dollars, possibly just before the
Corralito, and those who had maintained their assets in pesos. The solution which was
put in place distributed more evenly and equitably the burden of the country’s new
financial situation between all those affected, while recognizing through the asymetric

pesification the expectations of those who had made deposits in dollars.

213. According to one of the most specific economic studies devoted to the issue, and
discussed by the Parties at the hearing, “[r]edenomination of dollar debts implied a
substantial reduction of the real debt service burdens of dollar-denominated debtors. It
was inspired by the realization that without redenomination Argentina would have to find
a way to address massive economy-wide insolvency of dollar-denominated debtors, as

well as huge relative price increases for energy and transport costs that were fixed by

 

infeasibility of fiscal reform (a fact illustrated by the brief tenure and abrupt demise of officials who suggested the desirability of fiscal reform), sovereign

default and devaluation became inevitable toward the end of 2001.”

 

 

laimant mentions the cases of Indonesia in 1997, Ecuador and Bolivia in 1999 and Uruguay in 2002 (Claimant's Reply, 93-94). It further

points to various strategies in debt restructuring adopted by these and other countries in a situation of crisis; all of them however presuppose that the crisis,

 

 

brings borrowers into distress and that companies in distress can be saved through various debt restructuring, a form of solution that cannot be (by

definition) fully compliant with depositors’ rights.

94

concession contracts in dollar terms.”*!? Furthermore “Argentina was in an unusually
vulnerable macro-economic position as the result of the large fraction of domestic debts
and transportation and utility concession contracts that were denominated in or indexed to
the dollar, and the small fraction of its economy devoted to exports,”*”° Thus de-
dollarization seems to have represented, according to qualified observers,*”! as almost a
“must” for Argentina, in order to devaluate effectively, avoid unbearable asymmetries in
the allocation of the burden that devaluation entails and to stimulate the recovery.”
Finally, contrary to the Claimant’s allegations, the de-dollarization of 2002 by Argentina

was not without precedents in recent financial crises.*??

214. The Tribunal finds that de-dollarization was inevitable in the situation facing
Argentina, in order to achieve a balanced distribution of the burden of the devaluation
and of the abandonment of the convertibility at par with the dollar, once the fiction that
pesos and dollars were equivalent had been discredited by the massive flight from peso to
dollar (which had become a cause for the unsustainability of the very convertibility at
par). The asymmetry of the exchange rates adopted reflected as far as possible, although

only partially, the expectations of depositors in dollars within Argentina that they would

319 Calomiris, 1 tt.

320 Calomiris, 3, the author further explains, at 12, that “Argentine private sector debt was much more heavily dollarized than those of the other four

 

countries with similar of higher dollarization score.” See also IMP, Evaluation Report, 20.

321 Calomiris, 8, reports, among others, the opinion of the Nobel Prize winner Joseph Stiglitz who “argued that devaluation would produce financial

 

distress for borrowers with dollar-d claims, and that a of debts or some other plan to reduce the value of the

  

dollar-denominated debt would soften the blow of devaluation.” As to the need of de-dollarization together with the large scale depreciation of the pesos
see also Lessons from the Crisis, 32, and IMF, Evaluation Report, 66.

32

 

Krugman’s Editorial, quoted footnote 166 above: “[aldmittedly, the fact that much private debt in Argentina is indexed to the dollar means that a
peso devaluation might create financial problems ... Simply issue a decree canceling the indexation. I’s a radical solution, but the situation is desperate,
and there is a precedent: it’s more or less what President Roosevelt did in 1933.” According to Calomiris, 8, “[t]he Argentine government had observed
the consequences of devaluation without debt redenomination in Mexico post-1994 crisis and in East Asia post-1997, and was keenly aware of the severe

adverse consequences of not combining devaluation with debt redenomination.” Calomiris, 13-15, concludes that devaluation with debt redenomination

 

had salutary effects on the investment behaviour of debtor firm and “was a positive surprise at the time it was enacted.

 

323 According to Calomiris, 10, Mexico’s devaluation of 1982 had included “a similar debt-relief policy of reducing the dollar value of its dollar-
denominated bank loans and dollar denominated deposits in 1982.” Notably: “[t]he real value of loans was reduced through the conversion of foreign
currency loans to pesos at an exchange rate that overstated the value of the peso relative to the dollar.” Indeed, as Mann, 471, recalls this operation led to
litigation in the U.S. by affected investors unsuccessfully claiming that they had been partially expropriated by the forced conversion of their dollar-

denominated deposits into pesos at an artificial rate, West v. Multibanco Comermex S.A. (C.A. 9th Cit.), 807 F. 2d 820 (1987),

95

be more secure than holders in pesos in case of crisis.** That burden was charged to the

entire economy.*?>

(d) In respect of the suspension of payments, default and rescheduling of the
governmental financial instruments held by CNA

215. First of all, the Claimant complains that Argentina defaulted at the end of 2001 and
the beginning of 2002 on various financial instruments issued by the Government and
held by CNA. Moreover it also complains that interest payments due to CNA under these
financial instruments were delayed substantially in 2002, even in respect of the new terms
that Argentina had unilaterally set. Argentina submits that in the first months of 2002 its
financial administration was in such a state of disarray and the public finances in such a
shortage of funds due to the crisis (and specifically due to the lack of access to
international capital markets) that both forms of conducts, namely as to default and as to
lack of punctual payment of interest, appear to have been inevitable. Overdue payments
were in any case made when, where and as far as payments restarted on a regular basis in

the second half of 2002.°7°

216. The other complaints of Continental relate to specific aspects of the conditions of
the restructuring process of the various obligations and similar instruments on which
Argentina had defaulted at the end of 2001 and at the beginning of 2002. As described by
Argentina itself, under the restructuring process, which ended in June 2005, “the
Argentine Government offered to swap all Argentine government debt securities issued
before December 31, 2001, on default, for new securities with an extended term and for a

minor principal and/or interested value but adjusted to Argentina’s capacity payment.”*””

217. Specifically as to the GGLs, the evidence shows that they were pesified and

indexed to the CER and that they were to earn a reduced interest rate in accordance with

 

324 The expectation that dollars could be immune from a financial and exchange crisis of the m

 

wide of the one which occurred was legally

 
 

misplaced. Dollar denominated deposits and secured were not “real” dollars, backed by the U.S. They were the result of conversions of pesos

 

within Argentina’s economic and financial system and were backed by the foreign exchange reserves of Argentina.

 

325 According to Calomiris, 10, the ultimate result of the asymetric pes

bon

ication, adopted as “an attempt to placate depositors, who complained of the loss

 
 

 

of value of their deposits,” and which entailed the government is to the banks to cover the losses the latter suffered as a consequence, was that

 

 

taxpayers paid for the cost of the relative subsidy received by citi

 

sas depositors.”
326 Claimant’s Memorial at p. 15.

327 Argentina’ Counter-Memorial, paras. 722-723.

96

Decree 471/02. The guarantee that had initially been provided for the case of default
(consisting in the proceeds of the financial transaction tax) was thereafter withdrawn by
Decree 644/02 specifically dealing with GGLs: within the restructuring of Argentina’s
public finances the proceeds of this tax were now to be shared by the Government with
the provinces. Since there was no interest for a holder to opt for the return of the
securities which had been swapped for the GGLs (since these were also in default), CNA
opted to accept the new terms. In view of the situation of the public finances of Argentina
in the crisis of 2002, we conclude that these Measures can be considered reasonably
necessary within the pesification of the economy. The treatment of GGLs compares with
that of other financial instruments held by the public. The special guarantees (that had
been provided in the original conditions, in order to induce depositors to accept a swap
intended to avert the risk of an impending crisis), once the crisis had arrived, had either
lost their value or could not escape being subjected to the same necessity and hence to the

need of being restructured.**

218. As to dollar-denominated Term Deposits (CD), the evidence shows that they had
been first frozen under the Corralito, then “reprogrammed” (so-called CEDROS) under
Res. 6/2002, thereafter pesified at 1.4 plus CER adjustment (Decree 471/2002), and
further frozen under Res. 73. Short term deposits were thus frozen for a considerable
length of time, except for the possibility of withdrawals as introduced for insurance
companies. As Continental explains, it opted in July 2002 for a dollar denominated bond
(BODEN 2012) in exchange of deposits held with the bankrupt Scotiabank.” As to the
rest of its deposits, Continental preferred not to accept the Government’s offers in May
and July 2002 (Decree 905 and 1836) to exchange them against long terms bonds in
dollars. The Claimant accepted instead the conditions of the repeal of the Corralon,
that is the subsequent de-freezing, or thawing provided by Decree 739 of March 28,
2003: this entailed a further rescheduling of 120 days with a 2% annual interest and

receiving a dollar bond (BODEN 2013) “to compensate for the difference between the

328 See particularly Argentina’s Counter Memorial, paras. 589-600 and paras. 705 ff. According to Argentina (Counter Memorial, para. 710) “[tJhe

 

manner of servicing the PGNs offered to the creditors was the only way that the Federal State was able to meet, allowing making payments in li

the resources available with considerable fiscal effort and under distressful economic and social conditions.”

 

329 Argentina’s Counter-Memorial, para. 54

330 Argentina’s Counter-Memorial, para. 617.

97

market exchange rate at the date of the enactment of the Decree and the government
imposed rate of 1.4 pesos to the dollar as adjusted by CER.”**! According to Argentina,
thanks to this mechanism a holder like CNA was able through indexation and the dollar

bond to recover a substantial amount of the initial capital loss.

219. We are of the view that in the state of necessity faced by Argentina the elaborate
mechanism described above was appropriate and reasonable to cope with the need
urgently to stabilize the financial markets and the banks, reinstating progressively the
rights of depositors. The burden that depositors had to bear initially was alleviated pari
passu with the improvement of the conditions of the economic and financial system: this
entailed also a partial “re-dollarization” of their claims through the dollar-denominated

BODEN.

220. As to the Treasury Bills (LETE)*™, the evidence shows**? that Argentina offered
to restructure them through Decree 1735/04 of December 9, 2004 by offering a swap of
these securities, as well as of several other securities also in default, against newly issued
securities, specifically GDP-linked derivative instruments.“ CNA did not accept this
conversion, since it would have received in exchange “only U.S.$0.30 per dollar and
would have been required to waive its rights. It would have also been required to accept
long maturities on bonds from a government that had demonstrated its willingness to

repeatedly default on its debt.”**

221. In respect of this restructuring the Tribunal rejects the defense of necessity by

Argentina based on Art. XI of the BIT, in the light of the following factors:

331 Argentina's Counter-Memorial, para. 58.
332 Claimant's Reply, para. 78; Argentina’s Counter-Memorial, para 717 ff

333 See above para. 151

 

sntina’s Counter-Memorial, paras. 717, 414; Claimant’s Reply, para 78,
335 Claimant’s Reply, para. 78. Argentina indicates that 76,15 % of the holders of eligible securities took part to the swap (Counter-Memorial, para

415). According to Claimant (Claimant's Rey

 

ra, 386) it has suffered as to LETEs losses of 0.7 million due to pesification and of 2.8 million “due to

  

the further default and revocation of contractual rights.

98

(a) the late date in which the swap was offered, when Argentina’s financial

conditions were evolving towards normality;**°

(b) the reduced percentage of the original value of the debt that Argentina

unilaterally offered to recognize;

(c) the condition that any other rights would be waived, which entailed also

waiving the protection of the BIT.”

222. Since, as stated above under (a), Argentina’s financial situation was evolving
towards normality when the LETEs were restructured, Argentina cannot avail itself in
this respect of the alternative defense based on state of necessity in customary
international law. The fundamental requirement that the conduct be “the only way for a
State to safeguard an essential interest against a grave and imminent peril” (Art. 25 (1) (i)
ILC Articles) was lacking for the reasons stated hereabove under (a). The Tribunal
rejects, therefore, also this alternative defense by Argentina as to the restructuring of the
LETEs. We consider separately below the consequences of this adverse decision for

Argentina.

(ii) Whether Argentina could have adopted at an earlier time different policies that would
have avoided or prevented the situation that brought about the adoption of the
challenged measures

223. The Claimant developed a further argument in order to reject Argentina’s plea of
necessity. In the Claimant’s submission, Argentina could have avoided the devaluation
and the pesification if it had adopted a different economic policy, specifically if it had
implemented in a timely manner those accompanying policies and measures (especially
relating to budgetary and fiscal discipline) required for the sustainability of the parity
arrangement, convertibility and the currency board. This argument points also to a
contribution by Argentina itself to the crisis and hence to the impugned Measures:
396 We recall that Argentina had retumed tothe U.S. capital market with an ssunce of secrtsin September 200, se above para. 159

337 We note in this respect that Argentina has justified the waiver requirement imposed for the participation to the restructuring of the GGLs at a much

carlier date, in the midst of the crisis (Decree 471 of March 8, 2002) with the need to avoid that creditors might obtain a kind of double recovery by

 

domestic courts: these had at the time often disregarded the emergency legislation, and had ordered the Government to respect the original

   

 

conditions (including the dollar denomination) of various instruments (see Argent

 

's Counter Memorial, para. 598). This “danger” no longer existed in

2004 after the Bustos decision by the Supreme Court which fully recognized the validity of the emergency legislation

99

“Argentina could have implemented economic policies that would have supported the

ability of the currency board to withstand an economic recession.” 338

224. In this respect too, the analysis by the Tribunal is circumscribed in drawing
appropriate conclusions in respect of the necessity for Argentina’s impugned measures
under the BIT. States are basically free to adopt economic and monetary policies of their
choice; and this Tribunal is not subjecting past economic policies to any judicial,
administrative or political review. It is a fact that economic observers and institutions,
looking retrospectively at the causes of Argentina’s crisis, have pointed out that
Argentina had not carried out, fully or adequately, the various policies that the Fund had
recommended, especially as to fiscal balance (in order to sustain the currency board
system) and as to cost of labour (in order to maintain the economy’s competitiveness). It
is also a fact that, at the time, the IMF recognized favourably Argentina’s efforts towards
the implementation of the recommended policies, even if they had not been enacted fully
and had not obtained the expected results. Thus the IMF had continued supporting
Argentina all along. It is also a fact that the IMF had recognized the negative impact of
various exogenous factors in this failure”? Even ex post facto, however, qualified
observers remain in disagreement as to the exact causes of the crisis and the mix of

measures that might have avoided it?

225. We have highlighted above, based on the chronology of relevant facts,
contemporary accounts and later analyze, that Argentina’s authorities made serious
efforts in 2000-2001 to take a number of measures and policies in order to implement the
Fund’s advice (as part of the IMF Stand-By conditions) and to redress the economic and
financial situation under the convertibility regime. These efforts culminated with the
zero-deficit law in the summer of 2001, with the IMF recognising these efforts by

continuing to extend its support.

226. It is a fact that the results were not those expected. The harsh measures
recommended were met by public resistance (notably the labour force), could not be
338 Claimant's Reply, para. 36.

339 Sce specifically the various IMF Reviews of the Stand-By Arrangement of March 2000 highlighted above.
340 See IMF, Evaluation Report, at p. 14.

100

successful in the short time span that was available, and could not be realistically
implemented as such in view of the organizational shortcomings of Argentina’s
administrative apparatus. Nor does it appear to the Tribunal that the Argentinean
Government can be faulted for not having more energetically pursued these policies. The
lenient and benevolent attitude of the Fund which acknowledged in 2001 the difficulties
that Argentina had encountered in implementing the conditions of the Stand-By
arrangement has also to be taken into account.*4! Significantly, even retrospectively,
some analysts have expressed the opinion that those measures would have been

ineffective to avoid the crisis in any event. 3

227. For the purpose of this Award, we conclude that Argentina made reasonable
efforts to take measures that would have, or might have maintained convertibility thus
respecting its international obligations connected thereto. In conformity with the concept
of “necessity” discussed above, we consider that the Government’s efforts struck an
appropriate balance between that aim and the responsibility of any government towards
the country’s population: it is self-evident that not every sacrifice can properly be
imposed on a country’s people in order to safeguard a certain policy that would ensure
full respect towards international obligations in the financial sphere, before a breach of
those obligations can be considered justified as being necessary under this BIT. The

standard of reasonableness and proportionality do not require as much.*?

228. In exploring alternative policies that Argentina might have pursued in the
preceding months that would have made resort to the impugned Measures unnecessary,
an early abandonment of the currency board system and of convertibility at par must be
considered. In fact several observers, retrospectively, have criticized Argentina and the

Fund not for having failed to implement those accompanying policies envisaged by the

 

341 See Lessons from the Crisis, 40: “{t}he IMF's decision to continue its support during the pre-crisis period, including through its endorsement of

policies under the its precautionary arrangement, despite repeated policy slippages, must be evaluated in the context of available alternatives. There was

 

an evident fear among the IMF's shareholders, and the international community at large, that policies would quickly deteriorate in the absence of IMF
oversight.”
342 See Lessons from the Crisis, 32: “[t]hus, once the depression was under way, there was no easy way out, as the authorities had no policy instruments

that could have enabled them to stimulate th se 10 1998).

 

economy without compromising debt sustainability” (with ref

 

343 We recall as to the cost factor that in the GATT-WTO case law an alternative is not to be considered reasonably available if it imposes an “undue

burden” or “prohibitive costs.”

101

Stand-By Arrangement that had been recommended at the time, but rather for not having
abandoned convertibility earlier, once the sustainability of convertibility appeared to be

unlikely under realistic conditions.“

229. Such an exit from convertibility could be considered a reasonable alternative if it
could have been carried out in an orderly fashion, without forcing upon holders a
reduction of the value of their security, by unilateral restructuring below par or by
pesification. However, contrary to the Claimant’s position, the dominant view in
retrospect is that a voluntary restructuring, respectful of holders’ rights, within an
abandonment of the currency board would not have been viable from at least early
1998* or 1999.4 Any abandonment of the convertibility in 2000*” or by mid-2001
would have entailed an even more significant reduction of the value of the debt for the
creditors in order to avert a general crisis as the one that materialized at the end of the
year." In legal terms, such a debt forced restructuring would have represented a breach
of the terms of the debt instruments being restructured, exactly as was the case for the
relevant Measures enacted by Argentina at the end of 2001 — beginning of 2002. Such a
pre-emptive or anticipatory default could have been more easily challengeable as to the

absence of any “necessity” under the BIT.

230. Even if practicable, these “alternatives” cannot however be invoked fruitfully by
the Claimant as measures that would have respected its dollar-denominated investments

in Argentina whilst being sufficient to avoid the crisis. If Argentina had abandoned the

 

344 According to Mussa, 35, “[ilt is impossible to know at what point sovereign default and a likely collapse of the Convertibility Plan became
unavoidable. Perhaps it was already too late by the autumn of 2000.”

345 See IMF, Evaluation Report, 20: “iJn retrospect, the years 1996-97 may well have been the last opportunity for Argentina to exit from the peg
without facing very high costs ... It should be noted however that exit was never an easy option, either politically or economically. The legal

consequences of an exit would have been just as significant, given the extensive dollarization of contracts and that it would have meant the breach of a

 

social contract between the state and the public.”

   

346 With reference to 1998-1999, according to Lessons from the Crisis, 34, “[a] possible alternative approach, at this stage, would have been a pre~

 

cemptive sovereign debt restructuring, which would have provided both sufficient liquidity and net present value relief, combined with a strategy to limit
the adverse repercussion on banks’ balance sheets (...) However, at that stage, the authorities were understandably reluctant to adopt such a drastic
approach, as a sovereign default was regarded as a last resort that should be taken only after all other policy options were exhausted.” See also IMF,
Evaluation Report, 66.

347 According to Mussa, 19-20, in late autumn 2000 “[njecessarily, this rescheduling of private credits could not be entirely voluntarily, as private
creditors would be required to accept significant modifications of their existing claims that would reduce their market value ... would be viewed as a de
facto sovereign default and would likely to be very messy.”

348 Lesson from the Crisis, 36, 40.

102

parity and convertibility at 1:1 before 2000, Continental could not have made those U.S.
dollars denominated investments exchanging at par CNA’s income made in peso that it
complains have been affected by Argentina devaluation/pesification. If the convertibility
board system had been abandoned later, the probability is, as indicated above, that the
Claimant would have been subject to the same losses that it challenges here. Therefore

the alternative would not have put it in any better situation.

E. The effect of the applicability of Article XI
(i) In general

231. Concluding that the measures taken by Argentina were necessary to address,
through painful means and by retreating from a number of commitments to the public as
to the stability and convertibility of the national currency, an impending situation of
complete breaking down of the economy, does not imply that the crisis was inevitable. If
a different economic and exchange policy had been introduced years before this could
have avoided the crisis of 2001-2002. While we have examined this scenario, the
causative link between these “pre-emptive” policies and the Measures at issue would
have been possibly too tenuous to consider them as alternatives that would have rendered
these measures unnecessary under Art. XI. In any case, for the reasons just stated, the
Claimant would not have profited in respect of its dollar-denominated investments that it
made in 2001 on the basis of the fix parity/free convertibility system in place that was
soon thereafter to become unsustainable. At the stage when the Measures were adopted it
does not appear to the Tribunal that Argentina had the choice to resort generally to

alternatives that would have been economically and legally less disruptive.

232. The measures were sufficient in their design to address the crisis and were applied
in a reasonable and proportionate way at the end of 2001 — 2002. They have led to
recovery in a context favorable to Argentina’s exports. We also note that the relevant
Measures were basically limited to the economic and financial aspects of the economic
crisis. They did not interfere otherwise with the ordinary conduct of private business

activities; they did not entail (re)nationalization of private owned business, nor otherwise

349 CI. WTO Appellate Body, EC-Asbestos, 168, for relying on the aptitude of the design of a measure to reach its objectives as one of the yardsticks in
order to uphold its admissibility

103

interfere with private contracts, including insurance companies (nor does the Claimant
complain of any such measure). None of the impugned Measures differentiated between
national or companies of Argentina, on the one hand, and foreign or foreign owned
companies and businessmen, be they investors or not, on the other hand. CNA was in all

respect treated as any other Argentine (insurance) company.

233. In sum, based on the evidence adduced by the Parties in these proceedings, we
consider that Argentina’s conduct in the face of the economic and social crisis

conformed, by and large?

with the conditions required for derogating from its
obligations under Art. XI of the BIT as to the Measures challenged in the present dispute.
The examination of the Claimant’s challenges under the various BIT provisions it has
invoked will have therefore to take into account Art. XI, evaluating in more detail
whether and how far the defense based on necessity under that provision is relevant and

available as to the specific claims of breach and with what effects.**!

(ii) Has Argentina contributed to necessity?

234. Before concluding our decisions on necessity, the Tribunal must also deal with the
argument that necessity is unavailable to Argentina “because Argentina contributed”
itself to the state of necessity it invokes. Art. 25 ILC, which excludes the plea of
necessity in such a case at para. 2(b), and on which the Claimant relies, cannot be the
yardstick as to the application of Art. XI of the BIT for the reasons stated above.
Arguably, under Art. XI a Contracting Party may invoke necessity even if the need to
protect its essential security interest has materialized as a consequence of a deliberate but
still legitimate policy of that very State.>? On the other hand, if a Contracting Party to the

BIT has contributed to endangering its essential security interest, for the protection of

350

 

fe have stated at para. 220 ff. that the restructuring of the LETEs, as concems CNA, does not appear having met the requirements that would have

made it “ng

 

essary,
351 The concept and evaluation of necessity does not require nor allow the Tribunal to go into the merits in detail and to substitute its own judgment to
that of the national authorities, such as considering whether a conversion rate of, let us say, 1.50 would have been more appropriate than the one chosen
of 1.40, As already indicated, a margin of discretion and appreciation is generally recognized to national authorities in this respect whenever their conduct
is tested under international standards.

352 One could imagine that country A, which has a BIT in force with country B, adopts an unfriendly attitude or poticy towards the latter. Country B

reacts in a way that country A considers, some of its essential security inte

 
 

ts. In order to protect those interests, country A then considers it

      

“necessary” to adopt measures limiting movements of funds to country B, or prohibiting investors from country B from engaging senior man

personnel of nationality B against provisions granting such rights as those found in the Argentina ~ USA BIT.

104

which it has then adopted the challenged measures, those measures may fail to qualify as
“necessary” under Art. XI, since that Party could have pursued some other policy that

would have rendered them unnecessary.

235. It cannot be denied that a country is always ultimately responsible of its economic

policy and of its consequences, at least politically and economically.*** The conduct of

  

economic aff

 

s, as any other affairs, pertains to the Government, so that the state bears
the ultimate responsibility for any failure. The Claimant points out that Argentina’s own
senior authorities did in fact recognize this responsibility.>* Legal evaluation is based
however on different parameters. Our analysis in the preceding paragraphs shows that the

economic and exchange policies whose ultimate unsustainability led to the crisis were

  

regarded as sound economic policies which had been beneficial for years to Argentina’s
economy. The fixed parity/convertibility/currency board system was praised by the
international financial community and by many qualified observers. It had been
recommended by the IMF and received its massive financial assistance, as well as the

political support of the United States.

236. It is argued that Argentina could have changed course and rejected the advice it
was receiving, or on the contrary, that it might have tried to enforce with more
determination those supporting policies that had been recommend to it. In either scenario
conflicting qualified views have been expressed retrospectively on the soundness and

feasibility of those policies or of the alternatives.*° In the light of the analysis available

 

353 The IMF Evaluation Report, 64, summing up its “Major Findings” states the following: “[t]he catastrophic collapse of the Argentine econom;

2001-2002 represents the

 

ure of Argentine policy makers to take neces

 

ary corrective measures at a sufficiently

 

arly stage. The IMF on its part,

 

supported by its major shareholders, also erred in failing to call an earlier halt to support for a strategy that, as implemented, was not sustainable.” The
subsequent (2006) External Evaluation of the IEO Report of 2004, 14, (Argentina’s doc. R-294) has criticized this text, as a rearrangement in its final
version in order to reduce the Fund’s role in the ultimate failure of its program of assistance to Argentina: “[tJhe IEO draft summary of missteps leading

up to Argentina’s currency collapse focuses on misjudgement by IMF staff and management; the final version of the paragraph focuses on misjudgements,

 

by Argentine authorities.
354 This had been recognized by President Duhalde in the Financial Times, US Edition of February 7, 2002 (“in the case of Argentina, no one bears more

of the blame for the crisis than Argentina itself”), as the Claimant emphasises,

 

ce Claimant’s doc. C-111 and Claimant’s Reply, para. 13.
35:

  

Scott, 516: “

 

Juring the two years leading up to the crisis, the IMF repeatedly loaned Argentina funds. US government officials were involved in
each IMF decision.” This is confirmed in more detailed journalistic terms by Blustein, 145 ff, focusing on the support of the US administration in summer

2001 to the IMF policy of assistance to Argentina,

 

356 In economic matters, the analysis of causation, that is the determination of which facts caused a certain other fact, or whether a certain fact was

among. the contributory causes of that certain other fact and whether its impact was material, does not lend itself to the same scientific analys

 
 

domain of the so-called exact sciences and of natural phenomena. The IMF Evaluation Report, dealing with “Factors Contributing to the Cris

and of the evidence submitted to us we have come to the conclusion that the most likely
means to avoid the crisis and the measures adopted to face and overcome it, would have
been to adopt different policies years before, against the advice and support that
Argentina was receiving from the outside. In this context we do not consider that

Argentina because of its own conduct is barred from invoking Art. XI of the BIT.

VII. Specific Claims of Breaches
A. Claim of breach of Article V (Freedom of Transfer)

237. The Claimant complains that CNA was prevented from transferring to the U.S. at
par free funds amounting to U.S.$19,000,000 by Decree 1570 of 2001 (Corralito) which
forbade withdrawals from banks and transfers of funds (which CNA had converted in
dollars) out of Argentina. The amount of damages it claims as the loss from devaluation
of those funds equivalent to U.S.$14,631,000.7°” Continental claims that this prohibition
breached its right as an investor to effect “all transfers related to an investment” provided
for by Art. V of the BiT.* According to Continental, the proposed transfer concerned
“proceeds from the sale or liquidation of all or any part of an investment” (Art. V(1) (e)),
based on the following reasoning: “Continental’s shares in CNA ART are definitely an
investment protected under the BIT. The transfer of the asset of an investment is a
transfer related to an investment. Transfers of U.S. dollar term deposits on maturity are

also ‘proceeds from the liquidation of...part of an investment.’”*?

238. As mentioned above at para. 82, Argentina denies having breached Art. V of the
BIT in regards to transfers. First of all, Argentina claims that Art. V concerns only
foreign investors and not local subsidiaries as CNA ART. Argentina indicates that Art.
V(1)(e) is not applicable here, because it “protects transfers of the proceeds of the sale or

liquidation of all or any part of an investment,” that is by the parent company

 

‘nt that a combination of do ial factors contributed to

 

notes that “(there is a go and ext , but different authors have

       
 
     
 

emphasised different factors as al policy, the rigid excl external shocks.

     

‘The Report also dist iclors that generated vulnerability and the immediate factors that triggered the crisis.”

 

357 This amount corresponds to the difference between the original amount calculated in dollars plus interests it would had earn if it would have

 

remained in dollars, minus the pesified amount increased by the interest earned thereon, reconverted in dollar at the current exchange rate at March 2006.

 

hedule 8 of the Reply Report of Mr. H. Rosen, expert witness for the Claimant at page 43.
358 Claimant's Reply, para. 193 ff.
359 Claimant's Reply, para. 195

106

(Continental), while here the bank deposits were held by CNA. Argentina further argues
that Art. V does not prevent “specific regulations for balance-of-payment difficulties” in
view of Art. XI of the BIT and of the “standards established in multilateral agreements
which both Argentina and the United States ... have signed,” with specific mention of the
GATT, the GATS and the IMF? Argentina also claims that its regulation of monetary
transfers conforms with international customary law, as a manifestation of the exercise of
monetary sovereignty by States, in view of the severe difficulties in its balance-of-
payment.*"! Argentina claims that “if CONTINENTAL wanted to make transfers abroad
of money derived from revenues and dividends, they could be made by previously
requesting the authorization from the corresponding authority, i.e., ‘the BCRA,’ a request

that neither CNA nor Claimant ever made.” **

239. The first issue here is to determine whether the transfer that Continental claims it
would have made if the Corralito had not prevented it, falls within those “transfers
related to an investment” which the Parties to the BIT undertook in Art. V to permit
“freely and without delay into or out of its territory.” This type of provision is a standard
feature of BITs: the guarantee that a foreign investor shall be able to remit from the
investment country the income produced, the reimbursement of any financing received or
royalty payment due, and the value of the investment made, plus any accrued capital
gain, in case of sale or liquidation, is fundamental to the freedom to make a foreign

investment and an essential element of the promotional role of BITs.*°

This explains
moreover the detailed list of permitted transfers that most BITs set forth.** On the other

hand, the Treaty terms show that such freedom is not without limit.

240. The first issue is to determine which transfers are “related to the investment.” This
is important since in respect of those transfers the U.S. BITs “prohibit virtually all

restrictions,” thus limiting the Parties’ prerogatives under customary international law to

ntina’s Rejoinder, para. 295.

   
  

 

ntina’s Rejoinder, para, 297.
ntina’s Rejoinder, para. 306.

D, Transfer of Funds, Executive Summary, sums up the point as follows: “[..] a transfer provision ensures that at the end of the day, a
foreign investor will be able to enjoy the financial benefits of a successful investment.”

364 For a systematic review of clauses see UNCTAD, Bilateral Investment Treaties in the Mid-1990s, 1998, 75; Dolzer, Stevens, 85.

107

A oti 5
impose currency exchange restrictions.*™

Guidance is to be found in the detailed (though
non-exclusive) list in Art. V(1) and the purpose identified above of this kind of provision.
Protected transfers are those essential for, or typical to the making, controlling,
maintenance, disposition of investments, especially in the form of companies; or in the
form of debt, service and investment contracts, including the making, performance and
enforcement of contracts; the acquisition, use, protection and disposition of property of
all kinds, including intellectual and industrial property rights; and the borrowing of funds,
to name the kind of investments and associated activities mentioned in Art. I of the BIT

more relevant to this issue.

241. The type of transfer at issue here does not fall into any of these categories, nor
specifically does it represent the “proceeds from the sale or liquidation of all or any part
of an investment.” It was merely a change of type, location and currency of part of an
investor’s existing investment, namely a part of the freely disposable funds, held short
term at its banks by CNA, in order to protect them from the impending devaluation, by

transferring them to bank accounts outside Argentina.

242. The transfer did not correspond to, nor was it required to satisfy any payment
obligation of CNA, commercial, financial or other; nor would it involve the transfer of
ownership of the funds involved to some different entity. It was clearly a legitimate
operation from a business point of view, permissible under the convertibility regime of
Argentina until the Corralito. This does not mean that it would fall within the “transfers
related to an investment” under Art. V. The fact that the BIT does not limit these transfers
to those made by the foreign investor itself and that these transfers may be made by the
local subsidiary, in favor of its parent company as well of other entities (thus in case of
payment of royalties, payments related to loans received etc.), does not mean that any

trans-border movement of funds by such subsidiary is “related to an investment.”

243. Both parties have relied also on the IMF provisions and the connected principles of
the multilateral regulation of international payments in support of their position. As is

well known, the IMF distinguishes between current transactions and capital movements.

365 See Vandevelde, 139-141

108

The “avoidance of restrictions on current payments” (Art. VIII), except with the approval
of the Fund, is a “general obligation” of IMF members, adhered to by their vast majority
that do not avail themselves of the transitional regime of Art. XIV. It reflects one of the
key purposes of the Fund, “to assist in the establishment of a multilateral system of
payments in respect of current transactions” as stated in Art. I (iv), as was the case of
Argentina when its currency was freely convertible. On the other hand, capital
movements may be subject to exchange controls by individual members, inter alia in

view of their possible speculative nature and destabilizing effects on national economies.

244. The above distinction is of limited assistance here, because transfers “related to an
investment” listed in and allowed by Art. V of the BIT includes both current transactions
and capital movements: Art. V may be considered a /ex specialis in respect of the IMF
regime and more liberal than the latter. In any case, capital movements are defined a
contrario by the definition of “current transactions” in Art. XXX of the Fund. Not all
capital movements are in themselves “investments,” such as direct investments or
portfolio investments listed in Art. V of the BIT. In the IMF terminology and
classification, widely accepted beyond the Fund’s ambit, the movement of capital at issue
here was or would have been more specifically a short-term deposit abroad, a transaction
which may be subject to tighter controls than direct or portfolio investment
transactions.*® This confirms the Tribunal in its conclusion that the transfer which the
Claimant complains it could not carry out because of the Corralito, namely a short-term
placement out of Argentina of the equivalent of $19,000,000, was not a transfer related to

an investment protected by Art. V of the BIT.

245. As a consequence Argentina has committed no breach of Art. V of the BIT to the
detriment of the Claimant, so that the latter’s claim in this respect must be and is rejected
by the Tribunal. This conclusion makes it unnecessary for the Tribunal to examine the
subordinate arguments of the Parties: namely (a) whether in view of the acute foreign

exchange crisis Argentina was encountering, Argentina was allowed, notwithstanding its

366 See IMF, Balance of Payments Manual, 5° edition, 1993, Chapters XV and XX. When States commit th

 

ves to allow capital movements, they

focus especially on direct investments and reserve th

 

t not to liberalize short term monetary placements abroad of the type discussed here; see OECD
Code of Liberalization of Capital Movements, and its List B-X1; European Community, Directives on Capital Movements, May 11, 1960 and December

18, 1962 (not in force any more), Annex I, List D, and Annex I IX.

109

obligations under Art. V BIT to introduce the exchange restrictions of Decree 1570,
based on Art. XI of the BIT, on the IMF Agreement or under customary international
law; (b) whether the Claimant cannot invoke Art. V because neither itself (Continental)
nor CNA ever decided to make, or asked to be authorized to effect the transfers at
issue; and (c) whether the derogations allowed under the Corralito would have made

those transfers possible.**

B. Claim of breach of Article II (2)(a) (Fair and Equitable Treatment)
a) In general

246. The Claimant has severely criticized the behavior of Argentina towards its
investments during the crisis; in its view Argentina “promised to refrain from interference
with Bank Deposits, then froze and pesified them;”°°? “promised to honor its government
debt, then defaulted on and pesified it”°”° The Claimant submits that these Measures
breached the BIT’s obligation to treat it, as a U.S. investor, in a fair and equitable manner
and according to the international law standard of treatment, contrary to Art. IT (2)(a) of
the BIT. This Article provides that: “[i]Jnvestment shall at all times be accorded fair and
equitable treatment, shall enjoy full protection and security and shall in no case be
accorded treatment less than that required by international law.” Specifically according to

the Claimant, this article obliges Argentina “to provide a stable legal and business

371 9372

environment” and “to protect investors’ legitimate expectations.

247. According to the Claimant, in the light of what it considers to be the legal import
of these Treaty standards and in view of the commitments Argentina had undertaken in
respect of its monetary system, of the protection of private investments and of the terms

of the debt instruments it had issued, Argentina has breached the standards of Art. II

367 As Argentina correctly points out, there is no cogent evidence in the evidential record that the Claimant intended actually to shift its funds out of

 

Argentina at the time of the Corralito. Up to then, the Claim ing its funds in Argentina (see above para. 132),

converting them from pesos into dollar-denominat

 

instruments... CNA thus acted as “a good corporate citizen” of Argentina and did not participate in

 

  

flight of the second part of 2001 which lead to the imposition of the Corralito.
368 See above footnote 197.

369 Claimant's Reply, para. 53.

370 Claimant's Reply, para. 70.

371 Claimant's Reply, para. 181 ff.

372 Claimant's Reply, para. 188 ff.

110

(2)(a) BIT: through Decree 1570 (Corralito); by pesification of bank deposits through
Decree 214; by pesification of government debt through Decree 471; by the unilateral

rescheduling of deposits and default on debt”

248. Argentina opposes the Claimant’s claim concerning the alleged violation of Art. IT
(2)(a) of the Bits” According to Argentina, the fair and equitable treatment standard (as
well as the other treatment standards mentioned in the same paragraph) must be applied
considering especially the circumstances under which such measures were adopted,
namely the “dramatic economic situation” that Argentina was experiencing when the
challenged Measures were enacted. According to Argentina, the traditional “minimum
standard” of treatment of aliens is the one relevant under Art. II(2)(a), so that
“investments made by Continental, as it happens with the remaining foreign investments,
have been considered in accordance with international law.”*”> Argentina then explains
why in its view the Measures it had adopted since December 2001 are in accordance with
the principle of fair and equitable treatment: “[t]hese measures constituted a reasonable,
good faith and non discriminatory answer to the most serious crisis that the country had
ever suffered which, over time, had a positive effect on the country in general and on the
investments of Continental and CNA ART in particular.”*”° Argentina opposes the
reliance by the Claimant on the alleged respect required for the Claimant’s “legitimate
expectations,” submitting that the standard at issue does not justify the foreign investor
expecting that regulation will never change; specifically it does not prevent re-adaptation
in an exceptional situation of emergency. In any case, as already indicated Argentina
claims that the Measures challenged were necessary to counteract the crisis and are thus

covered by its invocation of Art. XI of the BIT.”

249. The Parties disagree on the legal content of the “fair and equitable” standard of
treatment in Art. II (2)(a) of the BIT. They especially disagree as to whether, factually,

the abrupt radical change of the legal setting concerning Argentina’s currency, exchange

373 Claimant's Reply, paras. 216-229,

374 Argentina’s Counter-Memorial, para. 492

   
 

375 Argentina's Counter-Memorial, para. 501 ff.
ntina’s Counter-Memorial, paras. 571 and 625.

ntina’s Reply, paras. 22-23, 56, 71, 80 and 365 ff.

111

mechanism, and the regime of financial instruments in circulation in the crisis period, as

it affected the Claimant’s investments, was a breach of such standard.

250. One of Claimant’s central arguments is that this standard requires as an essential

element “a stable legal and business environment,”*”®

an obligation that (in its view) is
also entailed by the undertaking of the host State to provide full protection and
security.°” The Claimant submits that since such a stable environment must be granted
by a host State acting in good faith, an investor such as Continental has a “legitimate

expectation” that this will be the case.

251. Thus the Claimant had “legitimate expectations” that the convertibility regime of
Argentina would not be changed, so that free transfer would be maintained, existing
dollar-denominated securities and deposits would not be compulsory transformed in
pesos at a below-market rate and their terms would be respected (all of which did not
happen in Argentina’s crisis). The Claimant concludes that since Argentina subverted the

business environment it failed to respect the Claimant’s rights.

252. The Claimant relies as a basis for its alleged legitimate expectations on a series of
acts and pronouncements by Argentina’s authorities from different sources and having
unequal legal value. Thus, the Claimant invokes the Intangibility Law of September 24,
2001 by which “Argentina assured investors that Argentina would not interfere with bank
deposits. The Investor relied on Argentina’s representations to keep its money in
Argentina. Argentina’s subsequent asset freeze failed to fulfill the Investor’s legitimate
expectation that Argentina would not interfere with its deposits.”**° Also the pesification
in itself is claimed to be contrary to this standard in conjunction with the Intangibility

Law.**' The Claimant also relies on certain public statements by Minister Cavallo,

378 Se

 

S Award, paras. 274-280; Occidental Exploration and Product Company Award, paras. 183-186; Tecmed Award, paras. 153-156 which the
Claimant refers to. See Claimant’s Reply, para. 182 ff

379 Claimant relies on Azurix Award, para. 408. See Claimant's Reply, para. 186.

380 Claimant's Reply, para. 219.

381 Claimant's Reply, para. 223 with reference to the CMS Award, paras. 275 and 281

112

undertaking not to abandon the convertibility regime, as well as on the terms of the

GGLs* and of the LETEs.***

253. Argentina on the other hand submits that the fair and equitable treatment standard
does not oblige further treatment or treatments beyond what is required by virtue of the
minimum standard of international customary law. This standard is related to notions
such as natural justice or lack of discrimination and does not refer, as results also by the
more recent agreements amongst states, to the legal and business framework stability, or
the expectations or “basic assumptions” of foreign investors. Argentina relies on the
NAFTA arbitral awards concerning the application of fair and equitable treatment
standard. Quoting the NAFTA Tribunal in the Waste Management II case, Argentina
submits that the minimum standard of fair and equitable treatment is breached if the
State’s conduct is “arbitrary, grossly unfair unjust or idiosyncratic, is discriminatory and
exposes the claimant to sectional or racial prejudice or involves a lack of due process
leading to an outcome which offense judicial propriety- as might be the case with the
manifest failure of natural justice in judicial proceedings or a complete lack of
transparency and candor in an administrative process.”**4 Argentina relies also on the
position recently taken by several states, including the United States of America, with
regard to the content of this standard, as expressed in the context of the NAFTA, the FTA
with Chile, and the U.S. Model BIT of 2004.3 In summary, according to Argentina, “to
determine whether the Argentine Republic acted in accordance with the principle of good
faith it is necessary to evaluate whether allegedly offensive measures invoked adopted by
the Argentine Republic were dishonest, unreasonable or unfair.”°*° Applying the
abovementioned criteria, the challenged measures appear honest, reasonable and fair, so

Argentina submits that that it did not act in bad faith.

254. It is generally accepted that the “fair and equitable” standard of treatment has an

important role in the protection of foreign investments, which explains the inclusion of

382 Claimant's Reply, para. 228.
383 Claimant's Reply, para. 230.

ntina’s Count

  

Memorial, paras. 538-543,

 

ntina’s Counter-Memorial, paras. 501-516.

 

ntina’s Counter-Memorial, para. 567,

113

this standard in BITs and other international instruments dealing with foreign investment.
It is especially important for direct investments which are usually made for a
considerable duration and whose profitability and economic contribution to the host
country’s economy are dependent on them being treated by local authorities in a way
which is coherent with the ordinary conduct of business activity. While the requirements
of a lawful expropriation focuses on the preservation of the value of the investment when
the host State precludes its further operation for some public reasons, the fair and
equitable standard is aimed at assuring that the normal law-abiding conduct of the
business activity by the foreign investor is not hampered without good reasons by the
host government and other authorities. However, in every case, it is first necessary to
interpret the wording of the particular Fair and Equitable Treatment standard
incorporated in the BIT at issue. It does not follow that, whatever that wording, the Fair
and Equitable Treatment standard should always be the lower minimum standard under

customary international law.

255. Moreover, the content of the obligation incumbent upon the host state to treat a
foreign investor in a fair and equitable manner, even when applicable “at all times” as
specified in Art. II(2)(a) of the BIT, varies in part depending on the circumstances in
which the standard is invoked: the concept of fairness being inherently related to keeping
justice in variable factual contexts.**” This explains the considerable debate surrounding
the main features of the Fair and Equitable Treatment standard generally as well as its
relations, especially in the context of BITs and similar instruments, with others standards
that are often spelled out in conjunction with it, such as “full protection and security”

and, of course, the minimum international standard.***

256. It is not necessary for us here to go more into that debate. The issue here is
relatively straightforward: whether certain abrupt and fundamental changes made by
Argentina to its exchange and currency regime because of the 2001-2002 economic and

financial crisis, with the aim of resolving it, including the traumatic blocking of bank

387 Noble

   

entures Award, para. 181
388 See ally OECD, International Investment Law, A Changing Landscape, 2005, Chapter 3 “Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard in

International Investment Law.” 73-125.

114

accounts, the pesification of deposits and financial instruments, the default and
subsequent restructuring of the same, made the treatment of the Claimant’s investment

not “fair and equitable.”

257. The Claimant has framed its claim in terms of “legitimate expectations.” It submits
that it was entitled to rely legally under the BIT on the existing exchange and currency
regime which existed when it made its investment in the insurance sector of Argentina, so
that when this was changed to its detriment, it was entitled to claim indemnification. The
Claimant does not rely on the convertibility regime of 1991 per se. It rather points out to
certain specific legislative enactments and contractual undertakings of Argentina (the
Intangibility Law and the terms of issuance of the GGL’s respectively) in order to support
its claim that its expectations of stability were “legitimate.” In respect of GGLs, the
Claimant also points to the circumstances that the complete subversion of the monetary
regime happened just weeks after the solemn and formal statements contained in those

instruments.

258. Stability of the legal framework for investments is mentioned in the Preamble of
the BIT. It is not a legal obligation in itself for the Contracting Parties, nor can it be
properly defined as an object of the Treaty. It is rather a precondition for one of the two
basic objects of the Treaty, namely the promotion of the investment flow, rather than
being related to its other objective, that of granting protection for investments on a
reciprocal basis. Stability of the legal framework is undoubtedly conducive to attracting
foreign investments, especially direct investments where business plans can extend over a
number of years; and even more so in respect of those where initial investments are
substantial and are recouped only over a long period of time. On the other hand, it would
be unconscionable for a country to promise not to change its legislation as time and needs
change, or even more to tie its hands by such a kind of stipulation in case a crisis of any
type or origin arose. Such an implication as to stability in the BIT’s Preamble would be
contrary to an effective interpretation of the Treaty; reliance on such an implication by a
foreign investor would be misplaced and, indeed, unreasonable. In any case, it is

uncontested that the legal and regulatory regime for CNA’s insurance business in general

  

remained stable throughout the crisis.

115

259. The situation of the foreign investor at issue here is therefore different from that
raised in other cases relied upon by the Claimant, many of them concerning different
Measures that Argentina adopted in the crisis. In the present case, general
pronouncements are mostly at issue, predominantly of a legislative type. Moreover, the
features of the legal or contractual regime at issue here were applicable or addressed
either to the generality of Argentina’s public, or to a wide range of depositors and
subscribers of certain financial instruments. Moreover, the general legislative
“assurances” were not the basis on which Continental had relied in making its investment

in Argentina, since it had entered in that market before such assurances.

260. By contrast, in most cases invoked by Continental as “precedents,”**°

specific
undertakings were at issue, legislative, administrative or contractual (some of them by
local authorities) directed or agreed with the investor, on the basis of which and in
reliance upon the aggrieved investor had actually made its investment and committed
long term resources. Without here entering into an evaluation of those cases, there are
significant factual and contextual differences with the present case as to the application of

the abstract concept of “reasonable legitimate expectations.”

261. In summary, in order to evaluate the relevance of that concept applied within Fair
and Equitable Treatment standard and whether a breach has occurred, relevant factors

include:

i) the specificity of the undertaking allegedly relied upon*” which is mostly absent
here, considering moreover that political statements have the least legal value,

regrettably but notoriously so;

ii) general legislative statements engender reduced expectations, especially with

competent major international investors in a context where the political risk is

389 Contrary to the case before this Tribunal, the CMS ‘Tribunal evaluated the pesification as a breach of the BIT not per se but in connection with

 

Argenti al regime (i.e. the tariff regime calculated in dollars and the US PPI adjustment of the gas tariffs).

 

\'s obligations under the

 

 

‘The pesification was adjudged there to be contrary to the BIT"s obligations in its relationship with those specific guarantees that were addressed by

 

Argentina to foreign investors under the Gas sector legal regime and “were crucial for the investment decision” (CMS Award, para. 275).

390 Such as those inherent in contractual obligations undertaken by Argentina abroad subject to foreign law, such as bond issuances on international

 

financial markets,

116

high. Their enactment is by nature subject to subsequent modification, and
possibly to withdrawal and cancellation, within the limits of respect of

fundamental human rights and ius cogens;

iii) unilateral modification of contractual undertakings by governments, notably when
issued in conformity with a legislative framework and aimed at obtaining
financial resources from investors deserve clearly more scrutiny, in the light of
the context, reasons, effects, since they generate as a rule legal rights and

therefore expectations of compliance;

iv) centrality to the protected investment and impact of the changes on the operation
of the foreign owned business in general including its profitability is also relevant;
- good faith, absence of discrimination (generality of the measures challenged
under the standard), relevance of the public interest pursued by the State,
accompanying measures aimed at reducing the negative impact are also to be

considered in order to ascertain fairness.

262. In light of the above criteria the Tribunal concludes on the facts of this case that:

i) Continental cannot invoke legitimate expectations as to the change of the
convertibility regime of 1991, notwithstanding political declarations by various

authorities that convertibility would not be abandoned.

ii) Continental should have maintained a reduced trust in the Intangibility Law of
September 2001, since this was enacted when the worsening of the crisis was
evident and indeed made in order to try to support dwindling confidence in the
sustainability of the convertibility. (Even more so since Continental and CNA

were professional operators in the financial sector).

iii) As far as the de-dollarization and its specific modalities could be considered

contrary to any fair and equitable treatment in the light of previous assurances by

117

%°! the Tribunal considers that the

Argentina (including the Intangibility Law),
necessity defense under Art. XI is available to Argentina for the reasons explained

above.

iv) The Measures were not discriminatory;>” they were general, affecting all sectors

of the national economy and all classes of depositors and investors, nor did they
affect the carrying-on of the insurance business of Continental in respect of which
the reliance on stability of the legal environment could have been properly

focused.**

263. As to Measures which directly affected the investor in subverting certain
contractual obligations, the Claimant impugns them for having been taken shortly after
investors such as CNA had been induced to accept those obligations (namely the GGLs).
In this respect the Tribunal considers that the plea of necessity by Argentina under Art.
XI of the BIT precludes any further analysis aimed at evaluating their compatibility with
Art. If (2)(a). The Tribunal recalls that it has signaled above that in any case the
impugned Measures, including the subsequent restructuring of the GGLs, comply with

the requirements of non discrimination, correspondence to their objective, and good faith.

264. As to the LETEs, on the contrary, we have already decided that the defence of
necessity, both under Art. XI of the BIT and under the principles of customary
international law, is not available to Argentina as to the conditions of their restructuring
in December 2004 and that the terms of the unilateral restructuring were by then
unreasonable;*”* notably where they implied a waiver of all rights by the holders, who
were being subjected to a substantial loss of their investment, in addition to having been

previously subjected to losses due to pesification.

391 The Intangibility Law was explicitly suspended for the duration of the public emergency by Art. 15 of the Public Emergency Law 25,561 of January
6, 2002.

392 On the contrary, Argentina did consider the special position of depositors and their expectations where it converted only these US dollar denominated

 

deposits at the different rate of 1.421, at the cost of the Nation’s Treasury.
393 As it results from the Annual Reports and accounts of CNA, its pre-tax earings amounted to pesos 2,083,067 at June 30, 2000; pesos 1,706,399 at

June 30, 2001 (Claimant’s doc. C-354); pesos 17.596.761 at June 30, 2002; pesos 1.761.466 at June 30, 2008 (Claiman

 

doc. C-355); pesos 28,610,648
‘at March 31, 2004: pesos 25,286,027 at March 31, 2005; pesos 17.596.761 at June 30, 2002 (Claimant’s docs. C-355), (Claimant's doc. C-90 and C-91).
394 See above paras. 220-222.

118

265. The breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment concerns the restructuring (not the
pesification of the LETEs), since we have found that the pesification generally is covered
by the defense of necessity. The loss sustained by the Claimant to be made good by
Argentina because of its breach of the Fair and Equitable standard in the BIT amounts,
therefore, to the dollar equivalent of the pesified amount of the LETEs in November-
December 2004, as indicated by the Claimant in U.S.$2.8 million, plus interest as

. 3
determined hereunder. *°*

266. In conclusion, save for the LETEs, the Tribunal considers that the invocation of
necessity by Argentina under Art. XI of the BIT is applicable to all other claims by the
Claimant for breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment standard by Argentina’s
Measures. The Tribunal decides accordingly that Argentina has not breached its

obligations under Art. IT (2) (a), by these Measures, except as to the LETEs.

b) Capital gain tax

267. Continental complains of the capital tax that was imposed in accordance of
existing tax legislation on the gain allegedly made by CNA, when its investments in
dollar-denominated financial assets up to then accounted for at one peso for one dollar,
were converted in pesos at 1.4:1. Continental submits that the increase of the peso value
was purely nominal: through the pesification it had suffered a substantial loss in the real
value of its investment which amounted also to a partial expropriation. In any case the

imposition of the tax on such a non-existent profit amounts to unfair treatment.*”°

268. Argentina denies any wrongdoing under the BIT. It points out that CNA's accounts
were in pesos (as were all corporate accounts in the country) and that the tax is a general
pre-existing fiscal measure applicable to capital gains by companies. It was thus properly
due by CNA since its accounts showed a capital value increase due only to the
conversion of dollar-denominated assets at 1.4:1, thanks to the preferential rate of the
pesification applied, while before they had be valued under the convertibility / par regime

at 1:1.

 

395 As to the calculation of interest see hereunder para. 303 ff.

396 Claimant's Memorial, paras. 216-218,

119

269. We recognize that, at first glance, it seems odd that a company holding dollar-
denominated assets which by effect of the forceful conversion is left with a peso amount
much inferior to the peso equivalent resulting had a market rate been applied, must also
pay a capital gain tax on such a nominal increase of value. However, such a tax regime is
far from unusual. Moreover, it has to be kept in mind that, in conformity with the
nominalistic principle, the currency of Argentina was the peso; CNA’s corporate
accounts were naturally expressed in pesos, as were both its revenues from its insurance
activity and its costs. Thus, during the convertibility regime any of CNA’s assets (and
income) denominated in dollars was necessarily recorded in its accounts in pesos at the
rate of 1:1. When these assets held in Argentina were converted in pesos at 1.4:1, CNA
realized an “exchange gain,” to be recorded in the assets part of the balance sheet and
which was not balanced by any corresponding item in the liability side. As a result, this
gain was properly considered a capital gain, subject to the general applicable tax regime.
The reduced external value of all peso assets of CNA was not something that could be
recorded and have an effect within those accounts governed by Argentina’s legislation.
The reduced net value of CNA, as an effect of the devaluation of the peso vis-a-vis the
dollar, diminished the value of any Argentina-based assets in term of any other stable
currency. This was material for the U.S. parent company and was properly registered in
its accounts. However, from an accounting perspective within Argentina it was neutral

and irrelevant.

270. In the Tribunal’s view, the claim of Continental concerning the application of the
capital gain tax has therefore no basis under Art. II (2)(a) of the BIT, nor for the same
reasons does it constitute an expropriation under Art. IV of the BIT. It is therefore

rejected by the Tribunal.

C. Claim of breach of Article IV (Prohibition of Direct and Indirect Expropriation)

271. The Claimant has also impugned several of Argentina's Measures as representing
an indirect, creeping or partial expropriation of CNA's investments in breach of Art.

IV(1) of the BIT. According to this provision:

120

Investments shall not be expropriated or nationalized either directly or indirectly
through measures tantamount to expropriation or nationalization except for a public
purpose; in a non-discriminatory manner; upon payment of prompt, adequate and
effective compensation; and in accordance with due process of law and the general
principles of treatment provided for in Article II(2).

272. More specifically Claimant considers that such an expropriation has resulted from:

i) the pesification of CAN’s dollar-denominated deposits and securities at a much

“below market exchange rate;”

ii) the restructuring of the GGLs at terms that did not reflect their acquisition value;

and

iii) the fact that the LETEs have been deprived of their value after CNA had not
accepted the “unreasonable” terms of their restructuring offered by Argentina on

May 31 and September 16 of 2002.°°”

273. Argentina opposes this claim as being groundless.*°* Argentina invokes the
principle that each state is sovereign as to the management of the exchange rate of its
currency, so that devaluation does not give rise to a claim of damages by those affected
neither under general international law nor under the BIT. Argentina further claims that
the pesification consisted in a new regulation of the pegging of the peso to the dollar, in
respect to domestic deposits and financial instruments which had until then benefited
from the convertibility-at-par regime. Argentina claims that it was within its prerogatives
to put an end to convertibility, compulsorily reconverting the domestic dollar-
denominated instruments in pesos at the same rate of 1:1, especially in view of the
serious reasons that had led it to abandon convertibility at par.” The fact that as a result
the peso devaluated so much more on the free market, so that the real value of the

formerly dollar-denominated instruments decreased at the same rate as the peso vis-a-vis

397 Claimant's Memorial, para. 55.
398 Counter-Memorial, paras. 321-326, 571 ff.
399 Argentina refers as a relevant precedent to the prohibition of the gold-indexation of obligations in the USA in 1933. See U.S. Supreme Court, Perry

v. United States, 249 U.S. 330 (1935), 294 U.S. 330, also referred to extensivi Court. S

 

the Bustos decision of the Supres

 

also in this respect

Nussbaum, 415, pointing out that “{ajimost all the of the gold dollar bonds floated after World War I by foreign debtors in the United States are

 

uncontestedly subject to American law.”

121

the U.S. dollar is for Argentina immaterial. Argentina also points out that depositors such

as CNA received a preferential treatment in that their holdings were converted at 1:1.4.

274. Argentina in any case invokes the defense of necessity, both under Art. XI of the
BIT and under the principles of customary international law. It points out that, in view of
the economic emergency the country was facing, the Emergency Law expressly
suspended the application of the Intangibility Law which had declared deposits
“intangible.” It also points out that Argentina’s Supreme Court, reversing its initial
position, has recognized since the Bustos decision of October 26, 2004, that the
emergency situation in which the country had fallen at the end of 2001 justified for public
purposes a restriction on the right of private property such as those introduced by the
emergency legislation. The Supreme Court had considered that this was a general
regulation that had been applied fairly and reasonably and that therefore did not give rise
to indemnification under Argentina’s Constitution, which in that respect reflects an

approach shared by most democratic constitutions and by international law.”

275. The Tribunal notes that most of the allegations brought by the Claimant under the
heading of expropriation (breach of Art. IV of the BIT) are substantially the same and are
addressed to the same Measures impugned as breaches of the fair and equitable standard
of Art. (ID(2)(a) of the BIT. We have already found that the defense of necessity under
the BIT is available to Argentina as concerns most claims of breach that Continental has
raised against the Measures, namely the pesification of dollar-denominated deposits and
the restructuring of GGL’s.‘°! The same defense based on Art. XI, leading to the non-
applicability of the various BIT substantive obligations, is available in respect of Art. IV
of the BIT. We do not need therefore to go further into the claims for breach of Art. IV

than is required for our decision.

276. It is appropriate to distinguish those Measures adopted by Argentina that appear to
be legitimate under the BIT, from those which are carved out because of the application
of Art. XI. As a starting point we refer to the distinction generally accepted in
400 Counter-Memorial, para. 366.

401 In fact the Claimant agreed that should the Tribunal find a breach of the BIT in its favour under both accounts, the damages claimed should not be

duplicated. See Claimant's Reply, para. 380.

122

international law and spelled out in some treaties,‘ notably in recent BITs,*” between
two types of encroachments by public authorities on private property: (i) On the one
hand, there are certain types of measures or state conduct that are considered a form of
expropriation because of their material impact on property, and which are legitimate only
if adopted for public purpose, without discrimination, and against the payment of
compensation according to the general or specific applicable standards. One may
distinguish between: (a) outright suppression or deprivation of the right of ownership,
usually by its forced transfer to public entities; (b) limitations and hampering with
property, short of outright suppression or deprivation, interfering with one or more key
features, such as management, enjoyment, transferability, which are considered as
tantamount to expropriation, because of their substantial impact on the effective right of
property. Both of these types of measures entail indemnification under relevant
international treaties, as well as under most constitutions which respect fundamental

human rights. 404

(ii) On the other hand, there are limitations to the use of property in the
public interest that fall within typical government regulations of property entailing mostly
inevitable limitations imposed in order to ensure the rights of others or of the general
public (being ultimately beneficial also to the property affected). These restrictions do not
impede the basic, typical use of a given asset and do not impose an unreasonable burden
on the owner as compared with other similarly situated property owners."°* These
restrictions are not therefore considered a form of expropriation and do not require
indemnification, provided however that they do not affect property in an intolerable,

discriminatory or disproportionate manner.‘°°

277. It is well known that the distinction is not always easy, that in different historical

and social contexts the line has been drawn differently and that different international

402 Notably Art. 1, Protocol I European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedom (ECHR).

403 See US Model BIT 2004, Annex B [Expropriation],

404 See generally R. Higgins, The Taking of Property under International Law, RC (1982), vol. Ill, 268; C. Leben, La liberté normative de I’Etat et la
question de expropriation indirecte, C. Leben (Ed.), Le contentieux arbitral transnational relatif é Uinvestissement, 2006, 163 {f.; Feldman Award,
para 112.

405 These limitations should not burden without good reason certain owners only, which would otherwise be made to bear the burden of an advantage

 

that benefits instead a wider group,
406 See Art. 1, First Protocol to the ECHR; US Model BIT 2004, Annex B [Expropriation]; Third Restatement of Foreign Relations Law of the United
States (1987), 712 (g). For an overview see OECD, International Investment Law, A Changing Landscape, 2005, Chapter 2 “Indirect Expropriation” and

the “Right to Regulate” in International Investment Law, 43-72.

123

tribunals, including arbitration tribunals under various BITs, have relied on different
criteria and have given different weight to them, such as those recognizing the public

interest on the one side and those protecting the integrity of property rights on the other.

  

Different tribunals have come to different evaluations as to the definition of a specific
measure brought forward for their decision and its classification in the first or second

category. “7

278. The fixing of an exchange rate and deciding the mechanism by which the national
currency may be exchanged for foreign currency and its conditions, including the
possibility of maintaining accounts and deposits denominated in a foreign currency
within the country, pertain to the monetary sovereignty of each State. These policies fall
under the second above-mentioned category (ii); they do not render the State liable for
the burden or losses that may be suffered by those affected, provided there is no
discrimination or unfairness in their application. The above-mentioned and related
prerogatives may be of course limited by international obligations, such as those applying
to the members of the IMF. The Argentina-U.S. BIT does not contain specific limitations
in this respect, except for the “freedom of transfer” provision of Art. V. Other Treaty
provisions may have, however, an impact, such as the MFN commitment and the fair and
equitable treatment obligations, if breached by a Contracting Party in the management of
its exchange policy. The Claimant itself recognizes that the BIT does not afford

protection against devaluation, nor was it subject to discrimination in that respect.

279. As to the pesification of existing dollar denominated financial assets within
Argentina, subject to its domestic law, there is no basis in our view for the Claimant's
case that any compulsory conversion in peso has to be measured against the floating
market value of the peso against the dollar at the time of the conversion, to the effect that
the difference amounts to an expropriation that Argentina has to make good in

damages.*°* The issue is rather whether Argentina had given a commitment to the foreign

407 Thus the Saluka and Methanex Tribunals have emphasized the different qualitative nature of the regulation at issue in those

 

(see also Olguin
and LG&E), while other Tribunals, such as Vivendi, have relied on the criterion of the intensity of the encroachment on property (the effect-doctrine).

408 The Tribunal notes that other international tribunals have also denied that in most insta

   

-s of devaluation an expropriation of private property under

 

international standards is present, except in extreme situations of improper conduct by the State. This is the consistent jurisprudence of the ECHR under

Protocol 1 to the ECHR protecting private property. See its presentation by former ECHR President Wildhaber, 253 ff. See also for the absence of any

124

investor that those assets would be linked to the U.S. dollar, thereby meaning the
convertible currency of the U.S. under U.S. law, and would be immune from any
evolution of the currency regime within Argentina. We cannot detect from the evidence
any such specific commitment. Any commitment in this respect would relate, as we have
already mentioned, to the fair and equitable treatment standard; namely whether
Argentina had given rise to some specific “legitimate expectations” addressed to and
relied upon by the foreign investor that its dollar denominated domestic deposits would
be immune from any encroachment. We have already discussed this issue under the fair
and equitable standard above, denying generally the Claimant’s claim of breach. We
came there also to the conclusion that, as far as these expectations might have had a basis,
the proper invocation of Art. XI of the BIT by Argentina does not allow us to analyze the
matter further under Art. II(2)(a) of the BIT (except in respect of the LETEs

restructuring).

280. The Tribunal has noted the invocation by the Claimant of the Intangibility Law
also under Art. IV of the BIT protecting U.S. investors in case of expropriation. The
argument is to the effect that since Argentina itself has declared the dollar deposits as
protected property in their “real dollar value” under the Constitution, thus precluding the
Government from affecting their value by pesification, the contrary action by the
Government during the crisis must result in an expropriation of private property under
Art. IV since assets defined as property in Art. I (a) of the BIT were thereby materially

affected.

281. We recall that the claims before us are brought under the BIT and not Argentina’s
law and that breaches of a treaty standard and breach of similar protection in domestic
law are not necessarily interconnected. A given act or conduct by public authorities that
constitute a breach of domestic law does not necessarily represent also a breach of

international law.*” The law of Argentina is therefore of limited relevance for us,

 

such duty under international law as to obligations in domestic currency subject to the nominalistic principle Mann, 465 ff; Genevitve Burdeau.
Liexercice des compétences monétaires par les Etats, RC 1988-V, 261 (except for “des conditions totalement arbitraires.”)

409 ICI, Elsi, para. 73,

125

including Supreme Court’s decisions interpreting the Constitution.""° On the other hand,
if some of the Measures at issue here had been found finally unconstitutional by the
highest judicial authority of Argentina because in breach of the basic protection to
property rights that Argentina’s Constitution grants in line with principles generally
accepted, it would appear awkward that the same measure would not be in breach of the

BIT standards.

282. In this respect the Supreme Court of Argentina has always relied on generally
accepted principles, recognized beyond the legal system of Argentina. They had been
spelled out and applied most recently before the 2001-2002 crisis in the leading Peralta
case of 1990. At issue was one of the restrictive measures taken in Argentina to cope with
the inflation of the 1980s, namely that providing the reimbursement of deposits in part
with long term bonds."!! The Supreme Court held in that case that in a situation of
emergency there is no violation of fundamental property rights “when for reasons of
necessity a regulation is enacted that does not deprive individuals of their economic
rights recognized by law nor denies their property, but restraints temporally the
enjoyment of those benefits or the use that may be made of that property.” As to the crisis
of 2001-2002, the decisions Smith of 2002 and San Luis of 2003 had adhered to that
standard, but had concluded that the Measures challenged (pesification and postponement
of due dates of deposits) had restricted unreasonably the substance of the right of
property of those affected. In the Bustos decision of 2004 instead, the Supreme Court
(consistently followed thereafter) held that in a situation of generalized necessity, duly
determined by the legislative power, non-discriminatory Measures such as the forced
conversion of deposits in foreign currency were lawful under Art. 17 of the Constitution,
in that they were reasonable limitations to private property in face of the severe
emergency of 2001-2002. In its 2004 decision the Court balanced differently the

compression of individual economic rights against the need to preserve society in a state

410 The parties have argued at length the issue of the constitutionality of certain Measures at issue (especially the Corralito and the pesification) under

 

 

Argentina’s Constitution. The parties have drawn opposite conclusions from the fact that initially the Supreme Court decided against the constitutionality
(Smith and San Luis decisions of February 1, 2002 and March 5, 2003 respectively, Claimant's doc. C-80 and C-81) while it thereafter reversed its stance
in 2004 after a majority of judges had been replaced by the executive power (Bustos decision of October 26, 2004, Argentina’s doc. RA-33).

411 Decision of December 27, 1990, Claimant's doc. C-276.

126

of adversity and of serious perturbation of physical, economic or other nature." It is the
acute crisis, and possibly only the acute nature of the crisis, that ultimately has justified
the judicial upholding of the “suspension,” or rather the revocation of the legislative
pronouncement contained in the Intangibility Law, by which just a few months before
Argentina’s Parliament had aimed to reassure the citizens of the country of the stability of

the convertibility regime also for the future.‘"

283. We reject therefore Continental’s claims of breach of Art. IV, as far as the matter

is not excluded from our scrutiny by the application of Art. XI.

284. Expropriation, even indirect, requires a certain level of sacrifice of private property
in order to be found. Minor losses that are an incidental consequence to a general
regulation of the economy adopted in the public interest are not considered to be
expropriation giving rise to indemnification as highlighted before. This is applicable to
the delays in payments of interest (that were subsequently made) and in the issuance of
certain bonds (that were in any case delivered later to CNA) of which Continental
complains. In the disarray Argentina was facing in 2002, these non compliances are

covered in any case by the plea of necessity under the BIT.

285. Before concluding, we recall that we have found above that the restructuring of the
LETEs held by CNA was not covered by the defense of necessity both under the BIT and
the principles of customary international law and caused substantial loss to the Claimant.
This has led the Tribunal to hold that the restructuring as concerns CNA was in breach of
the Fair and Equitable Treatment of Art. II (2)(a) of the BIT and that Claimant is entitled
to indemnification for that loss in the form of damages. Continental has claimed that the

restructuring and its implementation constitute at the same time an expropriation and has

412 See at p. 4496: “fe! derecho positivo argentino es particularmente explicito en lo que concierne a la legitimidad de la suspensién de los derechos
personales como recurso propio del poder de policia, a fin de proteger el interés pidlico en presencia de desastres o graves perturbaciones de carécter

fisico, econémico, o de otra indole, siempre que no se altere la sustancia de tales derechos.” See also at p. 4497: “[p]ara superar el estado de aversidad

 

que implica una situacién de emergencia, todos los sectores deben deponer sus intereses individuales en pos del bienestar general y, con tal fin, la
‘medidas no se limitaron a convertir a pesos las depositos constituidos en monedas extranjeras, sino que previeron mecanismos de compensation para
morigerar la pérdida de valor que necessariamente trae aparejado el abandono del sistema de convertibilitad, decision de politica economica sobre cuyo
acierto no pueden promunciarse los jueces.”

413 In evaluating the nature of Argentina’s crisis and in holding reasonable the Measures adopted to cope with it the Bustos decision appears to have

 

benefited also from the temporal perspective that was absent in the earlier decisions; see. for the relevance of this perspective WTO Appellate Body, EC-

Tyres on necessity, supra at footnote 294,

127

asked indemnification under either provision of the BIT in an amount corresponding to
the original dollar nominal value of those LETEs. Having already decided the same issue
under Art. II(2)(a) BIT, we do not need to pronounce further on the alternative claim of

violation of Art. [V submitted by the Claimant.

D. Claim of Breach of Article II (2)(c) (“Umbrella clause”)

286. Continental claims that a) the obligations observance clause of Art. II (2)(c)
requires Argentina to observe contractual obligations entered into with American
investors, including the ones given to their Argentinean subsidiaries; and b) that forum
selection clauses do not bar claims for a breach of the obligations observance clause. Art.
II (2)(c) BIT states that: “[eJach Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered
into with regard to investments.” This form of clause is often known and described as an

“umbrella clause.”

287. Relying principally on the CMS Award, Continental claims that, “when the
investment is a local company, the ordinary meaning of obligations entered into ‘with
regard to investments’ includes obligations entered into with that investment. An
obligation entered into with an investment is an obligation entered into with regard to the
investment.”*"* In other words, the Claimant considers that the object of the BIT is to
encourage and protect investment and that CNA is a Continental investment protected
under the BIT. Therefore the so—called umbrella clause in the BIT has to be interpreted
as covering not only the obligations Argentina entered into directly with the Claimant
investor as a U.S. company, but also those Argentina entered into with Continental’s

investment (namely the local subsidiary of the foreign investor), thus CNA.

288. The Claimant submits accordingly that “Argentina breached its obligations under
Art. II (2)(c) by not observing its contractual obligations to CNA ART” under the
following debt contacts: the GGLs (Guaranted Loan contracts), the LETEs (Treasury
Bills contracts) and the BODEN 2013 bond contracts. ais

414 Claimant's Reply, para. 138.

415 Claimant's Memorial, para. 122.

128

“16 the Claimant submits that “the

289. More specifically, with regard to the GGLs
government breached the contractual term requiring payment in U.S. dollars”: a) “by
forcefully converting the dollar-denominated GGL into pesos through Decree 471 on
March 8, 2002; and b) by diminishing the security interest underlying the GGLs through

Decree 644 of April 18, 2002.4!”

290. As to the LETE’s, the Claimant submits further that Argentina breached the US
dollar denominated LETE contracts by enacting Decree 471, converting them into pesos.
Furthermore, on March 15, 2002 “Argentina breached its contractual obligation to pay
CNA ART its principal and interest.” Finally, on April 25, 2002, Resolution 73 made the
default of Argentina on its public debt (with some exceptions) official, in that payment of
the public debt of the national government was thereby deferred through December 31,
2002 “or until financing thereof has been completed if the latter is completed before that
date.” As a result, “to date CNA ART has not received payment as required by the

contract.”4"8

291. In respect of its dollar denominated deposits, Continental recalled that in 2003
CNA accepted “under protest” the terms of Decree 739 of March 28, 2003 that provided
for an elaborate scheme of “partial thawing of the bank freeze,” after a further
rescheduling of 120 days, earning 2% p.a. interest, and the distribution of a BODEN 2013
(State Bond) “to compensate for the difference between the market exchange rate at the
date of issuance of the Decree and the government imposed rate of 1.4 pesos to the dollar

adjusted by CER.”*”?

292. According to the Claimant, Argentina also failed to perform according to its terms
the BODEN 2013 contract when, upon the expiry of the 120 day period in late August of

2003, it failed to deliver in a timely manner the instruments themselves or credit them in

416 As to the issuance of the GGLs in swap for others governmental securities held by CNA see above para, 133 ff
417 Claimant's Memorial, para. 124.

418 Claimant's Memorial, para. 128.

419 Claimant's Memorial, para 58.

129

CNA ART’s favor.’”° Besides complaining that these bonds were not issued at the due
dates, Continental also complains that the payments of the initial interests were delayed
from April 30 and September 30 of 2003 to February 11, 2004, when the interest in

+) 42
arrears was paid. el

293. Argentina opposes the Claimant’s arguments. First, Argentina contends that in
accordance with the principle of pacta tertiis nec nocent nec prosunt, Continental cannot
invoke any “commitment” allegedly assumed with CNA, because the latter would have
been entered with “legal entities which are evidently independent, and which have
different rights, even though they are interconnected...” According to Argentina,
Continental cannot invoke the following commitments, because they were entered into
with CNA and not with Continental: “1) the bank deposit agreement was executed
between CNA ART and those banks in which Argentine citizens had placed their
deposits; 2) the guaranteed loans that CNA ART received from the Argentine
Government as the first measure of the so-called local phase of restructuring program of
the obligations assumed by the latter; 3) the offer and subsequent purchase of LETEs by
CNA ART; and 4) the BODEN 2013 Agreements.”*

294. Second, relying on the E/ Paso Decision, Argentina submits that umbrella clauses
cover only a particular type of contract: an “investment agreement” that host States
conclude with foreign investors. In such a case, “not applicable to this dispute, the
violations that the Claimant could allege would be due to rights that it actually exercises

and which are contemplated in a legal document governed by international law.” 425

295. The umbrella clause is intended to protect the commitments assumed by the
Argentine Republic towards foreign investors protected by the BIT, not contractual

obligations,*”* and “... does not apply to contracts entered into between CNA ART and

 

420 Continental claims also that “to date, two financial institutions have not credited the BODENs in CNA ARTs favor.” S nant’s Memorial

 

 

paras, 130-131. Claimant has not reiterated this complaint in subsequent proceedings so that the Tribunal assumes that this failure has been by now cured

 
 

as it was indeed incumbent upon Argentina to do.
421 Claimant's Memorial, para. 64.

422 Counter-Memorial, paras. 628-630.

423 Counter-Memorial, paras. 643-644.

424 Counter-Memorial, para. 689.

130

the Argentine Republic.”*> In fact, even accepting that the observing obligations clause
includes contractual obligations, “everything relating to the existence and extent of the
commitments that may be invoked under the umbrella clause is governed by domestic
law.’*?6 Therefore because the GGLs, the LETEs and BODEN 2013 are exclusively
governed by the laws of Argentina, “in order to evaluate performance by the Argentine
Republic of the obligations contained in such contracts, the tribunal will necessarily
[have] to consider the contracts as well as the Argentine laws that set the conditions

under which the contracts could be executed and amended.” *””

296. The preliminary task of the Tribunal is thus to determine the scope of the umbrella
clause in the BIT. The Tribunal is conscious that the interpretation of umbrella clauses,
such as the one found in Art. II (2)(c) of the BIT, remains controversial and that there is a

lack of consistency in the practice of investment arbitral tribunals on the matter.

297. For the purpose of determining the type of obligations that Argentina must observe
under this umbrella clause, it is necessary to begin with the analysis of the text of Art. IT
(2)(c). The covered obligations must have been entered “with regard to” investments.
Thus they must concern one or more investments and, moreover, must address them with
some degree of specificity. They are not limited to obligations based on a contract.
Finally, provided that these obligations have been entered “with regard” to investments,
they may have been entered with persons or entities other than foreign investors
themselves, so that an undertaking by the host State with a subsidiary such as CNA is not

in principle excluded.

298. Furthermore, the fact that the obligation at issue arises under a contract or a
unilateral commitment and is governed by local law does not exclude the operation of the
umbrella clause, although the determination of the content of the obligation under the
applicable national law may be a pre-requisite. It is well established that “compliance

with municipal law and compliance with the provisions of a treaty are different questions.

425 Counter-Memorial, para. 690.
426 Counter-Memorial, para. 694.

427 Counter-Memorial, para. 701

131

What is a breach of treaty may be lawful in the municipal law and what is unlawful in the

municipal law may be wholly innocent of violation of a treaty provision.”*8

299. The Parties provided in the BIT, however, for an additional guarantee to their
investors, that is “to observe any obligation” that they have assumed specifically with
regard to investments, irrespective of the law applicable to them. As stated by the LG&E
tribunal, “the umbrella clause is a general provision included in a fairly large number of
bilateral treaties that creates a requirement for the host State to meet its obligations
towards foreign investors, including those that derive from a contract. Hence such
obligations receive extra protection by virtue of their consideration under the bilateral

treaty"

300. In light of the above it should be clear that this umbrella clause does not come into
play when the breach complained of concerns general obligations arising from the law of
the host State.*° This interpretation of the BIT’s Art. II (2)(c) by the Tribunal is also
supported by the conclusions on the scope of the same wording reached by other
tribunals. As decided in the CMS Annulment Decision, “it seems clear that Article II
(2)(c) is concerned with consensual obligations arising independently of the BIT itself
(i.e. under the law of the host State or possibly under international law). Further they
must be specific obligations concerning investment. They do not cover general

requirements imposed by the law of the Host State.*!

301. The obligation that a State must observe under an umbrella clause “will often be a
bilateral obligation,” such as a contractual obligation, “or will be intrinsically linked to
obligations of the investment company.’**? This can include the unilateral commitments
arising from provisions of the law of the host State regulating a particular business sector
428 ICI, Elsi, para. 73,

429 See LG&E Decision, para. 170.
430 S

 

FA. Mann, British Treaties for the Promotion and Protection of Investments, 52 BYIL, 241, 246 (1981), “the provision only covers an

ng from a particular commitment either of the Contracting Parties may havi

 

obligation entered into... Such obligations may arise from contract with

 

the State or from the terms of the licence granted by it. It may be express or implied, it may be in writing or oral. But it must clearly be ascertainable as an

  

 

obligation of th elf arising from its own commitments.” It follows therefore that “where the contract is made with a private person, then the

 

   

and in so far as an obligation of the State arising from its own particular commitment (as opposed to existing general legislation)

431 CMS Annulment Decision, para. 95(a).
432 Ibid para. 95(d).

132

and addressed specifically to the foreign investors in relation to their investments therein.
For example, according to the award of the LG&E tribunal,’ this was the case of the
obligations that were made by Argentina to foreign investors under the Gas Law and its
implementing regulations because they were the basis on which the original investors

relied to make investments in the gas sector.

302. Therefore, the provisions of the Convertibility Law and those of the Intangibility
Law cannot be a source of obligations that Argentina has assumed specifically with
regard to the Claimant’s investment company*™ and which are protected under the BIT’s
umbrella clause. Moreover, the provisions of the legislative regime that were changed
were addressed either to the generality of Argentina’s public or to a wide range of
depositors and subscribers of a number of financial instruments.** As to the GGLs, they
were undoubtedly more specific and of a contractual nature. They could therefore be
considered as guaranteed by the umbrella clause, subject to the caveat that they were not
directed to foreign investors nor specifically addressed to their investments. In any case
we have already recognized necessity under Art. XI, while as to the LETEs, we have

436

instead found a breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment™” and therefore we do not

need to investigate the matter any further.

303. To summarize, a number of obligations that the Claimant alleges to have been
breached by Argentina are not covered by the BIT’s umbrella clause, while, as to the
GGLs, in as far as they may have been covered by this clause, the defense of necessity
under Art. XI is upheld. The claim of Continental that Argentina has breached Art. II

(2)(c) is, therefore, dismissed.

433 LG&E Decision at pa

 

 

175: “{als such, Argent

 

\'s abrogation of the guarantees under the statutory framework ~ calculation of the tariffs in dollars
before conversion to pes: ial tariff adjustments by the PPI and no price controls without indemnification — violated its obligations to

Claimants’ investments. Argentina made these specific obligations to foreign investors, such as LG&E, by enacting the Gas Law and other regulations,

 
 

 

and then advertising these guarant

 

in the Offering Memorandum to induce the entry of foreign capital to fund the privatization program in its public

service sector. These laws and regulations became obligations within the n of Article 112)(c), by virtue of targeting foreign investors and applying
specifically to their investments, that gave rise to liability under the umbrella clause.

434 See

   

mant’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 18-22.

435 Moreover th

 

‘general legislative assurances” were not the basis on which the private parties or investors involved had relied to make investments,
since they were already present in Argentina,

436 See above para. 264 ff.

133

VIII. Conclusions of the Tribunal

304. Summing up, Continental fails entirely on its claims based on Art. V (Freedom of
transfer), on those based on Art. II (2)(c) (Umbrella Clause) relating to non-contractual
instruments. The Tribunal’s rejection of those based on Fair and Equitable Treatment
(except for the claim concerning the LETEs) and on those based on the Umbrella Clause
(as they relate to contractual instruments such as the GGLs) is the result of the Tribunal
having decided that Argentina is entitled to avail itself of the defense based on necessity
under Art. XI of the BIT. For the above reasons, the only claim of breach of the BIT on
which the Claimant prevails is that of the breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment

obligation of Art. II (2)(a) concerning the restructuring of the LETEs.

305. The Claimant submits it has suffered as to LETEs losses amounting to
U.S$700,000 due to pesification and to U.S$2,800,000 “due to the further default and
revocation of contractual rights.”4°7 For the reason stated above, the Claimant is entitled
to be compensated only for the latter amount that corresponds to its capital loss. The
Claimant is accordingly entitled to payment of compensation in the principal sum of

U.S.$2,800,000.

A. Calculation of Interest

306. The Claimant also claims interest. The Claimant has not expressly specified

438

whether such interest is simple or compound interest or at what rates.~” Argentina has

made no submissions on these matters.

307. In the Tribunal’s view, the claim for interest covers both simple and compound
interest. Accordingly, the first issue to be decided by the Tribunal is whether to award

simple or compound interest.

308. As a general principle, almost invariably, justice requires that the wrongdoer who
has deliberately failed to pay compensation should pay interest for the period during it

has withheld that compensation unlawfully. The claimant, in addition to suffering from

 

437 See Claimant’s Reply, para. 386.
438 In the final paragraph of its Memorial, the Claimant asks a compensation “including interest on such amounts computed at a commercial interest rate
from the date of loss to the date of payment of the award, compounded on an annual basis, plus costs of this arbitration.”

134

the wrongdoing giving rise to compensation, has suffered a further loss from non-
payment of that compensation when it should have been paid by the wrongdoer.
Moreover, a wrongdoer withholding payment may be unjustly enriched by its deliberate
non-payment of such compensation, at the expense of the claimant. In these
circumstances, therefore, full reparation will include an order for interest. However, there
has been until recent times a controversy attaching to compound interest, as distinct from

simple interest, in international law.

309. In Professor Crawford’s Third Report on State Responsibility, the summary

3
records:**°

“[...] although compound interest is not generally awarded under international law
or by international tribunals, special circumstances may arise which justify some
element of compounding as an aspect of full reparation. Care is however needed
since allowing compound interest could result in an inflated and disproportionate

award, with the amount of interest greatly exceeding the principal amount owed.”

This caution is perhaps surprising: compound interest reflects economic reality in modern
times, and the hesitation may be directed more at extreme rates and rests rather than
compound interest in principle. The time value of money in free market economies is
measured in compound interest; simple interest cannot be relied upon to produce full
reparation for a claimant’s loss occasioned by delay in payment; and under many national
laws recently enacted, an arbitration tribunal is now expressly empowered to award

compound interest.”

310. Under international law, the Tribunal concludes that it may order compound
interest if it is necessary to ensure full reparation. There is nothing in the BIT, the ICSID
Convention and Arbitration Rules, that restricts the Tribunal’s power to award compound
interest under international law for breach of the Respondent’s obligations under the BIT.
In reaching this general conclusion, the Tribunal has considered, in particular, Article 38
439 Professor lames Crawford, Third Report on State Responsibility, August 4, 2000, (ILC 2000

440 For example, Section 49(3) of the English Arbitration Act 1996 grants arbitrators the power to award compound interest on any principal amount

awarded.

135

of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility; Dr. F. A. Mann’s Article “Compound Interest

as an Item of Damage in International Law,” in “Further Studies in International Law,”

and Judge Schwebel’s Article “Compound Interest in International Law.”*?

311. There is a significant convergence between the views of these experienced jurists.
Dr. Mann concluded: “on the basis of compelling evidence, compound interest may be
and, in the absence of special circumstances, should be awarded to the claimant as
damages by international tribunals.” Judge Schwebel likewise concluded, more than a
decade later: “[iJt is plain that the contemporary disposition of international law accords
with that found in the national law of States that are commercially advanced, namely, it
permits the award of compound interest where the facts of the case support the

conclusion that it is appropriate to render just compensation.”

312. It is unnecessary to recite here other well-known legal materials (many of which
are considered in these two articles), save to record the position succinctly expressed in

the ICSID award in Santa Elena v. Costa Rica (2000).*4

No uniform rule of law has emerged from the practice in international arbitration
as regards the determination of whether compound or simple interest is
appropriate in any given case. Rather, the determination of Interest is a product of
the exercise of judgment, taking into account all the circumstances of the case at
hand and especially consideration of fairness which must form part of the law to

be applied by this Tribunal.

In particular, where an owner of property has at some earlier time lost the value of
his asset but has not received the monetary equivalent that then became due to
him, the amount of compensation should reflect, at least in part, the additional
sum that his money would have earned, had it, and the income generated by it,

been reinvested each year at generally prevailing rates of interest. It is not the

441 F. A. Mann, Further Studies in International Law, (Oxford 1990) pp. 377 ff; see also Mann, “Compound Interest as an Item of Damage in

International Law," 21 U.C.Davis Law Review, 557 ff (1988),

 

442 Stephen M. Schwebel, “

 

ompound Interest in International Law,” TDM Volume 2, Issue 5, November 2005.
443 Compaitia del Desarrollo de Santa Elena S.A. v. Republic of Costa Rica (ICSID Case No. ARB/96/1), Award of February 17, 2000, 15 ICSID Rev. -
FLL. 169 (2000), 39 ILM 1317 (2000) at paras. 103-104.

136

purpose of compound interest to attribute blame to, or to punish, anybody for the
delay in the payment made to the expropriated owner; it is a mechanism to ensure

that the compensation awarded the Claimant is appropriate in the circumstances.

This discretionary approach to the award of compound interest under international law
may now represent a form of “jurisprudence constante” in ICSID awards. A recent study
of 45 ICSID arbitrations resulting in 14 awards of compensation demonstrates that, of the
latter, 8 ordered compound interest, 3 simple interest, and 1 no interest (the remaining 2

did not disclose whether compound or simple interest was ordered).

313. In the present case, the Tribunal considers that full reparation to Continental
should include compound interest on the compensation due from but unpaid by
Argentina. The Tribunal bears much in mind that Continental’s loss consists of the
deprivation of an interest-bearing financial instrument, measurable by reference only to
compound interest. It would be unjust in these circumstances to order simple interest,

because it would fall significantly short of such full reparation.

314. As regards the rate of compound interest, the Tribunal exercises its discretion to
select the rates for U.S.$ 6 months Libor (as published in the Financial Times) plus 2 per

cent compounded annually until payment.

315. As regards the commencement date for compound interest, since Decree 1735/04
restructuring the LETEs was issued in December 2004, the Tribunal fixes January 1,

2005 as the initial date to this purpose.

316. The Tribunal has taken note of Argentina’s submission that unrestructured LETEs
have a market price. Accordingly, the Tribunal’s orders for payment of principal and
interest by Argentina are subject to Continental first procuring the surrender of all LETEs

held by CNA not previously tendered pursuant to Argentina’s restructuring offer.

44 James Gray, Jason Cain and Wayne Wilson, “ICSID Arbitration Awards and Cost,” TDM Volume 3, Issue 5, December 2006.

137

B. Apportionment of the arbitral costs

317. As to costs, each party has asked the Tribunal that its expenses in connection with
these proceedings, including the amount of the deposits made to ICSID for the Centre’s
charges and the expenses and fees of the arbitrators (Art. 59 and 60 of the ICSID
Convention), be reimbursed to it by the other party. To this effect each party has
submitted detailed calculations.“ This is an issue that the Tribunal has to decide as part

of the award pursuant to Art. 61 of the ICSID Convention.

318. The Convention and the attendant Rules and Regulations give ICSID tribunals’
broad discretion in awarding costs and offer little guidance on how this discretion is to be
exercised. Moreover, the practice of ICSID tribunals in apportioning costs “is neither
clear nor uniform.’”“° In a number of cases the principle “the loser pays,” commonly
applied in international commercial arbitration, has been followed; in many others the
tribunals decided that the parties were to bear equal shares of the fees and expenses of the
arbitrators and of the charges for the use of Centre’s facilities and services. In their
decisions on awarding costs, besides assessing them against the unsuccessful party,
arbitral tribunals have often taken into account the nature of the dispute, the novelty of

the legal issues, and the conduct of the parties in the proceedings.

319. As to this case, the Tribunal notes that the Claimant is succeeding in only one of
the many claims of breaches of the BIT it has put forward, namely only in relation to the
restructuring of the LETEs. As to the other claims, most of them (except the one under
Art. V (Freedom of Transfer) and in part those under the Umbrella Clause, (which are
being rejected as groundless in the merits)) are being dismissed because the Tribunal has
accepted the preliminary exception raised by Argentina that Art. XI of the BIT removes
the Measures challenged by the Claimant from the Treaty’s coverage. This leads the
Tribunal to conclude that there are good reasons to decide, as it is hereby decided, that

each party shall bear any and all of its own expenses in connection with the presentation

 

aimant has quantified its costs in the amount of USS 3,323,849.91 besides ICSID fees. Respondent has quantified its own costs, net of ICSID
fees, in the amount of US$ 844,776.43.

446 See Schreuer, 1225, 1230.

 

138

and preparation of the case, as well as half of the fees and expenses of the arbitrators and

the charges for the use of the Centre’s facilities and services.

139

IX. Decision of the Tribunal

320. For these reasons, the Tribunal finally decides as follows:

(A) Save for the Claimant’s claim relating to the LETEs, all substantive

claims made by the Claimant are dismissed;

(B) As regards the claim relating to the LETEs, the Respondent is liable to
pay compensation to the Claimant in the principal sum of U.S. $2,800,000
(United States dollars two million eight hundred thousand) and compound
interest thereon at the rates for U.S.$ 6 month Libor (as published in the
Financial Times) plus 2 per cent compounded annually from January 1,
2005 until payment, subject to the Claimant first procuring the surrender
of all LETEs held by its subsidiary, not previously tendered to and
accepted by Argentina;

(C) The Parties shall bear all their own legal costs and expenses, without

recourse to each other; and

(D) The Parties shall bear equally the costs and expenses of the Tribunal
and ICSID.

140

“4 ~~
an ( a foun AX _
Giorgio Sacerdoti
President of the Tribunal

2} Anya 2308

RD Vos Veest-Verv
Mithell Nader. V.V.Veeder

Arbitrator Arbitrator
August N, 2006 15. vit, NOOK

141

X. Index of Cases”

Azurix Award

CMS Annulment Decision

CMS Award

Compania de Santa Elena Award

Dominican Republic-Cigarettes

EC-Asbestos

EC-Chicken Cuts

EC-Tyres (Apellate Body)

EC-Tyres (Panel)

447 With regard to the cases quoted in the award numbers refer to paragraphs.

 

ICSID Award, July 14, 2006,
Azurix v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12

ICSID Decision on Annulment,
September 25, 2007, CMS Gas
Transmission Company v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case
No. ARB/O1/8

ICSID Award, May 12, 2005, CMS
Gas Transmission Company v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case
No. ARB/O1/8

ICSID Award, February 17, 2000,
Compania del Desarrollo de
Santa Elena S.A. v. Republic of
Costa Rica, ICSID Case No.
ARB/96/1

WTO Appellate Body, Dominican
Republic-Measures Affecting the
Importation and Internal Sale of
Cigarettes, WT/DS302/AB/R,
adopted May 19, 2005

WTO Appellate Body, European
Community-Measures Affecting
Asbestos and Asbestos-Contained
Products, WT/DS135/AB/R,
adopted April 5, 2001

WTO Appellate Body, European
Communities-Customs
Classification of Frozen Boneless
Chicken Cuts, WT/DS269/AB/R,
adopted September 27, 2005

WTO Appellate Body, Brazil
Measures Affecting Imports of
Retreated Tyres,
WT/DS332/AB/R, adopted
December 17, 2007

Panel Report, Brazil-Measures
Affecting Imports of Retreaded
Tyres, WT/DS332/R

142

Elsi (United States of America v.

Italy)

Enron Award

Gabcikovo-Nagymaros Project
(Slovakia — Hungary)

Korea- Beef (WT/DS/AB/R;
WT/DS/AB/R)

LG&E Decision

Mitchell Annulment Decision

Nicaragua (Merits)

Noble Ventures Award

Occidental Exploration and
Product Company Award

Oil Platforms (Merits)

International Court of Justice, July
20, 1989, Case concerning
Elettronica Sicula S.p.a. (ELSI)
(United States of America v.

Italy)
ICSID Award, May 22, 2007,
Enron Corporation and

Ponderosa Assets, LP. v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case
No. ARB/O1/3

International Court of Justice,
September 25, 1997, Gabcikovo-
Nagymaros Project (Slovakia —
Hungary)

WTO Appellate Body, Korea-
Measures Affecting Imports of
Fresh, Chilled and Frozen Beef,
WT/DS161/AB/R
(WT/DS 169/AB/R), adopted
June 7, 2001

ICSID Decision on __ Liability,
October 3, 2006, LG&E Energy
Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and
LG&E International Inc. v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case
No. ARB/02/1

ICSID Decision on Annulment,
November 1, 2006, Patrick
Mitchell v. Democratic Republic
of the Congo, ICSID Case No.
ARB/99/7

International Court of Justice, June
27, 1986, Military and
Paramilitary Activities in and
against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v.
United States Of America),
Merits

ICSID Award, October 12, 2005,
Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania

LCIA Award, July 1, 2004,
Occidental Exploration and
Product Company v_ The
Republic of Ecuador, Case No.
3467

International Court of Justice,
November 6, 2003, Oil Platforms

143

Oil Platforms (Preliminary
Objection)

Sea-Land Service, Inc. v. The
Islamic Republic of Iran, Ports
and Shipping Organization of
Tran (Case No. 135)

Sempra Award

SGS v. Philippines Decision on
Jurisdiction

The SS. Wimbledon

Tecmed Award

U.S.-Gambling (WT/DS/AB/R)

(Islamic Republic of Iran

v. United States of America),
Merits

International Court of Justice,
December 12, 1996, = Oil
Platforms (Islamic Republic of
Iran

v. United States of America),
Preliminary Objection

Tran-U.S. Claims Tribunal, Award
No. 135-33-1, June 20, 1984,
Sea-Land Service, Inc. v. The
Islamic Republic of Iran, Ports
and Shipping Organization of
Iran, VI Tran-US CTR 149, page
1 ff.

ICSID Award, September 28,
2007, Sempra Energy
International v. Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/16

ICSID Decision on Jurisdiction,
January 29, 2004, SGS Société
Générale de Surveillance S.A. v.
Republic of Philippines

Permanent Court of International
Justice, August 17, 1923, Case of
The S.S. Wimbledon

ICSID Award, May 29, 2003,
Técnicas Medioambientales
Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican
States, ICSID Case No. ARB
(AF)/00/2

WTO Appellate Body, United
States-Measures Affecting the
Cross-Border Supply of
Gambling and Betting Services,
WT/DS285/AB/R, adopted April
20, 2005

144

XI. Abbreviations“*

Argentina Business Nolan J.L., Hinkelman EG.,
Woznick A., Shippey K. C.,
Argentina Business, The Portable
Encyclopaedia For Doing Business
with Argentina, World Trade Press,
1996, California, U.S.A.

BCRA Banco Central de la Republica
Argentina
Blustein Blustein, And the Money Kept Rolling

in (and out): Wall Street, the IMF,
and the bankrupting of Argentina,
2005, New York (C-145)

Calomiris Calomiris C., Devaluation with
Contract Redenomination in
Argentina, National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper
No. 12644

Dolzer, Stevens Dolzer, Stevens, Bilateral Investment
Treaties, The Hague, Kluwer Law
International, 1995

FCN Treaty Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and
Navigation

GATS General Agreement on Trade in
Service

GATT 1947 General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade

Hornbeck Hornbeck J.H. The Argentine

Financial Crisis: A Chronology of
Events, CRS Report for Congress,
January 31, 2002 (C-189)

ICSID International Centre for the
Settlement of Investment Disputes

448 With regard to these abbreviations numbers refer to pages.

145

ILA
ILC

ILC Articles

IMF, Evaluation Report

IMF, First Review

IMF, Second Review

IMF, Third Review

IMF-Fund

Tran-U.S. CTR

International Law Association
International Law Commission

International Law Commission
Articles on Responsibility of States
for Internationally Wrongful Acts,
with commentaries, 2001

IMF, The IMF and Argentina, 199]-
2001, [Washington, D.C.):
International Monetary Fund,
Independent Evaluation Office,
2004 (C-149, R-207)

IMF, Argentina: 2000 Article IV
Consultation and First Review
Under the Stand-By Arrangement,
and Request for Modification of
Performance Criteria-Staff Report
and Public Information Notice
Following Consultation, (MF Staff
Country Report No. 00/164,
December 2000 (C-137)

IMF, Argentina: Second Review
Under the Stand-By Arrangement,
Request for Waivers and
Modification of the Program-Staff
Report and News Brief on the
Executive Board Discussion, IMF
Country Report No. 01/26, January
2001 (C-396, R-209)

IMF, Argentina: Third Review Under
the Stand-By Arrangement, Request
for Waivers and Modification of the
Program-Staff Report and News
Brief on the Executive Board
Discussion, IMF Country Report
No. 01/90, June 2001 (C-397, R-
110)

International Monetary Fund

Iran-United States Claims Tribunal
Reports

146

Krugman

Lessons from the Crisis

Mann

Mussa

Nussbaum

Scott

UNCTAD

U.S. 2004 Model BIT

U.S.-Argentine BIT or BIT

U.S.-Congo BIT

Krugman P., Editorial, Reckonings; A
cross of Dollars, N.Y. Times,
November 7, 2001 (R-54)

Daseking C., Ghosh A., Lane T., and
Thomas A., Lessons from the Crisis
in Argentina, IMF Occasional
Paper No. 236, Washington DC,
2005

Mann F.A., The Legal Aspect of
Money, Fifth Edition, 1992, Oxford

Mussa M., Argentina and the Fund:
From Triumph to Tragedy, 2002,
Washington D.C.(C-153, R-208)

Nussbaum A., Money in the Law
National and International, The
Foundation Press Inc.: Brooklyn,
1950

Scott H.S., International Finance:
Law and Regulation, Thomson
Sweet & Maxwell, 13 ed., 2006

United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, International
Investment Agreements, Key Issues
Vol. I, 2004

United States of America’s Model
Bilateral Investment Treaty of 2004

Treaty between United States of
America and the Argentine
Republic concerning the reciprocal
encouragement and protection of
investment

Treaty between United States of
America and the Republic of Zaire
concerning the reciprocal
encouragement and protection of
investment

147

U.S.-Russia BIT

Vandevelde

VCLT

Wildhaber

The World Bank

WTO

Treaty between United States of
America and the Russian
Federation concerning the
reciprocal encouragement and
protection of investment

Vandevelde K. J., United States
Investment Treaties, Policy and
Practice, 1992, Deventer, Boston

Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties

Luzius Wildhaber, The Protection of
Legitimate Expectations in
European Human Rights Law;
Economic Law and Justice in Times
of Globalisation, Festschrift for
Carl Baudenbacher, 2007

International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development

World Trade Organization

148

