ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/04/01

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(Additional Facility)

CORN PRODUCTS INTERNATIONAL, INC.
Claimant

and

THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES
Respondent

DECISION ON RESPONSIBILITY

Before the Arbitral Tribunal constituted under Chapter Eleven of
the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and‘comprised of:

Professor Andreas F. Lowenfeld
Licenciado Jestis Alfonso Serrano de la Vega
Professor Christopher J. Greenwood (President)

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Gonzalo Flores

Date: 15 January 2008

IL.

iil.

Iv.

Vv.

VI.

VIL.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Summary of the Case
History of the Proceedings
The Facts

The Positions of the Parties
A. — The Claimant

B. The Respondent

Cc. Claimant’s Response to the Countermeasures
~ Argument
*

The Tribunal’s Approach to the Issues

The Performance Requirements Claim
under Article 1106

The Expropriation Claim under Article 1110

VIII. The National Treatment Claim under Article 1102

Ix.

A "The Claimant’s Submissions

B. The Respondent's Submissions

C. Fhe Tribunal’s Analysis

The Respondent’s Countermeasures Defence

A. _ International Law regarding Countermeasures
B. The Submissions of the Parties

C. The Tribunal’s Analysis

(1) _ Is Mexico precluded from advancing a
Countermeasures defence because of
the WTO Decisions ?

paras.

paras.

paras.

paras.

paras.

paras.

paras.

paras.

paras.

paras.

paras.

paras.

paras.

paras.

paras.

paras.

paras.

paras.

paras.

1-14

15-25

26-48

49-73

50-58

59-71

72-73

74-78

79-80

81-94

95-143

96-101

102-108

109-143

144-191

145-149

150-152

153-191

154-160

(2) _ Is international law on countermeasures
applicable to claims under Chapter XI? _ paras. 161-179

(3) Are the requirements for a lawful
countermeasure satisfied ? paras. 180-192

X. Conclusions para. 193

DECISION

Summary of the Case

This case concerns a claim brought by Corn Products International, Inc.
(“CPI”), a corporation incorporated in Delaware and thus a United States
company for the purposes of the North American Free Trade Agreement (“the
NAFTA”), against the United Mexican States (“Mexico”). The claim is for
alleged violations of Chapter XI of the NAFTA and is brought pursuant to
Article 2 of the Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules of the International
Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”). The principal

steps in the proceedings are recounted in Part II of the Decision.

CPI is a major manufacturer of High Fructose Corn Syrup (“HFCS”), a
sweetener made from yellow corn and used, inter alia, as a sweetener in soft
drinks. Following the entry into force of the NAFTA, CPI, through its
wholly owned subsidiary, a Mexican company now known as Corn Products
Ingredientes (“CPIng”), engaged~in the large scale production of HFCS in

Mexico, most of which was supplied to the Mexican soft drinks industry,

where it competed with sweeteners made from cane sugar.

In December 2001 the Mexican Federal Congress adopted legislation
amending the provisions for the Impuesto Especial Sobre Produccién y
Servicios (“IEPS”), an excise tax. The effect was to impose a tax of 20% on

any drink which used a sweetener not made from cane sugar. The factual

background to the case is summarised in greater detail in Part III of the

Decision.

CPI claimed that the effect of the tax was immediately to cause those soft
drink bottlers which were its customers to switch from HFCS to sugar cane
sweeteners, thereby destroying its market. It was obliged to close one of its
plants and significantly to reduce its overall production in Mexico, although
sales recovered in 2001 The
tax (to which the Tribunal will refer for convenience as the “HFCS tax”) was

repealed in December 2006 with effect from 1 January 2007.

CPI commenced proceedings under Chapter XI of the NAFTA, claiming that
Mexico’s action in imposing the tax violated the following provisions of the

NAFTA:-

Article 1102, which requires each State Party to the NAFTA to accord
to investors of another State Party and their investments treatment no
Jess favourable than that which it accords to its own investors and their
investments. CPI maintained that cane sugar producers and HFCS
producers were in like circumstances and that the tax was designed to
favour the predominantly Mexican-owned sugar producers at the

expense of the HFCS producers who were foreign-owned;

Article 1106, which deals with performance requirements. CPI

maintained that the effect of the tax was to condition the receipt of an

advantage — exemption from paying the tax — on the use of Mexican

produced cane sugar;

Article 1110, on the ground that the tax was a measure tantamount to

expropriation of CPI’s investment.

Mexico maintained that the HFCS tax was a countermeasure taken in
response to prior violation of the NAFTA by the United States of America.
Mexico submitted that the United States restricted exports of Mexican sugar
to the United States in violation of the transitional provisions in the NAFTA
for sugar exports and blocked the operation of the inter-State dispute
settlement mechanism under Chapter XX of the NAFTA, with the result that
Mexico was unable to obtain a ruling under Chapter XX regarding the
incompatibility of the United States measures with its NAFTA obligations.
Mexico contended that, in accordance with the principles of international law
regarding State responsibility, the status of the HFCS tax as a countermeasure
precluded its wrongfulness vis-a-vis the United States and that CPI, as an
investor of United States nationality, could not enjoy rights under the NAFTA

greater than those of the United States.

While Mexico thus argued that the status of the HFCS tax as a
countermeasure was a complete defence to CPI’s claims, it also contended
that, quite apart from the issue of countermeasures, CPI had failed to establish
a breach of any of the Chapter XI provisions on which it relied. The Parties’

submissions are reviewed in greater detail in Part IV of the Decision.

10.

li.

The Tribunal considers that the questions whether the HFCS tax was a
countermeasure and whether, if so, that provides an answer to CPI’s claims
arise only if the Tribunal first finds that, in the absence of a countermeasures
defence, CPI would succeed under one or more of the three provisions on
which it relies (see Part V of the Decision). Accordingly, the Decision first
considers whether — setting aside the issue of countermeasures — CPI would

succeed under Articles 1106, 1110 or 1102.

In Part VI, the Tribunal examines the claim under Article 1106 and
concludes that CPI has failed to establish that the HFCS tax falls within either
Article 1106(1) or (3). In the Tribunal’s view, the HFCS tax is not a

performance requirement and cannot give rise to liability under Article 1106.

In Part VII of the Decision, the Tribunal examines the expropriation claim
under Article 1110. The Tribunal considers that CPI has failed to make out
its claim under this provision. While it accepts that the imposition of the
HFCS tax caused CPI losses during the period 2002-2004, it does not
consider that the imposition of the tax rose to the level of an expropriation or

a measure tantamount to an expropriation within the meaning of Article 1110.

The Tribunal then turns, in Part VIII of the Decision, to the claim under
Article 1102. It concludes that Mexico failed to accord CPI, and its
investment, treatment no less favourable than that it accorded to its own
investors in like circumstances, namely the Mexican sugar producers who

were competing for the market in sweeteners for soft drinks. Accordingly,

13,

unless Mexico can succeed in its countermeasures argument, there has been a

violation of Article 1102.

Whether Mexico can succeed in its countermeasures defence is considered in
Part IX of the Decision. For the reasons there given the Tribunal has
concluded that this defence fails. The Tribunal considers that, even if the
doctrine of countermeasures can operate so as to exclude the wrongfulness of
an act as between the States party to the NAFTA (on which the Tribunal
expresses no opinion), it does not have this effect in Chapter XI proceedings

where the claimant is an investor. .

Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes (at Part X of the Decision) that Mexico
has violated Article 1102 of the NAFTA. The amount of compensation due
in respect of this violation will be considered in the next phase of the
proceedings. CPI’s other claims, under NAFTA Articles 1106 and 1110, are
dismissed. The decision of the Tribunal is unanimous but Professor
Lowenfeld appends a Separate Opinion regarding the reasoning of the

Tribunal with respect to the issue of countermeasures.

The Tribunal wishes to express its gratitude to the Parties and their counsel
for the very thorough submissions made on all aspects of the claim. The

Tribunal has found them very helpful.

The Proceedings

The Claimant in the present case, Corn Products International, Inc. (“CPI”), is
a corporation organized under the laws of the State of Delaware. The
Respondent is the United Mexican States (“Mexico”). On 28 January 2003,
CPI served on Mexico a Notice of Intent in which it stated its intention of
commencing proceedings under Chapter XI of the North American Free
Trade Agreement (“NAFTA”). On 21 October 2003, CPI delivered to the
International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes a Request for
Arbitration under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules. The case was

registered on 26 January 2004.

In accordance with Article 1123 of NAFTA and Article 6 of the Rules, the
parties proceeded to constitute the Tribunal. CPI appointed Professor
Andreas Lowenfeld, a United States national. Mexico appointed Licenciado
Manuel Tron, a Mexican national. The Secretary-General, following
consultations with the parties, appointed Professor Christopher Greenwood,
CMG, QC, a British national, as President of the Tribunal. The Tribunal was
constituted on 28 April 2004. On 3 May 2004 Licenciado Manuel Tron
resigned from the Tribunal. In accordance with Article 14(3) of the ICSID
Additional Facility Arbitration Rules (“the Rules”), the remaining members
of the Tribunal considered his resignation and consented thereto. That
consent was recorded in Procedural Order No. 1. On 17 June 2004, Mexico
appointed Licenciado Jestis Alfonso Serrano de la Vega to fill the resulting

vacancy in accordance with Article 17 of the Rules. The Tribunal was

reconstituted on 13 July 2004. Mr Gonzalo Flores, Senior Counsel, ICSID,

was appointed Secretary of the Tribunal.

The parties agreed that the seat of the arbitration would be the City of
Toronto, in Ontario, Canada, but that the hearings might be arranged for other

locations if that were considered convenient.

By a letter of 8 September 2004, addressed to the Secretary-General of
ICSID, Mexico requested the establishment of a consolidation tribunal under
Article 1126 of NAFTA to consider the consolidation of the CPI claim with
one filed by Archer Daniels Midland Co. ‘and Tate and Lyle Ingredients
Americas, Inc. (then A.E. Staley Manufacturing Co.) (“the ADM/Staley
case”). In a letter of the same date to the Tribunal, Mexico requested the
suspension of the present proceedings’ pending the decision of the

consolidation tribunal.
.

The first session of the Tribunal was held in London, United Kingdom, on 16
September 2004. At that session, the Tribunal heard counsel for both parties
on the application for a suspension. The Tribunal dealt with that application

in its Procedural Order No. 2, the relevant parts of which are as follows:-

“4. Ifa tribunal is established under Article 1126, and if that tribunal
decides that the present case and the ADM/Staley case have a question
of law or fact in common, then, under Article 1126(2) of NAFTA, that
tribunal may decide that it would be “in the interests of fair and
efficient resolution” of the two claims for them to be heard together. In
that event, Article 1126(2) empowers that tribunal to assume
jurisdiction over the two cases in whole or in part. By contrast, the
present Tribunal has no power to decide whether or not the two cases

should be consolidated and, indeed, has no jurisdiction over the
ADM/Staley case.

5. NAFTA Article 1126(8) provides that -

“A Tribunal established under Article 1120 shall not have
jurisdiction to decide a claim, or a part of a claim, over which a
Tribunal established under this Article has assumed
jurisdiction.”

Accordingly, if an Article 1126 tribunal assumes jurisdiction over the
present case, then the jurisdiction of the present Tribunal will come to
an end in respect of such part or parts of the claim over which the
Article 1126 tribunal assumes jurisdiction.

6. The Tribunal notes that the ADM/Staley case has not yet been
registered by. the Center and that no tribunal has, as yet, been
sestablished under Article 1126. Accordingly, the Tribunal remains
seised of the present case and, subject to any jurisdictional objection
which may subsequently be raised by Mexico, has jurisdiction over it.
Nothing in Article 1126, or in any other provision of NAFTA or the
ICSID Additional Facility Arbitration Rules, requires the Tribunal to
suspend proceedings in such a situation.

7. The Tribunal considers, however, that, while it has no duty to

suspend the present proceedings, it has a discretion to do so. The

existence of such a discretion appears to be implicit in Article 1126(9)
* of NAFTA, which provides that -

“On application of a disputing party, a Tribunal established
under this Article, pending its decision under paragraph 2, may
order that the proceedings of a Tribunal established under
Article 1120 be stayed, unless the latter Tribunal has already
adjourned its proceedings.” (Emphasis added)

The Tribunal has therefore treated the request by Mexico as an
application that the Tribunal use its discretion to suspend the
proceedings pending a decision of an Article 1126 tribunal.

8. The Tribunal considers that the two principles by which it should
be guided in the exercise of its discretion are (a) the efficient conduct of
the proceedings and (b) fairness to both disputing parties.

9. With regard to the first principle, if an Article 1126 tribunal should

assume jurisdiction over the present case, even only in part, it may well
wish to fix an entirely fresh schedule for submissions and there is a

11

danger that work done by the parties in preparing submissions for the
present Tribunal may have to be duplicated. On the other hand, the
Tribunal is concerned that the present claim was filed as long ago as
October 2003. The Tribunal, while not at this stage seeking to inquire
into the causes, is concerned by the fact that such a long period has
elapsed since the claim was filed. If a tribunal is not established under
Article 1126, or if such a tribunal is established but then decides not to
assume jurisdiction over the present case, then if this Tribunal has
suspended its proceedings, there will be a further delay — perhaps of
several months ~ before a pleading schedule is even determined. The
uncertainty regarding Mexico’s application to the Center is enhanced by
the fact that no Article 1126 tribunal exists as yet and, indeed, that the
ADM/Staley case has not even been registered.

10. With regard to the duty of fairness to the parties, the Tribunal was
impressed by the submissions of counsel for Mexico, which is, of
course, party to both this case and ADM/Staley, that it should not be put
in the position of having to conduct proceedings both before this
Tribunal and before an Article 1126 tribunal and that it should not be
required to expend time and money in preparing written submissions
for this Tribunal when the Article 1126 tribunal may in due course
assume jurisdiction and therefore put an end (at least for the time being)
to these proceedings. On the other hand, the Claimant has already had
to endure a considerable delay in the proceedings and its counsel has
urged that further delay will prejudice it.

11. The Tribunal notes that it is the Claimant who will have to prepare
the first written submissions, the Memorial. In view of the likely time
scale for the establishment of an Article 1126 tribunal and the
consideration by such a tribunal of whether or not to assume
jurisdiction over the present case, if the deadline for the filing of the
Memorial is set at a date early in 2005, it is probable that an Article
1126 tribunal, if one is convened, will have reached a decision on the
question of consolidation before the Memorial has to be filed. While it
remains the case that, if such a tribunal decides to consolidate the two
cases and to assume jurisdiction over the present claim shortly before
the Claimant is due to deposit its Memorial, the Claimant will have to
halt in its tracks and prepare written submissions in accordance with
whatever new timetable is determined by the Article 1126 tribunal, it is
unlikely that that would cause any real prejudice to the Claimant. As
the Claimant’s counsel has explained, the Claimant would be obliged to
do the work involved in preparing a Memorial in any event. Moreover,
if there is any prejudice it would be to the Claimant and the Claimant
has stated that it is prepared to take that risk.

20.

21,

22.

23.

24,

12. Fixing a pleading schedule which involved the filing of the
Memorial early in 2005 would involve no unfairness to Mexico, since it
is probable that an Article 1126 tribunal would have taken a decision on
consolidation before Mexico had to begin work on its Counter-
Memorial. Nevertheless, in the event that the position regarding
consolidation remained unclear by the time the deadline for the
Claimant to file its Memorial approached, the Tribunal would be
perfectly willing to hear an application from either party to vary the
timetable. The Tribunal also notes that Article 1126(9) authorizes an
Article 1126 tribunal to order suspension of our proceedings.”

The Tribunal also decided, with the agreement of the parties, that the
proceedings would consist of two rounds of written pleadings and an oral
phase, addressed to the question of responsibility, with the issue of damages

‘
deferred until after the Tribunal had rendered a decision on responsibility.

The consolidation tribunal decided on 20 May 2005 not to order

consolidation of the present case with the ADM/Staley case. ~~

CPI deposited its Memorial on 11 April 2005. Mexico filed its Counter-

memorial on 15 September 2005. CPI deposited its Reply on 26 October

2005 and Mexico its Rejoinder on 12 December 2005.

On 17 March 2006, CPI asked the Tribunal to reconsider the decision to
bifurcate the proceedings. That application was refused by Procedural Order

No. 5.

Oral hearings were held on 10-13 July 2006 at the seat of the Centre in

Washington, DC. The parties were represented as follows:

Claimant
Ms Lucinda Low
Mr Jeffrey Pryce
Mr José Ramén Gonzilez Magaz,
Mr Owen Bonheimer
Mr Sergio Puig
Ms Megan Ihrie, all of Steptoe and Johnson LLP;
Ms Mary Ann Hynes, of CPI
Ms Christine Castellano, of CPI, and

Ms Maria del Carmen Portilla Pons, of CPIngredientes.

Respondent

Mr Hugo Perezcano Diaz, of the Secretaria de Economia

Mr Salvador Behar

Ms Laura Martinez, both of the Embassy of Mexico to the United States
Mr Stephan E. Becker

Mr Sanjay Mullick, both of Pillsbury, Winthrop, Shaw and Pittman LLP
Mr J. Christopher Thomas, QC

Mr J. Cameron Mowatt

Mr Alejandro Barragén

Ms Celeste Mowatt, all of Thomas and Partners, and

Professor James Crawford, SC, of Matrix Chambers.

25.

26.

27.

The Members of the Tribunal were assisted, with the agreement of the
parties, by Mrs Jessica Wells, Barrister-at-Law, of Essex Court Chambers,
who attended the hearing. Mrs Wells gave the same undertaking as to

confidentiality as the Members of the Tribunal.
The Facts

High Fructose Corn Syrup (“HFCS”) is one of the products of refined corn.
It is produced by the wet milling of corn so as to produce a slurry starch
which is then refined to produce a number of end products of which HFCS is
one. While the refining précess has existed for a long time, HFCS is a
comparatively recent product. HFCS is used primarily as a sweetener in the
food and beverages industry, where it competes directly with sweeteners
made from sugar. “There are two principal concentrations of HFCS produced
for use as a sweetener in food and beverages: HFCS grade 55 (“HFCS 55”),
which contains 55% fructose and has a sweetness level equivalent to that of
sugar, and HFCS grade 42 (“HFCS 42”), which contains 42% fructose.
HFCS 55 is used principally_in the soft drinks industry. By the mid-1980’s
HFCS had become the sweetener most commonly used in soft drinks in the
United States and Canada, gaining a competitive advantage over sugar both
because it was generally cheaper and because it was supplied in liquid form

and was therefore more convenient to use.

By the start of the 1990’s, Corn Products International, Inc. (“CPI”) had long

been a major producer of HFCS and supplier to the soft drinks industry in the

28.

United States. It also owned facilities in Mexico through its subsidiary,
currently known as CP Ingredientes (“CPIng”). In 1993-94 CPI formed a
joint venture with a Mexican company, Arancia, to produce HFCS in Mexico
with the intention of competing with sugar for the soft drink sweeteners
market in Mexico. The Mexican Government made a commitment in writing
guaranteeing access to duty-free imported yellow corn for the purpose of
producing HFCS in April 1994, The joint venture was to produce HFCS in
Mexico. A key part of the intended market was to be sales of sweeteners to
the Mexican soft drinks industry which had previously used sweeteners made

from sugar.

The joint venture embarked upon what it described as the “Colibri Project” to
establish a substantial HFCS production facility in Mexico. In the first phase
of that project, in 1995-97, CPI made a substantial investment in establishing
HFCS production facilities at the San Juan del Rio plant (“SJR”) already
owned by CPIng. The new facilities were designed to operate on a
continuous basis and to produce some tons of HFCS a day. Production
began in late 1996 and the plant was formally inaugurated by the then
President of Mexico, Ernesto Zedillo, in May 1997. In 1097 a
major prospective customer, certified that the plant met its quality standards.
Production capacity was increased at the end of 1997. HFCS produced at the
plant became a major source of sweeteners for the Mexican soft drinks

industry.

29.

30.

31.

32.

In 1998 CPI agreed to buy out the Aranguren family, the owners of Arancia.

By 2001 CPI claimed to have acquired approximately of the sweeteners
market for soft drinks in Mexico, with sugar sweeteners accounting o>
and the remainder being held by other HFCS suppliers. CPI’s evidence gives

the total production of HFCS by CPIng in Mexico in 2001 as {iitons.

At the same time as HFCS was displacing sugar from a significant part of the
market for soft drinks sweeteners, the Mexican sugar industry was engaged in
a dispute with the United States over access to the United States sugar

market.

In the early 1990’s Mexico consumed more sugar than it produced but,
following extensive restructuring of the industry as part of economic reforms
introduced by the Mexican Government, sugar production was rising and, by
the time that NAFTA was being negotiated, the Mexican Government
considered that the deficit would soon disappear and Mexico would have a
sugar surplus for which export markets would be needed. It therefore
negotiated for access to the United States market. At all relevant times the
price for sugar in both the United States and Mexico was substantially higher

than the world market price.

33.

34.

35.

The United States Government was not prepared to open its market to
Mexican sugar imports with immediate effect but was prepared to concede
access for surplus production under transitional arrangements, incorporated
into the NAFTA, which would operate until 31 December 2007. There was,
however, a difference between the two governments as to how the existence
and size of any surplus was to be determined. In particular, the two
governments differed over how the effect of HFCS displacement of sugar

from part of its traditional market in Mexico was to be taken into account.

That issue was the subject of an exchange of letters attached to the NAFTA
(“the side-letters”). There has, however, been a difference between the two
governments over which text of these side-letters was finally agreed. This
Tribunal has no jurisdiction to resolve that question, nor has it any need to do
so. For present purposes it is sufficient to note, by way of background to the
dispute between CPI and Mexico which is before this Tribunal, that between
1997 and 2006 the United States Government admitted to its market a smaller
quantity of Mexican sugar than the Mexican Government and Mexican sugar
producers maintained should have been admitted in accordance with the

terms of NAFTA and the side-letters.

The result was that during the 1990’s Mexico moved to a position in which it
had a surplus of sugar which, in most years, it was unable to export to the
United States (the only other potentially available market in which prices

were so far in excess of the world market price). Moreover, sugar’s share of

the market for soft drinks sweeteners in Mexico had fallen because of

competition from HFCS.

36. There was considerable economic hardship in the Mexican sugar industry at
that time. Approximately two million people were working in the sugar
industry in Mexico and the economic situation led to a number of
bankruptcies, unemployment and falling prices paid to sugarcane growers.
One consequence was a restructuring within the industry which included the
expropriation of a number of sugar mills which the Government considered to

be in financial difficulties.' .

37. The Government of Mexico complained to the United States Government that
the latter was restricting access for surplus Mexican sugar to the United States
market in breach of its obligations under NAFTA and the side-letters. The
United States denied that its actions constituted a violation of those

obligations.

38. The Mexican Government therefore invoked the machinery for settlement of
disputes in Chapter XX of NAFTA. In March 1998 Mexico requested
consultations under Article 2006. The consultations were held but did not
resolve the issue. Mexico then requested a meeting of the Free Trade
Commission established by NAFTA. That also did not achieve a resolution

of the differences between Mexico and the United States regarding sugar

| ‘This restructuring gave rise to claims under NAFTA Chapter XI; see GAMI v. Mexico, award of 15

November 2004, discussed at paras. 131-132 and 140, below.

19

39.

40.

access. In August 2000 Mexico requested the establishment of an arbitral

tribunal under Article 2008 of NAFTA.

No tribunal was established. Why that was so is the subject of a controversy
between the United States and Mexico over which this Tribunal has no
jurisdiction. Suffice it to say that Mexico maintained that the United States
effectively frustrated the operation of the Chapter XX mechanism, thereby
contravening that part of NAFTA. The United States has denied that it acted

contrary to its obligations under Chapter XX.

In December 2001 the Federal Congress in Mexico enacted legislation
amending the Impuesto Especial Sobre Produccién y Servicios (“IEPS”), an
excise tax. These amendments required bottlers of soft drinks to pay a tax of
20% on the full price of each drink. The tax was also payable on each
increase in price when the soft drink was transferred in the chain of
distribution to the retailer. There was, however, an exemption from the tax if
the soft drink was manufactured using sweeteners made exclusively from
cane sugar. The result was that the new tax (referred to throughout the
present proceedings and in this Decision as “the HFCS tax”) was effectively
payable only on soft drinks made using HFCS.” It was irrelevant whether the
HFCS was produced in Mexico or imported as the HFCS tax applied

whenever HFCS was used as a sweetener in soft drinks.

It would also have been payable on soft drinks made using sweeteners made from sugar beet or other

sources apart from cane sugar but there was no evidence before the Tribunal of any significant use of such
sweeteners by Mexican soft drink bottlers.

20

41.

42.

43.

The imposition of the HFCS tax was the result of initiatives within the
Federal Congress and not a proposal from the Executive Branch. The record
demonstrates that the Executive was opposed to the imposition of the tax.
Nevertheless, the Mexican Government maintained that the HFCS tax was
imposed by Mexico as a countermeasure in response to the alleged failures of
the United States to honour its NAFTA obligations concerning the sugar

access dispute and that it was notified to the United States as such.

That explanation was not accepted by CPI which maintained that the motive
for the imposition of the HFCS tax was protectionist, that the tax raised no
revenue because it could be avoided by switching from HFCS to sugar cane
sweeteners and that the purpose was to protect the Mexican sugar industry by
encouraging increased consumption of sugar. CPI quoted a number of
statements by Members of the Federal Congress who supported the
impositiog of the tax which, CPI contended, showed the protectionist intent

behind the tax.

The HFCS.tax was imposed with effect from 1 January 2002. However, it
was suspended by the Executive on 5 March 2002. The decision of the
Executive was challenged by the Congress before the Supreme Court which
tuled, in July 2002, that the Executive had no authority to suspend the tax and

ordered its reimposition.

Although the HFCS tax was payable not by CPIng but by the soft drinks

bottlers, there was an immediate effect upon CPIng, because the bottlers

21

could — and did — avoid paying the tax by switching from HFCS to cane sugar
sweeteners. According to CPI, as soon as the HFCS tax was imposed, orders
for HFCS from its soft drinks customers dried up. On QED Ping
was forced to shut down HFCS 55 production at one plant. During 2002

production declined significantly. In 2003 and 2004 HFCS 55 production

was impaired and at times stopped completely. i.

45. CPIng endeavoured to challenge the HFCS tax before the Mexican courts but
its challenges were rejected on the ground that it lacked standing, since the

3

tax was paid not by CPIng but by the soft drinks bottlers. Some of those

bottlers did bring proceedings of their own and in 2004 there was an increase

in orders for HFCs QED 'cacing to a significant

recovery in sales.

46. The parties disagree as to the extent of the losses caused to CPI and CPIng by
the HFCS tax. It was not denied that the initial effect was a significant
reduction in orders leading to production cuts. Mexico alleged, however, that

CPIng was able to make up for part of that loss by switching production to

meet demand from other HFCS markets,

3 Decision of the Supreme Court of 25 August 2004 in Amparo en Revisién 756/2004, Arancia-Corn

Products SA de CV, Exhibit C143.

22

47.

48.

i: CPI denied that its attempts to mitigate its loss by

finding alternative markets had had such substantial effects and contended
that the recovery in production occurred later than Mexico had alleged. In
view of the Tribunal’s decision (set out below) on the need for a second phase
of proceedings to determine quantum issues, the Tribunal makes no findings

on these issues at this stage.

On 7 October 2005 a Panel of the World Trade Organization (“WTO”) held
that the HFCS tax contravened Article III of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade, 1994 (“GATT”) and was not justified under Article XX(d)
of the GATT. The Panel considered that HFCS and sugar sweeteners were
“like products” for the purposes of Article II] of GATT and that the tax was
clearly designed to favour sugar sweeteners at the expense of HFCS. .On.6
March 2006, the Appellate Body of the WTO issued a Report (Mexico — Tax
Measures on “Soft Drinks” and Other Beverages, WT/DS308/AB/R)
upholding the Panel’s conclusions that the HFCS tax was contrary to Article
III and that Mexico had not established that it was justified under Article XX.
The Parties to the present proceedings differed regarding the significance of

the WTO decisions.

The HEFCS tax was finally repealed in 2006 following an agreement between
the United States and Mexico concerning access for Mexican sugar to United

States markets during the remainder of the transitional period.

23

IV.

49.

50.

Sl.

The Positions of the Parties

This Part of the Decision summarises the principal arguments of the Parties.
Some aspects of these arguments are addressed in greater detail in Parts VI

to IX, below.
A. The Claimant

The Claimant, CPI, claimed on its own behalf as an investor of the United
States within Article 1116 of the NAFTA. It also claimed, under Article
1117, on behalf of its wholly owned subsidiary, CPIng, which is incorporated
in Mexico, and which is “an enterprise of another Party that is a juridical
person that the investor controls directly or indirectly” (Article 1117(1)). The

investment to which the claim under Articles 1102 and 1106 relates was said

to be CPIng itself. With regard to the Article 1110 claim, however, CPI’s

Memorial maintained that the relevant investment was the property CPI held,
*

indirectly through CPlIng, relating to its HFCS production and supply

business. CPI’s identification of the relevant investment for the purposes of

“the Article 1110 claim underwent some refinement during the course of the

oral and written pleadings, as explained in Part VII, below.

CPI maintained that the HFCS tax was not, in reality, a tax at all. It claimed
that it was openly acknowledged by Mexico that the HFCS tax would not
raise significant, or any, revenue, because a bottler could avoid payment of
the tax by switching from HFCS to sugar cane sweeteners and that the

purpose of the tax was to put pressure on the bottlers to do precisely that. It

24

52.

53.

was therefore irrelevant that the tax was not levied on CPI or the other
producers/suppliers of sweeteners but on the bottlers of soft drinks. The
effect of the tax - both in intention and in the event ~ was to close off access
for HFCS to the soft drinks market as the soft drinks bottlers switched en

masse to the use of the untaxed cane sugar for use as a sweetener.

CPI’s first claim was under Article 1102 of the NAFTA. CPI relied on

paragraphs 1 and 2 of that Article, which provide as follows:-
“Article 1102: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to irivestors of another Party treatment no
Jess favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own
investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion,
management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of
investments.

2. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another
Party treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like
circumstances, to investments of its own investors with respect to the
establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct,
operation, and sale or other disposition of investments.”

CPI maintained that a producer of HFCS for the Mexican soft drinks market
was in like circumstances (for the purposes of Article 1102(1)) to a sugar
producer which was also seeking to supply to the same market. Likewise, it
argued that its investment was in like circumstances (for the purposes of
Article 1102(2)) to those of the sugar producers. While the Mexican sugar
industry was predominantly owned by Mexican nationals (including the
Mexican State), CPIng and the only other manufacturer of HFCS in Mexico

were both foreign owned.

25

54.

55.

56.

CPI relied heavily on what might be called a “competitive market analysis”.
It noted that HFCS and sugar were in direct competition - indeed, were
treated as interchangeable - in the market for soft drink sweeteners. It
derived support from the decisions of the WTO Panel and Appellate Body
that HFCS and sugar were “like products” for the purposes of Article III of
the GATT. While it accepted that the test of like circumstances under Article
1102 was not identical to that of “like products” under the GATT, CPI argued
that the fact that the two products were interchangeable in the relevant market
and in direct competition were facts of the utmost significance and led in this

case to the conclusion that the “like circumstances” test was satisfied.

In addition, CPI relied upon the purpose of the HFCS tax. CPI did not accept
that the tax was a countermeasure, the purpose of which was to address
alleged US violations of the NAFTA, and asserted that it was, in reality, a
piece of protectionist legislation designed to aid the Mexican sugar industry
by effectively removing its principal competitor in the important soft drinks
sweetener market. As such, CPI claimed, the tax was based on a recognition
of the similarities between HFCS and sugar, which, according to CPI, further
demonstrated that those who produced the two products were in like

circumstances.

In CPI’s view it then became plain that the HFCS suppliers were accorded
Jess favourable treatment. Although the tax was not levied upon them but
upon the bottlers, they were its intended target and they suffered the effects of

it. Since sugar production in Mexico was predominantly Mexican-owned at

26

58.

59.

the relevant time, whereas HFCS was either imported from the United States
or produced in Mexico by foreign-owned producers (including CPIng), the
tax discriminated, both de jure and de facto, between Mexican and foreign
companies. Moreover, Mexico’s claim that the tax was intended as a
countermeasure was further proof, according to CPI, that the tax
discriminated on grounds of nationality, since a countermeasure designed to
target the United States would have to impose a disproportionate burden upon

United States interests and United States investors.

CPI also maintained that the HFCS tax amounted to a performance

requirement of the kind prohibited by Article 1106 of the NAFTA.

Lastly, CPI argued that the tax amounted to indirect expropriation, or to a
measure tantamount to expropriation, within Article 1110 of the NAFTA,
because CPI had been denied the use and enjoyment of its HFCS
manufacturing assets for a period of time while the HFCS tax was being
imposed upon its customers. CPI’s arguments on this point are summarised

in greater detail at paragraphs 81 to 85.

B. The Respondent

In its Counter-Memorial, Mexico’s principal response to CPI’s claims was
that the HFCS tax was a countermeasure taken by Mexico in response to prior
violations of the NAFTA by the United States. As such it was, in the
language of the International Law Commission Articles on State

Responsibility (“the ILC Articles”), a “circumstance precluding

27

60.

61.

62.

wrongfulness”, which, because CPI was claiming as an investor of the United
States, operated (according to Mexico) as a complete defence to the claims

irrespective of whether those claims were otherwise well-founded.

Mexico’s case was that the dispute between CPI and Mexico could not be
separated from the broader dispute between Mexico and the United States
regarding access for Mexican sugar to the United States market (see
paragraphs 31 to 39, above). Mexico maintained that the United States had
acted in breach of the NAFTA by restricting the amount of Mexico’s surplus
sugar production which could be exported to the United States at a time when
Mexico was admitting HFCS produced in the United States and the imported
HFCS, together with the HFCS produced by the Claimant and the other
producer in Mexico, were directly contributing to the surplus of sugar in

Mexico by displacing sugar from part of the soft drink sweetener market.

In addition, Mexico contended that the United States had frustrated the
operation of the Chapter XX dispute settlement mechanism so that Mexico
was unable to secure a hearing before an arbitration tribunal of its complaint
that the United States was in breach of its NAFTA obligations regarding
access to its sugar market. According to Mexico, this constituted a second,

and separate, violation of the NAFTA by the United States.

In these circumstances, Mexico maintained that it was entitled to take
countermeasures against the United States for the purpose of ensuring that the

sugar dispute was heard by a Chapter XX tribunal. Mexico asserted that

28

4

63.

64.

countermeasures were a recognized part of general international law. It
referred to the ILC Articles (in particular, Articles 22 and 49-54) and the
decision of the International Court of Justice in the Case concerning the
Gabcikovo-Nagymaros Project,’ in which the Court expressly recognized the
right of a State to take countermeasures against another State which had
committed a prior violation of international law. Provided that such
countermeasures complied with the requirements of international law (which
are discussed in Part IX of the Decision), Mexico claimed that they did not
amount to a violation of the international obligations of the State having

recourse to them.

Mexico argued that the HFCS tax met all of the requirements of international
law for a lawful countermeasure. It claimed that the tax was a proportionate
response to the actions of the United States, was directed against the United
States and was intended to secure United States compliance wjth its NAFTA
obligations. Mexico accepted that the initiative for adopting the tax had come
from the Mexican Federal Congress rather than the Executive Government
but denied that that was a material consideration and contended that it had

notified the United States of the measure and called upon the United States to

comply with its NAFTA obligations.

Once the HFCS tax were recognized to be a lawful countermeasure, Mexico

contended, the effect would be to preclude the wrongfulness of Mexico’s acts

ICJ Reports, 1997, p. 7.

29

65.

66.

in adopting and enforcing the tax not only vis-a-vis the United States but also

vis-a-vis CPI.

In Mexico’s view, Chapter XI of the NAFTA could not be construed as
conferring substantive rights upon investors. The substantive rights which it
created existed solely at the inter-State level and were, according to Mexico,
therefore subject to a defence of countermeasures. The investor was given
only a procedural right of access to arbitration. If it exercised that right, then
what it was enforcing in the arbitration that resulted was the rights of its
State. Accordingly, Mexico maintained, CPI in the present arbitration was
seeking to enforce the rights of the United States and the defence of
countermeasures was equally available in respect of those rights when
enforced by CPI as it would have been if the United States had sought to
enforce them itself. As Mexico put it, CPI, as a United States investor, could

not be entitled to rights which were greater than those of the United States.

In this context, Mexico denied that the WTO proceedings were of any
relevance. They were concerned with a different treaty. The fact that the
HFCS tax had been held to violate Mexico’s obligations under the GATT did
not preclude Mexico from relying on countermeasures as a defence to an
action for violation of its obligations under the NAFTA. Mexico denied that
it had relied upon countermeasures as a defence in the WTO proceedings and
rejected the suggestion that the WTO Panel and Appellate Body had found

that the HFCS tax was not a lawful countermeasure.

30

67.

68.

69.

Mexico accepted that the Tribunal could not determine whether Mexico or
the United States was right about the sugar market access dispute. Its
argument was that since Mexico had a genuine and reasonable belief that the
United States was in breach of its NAFTA obligations, it had been entitled to
impose the HFCS tax as a countermeasure and that its action in doing so had
the effect of extinguishing CPI’s rights. Alternatively, Mexico advanced (at
the oral hearings) an argument that this Tribunal should defer making a
decision until a Chapter XX tribunal had ruled upon the question whether the
United States had violated its NAFTA obligations to Mexico such as to

justify Mexico in taking countermeasures against it.
While Mexico consistently maintained that the status of the HFCS tax as a

countermeasure was a complete defence to CPI’s claims, it also contended

that those claims were unfounded in any event.

With regard to the Atticle 1102 claim, Mexico maintained that CPI was not in
like circumstances to the Mexican sugar producers. It denied that the test of
“like products” under the GATT/WTO was determinative with regard to
whether or not the producers of such products were in “like circumstances”
for the purposes of NAFTA Article 1102. In the present case, a highly
material consideration, according to Mexico, was that the production of
HECS by CPI for sale in the Mexican market directly contributed to the sugar
surplus and thus exacerbated the effect of the United States restrictions on
market access for sugar, while CPI benefited directly from the opening up of

Mexican markets by the NAFTA and had access to the United States for

31

70.

71.

72.

HFCS produced in Mexico. Moreover, Mexico maintained, the price of sugar
in Mexico was the subject of official regulation, whereas the price of HFCS

was freely determined.

Mexico denied that the HFCS tax could plausibly be regarded as a
performance requirement within the meaning of Article 1106 and argued that

CPI’s claim under this provision was “fanciful”.

So far as the Article 1110 claim was concerned, Mexico emphasised that CPI
had been deprived of neither legal title to, nor physical control of, any part of
its investment. It maintained that the imposition of the tax had not had the
claimed effect of sterilising the market for CPIng’s product and pointed to a
recovery in CPIng’s sales of HFCS in 2003 and 2004
a: its customers succeeded, through amparo proceedings,

in freeing themselves of the obligation to pay the tax if they used HFCS as a
sweetener. While Mexico accepted that the concept of “measures tantamount
to expropriation” was different from both direct and indirect expropriation, it
denied that the concept was as broad as CPI claimed and submitted that the
infliction on a business of losses occasioned by temporary restriction of a
market was not capable of amounting to a measure tantamount to

expropriation.
C. Claimant's Response to the Countermeasures’ Argument

CPI maintained that countermeasures were not available as a circumstance

excluding wrongfulness in the present case. It maintained that the Tribunal

32

73.

74.

3

lacked jurisdiction to decide whether the United States had violated NAFTA,
so that a precondition for any successful countermeasures defence was
absent. In addition, Chapter XI of the NAFTA conferred rights upon CPI as
an investor which were separate and distinct from the rights and obligations
of the United States. Moreover, the investor-State dispute resolution system
created by Chapter XI was designed to avoid disputes between an investor of
one NAFTA Party and another NAFTA Party becoming entangled with inter-
State disputes. It therefore denied that Mexico could rely upon
countermeasures as a defence to a claim by CPI, as opposed to one by the

United States.

Furthermore, CPI contended that, even if a defence of countermeasures could,
in principle, be maintained in a Chapter XI context, it had to fail in the
present case, because the HFCS tax did not meet the criteria for a lawful

countermeasure as codified in the ILC Articles.
The Tribunal’s Approach to the Issues

The Tribunal begins by noting that there is no challenge to its jurisdiction
over the CPI claims. In particular, Mexico has not denied that CPI is an
investor of a Party within the meaning of Chapter XI or that CPIng
constitutes CPI’s investment, Similarly, there is no doubt that the claim

made by CPI falls within the jurisdictional provisions of Chapter XI.

For the Parties’ submissions regarding CPI’s argument that its investment for purposes of the Article

1110 claim was different from the investment for the purposes of its two other claims, see para. 81.

33

75.

76.

77.

The Tribunal therefore proceeds on the basis that it has jurisdiction and that,
in principle, it must exercise that jurisdiction. Nevertheless, its jurisdiction is
limited to Chapter XI of the NAFTA and to the parties before it. It has no
jurisdiction — as both parties accept — to determine whether the United States,
which is not a party to these proceedings, has violated provisions of the
NAFTA which fall outside Chapter XI of that Agreement. That limitation is
significant, as is explained in Part IX of the Decision, for the approach which

the Tribunal must take to the issue of countermeasures.

A second matter on which there is broad agreement between the parties — at
least as to the principles involved — concerns the law to be applied by the

Tribunal. In accordance with Article 1131(1) of the NAFTA, the Tribunal

_ “shall decide the issues in dispute in accordance with this Agreement and

applicable rules of international law”. The Tribunal considers the applicable
tules of, international law to include the rules relating to the interpretation of
treaties (which it is generally accepted have been authoritatively codified in
the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1969). The rules on State
responsibility (of which, it is accepted, the most authoritative statement is to
be found in the ILC Articles) are in principle applicable under the NAFTA
save to the extent that they are excluded by provisions of the NAFTA as lex

specialis.

The parties have cited a significant number of arbitration awards in other
Chapter XI cases and in proceedings brought by investors under other

international agreements. There is, of course, no doctrine of binding

34

78.

precedent in international law, nor any reason of principle why the tribunal
which has the first word on a subject should necessarily be treated as having
spoken definitively thereon. Nevertheless, the views of other tribunals on
issues similar to those arising in the present case and on questions of principle
which impact upon the issues in these proceedings are necessarily of value to

the Tribunal and have accordingly been taken into account.

Although Mexico’s principal argument, at least in its Counter-Memorial, was
that the HFCS tax was a countermeasure whose status as such precluded it
from being a violation of Chapter XI -of NAFTA, it also denied that its
conduct would amount to a violation of any of the provisions relied upon by
CPI in any event. The Tribunal considers that the question whether Mexico
can succeed by reference to a countermeasures argument arises only if the
Tribunal first concludes that — in the absence of a countermeasures defence —
Mexico’s conduct violated one or more of,the three provisions invoked by
CPI. The Tribunal has accordingly first considered whether the HFCS tax
would breach any of these provisions. At the oral hearings counsel for

Mexico accepted that this was the correct course to follow.

35

VIL

79.

The Performance Requirements Claim under Article 1106

The Tribunal will first deal with CPI’s claim under Article 1106. In relevant

part, Article 1106 provides as follows —

“Article 1106: Performance Requirements

1, No Party may impose or enforce any of the following requirements,
or enforce any commitment or undertaking, in connection with the
establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct or
operation of an investment of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party in
its territory:
(a) to export a given level or percentage of goods or services;
(b) to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;
(c) to purchase, use or accord a preference to goods produced
or services provided in its territory, or to purchase goods or,
services from persons in its territory;
(d) to relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the
volume or value of exports or to the amount of foreign
exchange inflows associated with such investment;
(e) to restrict sales of goods or services in its territory that such
investment produces or provides by relating such sales in any
way to the volume or value of its exports or foreign exchange
earnings;
(f) to transfer technology, a production process or other
proprietary knowledge to a person in its territory, except when
the requirement is imposed or the commitment or undertaking
is enforced by a court, administrative tribunal or competition
authority to remedy an alleged violation of competition laws or
to act in a manner not inconsistent with other provisions of this
Agreement; or ~
(g) to act as the exclusive supplier of the goods it produces or
services it provides to a specific region or world market.

2. A measure that requires an investment to use a technology to meet
generally applicable health, safety or environmental requirements shall
not be construed to be inconsistent with paragraph 1(f). For greater
certainty, Articles 1102 and 1103 apply to the measure.

3. No Party may condition the receipt or continued receipt of an
advantage, in connection with an investment in its territory of an
investor of a Party or of a non-Party, on compliance with any of the
following requirements:

36

80.

(a) to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic content;
(b) to purchase, use or accord a preference to goods produced in
its territory, or to purchase goods from producers in its territory;
(c) to relate in any way the volume or value of imports to the
volume or value of exports or to the amount of foreign exchange
inflows associated with such investment; or
(d) to restrict sales of goods or services in its territory that such
investment produces or provides by relating such sales in any way
to the volume or value of its exports or foreign exchange
earnings.”
CPI freely admits that its claim is without precedent. Counsel for Mexico
described it as “fanciful”. The Tribunal would not go that far but it is clear
that CPI has not made out its case under this provision. No requirement was
imposed on CPI by the tax enacted by the Mexican Congress on soft drinks
using HFCS as a sweetener. Mexico made no demand on CPI for increased
investment, increased local procurement or a greater level of local employees.
Nor did the tax or any other regulation cited by CPI purport to prescribe the
level of its domestic sales, imports, exports, or foreign exchange earnings.
While the tax here challenged was adopted with the intent and effect of
reducing the use by CPI’s customers of CPI’s product, the performance

requirement, if any, was placed on the soft drink manufacturers, and even that

was not mandatory. The claim under Article 1106 fails.

37

VH. The Expropriation Claim under Article 1110

81. CPI’s second claim is that the HFCS tax amounted to an indirect
expropriation, or a measure tantamount to an expropriation, of its investment.
CPI maintained that, for the purposes of its Article 1110 claim, the
“investment” in respect of which the claim was made was different from that
with respect to which it claimed under Articles 1102 and 1106.° Whereas, for
the purposes of its Article 1102 and 1106 claims, CPI argued that the
“investment” was CPIng, for the purposes of its Article 1110 claim, CPI
contended that the relevant investment was “the property it holds, indirectly
through CP Ingredientes, relating to its HFCS production and supply
business”.’ This raises the question whether a claimant under Chapter XI is
entitled to rely upon different notions of what constitutes the “investment” for
the purpose of different claims arising out of the same set of facts. Mexico
questioned this aspect of CPJ’s submissions but the Tribunal has not
considered the matter further, because it has concluded that, even if CPI’s
submission regarding what constitutes the “investment” for the purposes of
Article 1110 is accepted, the claim for expropriation still fails for the reasons

set out below.

82. A threshold problem for this part of CPI’s case is that it retained both title and
physical possession of all of the assets in question at all times. CPI

acknowledged that but maintained that neither a physical taking nor a transfer

© See paragraphs 50 and 74, above.
7 Memorial, para. 252.

38

of title is required for indirect expropriation or for measures tantamount to
expropriation. It relied heavily upon the award in Metalclad v. Mexico * and
on two expert opinions prepared for it by Professor Dolzer. In particular, CPI
relied on the statement by the Metalclad tribunal that “depriving the owner ...
in significant part ... of the reasonably-to-be-expected economic benefit of

9

property” ” was capable of constituting expropriation.

83. In that context, CPI argued that the HFCS tax deprived it of “the expected
economic use and benefits from its HFCS-related investments” '° by
destroying overnight its market for HFCS. It emphasised that the purpose of
the HFCS tax (as opposed to that of the IEPS as a whole) was not to raise
revenue but to destroy the soft drinks market for HFCS to the benefit of the
Mexican sugar industry. It also placed great weight on what it argued was the

discriminatory nature of the tax.

84. Mexico differed from CPI both as regards the content of the law under Article

1110 of the NAFTA and its application to the facts of the case. It argued
(relying upon Pope and Talbot,'' SD Myers '? and Feldman '*) that a measure
is not “tantamount to expropriation” unless it is equivalent to an
expropriation, that Metalclad was a widely criticised award which was
annulled in part by the British Columbia Supreme Court '* and that, even if it

8 ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1; 5 ICSID Reps 209.

°  Tbid., para. 103.

10 Memorial, para. 379.

"\ Award of 10 April 2001, 7 ICSID Reps. 102.

°° First Partial Award on Liability, 13 November 2000; 8 ICSID Reps. 18.

3 ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1; 7 ICSID Reps. 341.
'4 5 ICSID Reps. 236 and 6 ICSID Reps. 52.

39

had been rightly decided, what was involved in Metalclad was the permanent
destruction of the claimant’s business, whereas CPI’s production of HFCS
recovered within two years mm
Ga In this connection, Mexico pointed to the reports filed by CPI for
2002, 2003 and 2004 which showed no write-down of the value of its assets
as a result of the imposition of the HFCS tax and contained a series of

optimistic statements about the likelihood of its repeal.

85. On this last point, CPI countered that the reports reflected accounting
conventions and the position of CPI’s Mexican business as a whole, rather
than the relevant investment, which, it claimed, was far more heavily

affected.

86. Article 1110(1) of the NAFTA provides that —

“No Party may directly or indirectly nationalize or expropriate an
, investment of an investor of another Party in its territory or take a
measure tantamount to nationalization or expropriation of such an
investment (‘expropriation’), except:
(a) for a public purpose;
(b) on a non-discriminatory basis;
~ (c) in accordance with due process of law and Article 1105(1);
and
(d) on payment of compensation in accordance with paragraphs 2
through 6.”

87. The recent award in Fireman’s Fund Insurance Company v. Mexico 5

(“FFIC”) summarises the effects of the existing NAFTA jurisprudence on

expropriation in the following terms (footnotes omitted)—

15 ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/02/01. The award was only made public in a redacted form in July 2007,
although it had been notified to the parties to that ease in July 2006.

40

“(a) Expropriation requires a taking (which may include destruction) by
a government-type authority of an investment by an investor covered by
the NAFTA.

(b) The covered investment may include intangible as well as tangible
property.

(c) The taking must be a substantially complete deprivation of the
economic use and enjoyment of the rights to the property, or of
identifiable distinct parts thereof (i.e., it approaches total impairment).

(d) The taking must be permanent, and not ephemeral or temporary.

(e) The taking usually involves a transfer of ownership to another
person (frequently the government authority concerned), but that need
not necessarily be so in certain cases (e.g., total destruction of an
investment due to measures by a government authority without transfer
of rights).

(f) The effects of the host State’s measures are dispositive, not the
underlying intent, for determining whether there is expropriation.

(g) The taking may be de jure or de facto.
(h) The taking may be ‘direct’ or ‘indirect’.
'

(i) The taking may have the form of a single measure or a series of
related or unrelated measures over a period of time (the so-called
‘creeping’ expropriation).

Gj) To distinguish between a compensable expropriation and a non-
compensable regulation by a host State the following factors (usually in
combination) may be taken into account: whether the measure is within
the recognized police powers of the host State; the (public) purpose and
effect of the measure; whether the measure is discriminatory; the
proportionality between the means employed and the aim sought to be
realized; and the bona fide nature of the measure.

(k) The investor’s reasonable ‘investment-backed expectations’ may
be a relevant factor whether (indirect) expropriation has occurred.”!®

 

16

Ibid., para. 176.

41

88. The present Tribunal agrees generally with this analysis. It considers that

three points are of particular importance for the present case.

89. First, it is important not to confuse the question whether there has been an
expropriation with that of whether the four criteria in paragraphs (a) to (d) of
Article 1110 have been satisfied. Those paragraphs come into play only if it
has been decided that there has been an expropriation, or a measure
tantamount to an expropriation, but the absence of one or more of them is not

in itself indicative of expropriation.!”

90. Secondly, as the tribunal in FFIC recalls, it is necessary to’ bear in mind that
there is a distinction between discriminatory treatment of the property of an
investor (and, for that matter, unfair and inequitable treatment) and
expropriation. It is not the case that, because a measure which affects
property rights is discriminatory, it is therefore an expropriation (or
something tantamount to an expropriation). Rather, if a measure is
established to be an expropriation (or something tantamount thereto), it
cannot then be justified if it is discriminatory. In FFIC, the tribunal held that
there was a clear case of discriminatory treatment but that this did not rise to

the level of a claim under Article 1110.°

'" See FFIC, para. 174.
'8 See FFIC, paras. 203-209.

42

91. Thirdly, where there is no physical taking of property or forcible transfer of
title, in the words of the FF/C award, “the taking must be a substantially
complete deprivation of the economic use and enjoyment of rights to the
property, or of identifiable distinct parts thereof (i.e. it approaches total
impairment)”."? In the words of the tribunal in Waste Management (No. 2),
“it is not the function of Article 1110 to compensate for failed business
ventures, absent arbitrary intervention by the State amounting to a virtual

taking or sterilising of the enterprise”.

92. Applying that test to the claim advanced by CPI, the Tribunal has concluded
that CPI has failed to make good its claim under Article 1110. In the absence
of a physical taking or transfer of ownership, CPI needed to show that there

: had been such a degree of interference as to sterilise its business; in the words
of the tribunal in FFIC “the taking must be a substantially complete
deprivation of the economic use and enjoyment of the rights to the property,
or of identifiable distinct parts thereof”.' It has failed to do so. That CPI’s
HFCS production facilities suffered a substantial blow to their market for a
period of some two years is not in doubt. But CPI retained full control of its

investment at all times, was able to report to its shareholders that the HFCS

tax would not make a long term difference to its business QD
Fr In these circumstances, the Tribunal concludes

that the effects of the HFCS Tax cannot be considered to have amounted to a

' Para. 176 (c).
20 Para. 160. Emphasis added.
21 See FFIC para. 176 (c) quoted in para. 87, above.

43

93.

94.

substantially complete deprivation of the economic use and enjoyment of the
investment, even if (see paragraph 81, above) one takes the more restrictive
view of what constitutes the investment for which CPI contended in its

Article 1110 claim.

Government measures which have a detrimental effect on an investor’s
markets, even if they are discriminatory (an issue considered in the next
section of this award), are not expropriatory unless they have the effect of
destroying the business in question. That was simply not the case here.
Whether or not one considers the standard laid down in Metalclad to be too
broad, the fact is that what happened in the present case would not meet that

standard.

The Tribunal thus dismisses the claim for violation of Article 1110.

44

VIII. The National Treatment Claim under Article 1102

95. Article 1102 reads, in relevant part, as follows -

A,

“Article 1102: National Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to investors of another Party treatment no
less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own
investors with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion,
management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of
investments.

2. Each Party shall accord to investments of investors of another Party
treatment no less favourable than that it accords, in like circumstances,
to investments of its own investors with respect to the establishment,
acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation, and sale or
other disposition of investments.” .

The Claimant’s Submissions

96. CPI relied on both Article 1102(1) and 1102(2). It contended that the HFCS

tax, although formally levied on the soft drink bottlers, was, in its effects,

treatment of CPI with respect to the operation of its investment (within the
,

meaning of Article 1102(1)) and treatment of that investment (within the

meaning of Article 1102(2)) which was less favourable than Mexico

accorded, in like circumstances, to its own investors and their investments.

97. To CPI, the test to be applied under Article 1102 was straightforward and had

been

identified in a series of earlier awards given by NAFTA tribunals

applying that provision. CPI relied, in particular, upon the awards in Pope

and Talbot v. Canada,” SD Myers v. Canada,” ADF v. USA *4 and Feldman

2 7 ICSID Reps. 43.

2g ICSID Reps. 3.

24 ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/1; 6 ICSID Reps. 449.

45

98.

99.

v. Mexico. *° It claimed that these awards laid down a consistent standard

which this Tribunal should apply.

The Mexican investors with whom CPI maintained it was in “like
circumstances” at the relevant time were the sugar producers. In this context,
CPI relied heavily on the fact that HFCS and sugar were at all times direct
competitors and directly substitutable products in the market for soft drink
sweeteners in Mexico. It pointed out that, even before the matter was
considered by the WTO, the Mexican Government had itself treated the two
products as interchangeable in the course of its anti-dumping investigation 76
and that it did not contest that HFCS and sugar were “like products” within

the meaning of GATT Article III.

CPI also placed considerable reliance on the reports of the WTO Panel and
Appellate Body regarding Tax Measures on Soft Drinks and Other Beverages
which was directly concerned with the HFCS tax. The Panel there decided,
inter alia, that HFCS and sugar were like products within the meaning of
GATT Article II?” The Panel’s conclusions were upheld by the Appellate
Body.*® While CPI accepted that the fact that HFCS and sugar were “like
products” for the purposes of GATT was not by itself determinative of

whether the producers of HFCS and of sugar were in “like circumstances” for

5 ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1; 7 ICSID Reps 318.

Final Decision of the Antidumping Investigation, paras. 423-428, Official Gazette 23 January 1998,

Exhibit C17B; Letter of 22 April 2002 from the Executive Secretary, Federal Commission on Competition,
Exhibit C 144.

7 Panel Report of 7 October 2005, WT/DS308/R, para. 8.136.
28 Appellate Body Report of 6 March 2006, WT/DS308/AB/R.

46

100.

101.

the purposes of Article 1102, CPI argued that the WTO finding was highly

relevant to the application of the “like circumstances” test in Article 1102.

CPI maintained that Article 1102 encompassed both de facto and de jure
discrimination but that the HFCS tax was an instance of de jure
discrimination. It pointed to the fact that, at the relevant time, the only
producers of HFCS in Mexico were foreign-owned, whereas the majority of
the sugar producers in Mexico were Mexican-owned, many of them being
owned by the Mexican State. CPI contended that under Article 1102 it was
required to show only that the treatment which it had received was less
favourable than the best treatment accorded by Mexico to Mexican-owned

sugar producers.

“CPI also contended that Mexico had itself accepted that the HFCS tax

discriminated against CPI because of its United States nationality. In that
regard, it pointed both to statements made in the Mexican Congress, at the
time of adoption of the tax, that the purpose of the tax was protectionist and
to the Mexican defence that the tax was a countermeasure, arguing that this
showed that the tax was directed against HFCS producers and importers as a
means of retaliation against the United States, thus indicating that the tax was

intended to have a discriminatory effect.

47

102.

103.

B. The Respondent’s Submissions

Mexico contended that, quite apart from its argument that the tax was a
lawful countermeasure, the HFCS tax was not inconsistent with Article 1102.
Mexico did not contest that HFCS and sugar were like products in the market
for soft drink sweeteners but challenged the relevance of the WTO finding to
that effect for the question whether the producers of HFCS and the producers
of sugar for that market were in like circumstances. According to Mexico,
which relied on the award in Methanex v. USA,” the two tests were quite

different.

Mexico emphasised a passage in the Methanex award, in which the Tribunal
held that -

“... if the drafters of NAFTA had wanted to incorporate trade criteria in
its investment chapter by engrafting a GATT-type formula, they could
have produced a version of Article 1102 stating ‘Each Party shall accord
to investors [or investments] of another Party treatment no less favourable
than it accords its own investors, ‘in like circumstances with respect to any
like, directly competitive or substitutable goods’. It is clear from this
constructive exercise how incongruous, indeed odd, would be the
juxtaposition in a single provision dealing with investment of ‘like
circumstances’ and ‘any like, directly competitive or substitutable

goods’ .
Mexico maintained that, in order to contravene Article 1102, a measure had
to discriminate against an investor of another NAFTA Party (or the
investment of an investor of another Party) gua investor. In Mexico’s
submission, the HFCS tax did not target CPI qua investor but was rather a

response to the financial crisis in the sugar industry. According to Mexico,

29 44 ILM (2005) 1343, Part I, Chapter B, paras. 4-6.

30

Tbid. at paras. 33-34.

48

the production and consumption of HFCS in Mexico was a central feature of
that crisis, since the United States refused to take account of HFCS
production in Mexico in calculating whether or not Mexico had a sugar

surplus which carried an entitlement to access to the United States market.

105. That led, in Mexico’s view, to the conclusion that HFCS and sugar producers
were not in like circumstances, because, within a highly regulated market,
HECS producers like CPI had unfettered access to the market in both Mexico
and the United States, whereas Mexican sugar producers had to contend with
increased competition from HFCS in the home market while being severely

limited in their access to the market in the United States.

106. So far as the case law was concerned, Mexico argued that the Tribunal should
not rely upon Pope and Talbot or Myers, which it described ‘as “first
generation’ awards reflecting an incipient and tentative analysis” 31 that had
not been accepted by the NAFTA Parties in their submissions in later cases.
The other two cases primarily relied upon by CPI — ADF and Feldman — were
of no assistance in Mexico’s submission, ADF because it had turned on the
application of the provisions in NAFTA on government procurement, and
Feldman because Mexico had conceded in that case that the various cigarette

exporters were in like circumstances.

3! Rejoinder, para. 144.

49

32
3B

107.

108.

109.

Instead, Mexico urged the Tribunal to rely upon the award in GAMI v.
Mexico,” where the tribunal had held that financially secure sugar producers
in Mexico were not in like circumstances as those sugar producers which
were in financial difficulty, so that the Mexican Government had not violated
Article 1102 when it expropriated a number of financially insecure concerns,
some of which were owned by United States investors, while leaving in
private ownership other financially secure mills, some of which were

Mexican-owned.

Mexico also relied on the award in Loewen v. US4,* which it read as

authority for the proposition that parties in adverse interest could not also be
in like circumstances for the purposes of Article 1102. CPI and the Mexican
sugar producers were, it said, in adverse interest not only because they
competed in the market for soft drink sweeteners but also because CPI,
through the trade association of which it was a member, had opposed the
relaxation of United States barriers on access for Mexican sugar to the United

States market.

C. The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal notes at the outset that Article 1102 embodies a principle of
fundamental importance, both in international trade law and the international
law of investment, that of non-discrimination. A study prepared for

UNCTAD went so far as to say that —

Award of 15 November 2004; to be published in 13 ICSID Reps.
ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3; 7 ICSID Reps. 421.

50

“the national treatment standard is perhaps the single most important
standard of treatment embodied in international investment
agreements.”

110. Its significance in the legal regime of GATT/WTO is also beyond doubt.
GATT Article III, which embodies the principle of like treatment for like
products irrespective of national origin is one of the cornerstones of that

regime. Article III.4 provides that —

“The products of the territory of any contracting party imported into the
territory of any other contracting party shall be accorded treatment no
less favourable than that accorded to like products of national origin in
respect of all laws, regulations and requirements affecting their internal
sale, offering for sale, purchase, transportation, distribution or use. The
provisions of this paragraph shall not prevent the application of
differential internal transportation charges which are based exclusively
on the economic operation of the means of transport and not on the
nationality of the product.”*°

111. The absolute character of this provision, as well as its central role within the
regime, was highlighted by the GATT Panel in the Section 337 case,
involving a challenge by the» European Community to procedures for
determining patent disputes between domestic and imported products. The

Panel there stated that —

“The Panel noted that, as far as the issues before it are concerned, the
‘no less favourable’ treatment requirement set out in Article III.4 is
unqualified ... The words ‘treatment no less favourable’ ... call for
effective equality of opportunities for imported products in respect of
the application of laws, regulations and requirements affecting the
internal sale, purchase, transportation, distribution or use of products.
This clearly sets a minimum standard as a basis. ... Given that the
underlying objective is to guarantee equality of treatment, it is
incumbent on the contracting party applying differential treatment to

34 UNCTAD, National Treatment (1999), United Nations Doc UNCTAD/ATEMIT/11 (vol. IV), p. 1
* See also Article XVII of the GATS.

St

36

112.

113.

show that, in spite of such differences, the no less favourable treatment
standard of Article III is met.”**

The relationship between the principle of non-discrimination in matters of
trade and non-discrimination in matters of investment was evident in the
Canada-US Free Trade Agreement, Chapter 16 of which was largely carried
over into Chapter XI of NAFTA (although Chapter XI of NAFTA contained
the important additional feature of investor-State arbitration which had been

absent from the earlier agreement).

The principle of national treatment is given prominence in the statement of

the objectives of the NAFTA in Article 102(1), which provides that -

“The objectives of this Agreement, as elaborated more specifically
through its principles and rules, including national treatment, most-
favoured-nation treatment and transparency, are to:

(a) eliminate barriers to trade in, and facilitate the cross-border
movement of, goods and services between the territories of the
Parties; ,

(b) promote conditions of fair competition in the free trade area;

(c) increase substantially investment opportunities in the territories of
the Parties;

(d) provide adequate and effective protection and enforcement of
intellectual property rights in each Party’s territory;

(e) create effective procedures for the implementation and application
of this Agreement, for its joint administration and for the resolution
of disputes; and

United States — Section 337 of the Tariff Act of 1930, GATT Panel Report adopted 7 November 1989,

BISD 36" Supp. 345 (1990), para. 5.11.

52

(f) establish a framework for further trilateral, regional and multilateral
cooperation to expand and enhance the benefits of this
Agreement.”.”

114. Specific instances of the principle of non-discrimination appear in Articles
301 (national treatment with regard to goods), 1202 (national treatment with
regard to services) and 1405 (national treatment with regard to financial
services), as well as Article 1102, the provisions of which were described by
the Tribunal in Feldman as “a fundamental obligation of Chapter XI”.* The
Feldman Tribunal also stressed that language analogous to that of Article
1102 was to be found in GATT Article III and in the Canada-US Free Trade

Agreement.®

115. The parties in the present case agreed that Article 1102 embraces de facto as

40

well as de jure discrimination.” The Tribunal agrees. The parties differed,

however, on almost every other issue of relevance to the application of

. Article 1102 to the HFCS Tax.

116. The Tribunal considers, therefore, that it is necessary to start from first
~ principles. The text of Article 1102 suggests that there are three elements

which have to be established for a claim under that provision to succeed,

7 Emphasis added. Article 102(2) provides that “the Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of

this Agreement in the light of its objectives as set out in pa 1 and in with

rules of international law”.

% 7 ICSID Reps. 318, para. 165.

* Ibid.

“© CPI asserted that Article 1102 encompassed de facto discrimination in its Memorial, para. 298. Mexico
accepted that proposition in response to a question from the Tribunal at the oral hearings, Transcript, Day
4, p. 1019, lines 15-16 (Mr Becker).

53

117. First, it must be shown that the Respondent State has accorded to the foreign
investor or its investment “treatment ...with respect to the establishment,
acquisition, expansion, management, conduct, operation and sale or other
disposition” of the relevant investments. Secondly, the foreign investor or
investments must be “in like circumstances” to an investor or investment of
the Respondent State (“the comparator”). Lastly, the treatment must have

been less favourable than that accorded to the comparator.’

118. The application of this three-fold test must, however, be sensitive to the
particular circumstances of each case with the analysis focussing on the
specific nature of the measure under challenge. In this respect, there is a
close relationship between whether the State intentionally discriminated on
grounds of nationality and the test of like circumstances. As other Chapter XI
tribunals have emphasised, it is necessary to consider the entire factual and

legal context.”

119. Applying these principles to the facts of the present case, the first question is
whether the imposition of the HFCS tax on the soft drink bottlers can be
regarded as “treatment” accorded by Mexico to CPI. The Tribunal considers
that it should be so regarded. Mexico concedes that the tax was not intended
to raise revenue but to assist the Mexican sugar industry at a time of crisis
and to respond to what Mexico considered was a US violation of other
NAFTA provisions. It is obvious that if either of these objectives was to be

4\ See, e.g., the Award on the Merits of 24 May 2007 in UPS v. Canada, para. 83.
® Pope and Talbot Award, paras 75-78; SD Myers, para. 245.

54

achieved, the tax would have to produce an effect upon the HFCS producers
and suppliers, of which CPI was the largest (with approximately QED of
the HFCS share of the market before the HFCS tax took effect). By contrast,
there was no intention to produce any effect upon the bottlers other than of
pressuring them to switch from HFCS to sugar as a sweetener. In these
circumstances, it would be the triumph of form over substance to hold that the
fact that the tax was structured as a tax on the bottlers, rather than the
suppliers of sweeteners, precluded it from amounting to treatment of the latter

for the purposes of Article 1102.

120. Turning to the question of whether CPI and the other producer of HFCS in
Mexico were in like circumstances to the Mexican sugar producers — the only
suggested comparator — the Tribunal concludes that this requirement is
satisfied on the facts of the present case. It considers that it is necessary to
begin with a comparison between domestic and foreign investors operating in
the same business or economic sector as the claimant.*® There can be no
doubt that Mexican sugar producers operated in the same business or
economic sector as CPI. When it came to supplying sweeteners to the soft
drinks industry, their products were in direct competition with one another,
treated both by customers and by Mexican law as being interchangeable. The
purpose of the HFCS tax was avowedly to alter the terms of competition

between them.

*® See, e.g., Pope and Talbot, paras. 75-78.

55

121. In this context the Tribunal takes note of the fact that the WTO Panel and
Appellate Body have held that HFCS and sugar were “like products” for the
purposes of Article III of GATT. The Tribunal is mindful of the warning,
afforded by Methanex,** that the terms of GATT Article III were taken into
Chapter ITI of the NAFTA and not Chapter XI, where different language was
used. It is also conscious that its jurisdiction is limited to the provisions of
Chapter XI and does not extend to Chapter III. It accepts that CPI cannot
succeed in its claim under Article 1102 simply by showing that HFCS and
sugar are “like products” for the purposes of Article III of GATT, nor does it
understand CPI to have advanced such an argument. The test under Article
1102 is a separate and distinct test from that under Article III.4 of GATT (or

Article 301 of the NAFTA for that matter).

122. Nevertheless, the Tribunal does not accept that the fact that HFCS and sugar
are like products for the purposes of GATT is irrelevant to the application of
the Article 1102 test. On the contrary, it considers that this fact is highly
relevant to the application of that test. While the Tribunal would not suggest
that the fact that a foreign investor and a domestic investor are producing like
products will necessarily mean that they are to be considered as being in like
circumstances for the purposes of Article 1102, or that differential treatment
will necessarily entail a violation of that provision, where the measure said to
constitute the violation of Article 1102 is directly concerned with the

products and designed to discriminate in favour of one and against the other, °

44 ILM (2005) 1343 at Part IV, Chapter B, para. 30.

56

then that is a very strong indication that there has been a breach of Article

1102.

123. Although the passage from Methanex quoted in paragraph 103, above might
be thought to take a different view, the Tribunal considers that the Final
Award in Methanex, taken as a whole, is not inconsistent with the approach
suggested in the preceding paragraph. The Methanex tribunal expressly
recognized the relevance of GATT/WTO jurisprudence. *° In addition, it is
pertinent to note that that tribunal was at pains to emphasise that methanol
was not a direct competitor with ethanol, since the latter was used as an
additive to petrol whereas the former was merely one ingredient of the
additive MTBE, “° that the measure said to violate Article 1102 was not
discriminatory on its face since it applied ‘equally to US producers of

‘7

methanol who were the obvious comparators for Methanex “” and that the

measure was adopted for legitimate regulatory reasons.

124. By contrast, HFCS is directly substitutable for sugar as a soft drink sweetener
and, as stated above, had always been treated as such by Mexico. That fact
also sets the present case apart from the facts of the UPS case, where the
tribunal pointed out that packages delivered by mail and those sent by courier
were treated differently (and had historically been treated differently) both by

Canada and by other States.

45 44 ILM (2005) 1343 at Part II, Chapter B, para. 6.
‘© “The incontrovertible fact is that Methanex produced methanol as a feedstock for MTBE and not as a
gasoline additive in its own right.” (Ibid., at Part 1V, Chapter B, para. 28).

” Para, 21

s7

125,

126.

In response, Mexico raised three factors which, it claimed, militated against
CPI and the sugar producers being in like circumstances: (1) the fact that the
price for sugar was regulated, whereas that for HFCS was not, (2) the fact that
Mexican sugar was to a significant extent denied access to the United States
market during the relevant period, whereas there was no barrier to trade in
HFCS across the US-Mexican border, and (3) the fact that the trade
association of which CPI was a member had lobbied in the United States
against increasing the amount of Mexican sugar which could be imported into
the United States. The Tribunal has carefully considered each of these factors
but is not persuaded that they lead to the concfusion that CPI and the sugar

producers were not in like circumstances.

To take, first, the issue of price regulation. Mexico argued that, since sugar in
Mexico (as in certain other countries, including the United States) is subject
to a regulatory regime designed to affect the price, whereas the price of HFCS
is unregulated, the two products, or the investments in the respective
industries, cannot be regarded as “in like circumstances.” The Tribunal has
carefully considered this contention, in the light of the object and purpose of
the non-discrimination provisions that run through the entire North American
Free Trade Agreement. We conclude that where the products at issue are
interchangeable and indistinguishable from the point of view of the end-users
(i.e. the purchaser of soft drinks), the products, and therefore the respective
investments, are in like circumstances. Any other interpretation would negate

the effect of the non-discrimination clauses, because it would always be

58

127.

128.

48

possible to find differences between the way competing products are owned,
managed, regulated, or priced. Just as a regulation on margarine is
discriminatory when intended to protect the producers of butter, though only
one of the products is made with milk, so a regulation on HFCS is
discriminatory when intended to protect the producers of sugar. When the
clear impact of that discrimination falls on the foreign investor, the result is a

violation of Article 1102 of the NAFTA

In this regard, the Tribunal notes that there was no evidence that, if the
market for sugar had been deregulated and Mexican sugar producers had been
able to sell their products at economic cost (plus a reasonable rate of return),
they would have been able to compete with HFCS on price. Sugar cane
sweeteners were more expensive than HFCS, because the production costs of
sugar were higher.“* Moreover, if the problem had been the regulated price
of sugar, Mexico could have relaxed that regulation — at least as regards sugar
used to sweeten soft drinks. Instead, the avowed purpose of the HFCS tax
was to raise the cost of HFCS as a sweetener, while retaining the existing

high prices for sugar cane sweeteners.

Mexico’s second contention was that HFCS producers and Mexican sugar
producers could not be regarded as being in like circumstances within the

context of the NAFTA because the latter were denied access to the United

Mexico did not dispute CPI’s assertion (Memorial, para., 25) that the production costs of HFCS were

lower than those of sugar (Counter-Memorial, Appendix |, p. 12).

59

129.

130.

131.

States sugar market, whereas the former had access to markets in both the

United States and Mexico.

It is impossible not to feel sympathy for the plight of the Mexican sugar
producers who were substantially denied access to the market in the United
States — whether in breach of NAFTA or not - during the relevant period.
However, the Tribunal cannot accept that this fact alters the finding that the
sugar producers and CPI were in like circumstances. Article 1102 requires
that the investors (or investments) which are being compared are in /ike not
identical circumstances. Whether CPI had access to markets in the United
States was entirely irrelevant to the decision to impose the HFCS tax. It was

because of HFCS’s share of the market in Mexico that the tax was imposed.

Moreover, there is no evidence that CPI did — or could have — switched to
customers in the United States for its Mexican-produced HFCS when it was
confronted with the loss of its Mexican market as a result of the HFCS tax.
On the contrary, the fact that it was obliged to close one plant and
significantly reduce production elsewhere in Mexico, together with the
lengths it went to in order to develop alternative products for different
markets within Mexico (e.g. by trying to develop cleaning products based on
HFCS) suggest that no alternative market in the United States was, in reality,

to be found.

Nor is there a material difference between CPI and the sugar producers of the

kind that existed in GAMI between the expropriated mills and those that were

60

132.

133.

not expropriated. In GAM, considerations of nationality and the competition
between the different producers were irrelevant to the choice of which
producers were expropriated. It was financial stability which led to some

being included while others were excluded

The present case might be analogous to GAMI if HFCS had been produced in
equal (or nearly equal) volume by Mexican-owned and US-owned firms. In
that circumstance, a measure designed adversely to affect the market for
HFCS in order to protect the position of the sugar industry could not have
been held to violate the requirement of national treatment. But the
uncontradicted evidence in this case was that production of HFCS in Mexico
was wholly concentrated in foreign-owned enterprises (predominantly CPI,
which had GD of the. HFCS share of the market for soft drink
sweeteners), whereas production of sugar was largely carried out by Mexican
nationals (with the Mexican State itself owning a substantial part of sugar
production). Thus, the effect of what was, in substance, a special tax on
HECS was the distortion of the market in favour of domestic suppliers and to
the disadvantage of the foreign investors protected by Chapter XI of the

NAFTA.

Lastly, Mexico argued that the fact that Mexican sugar producers sought
access to the United States sugar market, whereas, so Mexico claimed, the
trade association of which CPI was a member, lobbied against extending such
access, showed that CPI and the sugar producers were not in like

circumstances. This argument was supported, in Mexico’s view, by reference

61

to the Loewen case, %

which Mexico interpreted as authority for the
proposition that two parties whose interests were directly opposed to one

another could not be regarded as being in like circumstances.

134. The Tribunal is not convinced by this argument. In the first place, the
Tribunal consider that the Loewen tribunal was laying down a principle of
anything like the breadth suggested by Mexico. The tribunal was there
concerned — in a passage notable for its brevity “° — to show that the
circumstances of a plaintiff in civil litigation differ from those of a defendant
to such an extent that the treatment accorded to the plaintiff in @ particular
case cannot by itself be sufficient to establish that the treatment accorded to
the defendant was a breach of the principle of national treatment. Even that
statement has attracted a degree of criticism but it is unnecessary for this
Tribunal to enter into that controversy. Even if the Loewen tribunal was
correct in holding that there are material differences between the plaintiff and
the defendant in a civil case, the circumstances of the present case are
completely different. CPI and the sugar producers were not opposing parties
in litigation. .

135. The fact that economic competitors have — and lobby for — different interests
is not at all surprising. On the contrary, it is a fact of economic and political
life which may be observed in any open society. Far from suggesting that
they are not in like circumstances, it tends to suggest the opposite; it is

#  ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3; 7 ICSID Reps. 421 at 442.
Ibid, para. 140.

62

136.

137.

precisely because they are in close competition that they lobby against each
other — if they were not competing in the market for what are effectively
interchangeable products, they would not trouble to maintain such lobbying
activities. To accept Mexico’s argument in all its breadth would be to neuter
Article 1102, because it is precisely where the interests of foreign investors
and domestic investors are in conflict that the principle of non-discrimination

becomes most important.

Moreover, in marked contrast to Methanex and GAMI, the present case

concerns a measure the purpose of which was to affect the competition

between the products produced by the foreign and domestic investors and to
afford a considerable competitive advantage to the latter. The competition
between the two products ~ HFCS and sugar — was at the heart of the measure
adopted. By contrast, in Methanex, it was not the competition which
concerned those taking the measure but the environmental effect of one of the
products. In GAMI/ the competition between the products was largely
irrelevant. In these circumstances, the Tribunal cannot escape the conclusion
that the producers of like products which were directly competitive were in
like circumstances as regards a measure designed expressly for the purpose of

affecting that competition.

It is also relevant that, again in contrast to GAMI and Methanex, nationality
was a highly pertinent factor in the imposition of the tax. In saying that, the
Tribunal does not endorse the submissions made by CPI based upon the

remarks of individual members of the Mexican Congress about the purpose of

63

the legislation. We have doubts about the extent to which such comments can
legitimately be treated as evidence of the intent of the Legislature as a whole,
let alone of the State itself, in imposing a measure of this kind, although we
do not need finally to decide that point. Rather, it is the countermeasures
justification advanced by Mexico which we consider important. If the HFCS
tax was intended as a countermeasure targeted against the United States, it
had to have been crafted in such a way that it bore especially heavily upon
US interests, otherwise it would have had no chance of being effective or of
being a lawful countermeasure. As counsel for Mexico said in the course of
the oral hearing, “the model Countermeasure is one that causes pain”. © But
that pain has to be caused to the State against whom the countermeasure is
targeted, in this case the United States. While the Tribunal will consider
whether the HFCS tax amounted to a lawful countermeasure in the next Part
of the Decision, we must at this stage say that the very fact that such a
justification has been advanced amounts to a recognition by Mexico that
HFCS producers and suppliers were targeted, in part at least, because of the

extent of their links to the United States.

138. That factor is also decisive for the third part of the test set out in paragraph
117, above. It demonstrates an intention on the part of Mexico to treat CPI
differently because of its nationality. While the existence of an intention to
discriminate is not a requirement for a breach of Article 1102 (and both

parties seemed to accept that it was not a requirement), where such an

5! Professor Crawford, Transcript Day 4, p. 1071 (in answer to a question put by Licenciado Serrano).

64

139.

140.

intention is shown, that is sufficient to satisfy the third requirement. But the
Tribunal would add that, even if an intention to discriminate had not been
shown, the fact that the adverse effects of the tax were felt exclusively by the
HEFCS producers and suppliers, all of them foreign-owned, to the benefit of
the sugar producers, the majority of which were Mexican-owned, would be
sufficient to establish that the third requirement of “‘less favourable treatment”

was satisfied.

Before the Tribunal leaves the subject of Article 1102, there are two matters
which require brief consideration. The first relates to the treatment of the
earlier awards on Article 1102. There was a marked difference between the
parties concerning the weight to be given to the awards of other tribunals
which have dealt with Article 1102. As explained. above, CPI focussed
primarily upon the awards in SD Myers, Pope and Talbot, ADF and Feldman.
By contrast, Mexico either distinguished those cases on their facts or sought
to explain them away as “first generation awards” the reasoning in which had

now been superseded by that in GAMI, Methanex and Loewen.

The Tribunal does not accept that these are in fact competing lines of
authority. It considers that the differences between them are more ones of
emphasis — due, in large part, to differences between the facts of the cases
concerned and therefore entirely understandable — than of principle. Of the
cases relied upon by Mexico, Loewen and Methanex have already been
discussed. The facts of GAMI place that award in a rather special category.

The case concerned Mexico’s plans for restructuring the sugar industry in the

65

141.

142.

face of a severe financial crisis. Those plans entailed the expropriation of a
number of sugar mills which were in financial difficulties. The claimants
argued that their mills had been expropriated, whereas others, some of which
were Mexican-owned, had not. The Tribunal rejected the argument that the
fact that the expropriation affected only some sugar mills necessarily entailed
a breach of Article 1102. The nationality of the mill owners (including the
shareholders in the mill owning companies) was irrelevant to the choice of
which mills were expropriated, a decision based upon governmental
perceptions of their economic condition. The Tribunal does not question the
correctness of the decision in GAMI but it does question how much light it
sheds on the issues in the present proceedings. The discussion of Article
1102 in that case occupied barely two pages of the award and was largely
confined to the facts of the case. As explained above (paras. 131-132), the

facts of the present case are very different.

The second matter concerns Mexico’s argument that Article 1102 requires
that a foreign investor be treated in a less favourable way qua investor,
whereas, so Mexico argued, the HFCS tax did not amount to treatment of CPI
qua investor but rather was a measure taken to address a crisis in the Mexican

sugar industry.

The problem with this argument is that it confuses the nature of the measure
taken with the motive for which it was taken. The Tribunal does not doubt
either that there was a crisis in the Mexican sugar industry, or that the motive

for imposing the HFCS tax was to address that crisis. That does not alter the

66

143.

Ix.

144,

fact that the nature of the measure which Mexico took was one which treated
producers of HFCS in a markedly less favourable way than Mexican
producers of sugar. Discrimination does not cease to be discrimination, nor
to attract the international liability stemming therefrom, because it is
undertaken to achieve a laudable goal or because the achievement of that goal

can be described as necessary.

Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that, unless Mexico is successful in its
countermeasures argument (to which we now turn), the HFCS tax was a

violation of CPI’s-rights under Article 1102 (1) and (2) of the NAFTA.

The Respondent’s Countermeasures Defence

The Tribunal’s ‘conclusions regarding Article 1102 make it necessary to
consider Mexico’s countermeasures defence. Before reviewing the
submissions of the parties on this issue, the Tribunal will first set out the
principles of general international law relevant to non-forcible
countermeasures. The parties were generally in agreement on the content of
these principles; it was whether those principles were applicable to a claim
under Chapter XI and, if so, whether the Tribunal could find that the

conditions for a lawful countermeasure were satisfied, which divided them.

67

A. International Law regarding Countermeasures

 

145. The concept of counter is Al blished in cus y
international law. That a countermeasure which complied with certain
conditions could preclude the wrongfulness of an act which would otherwise
be contrary to the international law obligations of the State which carried it
out was expressly recognized by the International Court of Justice in the Case
concerning the Gabcikovo-Nagymaros Project (Hungary v. Slovakia)*’, as
well as by the arbitral tribunal in the US-France Air Services Case.” It is
generally agreed (and was certainly not in dispute between the parties in the
present proceedings) that the conditions which a countermeasure is required
to meet are as set out in the ILC Articles on State Responsibility (notably

Articles 22 and 49-53).

146. Those conditions may be summarised as follows. In order to have the effect

. .
of precluding wrongfulness, a countermeasure must —

qd) be taken in response to a prior breach of international law by another
State;** ~
(2) be directed against that wrongdoing State;°°

(3) be taken for the purpose of inducing that State to comply with its
international obligations;~°
* ICI Reps, 1997, p. 3, at para. 83,
% (1978) 54 ILR 303, at para. 81.

* ILC Article 49(1).
* ILC Article 49(1).

68

(4) be limited in time and, so far as possible, be taken in such a way as
to permit resumption of the performance of the obligations in

question;”

(5) be proportionate to the injury caused by the original wrongful act,
taking account of the gravity of the wrongful act and the rights in

question’ 38

(6) be accompanied by a call on the State responsible for the original
wrongful act to fulfil its obligations and a good faith attempt to
negotiate or resolve the dispute in question through other forms of

dispute settlement.”

147. Countermeasures are an exceptional remedy and must not be taken if the
matter can be brought before a competent international court or tribunal
unless the State responsible for the original wrong fails to implement the
dispute settlement process in good faith. A countermeasure must be
terminated as soon as the State responsible for the original wrong has

complied with its obligations.”

148. A countermeasure which meets these conditions has the effect of precluding
the wrongfulness of the act which constitutes the countermeasure. It does so,

however only vis-a-vis the State responsible for the original wrong and not

 

56 ILC Article 49(1).

37 TLC Article 49(2) and (3).
58 ILC Article 51.

® ILC Article 52.

© ILC Article 52(3) and (4).

69

vis-a-vis any other party.” It will be necessary to say more about this aspect

of the law of countermeasures later.

149. Lastly, it should be said for the sake of completeness — though it has no direct
relevance to the present case - that the doctrine of countermeasures does not
affect certain obligations such as those concerning the use of force, the law of

human rights or norms possessing the status of jus cogens.®
B. The Submissions of the Parties

150. Mexico contended that the HFCS tax was a countermeasure adopted by
Mexico in response to a prior violation of the NAFTA by the United States.
As the arguments in the case unfolded, Mexico developed its submissions
regarding the prior violation as follows. It identified what it alleged were two
separate violations by the United States. First, it maintained that the denial
by the United States of access for most of Mexico’s surplus sugar produce to
the United States market was a violation of the NAFTA and of the side-letters
on sugar. Secondly, Mexico contended that the United States had violated its
obligations to Mexico under Chapter XX of the NAFTA by frustrating the
dispute settlement mechanism under that Chapter and thus preventing Mexico
from getting a hearing before a tribunal in respect of the dispute over sugar

access.

 

SILC Article 53.

® Commentary to ILC Articles 22 and 49, Crawford, The ILC Articles on State Responsibility (2002), pp.
168-9 and 285 (hereinafter, “The ILC Articles (2002)”).

® ILC Article 50.

70

151.

152.

Mexico further maintained that the tax complied with all of the other
requirements of a countermeasure. In particular, it submitted that the tax was
a measure directed against the United States. It also argued that wrongfulness
was precluded against CPI because CPI had no substantive rights of its own
under Chapter XI but was merely empowered by the Chapter to assert, in
arbitration, rights which belonged to the United States. According to Mexico,
an investor could not be in a stronger position under Chapter XI than the State

upon whose rights it was dependent.
CPI raised six objections to the countermeasures argument:-

(1) The sugar access dispute was a trade dispute arising outside Chapter XI

and was thus outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal;
(2) The doctrine of countermeasures found no room in the NAFTA;

(3) Mexico had already lost the counterméasures argument in the WTO

proceedings and could not therefore rely upon it in the present case;

(4) The countermeasures defence depended upon a finding that the United
States had violated its obligations under the NAFTA. This Tribunal
could not make such a finding and no such finding had been made by

any tribunal competent to do so;

(5) Countermeasures did not exclude wrongfulness against a third party

such as CPI; and

wal

153.

(6)

The HFCS tax was not a countermeasure in any event. It had been
intended by the members of the Mexican Congress who had promoted it
as a protectionist measure and it did not satisfy the other requirements
for a lawful countermeasure, including notification to the United States

and proportionality.

C. The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal considers that, for Mexico to succeed in its countermeasures

defence it would have to satisfy the Tribunal regarding each of the following

three propositions:-

@)

(2)

(3)

that the decisions of the WTO Panel and Appellate Body do not
preclude Mexico from relying upon the defence of countermeasures in

this case;

that the doctrine of countermeasures, although devised in the context
of the legal relations between States, is applicable to a claim brought
not by one State against another, but by a private investor claiming

under Chapter XI of the NAFTA; and

that, if the doctrine of countermeasures is applicable, in principle, to
claims under Chapter XI of the NAFTA, the conditions laid down by
general international law for a successful countermeasures defence are

satisfied in the present case.

The Tribunal will consider these questions in turn.

72

154,

155.

1. Is Mexico precluded from advancing a countermeasures defence
because of the WTO Decisions ?

The Tribunal does not accept that Mexico is precluded from raising the
defence of countermeasures because of the rulings against it by the WTO
Panel and Appellate Body. Those decisions turn on the language of the
GATT and, in particular, of GATT Article XX(d), which reads as follows —

“Article XX General Exceptions

Subject to the requirement that such measures are not applied in a
manner which would constitute a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable
discrimination between countries where the same conditions prevail, or
a disguised restriction on international trade, nothing in this Agreement

~ shall be construed to prevent the adoption or enforcement by any

‘contracting party of measures:

(d) necessary to secure compliance with laws or regulations which are
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement, including those
relating to customs enforcement, the enforcement of monopolies
operated under paragraph 4 of Article II and Article XVII, the
protection of patents, trade marks and copyrights, and the prevention of
deceptive practices;”

.
The Appellate Body decided that this provision was restricted to measures
taken by a State which were designed to secure compliance with that State’s
own laws and lations and did not pass counter ires in the

sense of international law. The scope of the decisions is made clear in the

following passages from the decision of the Appellate Body —

“68. In our view, the central issue raised in this appeal is whether the
terms ‘to secure compliance with laws or regulations’ in Article XX(d)
of the GATT 1994 encompass WTO-inconsistent measures applied by a
WTO Member to secure compliance with another WTO Member's
obligations under an international agreement.

73

75. ... Even if ‘international countermeasures’ could be described as
intended ‘to secure compliance’, what they seek ‘to secure compliance
with’—that is, the international obligations of another WTO Member—
would be outside the scope of Article XX(d). This is because ‘laws or
regulations’ within the meaning of Article XX(d) refer to the rules that
form part of the domestic legal order of the WTO Member invoking the
provision and do not include the international obligations of another
WTO Member.”

156. The Appellate Body’s decision is conclusive that the HFCS tax could not be
justified under Article XX(d) of GATT and, taken together with the other
findings, establishes that the HFCS tax violated Article III.4 of GATT. It
does not, however, decide that the Tax could not amount to a countermeasure,
or that, if it did, it could not preclude wrongfulness under the NAFTA.

Indeed, the Appellate Body was at pains to stress that it could not determine

questions of legality under the NAFTA.

157. The WTO decision is not, therefore, a rejection of the countermeasures
defence under general international law and in the context of the NAFTA and

does not preclude Mexico from advancing that defence in the present case.

158. Nor does the fact that the tax violated Mexico’s obligations under the GATT
mean that it could not constitute a countermeasure which operated to preclude
wrongfulness under the NAFTA. It is a feature of countermeasures that they
may operate to preclude wrongfulness in respect of one obligation of the State
which takes them, while not affecting another obligation of that State. This is
apparent from the text of Article 50 of the ILC Articles on State

Responsibility. Paragraph 1 of that Article provides that —

“  Mexico-Tax Measures on Soft Drinks and Other Beverages WT/DS308/AB/R 6 March 2006.

74

159.

“Countermeasures shall not affect:

(a) The obligation to refrain from the threat or use of force as
embodied in the Charter of the United Nations;

(b) Obligations for the protection of fundamental human rights;
(c) Obligations of a humanitarian character prohibiting reprisals;

(d) Other obligations under peremptory norms of general
international law.”

The language of this provision is instructive. It does not say that a measure
which contravenes one of the obligations cited in paragraphs (a) to (d) cannot
constitute a countermeasure but simply that countermeasures cannot affect
those obligations. It appears to contemplate that a measure which is contfary
to one of these obligations will entail a breach of that obligation by the State
which undertakes it but may nevertheless preclude the wrongfulness in
relation to another obligation of the State which does not fall within

paragraphs (a) to (d).
’

Moreover, the Commentary to this Article 6 makes clear that “States may
agree between themselves on other rules of international law which may not
be the subject of countermeasures” in accordance with the lex specialis
principle in Article 55. In such a case, the same conclusions would apply,
namely that an act which was contrary to such /ex specialis would involve the
responsibility of the State under the lex specialis in question but it would not
prevent the countermeasures principle operating to preclude wrongfulness in
respect of obligations arising under other international agreements or rules of

customary international law.

15

160. Accordingly, the Tribunal considers that the proceedings before the WTO and
the decisions of the Panel and Appellate Body do not prevent Mexico from

relying on the countermeasures principle in the present proceedings.

2. Is the international law on countermeasures applicable to claims under
Chapter XI of the NAFTA ?

161. The Tribunal has concluded, however, that the doctrine of countermeasures,
devised in the context of relations between States, is not applicable to claims
under Chapter XI of the NAFTA. Those claims are brought by investors, not
by States. A central purpose of Chapter XI of the NAFTA was to remove
such claims from the inter-State plane and to ensure that investors could
assert rights directly against a host State. The Tribunal considers that, in the
context of such a claim, there is no room for a defence based upon the alleged
wrongdoing not of the claimant but of its State of nationality, which is not a

party to the proceedings.

162. The Tribunal wishes to emphasise that what is in issue here is not whether
countermeasures can preclude wrongfulness under the NAFTA as a whole but
only whether they can preclude wrongfulness against an investor claiming
under Chapter XI. That depends in large part on the nature of the rights and

obligations which arise under Chapter XI.

163. It is a well established feature of the law relating to countermeasures that a

countermeasure must be directed against the State which has committed the

 

® The ILC Articles (2002), p. 290, para. 10.

76

prior wrongful act. Moreover, even if a countermeasure is directed against
that State, if it also entails action inconsistent with an obligation which the
State taking countermeasures owes to another party, the doctrine of
countermeasures does not preclude the wrongfulness of the measure as
against that other party. Thus, the Commentary to ILC Article 49 explains

that —

“A second essential element of countermeasures is that they ‘must be
directed against’ a State which has committed an internationally
wrongful act and which has not complied with its obligations of
cessation and reparation under Part Two of the present articles. The
word ‘only’ in paragraph 1 applies equally to the target of the
countermeasures as to their purpose and is intended to convey that
countermeasures may only be adopted against a State which is the
author of the internationally wrongful act. Countermeasures may not be
directed against States other than the responsible State. In a situation
where a third State is owed an international obligation by the State
taking countermeasures and that obligation is breached by the
countermeasure, the wrongfulness of the measure is not precluded as
against the third State. In that sense the effect of countermeasures in
precluding wrongfulness is relative. It concerns the legal relations
between the injured State and the responsible State.”®”
*

164. A countermeasure cannot, therefore, extinguish or otherwise affect the rights
of a party other than the State responsible for the prior wrongdoing. On the
other hand, it can affect the interests of such a party. To quote from the

Commentary to Article 49 once more —

“This does not mean that countermeasures may not incidentally affect
the position of third States or indeed other third parties. For example, if
the injured State suspends transit rights with the responsible State in
accordance with this Chapter, other parties, including third States, may
be affected thereby. If they have no individual rights in the matter they
cannot complain. Similarly if, as a consequence of suspension of a trade

 

6 The Tribunal expresses no view on the question whether a defence of countermeasures might operate in
proceedings between two NAFTA States under Chapter XX of the NAFTA.
7 The ILC Articles (2002), p. 285, para. 4. See also the Commentary to Article 22 at pp. 168-9.

77

agreement, trade with the responsible State is affected and one or more
companies lose business or even go bankrupt. Such indirect or collateral
effects cannot be entirely avoided.” 6

165. The question, therefore, is whether an investor within the meaning of Article
1101 of the NAFTA has rights of its own, distinct from those of the State of
its nationality, or merely interests. If it is the former, then a countermeasure
taken by Mexico in response to an unlawful act on the part of the United
States will not preclude wrongfulness as against CPI, even though it may

operate to preclude wrongfulness against the United States.

166. During the oral hearings counsel for Mexico argued that Chapter XI of the
NAFTA grants an investor only a procedural, and not a substantive, right.
The investor of one NAFTA Party is granted the right to bring proceedings
against another Party rather than depending upon-its State of nationality to
bring proceedings on its behalf (as would have happened under the traditional
international law of diplomatic protection). However, Mexico argued, the
substantive right which the investor was empowered to enforce was still the
right of the State as a Party to NAFTA. Mexico maintained that this
approach was supported by the fact that the substantive provisions of Chapter
XI were not cast in terms of individual rights. It also relied upon the award of

the Loewen Tribunal © and what it claimed was the concordant subsequent

practice of the three NAFTA Parties.

% The ILC Articles (2002), p. 285, para. 5.
© 7 ICSID Reps. 442.

78

167.

168.

169.

170.

The Tribunal has concluded that these arguments are not persuasive. In the
Tribunal’s view, the NAFTA confers upon investors substantive rights

separate and distinct from those of the State of which they are nationals.

It is now clear that States are not the only entities which can hold rights under
international law; individuals and corporations may also possess rights under
international law. In the case of rights said to be derived from a treaty, the
question will be whether the text of the treaty reveals an intention to confer
rights not only upon the Parties thereto but also upon individuals and/or

corporations.

In the case of Chapter XI of the NAFTA, the Tribunal considers that the
intention of the Parties was to confer substantive rights directly upon
investors. That follows from the language used and is confirmed by the fact
that Chapter XI confers procedural rights upon them. The notion that Chapter
XI conferred upon investors a right, in their own name and for their own
benefit, to institute proceedings to enforce rights which were not theirs but

were solely the property of the State of their nationality is counterintuitive.

It has long been the case that international lawyers have treated as a fiction
the notion that in diplomatic protection cases the State was asserting a right of
its own — violated because an injury done to its national was in fact an injury
to the State itself. It was a necessary fiction, because procedurally only a
State could bring an international claim, but the fact that it did not reflect

substantive reality showed through not only in the juristic writing but also in

79

171.

172.

173.

various rules of law surrounding diplomatic protection claims. Two

examples will suffice.

First, the local remedies rule is applicable in general international law to
claims brought by a State by way of diplomatic protection but not to claims in
which it enforces obligations owed directly to it. Yet if the notion that the
rights being enforced in diplomatic protection claims were the rights of the
State itself, it is difficult to see why the two categories of cases should be

treated differently.

Secondly, the docttine of continuing nationality under general international
law requires that in a diplomatic protection case the individual national in
respect of whom the claim is brought must have been a national of the
claimant State not only at the date of the alleged wrong but continuously from
that date until the date of the award (or, on some views, the date of the claim
being filed). Again, if an injury to the national is a violation of the rights of
the State, it is difficult to see why the victim’s nationality after the date of the
injury is of any relevance at all; the rights of the State would have been
violated anyway and there is no logical reason why the State should not claim
in respect of that violation whatever subsequently becomes of the individual

victim.

What these two rules actually demonstrate is that when a State claimed for a
wrong done to its national it was in reality acting on behalf of that national,

rather than asserting a right of its own. The pretence that it was asserting a

80

claim of its own was necessary, because the State alone enjoyed access to
international dispute settlement and claims machinery. However, there is no
need to continue that fiction in a case in which the individual is vested with
the right to bring claims of its own. In such a case there is no question of the
investor claiming on behalf of the State. The State of nationality of the
Claimant does not control the conduct of the case.”” No compensation which
is recovered will be paid to the State. The individual may even advance a
claim of which the State disapproves or base its case upon a proposition of
law with which the State disagrees. That occurred in GAMI, in which the
United States filed a submission that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction with
regard to certain shareholder claims advanced by the Claimants. The

Tribunal disagreed and held that it had jurisdiction with regard to all the

1

claims.” Yet if GAMI, as an investor of the United States, was doing no

more than asserting the substantive rights of the United States, it is difficult to

.
see how such a conclusion could have been reached.”

174. | The Tribunal considers that the reality under Chapter XI is that an investor

which brings a claim is seeking to enforce what it asserts are its own rights

© Article 2103(6) of the NAFTA gives the State of nationality of the investor a limited power regarding a
claim for expropriation based upon a taxation measure but this is exceptional and, in any event, does not
give the investor’s State of nationality control over the proceedings.; rather its effect is that the State of
nationality and the respondent State, if agreed, can together effectively preclude such a claim by
determining that the measure in question was not an expropriation. It does not affect the analysis in the text
above.

7 See paras. 29-30 and 43 of the Award.

7 See also the position of the Canadian Government in Mondev v. USA, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2,
6 ICSID Reps. 18, and the article by Douglas, “The Hybrid Foundations of Investment Treaty Arbitration”
74 BYIL (2003) 151 at 170. The Court of Appeal for England and Wales espoused the view that investors
under both the NAFTA and bilateral investment treaties were asserting rights of their own rather than
exercising a mere procedural power to enforce the rights of their State, see Republic of Ecuador v.
Occidental Exploration and Production Co [2005] EWCA Civ 1116, [2006] QB 432 at paras. 14-22.

81

under the treaty and not exercising a power to enforce rights which are

actually those of the State.

175. The Tribunal does not read the Loewen award 7 as taking a different position.
The passage in Loewen which is quoted as supporting the notion that the
investor is enforcing the rights of the State ™ is actually dealing with a far
more restricted point and says only that the rights are “in origin” those of

States.

176. The Tribunal therefore concludes that the investor, such as CPI, has rights of
its own under Chapter XI of the NAFTA. As such, it is a third party in any
dispute between its own State and another NAFTA Party and a
countermeasure taken by that other State against the State of nationality of the
investor cannot deprive that investor of its rights. To revert to the two
different examples given by the ILC in its Commentary on Article 49(1), this
is a case involving the rights of a third party and not merely its interests.
Mexico owed obligations to CPI under Chapter XI of NAFTA which were
separate from the obligations it owed to the United States under the NAFTA
as a whole. Even if the doctrine of countermeasures could operate to
preclude the wrongfulness of the HFCS tax vis-a-vis the United States (and,
for the reasons given below, the Tribunal makes no comment on that

question), they cannot do so vis-a-vis CPI.

® 7 ICSID Reps. 421.
™ Paras. 232-233.

82

177. The US-France Air Services case,’> on which Mexico relied heavily, was
quite different from the present case. The US-France Air Services case
involved a claim by the United States that France had violated the Air
Services Agreement between the two States by refusing to allow Pan-
American, an airline designated by the United States in accordance with the
Agreement, to continue operating a service from the west coast of the United
States to Paris which involved a change of aircraft in London. One of the
issues which arose in the proceedings was whether retaliatory action taken by
the United States against an airline designated by France, Air France, was a
lawful countermeasure. The tribunal held that the United States action
against Air France (a threat to block Air France flights from Paris to the west
coast of the United States) was a lawful countermeasure and that its

wrongfulness was therefore precluded.”

178. | However, the proceedings in that case were proceedings between the two
States. Moreover, the tribunal plainly considered that the proceedings
concerned the rights of the two States and not any rights of the airlines as it
held, in another part of its award, that the local remedies rule was
inapplicable, because the case was one concerning direct injury to a State and
did not involve rights granted to a private party.”” By contrast, the present

case is between CPI and Mexico and, for the reasons given above, the

75 54 ILR 303.
7 54 ILR 303 at 335-341, paras. 72-98.
7 54 ILR 303 at 323-5; paras. 29-31.

83

Tribunal considers that it involves the rights, and not merely the interests, of

CPI.

179. Nor is the Tribunal persuaded that the practice of the three NAFTA Parties
demonstrates that the doctrine of countermeasures is applicable under
Chapter XI of the NAFTA. Article 31(3) (c) of the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties, 1969, provides that “any subsequent practice in the
application of the treaty which establishes the agreement of the parties
regarding its interpretation” (emphasis added) shall be taken into account in
the interpretation of that treaty. The Tribunal therefore agrees with Mexico
that subsequent practice of the three NAFTA Parties must be taken into
account in the interpretation of the NAFTA if that practice establishes the
agreement of the three Parties regarding the proper interpretation of the
relevant NAFTA provisions. It is essential, however, to consider precisely
what agreement is said to be deduced frqm the practice of the Parties. The
practice relied upon by Mexico (e.g., the United States imposition of tariffs
upon Canadian sugar, the Memorandum of Understanding between Canada
and the United States regarding trade in “wheat ® and the Mexico-United
States trucking dispute °°) does not point to any agreement between the
NAFTA Parties regarding the question which arises in this arbitration,
namely whether countermeasures may afford a defence in Chapter XI
proceedings. Whatever may be the relevance of that practice as regards the

78 Counter-Memorial, paras. 264-6.

” Counter-Memorial, paras. 267-9
8 Rejoinder, para. 76.

84

180.

181.

effect of countermeasures on State-to-State relations under NAFTA, that is a
quite separate question (as the Tribunal has pointed out above, paragraph

162).

3. Are the requirements of a lawful countermeasure satisfied?

That conclusion makes it unnecessary to address the third question, identified
in paragraph 155, above, namely whether the HFCS tax met the requirements
for a lawful countermeasure under general international law, for example,
whether it complied with the principle of proportionality and the requirement
of proper notice. To address these questions would not only be unnecessary,
it would also be inappropriate, as the question of whether the Tax was a
‘countermeasure, thus precluding wrongfulness vis-a-vis the United States,
may fall to be determined by another tribunal. This Tribunal accordingly
says nothing further about these questions. There is, however, one matter
which was the subject of much debate before the Tribunal (and to which the ,
foregoing consideration does not apply) on which it is necessary to say
something. That concerns the effect of the limits on the Tribunal’s

jurisdiction upon the defence of countermeasures.

It is common ground that the jurisdiction of this Tribunal is limited to alleged
violations of Chapter XI of the NAFTA and to the parties before it. It has no
jurisdiction to determine whether there has been a breach of any of the other
provisions of the NAFTA or to rule on the conduct of the United States which

is not a party to these proceedings.

85

182.

183.

It is immediately apparent that these jurisdictional limits give rise to serious
difficulties in relation to the handling of Mexico’s countermeasures defence.
Mexico maintained that it was entitled to take countermeasures because the
United States had violated its obligations under the NAFTA (a) by denying
access for Mexican sugar producers to the United States market and (b) by
frustrating the operation of the Chapter XX disputes settlement mechanism.
But the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to determine whether these
allegations against the United States are well-founded or not. The United
States is not a party to these proceedings and the Tribunal does not have
jurisdiction to determine whether any provision of the NAFTA falling outside
Chapter XI has been violated. How, then, can the Tribunal determine
whether the HFCS tax was a response to a prior violation of international
law? And if it cannot determine that this requirement of a lawful
countermeasure is satisfied, how can it uphold Mexico’s countermeasures

,
defence ?

Mexico conceded that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to determine whether or
not the United States was in breach of the NAFTA but argued that it could
still succeed in its countermeasures defence. It contended that
countermeasures were necessarily taken by a State before the question of
whether there had been a prior wrong has been established by an international
tribunal. It relied upon a passage in the US-France Air Services case, in

which the Tribunal commented that -

86

“Under the rules of present-day international law, and unless the
contrary results from special obligations arising under particular
treaties, notably from mechanisms created within the framework of
international organizations, each State establishes for itself its legal
situation vis-a-vis other States. If a situation arises which, in one
State’s view, results in the violation of an international obligation by
another State, the first State is entitled, within the limits set by the
general rules of international law pertaining to the use of armed force,

to affirm its rights through ‘countermeasures’.

184. On that basis, Mexico argued that, for it to succeed in its countermeasures
defence, it was not necessary for it to establish that the United States had
violated the provisions of the NAFTA (whether in respect of denial of access

to the sugar market or frustration of the dispute resolution provisions). It
needed only to satisfy the Tribunal that Mexico had, when it imposed the

HFCS tax, and continued to have while the Tax was in place, a genuine belief

that it had a reasonable prospect of succeeding in establishing that the United

States was in breach, should that question come before a competent tribunal.

185. Notwithstanding the skill with which this argument was advanced, the
Tribunal does not believe that it is possible to “square the circle” in the way
suggested by Mexico. The requirement of a prior violation of international

, law is an absolute precondition of the right to take countermeasures. That
was made clear by the International Court of Justice in the Gabcikovo-
Nagymaros case, when the Court said —

“In order to be justifiable, a countermeasure must meet certain
conditions. ... In the first place it must be taken in response to a

8! 54 ILR 303 at 337, para. 81.

87

previous international wrongful act of another State and must be
directed against that State.”*

186. That requirement is reiterated in Article 49(1) of the ILC Articles, which

states —

“An injured State may only take countermeasures against a State which
is responsible for an internationally wrongful act in order to induce that
State to comply with its obligations under Part Two.”

The Commentary to that provision observes that —

“A fundamental prerequisite for any lawful countermeasure is the
existence of an internationally wrongful act which injured the State
taking the countermeasure.”*?

187. It is plainly not open to this Tribunal to dispense with a fundamental
prerequisite of this kind. Nor is the fact that countermeasures are taken
before a tribunal rules on whether there has been a prior wrong alter the
importance or the objective nature of this fundamental prerequisite. To quote

the ILC Commentary again —

“Paragraph 1 of Article 49 presupposes an objective standard for the
taking of countermeasures, and in particular requires that the
countermeasures be taken against a State which is responsible for an
internationally wrongful act in order to induce that State to comply with
its obligations of cessation and reparation. . A State taking
countermeasures acts at its peril, if its view of the question of
wrongfulness turns out not to be well founded. A State which resorts to
countermeasures based on its own unilateral assessment of the
situation does so at its own risk and may incur responsibility for its own
wrongful conduct in the event of an incorrect assessment.”

® ICI Reps., 1997, p. 7 at p. 55, para. 83.
§ Commentary, para. 2; The ILC Articles (2002), p. 284.
* Commentary, para. 3; ibid., pp. 284-5 (emphasis added).

88

188. Moreover, the ILC Commentary expressly addresses (in a footnote to the
passage just quoted) the statement by the Tribunal in the US-France Air

Services case on which Mexico relies —

“The Tribunal's remark in the Air Services case, to the effect that ‘each
State establishes for itself its legal situation vis-a-vis other States’,
(R.LA.A., vol. XVII, p. 416 (1979), at p. 443. para. 81) should not be
interpreted in the sense that the United States would have been justified
in taking countermeasures whether or not France was in breach of the
Agreement. In that case the Tribunal went on to hold that the United
States was actually responding to a breach of the Agreement by France,
and that its response met the requirements for countermeasures under
international law, in particular in terms of purpose and proportionality.
The Tribunal did not decide that an unjustified belief by the United
States as to the existence of a breach would have been sufficient.”*

189. Since the burden of establishing all of the elements of the countermeasures
defence is on Mexico, as the party asserting that defence, it would follow that,
even if (contrary to the view of this Tribunal) the doctrine of countermeasures
were applicable to Chapter XI proceedings, Mexico’s defence would
necessarily fail if Mexico could not establish one of the requirements of a
countermeasure (especially the first and most fundamental requirement,
namely that any countermeasure must be taken in response to a prior breach

of international law by another State).

190. During the oral hearings, Mexico proposed that the Tribunal should stay the
proceedings until the question whether or not the United States had acted

unlawfully in the sugar access dispute had been resolved at the inter-State

§ Thid., n. 788, p. 285.

89

level and then resume consideration of the countermeasures issue when that

question had been resolved. The Tribunal did not accept that proposal. 86

191. For the reasons given above, the Tribunal considers that the doctrine of
countermeasures does not apply under Chapter XI in any event. That renders
it unnecessary for the Tribunal to decide upon the request for a stay.
Moreover, the Tribunal considers that it would be impracticable for Chapter
XI tribunals to stay proceedings and await resolution of issues of this kind at
the inter-state level. The Tribunal notes that, in the present case, the question
whether or not the United States was in breach of NAFTA in the sugar access
dispute had still not been resolved more than a year after the conclusion of the

oral hearings.

192. The Tribunal therefore rejects the countermeasures defence.

* Transcript, Day 4, pages 778-779.

90

xX. Conclusions and Decision

193. The Tribunal therefore decides that:-

(1) Mexico has incurred responsibility for a violation of Article 1102 in

respect of CPI and CPIng;

(2) The quantum of compensation will be determined in a later phase of the

proceedings;

(3) CPI and CPIng’s other claims are dismissed;

(4) The question of costs will be determined as part of the next phase of the

proceedings.
*
[signature] [signature]
Andreas F, Lowenfeld Jestis Alfonso Serrano de la Vega

[signature]
Christopher J. Greenwood

91

