INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others
Respondents on Annulment

v.
Kingdom of Spain

Applicant on Annulment

(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

DECISION ON THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION’S APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO
INTERVENE AS A NON-DISPUTING PARTY

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Prof. Dr. Jacomijn van Haersolte-van Hof, President of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Alvaro Castellanos Howell, Member of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Timothy J. Feighery, Member of the ad hoc Committee

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Anna Toubiana

2 April 2020

Til.

Table of Contents

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION’S APPLICATION...
THE DISPUTING PARTIES’ POSITIONS...

 

 

A. Spain’s Position 3

 

B. Cube’s and Demeter’s Posi

THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIG.....

 

 

A. The Applicable Legal Standard..

B. The EC’s Application to Intervene Pursuant to Rule 37(2) of the

Arbitration Rules or as an Expert...

 

DECISION. 12

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

IL.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On 24 February 2020, the European Commission (the “EC” or the “Commission”)
submitted with the ICSID Secretariat an Application for Leave to Intervene as a Non-
Disputing Party dated 21 February 2020 (the “Application”) pursuant to Rule 37(2) of
the ICSID Arbitration Rules (the “Arbitration Rules”).

The Respondents on Annulment are Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV, Cube Energy
S.C.A., Demeter Partners S.A., Demeter 2 FPCI, and Cube Infrastructure Managers S.A.

(together, “Cube and Demeter” or “Respondents”).
The Applicant is the Kingdom of Spain (“Spain”).
Spain and Cube and Demeter are collectively referred to as the “Parties.”

Pursuant to the Committee’s instructions of 26 February 2020, the Parties filed their

observations on the EC’s Application on 4 March 2020 (the “Observations”.

After reviewing the Parties’ Observations, on 6 March 2020, the Committee invited the
Parties to submit comments on the opposing Party’s Observations by 16 March 2020

(the “Comments”).
THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION’S APPLICATION

In its Application, the Commission states that its request to intervene in the present

annulment proceeding is limited to the following three points:!

(a) Article 26 of the Energy Charter Treaty [“ECT”] does not apply “intra-EU,”
so that the Arbitral Tribunal lacked jurisdiction and committed an error leading

to annulment when confirming its jurisdiction to hear the case; and

(b) Union law on State Aid forms part of the applicable law before the Arbitral
Tribunal, which is of relevance in particular for the interpretation and
application of the substantive investment provisions of the Energy Charter

Treaty, and precludes in the present case the award of damages against Spain;

' Application, 4 23.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

by ignoring and hence not applying them, the Arbitral Tribunal failed to apply

the applicable law, which must lead to the annulment of the contested award;

(c) Union law on State Aid requires a stay of enforcement of the Award, because
Spain is under an obligation under EU law, and hence of international law

applicable to the parties, not to pay the contested award.

The Commission then elaborates on the reasons why it considers that its intervention
satisfies the conditions set out in Rule 37(2) of the Arbitration Rules, and states that its
intervention “would show that the Arbitral Tribunal has committed several errors of

law, which necessarily have to lead to the annulment of the award.”?

Specifically, the EC asserts that its intervention would assist the Committee in the
determination of factual and legal issues, which fall within the scope of the dispute.*
The Commission further contends that it has a significant interest in the proceedings as
a guardian of the EU Treaties and plays a central role in the interpretation and
application of rules relating to investment protection within the EU.* The EC also notes
that it has a central role in the State Aid application system as established in Articles

107 and 108 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (“TFEU”).°

The Commission requests the Committee to grant it leave to intervene, and to set a
deadline for the Commission to file a written amicus curiae submission. ° The
Commission offers that, if necessary, it could also first file an amicus curiae submission
on the question of a stay of enforcement of the Award.’ The EC also requests access to
the documents filed in the proceeding and permission to attend hearings.* Finally, the
EC “recalls that it could also be invited as an expert on EU law, rather than as a non-

disputing party.”?

 

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

Il.

THE DISPUTING PARTIES’ POSITIONS
A. Spain’s Position

Spain requests the Committee to grant the EC’s Application as it considers that it

complies with all the requirements set out in Rule 37(2) of the Arbitration Rules.!°

First, Spain argues that the EC’s intervention would assist the Committee in the
determination of factual and legal issues related to the proceeding by bringing a
perspective, particular knowledge or insight that is different from that of the disputing
Parties.'! According to Spain, the Commission’s arguments would help the Committee
make an informed decision “not only because of the knowledge on the EU legal system
that the Commission can provide, but also because of the knowledge that the
Commission has about the ECT itself, given that it was the Commission who, on behalf
of the EU, promoted and signed the ECT.”!? Spain adds that the EC is “endowed with

the most absolute independence” as recognized by Article 245 of the TFEU."

Second, Spain submits that the Commission’s Application refers to a matter within the
scope of the dispute. '* Spain argues that the issues raised by the Commission “go to the
very core of the grounds for annulment invoked in this proceeding.” According to
Spain, the matters addressed in the EC’s Application refer to issues within the powers
of the ad hoc Committee.'® Spain adds that the Committee should not “repeat the
mistake committed by the Cube Tribunal,” and should allow the EC’s intervention and

insight in the annulment proceeding. '”

Third, Spain argues that the Commission has a significant interest in the proceeding “as
it affects an issue of general interest like the application of the ECT, signed by the EU

and its Member States, within its territory and in the matter of State Aid regulations, so

© Spain’s Observations, {ff 13-29.

4 Id. 99 14-18.

21d, q 15.

3 [d., (9 17-18; Spain’s Comments, 1 16.
4 Spain’s Observations, {ff 19-25.

8 Td.,420.

© Spai

 

Comments, { 4.

"7 Spain’s Observations, { 24.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

linked to the very roots of the European Union and its fundamental freedoms.”!® Spain
submits that the Commission’s interest in the present proceeding is unquestionable,
“not only because of its general role as the guardian of the EU Treaties, but also because
the effective application and enforcement of its State Aid Decision is at stake in this
proceeding.”'? Spain cites to the tribunals in AS PNB Banka v. Latvia and Electrabel

S.A. v. Hungary in support of its position in this regard.”°

Finally, Spain submits that Rule 37(2) of the Arbitration Rules allows the Committee
to take into account other criteria, including the fact that the Commission’s intervention
will contribute to the “good end of the present proceeding as it will decisively illustrate
on the grounds for annulment of the Award,” and to the issue of a stay of enforcement
of the Award.?! Spain contends that given the early stages of the proceeding, no
disruption can be caused by the Commission’s intervention as both Parties would have
sufficient time and opportunity to comment on any submission made by the

Commission.”

Based on the above arguments, Spain concludes that the Commission’s intervention
should be granted. Spain further submits that the EC should be granted access to all
documents produced in this arbitration, and that the Commission should be allowed to

intervene at the hearing.”*
B. Cube’s and Demeter’s Position

Cube and Demeter submit that the EC’s Application does not satisfy Rule 37(2) of the

Arbitration Rules, and that the Committee should deny the petition.

First, Cube and Demeter argue that the EC’s Application addresses issues that the

Tribunal finally decided and that the ICSID Convention does not permit the Committee

8 1d.,426.

1d.,429.

2 Spain’s Comments, {{{| 19-20; AS PNB Banka and others v. Republic of Latvia, CSID Case No. ARB/17/47,
Procedural Order No. 3, 30 October 2018, Spain’s Annex 057; Electrabel S.A. v. Republic of Hungary, ICSID
Case No. ARB/07/19, Procedural Order No. 4, 28 April 2009, Spain’s Annex 058.

2! Spain’s Observations, { 30, 36.

2 1d. 32.

23 Id., Wh 34-39.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

20.

to revisit.*+ Cube and Demeter contend that despite the circumscribed nature of the
annulment process under the ICSID Convention, the EC states that it wishes to show
the errors in law that the Tribunal made, which would lead to the annulment of the
Award.” According to Cube and Demeter, the Committee does not have the power or
authority to consider the allegations regarding the ECT application to the intra-EU
disputes and the EU law on State Aid as part of the applicable law under the ECT.”
Rather, the Committee may only consider whether one of the annulment grounds

pursuant to Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention is applicable.”

Second, Cube and Demeter state that the EC does not bring a perspective, particular
knowledge, or insight to the proceeding that is different from Spain.7* Cube and
Demeter contend that the EC’s views are not independent from Spain and adds that
Spain has already presented the arguments the EC has raised in the underlying
arbitration. Cube and Demeter add that admitting the Commission’s participation
“would result in repetitive pleadings, forcing Cube and Demeter to defend themselves
against two entities rather than one” and would increase costs in a way that
disproportionately burdens Cube and Demeter.”? In support of this argument, Cube and

Demeter cite to the tribunal in Eli Lilly v. Canada.*°

Third, Cube and Demeter submit that the Commission does not have a valid “significant
interest” in this proceeding in its role as guardian of the EU Treaties.*! In reality,
according to Cube and Demeter, the EC’s interest is a “self-serving political objective
to rewrite the system of international treaty arbitration within Europe.”*? The EC’s
attempts to intervene in dozens of intra-EU ECT proceedings involving Spain and other
EU Member States is a “political strategy aimed at rendering the investment treaty

arbitration process and the ECT itself invalid within the EU,” and stripping investors

2 Respondents’ Observations, pp. 2-4.

27 Respondents’ Comments, p. 2.
°8 Respondents’ Observations, p. 4.

29 Id

30 Id.

Td.,p.5.

2 Td.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

21.

22.

23.

24.

like Cube and Demeter of their rights under the ECT.** Cube and Demeter submit that
the EC’s political agenda has no bearing in the present annulment proceeding and, in
any case, does not amount to a valid or significant interest that would justify

intervention.*4

Fourth and finally, Cube and Demeter submit that the EC’s arguments are meritless as
the Tribunal in the underlying arbitration rejected the intra-EU objection.*> Indeed, the
Tribunal first rejected Spain’s reading of EU law into the ECT and its argument that
EU law prevails over all other international law between EU Member States.*° The
Tribunal also rejected Spain’s argument that the European Court of Justice’s decision
in Achmea equally applied to the ECT and held that the decision was inapposite as
precedent for the present proceeding.*” Cube and Demeter add that the Tribunal’s
findings are supported by at least 27 ECT tribunals that have faced the same intra-EU

objection under the ECT and that have all unanimously rejected the objection.**

Cube and Demeter also contend that the EC’s arguments on State Aid are groundless
as no determination has ever been made concerning Spain’s original incentives regimes

for renewable energy investments and their incompatibility with State Aid.”

Cube and Demeter further object to Spain’s request that the EC be allowed to file a
submission on a stay of enforcement of the Award as the Parties have addressed that
issue at great length. According to Cube and Demeter, the Commission’s intervention
at this stage with regard to that issue would create a significant disruption of the

proceeding.*°

Based on the above, Cube and Demeter request that the Committee deny the
Commission’s request to intervene or participate as an expert.*! Cube and Demeter,

however, request that should the Committee admit the EC’s Application, the

33 Jd.; Respondents’ Comments, p. 8.
34 Respondents’ Observations, p. 5.

40 Respondents’ Comments,

pp. 6-9.

 

 

41 Respondents’ Observations, p. 10.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

IV.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

® Id.

Committee should implement restrictions to safeguard Cube’s and Demeter’s rights,
including: (i) limiting the EC’s involvement to a single submission that is narrow in
scope and length; (ii) refusing the EC access to the case file; (iii) rejecting the
Commission’s request to attend any hearing in this proceeding; and (iv) requiring the
EC to post security for the additional costs imposed upon Cube and Demeter as a result
of the EC’s intervention, or alternatively to provide an undertaking to pay these added

costs.”
THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS
A. The Applicable Legal Standard

As stated above, the Commission seeks to intervene in this annulment proceeding on

three points and bases its Application upon Rule 37(2) of the Arbitration Rules.

Pursuant to Rule 53 of the Arbitration Rules, the above-mentioned provision applies,

mutatis mutandis, to the present annulment proceeding.

In their submissions, both Spain and Cube and Demeter agree that Rule 37(2) sets the

applicable standard to determine the admissibility of the EC’s Application.

As an alternative to its request to be admitted as a non-disputing party, the Commission
proposed the possibility that it be invited as expert witness.*? Cube and Demeter have
objected stating that this would not provide the Committee with an independent and
disinterested view of EU law.** Spain has not commented on this alternative request, a

fact that Cube and Demeter argue renders their objection on this point uncontested.*

The Committee notes, however, that the Commission’s alternative request lacks a
specific legal basis. Consequently, the Committee will consider it within the general
procedural framework of these proceedings and in particular Rule 34 (which sets forth
the general principles relating to evidence), Rule 35 (which addresses the examination

of witnesses and experts), and Rule 36 (dealing with witnesses and experts) of the

43 Application, { 21.
+4 Respondents’ Observations, p. 9.
45 Respondents’ Comments, p. 1.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

30.

31.

32.

Arbitration Rules. While the legal bases may be different, the primary and alternative
request cannot be assessed in isolation, and consequently they are addressed in order in

the section that follows.

B. The EC’s Application to Intervene Pursuant to Rule 37(2) of the

Arbitration Rules or as an Expert

Rule 37(2) of the Arbitration Rules provides for the opportunity for a non-disputing
party to intervene. In principle, that opportunity exists equally in annulment
proceedings (see Rule 53 of the Arbitration Rules providing that the provisions of these

tules apply mutatis mutandis to a procedure for the annulment of an award).

Nevertheless, in deciding whether or not to allow a third party to intervene, the
Committee must be mindful of the nature and scope of the present proceeding. Namely,
a request for annulment may only be made on the basis of the specific grounds set out
in Article 52 of the ICSID Convention, and the Committee may not engage in a broader
review of the merits of the award. Nor may it substitute its views for those of the tribunal
that rendered the award.*° Consequently, the Committee should adopt procedures

commensurate with the nature and scope of an annulment proceeding.

These limitations are equally relevant in so far as the Commission’ s request to intervene
extends to the question of a stay of the enforcement of the Award. In support of its
request to intervene in this respect, the Commission argues that pursuant to TFEU
Article 108(3), Spain may not pay the award, and if Cube and Demeter were to seek to
enforce the Award “they would act in violation of their obligations under international
law,” *” and if the “Committee was to refuse to grant an unconditional stay on
enforcement of the Award, it would equally violated [sic] its obligations under

international law.”**

46 Hi-Taek Shin, Annulment, in BUILDING INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT LAW: THE FIRST 50 YEARS OF ICSID 699,
700 (Meg Kinnear et al. eds.), Respondents’ Annex CL-260.

*7 Application 4 52.

81d.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

33.

34.

35.

36.

The Commission’s arguments on the stay of enforcement give rise to considerations of
procedure and substance. As to procedure, the Committee considers that the Parties
agreed on a timeline for the annulment proceeding, including a submission schedule in
relation to the stay of enforcement and providing for a decision by the Committee on
the stay enforcement to be issued by 17 April 2020.*? The Parties have not addressed
the impact, if any, of the Commission’s request to intervene on the procedural calendar,
and notably neither has requested any extension thereof. In so far as it supports the
request for intervention, it would have been up to Spain to consider the procedural
implications of the Commission’s request. And as will be discussed below, precisely
because the broad and profound nature of the putative intervention, the procedural
consequences of an intervention in the form and shape proposed by the Commission

and supported by Spain are likely to be considerable.

Concerning the substance and scope of the Commission’s request to intervene, its
argument, referred to in paragraph 32 above, highlights the fact that an analysis and
evaluation of the request would require addressing fundamental issues effectively
requiring consideration of many, if not all, of the arguments made and expected to be

made in the context of this annulment proceeding.

With this in mind, the Committee emphasizes that its decision as to whether or not to
permit the intervention requested by the EC pursuant to Rule 37 of the Arbitration Rules
is not and should not foreshadow a decision on the stay of enforcement proceedings.
The present decision is, as it should be, confined to the EC’s request to intervene. In
the context of stay proceedings, “any discussion on the merits and on the chances of
annulment of the Award would be misplaced.”*° This limitation applies a fortiori to the
present decision on the request to intervene in the annulment proceeding and to allow

the intervener to make a submission in relation to the stay.

Furthermore, the argument of Spain that the issues raised by the Commission “go to the

v51

very core of the grounds for annulment invoked in this proceeding,”°’ if anything,

*° Procedural Order No.1, Annex A — Procedural Calendar.

50 Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, 1CSID Case No. ARB/99/7, Decision on the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award, 30 November 2004, { 26, Spain’s Annex 048.

51 Spain’s Observations, {{ 20.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

37.

38.

39.

40.

underlines the point that allowing the Commission to intervene at this stage would not
only disrupt the proceeding; it would fail to assist the Committee. It is precisely because
this is not the time or place to engage in a comprehensive review of the merits that a
non-disputing party intervention is not of assistance to the Committee. Pursuant to Rule
37(2) of the Arbitration Rules, the Committee should be persuaded that the non-
disputing party’s submission would assist the Committee and the Committee is of the

view that, given all of the submissions on this issue, this threshold has not been met.

Consequently, both in terms of procedural and substantive impact, the Committee finds

that the request for intervention by the Commission must be rejected.

It would be premature to decide definitively now whether the intervention of the
Commission in some capacity at some stage would assist the Committee in the
determination of factual and legal issues related to the proceeding by bringing a
perspective, particular knowledge or insight that is different from that of the disputing
Parties. While this may risk suggesting that an intervention at a later stage is

conceivable, the Committee notes the following.

Spain argues that the Commission has a significant interest in the proceeding “as it
affects an issue of general interest like the application of the ECT, signed by the EU
and its Members States, within its territory and in the matter of State Aid regulations,
so linked to the very roots of the European Union and its fundamental freedoms” and
the Commission’s interest in the present proceeding is unquestionable, “not only
because of its general role as the guardian of the EU Treaties, but also because the
effective application and enforcement of its State Aid Decision is at stake in this
proceeding.”*? At the same time, Spain has argued that the Commission should be
allowed to intervene because it is “endowed with the most absolute independence” as

recognized by Article 245 of the TFEU.*

Without expressing a view on these statements, the Committee notes that,

notwithstanding Spain’s assertions, the Commission’s perspective is difficult to align

2 Id., YI 26, 29.
53 d., Ql 17-18.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

Al.

42.

43.

44.

with the alternative request made to create a role for the Commission as an (independent)
expert. Spain has not clarified whether it supports this alternative request, and so far as
it does; nor does it express a view whether the Commission’s putative role as expert

would be as party expert or the Committee appointed expert.

In this light, the Committee recalls that based on the Parties’ agreement, the Committee
confirmed in paragraph 15.5 of Procedural Order No.1 that “[t]he Parties shall include
all of the evidence on which they intend to rely, including [...] expert opinions or
reports [...].” Subject to the structure and guidance of the ICSID Convention and the
Arbitration Rules, and in particular Rules 34-36, it is the Parties’ prerogative to submit
the evidence they intend to rely on, as referred to in paragraph 15.5 of Procedural Order
No. 1. The reference to mutatis mutandis in Rule 53 of the Arbitration Rules reflects
that the powers of the Committee, while mirroring those of a tribunal, are
commensurate with the nature of the annulment proceedings, and should be applied in
accordance with the powers accorded to annulment committees by the Convention and

the Arbitration Rules.

In this case, the Commission has not specified in which capacity it would suggest it
could or should be involved as expert, and the Parties have not commented on the

procedural framework for such involvement either.

For any expert’s testimony to be of assistance to the Committee, it would have to reflect
an independent and impartial view. However, precisely because of the critical and
extensive role of the Commission in the EU legal architecture, it is difficult to square

this roll with the notion of the Commission as independent in this dispute.

While the Committee does not wish to pre-empt the presentation of evidence by the
Parties pursuant to Procedural Order No. | and the Arbitration Rules, and while equally,
it cannot exclude the possibility that at some point in time it, on its own motion or at
the request of the Parties may wish to seek the appointment of an expert, the Committee
sees no basis for allowing the Commission at this stage to become involved in this

proceeding as expert.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

45. Consequently, the Committee also rejects the alternative request that the Commission

be invited as expert witness.
Vv. DECISION

46. Having considered the Commission’s Application and the Parties’ submissions, and for

the reasons stated above, the Committee at this stage:

(a) rejects the EC’s Application;
(b) rejects the EC’s alternative request that it be invited as an expert witness; and

(c) reserves the issue of costs on this Application to a further order or decision.

a =

Mr. Timothy J. Feighery Mr. Alvaro Castellanos Howell
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee

v

Prof. Dr. Jacomijn van Haersolte-van Hof
President of the ad hoc Committee

