INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others
Respondents on Annulment

v.
Kingdom of Spain

Applicant on Annulment

(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

DECISION ON THE CONTINUATION OF THE PROVISIONAL STAY OF
ENFORCEMENT OF THE AWARD

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Prof. Dr. Jacomijn van Haersolte-van Hof, President of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Alvaro Castellanos Howell, Member of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Timothy J. Feighery, Member of the ad hoc Committee

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee
Ms. Anna Toubiana

 

17 April 2020

Til.

Table of Contents

PROCEDURAL HISTORY
THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS.

 

Spain’s Position

1. The Applicable Legal Standard...

 

 

 

 

2. Whether the Circumstances Require a Stay.
a) The Application is well-founded, made in good faith and is
not dilatory 5

 

b) — Spain will be harmed if the stay is not continued

c) Cube and Demeter will not be harmed if the stay is
continued

d) The United States Courts’ Decisions.
e) The Eiser and Antin Decisions ..
Whether Security Should Be Ordered .................
Cube’s and Demeter’s Position 15
The Applicable Legal Standard...
Whether the Circumstances Require a Stay.

 

 

 

»

 

 

rm

 

»

 

 

a) Spain is unlikely to comply with the Award if it:
1 fails

 
 
 
 
 

b) The hardship factor weighs in favour of Cube and Demeter.

c) Spain does not face any real risk of non-recoupmen'

d) The Eiser and Antin decisions

3. Whether Security Should Be Ordered
THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS. 35
The Applicable Legal Standard 35
Whether the Circumstances Require the Stay to Be Continued.

 

1. Seriousness and Non-Dilatory Nature of the Application

2 «Ci i and R ip

3. Legal Obligations and Hardship
Whether Security Should Be Ordered

DECISION. 43

 

 

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

This Decision addresses the Kingdom of Spain’s application for the continuation of a
provisional stay of enforcement of the ICSID award rendered on 15 July 2019 in Cube
Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain, YCSID Case No.
ARB/15/20 (the “Award”).

On 12 November 2019, the Kingdom of Spain (“Spain”) filed an application for
annulment of the Award (the “Application”). The Application contained a request for
a provisional stay of enforcement of the Award until the ad hoc Committee ruled on
such a request, and further that the stay be maintained until the Application itself is
decided by the ad hoc Committee (the “Request”) pursuant to Article 52(5) of the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of
Other States (the “ICSID Convention”) and Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Rules of

Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”).

The ICSID Secretary-General registered the Application on 18 November 2019 and the
ad hoc Committee (the “Committee”) was constituted on 18 December 2019 in
accordance with Arbitration Rules 6, 52(2), and 53. The Members of the Committee
are Prof. Dr. Jacomijn van Haersolte-van Hof (Dutch), President, Mr. Alvaro
Castellanos Howell (Guatemalan), and Mr. Timothy J. Feighery (US, Irish). All

members were appointed by the Chairman of ICSID’s Administrative Council.

On 9 January 2020, Spain filed its Submission in Support of the Continuation of the

Stay of Enforcement of the Award (the “Submission’”).

On 22 January 2020, the Committee held the first session by telephone conference and
issued Procedural Order No. 1 concerning procedural matters along with a procedural

calendar.

On 23 January 2020, Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV, Cube Infrastructure Managers
S.A., Cube, Energy S.C.A., Demeter Partners S.A., and Demeter 2 FPCI (“Cube and
Demeter,” or the “Respondents’) filed their Opposition to Spain’s Request for

Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award (the “Response”).

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

IL.

On 6 February 2020, Spain filed its Reply in Support of the Continuation of the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award (the “Reply”).

On 28 February 2020, Cube and Demeter filed their Rejoinder to Spain’s Reply in

Support of the Continuation of Stay of Enforcement of the Award (the “Rejoinder”).

On 5 March 2020, pursuant to the procedural calendar, the Committee informed the

Parties that a Hearing on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award was not necessary.

On 24 February, the European Commission (“EC”) submitted with the ICSID
Secretariat an Application for Leave to Intervene as a Non-Disputing Party dated 21
February 2020 pursuant to Rule 37(2) of the Arbitration Rules. Pursuant to the
Committee’s instructions, the Parties submitted their observations on the EC’s
Application on 4 March 2020. The Parties further submitted comments on the opposing

Party’s observations on 16 March 2020.

After reviewing the Parties’ submissions, the Committee issued its Decision on the
European Commission’s Application for Leave to Intervene as a Non-Disputing Party

on 2 April 2020, denying the EC’s Application.

Sections II and III of this Decision summarise the Parties’ positions on the stay of
enforcement of the Award.! Section IV sets out the reasons for the Committee’s

decision. The Committee’s decision is stated in Section V.
THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS
A. Spain’s Position

Spain seeks the continuation of the provisional stay of the Award until the Committee
renders its decision on the Application for annulment. It argues that the prevailing
practice of ICSID ad hoc Committees has been to stay enforcement of an award during
the pendency of annulment proceedings. Further, according to Spain, there are no

circumstances that justify deviating from this practice given (i) the merits and good

' The summaries included in this Decision are not intended to be exhaustive descriptions of the Parties’
submissions. The objective is to provide the relevant context for the Committee’s analysis and findings. The
Committee has nevertheless carefully considered all the submissions made by the Parties.

2

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

faith of the Application; (ii) the harm to Spain if a stay is denied; and (iii) the absence

of harm to Cube and Demeter.
1. The Applicable Legal Standard

14. Spain submits that the Committee is empowered to continue the stay of enforcement
“if it considers that the circumstances so require” and that the common practice is to do
so unless there are circumstances warranting otherwise. 7 In support, Spain cites to the
ad hoc Committee’s holding in Occidental v. Ecuador that “[t]he prevailing practice in

”3 and to the statement

prior annulment cases has been to grant the stay of enforcement
of the ad hoc Committee in Victor Pey Casado v. Chile that “absent unusual
circumstances, the granting of a stay of enforcement pending the outcome of the

annulment proceedings has now become almost automatic.”*

15. Spain rejects the notion that a stay of enforcement may only be granted in “exceptional
circumstances.”° For Spain, the ICSID Convention and the ICSID Arbitration Rules do
not use the term “exceptional” to qualify the circumstances that justify maintaining a

stay of enforcement.®

16. Further, using “exceptional circumstances” as the legal standard cannot be reconciled
with the common practice of ICSID ad hoc Committees.’ Specifically, Spain notes that
of the 55 ICSID annulment cases where stays of enforcement have been sought, 39

stays were granted resulting in a 75% success rate for applicants.*®

17. Spain also points out that the decisions cited by Cube and Demeter in support of their

position do not actually state that “exceptional circumstances” are required to continue

2 Submission, 17, citing Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

3 Id., 7; Occidental Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of
Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Decision on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 30 September 2013
(“Occidental”), Spain Annex-29, 50.

+ Submission, 8; Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v. Republic of Chile, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/98/2, Decision on the Republic of Chile’s Application for a Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 5 May 2010
(“Victor Pey Casado”), Spain Annex-30, (25.

5 Reply, 18.

61.19.

 

  

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

20.

a stay of enforcement.” In fact, the only decision cited by Cube and Demeter which
includes the phrase “exceptional circumstances” uses it to refer to the burden on the
party opposing the stay and subsequently joins the rest of the decisions cited by Cube

and Demeter in referring only to “circumstances” as the requirement for continuation.'°

Noting that neither the ICSID Convention nor the ICSID Arbitration Rules state which
factors an ad hoc Committee should consider in its decision to continue a stay of
enforcement, Spain submits that the Committee should consider (a) whether the
annulment application is dilatory or frivolous; (b) the adverse consequences to either
party as a result of granting or denying the stay of enforcement; (c) the risk of non-
recoupment of the award if it is paid and subsequently annulled; and (d) the risk that

the award may not be complied with if the annulment application fails.!!

Regarding the burden of proof, Spain argues that the Committee should evaluate all
circumstances and cites the holding of the ad hoc Committee in Standard Chartered
Bank vy. Tanzania that “[no] particular party [in a stay application] bears the burden of

establishing circumstances requiring a stay” as support.'?

Spain notes that it has nevertheless fully and successfully undertaken to identify the
circumstances warranting the stay whereas Cube and Demeter merely object to the
Request without further support.'? Spain submits that although Cube and Demeter do
not bear the primary burden, they must establish certain issues including whether they
would be prejudiced by the stay and their commitment to return the funds that would

be paid under the Award if the Application ultimately succeeds. '*

9° Id., (20.

 Fd., 21-22.

"1d. (96-7.

"2 [d., 29, citing Standard Chartered Bank (Hong Kong) Limited v. Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited,
ICSID Case No. ARB/10/20, Decision on Applicant’ Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award,
12 April 2017 (“Standard Chartered”), Spain Annex-40, 53.

5 Reply, $926, 30.

4 1d. 4927, 30.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

2. Whether the Circumstances Require a Stay

21. Spain, in its Submission and Reply, highlights the following circumstances in support

of its request in support of the continuation of the stay:
a. the Application is well-founded, made in good faith, and is not dilatory;
b. Spain’s position would be prejudiced if the stay is not continued; and
c. continuing the stay would not prejudice or harm Cube and Demeter.

a) The Application is well-founded, made in good faith and is not

dilatory

22. Spain submits that one of the circumstances that ad hoc Committees have considered
in deciding whether to grant a stay of enforcement is whether the annulment application
is frivolous, dilatory, or not made in good faith. '5 Therefore, “Tilf frivolousness of an
annulment application is a factor in determining whether to grant or deny a stay, then

the seriousness of the annulment application must necessarily be considered.” !®

23. Spain argues that even a cursory analysis of the grounds confirms “the good faith and

seriousness of the Application.”'” Spain contends that:

a. “[...] the Tribunal went beyond its jurisdiction by failing to apply the proper law
with regard to the intra-EU objection and wrongly interpreting Article 26 of the
Energy Charter Treaty [...] The Tribunal also failed to apply the proper law by

completely disregarding European Union Law when assessing the facts and merits

'5 Id., 31, citing generally, MTD Equity Sdn Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile, (CSID Case No.
ARB/O1/7, Decision on the Respondent's Request for a Continued Stay of Execution, 1 June 2005 (“MTD
Decision on the Request for a Continued Stay”), Spain Annex-32, {28; CMS Gas Transmission Company v.
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8, Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued
Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 1 September 2006 (“CMS Decision on the Request for a Continued Stay”),
Spain Annex-33, 37.

16 Reply, 133, f. 30, citing Quiborax S.A. and Non-Metallic Minerals S.A. v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, \CSID
Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision on the Application to Terminate the Provisional Stay of Enforcement of the Award
dated 21 February 2017 (“Quiborax”), Spain Annex-41, J 58 (“On the other hand, the Request for Annulment
and the grounds raised by Respondent are, at first glance, sufficiently serious to convince the Committee that the
Request for Annulment is not imprudent.”).

" 1d. 933.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

24.

25.

of the case. Finally, the wrongful application of the proper law by the Tribunal
determined that the Award infringed the most basic principles contained in the
European Commission’s State Aid Decision on the Spanish renewable energy

support scheme;”!®

“[...] the Award incurred in a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure and thus prevented the Kingdom of Spain of its right to fully present its
case, precisely by denying Spain the introduction into the record of the Declaration
of the Representatives of the Governments of the Member States of 15 January 2019,
by denying the European Commission’s intervention in the arbitral proceeding, by
breaching the most basic rules regarding evidence and the Applicant’s right to be
heard and by providing the Applicant with a treatment which failed to be impartial

and equal;”!” and

“[...] the Award failed to state the reasons on which it is based by providing
contradictory findings in relation to stabilization commitments and the application

of European Union Law.””°

Spain does not suggest that the Committee decide whether to grant the Request solely
on the merits of the grounds for the Application.?! Instead, Spain invokes the fumus
bonii iuris of the Application and argues that insofar as the Application raises “serious,
well-grounded bases for annulment and has been made in good faith,” this clearly

weighs in favour of the stay.?”

b) Spain will be harmed if the stay is not continued

Spain claims that it would be prejudiced in the absence of a stay.” If the Award is
annulled after its enforcement, Spain could not recover the funds in light of Cube’s and

Demeter’s cascade structure, which places the most liquid assets in subsidiaries rather

 

1d, 413.

2 1d., 14.

2! Reply, (34.

2 Td., 9932-35.

3 Submission, 15.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

26.

27.

28.

than in the creditor companies.”4 Spain also raises the possibility of Cube and Demeter
becoming insolvent, paying out the Award to shareholders, assigning their interest in
the Award to third parties, and dissolving altogether as impediments to its ability to

recoup the funds.?>

Spain rejects Cube’s and Demeter’s argument that a right to immediate enforcement of
the Award is the primary guiding principle of the Committee’s analysis.” The right to
seek annulment and a stay of enforcement of an award under the ICSID Convention, as
Spain does now, are equally important and should be considered in determining the risk
of non-recoupment a State faces.”’ In support, Spain cites the ad hoc Committee’s
holding in MTD v. Chile that a State “should not be exposed, while exercising
procedural rights open to it under the Convention, to the risk that payment made under
an award which is eventually annulled may turn out to be irrecoverable from an

insolvent claimant.”

In any case, Spain points out that even if the amount could be recouped, Spain should
not be forced to commit the taxpayer-provided resources and efforts required for the
additional legal proceedings when maintaining the stay could have avoided this
burden.” This burden would be exacerbated by the fact that Cube and Demeter are
based in different EU countries thereby requiring Spain to pursue litigation in various
jurisdictions.*” While Cube and Demeter would be compensated for a potential delay
in payment through interest, no similar provision exists to compensate Spain for the

hardship of recovering the funds.*!

Furthermore, Spain argues that by lifting the stay, “there is a real prejudice that could

be caused to Spain (and third parties)” arising out of Spain’s multiple obligations under

2 Td, W16-17.

2 Reply.

. 455.

26 Id., 57.
2 Td., Y57-58.
28 Id., 458, citing MTD Decision on the Request for a Continued Stay, Spain Annex-32.

9 Submis
£47.

30 Reply.

 

on, 19.

5 1d., 953.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

29.

30.

31.

international law.*? Specifically, if the stay is lifted, Spain will be forced to choose
between complying with the ICSID Convention or the Treaty on the Functioning of the

European Union (the “TFEU”).*

Spain submits that under Article 107(1) of the TFEU, it is restricted from providing aid
that “distorts or threatens to distort” competition and trade between Member States.**
Spain also submits that under Article 108(3) of the TFEU, it must inform the EC of
“any plans to grant State Aid and must not implement such plans before the European
Commission has authorized it.”?> If the EC finds that the State Aid is incompatible with
the standards set out in Articles 107(2) and 107(3) of the TFEU, “the State concerned

shall abolish or alter such aid within a period of time to be determined by the [EC].”*°

Considering the TFEU’s framework, Spain is required to obtain the EC’s authorization
in order to comply with the Award because it constitutes notifiable State Aid.*” That
the Award constitutes notifiable State Aid was determined by the EC’s decision of 10
November 2017 (the “EC Decision”) regarding Spain’s regulatory scheme supporting
renewable measures. ** Accordingly, any payment of the Award by Spain before

receiving the EC’s authorization constitutes a violation of European Union law.*?

Spain submits that lifting the stay and therefore forcing it to decide prematurely whether
to comply with the ICSID Convention or the TFEU would result in undesirable
consequences. Specifically, if Spain decides to comply with its obligations under the

TFEU, it will have to refrain from paying the Award, thereby violating Article 53 of

22 Id., 86.

3 1d. 495.

* Id., 100, citing Consolidated versions of the Treaty on the European Union and the Treaty on the Functioning
of the European Union and the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights (2012/C/326/02), Official Journal of the
European Union C 326/49, 26 October 2012, Spain Annex-49, Article 107(1).

35 Id., 102, citing Id., Article 108(3).

36 Id., 103, citing Id., Article 108(2).

37 Id., 100.

38 Id., 4106, citing Decision C(2017) 7384 of the European Commission, rendered on 10 November 2017,
regarding the Support for Electricity generation from renewable energy sources, cogeneration and waste (S.A.
40348 (2015/NN))), Spain Annex-28.

39 Id., (108.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

32.

33.

34.

the ICSID Convention.*° This could “subject [Spain] to various indirect sanctions”

including proceedings before the International Court of Justice.*!

Tf, on the other hand, Spain decides to comply with the ICSID Convention and the EC
determines that the Award is incompatible State Aid after Cube and Demeter have
obtained payment, Spain would be required to initiate legal proceedings to recover the
amounts paid.’ If Spain fails to recover these amounts, the EC may impose monetary
sanctions on Spain.*? Further, the Parties may find themselves in additional legal
proceedings if Cube and Demeter challenge the EC’s determination. Regardless of its
choice, however, Spain will be forced to face the consequences of the breach it will

have committed.°

Spain rejects Cube’s and Demeter’s characterization of Spain’s conflicts under
international law as “an excuse to avoid complying with the Award.”*° Spain notes that
the procedure it must adhere to before the EC does not create an additional opportunity
for objections to the jurisdiction of the arbitration proceeding or the Award as Cube and
Demeter suggest.*” Spain also points out that Cube and Demeter are subject to EU law

as well and therefore cannot dissociate and benefit from it at the same time.**

Spain contends that once the Committee has resolved the Application, these issues can
be prudently dealt with as Spain’s conflicting obligations under international law will
become moot, narrowed in scope, or at the least, a certainty.*? Thus, continuing the stay

keeps the Parties from having to engage in proceedings that may turn out to be

40 1d., 4196, 99.

41 Jd. 496, citing Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7, Decision on
the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 30 November 2004, Spain Annex-48, 41.
2 Reply, (9187, 117.

3 7d., $194, 117.

4 1d., 488.

+5 Id., 195-96.

*6 7d., 4109, citing Response, {19.

47 7d. (YI10-111.

87d. G121.

* id., 490.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

35.

36.

37.

unnecessary™’ as well as from violating any laws or obligations they are each subject

to.5!

Lastly, Spain submits that the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (the “WCLT”)
counsels against lifting the stay.>? This is pursuant to Articles 30(1) and 30(3) of the
VCLT, which provide that in the event that successive applicable treaties relate to the
same subject matter, “the earlier treaty applies only to the extent that its provisions are
compatible with those of the later treaty.”*? Because Article 53 of the ICSID
Convention and Articles 107 and 108 of the TFEU are applicable to payment under the
Award in a conflicting manner, the ICSID Convention, as the earlier treaty to have been
adopted,*+ can only apply to the extent that it is compatible with the TFEU.*° By
granting the stay, however, the incompatibility between the ICSID Convention and the

TFEU will not materialize, allowing both treaties to be applied without limitation.*°
c) Cube and Demeter will not be harmed if the stay is continued

Spain raises several arguments for why Cube and Demeter will not be prejudiced if the
stay is continued. As the fifth-largest economy in the European Union and the 13" in
the world in terms of GDP, there is no danger of Spain being unable to pay the Award

should the Application ultimately fail.>’

Spain declares that it takes its international
commitments under the ICSID Convention seriously and alleges that the fact that there
is no history of non-compliance further supports why there is no risk that Cube and

Demeter will be unable to obtain payment under the Award.°*

Spain rejects Cube’s and Demeter’s mischaracterization of the Request as proof of

history of non-compliance with arbitral awards and distinguishes the precedent cited by

50 d., 489.

51 Jd. 4122.

32 Id. 4123.

53 Jd., 4123, citing Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 23 May 1969, BOE 17 June 1980, Spain Annex-
52, Article 30.

51d. 4124.

55 Jd. 4127.

56 d., 4128.

57 Subr

  

. 947.

58 Id., 26; Id.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

Cube and Demeter based on the “self-initiated commitment proffered by the Kingdom
of Spain.” °° Spain submits that this should be considered sufficient under the

circumstances and weigh in favour of the stay.

38. Furthermore, Spain argues that even though various ad hoc Committees have
recognized that a delay in payment is insufficient to prejudice the party opposing the
stay of enforcement,°! it has also been routinely found that the payment of interest
remedies any potential delay in the enforcement of an award.” Specifically, Cube and
Demeter would be compensated for the delay by the Award’s terms, which provide that
Cube and Demeter are entitled to interest from 20 June 2014 to the date of payment at

the six-month EURIBOR rate compounded semi-annually.

39. Moreover, should the Application fail, Spain will seek the authorization required from

the EC to pay the Award in a prompt manner. Further, Spain points out that it has

59 Reply, (9148-51.

© Td. 951.

6! Id. 41-42, citing Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Decision on the Argentine
Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 28 December 2007 (“Azurix”), Spain
Annex-31, (22 (“Although the Committee accepts that there may be very exceptional circumstances where a stay
ought not be ordered, that is not the situation here.”); Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation (formerly Enron
Corporation) and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3, Decision on the
Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 7 October 2008, (“Enron”),
Spain Annex-35, 52.

© Submission, 22; Reply, 943, citing MTD Decision on the Request for a Continued Stay, Spain Annex-32, [36
(“Delay [in payment] “which is (...) incidental to the Convention system of annulment (...) can be remedied by
the payment of interest in the event that the annulment application is unsuccessful.”); Azurix, Spain Annex-31,
g40 (“Other than by being put to the effort and expense of defending an annulment request and by the receipt of
funds being delayed (assuming the annulment application to be unsuccessful), the Committee does not accept that
Azurix suffers any prejudice of a kind warranting the provision of security. The provision for interest compensates
for the delay.”); CMS Decision on the Request for a Continued Stay, Spain Annex-33, 50 (“Argentina had
demonstrated that CMS will not be prejudiced by the grant of a stay, other that in respect of the delay which is,
however, incidental to the Convention system of annulment and which can be remedied by the payment of interest
in the event that the annulment application is unsuccessful. As a consequence, the Committee has decided to grant
such a stay without requesting Argentina to provide a bank guarantee.”); Quirobax, Spain Annex-41, 764 (“El
Laudo otorga a las Demandantes intereses compuestos anualmente. Los comités de anulacién han determinado
que los intereses compuestos son suficiente compensacién por la demora que resulta de una suspensién de
ejecucién de un laudo.”); Caratube International Oil Company LLP and Devincci Salah Hourani v. Republic of
Kazakhstan, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/13, Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 12 December 2019,
(“Caratube’), Spain Annex-39, 197 (internal citation omitted).

©3 Submission, (23; Reply, 143.

1d. (27; Id., (37.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

40.

Al.

42.

already notified the EC of the Award and in fact, requested the authorization even

before filing the Application.®

Finally, Spain rejects Cube’s and Demeter’s argument that they would be prejudiced
because “their chances to effectively collect any amount on the Award will be
dramatically reduced.” Spain submits that any prejudice resulting from the stay must
be “fully proven” and rest on “unmistakable proof” rather than mere speculation and
hypothesis as has been provided by Cube and Demeter.®’ In fact, Cube and Demeter
admit that they are not in financial distress or in need of payment of the Award for

viability.
d) The United States Courts’ Decisions

Spain further points out that all of the reasons it now provides as weighing in favour of
the stay have also been used by United States courts to deny enforcement of awards
against Spain that are still pending annulment. Specifically, Spain cites the decisions
of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia in relation to the Antin
award and the award in Novenergia IT Energy & Environment (SCA) v. The Kingdom
of Spain.”

In support of its decision to stay enforcement in both cases, the U.S. court — like Spain
does now — cited Spain’s entitlement to annulment under the ICSID Convention,”! the
efficiency and fairness of staying the enforcement proceedings until resolution of the
annulment is reached,”” the conservation of the parties’ resources,’ the hardship that

Spain would face if the award was prematurely enforced,” the good faith of Spain’s

65 Reply, 149.

66 Id. 36; Response, 25.

61 Td., Y39-40.

68 1d. B8.

© Td. Jol.

7 Td., YI61, 62.

7! [d., 461, citing Order Granting Motion to Stay from the United States District Court for the District of Columbia,
28 August 2019, Spain Annex-43.
2 Id. 61.

B Id, 61.

4 Id. 61.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

43.

44.

4S.

8 1d.,4

annulment proceedings,” and the burden on Spain if it were forced to litigate to recover

assets. 7°
e) The Eiser and Antin Decisions

Finally, Spain argues that Cube’s and Demeter’s invitation for the Committee to follow
the decisions on the stay of enforcement in the Eiser v. Spain and Antin v. Spain cases

should be rejected.””

Spain maintains that the ad hoc Committee in Eiser merely followed the decision of the
ad hoc Committee in Total v. Argentina on key issues and in doing so, deviated from
the standard practice of ICSID ad hoc Committees.”* These key issues include the
interpretation of the word “require” in Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention,” the
relevance of statistics in defining the standard practice of ad hoc Committees,*° which
party should bear the burden of proof,*! and whether the merit of the annulment
application is a relevant factor to consider.*? Spain also makes note of the fact that Ms.

Teresa Cheng was a member of both Committees. **

According to Spain, the approach in Eiser is problematic because it imposes a “strict
and nearly impossible standard” of proof for a stay of enforcement request without
providing guidance on the type of circumstances that would suffice.** Spain submits
that the uncertainty and difficulty created by Eiser in understanding the ICSID

Convention should dissuade the Committee from adopting the same approach.*

[61.

76 [d., {63, citing Memorandum Opinion on the Order Granting Motion to Stay from the United States District
Court for the District of Columbia, 27 January 2020 in the Civil Action No. 18-cv-01148 (TSC), Spain Annex-

“1d,
S1d.,4

(74.
(174-75.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

46.

47.

48.

Spain further discourages the Committee from using Eiser as precedent based on the
dissimilar circumstances of that case. Spain points out that while the ad hoc Committee
in Eiser lifted the stay relying, in part, on the undertaking offered by the annulment
respondents to repay any amount received under the award, Cube and Demeter have
made no such offer.*° Spain also distinguishes Eiser based on the fact that the EC had
not been notified of the Eiser award at the time the ad hoc Committee made its decision,
in contrast with the state of affairs of this case.8’ Lastly, Spain submits that the Eiser
decision did not give adequate consideration to the question of EU law due to the

Committee’s “difficulty coming to a clear understanding” of the issue.**

As for the Antin decision, Spain contends that the ad hoc Committee replicated what
was done in Ejiser to the contrary of the common practice of ICSID ad hoc
Committees.*? Spain draws parallels between the two decisions on issues such as the
position taken regarding Spain’s conflicts,” the lack of guidance provided on the role
of interest payment,”! and the disregard for the merits of the annulment application.”
Regarding its conflicting obligations under international law, Spain notes that the Antin
decision was “especially flawed” due to the Committee’s failure to understand that the
conflict existed and suggestion that it had been created by Spain rather than by the

annulment respondents.°?
3. Whether Security Should Be Ordered

Spain submits that security should not be a condition for continuing the stay for three
reasons. First, such an order would put Cube and Demeter in a better position than they
would be in if no annulment proceeding was commenced.” Security should only be

required in instances where it is shown that the award creditor would be prejudiced by

°% Submission, 28; Reply, 1140.

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

49.

50.

51.

52.

the continuation of the stay.*° In the present case, Cube and Demeter have failed to

prove that security is required.°°

Furthermore, Spain argues that the conditions proposed by Cube and Demeter are
“completely unacceptable” as they would force Spain to pay an “exorbitant”
commission, which is not foreseen in the ICSID Convention.” In fact, Spain submits
that this commission is essentially a penalization for requesting annulment, which in

turn infringes on its right under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention.”*

Moreover, the EC’s authorization would be required in order to place the funds into an
escrow account or to obtain a bank guarantee as proposed by Cube and Demeter.”
Therefore, conditioning the stay would trigger Spain’s conflicting obligations under

international law and their respective consequences on the Parties. !°

Spain submits that for these reasons, its commitment to comply with the Award,
initiated efforts to obtain the EC’s authorization, and the provision of interest under the

Award are sufficient, thereby making the conditions or securities superfluous.!°!
B. Cube’s and Demeter’s Position

Cube and Demeter ask that the continuation of the provisional stay of enforcement of
the Award be denied. They argue that the prevailing practice of ICSID ad hoc
Committees has been mischaracterized by Spain and that circumstances do not warrant
a stay of enforcement of the Award. Further, Cube and Demeter petition for adequate

security from Spain if the stay is granted.

% Jd., 423, citing Victor Pey Casado, Spain Annex-30, {29.

° Reply, 1138.

97 Id, (138-139.

%8 d., 4139.

* id. 4141.

100 Td., F141.

1 Id., 142-143, citing Azurix, Spain Annex-31, (422, 25, 37, 40.

15

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

1. The Applicable Legal Standard

53. Cube and Demeter argue that Spain has failed to set out the relevant legal test for the
standard used to determine an application for a stay of enforcement. They reject Spain’s
submission that a permanent stay of enforcement is the norm during the pendency of
ICSID annulment proceedings as being outmoded jurisprudence that “mischaracterizes
the prevailing practice.”!°* Relying on recent ICSID jurisprudence, Cube and Demeter
state that “committees have consistently found that stays of enforcement are not
automatic and there should be no presumption in favor of a stay.”!°? Instead, “there

must be some circumstances present that speak in favor of granting [or continuing] a

9104

stay’ as exemplified by the ad hoc Committee in Occidental v. Ecuador, a decision

used by Spain in support of its Request.

102 Response, 5; Rejoinder, 2.

103 1d,, 8, f. 8, citing Ioannis Kardassopolous and Ron Fuchs v. Georgia, I\CSID Case Nos. ARB/O5/18 and
ARB/07/15, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 12 November 2010
(“Kardassopolous”), Respondents’ CL-174, {26 (“Consonant with the extraordinary nature of the annulment
remedy, the stay of the enft isan to the ICSID enfe regime. Stay of during
the annulment proceeding is by no way automatic, quite to the contrary, a stay is contingent upon the existence of
relevant circumstances which must be proven by the Applicant”); Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of
Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8, Decision on Applicant’s Request for Continued Stay of Enforcement of the
Award, 7 May 2012, Respondents’ CL-175, 43; SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of
Paraguay, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/29, Decision on Stay, 22 March 2013, (“SGS Société”), Respondents’ CL-
176, 82; Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation v Republic of Chile, ICSD Case no. ARB/98/2,
Decision on the Republic of Chile’s Request for a Stay of Enforcement of the Unannulled Portion of the Award
— Supplementary Decision, 16 May 2013, Respondents’ CL-177, 140; Elsamex SA v Republic of Honduras,
ICSID Case No. ARB/09/4, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of
the Award, 11 March 2014, Respondents’ CL-178, {90 (“This Committee shares the opinion that under the
ICSID Convention system, the continuation of the suspension is not automatic, nor is there a presumption in its
favor”); Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/01, Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the
Award, 4 December 2014 (“Total”), Respondents’ CL-179, 70-73, 75; Flughafen Ziirich A.G. and Gestion e
Ingenieria IDC S.A. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/19, Decision on the
Termination of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 11 March 2016 (“Flughafen”), Respondents’ CL-180,
56; O! European Group B.V. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/25, Decision on.
Stay Enforcement of the Award, 4 April 2016 (“OI European”), Respondents’ CL-181, 87-89; Churchill
Mining Ple and Planet Mining Pty Ltd v. Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/14 and 12/40, D
on the Request for Continued Stay of the Enforcement of the Award, 27 June 2017 (“Churchill Mini
Respondents’ CL-182, 34; Eiser Infrastructure Limited and Energia Solar Luxembourg S.a r.l. v. Kingdom of
Spain, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/36, Annulment Proceedings, Decision on Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 23
March 2018 (“Kiser”), Respondents’ CL-183, 48 (“The Committee fails to see any textual support in the ICSID
Convention or in the Arbitration Rules for the notion that there is a presumption in favor of granting a request for
stay. (...) In this regard, the Committee does not consider that the stay of enforcement is automatic.”).
104'Response, {[7, citing Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/02/16,
Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request or a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 5 March 2009
(“Sempra”), Respondents’ CL-173, (27.

 

 

  

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

54. Cube and Demeter also contend that even the case law provided by Spain confirms the
new trend. Specifically, Cube and Demeter note that out of the eleven public decisions
on stay of enforcement requests from 2016 and 2017, only two of the requests were
granted unconditionally while five were denied and four were granted with some form

of condition.

55. Furthermore, Cube and Demeter point out that a stay of enforcement, like the remedy
of annulment itself, is an exception while “immediate enforcement is the rule.”! In
support of its position, Cube and Demeter cite the ad hoc Committee’s remark in
Burlington v. Ecuador that “the stay of enforcement is an exception in the context of
the remedy of annulment that is itself limited and exceptional”! as well as the SGS v.
Paraguay ad hoc Committee, which noted that “only in very specific cases where the

circumstances so require, may enforcement be stayed.” !*

56. It is therefore Cube’s and Demeter’s position that although the ICSID Convention does
not use the word “exceptional,” the stay of enforcement is an exceptional measure

requiring special circumstances or, in other words, a high threshold to be met.!°°

57. Cube and Demeter contend that the use of the term “require” in Article 52(5) of the

ICSID Convention, as opposed to “other less categorical verbs, such as ‘recommend,’

> 110

‘deserve,’ ‘justify’ or similar words’ establishes a “high bar for imposing or

continuing a stay.”''' Cube and Demeter cite the ad hoc Committee’s decision in
Border Timbers v. Zimbabwe stating that “not just any circumstances, even if relevant

to the case, may justify a stay; the circumstances must be sufficiently compelling so as

to ‘require’ a stay.”!!?

05 Rejoinder, 44, citing Spain Annex-38.

16 Response, 9; Rejoinder, 18.

07 Td., 49; Id., 410, citing Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, (CSID Case No. ARB/08/5, Decision
on Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 31 August 2017 (“Burlington”), Respondents’ CL-184, (73.

108 Response, 9, citing SGS Société, Respondents’ CL-176, 185.

'09 Rejoinder, 19.

410 Response, {10, citing Of European, Respondents’ CL-181, (89.

1 7d., 10.

12 [d., 410; Rejoinder 9, citing Border Timbers Limited, Timber Products International (Private) Limited, and
Hangani Development Co. (Private) Limited, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/25, Decision on Stay of Enforcement of
the Award, 24 April 2017 (“Border Timbers”), Respondents’ CL-185, {78.

17

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

58. Cube and Demeter state that because there is no presumption in favour of the stay of
enforcement of the Award, Spain bears the burden of establishing that “sufficiently
compelling circumstances require continuation of the stay.”!!? That Spain bears the
burden of proof is established by Article 54(4) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules and

confirmed by arbitral case law.!!+

59. Further, Cube and Demeter reject the notion that the burden of proof on certain issues
falls onto them as a matter of logic, as stated by Spain, arguing that whether a party
bears the burden of proof is only a matter of law that cannot be altered by the
discretionary power of an ad hoc Committee.'!> The only burden of proof they bear is
establishing the veracity of the facts alleged in response to the Request.!'® Thus,
according to Cube and Demeter, the award debtor is tasked with identifying the
necessary circumstances as well as establishing their compelling nature which in turn
justifies granting the stay with the burden shifting to the opposing party only in the

event that a request to modify or terminate the stay is filed.'!7

60. In addition, Cube and Demeter point out that statistics actually weigh in favour of
rejecting the Request as six of the eight publicly available decisions since 2016 rejected
the request to continue the stay and two additional ones were granted but with

conditions.!!® Further, Cube and Demeter state that in light of the fact that more than

 

113 Jd, Y15 (emphasis in original); Rejoinder, 996, 12, citing Occidental, Spain Annex-29, 50; Eiser,
Respondents’ CL-183, 53 (Consequently, it is for the party requesting the stay to demonstrate that there are
circumstances that will justify or merit the granting or continuation of the stay (...) it is clear that the party who
is against, or wants to, lift the stay is also entitled to put forward arguments and evidence to support its case. This,
in our view, does not affect the proposition that the party requesting the stay bears, in the first instance, the burden
to substantiate such request”); SGS Société, Respondents’ CL-176, 186 (“Based on the plain language of Rule
54(4) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, it is also clear to the Committee that the party interested in the continued
stay bears the burden of proof to demonstrate the existence of circumstances that warrant said continuation.”).
114 Rejoinder, {{14-16, citing Sempra, Respondents’ CL-173, (27; Victor Pey, Respondents’ CL-177, (36-37;
SGS Société, Respondents’ CL-176, 88; Border Timbers, Respondents’ CL-185, 180.

15 Td. 13,17.

116 Td. G18.

117 Td. YO, 14.

118 Response, G11; Rejoinder, 4, citing Tenaris S.A. and Talta - Trading e Marketing Sociedade Unipessoal Lda.
v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, \CSID Case No. ARB/11/26, Annulment Proceedings, Decision on the
Request to Maintain the Stay of Enforcement, 24 March 2017, Respondents’ CL-186, 94; Saint-Gobain
Performance Plastics Europe v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, 1CSID Case No. ARB/12/13, Annulment
Proceedings, Procedural Order No. 2 dated 24 October 2018, Respondents’ CL-187, 25; Tenaris S.A. and Talta
- Trading e Marketing Sociedade Unipessoal Lda. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No.
ARB/12/23, Decision on Annulment, 28 December 2018, Respondents’ CL-188, 22; Valores Mundiales, S.L.

 

18

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

half of annulment cases have not been accompanied by requests for stays of
enforcement, “the more informative statistic” is that the majority of annulment cases

have not issued stays of enforcement.!!°

6l. Ultimately, however, Cube and Demeter argue that statistics should not be viewed in
isolation and are not determinative as Spain suggests. '7° Instead, they must be
considered together with the legal standard applied as well as the fact-specific
circumstances given that all ad hoc Committees have reached a decision by conducting

a “case-by-case analysis and only refer to case law to determine the relevant legal

criteria.”!?!
2. Whether the Circumstances Require a Stay
62. In determining whether circumstances warrant approval of the application, Cube and

Demeter agree with Spain on three factors that should be considered: (i) the likelihood
of compliance with the Award if the annulment application is unsuccessful; (ii) the
hardship faced by each party if the Award is immediately enforced or not; and (iii) the
risk of non-recoupment following a decision on annulment. !?? Cube and Demeter
submit, however, that all factors weigh in favour of Cube and Demeter, not Spain, and

therefore, in favour of lifting the stay of enforcement. !??

63. Further, Cube and Demeter reject Spain’s reliance on the merit of the Application as a
factor that the Committee should consider in deciding the Request.'* In their view,

“the strength of an application for annulment is normally irrelevant to decide whether

and Consorcio Andino S.L. v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/11, Decision on the
Request for a Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 6 September 2018, Respondents’ CL-171,
113; Eiser, CL-183, 156; Infras Services L g S.a.rl. and Energia Termosolar
B.V. (formerly Antin Infrastructure Services Luxembourg S.d.r.l. and Antin Energia Termosolar B.V.) v. Kingdom
of Spain, 1CSID Case No. ARB/13/31, Decision on the Continuation of the Provisional Stay of Enforcement of
the Award, 21 October 2019 (“Antin’”), Respondents’ CL-189, 185; Karkey Karadeniz Elektrik Uretim A.S. v.
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/13/1, Annulment Proceeding, Decision on the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award dated 22 February 2018 (“Karkey”), Respondents’ CL-190, 132-135; Churchill
Mining, Respondents’ CL-182, 43.

119 Rejoinder, (3.

120 Rejoinder, 95-7.

121 Rejoinder, 5.

122 Response, 15; Rejoinder, 922.

123 Id. G5.

24 Rejoinder, 21.

 

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

64.

65.

66.

125

Response, {12 (emphas

a stay of enforcement should be continued.”'?° As the ad hoc Committee in Total v.
Argentina noted, “a serious application is the least that can be expected from an
applicant, and nowhere in the ICSID Convention — or in the practice of ad-hoc
committees — [does] compliance with such minimum duty resul[t] in the extension of
the stay.”!?° Thus, the annulment application only becomes relevant if it is manifestly

devoid of any merit, in which case a stay should not be imposed or continued. !2”

Cube and Demeter point out that the cases cited by Spain in support of its argument
regarding the seriousness of the Application merely considered whether the annulment
application was dilatory or frivolous as a threshold matter “since a finding that the
annulment application was dilatory or frivolous would obviate the need of the

annulment committee to further consider the question of the stay.”!?8

a) Spain is unlikely to comply with the Award if its request for

annulment fails

Cube and Demeter contend that there is a real risk that Spain would fail to comply with
the Award. They dismiss Spain’s claim of a strong economy as being irrelevant to the
issue and instead point out Spain’s (i) reluctance to set unfavourable precedent; (ii)
record of non-compliance with past ICSID awards; and (iii) statements regarding the
need for the EC’s authorization in order to pay as proof of the likelihood of non-

compliance.

In this context, Cube and Demeter refer to the “dozens of other arbitral awards in
relation to the same renewable energy measures that were at issue in this case” as one
of the underlying reasons for Spain’s reluctance to voluntarily pay the amount due
under the Award.!”° They point out that by complying with one award, Spain would

probably be forced to comply with all the others as well.!*°

  

in original).

'26 Td., 413; Rejoinder, {27, citing Total, Respondents’ CL-179, 183-84.
"2 MTD Decision on the Request for a Continued Stay, 28

28 Rejoinder, (26.

29 Response, {17.

130 Td., 17; Rejoinder, 29.

20

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

67. Cube and Demeter challenge the accuracy of Spain’s statements regarding its history
of compliance with ICSID awards. There are currently “over 50 treaty claims filed
against Spain at ICSID and other venues — worth a combined US$ 7.3 billion,” which
have produced at least fourteen final awards against Spain.'*! Cube and Demeter note
that Spain has failed to pay the amounts due under these awards even though many are
immediately enforceable and cite the Eiser and Antin awards as recent examples of

Spain’s non-compliance. !*7

68. Cube and Demeter further maintain that Spain’s statement that it would only comply
with the Award after obtaining authorization from the EC “creates serious doubts as to
whether Spain ultimately will pay” and contradicts the terms of the ICSID Convention
as well as Spain’s obligations under international law.'*? Cube and Demeter also reject
the notion that Spain needs EC-approval in the first place and argue that if requested,

the EC would not easily give its authorization. "4

69. Cube and Demeter argue that the EC has a history of blocking enforcement of ICSID
awards against EU Member States in intra-EU disputes and is generally hostile to intra-

EU investment arbitration.'*° Coupled with Spain’s

 

similar position against intra-EU
arbitration expressed in the Application and this case’s proceedings, Cube and Demeter
contend that “it is difficult to accept Spain’s hollow promise that it will pay.”!*° In
further support of this argument, Cube and Demeter cite Micula v. Romania, where the
ad hoc Committee found that by conditioning the award’s enforcement “on the

European Commission’s interpretation of European Union law,” Romania had

13174, 18, citing C. Sanderson, Spain offers incentives to end renewables claims, GLOBAL ARBITRATION
REVIEW, 22 November 2019, Respondents’ CL-192, p.

132 Jd. 418: Rejoinder, 29, citing Eiser, Respondents? tL. 183: Antin, Respondents’ CL-189.

133 Response, 19.

134 Td,, J20; Rejoinder, 31.

135 Id., 20; Rejoinder, 931, citing Jarrod Hepburn, Micula brothers score enforcement victory, as EU General
Court annuls Commission’s decision to prohibit Romania from paying ICSID award, 1A Reporter, 18 June 2019,
Respondents’ CL-205 p.1 (“In a judgment rendered on June 18, 2019, the General Court of the European Union
has annulled the European Commission’s decision to bar Romania from complying with the 2013 ICSID award
rendered in favour of Swedish investors Ioan Micula and Viorel Micula and a number of corporate entities
controlled by them. The Commission decision, which we covered here, had found that any Romanian payment to
the Miculas would breach EU state aid rules. The General Court has now annulled the Commission decision,
thereby potentially removing an obstacle to enforcement of the underlying ICSID award.”).

136 Response, 922.

21

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

70.

71.

72.

indicated a

with.?137

“probable risk’ that the payment obligations would not be complied

b) The hardship factor weighs in favour of Cube and Demeter

Cube and Demeter submit that ad hoc Committees often consider the hardship that
would result to the parties if the stay is continued or lifted in deciding whether to grant
a request to continue a stay of enforcement. In the present case, this consideration
weighs in favour of Cube and Demeter because Spain has not shown that it will suffer
material hardship should the stay be lifted but Cube and Demeter would face significant

harm without the lift.

Cube and Demeter contend that their “chances to effectively collect any amount on the
Award will be dramatically reduced” if the stay is continued. '** This effect is attributed
to Spain’s likely refusal to voluntarily pay the Award thereby creating the need for Cube
and Demeter to enforce the Award against those limited assets which are not protected
by sovereign immunity of execution.'*? Cube and Demeter note that in this scenario,

the strength of Spain’s economy is irrelevant.'#°

Further, Cube and Demeter submit that this problem is exacerbated by the numerous
other awards pending payment from Spain, which total approximately EUR 915 million
but is likely to rise by the time the Committee issues a decision on annulment.'4! That
these pending awards represent a real risk to Cube’s and Demeter’s ability to collect
any amount under the Award if the stay is continued is demonstrated by the recent

enforcement of the Eiser and Antin awards by the Federal Court of Australia. !47

57 Response, (22, citing Joan Micula, Viorel Micula, and others v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/20,
Decision on Annulment, 26 February 2016, Respondents’ CL-207, 135.

38 Response, [25 (emphasis in original).

139 Td., 425; Rejoinder, 439.

40 Rejoinder, 39.

41 Response, 25.

142

Rejoinder, 40, citing S. Perry, Spain solar awards enforced in Australia, Global Arbitration review, 24

February 2020, Respondents’ CL-210.

22

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

723.

74.

75.

In addition, Cube and Demeter state that the notion of interest as compensation for any
delay in enforcement is “wholly unfounded.”!*? They submit that post-award interest is
meant to encourage prompt payment and compensate for the “time value of money
Spain should have already paid” rather than for dramatically increased risk of not being
paid at all.'*+ Interest does not, however, grant the State permission to delay payment
as Spain suggests. '4° In support, Cube and Demeter cite the Antin Committee’s holding

that:

the payment of interest should not be considered a sufficient remedy for
any prejudice caused by a delay in the Award's enforcement. ... Given that
the prejudice complained of by the Claimants directly relates to difficulties
in enforcement (and not the loss of use of the funds under the Award), the
payment of interest is not an adequate remedy.'*°

Furthermore, Cube and Demeter submit that even if they faced no harm as a result of
the stay of enforcement, the fact that Spain would not suffer from lifting the stay means

fied.'*” This was established by the

 

that the stay is not required and therefore not jus
Antin Committee when it noted that lifting the stay is favoured if neither party is
seriously affected by whether the stay is continued “because ‘Article 52(5) of the ICSID
Convention calls for circumstances ‘requiring’ a stay’ and because ‘there is no

presumption in favour of continuing a stay.””!48

Thus, Cube and Demeter reject Spain’s position that a stay should be lifted only in the
face of “unmistakable proof’ of hardship to the party opposing the stay as being
contradictory to the ICSID Convention." They reiterate that the burden, pursuant to
the ICSID Convention, is not for them to establish unmistakable proof of hardship in
order for the stay to be lifted but rather for Spain to prove that circumstances require its

continuation. !°°

43 Response, 26.

44 Td., 426; Rejoinder, 41.

45 Rejoinder, 41.

446 Response, 27, citing Antin, Respondents’ CL-189, 82.
47 1d., (28.

448 Response, 28, citing Antin, Respondents’ CL-189, 81.
49 Rejoinder, 42, citing Reply, 140.

150 7d, 443.

23

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

76.

77.

78.

79.

Moreover, regarding the potential harm to Spain, Cube and Demeter point out that the
Award’s “relatively modest” size will not be damaging to Spain, especially since,
according Spain itself, it has one of the strongest economies in the world.'*! Further,
the only harm that Spain alleged — non-recoupment of sums paid under the Award if it
is eventually annulled — is not a real proven risk in this case but rather mere speculation
by Spain.!°?

Cube and Demeter submit that Spain’s reliance on the decisions issued by the United
States court is ineffective. Cube and Demeter point out that the standard used by the
court differs from the one used by ad hoc Committees. 153 Moreover, Cube and Demeter
argue that the main reason that the U.S. court decided to stay enforcement in the cases
cited by Spain is because the adjudicatory bodies hearing the underlying proceedings —
the Svea Court of Appeal and an ICSID ad hoc Committee — had each stayed the
enforcement of the respective awards. !** That this was the court’s rationale is evidenced
by its request in the Antin case to remain informed by the parties of the pending ICSID

proceedings. !°°

Regarding the alleged hardship stemming from Spain’s conflicting international
obligations, Cube and Demeter submit that the argument is “fundamentally flawed.” *°
Cube and Demeter challenge the existence of a conflict and state that Spain “fabricated
this alleged conflict, with the help of the EC, for the sole purpose of avoiding its

payment obligations for as long as possible.” !*”

Cube and Demeter contend that Spain was not required to notify the EC of the Award
because it does not constitute State Aid as defined by Article 107 of the TFEU.!°*

Spain’s exclusive reliance on the EC Decision to classify the Award as State Aid is

'5! Response, {24.
182 1d, 924.

'53 Rejoinder, 44.
84 Rejoinder, (44.

155

Id., J46, citing Order Granting Motion to Stay from the United States District Court for the District of

Columbia, 28 August 2019, Spain Annex-43, pg.9.
156 Td., 56.
1ST 1d, 457.
158 Td., 467.

24

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

questioned by Cube and Demeter on the basis that the EC Decision did not “address
whether the original incentives framework that formed the basis of the underlying
arbitration in the present case was state aid at all.”!*? Cube and Demeter take further
issue with Spain’s reliance on the EC Decision because they consider the EC to have
improperly exceeded its scope by addressing the arbitrations against Spain under the
ECT based on “hypothetical eventual scenarios and without any analysis of an actual
situation of purported State aid” or consideration of the criterions necessary for a State
Aid determination, thereby exposing the political nature of its statements.'®° Cube and
Demeter also note that the Award did not exist at the time the EC Decision was rendered

and therefore, could not have been considered by the EC. 161

80. Additionally, Cube and Demeter compare the EC Decision to the EC’s 2015 decision
prohibiting Romania from paying an ICSID award and note that in the latter, the EC
actually found that the measures underlying that award were incompatible State Aid

whereas in the former, no such finding is made. 162

81. Cube and Demeter point out that the General Court of the European Union (the
“GCEU”) overturned the EC’s 2015 decision, notably holding that “under its case-law,
compensation for damage suffered did not constitute State aid unless it represented
compensation for the withdrawal of aid that was unlawful.”!® Thus, Cube and Demeter
argue that because nothing suggests that the compensation in the present case is for
withdrawal of unlawful State Aid — to the contrary, the evidence indicates that Spain’s
original incentive regime, RD 661/2007, was not State Aid given that Spain did not

notify the EC of it and the EC itself did not initiate an independent investigation into

159 Td., 68.

460 Td., 468-72.

161 Td., 469.

162 7d., 73, citing Jarrod Hepburn, Micula brothers score enforcement victory, as EU General Court annuls
Commission’s decision to prohibit Romania from paying ICSID award, 1A Reporter, 18 June 2019, Respondents’
CL-205, p.1 (“In a judgment rendered on June 18, 2019, the General Court of the European Union has annulled
the European Commission’s decision to bar Romania from complying with the 2013 ICSID award rendered in
favour of Swedish investors Ioan Micula and Viorel Micula and a number of corporate entities controlled by them.
The Commission decision, which we covered here, had found that any Romanian payment to the Miculas would
breach EU state aid rules.”).

63 7d., 74, citing Jarrod Hepburn, Micula brothers score enforcement victory, as EU General Court annuls
Commission’s decision to prohibit Romania from paying ICSID award, IA Reporter, 18 June 2019, Respondents’
CL-205, p.2.

 

  

25

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

82.

83.

84.

85.

this issue — the EC Decision, to the extent it concerns RD 661/2007, is grounded on a

premise that is inconsistent with EU law.'*

Ultimately, Cube and Demeter maintain that there is no indication that the EC has “ever
validly prevented a Member State from complying with the terms of an ICSID Award”
and that by informing the EC of the Award, Spain was intentionally establishing the
necessary circumstances to raise the alleged conflict as grounds for the Request. '°> The

alleged conflict is thus “nothing more than a convenient litigation posture.” !°

Cube and Demeter submit, however, that even if the conflict exists, it is a result of
Spain’s decision to enter into conflicting treaties and the Committee should not allow
Spain to rely on “the consequences of resolving this self-inflicted conflict to justify a
stay of enforcement.”!%’ In support, Cube and Demeter cite the Antin Committee’s
finding that “it would it would be unfair to the Claimants if the Award was stayed due
to a legal conundrum of the Applicant’s own making. Insofar as the Applicant willingly
chose to undertake international obligations that may conflict with each other, it cannot

thereafter complain of prejudice once these conflicts arise.” !°*

Further, Cube and Demeter point out that that even if the conflict exists and the
Committee decides to consider it as a source of hardship for Spain, the consequences
must be acute enough to justify continuance of the stay.'© In other words, Spain must
prove that without the stay, there will be “catastrophic, immediate and irreversible
consequences.” '”° However, Cube and Demeter argue that Spain has not met this

burden.

Cube and Demeter contend that Spain would not need to violate any of its international

obligations to resolve the conflict because rather than choose between them, as Spain

'64 Rejoinder, 74.

165 Td. W173, 75.

466 Td, 475.

161 1d., 457.

168 Td., 57, citing Antin, Respondents’ CL-189, 176.

169 1d., 458.

90 Td., 458, citing Maritime International Nominees Establishment (MINE) v. Republic of Guinea, ICSID Case
No. ARB/84/4, Interim Order No. 1 on Guinea’s Application for Stay of Enforcement of the Award, 12 August
1988, 27.

26

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

86.

87.

88.

11 Rej
12 p

submits, Spain could, and should, reconcile the obligations. !7! Nonetheless, assuming
that Spain would in fact have to choose between its international obligations, Cube and
Demeter note that the consequences of doing so would not be “catastrophic, immediate
and irreversible consequences” and therefore, do not warrant continuing the stay of

enforcement. !””

Cube and Demeter submit that Spain would not be forced to expend large sums either
to recover amounts paid to Cube and Demeter or to defend itself from their challenge
of the EC’s future decision.'” Spain fails to explain how it would incur any significant
legal costs to recover those amounts paid if the EC finds that payment to Cube and
Demeter constitutes impermissible State Aid before this annulment proceeding
concludes, which it is unlikely to do anyways. !74 Tf, on the other hand, Cube and
Demeter were to challenge the EC’s findings, Spain’s participation in the proceedings
would not be required.'’> Regardless, Cube and Demeter point out that incurring legal
fees is not within the realm of the kind of hardship that warrants a continued stay of

enforcement. !7°

In addition, Cube and Demeter reject the notion of a financial sanction on Spain by the
EC as a hardship warranting continuance of the stay in light of the fact that a number
of hypothetical events — ranging from a decision by the EC that the Award is
incompatible State Aid to a decision by the European Court of Justice against Spain —
would all need to occur before the end of this annulment proceeding, an unlikely

scenario. !7”

The allegation that Spain could be subject to a diplomatic protection claim from France
and Luxembourg is dismissed by Cube and Demeter as a “fanciful” concern since no

such claim is known to exist or is cited by Spain.'”® Cube and Demeter note that because

joinder, 159.

2 Id., 460.

173

 

ld.,
4 Id,,
"8 Id.,
"6 Id.,
" Xd.,
"8 Id.,

461.
462.
62.
462.
463.
64.

27

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

89.

90.

91.

France, Luxembourg, and Spain are all EU Member States, a diplomatic protection

claim or proceeding before the International Court of Justice is “highly doubtful.”!””

Cube and Demeter contend that Spain’s concern regarding the reputational damage it
would suffer from violating its international obligations is “nothing more than litigation
posturing.” !*° Cube and Demeter cite the fourteen investment cases in which Spain was
found liable and its failure to abide by any of them as evidence of its lack of concern

for its reputation. '*!
c) Spain does not face any real risk of non-recoupment

Cube and Demeter submit that although risk of non-recoupment may be considered by
an ad hoc Committee in deciding whether to continue a stay of enforcement, Spain has
not established that it faces such a risk.'$* Merely asserting that it will have to recoup
the amounts paid, as Spain did, is insufficient. '*? The SGS v. Paraguay ad hoc
Committee stated that “that the losing party may have to pay the award only later to be
reimbursed ‘is the natural consequence of the enforcement regime created by the ICSID
Convention, where a stay is the exception and not the rule.’””!*+ The Eiser and Antin ad
hoc Committees echoed this principle in their respective decisions. '* Thus,
continuance of a stay requires the award-creditor to establish the existence of a real and

proven risk of non-recoupment.!*°

Cube and Demeter do not argue that Spain’s right to seek a stay is subordinate to their
right to immediate enforcement. '*” However, they point out that unlike Spain’s right to

seek a stay, which is conditioned upon proof of circumstances requiring the stay, their

181 74, 65.

182 Response, 29; Rejoinder, 134.

183 Td. q29.

184 1q,, 429, citing SGS Société, Respondents’ CL-176, 193.

185 1d, 429, citing Eiser, Respondents’ CL-189, 72 (“In the Committee’s view, the burdens and risks raised by
the Applicant are common to virtually all annulment applications. They are, as the Claimants put it, a natural

of the Such cannot, as at 67 above, be

sufficient to require a stay.”).
186 7d, 429; Rejoinder, 32.
187 Rejoinder, 33.

28

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

 

right to immediate enforcement is not subject to whether Spain has initiated annulment
proceedings. '**This suggests that the ICSID Convention contemplates that the award-
debtor will have to engage in recoupment efforts thereby precluding such efforts from

constituting the necessary circumstance for a continued stay.!®°

92. Citing the Antin Committee, Cube and Demeter contend that a real risk of non-
recoupment would be present if Cube and Demeter were in “financial distress or on the
brink of insolvency.”'°° Cube and Demeter point out, however, that Spain rightfully did
not allege either of these circumstances since they are inapplicable to Cube and
Demeter. |”!

93. Further, Cube and Demeter contend that Spain — not them — bears the burden of
establishing the risk of non-recoupment and reject the grounds that have been used by
Spain to advance its position. '°

94. Cube and Demeter declare that they have assets outside of the photovoltaic and hydro
facilities implicated in these proceedings and, in fact, both companies are “highly-
diverse with assets in many industries and areas of the world.”!°

95. In addition, Cube and Demeter point out that Spain’s logic regarding the increased
liquidity of the plants as opposed to shares of other companies is flawed.'°* They submit
that “attaching and selling shares is a fundamentally simpler endeavour than attaching
and selling a fixed asset.” !°°

96. Furthermore, Cube and Demeter state that their good reputations and financial health
negates Spain’s assumption that Cube and Demeter would be unwilling to repay the
amounts owed.!°° Further, Cube and Demeter describe Spain’s string of questions

188 Td. 933.

189 Td. 933.

190 Response, 930, citing Antin, Respondents’ CL-189, 473.

191 Td. 4B0.

12 Td. 30; Rejoinder, 135.

qBl.

194 Td. BL.

195 Td. BL.

196 Td. 32.

29

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

97.

98.

99.

100.

regarding its ability to recoup sums paid to Cube and Demeter as insufficient and

reiterate that the risk must be established through evidence, not mere enquiry.'°”

Cube and Demeter reject the role that compensation plays in the context of the risk of
non-recoupment as proposed by Spain.!** Specifically, Cube and Demeter note that if
the ICSID Convention contemplates the possibility that the award-debtor will have to
engage in recoupment efforts without more, then the Committee should not consider

those same efforts to “constitute a ‘hardship’ that warrants ‘compensation’.”!°?

For these reasons, Cube and Demeter submit that the core principle of finality under
the ICSID Convention combined with Spain’s failure to establish compelling

circumstances counsel against continuance of the stay of the Award’s enforcement.
d) The Eiser and Antin decisions

Cube and Demeter submit that the decisions of the ad hoc Committees in Eiser and
Antin include “certain legal and factual findings that directly bear” on the Request and

reject Spain’s analysis of the two cases.7°

Concerning legal findings, Cube and Demeter argue that Eiser and Antin confirm the
trend to deny requests to continue the stay of enforcement.””! Specifically, the Eiser
decision stated that there is no presumption in favour of the stay and that the burden to

prove that circumstances require the stay falls on Spain.?°?

Meanwhile, the Antin
decision held that unless Spain can establish that it will suffer an “unusual degree of
prejudice” without the stay, then the stay must be lifted.”°? Finally, regarding non-
recoupment, both decisions found that a real risk of non-recoupment — such as

insolvency on behalf of the award-creditor — must be shown by Spain because the mere

7 Rejoinder, { 36, citing Reply, 1954-55.

98 Td., 437.

99 Td., 937.

200 7d., 448.

201 7d., 449, citing Eiser, Respondents’ CL-183, 156; Antin, Respondents’ CL-189, (85.

20

® Id., 449, citing Eiser, Respondents’ CL-183, 1947-48, 53.
283 Jd., 449, citing Antin, Respondents’ CL-189, {81.

30

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

fact that an award-debtor may need to recoup sums paid is insufficient to justify

continuing the stay.2°*

101. On factual findings, Cube and Demeter submit that Eiser and Antin are illustrative of
the circumstances that investors in the renewable energy sector face in enforcing awards
against Spain, which in turn counsel against granting the Request." Specifically, Cube
and Demeter argue that in light of the fact that the Eiser and Antin stays have been lifted
but remain unpaid, they show that Spain will probably also refuse to comply with the
Award if the Application fails.?°° Further, Cube and Demeter contend that Eiser and
Antin highlight the financial hardship they will face as a result of the reduced likelihood
of their ability to collect on the Award if the Request is granted and urge the Committee
to follow the reasoning in Antin regarding the inadequacy of interest as a remedy for
difficulty in enforcement.?”

102. Cube and Demeter find Spain’s criticisms of Eiser and Antin unavailing on several
grounds. They argue that “there is nothing remarkable or untoward about an ad hoc
committee referring to decisions of other ad hoc committees, and there is no indication

that either committee unduly relied on the findings of the other” as Spain suggests."

103. In addition, Cube and Demeter point out that Spain’s repeated arguments regarding the
burden of proof, the merit of the Application, and the role of interest as compensation
are meritless and have already addressed.?

104. Cube and Demeter also note that while Spain describes the legal standard applied in
Eiser as being “so strictly construed as to make it nearly impossible to obtain a stay”
and “extremely high ... and strict,” it fails to reference specific language in the decision

to support this description.?!° Instead, Cube and Demeter submit that the legal standard

24 7d., 449, citing Eiser, Respondents’ CL-183, 163; Antin, Respondents’ CL-189, 72.
285 d., 50.

206 7d., 50.

207 7d., 450.

208 7d, 452, citing Reply, {{67-72, 78-83.

2 1d., 453.

20 7d., 53.

31

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

105.

106.

107.

108.

applied in Eiser is “correct, reasonable, and consistent with that adopted by other

committees.”?!!

Moreover, Cube and Demeter argue that contrary to Spain’s position, the concerns
regarding EU law are irrelevant to the Committee’s analysis of the Request and

therefore, so is the treatment given to this issue by Eiser and Antin.?!?

Finally, Cube and Demeter point out that Spain criticizes Eiser but then cites it to argue
that while the Eiser Committee relied on the claimants’ undertaking to repay any
amount received if the annulment succeeded, no such undertaking has been made by
Cube and Demeter.”!? Further, Cube and Demeter distinguish Eiser on this point as the
claimants there “sold or transferred their rights in the award to a third party, allegedly
magnifying the risk of non-recoupment” but no such action by Cube and Demeter has

taken place in the present case.?!*

For these reasons, Cube and Demeter submit that despite Spain’s suggestion, the

Committee should not deviate from the analyses and decisions in Eiser and Antin.
3. Whether Security Should Be Ordered

Cube’s and Demeter’s primary position is that the stay of enforcement should be lifted.
However, if the Committee decides to continue the stay of enforcement, Cube and
Demeter submit that continuance should be conditioned on Spain providing “adequate
security that will safeguard Cube and Demeter’s rights in the event Spain’s annulment
application is rejected.”?!> Conditioning the stay of enforcement is a common practice
that has become well-established because of the balance it creates between the parties

in the “inevitable lapse of time involved in annulment proceedings.”?!®

2 7d., 453.

22 d., 453.

213 7d., 454, citing Reply, (76.

214 7d., 454, citing Eiser, Respondents’ CL-183, 138.

215

Response, 134.

2'67d., (34, citing Paul D. Friedland, Provisional Measures and ICSID Arbitration, Arbitration International, Vol.
2, No. 4, October 1986, Respondents’ CL-208, pgs. 335-357, 349.

32

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

109. Cube and Demeter cite a series of decisions by ad hoc Committees as proof of the
prevailing trend to condition the stay of enforcement to a guarantee or security by Spain
for annulment. Specifically, the conditions imposed by these Committees include

posting an unconditional and irrevocable letter of guarantee for the total amount due

217

under the award, plus interest,~'’ placing the funds corresponding to a large percentage

of the value of the award in escrow,?'8 furnishing an unconditional and irrevocable bank

219

guarantee covering the full amount of the award,~’” and posting an unconditional bank

guarantee.?”°

110. Cube and Demeter propose that in order to achieve fairness and equilibrium,
continuance of the stay should be conditioned upon Spain providing an irrevocable
bank guarantee from a reputable international bank for the total amount due under the
Award.”?! Alternatively, Spain may also be ordered to place an amount corresponding

to the total value of the Award into an escrow account in favour Cube and Demeter at

a reputable international bank.?”?

111. Cube and Demeter contend that conditioning the stay would not put them in a better
position than they would have been without the annulment proceeding and cite various
Committees in support.??? Cube and Demeter point out that paying the Award was an
obligation which Spain should have already fulfilled and that its promises to honour its
international obligations are undermined by its lack of payment to the fourteen creditors

awaiting payment.?*+

217 Jd., 435, citing Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on the
Application for Annulment, 5 February 2002, Respondents’ CL-209, 6.

218 Jd. 435, citing Sempra, Respondents’ CL-173, (117.

219 Jd. 435, citing Kardassopoulos, Respondents’ CL-174, 45, pp. 22-23.

220 Jd. 435, citing Flughafen, Respondents’ CL-180, 169.

221 1d. 936.

222 Td. 936.

3 Id, 437; Rejoinder, {86, citing Flughafen, Respondents’ CL-180, 76; Sempra, Respondents’ CL-173, 195
(“As to whether provision of a guarantee would, as Argentina contends, place the award creditor in ‘a better
situation’, the Committee considers that the appropriate comparison is not with a scenario where the award debtor
would not comply with its obligation under Article 53 (where a guarantee would obviously be ‘better’), but with
one where the debtor would comply. In such case the guarantee would not place the award creditor in a better
situation.”); Standard Chartered, Spain Annex-40, [87 (“The Committee rejects the argument that security
constitutes betterment”).

24 Td. YB8.

 

33

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

112. Cube and Demeter note that the only scenario in which they are put in a better position

by the condition they now propose is that in which Spain refuses or delays payment.?”>
However, as the ad hoc Committee in Sempra v. Argentina stated, “the appropriate
comparison is not with a scenario where the award debtor would not comply with its
obligation under Article 53 (where a guarantee would obviously be ‘better’), but with
one where the debtor would comply. In such case the guarantee would not place the

award creditor in a better situation.”

113. Cube and Demeter reject Spain’s position that the cost of obtaining a bank guarantee
would be exorbitant as a blanket assertion without any proof.?2’ They contend that it is
“well established” that conditioning continuance of a stay is not a punishment because,
per the Standard Chartered Bank decision, “the parties have a procedural right
guaranteed by the ICSID Convention that allows them to request the annulment of an
award, but this right cannot operate against the presumption of validity of awards
rendered under the ICSID Convention.” 7° Cube and Demeter reiterate that by
conditioning the stay, the parties’ rights and interests are accounted for in a balanced
manner, which in turn explains why the majority of ad hoc Committees choose to do

0.229

114. While Cube and Demeter state that security should be required in every case where a
stay of enforcement is not lifted, they also argue that the need for security is even more
essential in certain circumstances including when Spain is unlikely to comply with the
award should annulment fail.?*° Cube and Demeter submit that Spain’s actions (i.e. its
refusal to pay pending awards and promise to pay the Award contingent upon EC
authorization) indicate its future refusal to comply with the Award if the Application
fails and therefore place the present case in the realm of circumstances that make

adequate security crucial to a potential continued of the stay of enforcement.?*!

25 Id., 439.

226 Jd., 439; Rejoinder, 85, citing Sempra, Respondents’ CL-173, 195; Flughafen, Respondents’ CL- 180,76.
27 Rejoinder, {78.

28 d., 479, citing Standard Chartered, Spain Annex-40, 187.

29 Id., 480.

230 Jd, 81-82.

231 Jd., 484.

34

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

115.

Il.

116.

117.

 

 

Finally, Cube and Demeter advance that even if conditioning the stay puts them in a
better position, the advantage would be warranted given that granting a stay during
annulment proceedings intrudes on Cube’s and Demeter’s right under the ICSID
Convention by delaying their ability to receive immediate payment by at least one
year.?*? The Churchill Mining Committee stated that “on a general plane, the better
position which the award creditor obtains by conditioning the stay is made possible by
the award debtor having requested a stay of enforcement in the first place,” and Cube

and Demeter point out that Spain has tellingly chosen not to deal with this issue.?**
THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS
A. The Applicable Legal Standard

Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention establishes the power of the Committee to grant

or reject Spain’s request for the continued stay of enforcement of the Award:

The Committee may, if it considers that the circumstances so require, stay
enforcement of the award pending its decision. If the applicant requests a
stay of enforcement of the award in his application, enforcement shall be
stayed provisionally until the Committee rules on such request.

Rule 54 of the Arbitration Rules further provides as follows:

(1) The party applying for the interpretation, revision or annulment of an
award may in its application, and either party may at any time before the
final disposition of the application, request a stay in the enforcement of
part or all of the award to which the application relates. The Tribunal or
Committee shall give priority to the consideration of such a request.

(2) If an application for the revision or annulment of an award contains a
request for a stay of its enforcement, the Secretary-General shall, together
with the notice of registration, inform both parties of the provisional stay
of the award. As soon as the Tribunal or Committee is constituted it shall,
if either party requests, rule within 30 days on whether such stay should
be continued; unless it decides to continue the stay, it shall automatically
be terminated.

(3) If a stay of enforcement has been granted pursuant to paragraph (1) or
continued pursuant to paragraph (2), the Tribunal or Committee may at
any time modify or terminate the stay at the request of either party. All
stays shall automatically terminate on the date on which a final decision is

sponse, 440.
ejoinder, {87, citing Churchill Mining, Respondents’ CL-182, [38.

35

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

118.

119.

120.

rendered on the application, except that a Committee granting the partial
annulment of an award may order the temporary stay of enforcement of
the unannulled portion in order to give either party an opportunity to
request any new Tribunal constituted pursuant to Article 52(6) of the
Convention to grant a stay pursuant to Rule 55(3).

(4) A request pursuant to paragraph (1), (2) (second sentence) or (3) [for a
stay or its modification or termination] shall specify the circumstances that
require the stay or its modification or termination. A request shall only be
granted after the Tribunal or Committee has given each party an
opportunity of presenting its observations.

(5) The Secretary-General shall promptly notify both parties of the stay of
enforcement of any award and of the modification or termination of such
a stay, which shall become effective on the date on which he dispatches
such notification.

The request for a provisional stay was made by Spain on 12 November 2019 in its
Application. As noted above, this request included the request that the stay be continued
until the ad hoc Committee ruled on the Request, and further that the ad hoc Committee
tule that the stay be maintained until the Application itself is decided. On
18 November 2019, the Secretary General provided notice to the Parties of her
registration of Spain’s Application, and, pursuant to the mandatory terms of Rule 54(2)

of the Arbitration Rules, informed the Parties of the provisional stay.

The Committee set a schedule for submissions in relation to Spain’s request for
continuation of the stay, which was laid down in Procedural Order No. 1. As was
communicated to the Parties on 20 December 2019, the Committee decided to maintain
the provisional stay of enforcement until it had the opportunity to consider the Parties’

submissions and rule on the issue.

While the wording in Rule 54(2) of the Arbitration Rules relating to the imposition of
a provisional stay is mandatory (“the Secretary-General shail [...]” (emphasis added)),
Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention is likewise clear that the Committee’s decision
on the continuation of a stay is discretionary (“the Committee may [...]” (emphasis
added)). In addition, according to the same provision, the Committee’s discretionary
decision must be based on its appreciation of the specific circumstances of the case

(“[...] if it considers that the circumstances so require [...]”). There is no guidance in

36

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

the Convention or the Rules which circumstances shall be considered in deciding

whether or not to continue the stay.

121. Nevertheless, a stay, if issued pursuant to Article 52(2) of the ICSID Convention, is an
exception to the normal consequence of an award as provided for in Article 53(1) and
Article 54(1) of the ICSID Convention, that an award shall be binding on the parties,
and recognized as binding and enforceable by each Contracting State. Consequently,
the Committee is of the view that a stay is an exceptional remedy in the context of the

ICSID system.?**

122. The Parties agree that the Committee is empowered to continue the stay of enforcement
if the circumstances so require.?*> They are divided on the burden and standard of proof,
and the circumstances that meet the standard of Article 52(2) of the ICSID Convention
and Rule 54(2) of the Arbitration Rules.

123. Spain contends that rather than requiring a strict burden of proof approach, it is the
Committee’s task to exercise its discretionary powers to evaluate all circumstances in
order to determine whether a stay of enforcement is to be continued. It alleges that it
has presented the Committee with an array of circumstances that justify the continuance
of the stay of enforcement, and that, in any event, its burden of proof has been
discharged by far.**° Cube and Demeter submit that the discretionary powers of ad hoc
Committees do not alter the burden of proof. They further contend their proof is limited
to demonstrating that facts they allege in response to Spain’s Application are true, and

that Spain has failed to meet “its own independent burden of proof.”?*7

124. The Committee considers that while neither Article 52(2) of the ICSID Convention nor
Rule 54 of the Arbitration Rules explicitly provide which party bears the burden of
proof, the wording and structure of the Convention and the Arbitration Rules, which
distinguish the provisional stay and the ruling by the Committee on the continuation

thereof, and only provides mandatory wording in relation to the former, supports the

Burlington, (73.

ission, (7; Response, {{15; Rejoinder, 16.
26 Reply, 128-29.
237 Rejoinder, 16-18.

 

37

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

position that the normal approach to burden of proof applies, and that the party making
an application bears the burden of proof. This view is confirmed by several Committees,
notably in Karkey:

[a] “stay of enforcement during the annulment proceeding is by no way

automatic, quite to the contrary, a stay is contingent upon the existence of
relevant circumstances which must be proven by the Applicant.”?**

125. Consequently, the Committee is of the view that as the moving party seeking to
continue the provisional stay, Spain bears the burden of establishing the circumstances
that require the stay of enforcement, albeit that Cube and Demeter are obliged to
substantiate and where necessary, prove the positive allegations they rely on to rebut

Spain’s position.

126. The Parties are also divided on the circumstances that would meet the requirements of
Article 52(2) of the ICSID Convention. Spain rejects the notion that a stay may only be
granted in exceptional circumstances and argues that the majority of stay decisions
demonstrates that a continuing stay is the norm for annulment proceedings.”*° Cube and
Demeter, on the other hand, point to more recent jurisprudence tending to show a new
trend rejecting “automatic” continuation of stays, and argue that a stay of enforcement

is an exceptional measure requiring special circumstances.”“”

127. The Committee is of the view that in assessing the circumstances asserted by each of
the Parties, and in determining the appropriate standard of proof, there is no effective
presumption either in favour or against continuation of a stay. Rather, and consistent
with the view expressed by other, in particular more recent ad hoc Committees, the
Committee must consider the specific facts and evidence relied on by Spain, and in so
far as relevant by Cube and Demeter, whereby “the circumstances must be specific, and
allegations of harm must be substantiated by ‘specific evidence and data’ that give rise

to a ‘particularized fear of harm.’”*4!

238 Karkey, 99 (citing Kardassopoulos).
29 Reply, 493, 11.

240 Response, {1 1; Rejoinder, 14.

2 Karkey, (108.

 

38

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

B. Whether the Circumstances Require the Stay to Be Continued

128. Taking the above into consideration, the Committee will now proceed to evaluate the
circumstances invoked by the Parties in order to assess whether a continuation of the
stay is justified. Spain’s arguments in support of its request for continuation of the stay
are effectively two-fold: on the one hand it submits that the application is well-grounded,
made in good faith, and is not dilatory. In addition, it submits that (i) Cube and Demeter
cannot prove that the stay would not prejudice them; (ii) there is no danger that Spain
would not have the resources to pay the Award; and (iii) there is a real risk of non-
recoupment of funds in the event the Award is paid and subsequently annulled. While
Cube and Demeter basically agree that the numerated factors are relevant to assessing
Spain’s Application, they stress that the seriousness and good faith nature of an
annulment application are not relevant factors for consideration by the Committee. In
addition, related to the alleged seriousness and good faith nature of the Application, but
addressed separately in the Parties’ submissions, are the arguments in relation to
Spain’s submissions in relation to its obligations under EU law. Each of these

arguments are addressed in the sections that follow.

1. Seriousness and Non-Dilatory Nature of the Application

129. Spain submits that its Application is not dilatory or frivolous, and that it raises serious,
well-grounded, bases for annulment and has been made in good faith. 74? The
Committee considers that the basis for a finding that the basis of a request for annulment
is frivolous or dilatory is a high threshold. It also notes, however, that rather than
forming a requirement that must be demonstrated positively, the absence of good faith
or the dilatory nature of an application serves to rebut a request for a stay. As the
Committee in Total held “[a] serious application is the least that can be expected from
an applicant, and nowhere in the ICSID Convention — or in the practice of ad-hoc
committees [does] compliance with such minimum duty resul[t] in the extension of the

stay 7243

2” Reply, 132.
28 Total 484.

39

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

130.

131.

132.

2. Compliance and Recoupment

Fundamentally, Spain argues that not continuing the stay would prejudice it, while
continuing the stay would not harm Cube and Demeter. The Committee recalls that the
standard for deciding whether or not to continue the stay is whether circumstances
“require” a stay. These circumstances might pertain to either Spain, or Cube and
Demeter or to both. In so far as Spain has invoked as a relevant circumstance that there
is a risk of non-recoupment if the Award is paid at this time and later annulled, this is
a circumstance Spain should allege with sufficient specificity and support. Raising
questions about recovery” is not sufficient to fulfil the criterion of “requiring” a stay.
To support an allegation of the risk of non-recoupment, Spain would have to provide
more specific information and evidence about the risk of non-payment; it is not for

Cube and Demeter positively to prove their financial good-standing.

In this light, the Committee recalls that but for the showing of circumstances dictating
otherwise, the structure of the Convention provides that awards are binding and
enforceable. General considerations that not continuing a stay might result in money to
pass back and forth are not sufficient and should be distinguished from the scenario in
which the lifting of a stay would result in an appreciable risk that a payment would be

irrevocable, such as would be the case of a payment to an insolvent company.**°

The risk of non-recoupment is therefore not a material factor in the Committee’s
decision whether or not to continue the stay. Consequently, there is no real need to
consider whether such risk is outweighed by circumstances pertaining to Spain’s
financial well-being and willingness and ability to pay, in addition to or apart from
limitations arising out of or in relation to Spain’s obligations under EU law, which are
addressed in the section that follows below. Cube and Demeter submit that Spain is
unlikely to comply with the Award as this would create a precedent. The Committee
agrees with Cube and Demeter that the lack or not of resources is not relevant per se;

rather, the issue is the potential failure to enforce in the specific case.

24 Reply, 9154-55.

245

MTD Decision on the Request for a Continued Stay, {29.

40

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

133. On this note, the Committee is mindful of the fact that a significant number of ICSID
and other awards against Spain have been issued recently in cases similar to the present
case, and that some of these have led to (ongoing) enforcement proceedings in national
courts, suggesting an unwillingness by Spain to volunteer payment. The application to
seek authorization from the EC further suggests that if anything, compliance with the
Award is likely to be delayed and potentially frustrated. And while generally the
payment of interest is adequate to mitigate the delay in payment, where the chances of
enforcement are negatively impacted by a delay in enforcement, interest may not be a

sufficient compensation.”4°

134. Nevertheless, and while the circumstances suggest voluntary enforcement is not likely
to be imminent, the Committee is not required to make a positive finding of prejudice
to Cube and Demeter given that Spain has not established the likelihood of financial

hardship or prejudice in the form of risk of non-recoupment.

3. Legal Obligations and Hardship

135. In addition to the balancing of potential prejudices in relation to issues of compliance
and recoupment outlined above, Spain invokes another potential prejudice, which it
submits should be considered in the balancing of interests and hardship. Namely, it
points out that its obligations under EU law effectively conflict with its obligations
under international law. Cube and Demeter dispute that Spain’s alleged obligations

under EU law justify a finding of hardship requiring a continuation of the stay.

136. Spain argues that payment to Cube and Demeter constitutes notifiable State Aid, and
that payment is contingent on getting clearance from the Commission. It sets out in
considerable detail its submission that payment and enforcement of the Award until
such clearance is obtained constitute a breach of EU law, and that a stay would help
avoid a conflict with international law and/or at least avoid payment to, and subsequent
restitution from Cube and Demeter. It highlights its difficult position, and argues a stay
would ensure that not only Spain, but also Cube and Demeter act in compliance with

their EU obligations. It also contends that the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

26 Antin, 82.
Al

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

supports its argument that a stay offers a solution to the incompatibility of legal

obligations it faces.

137. Cube and Demeter submit, by reference to the [Stay Decision in Antin] that if there is

a genuine conflict of legal obligation, this is one of Spain’s own making.

138. As the Committees in Eiser and Antin considered, it is not clear how a stay of
enforcement would help to resolve the alleged conflict between Spain’s obligations
under EU law on the one hand, and international law on the other. At most, a stay would
defer the (potential) conflict, and it is far from clear that such a temporary respite would
provide any opportunity to resolve the challenges Spain acknowledges that it is
facing.?*” Furthermore, as the Committee in Antin considered, while appreciative of the
legal quagmire Spain finds itself in, this is “a legal conundrum of the Applicant’s own
making.”**8

139. Moreover, as the brief overview above illustrated, the arguments raised by Spain in
support of its submission that it faces conflicting obligations under EU and international

law, appear to go to the heart of this annulment proceeding”

and would require the
Committee to consider facts and circumstances that pertain to the merits of the dispute.
As several other ad hoc Committees, notably Karkey, referring to OJEG v. Venezuela,
have held, “the merits of an annulment application are not relevant for purposes of the
decision on whether or not to grant the stay, or the continuation of the stay.”° Any
decision on the question of the continuation of a provisional stay cannot therefore be
based on any evaluation of the outcome of these proceedings. For this reason as well,

the Committee will not consider the alleged conflict of legal obligations in its balancing

of potential prejudice and hardship.

27 Antin, (75.

28 1d., 476.

» Application, (15
280 Karkey, (118.

42

Cube Infrastructure Fund SICAV and others v. Kingdom of Spain
(ICSID Case No. ARB/15/20) — Annulment Proceeding

 

140.

IV.

141.

C. Whether Security Should Be Ordered

In light of the Committee’s view that there are no circumstances requiring the Award
to continue to be stayed, there is no need for the Committee to consider Cube’s and
Demeter’s alternative plea that, should the Committee stay the enforcement, the
Committee should require ‘adequate security that will safeguard Cube and Demeter’s

rights in the event Spain’s annulment application is rejected.”?>!

DECISION
For the reasons stated above, the Committee:
a. decides that the stay of enforcement of the Award should not be continued; and

b. reserves the issue of costs on this Request to a further order or decision.

fo 4

Mr. Timothy J. Feighery Mr. Alvaro Castellanos Howell
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee

v

Prof. Dr. Jacomijn van Haersolte-van Hof
President of the ad hoc Committee

251 Response 434.

43

