INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the annulment proceeding between
DAIMLER FINANCIAL SERVICES A.G.

Applicant

and

REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

 

DECISION ON ANNULMENT

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Eduardo Zuleta, Chairman
Florentino Feliciano, Member
Makhdoom Ali Khan, Member

Secretary of the Tribunal
Anneliese Fleckenstein

Date of dispatch to the Parties: January 7, 2015

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing Daimler Financial Services Representing the Argentine Republic:
AG:

Paolo Di Rosa Dra. Angelina Abbona

John B. Bellinger IIT Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacién
Ramon P. Marks Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién
Nancy L. Perkins Posadas 1641

Mallory B. Silberman C1112ADC Buenos Aires

Brian Bombassaro Reptiblica Argentina

Arnold & Porter LLP

555 12" St. NW

Washington, DC 20004-1206
and

Michael Winkler

Bernd Fritzinger

Daimler Financial Services AG

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES 1

Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY 1
Il. POSITION OF THE PARTIES AND ANALYSIS OF THE TRIBUNAL ON THE

GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT 3

A. FAILURE TO STATE REASONS - ARTICLE 52(1)(E) ......-secesseessesseesesseesseeeeseesees 4

1. The Standard 4

(i) Daimler’s ar; 4

 

(ii) Argentina’s arguments ....
2. Failure to reach a majority decision on each question submitted «0.0.0.0. 7

(i) Daimler’s ar; 7

 

(ii) Argentina’s arguments ...........

3. The Award is Internally Inconsistent in its Findings Concerning the BIT’s 18-
month Clause and the Scope of the BIT’s MEN Clauses ..

 

 

 

(i) Daimler’s ar; 18
(ii) Argentina’s arguments 00.00... cscs cess cess eeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeseeeeseneneeneese 22
4. The Committee’s Analysis on the Alleged Failure to State Reasons ............0.. 25
(i) | The Standard 25

(ii) The Alleged Failure to reach a majority decision on each question
submitted 27

 

(iii) The Alleged Internal Inconsistencies of the Award in its Findings
Concerning the BIT’s 18-month Clause and the Scope of the BIT’s MFN

 

 

 

Clause: 38

B. MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS - ARTICLE 52(1)(B)......-:esesessessesssessesseeeeseese 46
1. The Standard 46

(i) Daimler’s ar; 46

(ii) Argentina’s arguments 00.00... cscs cess cess eeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeseeeeseneneeneese 48

2. Failure to apply the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties... 49

(i) Daimler’s ar; 49

 

(ii) Argentina’s arguments ....... 51

 

3. Application of the non-applicable principle of “full reparation” and failure to

 

apply the rule of pacta sunt SCrVANdG wo... c.cecececees este te cesses eee te tees eeeeneteeneeaeeneeeeees 53
(i) Daimler’s ar; 53
(ii) Argentina’s arguments ...........c.ccecsceseeses ee eseeseseeseseeseseeseseeseseessseensseeneeeeees 55

iii

4.

The Committee’s Decision on the Alleged Manifest Excess of Powers .
(i) | The Standard 56

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(ii) The Alleged Failure to apply the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties 59
(iii) The Alleged Application of the Non-applicable Principle of Full Reparation
and Lack of Application of the Principle of Pacta Sunt Servanda ............ 61
C. SERIOUS DEPARTURE FROM A FUNDAMENTAL RULE OF PROCEDURE -
ARTICLE 52(1)(D) 63
1. The Standard 63
(i) Daimler’s ar; 63
(ii) Argentina’s arguments ....
2. Prejudicial delay in rendering a jurisdictional decision............c cece 69
(i) Daimler’s ar; 69
(ii) Argentina’s argument ..........c.cccccecees ees eesteseeseeseeseeseeseesnesesnesneeneeneeseeneenses 71
3. Imposition of an improperly-heightened burden of proof .........0.cc eee 74
(i) Daimler’s ar; 74
(ii) Argentina’s arguments 00.00... cscs cess cess eeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeseeeeseneneeneese 76
4. Denial of a full and fair opportunity to be heard ..0...0.0.c cece 78
(i) Daimler’s ar; 78
(ii) Argentina’s argument .0....0.. cence
5. Failure by the Tribunal to deliberate and render a majority decision...........0..... 82
(i) Daimler’s ar; 82
(ii) Argentina’s arguments «00.0.0... cee
6. The Committee’s Decision on the Alleged Serious Departure From Fundamental
Rules of Procedure 85
(i) | The Standard 85
(ii) Alleged Prejudicial Delay in Rendering a Jurisdictional Decision
(iii) Alleged Imposition of an improperly-heightened burden of proof
(iv) Alleged Denial of a full and fair opportunity to be heard .
(v) Alleged Failure by the Tribunal to deliberate and render a majority decision
94
IV. COSTS 96
V. DECISION 97

 

1
18-month clause

2001 Draft Articles

Applicant or Claimant

Application
Arbitration Rules

Argentina
art.

Award

Background Paper on
Annulment

C-Mem. or Counter-Memorial

Committee

Daimler

Dissenting Opinion

Germany-Argentina BIT or the
BIT or the Treaty

Hearing on Annulment

Ic]
ICSID or the Centre

ICSID Convention or
Convention

Joint Procedural Agreement

LIsT OF DEFINED TERMS

Paragraph.
Articles 10(2) and 10 (3)(a) of the BIT.

2001 Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for
Internationally Wrongful Acts.

Daimler Financial Services AG.

Application for Partial Annulment of Daimler Financial
Services AG, dated December 20, 2012.

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings, April
2006.

The Argentine Republic.
Article.

Award rendered on August 22, 2012 in Daimler Financial
Services AG v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/0S5/01).

Background Paper on Annulment for the Administrative
Council of ICSID, August 10, 2012.

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on Annulment.

The ad hoc Committee composed of Mr. Florentino
Feliciano, Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan and Mr. Eduardo Zuleta.

Daimler Financial Services AG.

Dissenting Opinion of Judge Charles N. Brower, dated
August 15, 2012.

Treaty between the Argentine Republic and the Federal
Republic of Germany concerning the Encouragement and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments signed on 9 April 1991.

Hearing on annulment that took place at the seat of the Centre
in Washington, D.C. on July 14 and 15, 2014.

International Court of Justice.

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes.
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States.

The joint procedural agreement submitted by the Parties on
April 24, 2013.

Mem. or Memorial
MEN

Opinions

Parties

Rej. or Rejoinder
Reply
Respondent

Separate Opinion

Tr. [page:line]
Tribunal
VCLT

World Bank Guidelines or
Guidelines

Daimler’s Memorial on Annulment.
Most-Favored-Nation.

The Dissenting Opinion of Judge Charles N. Brower and the
Separate Opinion of Professor Domingo Bello Janeiro.

The Argentine Republic and Daimler Financial Services AG.
Argentina’s Rejoinder on Annulment.

Daimler’s Reply on Annulment.

The Argentine Republic.

Opinion of Professor Domingo Bello Janeiro, dated August
16, 2012.

Transcript of the Hearing on Annulment.
The Arbitral Tribunal that rendered the Award.
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.

1992 World Bank Guidelines on the Treatment of Foreign
Direct Investment.

vi

~

INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

Pursuant to Article 52 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 50(1) of the Arbitration Rules, on
December 20, 2012, Daimler Financial Services AG filed an application requesting the
partial annulment of the Award issued on August 22, 2012 by an Arbitral Tribunal consisting
of Professor Pierre-Marie Dupuy (President), Judge Charles N. Brower, and Professor
Domingo Bello Janeiro, in the arbitration between Daimler Financial Services AG and the

Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1) (hereinafter referred to as the “Award”.

The Applicant is Daimler Financial Services AG and is hereinafter referred to as “Daimler”

or the “Applicant”.

The Applicant is a company incorporated under the laws of the Federal Republic of

Germany.

The Respondent is the Argentine Republic and is hereinafter referred to as “Argentina” or

the “Respondent.”

The Applicant and the Respondent are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties.”

The Parties’ respective representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (ii).

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On December 20, 2012, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID”) received from Daimler an application for partial annulment of the Award

(hereinafter the ““Application’).

On December 27, 2012, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Application in
accordance with Rule 50(2)(a) of the Arbitration Rules and notified the Parties of the
registration pursuant to Arbitration Rule 50(2)(b). In the Notice of Registration, the
Secretary-General informed the Parties that in accordance with Rule 52(1) of the Arbitration
Rules, she would request that the Chairman of the Administrative Council of ICSID appoint
the members of the ad hoc committee that would consider the Application as stipulated by

Article 52(3) of the ICSID Convention.

On February 25, 2013, the Secretary-General informed the Parties that ICSID was
proceeding to recommend to the Chairman of the Administrative Council the appointment
of Mr. Eduardo Zuleta, a national of Colombia, Judge Florentino Feliciano, a national of the

Philippines, and Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, a national of Pakistan.

On March 7, 2013, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the Arbitration
Rules, notified the Parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that
the Committee was therefore deemed to have been constituted on that date. Ms. Anneliese

Fleckenstein, ICSID Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as Secretary of the Committee.

The Committee is composed of Mr. Eduardo Zuleta, Chairman of the Committee, Judge

Florentino Feliciano and Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan.

On April 24, 2013, the Parties submitted their Joint Procedural Agreement.

On April 30, 2013, the Committee acknowledged receipt of the Joint Procedural Agreement.
The Committee noted that the Parties had agreed on all points of the agenda and that there
were no further points for discussion. Therefore, and provided the Parties did not agree

otherwise, the first session with the Parties would be cancelled.

On May 15, 2013, the Committee informed the Parties that it had held a first session on May
2, 2013 and agreed to the Parties’ Joint Procedural Agreement. In their Joint Procedural
Agreement, the Parties confirmed that the Members of the Committee had been validly
appointed. It was agreed inter alia that the applicable Arbitration Rules would be those in
effect from April 10, 2006, that the procedural languages would be English and Spanish and

that the place of proceedings would be the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C.

As agreed in the Parties’ Joint Procedural Agreement, the Applicant filed a Memorial on
annulment on July 31, 2013; the Respondent filed a Counter-Memorial on annulment on
November 18, 2013; the Applicant filed a Reply on annulment on January 23, 2014; and the
Respondent filed a Rejoinder on annulment on April 7, 2014. Translations of each of these
submissions into the other procedural language were submitted by the Parties pursuant to the

Joint Procedural Agreement.

Ill.

15.

A hearing on annulment took place at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C. on July 14
and 15, 2014. In addition to the Members of the Committee and the Secretary of the

Committee, present at the hearing were:

For the Applicant:
Mr. Paolo Di Rosa Arnold & Porter LLP
Mr. John Bellinger II Arnold & Porter LLP
Ms. Nancy Perkins Arnold & Porter LLP
Ms. Mallory Silberman Arnold & Porter LLP
Mr. Brian Bombassaro Arnold & Porter LLP
Mr. Kelby Ballena Arnold & Porter LLP
Ms. Ana Pirnia Arnold & Porter LLP
Mr. Bernd Fritzinger Daimler Financial Services AG

For the Respondent:

Dr. Javier Pargament Subprocurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Dr. Carlos Mihanovich Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Dr. Gabriel Bottini

Dr. Mariana Lozza Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Dr. Silvina Gonzalez Napolitano Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Dr. Julian Negro Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Dr. Sebastian A. Green Martinez Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Dra. Lucila Miranda Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Dra. Magdalena Gasparini Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién

The proceeding was closed on December 5, 2014, pursuant to Arbitration Rule 38.

The Committee has conducted its deliberations in person and by various modes of
communication among its members and in issuing this Decision on Annulment has taken

into account all written submissions and oral arguments of the Parties.

POSITION OF THE PARTIES AND THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS ON THE
GROUNDS FOR ANNULMENT

Daimler seeks partial annulment of the Award on the basis that: (a) the Award has failed to
state the reasons on which it is based, contrary to Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention;

(b) the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers within the meaning of Article 52(1)(b)

20.

21,

22.

of the ICSID Convention; and (c) the Tribunal committed serious departures from

fundamental rules of procedure, in violation of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention.!

Argentina argues that Daimler’s request for partial annulment manifestly lacks legal merit
as is evident from the fact that the sole basis for Daimler’s request is its disagreement with
the Tribunal’s interpretation in relation to the MFN clauses. Furthermore, even if the
Tribunal’s interpretation were incorrect, it would not warrant annulment under the ICSID

Convention.”

This section addresses the submissions of the Parties on the three grounds of annulment
invoked by Daimler and provides a summary of the claims and reliefs sought by each Party.
The Committee’s analysis on each of these grounds for annulment is included after the

summary on the position of the Parties.

The Committee has carefully reviewed all claims, reasoning, documents and legal authorities
submitted by the Parties, and the fact that a reasoning, document or legal authority is not
cited or referred to in the summary does not mean that the Committee has not considered the

same.
A. FAILURE TO STATE REASONS - ARTICLE 52(1)(E)

1. THESTANDARD
(i) Daimler’s arguments
Daimler argues that the Award failed to state the reasons on which it was based regarding

the Tribunal’s determination on the applicability of the BIT’s MFN clause to bypass the 18-

month domestic court litigation requirement stipulated in the BIT.* According to Daimler,

"Mem. { 110.
2C-Mem. 2.
3Mem.{ 111.

23.

24.

25.

the Award suffers from “/acunae, contradictory reasons and a failure to explain the reasoning

on key issues.”*

According to Daimler, the Parties agree on the following: a failure to state reasons might
result from the omission of reasons or from contradictory reasons; a tribunal’s failure to
“deal with every question presented” or to reach a majority decision on such questions is a
failure to state reasons; and a failure to state reasons, on a point logically necessary for the

tribunal’s decision, must leave the decision essentially lacking in any expressed rationale.°

However, Daimler states that the Parties disagree on a number of points. Even though the
standard under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention is a failure to state “reasons”,
Argentina proposes a different standard based on whether “decisions” were made by the
Tribunal.° This is evident in Argentina’s claims that the Tribunal analysed the Parties’
positions and took decisions on all questions put forward.’ Yet, according to Daimler,
“analyzing” and “deciding” all questions is not sufficient to escape annulment because the
tribunal must explain why it reached its conclusions in order to fulfill the purpose of Article
52(1)(e).® A tribunal must “show its work” by guiding the reader through logical steps that
lead to a conclusion. If one of the steps is missing, then the decision is not capable of leading
the reader from “Point A. to Point B. and eventually to its conclusion” and the award must
be annulled.’ Daimler argues that its position has been confirmed in the Maritime
International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of Guinea (ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4)
(“MINE”) and Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates (ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/7) (“Soufraki”) decisions on annulment.!°

Accordingly, Daimler argues, the Committee must review each pivotal or outcome-

determinative point that serves as a link in the logical chain of the Award’s premises and

*Mem. LIL.

SReply 15.

© Reply 1 6.

7 Reply 16.

8 Reply 17.

° Mem. { 116; Reply 7.
“Reply 48.

26.

27.

28.

conclusions, and determine whether the Tribunal failed to state reasons or stated

contradictory reasons on each of these points.!!

Daimler submits that the Award should be annulled because of failure to state reasons, given
(1) a failure to reach a majority decision on each question submitted and (2) the existence of
inconsistencies in the Award’s findings concerning the BIT’s 18-month clause and the scope

of the BIT’s MEN clauses.
(ii) Argentina’s arguments

According to Argentina, it is clear that Daimler has fully understood the Tribunal’s analysis
and reasons for declining jurisdiction as can been seen from the arguments in its Memorial. !?
The weakness in Daimler’s arguments is further evidenced in its acknowledgement that the
BIT requires submission of its dispute to local courts and that it failed to meet this
requirement. Yet, it argued that in spite of this, the Tribunal was not mandated to apply the
18-month clause by virtue of the BIT’s MFN clauses.!? It is clear in the Award that the
Tribunal analyzed each party’s position and ultimately disagreed with Daimler’s position on
the MEN clauses. '* Moreover, Daimler has admitted that the majority took into consideration
the positions of both Parties and based its interpretation on the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties (“VCLT”).!> Argentina states that the Tribunal neither failed to exercise its
jurisdiction nor to state the reasons on which its decision was based. !° This is also true of the
application of the Tribunal’s interpretation to the facts of the case in relation to the failure to
satisfy the prior recourse to local courts requirement and the alleged futility of such

recourse. !7

Argentina argues that a ground for annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID

Convention is warranted in circumstances where “two genuinely contradictory reasons

4 Reply 19.

2 C-Mem. | 4.

3 C-Mem. 9 6-7.
4 CMem. (5.

'S C-Mem. fff 8-10.
'6C-Mem. 10.
"C-Mem. 11.

29.

30.

cancel each other out”, which is not the case here.'® Additionally, in order for an award to
be annulled on the basis of failure to state reasons, the omission has to be pivotal to the
outcome of the case and, as such, two conditions must be met: i) the failure to state reasons
must leave the decision on a particular point essentially lacking in any express rationale and,
ii) that point must be logically necessary for sustaining the tribunal’s decision.'? Daimler
invokes four alleged contradictions but it has not explained how they would affect the

outcome of the Award.”°

 

2. FAILURE TO REACH A MAJORITY DECIS IN EACH QUESTION SUBMITTED

(i) Daimler’s arguments

According to Daimler, as per Article 48(1) of the ICSID Convention, a tribunal must decide
each question by a majority of votes and, pursuant to Articles 48(3) and 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention, the award must deal with each question submitted and provide a statement of
reasons.! Daimler states that a necessary predicate to the notion of “dealing with a question”
is that the majority of the tribunal has reached a consensus decision on such question.”? As
such, it is possible for a tribunal to fail to deal with every question by failing to reach a

majority decision on such question.”?

Daimler argues that a very small number of ICSID cases feature separate opinions by more
than one arbitrator and in the instances where this is the case, the ad hoc committees must
look carefully at the reasoning provided by each arbitrator to determine whether each
question has been decided by a majority of the tribunal.” If there is different reasoning on
outcome-determinative issues, then a majority is not reached on such issues and the

requirement of Article 48(1) is not satisfied.?> This may be a ground for annulment under

'§ C-Mem. 153.

'® C-Mem. 954, citing the ad hoc committee in Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal
S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3) (“Vivendi I”).

2” C-Mem. 91 54-55, 175.

2! Mem. ff 112-113.

2 Mem. 114.

3 Mem. 114.

4 Mem. 115.

5 Mem. 115.

31.

32.

33.

Article 52(1)(e) if the parties are unable to follow the reasoning of the Tribunal from “Point

”°26 Tn addition, annulment can also be ordered

A. to Point B. and eventually to its conclusion’
if there is a complete absence of reasoning. This takes place by an omission to state reasons

or by reasons, which are contradictory.’

In this vein, Daimler argues that the Committee must take Professor Bello Janeiro’s Separate
Opinion into account for the purpose of following the Award’s reasoning and thus

determining if there was a failure to state reasons.*

Daimler argues that although all three arbitrators in the Daimler case signed the Award, the

 

act of signature itself is insufficient to establish that there was a majority on all questions
presented.”° This is evidenced by Judge Brower’s Dissenting Opinion disagreeing with the
Award’s determination on the MEN issue and Professor Bello Janeiro’s divergence of

conclusions and reasoning in his Separate Opinion.*°

Moreover, Daimler states that it seems that the Award reflects the reasons and conclusions

1.31

of only the President of the Tribunal.*’ As acknowledged in the Award, it reproduces in large

part the reasoning in an award of a different case that shared the same President.*? This
aspect is even more significant because the analysis that the Award reproduced was critical
to the outcome in this case: defining the principles of treaty interpretation that would apply
to the MEN issue.** The gravity of the situation is further compounded because the JCS
Inspection and Control Services Limited v. Argentine Republic (“ICS”) award was issued in
another case, conducted under a different set of rules and under a different Bilateral

Investment Treaty.*+

2 Mem. 4 116.

27 Mem. {{ 117-118, also citing the ad hoc committee in Victor Pey Casado and President Allende Foundation
v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/2) (“Pey Casado”).

28 Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 66:12 — 71:12.

2° Mem. { 121.

39 Mem. ff 121-122.

Mem. ¥ 123.

2 Mem. { 123.

33 Mem. 124.

4 Mem. ¥ 125.

34.

35.

36.

Daimler argues that another manifestation that the Award does not reflect the majority
opinion was Professor Bello Janeiro’s recognition in his Separate Opinion that he was
subscribing or adhering to the President’s conclusions.*> This admission further suggests
that the Tribunal failed to abide by its obligation to render an Award, which enables the
reader to determine the reasons of the Tribunal, and not those of each individual member, on

each question presented.*°

According to Daimler, the crucial part of the Award turns mainly on the meaning of
“treatment” in the BIT’s MEN clauses. Interpreting this word in the context of the VCLT,
the Award adopts a two pronged approach in that it 1) ascertains the intention of the State
Parties to the BIT, and 2) applies the principle of contemporaneity. The Tribunal then
determined whether its conclusion represents the Parties’ intention at the time the BIT was
negotiated.*” A failure of the majority to decide and deal with these questions amounts to a

gap in the logic of the Award.*®

Contrary to the conclusion in the Award that the World Bank Guidelines shed light on the
word “treatment” but are not determinative, Professor Bello Janeiro in his Separate Opinion
considers these Guidelines as determinative.*? The Award discusses other textual evidence
to discern the meaning of “treatment” but, according to Daimler, this is not the approach of
the majority because Professor Bello Janeiro contradicts this analysis and bases his
conclusions on the World Bank Guidelines, without referring to other evidence of
contemporaneous understanding of State Parties to the BIT.*° Daimler argues that this
divergence of views makes it impossible to confirm either that a majority decision was
reached with respect to each element of the standard determined to be applicable by the

Award or to follow the majority’s reasoning on each key point.*!

35 Mem 127.

36 Mem. { 128.
37 Mem. { 129.
8 Mem. { 130.
Mem. ff 131-132.
“” Mem. {if 134-136.
“1 Mem. 4 137.

37.

38.

39.

According to Daimler, if an arbitrator’s signature alone were sufficient to establish his
agreement with the award and its reasoning, Judge Brower’s signature on the Award would
have meant that he accepted the discussion of the MEN issue, which he expressly stated in
his Dissenting Opinion that he did not.*? Consequently, Argentina’s argument in this respect
is incorrect. Daimler argues that the two cases before the International Court of Justice
(“ICJ’) that Argentina relies on, dealt with different questions, which are not before this

Committee.

In the ICJ Case Concerning the Arbitral Award of 31 July 1989 (Guinea-Bissau v. Senegal)
(“Case Concerning the Award of 1989”) the question before the ICJ was the validity of an
individual’s vote and its effect on the existence of the award.“ Daimler states that it is not
questioning the validity of the Tribunal members’ votes, but whether the Award must be
annulled for failing to fulfill the requirements in Article 48 of the ICSID Convention.**
Similarly, the Advisory Opinion on Application for review of Judgment No. 333 of the United
Nations Administrative Tribunal (“Review of Judgment No. 333 Opinion’) does not address
any claims regarding the failure to state reasons. However, Daimler continues, this case does
give some guidance on the relevance of separate opinions under international law, which
need to be taken into account in order to interpret or elucidate a judgment.*® The ICJ
decisions relied on by Argentina actually favor a close review by the Committee of Professor
Bello Janeiro’s Opinion, which is in line with the conclusion in the Amco Asia Corporation
and others v. Republic of Indonesia ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1) (“Amco I’) decision, that
committees in ICSID cases must examine what the tribunal had said it was doing and what

it was in fact doing to resolve a question.*”

Similarly, the Granite State Machine Co. Inc v. Islamic Republic of Iran et al*’ award from

the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal cited by Argentina supports Argentina’s submission

Reply (Il.

3 Reply Wf 12-14.

4 Reply qi 12-13.

+5 Reply 12.

“Reply Wf 14-15.

“TReply 4 16.

*8 Granite State Machine Co. Inc. v. Islamic Republic of Iran et al., Award No. 18-30-3, dated 15 December
1982, Iran-US Claims Tribunal Reports, vol. 1, at 442

10

40.

41.

in respect of the validity or existence of the award, which is distinct from the question of
whether reasons in a concurring opinion, which contradict the award, warrant annulment.*?
This is consistent with the views of Judge Schwebel, who, citing the same authorities that
Argentina refers to, stated that an arbitrator who expresses views at variance with his vote
might prejudice the execution of the award and this prejudice could include annulment under
Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention.*° Daimler argues that in light of this, the existence
of an award or the validity of an arbitrator’s vote in favor of the dispositif does not preclude
that a separate statement of reasons might lead to the annulment of the award.>! In this case,
according to Daimler, Professor Bello Janeiro’s Opinion contradicts the Award in several

material aspects and thus nullity is required.>*

Argentina’s arguments with regard to the contents of the Separate Opinion fail to rebut
Daimler’s argument that the substance of the Separate Opinion is important to the
Committee’s task under Article 52(1)(e).** Daimler argues that, contrary to Argentina’s
contention, the Committee must examine Professor Bello Janeiro’s Opinion, which
ostensibly states that he fully subscribes to the Award but which actually contradicts it on
two outcome-determinative questions that the Tribunal had to decide. The first concerned
the Contracting State Parties’ intentions at the time of negotiating the BIT and, the second

concerned the principle of contemporaneity.™

According to Daimler, on the first point the Award found that certain material was not direct
evidence of the intention of the State Parties to the BIT, whereas Professor Bello Janeiro
found this material decisive. This is evident in the different treatment of the World Bank
Guidelines in the Award and the Separate Opinion.* On the second point regarding the
principle of contemporaneity, Daimler argues that the Award considers decisions of other

investor-State tribunals, made subsequent to the execution of the BIT, as “inadequate for the

* Reply 17.
5 Reply if 17-18.
5! Reply 19.
2 * Reply q19.
3 Reply 4 20.
4 Reply if 21-22.
55 Reply 23.

42.

43.

purposes of assessing the Parties’ understanding of particular BIT terms”.*° Yet, Professor
Bello Janeiro lists the evolution in investor-State arbitration as “decisive” and “most
important” to his reasoning. Moreover, the three most important reasons that he gives are
based on legal materials that the Award rejects.°” A review of what Professor Bello Janeiro
said he would do and what he actually did shows a clear contradiction on the same issues
between his reasons and those in the Award.>® Furthermore, Professor Bello Janeiro’s
contradictory reasons and his reliance on authorities not cited by or which the Parties had an

opportunity to address or explain was unfair to Daimler.*?

Daimler states that Argentina’s argument to the effect that it wasn’t necessary for Professor
Bello Janeiro to refer to all arguments in the Award is inapplicable. Indeed, Professor Bello
Janeiro refers to certain sections of the Award before proceeding to give contradictory
reasoning.” Argentina’s defence that Professor Bello Janeiro wrote his Separate Opinion to
explain his “change of heart” since the Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/8) (“Siemens”) case, is unresponsive. Whatever Professor Bello Janeiro’s
motivations were, his Separate Opinion articulates his reasons for concurring in the Award’s

findings, and these reasons are contradictory to those set forth in the Award.®!

With regard to the Award’s “importation” of the analysis in the JCS case, Daimler states that
this shows that the deliberative process was not undertaken, or critical determinations were
not made, by a majority of the Tribunal as required by the ICSID rules.®* According to
Daimler, Argentina’s defense of the “Tribunal President’s recycling of the analysis from

ICS”® misses the point that Daimler made: that the “President’s copy/paste exercise reflects

5 Reply 24.
57 Reply 25.
58 Reply i 26-27.
°° Reply 27.
Reply 428.
& Reply ff 28-29.
® Reply 4130.
& Reply 33

44.

45.

a failure by this Tribunal to agree on a single line of reasoning for the Award’s conclusion

on the issue of the 18-month and MEN clauses”.

(ii) Argentina’s arguments

According to Argentina, there is no “divergence of views” between the two majority
arbitrators and, even if there were, it would not affect the validity of the Award.® Firstly,
pursuant to Arbitration Rule 47(3), an arbitrator may “attach his individual opinion to the
award, whether he dissents from the majority or not”. It would be futile for an arbitrator to
attach a concurring opinion if it did not say anything different from what was stated in the
award, provided that this arbitrator supports the decision made in the award.® Secondly,
Argentina argues that Professor Bello Janeiro stated that he was attaching an individual
opinion to explain his position, which differed from his position in the Siemens case.°" Thus,
the reasons in the Separate Opinion have a different function from those of the Award.°*
Moreover, it was recognized in Daimler’s Memorial, and also by Judge Brower, that
Professor Bello Janeiro joined the President to form the majority. According to Argentina,
it was only natural for Professor Bello Janeiro to include in his opinion points that only

concerned him.”

Daimler’s argument that, by his own admission, Professor Bello Janeiro merely adhered to
the conclusions of the Tribunal’s President shows its lack of understanding of Arbitration
Rule 14(1), which envisages that the President of the Tribunal take a leading role in the
deliberations.”! Additionally, Argentina argues, deliberations are secret and subject to no

regulations and as such they can be conducted as arbitrators see fit. In fact, Judge Brower’s

Reply Wf 33-34.

6 Mem. 12; Hearing on Annulment,Tr, 147:17 — 150:1.
© CMem. { 14.

$1 CMem. { 15.

& Rej. q 22.

© CMem. ff 15-16

7 C-Mem. { 16.

™ CMem. { 17.

46.

47.

harshly critical opinion does not maintain that the deliberations were conducted in violation

of any rule or principle.”

Argentina argues that the Award is well founded and Daimler’s grounds for seeking partial
annulment are inadequate. In this regard, Argentina refers to the decision of the committee
in Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12) (“Azurix”), which held
that this ground for annulment only applies in a clear case of a tribunal failing to state
reasons.”> Additionally, the Azurix committee, citing the decision by an ad hoc committee
in Vivendi I, observed that Article 52(1)(e) concerns the failure to state reasons and not “the
failure to state correct or convincing reasons”.’* According to Argentina, in the case at hand,
there was a majority on each question, the Tribunal gave a decision on each question, the
reader can follow the Tribunal’s reasoning and all three members of the Tribunal signed the

Award.”

Contrary to Daimler’s claims, the Tribunal reached a majority decision on both questions
i.e., the 18-month wait clause and the MEN clause, with Professor Bello Janeiro voting in
favor of the Award’s conclusions and explaining “his reasons for subscribing to the
Award”.”° According to Argentina, in this context, which Tribunal member proposed the
terms of the Award is merely anecdotic. What is important is that the decision was by a
majority, as was the case here when Professor Bello Janeiro voted in favor of the decision
contained in the Award and its grounds regarding each of the Parties’ claims.”’ In fact, ICJ
jurisprudence”® supports the view that even if Professor Bello Janeiro had expressed an

opinion different from the Award or had expressed preference for a different solution, the

2 C-Mem. { 18.

3 C-Mem. 31.

74 @-Mem. 31, citing the Azurix Decision on Annulment at 55.

5 C-Mem. { 33.

7 C-Mem. {ff 34-35.

7 C-Mem. 9 36-37.

*8 Case Concerning the Award of 1989; Review of Judgment No. 333 Opinion.

14

48.

49.

50.

decision in the Award that he voted for would have been sustained.” This has also been

confirmed by the jurisprudence of the Iran-US Claims Tribunal.*”

Argentina argues that contrary to Daimler’s allegations, there is nothing incorrect or
inappropriate about the Award referring to the /CS decision. The reason it makes this
reference is because both cases share the same President, who did not want to burden the
parties “with duplicative drafting costs in respect of certain general points of law common
to both cases”*!. According to Argentina, it is common practice for tribunals to transcribe
parts of other awards they agree with and consider applicable.*” The fact that the JCS case
was an UNCITRAL case brought under a different Bilateral Investment Treaty is irrelevant
as the Tribunal referred to it with regard to a question that applied mutatis mutandi to this
case. Accepting Daimler’s argument would lead to the “absurd situation” that tribunals could

only refer to case-law based on the same treaty and originating from the same tribunal.*°

As regards the Award’s interpretation of the term “treatment”, Argentina states that
paragraph 224 of the Award, referring to the use of the World Bank Guidelines, clearly
indicates that they were taken into account “not as outcome-determinative evidence per se
but ‘as an indication of the prevailing view among the community of states during the period
contemporaneous to the adoption of the German-Argentine BIT’”.** Argentina refutes
Daimler’s assertion that Professor Bello Janeiro seems to contradict the Award’s reference
to the Guidelines. The Award was clear in its reference to these Guidelines and Professor

Bello Janeiro had no need to repeat all that was stated in the Award.*°

With regard to Daimler’s claim that Professor Bello Janeiro failed to cite any evidence as to
“the contemporaneous understanding of the State Parties to the BIT”, Argentina argues that

he had no reason to do so because an arbitrator is not obligated to attach an individual

9 C-Mem. ff 38-42

89 C-Mem. 143.

51C-Mem. 44, citing Award, footnote 303.
2 CMem. 44.

8 C-Mem. 145.

“4 C-Mem. 147.

5 CMem. 48.

51.

opinion.*® In fact, the ICJ has found that the content of a separate opinion or statement is of
no consequence to a tribunal’s decision. The fact that subsequent decisions to the Siemens
case have led arbitrator Bello Janeiro to review his position on the applicability of the MFN

clause does not nullify the decision adopted by the majority.*”

In its Rejoinder, Argentina argues that Daimler devotes several paragraphs of its Reply to
the need for the Tribunal to explain the process of its analysis. This argument is futile because
Argentina has already showed that the Tribunal stated reasons for its decisions on each issue
submitted in connection with the 18-month period and the MEN clauses, which can be
followed easily by any reader.** The MINE decision supports its arguments because that
committee rejected the request for annulment on the grounds of contradictions in the award,
clarifying that it was not necessary to state reasons for “truly obvious issues from which it
drew no conclusions”.*? The Caratube International Oil Company LLP v. Republic of
Kazakhstan (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/12) (“Caratube”) committee held that only
contradictory or frivolous reasons could be equated to a failure to state reasons. Daimler has
failed to prove that the reasons given by the Tribunal were either contradictory or not well

founded.”

According to Argentina, Daimler continues to distort its position in the Reply. Argentina did
not state that arbitrator Bello Janeiro gave contradictory reasons. It posed a hypothetical and
subsidiary argument on “the meaning of the majority opinion in an award and the value of
separate opinions”.*! Additionally, it did not state that the Committee should limit itself to
the verification of whether or not an arbitrator signed the Award. Indeed, under Article 52
of the ICSID Convention, the Committee must determine whether an award has stated the

reasons on which it is based.*”

8° C-Mem. 49.
87C-Mem. 9 49-50.
8 Rej. 1 8.

% Rej. $1 9-10.

© Rej. WH 11-12.

9% Rej. 13.

Rej. J 14.

53.

54.

55.

Daimler failed to support with jurisprudence this ground for annulment, whereas Argentina
referred to ICJ jurisprudence for the proposition that an award issued by a majority with a
separate or individual opinion is valid.°* This lack of reference to jurisprudence by Daimler
is due to the fact that the jurisprudence suggests that even if there were contradictions
between statements in the award and an individual opinion, the arbitrator’s decision in the
award will prevail.** As to Daimler’s citation of the ICJ’s Review of Judgement No. 333
Opinion regarding the consideration of individual opinions, Argentina emphasises that
whatever the position is under general international law, pursuant to Article 52 of the ICSID
Convention, the Committee must determine whether “the award has stated the reasons on

which it is based.”°>

In this case, the Award can be understood and is well founded thereby precluding the need
to refer to explanations in the individual opinions.”° Judge Schwebel, whom Daimler quotes,
is of the opinion that even if an arbitrator expresses strong disagreement, “his vote will stand
anyway”. This is not the case here, as arbitrator Bello Janeiro did not disagree with the

Award.*”

Argentina further argues that the Tribunal reached a majority on the 18-month and the MFN
clauses, and it took account of the World Bank Guidelines as an indication of the prevailing
view of the community of states at the time the BIT was adopted, not as determinative
evidence.®* Arbitrator Bello Janeiro’s Opinion adds additional grounds and does not alter
the decision made jointly with the President.” Moreover, the reasons stated in his Separate
Opinion had a different role than those reasons set forth by the Tribunal as grounds for the
Award;!' Professor Bello Janeiro never argued against the Tribunal’s conclusion that the

World Bank Guidelines do not intend to directly clarify a term of the BIT.'°! In his Opinion,

%3 Rej. (15.

4 Rej. 16.
%Rej. 17.

% Rej. 18.
7Rej. | 19.

%8 Re}. fff 20-21.
® Rej. | 22.

100 Rej. 4 22.

1 Rej. 425.

56.

57.

58.

Professor Bello Janeiro merely clarified that he considered the MEN issue the most important
part of the Award. Both the Opinion and the Award refer to the meaning given to the term
“treatment” at the time of the conclusion of the BIT, and arbitrator Bello Janeiro’s reference

to more recent case law does not alter the analysis in the Award. !°

In arbitrator Bello Janeiro’s view, the World Bank Guidelines confirm that at the time of the
BIT’s conclusion, “treatment” of investments and dispute settlement were different issues
and the Award conveys the same. His emphasis on the Guidelines is of no relevance because
what matters is that the majority considered it a “clue” that, together with other elements,
allowed the majority to reach its conclusion. !°? Moreover, under international law there are
no binding precedents and as such arbitrator Bello Janeiro’s references to other case law is

of no compelling consequence. !*

According to Argentina, Daimler’s argument on the transcription of the JCS decision is a
non-sequitur. The fact that the Tribunal transcribed some paragraphs of another award in
this Award does not mean that the reasons so transcribed were not discussed. Given the
secret nature of deliberations, the Parties may not have had knowledge of them. As such, the
logical conclusion would be that all paragraphs in the Award, including those taken from the
ICS award, were discussed by the three arbitrators and two arbitrators agreed to form the

majority. Nothing in the Award or in the Opinions leads to a different conclusion. !°°

3. THE AWARD IS INTERNALLY INCONSISTENT IN ITS FINDINGS CONCERNING THE
BIT’s 18-MONTH CLAUSE AND THE SCOPE OF THE BIT’S MFN CLAUSES

(i) Daimler’s arguments

According to Daimler, the Award is inconsistent in its treatment of the 18-month clause and
of the scope of the BIT’s MEN clauses. First, Daimler contends that the Award invokes

contradictory reasons regarding the nature of the BIT’s 18-month clause. In this regard,

Re}. 4 25.
3 Rej. 4 26.
14 Rej. 27.
5 Rej. | 28.

59.

60.

Daimler explains that the Award contradicts itself by saying in one paragraph that the 18-
month clause cannot be waived as a condition of Argentina’s consent to arbitrate, and in
another paragraph that it can be waived under certain circumstances. °° Daimler argues that
pre-arbitration requirements can be either mandatory or permissive. Mandatory requirements
are “conditions of consent”, which are jurisdictional in nature and must be fulfilled.
Permissive requirements can be, and have been, disregarded by a tribunal for various
reasons.!°’ The Award contradictorily treats the 18-month requirement as both mandatory
and permissive by first concluding that it cannot be bypassed or waived by the Tribunal, and

subsequently concluding that the clause can be waived in certain circumstances. !%*

The two scenarios described by Argentina to explain the contradictions outlined by Daimler
are not different: if the 18-month clause is jurisdictional (mandatory) it cannot be bypassed;
but if it is a procedural requirement (permissive), it could be waived by the Tribunal.!?
Daimler argues that the Tribunal’s findings in paragraphs 192 and 193 of the Award that the
18-month clause was jurisdictional, cannot be reconciled with its findings a few paragraphs
later that it could be waived if complying with the 18-month clause was deemed futile.
Daimler states that this contradiction leaves the Award “essentially lacking in any express

rationale”, !!°

Daimler further argues that the Award is contradictory on whether the BIT’s MEN clauses
reflect the Contracting States’ intention to allow the MEN clauses to be invoked in order to
overcome the Treaty’s conditions precedent to accessing international arbitration.!!' In its
analysis the Award looks to the expression treatment “in the territory” found in the MFN
clauses to determine the intention of the Contracting States. The Award states that if the
MEN clause applies to “treatment in the territory of the Host State”, treatment that is outside

the territory of the host State cannot be covered.!!? It then concludes that while litigating

66 Mem. fff 139-142.
‘07 Reply 4 36.

108 Reply 37.

‘© Reply 4 38.

40 Reply { 38.

4 Mem. ¥ 144.

"2 Mem, { 146.

61.

62.

before the domestic courts — as required by the 18-month clause — constitutes treatment
within Argentina, resorting to international arbitration does not constitute treatment within
the territory because it occurs, by definition, outside the host State.''? Since the right to
invoke international arbitration does not implicate “treatment in the territory”, the Award
concludes that Daimler could not rely upon the MEN clause in order to bypass the 18-month
requirement.''* However, this conclusion is contradicted in the Award’s comparison of the
dispute resolution clauses contained in the Argentina-Chile and Argentina-Germany BITs
when it states that Argentina could violate the MEN provision by requiring Daimler to
litigate its dispute in local courts, which constitutes treatment within Argentina, and not
requiring the same of Chilean investors.'!> According to Daimler, this contradictory

reasoning, “seriously affects the coherence of the Award”.!!©

In Daimler’s views, Argentina’s defense that these contradictions should be accepted by the
Committee because they appear in the section of the Award that is dicta, fails. Contradictory
reasons cancel each other out and warrant annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention whether or not they are in the operative part of the award, because this Article
does not limit its coverage to sections of the Award “its author (or defender) considers

operative”. !!7

Daimler also argues that the Award suffers from further contradictory reasons in its analysis
of the Tribunal’s authority to address the MFN claim. In analyzing such claim, the Tribunal
first conveyed that the MFN clause may confer the Tribunal with jurisdiction to hear the
case, but then asserted that Daimler had no standing to invoke the MEN clauses because it
had not satisfied the 18-month domestic litigation requirement.'!® Contrary to Argentina’s
contentions, the use of the term “unless” in paragraph 200 of the Award underscores the
circularity of the Award’s reasoning because it implies that the Tribunal does not have the

power to review the MEN clause, unless the MFN clause itself confers such power on the

43 Mem. ¥ 147.

44 Mem. ¥ 149.

45 Mem. ¥ 148.

46 Mem. 151.

"7 Reply 45.

48 Mem. #¥f 152-154; Reply 4 46.

20

63.

64.

Tribunal.'!° Furthermore, this contradiction would not be in favor of Daimler because the

Tribunal declined jurisdiction as a result of the conflicting reasons. !7°

Finally, Daimler claims that the Award contradicts itself by holding that the BIT’s 18-month
clause did not accord German investors less favorable treatment than Chilean investors,
whose BIT does not have such a clause, but then concluding that requiring German investors
to fruitlessly spend time and resources in Argentine courts while exempting Chilean
investors from such requirement, “could be viewed as discriminatory impairment of the
German investors’ rights”.!"! Daimler argues that Argentina’s claim that the Tribunal’s

reasoning on “more favorable treatment” is not comparable with its reasoning on “a

discriminatory impairment” is a position of “willful blindness” !??

. According to Daimler,
these two concepts overlap and their treatment in different sections of the BIT does not alter

this overlap. '>

In its Reply, Daimler argues that Argentina’s statement that it did not prove how the alleged
contradictions would affect the outcome of the Award, reflects three critical errors: i) it
premises its counter-arguments on an improperly narrow understanding of the term
“question”; ii) it overlooks the fact that reasons that conflict cancel each other out whether
or not one of them appears in dicta; and iii) it describes an improperly heightened burden of

proof.!4

Daimler argues that previous committees have explained in the context of a “serious
departure” under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention, that an applicant cannot be
required to prove that the tribunal would have reached a different conclusion. The standard
is focused on “the steps that comprise the award’s ‘logical chain’, from premise to

conclusion”. !?° According to Daimler, the Award bases its decision to decline jurisdiction

"9 Reply {ff 47-48.
20 Reply 49.

2 Mem. 155.

22 Reply 52.

23 Reply {[ 50-53.
4 Reply 54.
5 Reply 155,

21

66.

on four preliminary conclusions that are contradictory and cannot stand. Even a single
contradiction would leave the Award lacking in rationale and collapse its foundation. If the

majority had dealt with any of them, it might have reached a different conclusion. '?°
(ii) Argentina’s arguments

As to the nature of the 18-month clause, Argentina argues that there are no contradictory
reasons in the passages described by Daimler. The Tribunal stated in paragraph 194 that the
18-month clause could not be bypassed or waived by the Tribunal “as a mere ‘procedural’
or ‘admissibility-related’ matter”, which leaves open potential exceptions for reasons other
than those indicated by the Tribunal.!?’ As such, Argentina argues, in paragraph 190 of the
Award the Tribunal examines the alleged futility argument invoked by Daimler as a potential
exception to the 18-month provision and concludes that there was no such futility.!?°
Similarly, in paragraph 192 of the Award, the Tribunal examines a different hypothesis for
bypassing the 18-month requirement to the effect that the requirement was merely procedural
and not jurisdictional, granting the Tribunal discretionary power to observe or discard it, and
concludes in paragraph 194 that it is not a procedural or admissibility-related matter. '2° Thus,
Argentina argues, there is no contradiction between the paragraphs Daimler cites because
they analyse different scenarios. Moreover, there is no contradiction in regard to the nature
of the 18-month clause since the Tribunal analyses the futility requirement as a possible
exemption from compliance with this clause, which the Tribunal has described as a

jurisdictional pre-requisite. '*°

In this regard, Argentina further argues that the alleged contradiction asserted by Daimler is
in reality a difference in judgement between Applicant and the Tribunal regarding the
concepts of “jurisdictional clause” and “procedural clause”.'*! The Award concludes that a

procedural requirement is one within the discretion of the Tribunal to observe or discard,

26 Reply fff 55-56.
27 C-Mem. 158.
28 C-Mem. 159.
29 C-Mem. 4 60.
80C-Mem. {61
51 Re}. | 33; 136.

22

68.

69.

70.

and finds that the 18-month clause is not a procedural requirement. Further, the Award
concludes that a jurisdictional requirement establishes the conditions under which a tribunal
may exercise jurisdiction with the consent of the parties.'*? Yet there are exceptions to those
conditions, such as futility, which was addressed in the Award ultimately concluding that

there was no futility in this case.'*

Furthermore, there are no contradictions in the Tribunal’s analysis of the meaning of the
term “treatment in the territory”. According to Argentina, paragraphs 226 to 228 and
footnote 402 cited by Daimler are not contradictory as they refer to the treatment afforded
by Argentine national courts to Daimler within the context of “treatment in the territory”,
excluding international arbitration.'*4 Additionally, footnote 402 applies to the Tribunal’s
analysis in the alternative of the requirement that the comparator treaty must be more
favourable. In this regard, the Award itself states, “that it is not necessary to examine the

9 135

requirement that the comparator treatment invoked must be more favorable’ and as such,

even if there were a contradiction, it would not be “outcome-determinative”. °°

In its Rejoinder, Argentina states that Daimler has changed the paragraphs that it considered
contradictory in regard to the meaning of “most-favoured nation treatment in the territory”,
because it was unable to show the alleged contradictions. However, a plain reading of these
paragraphs shows that there are no contradictions. The Award clearly distinguishes between
extraterritorial dispute resolution and the actual treatment an investor receives in domestic

courts. !37

Argentina argues that upon Applicant’s own admission, to warrant annulment there must be
genuinely contradictory reasons that leave the decision on a pivotal point essentially lacking

in any expressed rationale!**. Daimler has not explained how the alleged contradiction would

82 Rej. 135.
89 Rej. 4 35.
4 C_Mem. 4 64.
35C._Mem. 65.
36C_Mem. { 66.
37 Rej. 4 37-39.
58 Rej. 1 40.

23

71.

72.

affect the outcome of the Award.!*? Argentina states that even if there were contradictions,
these would not have an effect upon a pivotal or outcome-determinative point. This is so,
because the portions of the Award referred to by Daimler belong to a section of the Award
that contains a subsidiary analysis on the comparator treaty requirement, which was not
necessary to the Tribunal’s decision.'*° In this regard, Argentina refers to the Caratube
committee, which rejected an annulment application because it related to an issue that was

incidental to and unnecessary for the Tribunal’s analysis. '*!

As to Daimler’s argument on the Tribunal’s analysis of its power to hear the MFN claim,
Argentina argues that the Award is not contradictory. The Tribunal analyses two different
bases for determining its jurisdiction, which is clear in the underlining of the term “unless”
in paragraph 200 and items 1 and 2 of paragraph 281 of the Award. This is further clarified
in footnote 355, which states that the Tribunal analyses its jurisdiction on two independent
bases, namely Article 10 (the dispute resolution clause) and Articles 3 and 4 (the MFN
clauses) of the BIT.'*? According to Argentina, following the rationale of the Award, the
Tribunal must first determine whether it has jurisdiction under the basic BIT, i.e. the
Germany-Argentina BIT, to then settle a claim about the applicability of the MFN clauses.
The Tribunal does so by first determining its jurisdiction under the dispute resolution clause
of the BIT, concluding that it does not have jurisdiction because Daimler failed to fulfil the
18-month requirement. It then examines its potential basis for jurisdiction under the MFN
clauses and, in this context the Tribunal considers the parties’ arguments on the scope and
meaning of the MEN clause in the BIT.'#? According to Argentina, even if there were a
contradiction, it would be in favor of Daimler because the MFN analysis considers the

possibility of providing the Tribunal with jurisdiction to the advantage of Daimler. '##

Similarly, with reference to Daimler’s claim that the Award is contradictory on the issue of

whether the 18-month clause grants less favorable treatment or not, Argentina states that the

89 Rej. 1 40.

40 Rej. F 41.

I Re}. 4 42.

‘2 C-Mem. { 69; Rej. Hf 45-46.
43 C_Mem. 470.

'44C_Mem. 71; Rej. 1.47.

24

2.

74,

75.

paragraph and footnote invoked by Daimler deal with different issues under different
provisions of the BIT and, as such, cannot be contradictory.'#* Paragraph 250 deals with
treatment in the territory of the host State under the BIT’s MEN clauses, whereas footnote
433 examines arbitrary or discriminatory treatment under Article 2(3) of the BIT.'#°
Additionally, the alleged contradiction is non-existent because footnotes 432 and 433 do not
refer to the 18-month clause as a jurisdictional requirement, but to the actual treatment
received by an investor in local courts after submitting its claims thereto. If such treatment
were to put an investor in an unfavorable position, it could result in less favorable treatment

according to the circumstances of the case. '47

Additionally, even if there were contradictions they would not affect a “pivotal or outcome-
determinative point” since the Award itself clarifies that it need not examine the requirement
that the comparator treatment invoked must be more favorable, because the wording of the

MEN clauses do not allow agreement with Daimler’s position. '4*
4, THE COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS OF THE ALLEGED FAILURE TO STATE REASONS

(i) The Standard

Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention provides that an award may be annulled if it has
“failed to state the reasons on which it is based”. Several ad hoc committees have observed
that annulment under this ground requires that the tribunal has failed to comply with its

obligation to render an award that allows readers to comprehend and follow its reasoning. '4°
The ad hoc committee, in the MINE annulment proceeding stated that:

“5.08 The Committee is of the opinion that the requirement that an award has to be
motivated implies that it must enable the reader to follow the reasoning of the

Tribunal on points of fact and law. It implies that, and only that. The adequacy of the

45 C_Mem. 4 73; Rej. 1.50.

46 C-Mem. 4 73; Rej. 150.

47 Rej. 51.

48 C_Mem. 74; Rej. 52.

49 See, e.g.: MINE, 1 15.08-5.09; Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4)
(“Wena”), 4 81; Vivendi I, 164.

25

76.

77.

reasoning is not an appropriate standard of review under paragraph (1)(e), because it
almost inevitably draws an ad hoc Committee into an examination of the substance
of the tribunal’s decision, in disregard of the exclusion of the remedy of appeal by
Article 53 of the Convention. [...] 5.09 In the Committee’s view, the requirement to
state reasons is satisfied as long as the award enables one to follow how the tribunal
proceeded from Point A to Point B and eventually to its conclusion, even if it made
an error of fact or of law. This minimum requirement is in particular not satisfied by

either contradictory or frivolous reasons.” !*°

Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention does not empower the Committee to review the
merits of the case. Such a review would amount to an appeal which is not a remedy provided

for in Article 53 of the ICSID Convention. As stated by the Wena annulment committee:

“79. The ground for annulment of Article 52(1)(e) does not allow any review of the
challenged Award which would lead the ad hoc Committee to reconsider whether the
reasons underlying the Tribunal’s decisions were appropriate or not, convincing or
not. As stated by the ad hoc Committee in MINE, this ground for annulment refers
to ‘minimum requirement’ only. This requirement is based on the Tribunal’s duty to
identify, and to let the parties know, the factual and legal premises leading the
Tribunal to its decision. If the Tribunal has given such sequence of reasons, there is

no room left for a request for annulment under Article 52(1)(e).'>!

Two tests must be satisfied before an ad hoc committee can annul an award based on
contradictory reasons. First, the reasons must be genuinely contradictory in that they cancel
each other out so as to amount to no reasons at all. Second, the point with regard to which
these reasons are given is necessary for the tribunal’s decision. In this regard the Vivendi I

annulment committee observed:

“In the Committee’s view, annulment under Article 52(1)(e) should only occur in a

clear case. This entails two conditions: first, the failure to state reasons must leave

50 MINE 4 5.08-5.09.
'S! Wena 79 and 81.

26

78.

79.

80.

81.

the decision on a particular point essentially lacking in any expressed rationale; and
second, that point must itself be necessary to the tribunal’s decision. It is frequently
said that contradictory reasons cancel each other out, and indeed, if reasons are
genuinely contradictory so they might. However, tribunals must often struggle to
balance conflicting considerations, and an ad hoc committee should be careful not to
discern contradiction when what is actually expressed in a tribunal’s reasons could

more truly be said to be but a reflection of such conflicting considerations.” !*

Therefore, in reviewing the alleged contradictions, an ad hoc committee must be mindful of
the fact that what sometimes may appear as a contradiction may be the result of a
compromise reached by a collegiate body to reach a decision. In addition, in reviewing the
apparent contradictions, the ad hoc committee should, to the extent possible and considering
each case, prefer an interpretation which confirms an award’s consistency as opposed to its

alleged inner contradictions. '**

The standard for annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention is, therefore,
high. It does not permit an ad hoc committee to second guess the reasoning of the tribunal
and that imposes on the applicant the burden of proving that the reasoning of the tribunal on
a point that is essential for the outcome of the case was either absent, unintelligible,

contradictory or frivolous. In order to succeed the Applicant must discharge this burden.

(ii) The Alleged Failure to Reach a Majority Decision on Each Question
Submitted

The issue posed to this Committee is whether, considering the scope and application of
Article 48 of the ICSID Convention (and in particular sections 1 and 3 thereof), the Separate
Opinion contradicts the Award and such contradiction results in a failure by the Tribunal to

reach a majority decision on each question submitted by the Parties.

Article 48 of the ICSID Convention reads:

82 Vivendi I, 4 65.
'53 See: Vivendi I, 65 and CDC Group ple v. Republic of Seychelles (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14) (“CDC”),
qsi.

27

82.

83.

84.

“(1) The Tribunal shall decide questions by a majority of the votes of all its members.
(2) The award of the Tribunal shall be in writing and shall be signed by the members
of the Tribunal who voted for it. (3) The award shall deal with every question
submitted to the Tribunal, and shall state the reasons upon which it is based. (4) Any
member of the Tribunal may attach his individual opinion to the award, whether he
dissents from the majority or not, or a statement of his dissent. (5) The Centre shall

not publish the award without the consent of the parties.”

The Committee will interpret Article 48 of the ICSID Convention following the provisions
of the VCLT, particularly Articles 31 and 33. Article 48 of the ICSID Convention must,
therefore, be read in good faith. Its words should be given their ordinary meaning, taking
into account their context, and in the light of the object and purpose of the ICSID Convention
taken as a whole.'*4 The texts of the ICSID Convention in English, French and Spanish,
(English and Spanish, are the languages of these proceedings) must be, insofar as possible,

given identical meaning.'>>

The Parties do not seem to differ on the scope and interpretation of sections (2) and (4) of
Article 48 as regards the Separate Opinion. Professor Bello Janeiro signed the Award and
“voted for it” (section (2)), and he had the option of attaching an individual opinion, even

when not dissenting from the majority (section 4).

As regards paragraphs (1) and (3) of Article 48 of the ICSID Convention, the Committee
observes that they use different language in addressing the issue of “questions” to be decided
by the tribunal in the award that it drafts. Paragraph (1), in the English text, refers to
“questions” which a tribunal shall “decide” ... “by a majority of votes of its members”.
Paragraph (3) uses a different expression. It refers to “every question”. The context is also
different from paragraph (1). In paragraph (3) the requirement is different. The award is to
“deal with every question submitted to the Tribunal, and shall state the reasons upon which

it is based”. In the Spanish version, paragraph (1) uses the words “todas las cuestiones” and

'S4 Cf VCLT, art. 31.
155 Cf. VCLT, art. 33.

28

85.

86.

87.

paragraph (3) makes reference to “todas las pretensiones”.'*© The French version uses, in
paragraph (1) the expression “toute question,” while paragraph (3) refers to “‘tous les chefs

de conclusions” |"

A reading of the aforementioned sections of Article 48 in English, French and Spanish, the
three authoritative languages of the ICSID Convention leads the Committee to conclude that
despite the ostensible similarity of the language in paragraphs (1) and (3) of Article 48
referring to “questions” to be addressed in the decision, these two paragraphs address two

different issues and deal with different matters.

Article 48(1) generally refers to how the decision-making process of the tribunal must take
place, and indicates that when the tribunal “decides” “questions”, the decision must be
supported by the vote of a majority of its members. In other words, any decision of the

tribunal in the award on a question decided by it requires a majority “vote”.

Article 48(3) refers to the tribunal’s obligation to “deal with” “every question” submitted to
it when rendering an “award”. The expression “every question” has not been defined by the
ICSID Convention. All versions of the ICSID Convention ought to be given the same
meaning. '** When read in conjunction with the Spanish and French versions of the ICSID
Convention, it seems without doubt that the words “every question” in the English version
refer to the heads of claim of the parties (“las pretensiones” in the Spanish version, les chefs

de conclusions in the French version). Article 48(3), therefore, refers to the tribunal’s

 

 

'56The Spanish version of Article 48 reads: “(1) El Tribunal decidird todas las cuestiones por mayoria de votos
de todos sus miembros. (2) El laudo deberd dictarse por escrito y Ilevard la firma de los miembros del Tribunal
que hayan votado en su favor. (3) El laudo contendra declaracién sobre todas las pretensiones sometidas por
las partes al Tribunal y serd motivado. (4) Los arbitros podran formular un voto particular, estén o no de acuerdo
con la mayoria, o manifestar su voto contrario si disienten de ella. (5) El Centro no publicara el laudo sin
consentimiento de las partes.” [Emphasis added].

157 The French version of Article 48 of the ICSID Convention reads: “(1) Le Tribunal statue sur toute question
la majorité des voix de tous ses membres. (2) La sentence est rendue par écrit; elle est signée par les membres
du Tribunal qui se sont prononcés en sa faveur. (3) La sentence doit répondre a tous les chefs de conclusions
ses au Tribunal et doit étre motivée. (4) Tout membre du Tribunal peut faire joindre a la sentence s
son opinion particuliére — qu’il partage ou non I’opinion de la majorité — soit la mention de son dissentiment.
(5) Le Centre ne publie aucune sentence sans le consentement des parties.” [Emphasis added]

'58 According to Article 33(4) of the VCLT, when there are multiple, equally authentic versions of a treaty,
they are all presumed to have the same meaning.

   

 

  

 

   

 

29

88.

89.

90.

91.

obligation to deal with, either directly or indirectly, all of the parties’ heads of claim within

its award.

In sum, the Committee considers that paragraphs (1) and (3) of Article 48 of the ICSID
Convention refer to two different obligations of the tribunal. On the one hand, Article 48(1)
provides that each and every question that is decided by a tribunal must be approved by a
majority of its members. On the other hand, Article 48(3) stipulates that, in its award, a
tribunal needs to deal with, either directly or indirectly, all the parties’ heads of claim
(“questions”, “chefs de conclusions” or “las pretensiones sometidas... al Tribunal’). To meet
this obligation, it is for the tribunal to determine and formulate the questions, which are
material to resolve the dispute between the parties and put these to a vote by the members of

the tribunal.

Based on the above, the Committee will now turn to the analysis of whether, as claimed by
Daimler, the Separate Opinion evidenced the Tribunal’s failing to reach a majority on each

question submitted.

According to Daimler, in the case of separate opinions, ad hoc committees must look
carefully at the reasoning provided by each arbitrator.'°° If there is different reasoning on
outcome determinative issues, then a majority is not reached. Daimler submits that the
signature of the arbitrator or the vote alone is not sufficient to establish that there was a

majority on all questions presented.'

According to Daimler, since the Award reproduces in a large part the reasoning of an award
rendered in a different case that shared the same President, and Professor Bello Janeiro
subscribed or adhered to the President’s conclusions, the Tribunal failed to render an award

that reflected the reasons of the Tribunal and not those of each individual member. !°!

‘59 Mem. 115.
60 Mem. 121.
‘6! Mem. ¥ 123; if 127-128.

30

92.

93.

94.

95.

According to Argentina, there are no divergent views between the two majority arbitrators,
and if there were, the Award would still be valid.!© In addition, it would be futile for an
arbitrator, in the majority, to attach a separate concurring opinion if he had nothing different
to say from what was stated in the award.'® Argentina claims that Professor Bello Janeiro
joined the President to form the majority. He attached an individual opinion to explain his
position as it expressed a view different from that expressed by him in his previous position

in the Siemens case.'©*

What is important, according to Argentina, is that the decisions on the 18-month and on the
MEN clauses was by a majority. Professor Bello Janeiro voted in favor of the decision
contained in the Award and added reasons to explain his change of mind, which reasons do

not affect the Award.!°

The Committee is of the opinion that the question of jurisdiction that the Parties required the
Tribunal to resolve — and which the Tribunal had to decide — was whether or not it had
jurisdiction over the dispute between Daimler and Argentina, in the light of the 18-months
and the MEN clauses of the Germany-Argentina BIT. The decision of these questions was

dispositive of the issue before the Tribunal.

The Committee is of the considered opinion that the Tribunal in its Award dealt with the
question before it i.e., whether it had jurisdiction in the matter. The Tribunal decided this
question by a majority vote. It complied with the ICSID Convention. Both Professor Pierre-
Marie Dupuy and Professor Domingo Bello Janeiro agreed that the Tribunal lacked
jurisdiction to hear the case. Judge Brower dissented and concluded that the Tribunal had
jurisdiction. The question of jurisdiction was decided by a 2 to 1 vote in favor of declining

jurisdiction.

'62.C-Mem. 12; Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 147:17 — 150:1.
63 C-Mem. #9 13-14.
‘64 C_Mem. if 15-16.
‘65 C_Mem. {ff 34-35.

31

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

Therefore, the Tribunal dealt in its Award with the “question” of jurisdiction and “decided”
it by a majority vote in strict compliance with both paragraphs (1) and (3) of Article 48 of
the ICSID Convention.

In the following paragraphs the Committee will deal with (a) the question of whether the
reasoning of the opinion of Professor Bello Janeiro (i) affects the majority and (ii) contradicts
the Award; and (b) assuming that there is a contradiction, whether, it would result in the
Award (i) not dealing with the questions submitted to the Tribunal or (ii) not stating the

reasons on which it is based.

The Committee has carefully reviewed the Separate Opinion and the alleged contradictions
between the Separate Opinion and the Award. The Committee is of the view that there are
no such contradictions. But even if the Committee were to accept Daimler’s submission with
regard to contradictions between the Separate Opinion and the Award its conclusion would
remain unchanged. The majority clearly voted that the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction,
and the reasoning in the Separate Opinion did not affect the vote of Professor Bello Janeiro
or the majority decision. Further, the Committee does not regard any of these alleged
contradictions as having the effect of stripping the Award of its rational basis on an outcome-

determinative question.

As for the alleged contradictions, Daimler claims that “there is a divergence of conclusions
and reasoning between the Award and Professor Bello Janeiro’s Separate Opinion, rendering
it impossible to confirm that a majority decision exists on the key jurisdictional issue decided
in the Award.”!°° According to Daimler, the contradictions lie in three specific points: (a)
the interpretative framework; (b) the World Bank Guidelines and (c) the evolution in case

law. The Committee does not agree with Daimler.

In the introductory paragraphs to his Separate Opinion Professor Bello Janeiro states his full

agreement with the decision contained in the Award and the reasoning thereof.'®’ After an

166 Mem. ¥ 122.

‘67 Separate Opinion, page 1. “Introductory Considerations: I wish to state at the outset that I fully subscribe to
the decision proposed by the President of the Tribunal. I find the award to be well founded since the question
of most favoured-nation (MEN) treatment is dealt with much more judiciously than in prior cas in particular
Mafezzini and Siemens (Decision on Jurisdiction).”

 

  

32

101.

103.

104.

x

examination of the Separate Opinion this Committee has no doubt that Professor Bello
Janeiro not only voted for the decision, but also clearly expressed his agreement with the

foundational reasons thereof.

After explaining his involvement in the Siemens case and the discussions that took place in
that case, Professor Bello Janeiro refers to the right that an arbitrator has to change his mind

with respect to positions taken or opinions expressed in previous cases. '*

. Professor Bello Janeiro cites examples of cases where arbitrators, in his view, have changed

their opinion on certain issues, indicates the factors that led him to clarify his opinion and
concludes that “my change of heart between the decision in the arbitral award concerning
the claim by Siemens against Argentina and the current case can be explained by the
important aspects summarized below, naturally without prejudice to any other more
substantiated opinion, but can be fully justified by the obvious fact that each arbitration is
different.”'®? (Emphasis added). The “important aspects summarized below”, i.e., the
reasons that made Professor Bello Janeiro change his mind with respect to Siemens, are

basically contained under the heading “Substantive Elements” of the Separate Opinion.

It is in this context that the wording of the Separate Opinion must be understood. Professor
Bello Janeiro agreed with the decision in the Award as well as with its foundational reasons.
The comments that he made, on the several aspects which Daimler terms contradictions, are,
on the one hand, explanations as to why he changed his mind with respect to the Siemens
award, and on the other hand additional reasons to support his vote in favor of the decision

on jurisdiction in the present case.

Article 48(4) of the ICSID Convention clearly lends support to the approach taken in the
Separate Opinion. It explicitly permits an arbitrator to record a separate opinion even if he
does not dissent “from the majority”. While voting with the majority on the decision(s) he

may author and attach his “individual opinion to the award’. Such an opinion is unlikely to

168 Separate Opinion, page 2, “In any case, with regard to the practical possibility for an arbitrator on an ICSID
Tribunal to change, clarify or alter in any way his opinion or his position, he clearly has in principle complete
freedom to do so, particularly after considering developments in the case and subsequent decis' rejecting
the extension or maximum expansion of the ambit of the MFN clause to cover dispute resolutions”.

  
  

‘69 Separate Opinion, page 3.

33

105.

106.

108.

be authored or attached to the award if it records nothing in addition to or different from
what is stated there. If a separate opinion were limited to agreeing with all aspects of the
reasoning in the majority award then it would be both repetitive and meaningless. If this is

all that Article 48(4) permitted it too would be meaningless.

But even assuming that in the three topics identified by Daimler (i.e., the interpretative
framework, the World Bank Guidelines and the evolution in case law) Professor Bello
Janeiro was not giving explanations as to his “change of heart” but stating his reasons to
support the Award, the Committee finds no contradiction between the Separate Opinion and

the Award with regard to the three topics.

First, there is no indication in the Separate Opinion that Professor Bello Janeiro disagrees
with the reasoning in the Award or that the reasoning that he puts forward substitutes the
reasoning of the Award. On the contrary, he expressly supports the reasoning of the Award.
Second, even if the Separate Opinion were to suggest, as Daimler submits, that more weight
should be assigned to certain sources (e.g., to judicial practice and case law), or that more
relevance should be given to the World Bank Guidelines, or that the evolution of case law
was relevant and should have been considered, these are, in the context of the Separate
Opinion, additional or subsidiary reasons that Professor Bello Janeiro gives. These reasons
are not intended to replace those in the Award. The two arbitrators in majority agreed on the
decision and the foundations thereof, but assigned different weight to certain sources. Third,
a separate opinion by its very nature includes additional or subsidiary considerations that are

not reflected in the award.

. However, even assuming that the reasoning of the Award and that of the Separate Opinion

were contradictory, this would not affect the Award in any way or result in a ground for

annulment.

As indicated in paragraph 98 above, in the Committee’s view the relevant issue is how the
majority voted. If the arbitrators in majority agree on the decision and vote in favor of it, the
fact that they may not concur in all the reasons leading to their vote in support of the decision

is irrelevant. The ICSID Convention, as already mentioned in paragraphs 83 and 104 above,

34

109.

110.

provides that arbitrators may issue a separate opinion if they agree on the decision but

disagree on the reasons leading to that decision.

The Committee would like to emphasize that a separate opinion is attached to express a
complementary, subsidiary or even different reasoning than that of the award. As correctly
pointed out by Argentina, “if an arbitrator has nothing to add to the award, there would be

no reason to draft a separate opinion”.!7°

On the issue of whether the award would be affected by a contradiction in the reasoning

between the award and the separate opinion, Prof. Schreuer states that:

“A majority vote is not affected by an apparent contradiction contained in a
declaration or individual opinion [...] made by a member who has voted in favor of
the decision. A member of a tribunal may vote for an award not because he or she
wholly agrees with it but because he or she feels that it is necessary to provide a
majority.”'7! “A concurring opinion that differs from the majority opinion on certain
points of the reasons does not affect the majority necessary for reaching a decision
[...]. What matters for the validity of the award in accordance with Art. 48(1) is that
the result has attracted the votes of a majority of the tribunal and not that the members

who voted for the award agreed on all points of the reasoning accompanying it.”!7*

. The three ICJ decisions cited by Argentina in its Counter-Memorial and discussed by the

Parties in these proceedings support the above conclusion.

. In the Case Concerning the Award of 1989, the ICJ reviewed an award in which one of the

arbitrators dissented and the president, who formed the majority, added a statement to the
effect that he would have responded in a different manner to one of the issues that had to be
decided in the award. The ICJ considered that even though there had been some

contradictions between the award and the opinion of the president, the alleged contradiction

Re}. 4 23.
""! Christoph H. Schreurer, “The ICSID Convention: A Commentary”, Second Edition, p. 810.
"2. Christoph H. Schreurer, “The ICSID Convention: A Commentary”, Second Edition, p. 832.

35

114.

115.

would not prevail over the position of the president when voting the award. In the words of

the ICJ:

“Furthermore, even if there had been any contradiction [...] between the view
expressed by President Barberis and that stated in the Award, such contradiction
could not prevail over the position which President Barberis had taken when voting
for the Award. In agreeing to the Award, he definitively agreed to the decisions,
which it incorporated, as to the extent of the maritime areas governed by the 1960
Agreement, and as to the Tribunal not being required to answer the second question
in view of its answer to the first. As the practice of international tribunals shows, it
sometimes happens that a member of a tribunal votes in favor of a decision of the
tribunal even though he might individually have been inclined to prefer another
solution. The validity of his vote remains unaffected by the expression of any such
differences in a declaration or separate opinion of the member concerned, which are

therefore without consequence for the decision of the tribunal.” '* (Emphasis added).

. The ICJ also upheld an award under similar circumstances — a separate opinion from the

president of the tribunal who formed the majority — in the Review of Judgment No. 333

Opinion.

In the Granite State Machine Company, Inc. v. Iran case, one of the arbitrators issued a
concurring opinion stating that he concurred in the award so as to “end protracted
deliberations” despite the fact that he did not concur with one of the elements considered for
compensation of the claimant. Moreover, the arbitrator, even though he did form the

majority, did not sign the award.!74

Other decisions, not cited in these proceedings, took the same approach. For example in
Starrett Housing International, Inc. v. Iran, an arbitrator, whose vote formed the majority,

decided to vote in favor of the award, rather than to dissent, despite his disagreement with

"3 Case concerning the Arbitral Award of 31 July 1989 (Guinea-Bissau v Senegal), ICJ Judgment of 12
November, 1991.

"4 Granite State Machinery Company, Inc. v. Iran, Award No. 18-30-3, December 15 1982; Iran-US Claims
Tribunal Reports, vol. | at 442.

36

116.

117.

118.

the damages awarded, based on “the realistic old saying that there are circumstances in which
“something is better than nothing.” The arbitrator indicated that “in a three-member Chamber
a majority of two members must join, or there can be no Award. My colleague Dr. Kashani
having dissented, I am faced with the choice of either joining in the present Award or
accepting the prospect of an indefinite postponement of any Award in this case. [...] The
deliberations in this case have continued long enough; [...]. Neither the parties nor the

Tribunal will, in my view, benefit from further delay.”!75

In all the cases referred to above, an arbitrator expressed reasons that could be considered —
and in some cases were in fact claimed as such by the party seeking annulment of the award
— contradictory to the reasoning in the award. Moreover, without the vote of the concurring
arbitrator, no award could have been issued in those cases. There was no identity of views
or similarity in the reasons given by the arbitrators forming the majority. Yet, given the

identity of their votes, the awards were valid.

In sum, what matters for purposes of making up a majority is not the individual reasoning of

the members in majority, but their votes.

In his 1996 Freshfields Lecture, profusely cited by the Parties in these proceedings, Judge
Stephen M. Schwebel noted the following in commenting the Case Concerning the 1989

Arbitral Award:

“The claim of Guinea-Bissau in the end boiled down to the complaint that the tribunal
had voted for what it could muster a majority for rather than for what a majority of
its members thought to be right. That complaint was well founded. But it did not
follow that the resultant award was inexistent, null and void, or even voidable. On
the contrary, so much of the judicial and arbitral process is characterized by judges
and arbitrators voting to form a majority rather than voting to express what each of
them may see as the optimum judgment. In a collective body, there is very frequently

a process of accommodation of differing views, sometimes sharply differing views.

"5 Starrett Housing Corporation, Starrett Systems, Inc., Starrett Housing International, Inc., v. The

Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Bank Omran, Bank Mellat, Interlocutory Award No. ITL 32-24-
1, December 19, 1983, 4 Iran-US C.T.R. 122, 159 (Concurring Opinion of Howard H. Holtzmann).

37

119.

120.

The result may be the consecration of the least common denominator. That may not

be a noble result, but it is a practical result. It is better than no result.”!76

Daimler suggests that the decisions invoked by Argentina and referred to above would not
apply to this case given that the grounds for annulment presented in those cases did not refer
to a “failure to state reasons”.!7’7 The Committee disagrees. What emerges from the
authorities cited above is that what matters for the validity of an award is not an identity of
reasoning by the arbitrators in majority, but the identity of their votes with respect to the

outcome. In this case the majority clearly voted to decline jurisdiction.

In sum, in the present case, the Committee has no doubt that the arbitrators making up the
majority voted in favor of dismissing the case for lack of jurisdiction and the Separate
Opinion does not affect the Award nor does it allow annulment based on the alleged “failure

to state reasons”.

 

The Alleged Internal Inconsistencies of the Award in its Findings
Concerning the BIT’s 18-month Clause and the Scope of the BIT’s MFN

Clauses

. According to Daimler, the Award “suffers from fatal internal inconsistencies, contradictions

and gaps in logic, including with respect to issues that the Award itself recognizes as integral
to its acceptance of Argentina’s objection based on the 18-month clause in the Germany-

Argentina BIT.”!78

. Daimler finds that the Award invokes contradictory reasons related to the BIT’s 18-month

clause and scope of the BIT’s MEN clauses in four different aspects: (a) the nature of the
BIT’s 18 month clause; (b) the meaning of “treatment in the territory” in the MFN clauses;
(c) the Tribunal’s authority to address the MFN claim; and (d) whether the 18-month clause

grants less favorable treatment.

"76 Stephen M. Schwebel, May the Majority Vote of an International Arbitral Tribunal be Impeached?: The
1996 Freshfields Lecture, Arbitration International, (Kluwer Law International 1997 Volume 13 Issue 2 )
pp. 145 - 154.

"7 Reply fff 12-15.

7 Mem. 138.

  

38

123.

The Committee will address each of these alleged inconsistencies.

(a) The nature of the BIT’s 18-month clause.

124. Daimler claims that, while in paragraph 194 “the Award concludes that ‘the 18-month

125.

126.

domestic courts provision constitutes a treaty-based precondition to the Host State’s consent
to arbitrate, [and] it cannot be bypassed or otherwise waived by the Tribunal’”'”, in both
paragraphs 190 and 198, “the Award states directly the opposite: that the 18-month clause,
despite being a ‘treaty-based jurisdictional pre-condition’, could be bypassed if certain

circumstances were found to exist.”!*?

According to Daimler “the Award asserts, on the one hand, that the 18-month clause was not
waivable at all, and, on the other, that it was indeed waivable under certain
circumstances.” '*! “These findings — Daimler argues- are entirely contradictory and cannot

be reconciled.” !*?

Argentina, however, was of the view that there was no contradiction whatsoever between
paragraph 194, on the one hand, and paragraphs 190 and 198, on the other hand.
According to Argentina, “the Award analyses and discards two different hypotheses invoked
as potential ways to bypass compliance with the BIT’s 18-month provision.”!** First, in
paragraph 190, the Tribunal analyses futility as a possible exception to the 18-month
requirement and concludes that there is no futility. Then, in paragraph 192, it analyses if the
18-month clause may be by-passed on the grounds that it is procedural. The answer thereto
is provided in paragraph 194, where the Tribunal concludes that “the 18-month provision
cannot be bypassed or otherwise waived by the Tribunal as a mere ‘procedural’ or
‘admissibility-related’ matter.” '®> Finally, in paragraph 198 the Tribunal refers to futility

— as opposed to nonsensicality — as a possible exemption from compliance with a treaty-

'” Mem. { 140, citing Award, 194.

‘80 Mem. ¥ 141.

'S! Mem. ¥ 142.

"2 Mem. ¥ 142.

83 C_Mem. 1 61.

8 C_Mem. 158.

85 C_Mem. 158 citing to Award, {| 194.

39

128.

129.

130.

based jurisdictional pre-requisite — such as the 18-month clause- and reiterates that futility

was not established in the present case. '*°

. The Committee has already stated in paragraph 77 above that for contradictory reasons to

result in a failure to state reasons, the reason must be on an outcome determinative issue and
the contradictions must be such that the reasons cancel each other out. Only in such cases
can it be said that the reasons amount to no reasons at all. The Committee has also observed
that an interpretation in favor of the award’s consistency should be preferred to an approach,
which expresses preference for annulling an award on grounds of some alleged inner

contradictions.

The Committee agrees with Argentina that there is nothing in the Award or the Separate
Opinion that could suggest that the award is not based on reasons. A holistic reading of the
Award, in its context, as opposed to a comparison between isolated sections further supports

the decision of this Committee.

The Tribunal found that it had no jurisdiction based on Article 10 of the BIT (the 18-month
clause). In doing so, the Tribunal first considered whether the 18-month provision could be
waived or bypassed by the Tribunal as a mere “procedural” or “admissibility related matter”
(paragraph 194). The Tribunal concluded that the 18-month requirement could not be waived
or bypassed because it is of a jurisdictional nature. Then the Tribunal examined whether or
not the 18-month domestic court litigation requirement is “nonsensical” (paragraphs 195-
198) and in that context concluded that “[s]overeign States are free to agree to any treaty
provisions they so choose — whether concerning substantive commitments or dispute
resolution provisions or otherwise — provided these provisions are not futile and are not

otherwise contrary to peremptory norms of international law”. !°7

In sum, the Tribunal — as correctly pointed out by Argentina — analyzed two different
scenarios but did not — as claimed by Daimler — record contradictory findings on the issue

of whether the 18-month clause can be waived or bypassed.

86 C_Mem. #11 58-61.
87 Award, { 198.

40

133.

(b) The meaning of “treatment in the territory” in the MFN clauses.

. By first comparing paragraphs 226 to 228 of the Award with footnote 432, Daimler claimed

that the Award reached contradictory conclusions regarding the question of whether the 18-
month requirement could be bypassed by virtue of a MFN clause. According to Daimler, in
doing so the Award first concluded that the right to invoke international arbitration did not
involve treatment “in the territory” of the host State and that the MEN clause was, thus,
inapplicable. But then — Daimler argued — the Award reached a contradictory conclusion as
it admitted that treatment received by an investor in Argentinean courts could lead to a
violation of the State’s MFN commitments. 8% According to Daimler, the fact that the
contradiction is contained in a footnote made no difference, because contradictory reasons

have the same effect regardless of their position in the award. '®°

. Argentina, argued that the contents of footnote 432 did not contradict the prior determination

made by the Tribunal in paragraphs 226 to 228 of the Award. First, Argentina pointed out
that paragraphs 226 to 228 and footnote 432 referred to treatment received by an investor in
the Argentinean courts, i.e. “treatment in the territory” — without including international
arbitration as a part thereof.'°? Second, Argentina noted that footnote 432 referred to an
analysis of the favorability of the comparator treaty, which, as previously established by the
Tribunal, was not required. Given that the analysis was not necessary, even if the alleged
contradictions had taken place, they would not have an effect upon an outcome-

determinative point of the Award.'?!

In its Rejoinder, Argentina noted that Daimler changed the portions of the Award invoked
by Daimler as contradictory. Regarding these newly compared portions, Argentina stated
that when analyzing the territorial limitation of the MFN clauses of the BIT, the Award drew

a clear distinction between extraterritorial dispute resolution from the actual treatment

88 Mem. #91 147-149.
89 Reply 145.

90 C-Mem. 4 64.

1 Rej. 4 41-42.

4l

134.

135.

136.

received by the investor in the domestic courts and hence, there was no contradiction

between the conclusion of the Tribunal on this matter. !°”

Upon an examination of the sections of the Award invoked by Daimler as contradictory —
paragraphs 230 and footnote 403, on the one hand, and paragraphs 247 to 248 and footnote
432 on the other hand!®? — the Committee is of the view that these sections of the Award do
not contradict each other. Further, the Committee is of the view that, even assuming that
such sections were contradictory; they do not meet the required standard to annul an award.
That standard is met only when contradictions within the award cancel its reasons out to such
an extent that these amount to no reasons at all on a point that is determinative for the

decision of the Tribunal.

The Committee reiterates that a submission that an award contains contradictory reasons
must not be examined in isolation. The reasons in an award have to be examined with due
regard to their context. A committee before it proceeds to annul an award on the ground of
contradictory reasons must examine their context and satisfy itself that these have the effect
of cancelling each other out leaving the decision on an outcome-determinative issue without
any rational basis. Moreover, if after having stated its reasons and deciding a given point,
the Tribunal, in an excess of caution or otherwise, analyses the other arguments made by the
parties, such additional — and perhaps unnecessary — analysis cannot be compared with the
reasons for the decision of the Tribunal to determine whether the two sets of reasons are
contradictory, for even if they are they will not cancel one another. In such cases, the reasons
for the decision are already in the Award, and the additional reasons can have no impact on

the decision of the Tribunal.

Footnote 432 belongs to paragraph 248 of the Award. This paragraph is under the section

titled “Requirement that the comparator treatment invoked must be favorable”. This section

12 Rej. 4 39.
'3 The Committee notes that Daimler changed the parts of the Award which are the subject matter of the
comparison. In the Memorial it compared paragraphs 226 to 228 with footnote 432 (See: Mem.144-151) and
in the Reply it compared paragraph 230 and footnote 403 (See: Reply. 940), on the one hand, and paragraphs
247-248 and footnotes 432 and 433, on the other (See: Reply. 40). In the Hearing Daimler cited the
contradictions between {231 of the Award and footnote 403 (Tr: 81:11-22)

42

137.

138.

139,

comprises paragraphs 240 to 250. In the first paragraph of that particular section, i.e.

paragraph 240, the Tribunal stated:

“Since this Tribunal has already concluded that the wording of Articles 3 and 4 of
the BIT as centred on the phrase ‘treatment in its territory’ does not permit it to agree
with the Claimant’s thesis, it is not strictly necessary to examine the requirement that
the comparator treatment invoked must be more favorable. Even if such an
examination were necessary, the Tribunal could not at present reach the same

conclusion as the Claimant on this point.”!°* (Emphasis added).

On a reading of the text and on examining the context of the Award, it is clear for the
Committee that the Tribunal gave its reasons in connection with the words “treatment in the
territory” and concluded that the wording of the BIT, and specifically Articles 3 and 4
thereof, did not allow the Tribunal to accept Daimler’s submissions in this regard. The
reasoning on the requirement of favorability of the comparator treatment is not — in the words
of the Tribunal — “strictly necessary’, but even if it were it would not lead the Tribunal to a

conclusion favorable to the Applicant.!*>

Considering that the reasoning on the comparator treatment was subsidiary or - in the words
of the Tribunal — “not strictly necessary”, and that a decision was made on the point for
different reasons, the alleged contradictions, even if these existed, would not have affected

the outcome of the Award.
(c) The Tribunal’s authority to address the MFN claim.

Daimler submitted that the Award invoked contradictory reasons on the Tribunal’s authority
to address the MFN claim. According to the Applicant, the Tribunal contradicted itself when
it conveyed that the MFN clause might confer it with jurisdiction, but then asserted that

Daimler could not invoke MEN treatment because it had not satisfied the conditions

' Award, | 240.
95 Award, | 240.

43

140.

142.

144,

precedent to arbitration.'°° According to Daimler these contradictory reasons resulted in the

Tribunal rejecting jurisdiction. !°”

According to Argentina, the alleged contradiction in the Tribunal’s analysis of its authority
to address the MFN claim does not exist. This is obvious from a simple review of the wording
in the Award. In fact — Argentina argued — the Award dealt with the dispute resolution clause
and the MEN clauses as two separate potential bases for jurisdiction. In addition to the fact
that there is no contradiction in the Tribunal’s reasoning on this issue, the fact that the
Tribunal considered two independent bases for jurisdiction is more favorable to Daimler.
Referring to the decision on annulment in Azurix, Argentina further argued that the Award
should not be annulled on the basis of an alleged contradiction that was to the advantage of

the Applicant. !%*

. The Committee agrees with Argentina in that there is no contradiction between paragraphs

200 and 281, on the one hand, and footnote 355 and paragraph 204, on the other.

In paragraph 200, the Tribunal addresses the issue of whether it has jurisdiction under the
BIT, which requires an initial recourse to domestic courts. It concludes that since “Claimant
has not yet satisfied the necessary condition precedent to Argentina’s consent to international
arbitration, its MFN arguments are not yet properly before the Tribunal. The Tribunal is

therefore presently without jurisdiction to rule on any MFN-based claims unless the MFN

 

clause themselves supply the Tribunal with the necessary jurisdiction”. !°

. In footnote 355 the Tribunal used the word “unless” to clarify that the dispute resolution

clause and the MFN clause are to be analyzed as independent potential bases for the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

Paragraph 204 examined whether the 18-month provision could be bypassed by the MFN

clauses, i.e., the analysis in paragraph 200 (the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction “unless the MFN

96 Mem. #¥f 152-154; Reply 411 46-48.
7 Reply 149.

98 C-Mem. {ff 67-71; Rej. 19. 43-47.
99 Award, 4 200.

44

145.

146.

148.

clauses themselves supply the Tribunal with the necessary jurisdiction”). In this regard the
Tribunal concluded that the impediment arising from the 18-month proviso “might be
surmounted by the content of the MFN clauses in question, in particular if those clauses
evince an intention, on the part of the Contracting State Parties, to allow the Treaty’s
conditions precedent to accessing international arbitration to be altered by operation of its

MEN provisions.”2°°

Finally, in paragraph 281 the Tribunal reached the conclusions based on its analysis of the

issue.

The line of reasoning of the Tribunal is clear and leads to its conclusion. The Tribunal noted
that since Daimler had not complied with the 18-month clause, the Tribunal did not have
jurisdiction to hear Daimler’s claims (including claims based on MEN clauses). The Tribunal
was of the view that unless the MEN clause itself conferred such jurisdiction it could not go
further. The Tribunal then considered whether the MFN clause would confer such
jurisdiction and concluded that it did not. There is no contradiction in this reasoning, much

less a contradiction of a nature where the reasons cancel each other out.

(d) Whether the 18-month clause grants less favorable treatment.

. According to the Applicant, the Award contains contradictions as it states that the 18-month

requirement does not grant German investors less favorable treatment compared to Chilean
investors under the Chile-Argentina BIT, but, at the same time, holds that requiring German
investors to fruitlessly litigate their treaty-based disputes in the Argentine courts, “while
exempting Chilean investors from the same requirement could be viewed as discriminatory

impairment of the German investors’ rights.”?°' (Emphasis added).

In response, Argentina argued that (i) Daimler’s comparison between paragraph 250 and
footnote 433 was inappropriate because those portions of the Award deal with different
provisions of the BIT; (ii) the alleged contradiction does not exist since the cited footnote

does not refer to the 18-month clause as a jurisdictional requirement; and (iii) even if the

200 Award, 204.
2! Mem. 78.

45

149.

150.

reasoning on this issue was contradictory, it would not affect an outcome-determinative point

of the Award, to justify annulment.”°

Footnote 433 is included in paragraph 248 of the Award where, as stated in paragraph 138
above, the Tribunal undertook an additional and subsidiary analysis that was not necessary.
Based on the standard spelt out in paragraph 77 above, the Committee agrees with Argentina
that even if footnote 433 contradicted paragraphs 250 and 281, the contradiction would not

affect a pivotal or outcome determinative point of the Award.

In other words, the text of footnote 433 is not pivotal to the main decision, and does not

affect the main reasoning of the Award on the point.

. For the foregoing reasons, the Committee is of the considered view that neither of the two

grounds for annulment put forward by Daimler constitute a failure by the Tribunal to state
reasons. Accordingly Daimler’s application for annulment of the Award, under Article

52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention cannot succeed.
B. MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS - ARTICLE 52(1)(B)

1. THE STANDARD

(i) Daimler’s arguments

. Daimler’s second ground for partial annulment rests on the basis that the Tribunal manifestly

exceeded its powers under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention by concluding that the
MEN clause could not be used by Daimler to bypass the 18-month clause.” Daimler cited
the decision in the CDC case, in which the committee observed that for a tribunal to commit
an excess of powers, it “(1) must do something in excess of its powers and (2) that excess
must be manifest”.”°* According to Daimler, it has been recognized by numerous committees
that an excess of powers can also be committed by a tribunal that fails to exercise its

jurisdiction or errs in such exercise. Daimler further refers to the Duke Energy International

202 Rej. ff 48-52.
23 Mem. { 158.
2 Mem. { 159.

46

153.

154.

155.

Peru Investments No. I Ltd. v. Republic of Peru (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/28) (“Duke
Energy”) committee, which stated that the powers of a tribunal go further than its
jurisdiction; they go to the scope of the task entrusted to the tribunal by the parties. As such,
a tribunal’s failure to apply the law chosen by the Parties was accepted by the ICSID

Contracting States to be an excess of powers.”

In determining whether a tribunal failed to apply the applicable law under Article 52(1)(b)
of the ICSID Convention, the Committee must determine whether in fact the tribunal applied
the law it was bound to apply. Accordingly, the Committee need not accept without
questioning the Tribunal’s conclusions on the applicable law, nor must it accept as
dispositive the Tribunal’s statement that it applied the applicable law. Moreover, many
committees have confirmed that non-application of the applicable law constitutes manifest
excess of power and this non-application may consist of applying rules other than those
agreed to by the parties or a decision not based on any law.°° Daimler cited the Sempra
Energy International v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/16) (“Sempra”)
decision, in which the award was annulled because the committee found that the tribunal’s
failure to apply the relevant provisions of the BIT amounted to a failure to apply the proper
law.°7 Daimler also cited the Duke Energy committee, which held that a tribunal’s failure

to deal with all the questions presented to it amounted to an excess of power.

Daimler argued that an excess of power is manifest when the excess is “obvious, clear, or
self-evident’, but it can also be manifest when the excess is “serious and material’ to the

outcome of the case.?°8

In its Reply, Daimler stated what it considered to be the points of agreement between the

Parties on the legal standard: that a failure to apply the applicable law is an excess of powers;

285 Mem. 4 160-162.
206 Mem. ff 163-165.
2” Mem. 166.
208 Mem. { 168.

47

156.

157.

158.

that a “gross or egregious” error in applying the law can be grounds for annulment; and that

“manifest” means “obvious, clear or self-evident” .?°

According to Daimler, the Parties disagree on how “obviousness” should be determined.
Argentina relies on the Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador
(Petroecuador) (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/10) (“Repsol”) and Wena annulment decisions
and argues that obviousness must be determined “simply by reading the Award” and
avoiding “elaborate interpretations one way or another”. However, Daimler argues, that
recent annulment decisions have held that a more detailed review of the arguments of the
parties in the arbitration is necessary when conducting an analysis of manifest excess of

powers,7!?

Concerning its claims for annulment, Daimler argued that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded
its powers in three ways: (i) it failed to apply the VCLT; (ii) it improperly applied the law of

“Full Reparation”; and (iii) it failed to apply the principle of Pacta sunt servanda.
(ii) Argentina’s arguments

According to Argentina, Daimler’s claim that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers
by concluding that the MEN clause could not be used to bypass the 18-month requirement
is simply an allegation that the Tribunal applied the law incorrectly.”!' Argentina argues that
previous ICSID committees have recognized that an error in the application of the law is not
a ground for annulment unless “it is so gross or egregious as substantially to amount to failure

> 212

to apply the proper law Argentina submitted that Daimler has acknowledged that a
tribunal’s excess must be manifest to warrant annulment. Previous committees have held
that “[t]he excess of power must be self-evident rather than the product of elaborate

interpretations one way or the other”.?!? According to Argentina, the excesses identified by

2 Reply 57.

20 Reply If 58-59.
21! C-Mem. ff 76-77.
22. C-Mem. 77.

23. C-Mem. 79.

48

159.

160.

162.

Daimler are not manifest but are “a product of elaborate interpretations” not warranting

annulment.?!4

In its Rejoinder, Argentina submitted that Daimler failed to show how the Tribunal exceeded
its powers and stated that the three grounds invoked by Daimler are interrelated and

constitute a mere disagreement with the Tribunal’s interpretation of the law.?!>

According to Argentina, it is undisputed that a mere disagreement with the interpretation of
an award on the applicable law is not a ground for annulment. This has been confirmed by
committees such as the Pey Casado and Amco I committees.”!° Daimler itself recognized
that the Tribunal was exclusively responsible for defining the scope of the Treaty, which was

done in the present case regarding the 18-month and MEN clauses.”!”
2. FAILURE TO APPLY THE VIENNA CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF TREATIES

(i) Daimler’s arguments

. According to Daimler, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by failing to apply the

law agreed to by the Contracting States to the BIT in connection with Argentina’s fifth
jurisdictional objection. The Tribunal’s failures are contrary to the mandate in Article 42(1)
of the ICSID Convention and Article 10(5) of the BIT, rendering each such failure an

independent ground for annulment.”!*

The first failure was a failure by the Tribunal to apply the VCLT to which Germany and
Argentina are parties. Moreover, the rules of treaty interpretation enshrined in Articles 31
and 32 of the VCLT are a part of customary international law. As such, under the ICSID
Convention and the BIT, the Tribunal was obligated to interpret the BIT provisions pursuant

to the VCLT rules on treaty interpretation.?!? According to Daimler, the Tribunal’s failure

24 C_Mem. {ff 79-80.
215 Re}. 53-54.

26 Rej. ff] 55-56.

27 Re}. 57.

28 Mem. ff 169-171.
29 Mem. $f 172-174.

49

164.

165.

to apply the VCLT’s rules on treaty interpretation constitutes one of two annullable errors:
an application of a law not agreed to by the parties or “a decision not based on any law”.?°
Indeed, even though the Award mentioned the VCLT it failed to apply its principles in
reaching the conclusion that the BIT’s MEN provisions cannot be used by Daimler to
overcome its non-compliance with the 18-month requirement. Judge Brower referred to this

failure in his Dissenting Opinion.??!

. During the hearing, Daimler explained that the application of the “affirmative-evidence

standard” and the “standing-community standard” to the issue of the Contracting State’s
consent to international arbitration, shows that the Tribunal failed to apply the VCLT’s rule
according to which an international treaty must be interpreted in good faith in accordance

with the ordinary meaning to be given to its terms.”

Daimler argued that in addition to the Award failing facially to apply the VCLT, Professor
Bello Janeiro’s admission in his Separate Opinion that he found other authorities to be
decisive on the MFN issue, underscores that there was not a majority decision “of the
Tribunal based on an interpretation of the relevant clauses of the Germany-Argentina BIT
pursuant to VCLT principles” .??> This shows that the Tribunal failed to apply the proper law,

which amounts to a manifest excess of powers.??+

In its Reply, Daimler stated that Argentina failed to rebut Daimler’s argument based on the

225

Tribunal’s manifest excess of powers.~*’ Moreover, Daimler pointed out that instead of

addressing Professor Bello Janeiro’s failure to apply the VCLT, Argentina repeated its
arguments that the Separate Opinion is immune from scrutiny and that Professor Bello

Janeiro simply added some additional considerations.?° According to Daimler, such

20 Mem. ff 175.

221 Mem. | 176.

22 Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 104:3 — 109:19.
23 Mem. ff 177-180.

24 Mem. { 181.

5 Reply 1 60.

26 Reply | 64.

50

166.

167.

contentions contradict the ICJ’s ruling that a separate opinion attached to an arbitral award

is important for the analysis of the award under review.”
(ii) Argentina’s arguments

Argentina referred to the passages cited by Daimler as a basis for its claim and stated that
these passages actually show that the Tribunal did in fact apply the interpretative principles
of the VCLT.”* It is evident from the Award itself that the Tribunal analysed the MFN
clauses with reference to the VCLT. Indeed, the Award clarifies that as a preliminary matter
it would refer to the ejusdem generis principle and then develop the interpretation of the
clause in light of the VCLT. In paragraph 217 of the Award the Tribunal first referred to the
ordinary meaning of the word “treatment” and then considered the context of the term.???
According to Argentina, the Tribunal followed this same construction in its analysis of
activities related to investment and investors, the exceptions established in Articles 3(3) and
3(4) of the BIT, the expression “Jess favorable”, and the relationship between the MFN
clauses in the BIT and other BIT provisions.?°° Furthermore, the Tribunal concluded that it
has undertaken the MFN analysis by taking into account the ordinary meaning of the text in
the relevant context and bearing in mind the BIT’s object and purpose, as mandated by the
VCLT.”*! Thus, it cannot be seriously argued that the Tribunal did not apply the

interpretation provisions of the VCLT.?*?

Argentina further rejected Daimler’s argument according to which the Tribunal increased
Claimant’s burden of proof by applying an “affirmative evidence standard” in contravention
of the VCLT’s rules of treaty interpretation. Argentina argued that such change in the burden

of proof was non-existent. The Tribunal carried out an interpretative analysis of whether

27 Reply | 64.

28 C_Mem. fff 81-84.

29 C-Mem. { 85.

230 C-Mem. { 86.

231 C-Mem. [87 citing Award, 4254.
232 C-Mem. 1 88.

Sl

168.

169.

170.

consent existed and such analysis was conducted within the framework in which the Parties

presented their arguments.?**

Argentina argued that the “weakness” in Daimler’s argument is further evidenced by the fact
that the entire argument relies on the alleged failure to apply the applicable rules in arbitrator
Bello Janeiro’s opinion, which is false and, in any case, irrelevant. There was a majority
sustaining the Award as evidenced by arbitrator Bello Janeiro’s express adherence to it and,
as such, the text of the Award needs to be examined and not his Separate Opinion.?**
Additionally, citing ICJ decisions, Argentina argues that the use of separate opinions has
been recognized in international law as a means to add further reasoning to a decision without
rejecting its reasons or grounds. Arbitrator Bello Janeiro expressly subscribed to the Award
and its grounds, and added additional considerations on issues that he thought should be
mentioned.?*> Given the purpose of the Separate Opinion and Professor Bello Janeiro’s
joining the majority vote, on the decision, there was no need for him to reiterate the rules of

treaty interpretation in his concurring opinion.*°

In its Rejoinder, Argentina argued that because Daimler alleged that the Tribunal failed to
apply the VCLT, it is Daimler which bears the burden of proof.?*’ Daimler recognized that
the Tribunal applied the VCLT rules of interpretation but submitted that it failed to do so
with regard to “certain” provisions, such as the MEN clauses. This shows that “a fortiori”

Daimler’s argument is a mere discrepancy in the application of the law.?°*

Argentina argued that in its Counter-Memorial it demonstrated the interpretative course the
Tribunal undertook and the Applicant gave no answer to this. Indeed, there is no difficulty
in following the Tribunal’s reasoning in the application of VCLT interpretative principles to

its MEN analysis.”*° With respect to other decisions of arbitral tribunals, the Tribunal made

233 Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 175:16 — 17:12.
24 C_Mem. fff 89-90.

235. C-Mem. fff 91-94.

236C-Mem. 1 94

237 Rej. 59.

238 Re}. 159.

29 Rej. 9 60-61.

52

174.

clear that it would consider these decisions because the Parties made extensive references to
them. The Tribunal also acknowledged that there is no precedent system in investor-State
arbitration but that it would consider decisions of other tribunals under certain criteria, which

it laid out.24°

. On the Tribunal’s application and non-application of the MFN clauses, Argentina submitted

that the Applicant is mistaken in focusing its analysis on only seven paragraphs of the Award
without taking into account other relevant sections.”*! The Applicant is dissatisfied because
it disagrees with the Tribunal’s interpretation and not because there is a failure to apply the

applicable law.?4?

This is also confirmed by Daimler’s argument on the pacta sunt servanda
principle; it sought that this be disregarded by the Tribunal when it claimed that the Tribunal

should ignore the dispute resolution clause in the BIT.*47

. Contrary to the Applicant’s argument, arbitrator Bello Janeiro did not fail to apply the VCLT.

He fully subscribed to the Award and as the Award applied the VCLT, so did arbitrator Bello
Janeiro, who limited himself to adding additional arguments that did not contradict the

decisions reached in the Award.>4

. As to Daimler’s reference to the Sempra case, Argentina stated that it is clearly

distinguishable. In that case the tribunal failed to apply the applicable law.?4> That was not

the case here.

3. APPLICATION OF THE NON-APPLICABLE PRINCIPLE OF “FULL REPARATION” AND
FAILURE TO APPLY THE RULE OF PACTA SUNT SERVANDA

(i) Daimler’s arguments

According to Daimler, another flaw in the Tribunal’s reasoning is found in its analysis of

whether the “comparator treatment” given by Argentina to Chilean investors was “more

40 Re}. 1 65.
241 Re}. ] 66-70.
22 Rej. 71.
243 Re}. 74-75.
24 Rej. 72.
245 Rej. 76.

53

175.

176.

favorable” than the treatment it gave to German investors.”*° Daimler argues that the
Tribunal applied the general principle of full reparation to determine whether the comparator
treaty was in fact more favorable to the investor.?*” However, the Award does not apply the
applicable law because this principle applies exclusively to the consequences of an
internationally wrongful act of a State, as evidenced by the plain text of Article 31 of the
2001 Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts (“2001
Draft Articles”) and the commentaries thereon.*** Indeed, Daimler argues that the “full
reparation” rule applies only after a tribunal has found that it has jurisdiction over a dispute,
that the State is responsible for an unlawful act and that there is injury.7*? According to

Daimler, the Award reflects a manifest excess of powers by applying an inapplicable rule.?°

Daimler cites the Sempra committee, which annulled an award in similar circumstances,
finding that the tribunal’s application of Article 25 of the 2001 Draft Articles instead of the
applicable BIT, constituted a failure to apply the applicable law and was, therefore, in excess
of powers.”>! According to Daimler, in this case, the Award’s excess of power is “manifest”
as it explicitly states that it will apply the principle of “full reparation” to determine if
Argentina was treating German investors less favorably than Chilean investors.”>?

Daimler submitted that Argentina does not contest that the Award applied the principle of
full reparation nor does it suggest that this principle was applicable to any jurisdictional
issues.?°? In response to Argentina’s assertion that the Award applied the full reparation
principle only after taking into account other aspects of the BIT, Daimler argued that it is
evident from the Award that it conducted a balancing test on the “less favourable treatment”,

for which the application of the reparation principle was an essential factor despite the

246 Mem. ff 182-183.

247 Mem. 1185; Reply 1 65.

248 Mem. {{] 186-190; citing the Report of the International Law Commission to the General Assembly, 2001
Draft Articles, with Commentaries, U.N. Doc. A/56/10 80-84 (2001) (ACA-39).

249 Mem. {| 190; Reply { 67.
250 Mem. | 191.

25! Mem. fi 192-194.

252 Mem. | 195; Reply { 68.
253 Reply 67.

54

177.

17:

179.

saa

“obvious non-applicability of a rule on damages to a jurisdictional determination”.** The
application of the non-applicable principle of “full reparation” was thus critical to the

Tribunal’s decision to reject Daimlers’ claims.?*°

According to Daimler, the rule that should have applied to the Award’s analysis of “less
favorable treatment” was the jus cogens rule of pacta sunt servanda established in the
VCLT.?°° The Award failed to apply the principle of pacta sunt servanda by not recognizing
that Argentina was bound by its obligations under the BIT, which must be performed in good
faith and, applying the rule of “full reparation”, allowing Argentina to “purchase its way out
of its treaty obligations by paying damages in a subsequent arbitration for any discrimination
suffered by Daimler Financial in the Argentine courts”.2°’ Daimler cited Professor Schreuer
for the proposition that disregarding the basic principle of pacta sunt servanda amounts to a

non-application of international law.?>*

Finally, Daimler submitted that Argentina did not dispute that pacta sunt servanda was the
applicable law nor did it argue that the Award did in fact apply that principle to the “less
favorable” analysis. Moreover, Argentina did not submit any observations on Daimler’s
reference to the Sempra decision that strongly supports annulment in the present case. These

“implicit concessions” confirm that annulment is warranted.?°?

(ii) Argentina’s arguments

Regarding the alleged misapplication of the principle of full reparation and the non-
application of the rule of pacta sunt servanda, Argentina argued that the Tribunal sought to
objectively determine whether a BIT with a prior submission to a local court requirement
was less favorable than the one with a fork-in-the-road provision.” The Tribunal then

concluded that a BIT, such as the present one with a local court submission requirement was

254 Reply 4 66 and { 68.
255 Reply, 1 66.

256 Mem. ff 198-199.
257 Mem. { 200.

258 Mem. {if 201-202.
29 Reply 71.

260 C-Mem. ff 95-97.

55

18!

18

18

0.

1,

not less favorable than the Argentina-Chile BIT, which did not have this provision.?°!
According to Argentina, the Award’s reference to the possibility of claiming before an
arbitral tribunal any expenses related to the domestic court litigation reinforced the fact that
the dispute resolution provision in the BIT was not less favorable. These references were
made in this context to illustrate that the investor couldn’t argue less favorable treatment
than that accorded to investors in BITs with fork-in-the-road provisions, as it may seek
reparations for these higher costs.”® Accordingly, there are no grounds for claiming that the

Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.7°

Regarding the alleged application of the principle of full reparation, Argentina claimed that
the Tribunal considered it an additional consideration to the time and cost factors, in its
discussion on whether there was less favourable treatment or not when investors had to resort
to local courts before arbitration, as opposed to investors that could proceed directly to
arbitration.2 Indeed, the Tribunal had already decided that the MEN clauses were not
applicable, which is evidenced by the use of the word “moreover” in paragraph 247 in which
it refers to the full reparation principle. According to Argentina, this shows that the analysis

was alternative and not determinative for the conclusion of the Award.?°

4. THE COMMITTEE'S DECISION ON THE ALLEGED MANIFEST EXCESS OF POWERS
(i) The Standard

Daimler submitted that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by failing to apply the
rules of law agreed by the Contracting States to the BIT because the Tribunal (i) failed to
apply Article 31 of the VCLT; (ii) applied the non-applicable principle of “full reparation”

and (iii) failed to apply the rule of pacta sunt servanda.

The Parties agree that under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention the applicable test for

a manifest excess of powers is to determine whether (i) there is an excess of powers; and (ii)

26! C-Mem. 497.
22 C_Mem. { 98.
263. C-Mem. 1 99.
264 Rej. 77.

265 Rej. 1 78-81.

56

183.

184.

185.

whether the excess is “manifest.” They also seem to agree on the well-established point that
a failure to apply the proper law or a failure to apply the law chosen by the parties may

amount to an excess of powers.

The Parties seem to differ, however, as to what is “obvious” or “manifest”. Argentina,
quoting, inter alia, the decisions of the ad hoc committees of Repsol and Wena advanced an
interpretation where obviousness must be determined by simply reading the award without
entering into a detailed examination of its contents and without elaborate interpretations one
way or the other.?°° Daimler, citing, inter alia, the ad-hoc committees of Continental
Casualty Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9); Fraport AG
Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/25) (“Fraport’) and Pey Casado supported an interpretation whereby it is necessary
for the ad hoc committee to engage in a careful review of the arguments that have been
advanced by the parties in the underlying arbitral proceedings, rather than in a merely

superficial inquiry.?°”

As regards the test to determine whether the Tribunal failed to apply the proper law, Daimler
submitted that there was no presumption of validity in favor of the Award and therefore the
Committee must (i) reach its own conclusion on the applicable law; (ii) determine if that was
the law that the Tribunal purported to apply; and (iii) whether there were any basis for
concluding that the decision of the Tribunal involved a manifest failure to apply the proper

law.268

Argentina, in turn, claimed that this was not a case in which the Tribunal failed to apply the
proper law or the law agreed upon by the Parties, but rather a case in which Daimler was not

satisfied because the Tribunal disagreed with its interpretation.”

26 C-Mem. 79.

267 Reply 159.

268 Mem. {| 163-165; Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 101:16 — 102:4.
29 C-Mem. [ 80

s7

186.

188.

The Committee is of the view that an excess of power must be “manifest”; in other words it
must be plain, evident, obvious and clear to warrant annulment.” As stated by the Wena
annulment committee: “The excess of power must be self-evident rather than the product of
elaborate interpretations one way or the other. When the latter happens the excess of power
is no longer manifest.”>"' If this Committee were to undertake a careful and detailed analysis
of the respective submissions of the parties before the Tribunal, as Daimler suggests, and
annul the Award on the ground that its understanding of facts or interpretation of law or
appreciation of evidence is different from that of the Tribunal, it will cross the line that

separates annulment from appeal.

. The Committee also considers that when more than one interpretation is possible, an award

cannot be annulled on the ground that it suffers from an exercise of excess of powers, much

less a manifest excess of powers. In the words of the CDC annulment committee

“[...] the term ‘manifest’ means clear or ‘self-evident’. Thus, even if a Tribunal
exceeds its powers, the excess must be plain on its face for annulment to be an
available remedy. Any excess apparent in a Tribunal’s conduct, if susceptible of
argument ‘one way or the other’, is not manifest. [...] If the issue is debatable or
requires examination of the materials on which the tribunal’s decision is based, the

tribunal’s determination is conclusive.””?”?

The annulment proceeding is not an appeal and therefore, is not a mechanism to correct
alleged errors of fact or law that a tribunal may have committed.?”* Annulment under the
ICSID Convention is a limited remedy destined to ensure the fundamental fairness of the

arbitration proceeding.?”*

2 See, e.g.: Wena, | 25; Repsol, 1 36; Azurix, 1 48 and 68; Sempra { 213.

2 Wena 25.

22CDC 441.

273 See, e.g.: Amco I, { 23; Wena, 1 18; Azurix, 141; Impregilo S.P.A v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case
No. ARB/07/17), Decision of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment, January 24, 2014,
119

™4 See, e.g.: MINE, { 4.04; Soufraki, | 20;

58

189.

190.

192.

Therefore, when an allegation is made that there was a manifest excess of powers for failure
to apply the applicable law, it is not the role of an ad hoc committee to verify whether the
interpretation of the law by the tribunal was correct, or whether it correctly ascertained the
facts or whether it correctly appreciated the evidence. These are issues relevant to an appeal,
but not for annulment proceedings in view of the limited grounds provided for under the

ICSID Convention.

As stated by the CDC annulment committee:

“Regardless of our opinion of the correctness of the Tribunal’s legal analysis,
however, our inquiry is limited to a determination of whether or not the Tribunal
endeavored to apply English law. That it did so is made plain by its explicit statement
in the Award that it did as well as by its repeated citation to relevant English

authorities.”?”°

. In sum, what the Committee can do is to determine whether the Tribunal correctly identified

the applicable law and endeavoured to apply it. As to the latter, there is a distinction between
endeavouring to apply the correct law and correctly applying the law. While the former may
provide a ground for annulment the latter is outside the scope of authority of an ad hoc
annulment committee. The Committee is of the view that the Tribunal complied with what

was required of it by the ICSID Convention.

(ii) | The Alleged Failure to apply the Vienna Convention on the Law of

Treaties

As regards the alleged failure to apply the VCLT, the Committee finds that the Tribunal
clearly identified the VCLT as applicable to the dispute and endeavored to apply it to the

several issues of interpretation of the BIT that arose between the Parties.

275 CDC, | 45. The MINE annulment committee, in turn, considered that: “Disregard of the applicable rules of
law must be distinguished from erroneous application of those rules which, even if manifestly unwarranted,
furnishes no ground for annulment.” MINE, { 5.04.

59

193.

194.

195.

In paragraph 46 of the Award (corresponding to the section titled “Applicable Law”) the

Tribunal observed:

“This claim arises under the German-Argentine BIT, in conjunction with the ICSID
Convention. As both the BIT and the ICSID Convention are international treaties concluded
between sovereign States, both are subject to the usual customary law rules governing treaty
interpretation under public international law, as reflected in article 31 and 32 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties (“Vienna Convention”). The Tribunal will apply these
rules in discerning whether all of the jurisdictional requirements of the ICSID Convention

and the BIT have been met.” (Emphasis added).

Thereafter the Award undertakes the analysis of the application or non-application of the
MEN clauses and indicates, in several paragraphs, how, in the opinion of the Tribunal, the

VCLT is relevant to the interpretation of the different provisions of the BIT.?”°

Daimler quoted Judge Brower’s Dissenting Opinion to support the alleged lack of
application of the VCLT and referred to the Separate Opinion to indicate that Professor Bello
Janeiro did not apply the VCLT.?”’ As for the opinion of Judge Brower, it constitutes a
different approach to the application of the VCLT and it is not for the Committee to review
the correctness of the interpretation of the Tribunal or the merits of the criticism of Judge
Brower. Suffice it to say that had Judge Brower not been critical of either the Award or the
Separate Opinion he would have joined the majority and the Award would have been
unanimous. He dissented because he was critical of the reasoning and disagreed with the
decision. His dissent cannot form the basis of annulment unless it is evident that the majority
Award suffers from a manifest excess of powers by the Tribunal. With respect to the Separate
Opinion, the Committee has already expressed its views and conclusions as to the effects of

such a Separate Opinion on the Award in paragraphs 107 to 120.

27 See, e.g., Award, | 167; ff] 172-173; | 178; 231 and {{ 254.
2” Mem. ff 175-179.

60

196.

198.

199.

200.

201.

This is sufficient, in the Committee’s view, to conclude that annulment of the Award under
Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention for the alleged failure to apply the VCLT is not

warranted.

(iii) The Alleged Application of the Non-applicable Principle of Full
Reparation and Lack of Application of the Principle of Pacta Sunt

Servanda

. Daimler considered that the excess of powers resulting from the application of the non-

applicable principle of full reparation and the excess of powers resulting from the lack of
application of the principle of pacta sunt servanda are related “since by applying the ‘full

reparation’ principle, the Award failed to honor the principle of pacta sunt servanda.”?"8

According to Daimler, in its analysis of the “comparator treatment” to determine whether
the treatment granted by Argentina to Chilean investors was more favorable than the one
granted to German investors, the Award applied the principle of full reparation to conclude
that Chilean investors do not necessarily receive a better treatment than German investors.
This principle, according to Daimler, applied only after a tribunal had found (i) jurisdiction

over the dispute, (ii) State responsibility for an unlawful act and (iii) injury.?””

Daimler further contended that first by applying the principle of full reparation the Tribunal
acted in a manifest excess of its powers by applying a non-applicable provision. Second, the
Tribunal exceeded its powers by failing to apply the applicable law, i.e. the principle of pacta
sunt servanda. In the words of Daimler, the Award failed to apply such principle “by failing
to vindicate the rule that the Germany-Argentina BIT is binding on Argentina, and that

Argentina must therefore perform its obligations under the treaty in good faith.”?*°.

The Committee is of the opinion that there was no failure to apply the applicable law.

In paragraphs 240 to 243 of the Award, the Tribunal identifies the sources and principles

that it would apply to determine whether Chilean investors receive a better treatment than

28 Reply 1 69.
2 Mem. 183-190.
280 Mem. { 200.

61

German investors, and concludes that applying such principles to the matter in question “the
Tribunal could not endorse the Claimant’s proposed use of the MEN clause unless it could
determine that the dispute resolution provisions of Article 10 of the German-Argentine BIT
(the “Basic Treaty”) are objectively less favorable than those of Article X of the Chilean-

9281

Argentine BIT (the “Comparator Treaty”).

202. The Award then states:

203.

“Tt might be tempting to simply accept the Claimant’s assertion that the Comparator
Treaty is more favorable under the assumption that it must be favorable if the
Claimant prefers it. The problem, however, is that claimants’ preferences are
subjective. It is certainly conceivable that some future claimant may instead prefer to
have two successive chances for a favorable outcome under the Basic Treaty rather
than proceed immediately to international arbitration under the Comparator Treaty.
This is particularly so since recent trends indicate that the costs of international
arbitration may be quite high relative to the costs of domestic dispute resolution, and
the average time required to resolve disputes via international arbitration may equal

or exceed that of domestic court processes.”?** (Emphasis added).

After indicating that accepting Claimant’s assertions as to what is favorable could lead to a
situation where the terms “more” or “less” favorable have no objective meaning, the Award
analyzes the factors that should be considered in determining when the treatment of an
investor may be considered more favorable, which factors include the costs of pursuing a
case in the domestic courts and in international arbitration.2*° In such context, the Award
indicates that if in resorting to the domestic courts the investor receives less favorable or
discriminatory treatment, such investor would have to be compensated “in accordance with

the ordinary general international law principle of full reparation”.?**

281 Award, 244.
282 Award, 9 245.
283 See: Award, 111 246-247.
284 Award, 247.

62

204,

The Committee stresses that the Award must be read in context. The Tribunal reviewed in
detail the factors relevant for the so-called comparator treatment, including costs, and
indicated, in an ancillary manner, that if the investor received less favorable or
discriminatory treatment in the local courts it could be compensated in accordance with the
principle of full reparation. Moreover, this analysis of the “comparator treatment”, as stated
under paragraph 138 above, was identified by the Tribunal as unnecessary to determine the
issue of jurisdiction, and specifically, the application of the 18-month clause and the MFN

clause.

. Therefore, Daimler is not correct in its claim that the Award applied the principle of “full

reparation” or failed to apply the principle of pacta sunt servanda to its decision on
jurisdiction. An ancillary observation in the context of a section that the Tribunal considered
as additional, but not necessary, to its decision could not result in an annulment for failure

to apply the proper law.

. Consequently, the ad hoc Committee dismisses the contention by Daimler that the Award is

the result of a manifest excess of powers, as per Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

c. SERIOUS DEPARTURE FROM A FUNDAMENTAL RULE OF
PROCEDURE - ARTICLE 52(1)(D)

1. THE STANDARD

(i) Daimler’s arguments

. Daimler also requested a partial annulment of the Award on the ground that the Tribunal

committed serious departures from fundamental rules of procedure pursuant to Article

52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention. According to Daimler, the Tribunal committed

“numerous procedural anomalies and excesses, including causing prejudicial delay
in forcing the parties to undertake a prolonged and costly merits phase that could and
should have been averted; by failing to apply the applicable principles concerning
the burden of proof; by depriving the parties of the opportunity to address authorities

that were critical to the conclusions reached by the two purported members of the

63

208.

209.

210.

majority of the Tribunal; and by effectively failing to deliberate on the issues that
yielded the Award’s outcome-determinative conclusion with respect to Argentina’s

fifth jurisdictional objection.”?°°

According to Daimler, Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention protects parties from
awards that violate their due process rights.7*° The Committee must establish three elements
for annulment to occur: “(1) identification of a “fundamental” rule of procedure; (2) a finding
that the tribunal “departed” from such fundamental rule; and (3) a finding that such departure

was “serious.””?57

Pursuant to Article 52(1)(d), only violations of “fundamental” rules of procedure warrant
annulment of an award. Daimler cited the CDC and Pey Casado committees, which
explained “fundamental” as rules of natural justice, rules that are essential to the integrity of
the arbitral process.7** According to Daimler, four such rules were violated by the Tribunal:
“(1) the right to the prompt and efficient resolution of disputes, free from prejudicial delay;
(2) proper allocation of the burden of proof; (3) the right to a full and fair opportunity to be
heard; and (4) the tribunal’s obligation to deliberate and render a majority decision on each

question presented.”?*?

In regard to the right to prompt and efficient resolution of the dispute, Daimler argued that
the notion of ICSID arbitration as an efficient dispute resolution mechanism is reflected
throughout the Arbitration Rules, which establish timelines for claims, limits for the
preparation of an award and places primacy on the early resolution of preliminary issues.?°°
Daimler states that fairness sometimes requires timelines to remain flexible, but it also

prohibits prejudicial delay.”°! Delay alone has not been found as a ground for annulment,

285 Mem. ff 205.

286 Mem. { 206, citing the CDC Committee that Article 52(1)(d) is “necessary in order to ensure that the
resulting award is truly an ‘award,’ i.e. a result arrived at fairly, under due process and with transparency, and
hence in the basic justice of which parties will have faith.”

287 Mem. { 208. Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 36:14-17.
288 Mem. { 209.
289 Mem. 210.
29 Mem. 211.
2! Mem. { 211.

64

21

212.

but committees have left open the possibility for annulment for unreasonable delay.
Unreasonable delay has been examined by international tribunals in the context of denial of
justice claims and in those cases, most tribunals have taken into account the complexity of
the case and the parties’ procedural behavior.*”? Daimler argued that the effect of a delay
may also determine whether it was unreasonable, as was determined in the Pey Casado
case.2"3 In short, annulment must follow in cases where the delay is unreasonable, i.e. the

delay is unjustified or it causes prejudicial effects.?*

. Inregard to the proper allocation of the burden of proof, Daimler quoted Professor Schreuer

who has noted that Arbitration Rule 34(1) is the only rule that refers to rules of evidence, yet
parties have attacked arbitral awards in annulment procedures for the way in which they deal
with evidence and the burden of proof, alleging a violation of a fundamental rule of
procedure.”*> Professor Schreuer further noted the distinction drawn in the Wena and the
CDC cases between a tribunal’s failure to follow the applicable rules of evidence and its
discretion to form its view and weigh the evidence.”*° According to Daimler, reversing this
burden by imposing a higher burden exceeds the Tribunal’s discretionary power and can lead
to annulment.?” Additionally, the tribunal’s discretion under Arbitration Rule 34(1) is not
unlimited and it cannot exercise this discretion without discussing or referring to the relevant

evidence or respecting relevant legal standards.”*

The right to a full and fair opportunity to be heard is one of the most basic concepts of
fairness in adversarial proceedings and has been recognized by numerous committees as a
fundamental rule of procedure under Article 52(1)(d).?°? Unless this right is given to the

parties at every stage of the proceeding, annulment is justified.*°° “Full” means the right to

292 Mem. { 212, citing Jan Oostergetel and Theodora Laurentius v. Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL (Award, 23
April 2012); and Chevron Corporation (USA) and Texaco Petroleum Company (USA) v. Ecuador,
UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 34877 (Partial Award on the Merits, 30 March 2010).

293 Mem. 213.

24 Reply, 76.

25 Mem. 214.

296 Mem. 214.

27 Mem. 215.

28 Mem. 216.

29 Mem. 217.

300 Mem. § 218.

65

213.

214.

address every formal motion before the tribunal and every legal issue raised, and “fair”
opportunity to be heard not only means that the right is given equally to both parties to
respond adequately to arguments and evidence raised by the other, but that neither party is
prejudiced by unexpected events.*°! Daimler cited the Fraport committee, which annulled
the relevant award on the basis that the tribunal had admitted certain documents by the
respondent, did not give an opportunity to the parties to comment on the documents and then
based much of its findings on them.*°? According to Daimler, a party’s right to be heard is
“equally critical” when the Tribunal relies on evidence and arguments presented in another

case by one of the parties without affording the other party the right to comment.*”

In regard to the Tribunal’s obligation to deliberate and render a decision on each question
presented, Daimler stated that the obligation to deliberate is not explicit but is presupposed
in ICSID Arbitration Rule 15(1) by establishing that deliberations shall take place in private
and remain secret.* A previous committee found that “the requirement of deliberations
could be considered a fundamental rule of procedure”, which must be real and not merely
apparent.*”> However, given the secret nature of deliberations, it is not possible to determine
their seriousness, but a committee may be able to determine their effectiveness or whether
they occurred.*” This is true for situations where an award is issued together with separate
opinions that diverge on outcome-determinative points, evidencing that deliberations did not

fulfill their purpose of reaching a majority on each question presented.*°7

Daimler argued that whether or not a there was a “departure” from a fundamental rule of
procedure was a fact specific inquiry, which required the committee to look at what the

tribunal said it was doing and what it was actually doing. Daimler added that in order to

30! Mem. { 218.
302 Mem. ¥ 219.
303 Mem. 220.
34 Mem, 9221.
305 Mem. ¥ 221.
306 Mem. { 222.
307 Mem. | 223.

66

215.

216.

determine whether there was a “departure” the ad hoc committee must examine the full

record?°8,

Whether a departure was “serious” will be determined by the fact that the tribunal issued an
award substantially different from the award it would have issued had the rule been observed,
which only requires proof of the impact the issue may have had, or whether the party was
deprived of the protection the rule intended to provide.*” Referring to annulment decisions
in Wena, Caratube and Pey Casado, Daimler submitted that the applicant must demonstrate
the impact the issue may have had on the award, and not that the result would have been
different.*"° Furthermore, Daimler argued that if a committee finds a serious departure from

a fundamental rule, it has no discretion to uphold the award.3!!

According to Daimler, the Parties agree on most of the aspects of the legal standard
applicable under Article 52(1)(d).*!* The Parties agree that to be a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure, the departure “must be substantial and deprive the party of
the benefit or protection that the rule was intended to provide”, yet they disagree on whether
the “seriousness” requirement entails proof that the departure in effect altered one or more
of the Tribunal’s decisions.*!? Daimler disagreed with Argentina’s argument which refers to
Repsol, which in turn refers to the Wena committee. Argentina submitted that there must be
proof that the Tribunal would have reached a different decision had it not been for the
violation. According to Daimler, the Pey Casado committee also referred to the Wena
decision and argued that it stood for the proposition that the applicant must prove the impact
that the issue “may have had on the award’, not the impact the tribunal’s error actually
had.?!4 According to Daimler, this analysis is more logical since it is impossible to prove the

impact that an alternative scenario would have had. Furthermore, when an ICSID tribunal

308 Hearing on Annulment, Tr., 37:2-7.

309 Mem. ¥ 225.

310 Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 37:12-38:6.

3! Mem. 4 226.

312 Reply 72.

313 Reply, (9 72-73

314 Reply, 73; Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 249:1-250:13.

67

217.

218.

219.

departs from a fundamental rule of procedure, such departure is serious and warrants

annulment.3!5

(ii) Argentina’s arguments

Argentina stated that the purpose of Article 52(1)(d) is to “safeguard basic fairness and
integrity of the arbitration process”.*!° A departure from a fundamental rule is serious if it
has deprived the party of the benefit or protection of the rule; it must be outcome-
determinative.*'’ According to Argentina, what is important to determine is “whether the
underlying proceeding was fundamentally fair” in respect of basic rules of procedure under

international law.>!$

According to Argentina, Daimler failed to prove the elements it identifies as part of the
analysis under Article 52(1)(d), namely: i) the “fundamental” nature of the rule of procedure;

ii) a finding that there was a departure from such fundamental rule and iii) a finding that the

319

departure was “serious” or substantial?!° and would have resulted in a different outcome.*”°

According to Argentina, there was no departure from a fundamental rule of procedure in the
Tribunal’s analysis of Argentina’s fifth jurisdictional objection. Indeed, the Award contains

a description of the facts, a well-reasoned analysis of the applicable law and the defenses

1

raised by Daimler.*! Daimler’s claim is based on its disagreement with the Tribunal’s

dismissal of its claims but it does not show that there was a departure from a fundamental

rule of procedure.*??

315 Reply ( 73-74.

316 C_Mem. { 100.

317 C-Mem. { 101.

318 C-Mem. {{ 102; referring to the Wena committee’s Decision on Annulment.
9 Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 182:16-183:2

320 C_Mem. {ff 103-104.

321 C-Mem. { 110.

322. C-Mem. { I11.

68

2. PREJUDICIAL DELAY IN RENDERING A JURISDICTIONAL DECISION

(i) Daimler’s arguments

220. According to Daimler, the Tribunal committed a serious departure from a fundamental rule

221.

of procedure by unduly delaying a decision on jurisdiction despite having the elements to
tule on it since 2008. Indeed, on July 16, 2008 the Tribunal informed the Parties that it had
enough information on the issue of jurisdiction, yet it made them plead the merits of the case.
According to Daimler, the jurisdictional issues regarding the 18-month and the MFN clauses
were purely legal, not factual, and thus, joinder was not necessary.*” This resulted in the
Parties wasting time and resources pleading an issue on which the Tribunal ultimately
decided it had no jurisdiction.*** Daimler argued that the “fundamental” nature of the right
to a prompt and efficient resolution of a dispute is clear from the fact that its violation may
constitute a denial of justice. In this case, the Tribunal’s failure to issue its decision in a
timely manner deprived Daimler during “four years, one month and six days” from pursuing
annulment proceedings and/or litigation before Argentine courts.*° Furthermore, the delay
in rendering a jurisdiction decision led the Tribunal to rely on key issues imported from the

ICS award with regard to which Daimler never had an opportunity to be heard.*”°

In the Hearing on Annulment, Daimler argued that it “suffered prejudice from the
jurisdictional proceeding in ICS because the chair of both of the Tribunals, Professor Dupuy,
was influenced by these new arguments and Legal Authorities that were presented by
Argentina on the 18-month objection in the ICS context, which Daimler did not have an
opportunity to rebut.”*?” Daimler argued that the delay led to a change of heart by the

majority of the Tribunal that in 2012 decided to uphold the 18-month objection put forward

328

by Argentina,*?* although the same had not crossed their minds back in 2008.°?°

32 Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 231:11-12.

324 Mem. ¥f 228-229.

325 Mem. 229.

326 Reply 76.

327 Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 44:5-11.

328 Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 50:2-9.

329 Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 15:16 — 17:3; 41:1-3.

69

222.

223.

224.

Daimler argued that the Parties agree that in some circumstances, delay may render an award
subject to annulment and that delay, in and of itself, may be insufficient to justify
annulment.**? Daimler rejected as incorrect Argentina’s submission that for a delay to justify
annulment it must be equivalent to a denial of justice. Similarly, Argentina questioned
Daimler’s reliance on the CDC committee because while that committee found that even if
the tribunal had erred in issuing the award when it did, it did not find that to be a ground for
annulment.??! According to Daimler, this conclusion was reached because the committee in
that case found that the applicant had failed to show how it was prejudiced by the alleged
unreasonable delay. In this case, Daimler argued, it has shown the prejudice it suffered from

the delay.°?

Regarding Argentina’s argument that Daimler had proposed the joinder of the merits and
jurisdiction phases and that it had conceded that there was no unfairness, Daimler argued
that Argentina’s submission is erroneous. According to Daimler, its first proposition of
joinder was made in order to expedite the process and have the pleadings in both phases
proceed in tandem, and it was only in this context that it stated that there would be no
unfairness. Daimler’s second proposal had been to only have two rounds on the jurisdictional
issue and then, based on these pleadings, the Tribunal had to decide the issue of jurisdiction.
As such, Argentina erred in its submission that Daimler cannot now object to the procedure

adopted by the Tribunal.**

Daimler submitted that Argentina’s next argument that Daimler waived its right to the length
of the proceeding overlooks the record. On August 5, 2008 Daimler sent a letter to the
Tribunal urging it to issue “its decision on jurisdiction now...” stating its concern on the
further delay that might be caused. Thereafter, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4
joining jurisdiction to merits and Daimler had no choice but to comply with the Order.***

Moreover, Daimler argued, it was not required to object during the drafting period since it

330 Reply 4
231 Reply 4
332 Reply 1 78.

353 Reply {i 79-81.
3M Reply | J 82-83.

(77.
[ 78.

70

225.

226.

had already objected to the joinder. The important aspect of the Award is the fact that it
addressed only the jurisdictional issues for which the Tribunal had stated it had enough
information since 2008. Arbitration Rule 27 applies only when a party “knows or should
have known that a rule has not been complied with”. Daimler did not and could not know
that the Award would only address jurisdictional points and, thus, Rule 27 is not

335

applicable.

Daimler agreed with Argentina’s statement that tribunals have discretion to join the
jurisdictional and merits phases, but it argued that this discretion is not unbridled and cannot

be exercised arbitrarily.**°

Daimler also disagreed with Argentina’s suggestion that a
tribunal exercising this discretion is immune from review under Article 52(1)(d) of the
ICSID Convention.**’ Additionally, Argentina’s submission that the Award referred to
citations of the merits pleadings does not reconcile the Award’s delay when the Tribunal
declared in 2008 that it had enough information. Occasional references to the merits
pleadings regarding the jurisdictional objections did not justify a four-year delay in issuing

the Award, 3°
(ii) Argentina’s arguments

In regard to the Tribunal’s joinder of the jurisdictional objections to the merits of the case,
Argentina submitted that this is a power that tribunals have been granted expressly under
Article 41 of the ICSID Convention.**? This power is further confirmed by the Convention’s
travaux préparatoires, as well as the Report of the Advisory Regional Meeting of Legal

Experts in Investment Disputes.*#°

. As to Daimler’s argument on the length of time it took the Tribunal to issue its Award,

Argentina argued that, first, it was Daimler that initially insisted on the joinder of the

objections to the merits. It cannot now complain that the Tribunal exercised a power

335 Reply 84.

386 Reply 85.

357 Reply 85.

338 Reply { 86.

39 C-Mem. { 112.

40 C-Mem. {ff 113-115.

71

228.

envisaged in the Rules and invoked by Daimler.**!

Second, Daimler cannot complain now
about the length of the proceedings when it had expressly agreed with Argentina that the
deadlines for the first submissions would be 180 days long.*“? Third, pursuant to Arbitration
Rule 27, Daimler waived its right to object because it did not complain before the Tribunal
that its delay was a breach of a rule of procedure.*#? Fourth, the joining of jurisdiction and
merits implies that the Award could uphold a jurisdictional objection. Failure to have raised
this objection at the time of the joinder entailed a waiver by Daimler.*+ Additionally, it was
appropriate for the Tribunal to join its objections to the merits because three of the five
objections raised by Argentina concerned the merits of the case.*4° As such, Argentina
submitted that the Tribunal’s joinder of the objections to jurisdiction to the merits of the case
and the subsequent admission by the majority of one such objection was within the
Tribunal’s scope of competence and does not warrant annulment of the Award.*4° In any
case, the duration of the proceedings between the first hearing and the issuance of the Award

was five years and seven months, which is not unusual for ICSID timelines.°47

Furthermore, Argentina referred to Daimler’s argument that relies on the Pey Casado case
regarding the concept of “unreasonable” delay examined in the context of “denial of justice”
claims. According to Argentina, the conclusion in the Pey Casado case is not applicable to
the present case because the alleged delay in the Award did not result in the lack of treatment
of Daimler’s claims.*“* Daimler’s subjective belief of the appropriate period to consider the
issuance of the Tribunal’s decision as timely, cannot serve as grounds for annulment where
the issues claimed by the Parties were analysed and decided by the Tribunal.*4? Argentina
submitted that Daimler’s complaint was about only one of the five jurisdictional objections.

It further submitted that the time it must have taken to prepare the Dissenting and Separate

1 C-Mem. $f 23-24

42 C-Mem. 4 25.

3 C_Mem. 4 26.

4 C-Mem. 427.

45 C_Mem. 4 28.

46 C-Mem. 4 29.

7 Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 128:17-21.
8 C-Mem. {ff 120-121.

49 C-Mem. { 122.

72

229.

230.

231.

Opinions must also be considered as that probably added to the time of issuance of the

Award.*°°

According to Argentina, Daimler centered its request for annulment on the CDC case, which,
according to Daimler, left open the door for consideration of unreasonable delays as grounds
for annulment under Article 52(1)(d). However, Daimler failed to mention that the
committee in that case stated that “[e]ven had the Tribunal erred in issuing the Award when

it did, the Committee would see no basis for annulling the Award as a result”.3>!

Citing Wena, Argentina submitted that Daimler failed to demonstrate how the decision
would have been different if it had been issued earlier*>, depriving it of the benefit it would

have received.*°3

Furthermore, Argentina states that Daimler’s argument on the dismissal of the claim on
jurisdictional grounds would mean that every time a tribunal joined jurisdictional objections
to the merits it would be forced to reject the jurisdictional objections because otherwise its
decision would be unduly delayed.**4 Such a result would not only be absurd but would also
go against the tribunal’s powers under the ICSID Convention and Rules.*** It would be
contrary to the manner of exercise of authority as set forth by international courts and
tribunals, as well as the common practice of ICSID tribunals.*°° Argentina further argued
that Daimler had not cited a single case which supported annulment on the ground of delay

in issuing an award.>°”

. According to Argentina, Daimler mischaracterized the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 3.

The Tribunal did not state in Procedural Order No. 3 that it had enough information to decide

the jurisdictional issues nor did it close the discussion thereon. The Tribunal simply stated

350C-Mem. 123.

351 C-Mem. { 124.

352 Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 193:11-21.
353.C-Mem. 125.

354 Rej. 4 84; Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 124:2-9.
355 Rej. 49] 84-87.

356 Rej. 49] 87-89.

357 Rej. | 90-91; According to Argentina, the Committee in the CDC case cited by the Applicant’s rejected the
argument of undue delay and did not leave the door open to such annulment had the evidence been different.

73

234.

that it would not hold a jurisdictional hearing as it had “received enough information on the
positions of the parties on the issue of jurisdiction as they have been so far developed by
them in their respective written pleadings” ***, leaving the joinder to the merits as an issue to
be decided in a further procedural order. Following the Tribunal’s decision to join
jurisdiction to merits, there were discussions over jurisdictional issues and both merits and
objections to jurisdiction were dealt with at the hearing.**° The decision taken by the

Tribunal is not different from that of other ICSID Tribunals.>
3. IMPOSITION OF AN IMPROPERLY-HEIGHTENED BURDEN OF PROOF

(i) Daimler’s arguments

. Daimler argued that the Award further departed from a fundamental rule of procedure by

applying an improperly heightened burden of proof in its interpretation of the expression of
consent in the BIT. Instead of interpreting the BIT’s meaning in accordance with the VCLT,
the Award imposed an affirmative evidence requirement on Daimler to prove that the Parties
to the BIT intended the MEN clauses to include dispute resolution.*°! According to Daimler,
reversing the burden of proof was an abuse of the Tribunal’s discretion to handle evidence
and to form its own view of the relevance to be accorded to evidence under Arbitration Rule
34.°° The ICJ has also recognized a ruling of this nature as contrary to a fundamental rule
of procedure founded upon the “basic principle” of “the equality between the parties to the

2° 363

dispute’ Applying the ICJ’s observation to this case, Daimler submitted that

“establishing or proving’ the ‘rules of international law’ contained in the Germany-

Argentina BIT ‘[could not] be imposed upon any of the parties.’ ”>°*

The Tribunal imposed on Daimler this “affirmative evidence” requirement relying on a

single quote from the ICJ’s Djibouti v. France judgment (“Djibouti” judgment), a decision

358 Rej. $9] 92-93.

359 Rej. 1 93.

360 Rej. | 94,

361 Mem. { 233-234.
32 Mem. fff 215-216.
36 Mem. fff 233-234.
364 Mem. 4 235.

74

235.

that first appeared in the Award and on which Daimler was never given an opportunity to
comment.*° As put in the Hearing on Annulment, Daimler was held to a higher standard
without its knowledge because the higher standard was imported from the JCS proceeding.*
Additionally, the quote relied on by the Award was taken out of context and imposed no
such burden upon the Parties. The ICJ merely discerned the scope of consent to jurisdiction
of the parties and did not impose a burden of proof on the respondent to present affirmative
evidence. The analysis undertaken by the ICJ in the Djibouti judgment mirrors its analysis
in the Fisheries Jurisdiction 1974 (“Fisheries”) case, where the court determined the scope
of consent of the parties by interpreting the consent in light of the VCLT and did not impose
a burden on the parties.*°” Daimler stated that this was the approach that Judge Brower found

appropriate for the Tribunal in this case.**

Daimler argued that the Tribunal’s misplaced reliance on the Djibouti judgment led to its
imposing an improperly heightened burden of proof on Daimler and demonstrated that its
use as an authority for the “affirmative evidence” requirement was crucial and, as such,
Daimler should have had an opportunity to submit its views.*” Imposing on Daimler the
“affirmative evidence” burden to prove Argentina’s expression of consent to the BIT was a
breach of the fundamental rule of procedure that parties could not be required to establish or
prove rules of international law. The Tribunal thereby breached “the basic principle” of
equality of the parties.*”” Daimler stated that the departure was “serious” because it imposed
on it an improper burden on the essential issue of consent to arbitration, which was an issue
that could have led to a substantially different outcome in the Award.*”! Additionally, it

deprived Daimler of the protection afforded by the rule, i.e. equality of the parties.*””

365 Mem. {f 236-237.

36 Hearing on Annulment; Tr. 240:11-21.
357 Mem. #9f 238-241; Reply, 188.

35 Mem. 242.

36 Mem. 4 243.

3 Mem. 4 244.

3! Mem. 4 245; Reply. 195.

32 Mem. ¥ 245.

75

236.

238.

Daimler further argued that it is irrelevant whether the Tribunal intended to impose the
standard only on itself rather than on Daimler. The establishment of the affirmative evidence
standard was a de facto change in the burden of proof that ultimately led the Tribunal to
review the evidence presented by Daimler on the issue of consent under a more stringent

standard.375

. In response to Argentina’s argument, Daimler submitted that the fact that consent is

important does not justify imposing an improper burden on Daimler because consent is a
matter of treaty interpretation, which is the Tribunal’s responsibility.*”* According to
Daimler, the Tribunal “advances a novel theory” that when determining consent to a treaty,
fundamental rules of treaty interpretation no longer apply. However, the ICSID Convention
requires tribunals to apply the applicable law and forbids them from departing from
fundamental rules of procedure.*’> Argentina criticized the authorities cited by Daimler as
misleading because the quote from the ICJ Fisheries case referred to the principle of iura
novit curia. According to Daimler, the criticism is unfair because Daimler did quote the
entire passage and, more importantly, this principle is both consistent and relevant to the
principle of equality between the parties, which was made clear by the ICJ in the cases*”° of
Fisheries and Military and Paramilitary Activities?” cases. According to Daimler, “in an
attempt to distract” Argentina also argued that Daimler failed to prove a violation of
Arbitration Rule 34, yet this rule does not encompass all rules of evidence and procedure
and does not address the burden of proof. As such, it is irrelevant to a claim of a serious

departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.*”*
(ii) Argentina’s arguments

According to Argentina, the Award did not commit an “annullable error” in requiring

Daimler to produce evidence on the interpretation of the expression of consent in the BIT.

373 Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 60:8 — 61:9.

374 Reply 89.

375 Reply 90.

376 Reply ff 92-93.

371 Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v, U.S.), 1986 LC.J. 14 (June 27).
378 Reply 4 94.

76

23

24

24

24)

9,

0.

lL.

Indeed, the Tribunal explained the importance of consent to the interpretation of the Treaty

and its analysis showed that this evidentiary requirement is not abusive or excessive.*””

Furthermore, Argentina argued, that the principle of equality between the parties was not
breached by the Tribunal and Daimler’s reference to the Fisheries case was misleading, as
this case did not refer to this principle but to the iura novit curia principle.**° According to
Argentina, Daimler failed to prove that the Tribunal breached the principle of equality

between the parties by upholding Argentina’s fifth jurisdictional objection.**!

Contrary to Daimler’s allegation, Argentina never acknowledged a wrongful imposition of
the burden of proof upon Daimler.** The Tribunal did not impose an improper burden of
proof on Daimler and the paragraph cited to this effect merely supports the undisputed
proposition that State consent to any international settlement procedure must be conclusively
established. This is further made clear in the following paragraph where the Tribunal
assumes such responsibility.*** Furthermore, Argentina argued that the Tribunal’s reference
to the Djibouti judgement — which is only cited once in a footnote — relates to the need to
determine the scope of the State’s consent to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and is not relied

upon for the burden of proof.**4

According to Argentina, it is evident from the Award that the Tribunal ascertained the
relevant law, engaged in an interpretive analysis pursuant to the VCLT and applied the

applicable law.**°

According to Argentina, Daimler further failed to prove that the departure was serious.

Indeed, the Tribunal determined the scope of the clauses in the Treaty and interpreted them,

3 C-Mem. { 116.
380 C-Mem. 117.
381 C-Mem. { 118.
32 Rej. 1 96.

383 Rej. 49] 97-99.
34 Rej. $f 100-101.
385 Re}. ff 104-105.

77

243.

244,

so any alleged change in the burden of proof would not have had a substantial impact on the

decision.**°
4, DENIAL OF A FULL AND FAIR OPPORTUNITY TO BE HEARD
(i) Daimler’s arguments

According to Daimler, the Award’s reliance on the Djibouti judgment as the sole authority
for the “affirmative evidence” burden also evidences the Tribunal’s breach of Daimler’s right
to a full and fair opportunity to be heard. Daimler submits that a full opportunity implies that
both parties receive the opportunity to address every legal issue raised by the case; and a fair
opportunity means that each party is allowed to respond adequately to arguments presented

by the other and that it is not prejudiced by unexpected events.**”

Accordingly, even after the briefing phase is closed, the parties should be able to controvert
new evidence on which the tribunal intends to rely on as well as arguments and evidence
that were submitted in another case by one of the parties.*** Daimler argued that the Djibouti
judgment was neither submitted nor referred to by either party in this case, but seemed to
have been discussed in the JCS case. In that proceeding, Argentina submitted the Djibouti
judgment for the proposition that consent must be “unequivocal”. The case was later cited
in the JCS award, which reveals that the Tribunal applied the same “affirmative evidence”
requirement as in the present case.**° Similarly, the World Bank Guidelines were relied
upon in the Award even though they were not submitted by the Parties or addressed during
the hearing. Although the Award stated that they were not determinative for the issue of the
Contracting Parties’ intentions, Professor Bello Janeiro seems to have treated them as
applicable law in his Separate Opinion.*”° Daimler argued that given these circumstances,

the Tribunal was required to reopen the proceedings and hear both Parties “on the

386 Re}. J 106-107.

387 Mem. 4 218, {ff 236-238.
388 Mem. 220.

389 Mem. ¥f 247-248.

3 Mem. 249.

78

245.

246.

arbitrators’ new thesis” and the evidence it relied upon*”', as it actually did in 2010 in regard

to another of the jurisdictional objections.*°”

ICSID tribunals retain some ability to rely on evidence or arguments not introduced by the
parties to the extent that the parties receive a full and fair opportunity to be heard if the
evidence or arguments are determinative or constitute the sole basis or authority invoked by
the tribunal for the outcome, and are not merely duplicative or corroborative.*”? Daimler
stated that two of the three awards annulled in ICSID proceedings under Article 52(1) (d) of
the ICSID Convention were annulled due to the fact that the tribunal failed to afford the
parties a full and fair opportunity to be heard on evidence that resulted decisive in the

award.?°4

Contrary to Argentina’s contention, Daimler argued that the fact that the reference to the
Djibouti judgement was preceded by the term “e.g.” does not negate that this was the only
authority on which the Tribunal based its determination that Daimler bore the burden of
proving Argentina’s consent to the BIT.*° Also in response to Argentina’s Counter-
Memorial, Daimler stated that it did not argue that the mere reference to the JCS decision
warrants annulment. Instead, its reference to the JCS case was noted because it appeared that
the Djibouti judgement had been introduced in the JCS case and found its way into the Award
without input from Daimler.*”° This is also the case for the World Bank Guidelines, which
Professor Bello Janeiro found “particularly revealing”.**’ On this point Argentina only
argued that there was extensive discussion on whether or not consent existed, but this says
nothing on whether the Parties discussed these two points.*?* In sum, Daimler submitted that

while Argentina had the chance to address the Djibouti judgment as well as the World Bank

3! Mem. | 255.

3% Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 251:15 — 255:4.

393 Mem. ¥ 250.

3 Mem, 4 250-251; citing to Fraport, and Pey Casado.
35 Reply 99] 99-100.

3% Reply 101.

7 Reply { 102.

398 Reply | 102.

79

248.

249.

Guidelines during the JCS proceedings, Daimler was not given such an opportunity during

this arbitration.

. Furthermore, Daimler notes that the Award and the Separate Opinion refer to several post-

July 2008 references, despite the fact that the Tribunal had told the parties in July 2008, that
it had enough information on the question of jurisdiction.*”? Daimler argued that in light of
these new materials, the Tribunal was obliged to request additional submissions by the
Parties and its failure to do so amounts to a denial of a full opportunity to be heard that

warrants annulment under Article 52(1)(d).4

(ii) Argentina’s arguments

In regard to the Tribunal’s alleged reliance on the Djibouti judgment, Argentina argued that
this reference is made at the end of a long footnote by way of an example. Furthermore, it
was cited in response to the distinction drawn in Judge Brower’s Dissenting Opinion
between consent to submit to a specific dispute resolution method and the scope of this

consent.*°!

Likewise, Daimler’s claim that the Tribunal incorrectly referred to the
affirmative evidence requirement of consent is misplaced as consent is the “cornerstone of
the jurisdiction of the Centre” and the existence of consent was extensively discussed before
the Tribunal.*°? The Award is very eloquent in paragraph 175 on Daimler’s alleged
inconsistency between the fundamental principle of consent to international jurisdiction, the

need for a party invoking it to prove it and the interpretation rules contained in the VCLT.*°

Argentina stated that Daimler was not deprived of the right to be heard. Daimler only

contends that it was not given the opportunity to comment on certain legal authorities cited

by the Tribunal, which were publicly available and some of which were in the record.**

However, the relevant question here is that during the proceedings the Parties widely

39 Reply {if 104-110.

+ Reply { 110; Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 53:14 - 54:2; 56:16 - 18.
“0! Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 191:1 - 8.

“2 C-Mem. 21.

“03. C-Mem. 21.

Re}. | 109.

80

250.

251.

discussed the relevant issues in relation to which the Tribunal cited the legal authorities.*°>
As such, the Tribunal was not limited by the submissions of the Parties in regard to the legal
authorities. This is further confirmed by the principle of iura novit curia, whereby the
Tribunal had the duty to consider on its own initiative the rules of international law and legal
authorities relevant to the case.*°° Furthermore, Argentina claimed that Daimler did not even
argue that such authorities exceed the “legal framework’ established by the Parties’
arguments. In fact, the Parties extensively discussed the issues in relation to which the
Tribunal cited or invoked the legal authorities in question.*”” Specifically, the proposition
that the State’s consent cannot be presumed — which, according to Argentina, is what
“affirmative evidence” means — was discussed by the Parties in the hearing with reference to
the Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/14)
decision and also addressed by Argentina in its post-hearing brief in reference to the “Armed

Acti

  

ities Case in the Territory of Congo”.*°® Moreover, the Tribunal did not need the JCS
case record to have access to these authorities because they were publicly available and the

Tribunal could consider them sua sponte.*

Contrary to Daimler’s argument, this case is not similar to that of Amco Asia Corporation
and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1) (Second Decision on
Annulment) because in the present case the Tribunal did not make any decisions on a request

from Argentina without hearing Daimler.*!”

Regarding the reference to legal authorities subsequent to July 2008, Argentina stated that
the Tribunal did not close the discussion on the jurisdictional issue, but simply considered
that it had received enough information on the position of the Parties “so far developed”, and

therefore a hearing to address exclusively jurisdictional issues was not required*!!.

“5 Rej. LLL.

406 Rej. Hf 111-112.

Re}. F115.

“8 Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 284:17 - 291:11.
Re}. F116.

1 Rej. 121.

41 Rej. | 124

81

252.

254.

Following the joinder of the jurisdictional objections to the merits, jurisdictional issues were

further discussed, both at the hearing and thereafter.4!?

The cases cited by Daimler in support of its argument were clearly distinguishable. In
Fraport the tribunal took into account essential factual issues, specifically prohibiting the
parties from making submissions on such material and then relied on this factual material to
decide the case.*!? In Pey Casado the committee found that the tribunal decided issues not
raised by the parties and, thus, went beyond the legal framework.*!* This is not the case here.
Daimler only contends that it was not given an opportunity to comment on legal authorities
cited by the Tribunal in relation to matters that had been widely discussed by the Parties.*!>
Additionally, Daimler failed to show that this alleged breach was serious. Indeed, the
Tribunal already knew the Parties’ positions on these issues so that the lack of opportunity

to comment on the authorities could not have had an impact on the Award.*!°

5. FAILURE BY THE TRIBUNAL TO DELIBERATE AND RENDER A MAJORITY DECISION

(i) Daimler’s arguments

. Daimler argued that the Tribunal also breached a fundamental rule of procedure by failing

to deliberate and render a majority decision. Daimler stated that although deliberations are
not expressly required under the ICSID Rules, they are fundamental to an ICSID arbitration

and “annulment is nevertheless justified when it is apparent that deliberations have not

occurred, have not been meaningful, or have not achieved their purpose.”*!”

In accordance with Article 48 of the ICSID Convention, deliberations are intended to ensure

418

that all questions submitted to a tribunal are decided by majority vote During

deliberations the tribunal seeks to reach a majority decision on each “question submitted” by

422 Rej. Gf 122-125.
“3 Rej. | 127.
M4Rej. 128.

“15 Re}. (129.
Re}. J 130.

“1” Mem. { 256.

“18 Mem. 257.

82

the parties; arbitrators cannot simply “agree to disagree”.*!? Daimler argued that it is evident
in this case that on some of the issues deliberations took place but a review of the Award and
the Separate Opinions reveals that “no deliberations took place between the two arbitrators
who declined jurisdiction”.*”° Daimler stated that upon the Award’s own admission, the
MEN discussion was taken from the analysis of a different award and was, therefore, not
subject to deliberations. +?! Additionally, Professor Bello Janeiro stated in his Separate
Opinion that the Award was fully drafted and he simply “subscribe[d] to the decision

1,422

proposed by the President of the Tribunal

. Daimler argued that if the Committee were to find the above evidence insufficient, the

divergence of opinions between the two “majority” arbitrators on the interpretation of the
term “treatment” in the MEN clauses was proof of the failure to deliberate.*??_ According to
Daimler, in spite of the Award’s recognition of the two-prong test (see paragraph 35 above),
the Award and the Separate Opinion reflect different positions in regard to each prong.
Indeed, the Award recognizes that the World Bank Guidelines are soft law and do not shed
direct light on the matter, whereas the Separate Opinion treats these Guidelines as applicable
law.**4 Similarly, the Award distinguishes between State practice and investment case law
and states that investor-State jurisprudence cannot be evidence of the understanding of
States. As such, the Award looks to other textual evidence to discern the meaning of
“treatment”. However, Professor Bello Janeiro in his Separate Opinion relied on previous
investment case law, such as the Wintershall case, as well as apparent statements by States,
including Argentina. Daimler argued that this shows Professor Bello Janeiro’s opinion was
“divorced” from the intention of the Contracting Parties to the BIT.*?5 Furthermore, Daimler

stated that Professor Bello Janeiro’s decision was also “divorced” from the principle of

19 Mem. 1 258.
20 Mem. 1 259.
21 Mem. fff 260-261.
22 Mem. 261.
23 Mem. { 262.
24 Mem. ] 264.
25 Mem. if 265-267.

83

256.

contemporaneity because, apart from relying on the World Bank Guidelines, he relied on

evidence almost exclusively post-dating the BIT negotiations.*°

According to Daimler, despite the fact that the Award concluded that the term “treatment”
depended on the understanding of the Contracting Parties at the time the BIT was negotiated,
only the Tribunal’s President purported to apply this analysis to the conclusion that dispute
resolution was not within the term “treatment” in the MFN clauses of the BIT.*?’ Given the
importance of this term to the Award’s conclusion and the fact that the analysis turned on
those two elements, the absence of a majority decision on each of those elements constitutes

a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.*?*

According to Daimler, Professor Bello Janeiro enjoyed a degree of discretion to add
supplementary comments or reasons, but these needed to be consistent with the Award. That
not being the case, the deliberations cannot be said to have fulfilled their purpose.*”?
Contrary to Argentina’s contention, Daimler’s argument was not merely that the Tribunal
cited the JCS case, but that the President’s copy/paste of the JCS reasoning showed that the
Tribunal failed to deliberate and agree on a line of reasoning, because it merely imported
into the Award the product of deliberations of a different Tribunal and did not reach a

genuine majority.*°°

(ii) Argentina’s arguments

. Argentina submitted that Daimler’s arguments on the JCS decision are made simply to divert

attention from the jurisdictional objection that was upheld in the Award. Indeed, Daimler
failed to prove that any question on the fifth jurisdictional objection was not discussed by
the Parties during this proceeding irrespective of whether or not it appears in the JCS

decision.**!

26Mem. { 268.
27 Mem. {| 269.
28 Mem. §{ 270.
29 Reply ¥ 112.
8 Reply ¥ 113.
31. C-Mem. { 119.

84

259. According to Argentina since deliberations are secret, Daimler conveniently assumed that

260.

261.

the Tribunal failed to deliberate meaningfully. However, there is no indication in either
opinion to this effect.**? Furthermore, the fact that the President of the Tribunal submitted a
proposal to which arbitrator Bello Janeiro subscribed is in accordance with the ICSID rules
which recognize the President’s leading role in deliberations.*7> The fact that certain

paragraphs of the JCS award are transcribed does not alter this position.4**

6. THE COMMITTEE’S DECISION ON THE ALLEGED SERIOUS DEPARTURE FROM
FUNDAMENTAL RULES OF PROCEDURE

@ The Standard

The Parties seem to agree that a decision to annul under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID
Convention comprises three elements: (i) the identification of a “fundamental rule of
procedure’, (ii) a finding that the tribunal has departed from such a fundamental rule; and

(iii) a finding that the departure was serious.

As to the seriousness of the departure, Daimler submitted that for departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure to be serious it must either (i) have the potential to cause the
tribunal to render an award substantially different than that it would have rendered if the
fundamental rule had been observed, or (ii) deprive a party of the benefit or protection that
the rule was intended to provide.**> Argentina agreed that for a departure to be serious it
must deprive the party of the benefit or protection that the rule intended to provide.**°
However, Argentina submitted that the departure from a fundamental rule of procedure was

serious when it led a tribunal to a result substantially different from the result it would have

“82 Rej. | 132.

33 Rej. | 133.

+4 Roj. ff 135-137.
85 Mem. ] 225.

86 C_Mem. { 101.

85

262.

264,

265.

reached had the departure not occurred.**” Moreover, the applicant in an annulment

proceeding must prove that a different result would have been reached otherwise**®.

The Committee considers that under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention, a departure
from a procedural rule justifies annulment of the award provided that (i) the given departure

is serious; and (ii) the rule in question is fundamental.

. A departure is serious if it deprives a party of the protection afforded by the said rule. In the

words of the MINE annulment committee:

“5.05 A first comment on this provision concerns the term ‘serious’. In order to
constitute a ground for annulment the departure from a ‘fundamental rule of
procedure’ must be serious. The Committee considers that this establishes both
quantitative and qualitative criteria: the departure must be substantial and be such as
to deprive a party of the benefit or protection which the rule was intended to

provide.”**?

In other words, for a violation of the procedural rule to be serious, such violation “must have
caused the Tribunal to reach a result substantially different from what it would have awarded

had the rule been observed.”*4°

With respect to the rules of procedure that are to be considered fundamental, the Committee
considers that they are the rules of natural justice i.e., rules concerned with the essential

fairness of the proceeding. As pointed out by the CDC annulment committee:

“A departure is serious where it is ‘substantial and [is] such as to deprive the party
of the benefit or protection which the rule was intended to provide.’ [...] As for what
tules of procedure are fundamental, the drafters of the Convention refrained from

attempting to enumerate them, but the consensus seems to be that only rules of natural

87 C_Mem. { 104.
88 C_Mem. [ 104.
89 MINE, 15.05.
4° CDC, 449.

86

266.

267.

268.

269.

justice — rules concerned with the essential fairness of the proceeding - are

fundamental. Not all ICSID Arbitration Rules are fundamental in this sense.”

The applicant, in this case Daimler, had the burden of proving both that (i) the Tribunal
committed a serious departure from a procedural rule; and (ii) that the said rule was

fundamental.

The Committee will now address the four actions of the Tribunal that, according to Daimler,

seriously violated fundamental rules of procedure.
(ii) | Alleged Prejudicial Delay in Rendering a Jurisdictional Decision

Daimler submitted that on July 16, 2008, the Tribunal indicated that it had enough
information on the positions of the Parties on the issue of jurisdiction. However, it did not
issue its jurisdictional decision at that time, but joined jurisdiction and merits and “mandated
a long series of pleadings, oral argumentation, and witness examinations exclusively
addressing the merits of the parties’ dispute, which delayed a decision on the jurisdictional
issues for an additional four years, one month and six days. [...] These extensive and
expensive proceedings in the end amounted to a nullity and an egregious waste of resources,
given the Tribunal’s ultimate conclusion that it lacked jurisdiction to decide any merits issues

at all”.422

According to Daimler, it was clearly prejudiced by the delay because, (i) had the Tribunal
issued its jurisdictional decision in time, Daimler would have devoted its time and resources
to annulment proceedings, and/or to litigate the matter before the Argentinian courts;7and
(ii) the delay “led the Tribunal to rely on key sources imported from another arbitration, with

respect to which Daimler Financial never had an opportunity to be heard.”*+#+

41 CDC, 449.

+2 Mem. 229.

+3 Mem. { 230; Reply {{ 76.
+4 Reply | 76.

87

270.

271.

272.

274.

275.

276.

The Parties seem to agree that a delay per se would not merit annulment, but that
impermissible or unreasonable delay that causes prejudice to a party may, depending on the

circumstances, open the door for annulment.

In the Committee’s opinion, the record of these annulment proceedings does not support

Daimler’s allegations and therefore the Committee will dismiss such allegations.

According to the text of Procedural Order No. 3, on July 16, 2008 the Tribunal did not decide,
as contended by Daimler, that it had enough information to make a determination on the
issue of jurisdiction. In the said Procedural Order the Tribunal considered that no separate
hearing was required for jurisdiction given that it had received enough information through
the written submissions’ Therefore, the Tribunal cancelled the hearing on jurisdiction

originally scheduled for December 5 and 6, 2008.

. It was in Procedural Order No. 4, dated August 27, 2008 that the Tribunal decided to join

jurisdiction and merits.

Nothing in the record of these annulment proceedings suggests that as a result of Procedural
Order No. 3, or the decision to join jurisdiction and the merits, the Tribunal closed the
submissions on jurisdiction or prevented the Parties from presenting further arguments or
allegations on jurisdiction. On the contrary, the record indicates, and during the Hearing on
Annulment it became even clearer, that after July 16, 2008 the Parties further discussed the
objections on jurisdiction, including debates in the hearing that took place from November

30 through December 7, 2009, where merits and jurisdictions were addressed.**5

The Parties submitted their post-hearing briefs on March 29, 2010 — Respondent — and March
30, 2010 — Claimant.*“° Thereafter the Tribunal requested some additional information from

the Parties on August 20, 2010 and the Parties responded on September 28, 2010.44”

In the proceedings that ended with the Award, Argentina submitted five different

jurisdictional objections. In the Award the Tribunal referred to each one of these objections,

“45 Hearing on Annulment, Tr. 312:21 — 317:8; Tr. 342:21 — 343:9.
46 Award, WM 29-30.
47 Award, WM 31-32.

88

278.

279.

280.

and after stating the positions of the Parties it rejected four objections and accepted the fifth
titled “The Most-Favored Nation Clause does not Authorize the Claimant to Bypass the
Requirements of Articles 10(2) and 10(3) of the Treaty”. It was not, therefore, a case where,
as suggested by Daimler, the Tribunal decided to postpone the decision on one objection to
jurisdiction, have the Parties plead merits for months, and then issue an Award based on that

particular objection to jurisdiction.

. Areading of the Award suggests that at least some of the objections to jurisdiction could not

have been decided without discussing the facts, or additional evidence related to the merits
of the case. But in any event, it is not the duty of the Committee to second-guess the reasons
that the Tribunal may have had to cancel the separate hearing on jurisdiction, or to join
jurisdiction and merits or not to decide all the objections to jurisdiction without addressing
the merits. That would require, on the one hand, a review of the entire file and all the
circumstances existing at the time each such decision was made, and on the other, a review
of the reasons that the Tribunal had to conduct the proceedings in the manner it did. Even if
the Committee carried out this exercise it would serve no purpose. An extensive review of
this nature while it may be permissible in appellate proceedings which allow a review of

both errors of fact and law is clearly beyond the scope of annulment proceedings.

As a result of the foregoing, the Committee considers that there was no undue or
unreasonable delay in issuing the Award as claimed by Daimler and therefore, no violation

of a fundamental rule of procedure that merits annulment of the Award.

Alleged Imposition of an improperly-heightened burden of proof

 

Daimler attacked the wording of paragraph 175 of the Award as an imposition on Daimler
of an “affirmative evidence” requirement to prove the consent of the State Parties to the BIT

to include dispute resolution within the scope of the MEN clause.

Daimler, citing the ICJ Fisheries case, argued that the burden of establishing or proving rules

of international law cannot be imposed upon any of the parties and that such a rule is founded

48 Mem. §] 234.

89

28

28

283.

lL.

2

upon the basic principle of the equality of the parties to the dispute.” The concept of “rules
of international law” includes rules contained in treaties binding on the parties. Therefore,
by imposing on Daimler the burden of proving the scope of the consent of the Contracting

States to the BIT the Tribunal departed from a fundamental rule of procedure.**°

The Committee considers that — as rightly stated by Argentina*! — a reading of paragraph
175 of the Award in its proper context together with the paragraphs which immediately
follow, including paragraph 177 of the Award, makes clear that the Tribunal did not impose
a burden of proof on Daimler, much less a heightened and unacceptable burden of proof, that

resulted in a departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.
Paragraph 175 of the Award reads:

“{I]t is not possible to presume that consent has been given by a state. Rather, the
existence of consent must be established. This may be accomplished either through
an express declaration of consent to an international tribunal ’s jurisdiction or on the

basis of acts ‘conclusively establishing’ such consent.?”!

What is not permissible is
to presume a state’s consent by reason of the state’s failure to proactively disavow
the tribunal’s jurisdiction. Non-consent is the default rule; consent is the exception.
Establishing consent therefore requires affirmative evidence. But the impossibility of
basing a state’s consent on a mere presumption should not be taken as a ‘strict’ or
‘restrictive’ approach in terms of interpretation of dispute resolution clauses. It is
simply the result of respect for the rule according to which state consent is the
incontrovertible requisite for any kind of international settlement procedure.”

(Emphasis added)
Paragraph 177 of the Award states the following:

“In addressing the different issues raised by the disputing parties in the present case,

the main task of the Tribunal is therefore to identify the true will of the Federal

49 Mem. 234.
+0 Mem. ] 235.
+51 Rej. 9] 98-101.

90

284,

285.

286.

Republic of Germany and the Republic of Argentina as it was stated in the 1991
Treaty which they agreed upon for the ‘promotion and reciprocal protection of
investments’. In particular, the Tribunal must determine whether the State Parties, in
concluding the German-Argentine BIT, intended to submit to the jurisdiction of an
international arbitral tribunal in circumstances wherein the investor has satisfied the
procedural requirements for international dispute resolution under a Comparator
Treaty but has not fully complied with the investor-State dispute resolution process

laid down in the Basic Treaty.” (Emphasis added).

As already observed, the Award must be read in its context, and the paragraphs and sentences
cannot be interpreted or given a meaning in isolation from the section in which they are
included or the related paragraphs that provide them context. A reading of the above quoted
paragraphs and a review of the Award makes it clear that the Tribunal did not impose a
burden of proof on either Party; it simply stated that consent of the State cannot be presumed
and therefore must be established. Thereafter the Tribunal noted that it was its duty, based
on the different issues raised by the Parties, to identify the true will of the States when

expressing their consent to the BIT.

It follows from the above that the Tribunal did not impose an improper burden of proof on

Daimler that amounts to a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.
(iv) Alleged Denial of a Full and Fair Opportunity to be Heard

Daimler submitted that it was denied a fair opportunity to be heard because the Tribunal
relied on the Djibouti judgment as the sole authority for the affirmative evidence
requirement. Such decision was never discussed or presented in the arbitration between
Daimler and Argentina and appeared only in the Award. The Djibouti judgment was
imported into the Award by the President of the Tribunal from the JCS case where Argentina

had the opportunity to be heard with respect to such opinion.*°?

. Daimler also submitted that it was denied a fair opportunity to be heard because the Tribunal

informed the Parties in 2008 that the Tribunal had received enough information from the

+82 Mem., {if 236-237; Wl 247-248.

91

288.

289.

parties on the issue of jurisdiction, and then introduced and referenced a number of cases in

the Award and Separate Opinion that did not even exist in July 2008.4

The Committee is of the view that there was no serious violation of the fundamental right of

Daimler to be heard in the proceedings that ended with the Award.

The Djibouti judgment is mentioned once in the Award, in a footnote**

and its purpose is
to respond to an argument advanced in the Dissenting Opinion. After indicating that State
consent is the incontrovertible requisite for any kind of international settlement procedure,
the Award states: “What is true of the very existence of consent to have recourse to a specific
international dispute resolution mechanism is also true as far as the scope of this consent is

concerned”. Footnote 325 was inserted after this sentence and reads as follows:

“The Dissenting Opinion attempts to draw a neat dividing line between the
establishment of consent to be bound by a specific dispute resolution mechanism and
the scope of that consent, suggesting that the former can be founded on purely
“formal indicia” such as the fact of signature and ratification of a treaty, while the
latter is a matter of textual interpretation (Dissenting Opinion at n. 15). This
distinction is a red herring. If the interpretive analysis reveals that the scope of
Argentina’s consent to submit to the jurisdiction of an international arbitral tribunal
does not extend to the matter at hand, it is difficult to understand in what sense the
State’s consent to submit to that jurisdiction will have nevertheless been
“established” on the basis of the State’s mere signature and ratification of the Treaty.
The relevant question is not whether the Treaty was ratified — which it was — but what
precisely the States consented to in ratifying the Treaty. See e.g. Certain Questions
of Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters (Djibouti v. France), Judgment, 1.C.J.
Reports 2008, p. 177, at paras. 65ff (finding it necessary to determine the “extent of

the consent given by the Parties to the Court’s jurisdiction”).

“53 Reply | 104.
“84 Award, Footnote 325.

92

290.

291.

292.

293.

294.

The Djibouti judgment is not, as Daimler contends, the legal authority on the basis of which
the Tribunal required a heightened burden of proof from Daimler. Its text and context clearly
indicates, in the opinion of the Committee, that it was mentioned to support a response to
the Dissenting Opinion on the matter of how the Tribunal should interpret the provisions of
the BIT to establish the existence and scope of consent. It is clear from the record that the
Parties made extensive submissions on the issue of consent in relation to jurisdiction. A
single reference to an opinion, in a footnote responding to the Dissenting Opinion cannot be,
in the context in which it was written, considered as a legal authority that imposed an undue
burden of proof on Daimler, or as a legal authority with respect to which Daimler should

have been provided an opportunity to be heard.

As for the submission that the Tribunal informed the Parties in 2008 that it had received
enough information on the positions of the Parties on the issue of jurisdiction, and then
introduced and referenced a number of cases in the Award and Separate Opinion that did not
even exist as of July 2008 without giving Daimler the opportunity to be heard on those

authorities, the record in this annulment proceedings does not support Daimler’s contention.

As already observed in paragraph 274 above, by joining the merits and jurisdiction the
Tribunal did not close the submissions on jurisdiction or prevent the Parties from making
further arguments or allegations on jurisdiction. The Parties, in fact, referred to the
jurisdictional objections in the hearing and included jurisdictional submissions in their post-

hearing briefs.

Turning to the authorities quoted by Professor Bello Janeiro in the Separate Opinion, and the
effect thereof on the Award, the Committee has already addressed this matter in paragraphs
107 to 120 above. The reasons stated there are sufficient to reject the claim that the reference
in the Separate Opinion to authorities other than those presented by the Parties constitutes a

violation of a fundamental rule of procedure.

As to the post-July 2008 authorities cited in the Award, the Committee has three
observations: First, they were publicly available and either Party could access them. Second,
they were available before the Parties submitted their post-hearing briefs and nothing

prevented the Parties from relying on such authorities in support of their arguments. Third,

93

295.

296.

297.

the Parties had extensively discussed the issues on which the legal authorities were cited in

the Award.

This Committee is of the view that an arbitral tribunal is not limited to referring to or relying
upon only the authorities cited by the parties. It can, sua sponte, rely on other publicly
available authorities, even if they have not been cited by the parties, provided that the issue
has been raised before the tribunal and the parties were provided an opportunity to address
it. This is exactly the case here. Daimler had the opportunity to make submissions on all the
relevant issues related to objections to jurisdiction. Once such an opportunity was provided
the Tribunal was not obliged to confine itself to only those authorities, which had been cited
by the parties. No rule of law or procedure or requirement of due process prevented it from
referring to or relying upon other authorities that were in the public domain. Such reliance

did not violate any rule of natural justice including the right to be heard.

In sum, on July 16, 2008 the Tribunal decided not to hold a separate hearing on jurisdiction,
but did not close the proceedings on jurisdiction or prevented the Parties from making further
submissions on jurisdiction. Daimler had the opportunity to present its case on the objections
to jurisdiction filed by Argentina, from July 16, 2008 to the submission of the post-hearing
briefs on March 2010, including submissions during the hearing on jurisdiction and merits
held on November and December 2009. The fact that the Tribunal cited in the Award
decisions or authorities not previously cited by the Parties, but which were publicly
available, and were relevant to the issues on which the Parties had made extensive

submissions, does not constitute a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.

(v) | Alleged Failure by the Tribunal to Deliberate and Render a Majority

Decision

Daimler contended that the Tribunal had failed to comply with one of its basic duties: to
deliberate and reach a majority decision on each one of the questions submitted by the
Parties. In Daimler’s view, a review of the Award and the Separate Opinion reveals that no

deliberations had taken place between the two arbitrators who declined jurisdiction.*>

“55 Mem. fff 258-259.

94

298.

299.

300.

301.

According to Daimler, the lack of deliberations is evidenced by (i) the admission in the
Award, in footnote 303, that portions of specific parts of the analysis overlap with the
decision in the JCS arbitration whose tribunal shared the same President; (ii) the statement
by Professor Bello Janeiro in his Separate Opinion that he subscribed to the decision
proposed by the President of the Tribunal, which statement suggests that he was simply
presented with the Award by the President of the Tribunal; and (iii) the divergence of

opinions between the arbitrators that formed the majority.**°

Neither the text of the Award, nor the Arbitration Rules much less arbitration practice, and

other evidence in these annulment proceedings support Daimler’s contentions.

The Committee sees no departure from a fundamental rule of procedure in the President
preparing and submitting to the co-arbitrators for their consideration a draft award. On the
one hand, it is the President who presides over the deliberations (Arbitration Rule 14(1)). On
the other hand the preparation of a first draft by the President of the Tribunal is a working
method that tribunals frequently employ in order to draw up an award. From this it cannot
be inferred that the members of the Tribunal did not deliberate upon the Award. Nothing in
the record suggests that the draft was not discussed or that there was no deliberation. On the
contrary, the Dissenting Opinion and the Separate Opinion strongly suggest that the
arbitrators had deliberated; that there was dissent from the decision — Judge Brower — and a
need to clarify the vote — Professor Bello Janeiro — which clearly establishes that the Tribunal

reached its conclusions after due deliberations.

It is true, and the Parties do not dispute, that in the drafting of the Award the President
decided to use, in certain parts of the analysis, portions of the draft used in a different case
that he was chairing. This was clearly disclosed in footnote 303 of the Award. However, this
cannot ipso facto lead to the conclusion that the Award was made without deliberations.
There is not even an iota of evidence, which even remotely suggests that the President simply

copied an award, or substantial portions of it, from a different case and that Professor Bello

“56 Mem. fff 260-262.

95

302.

303.

Iv.

304.

305.

306.

307.

308.

Janeiro merely concurred without any discussion or deliberation. Again, the Dissenting

Opinion and the Separate Opinion suggest otherwise.

As for the differences between the Award and the Separate Opinion, the Committee has
already referred to them in paragraphs 89 to 120 above and concluded that the tribunal had
deliberated. There are no contradictions between the Award and the Separate Opinion of
Professor Bello Janeiro. Even if there were, the Award would not be affected as the majority

clearly voted to decline jurisdiction.

The Committee thus considers that there was no violation of a fundamental rule of procedure

resulting from the alleged failure of the Tribunal to deliberate and reach a majority decision.

COSTS

The Committee must now deal with the question of the costs of these annulment proceedings,

as to which the Committee has discretion.

The large majority of committees, in annulment proceedings, have held that legal costs
should be borne equally by the parties. They have done so not only where the application for

annulment has succeeded in whole or part, but also where it failed.

This Committee has considered whether such practice should be followed and whether or
not the result of such practice may be anomalous. In particular, the Committee debated
whether the Respondent should bear costs at all, given that every ground for annulment

presented by Daimler has been rejected.

Finally, the Committee decided that the Applicant should bear the costs of the annulment

proceedings (which it has already paid).

Insofar as legal costs are concerned this Committee decided to follow the aforesaid practice
and order that each Party should bear its own legal costs. This is not because this Committee
agrees that it should be applied as a general rule, but because of the circumstances of the

present case.

96

309. Even though Daimler was not successful in any of its claims, this is not a case where, as
indicated in CDC, the annulment application is “fundamentally lacking in merit” and that
Applicant’s case was “to any reasonable and impartial observer, most unlikely to succeed.”
In addition, the present case involved a “difficult and novel question of public importance”
(Vivendi I, paras. 117) concerning the effects of concurring opinions in the formation of the

majority, the deliberations and the reasoning of the award.
Vv. DECISION
310. For the reasons set forth above, the Committee unanimously decides:

i. To dismiss in its entirety the Application for Annulment of the Award submitted by

Daimler Financial Services A.G.

ii. That each party shall bear its own legal costs and expenses incurred with respect to this

annulment proceeding.

iii. That the Applicant, Daimler Financial Services A.G. shall bear the costs of the proceeding,

comprising the fees and expenses of the Committee Members, and the costs of using the

ICSID facilities.

97

[Signed] [Signed]

Florentino Feliciano Makhdoom Ali Khan

Arbitrator Arbitrator

Date: 26/11/2014 Date: 19/12/2014
[Signed]

Eduardo Zuleta
President
Date: 24/12/2014

98

