International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
Washington, D.C.

Daimler Financial Services AG
(Claimant)
v.

Argentine Republic
(Respondent)

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

 

AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Pierre-Marie Dupuy, President
Judge Charles N. Brower, Arbitrator
Professor Domingo Bello Janeiro, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Anneliese Fleckenstein

Representing the Claimant:

Paul Doyle

Kelley Drye & Warren LLP
101 Park Avenue

New York, New York

Representing the Respondent:

Dra. Angelina Maria Esther Abbona
Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacion
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacion
Buenos Aires, Argentina

Date of Dispatch to the parties: 22 August 2012

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

TABLE OF CONTENTS

DEFINED TERMS 1

INTRODUCTION

I
IL.

Il.
Iv.

VI.

. ADMISSIBILITY OF THE OBJECTION.

. SUBSTANCE OF THE OBJECTION...........

. POSITION OF THE RESPONDENT...........

 

2
PROCEDURE 2
THE FACTS, 5
APPLICABLE LAW. 11
THREE PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

 

. FIRST OBJECTION: THE CLAIM REFERS TO CONTRACTUAL MATTERS OVER WHICH

THE TRIBUNAL HAS NO JURISDICTION IN LIGHT OF THE CONTRACTS’ FORUM
SELECTION CLAUSES 14

1. Position of the Respond
2. Position of the Claimant ....
3. Considerations of the Tribuna!

 

 

. SECOND OBJECTION: THE CLAIMANT, AS SHAREHOLDER, LACKS JUS STANDI TO

BRING AN INDIRECT CLAIM FOR DAMAGES ALLEGEDLY SUFFERED BY THE ARGENTINE
SUBSIDIARIES 19

1. Position of the Respond

2. Position of the Claimant ....
3. Considerations of the Tribuna!

 

 

. THIRD OBJECTION: THE CLAIM REFERS TO THE ADOPTION OF GENERAL MEASURES

WHICH EXCEED THE JURISDICTION OF THE CENTRE

 

1. Position of the Respond
2. Position of the Claimant ....
3. Considerations of the Tribuna!

FOURTH OBJECTION TO JURISDICTION: DFS IS NOT THE PROPER
CLAIMANT BECAUSE IT NO LONGER OWNS THE CLAIM

 

 

 

 

1. Position of the Respond

2. Position of the Claimant ....
3. Considerations of the Tribuna!

 

 

 

The Tribunal’s request for further submissions concerning the SPA
Position of the R d

Position of the Claimant ....
Considerations of the Tribuna!

a) Applicable law. 50
b) Was the ICSID claim effectively assigned under international law
(and does international law have a “continuous ownership

 
 
 

eye

 

c) Was the ICSID claim effectively assigned under German law? ......
d) C i

FIFTH OBJECTION TO JURISDICTION: THE MOST-FAVORED NATION
CLAUSE DOES NOT AUTHORIZE THE CLAIMANT TO BYPASS THE
REQUIREMENTS OF ARTICLES 10(2) AND 10(3) OF THE TREATY.

 

 

 

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

B. POSITION OF THE CLAIMANT. 61

 
  
  

C. CONSIDERATIONS OF THE TRIBUNA|

 

1. Tribunal’s Interpretive Approach under Public International Law.

a) Interpretive principles flowing from the bilateral nature of BITs....
b) Consent as the cornerstone of all treaty commitments ..

2. Analysis of the Dispute Resolution Clause in the German-Argentine BIT ......... 72

a) Mandatory and sequential nature of the Treaty’s investor-State dispute
lution provisions 72
b) Does the 18-month domestic courts requirement constitute a condition
precedent to Argentina’ Ss consent to arbitrate or merely a procedural
directive or admissibility ? 74
c) Relevance of ‘whether or not. the 18-month domestic courts requirement is

79

 

d) The timing aspect of standing — when may an MFN claim be raised
before an international arbitral tribunal?.........

3. Analysis of the MFN Clauses in the German-Argentine BIT

 

 

 

a) The Treaty’s MFN texts and their interdependence.
b) Potential reach of the MFN clauses in light of the ejusdem generis rule...... 85
c) Ordinary meaning of the term “treatment” in the BIT’s two MEN clauses .. 88
d) Limiting effect of the words “in its territory” on the scope of the MFN

clauses 93
e) Significance of distinction between treatment of investments and

treatment of investors “with respect to their activities in connection

with i ” 96
f) Significance of the MFN clauses’ failure to refer to “all matters

subject to the Treaty...
g) Significance of the exceptions to MEN treatment \s

Articles 3(3) and 3(4)
h) Requirement that the comparator treatment invoked

must be more favorable
i) Relationship between the Article 3 MFN clauses and

  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

the Article 4 MFN clause...
j) Meaning of the MFN clauses i in light of the objects
and purposes of the BIT .. .
k) Supplementary indications from State practice and international
jurisprudence 111
1) The Dissenting Opinion and the Concurring Statement 119
4. Summary of Tribunal’s MFN analysis .............000000+ 119

 

VII. COSTS 120
VIII. DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL . 121
APPENDIX 1: SELECT ARGENTINE BITS BY DATE OF SIGNING .. 124

APPENDIX 2: SELECT ARGENTINE BITS BY DATE OF ENTRY INTO
FORCE 125

   

Argentine Subsidiaries
Argentine Subsidiary
Basic Treaty

BITs

Comparator Treaty
Convertibility Law
DAG

DCAG

DCCF

DCFS

DCLA

DCS

DFS

Domestic courts proviso
Emergency Law
German-Argentine BIT

ICJ

ICSID

Parent Company
PCI

MEN

Vienna Convention
18-month proviso

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

Defined Terms

DCS, DCCF and DCLA collectively

DCS (the parent company of DCCF and DCLA)
German-Argentine BIT

Bilateral investment treaties

Chilean-Argentine BIT

Argentine Law 23,928 of 1 April 1991

Daimler AG

DaimlerChrysler AG

DaimlerChrysler Compajfiia Financiera S.A.
DaimlerChrysler Financial Services AG
DaimlerChrysler Leasing S.A.

DaimlerChrysler Services, Argentina S.A.

Daimler Financial Services AG

Article 10(2) of the German-Argentine BIT

Argentine Law 25,561 of January 2002

Treaty Between the Federal Republic of Germany and the
Republic of Argentina for the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments (1991)

International Court of Justice

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
DCAG, subsequently DAG

Permanent Court of International Justice

Most-favored nation

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (1969)
Article 10(2) of the German-Argentine BIT

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

Introduction

1. This Award sets forth the Tribunal’s findings concerning the Respondent’s objections to
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in the matter of Daimler Financial Services A.G. v. Argentine
Republic. The Tribunal herein makes no findings as to the merits of any of the disputing parties’

claims or defenses.

L PROCEDURE

2. On 2 August 2004, as supplemented by two letters of 5 August and 21 October 2004,
DaimlerChrysler Services AG, a company incorporated under the laws of Germany, with its
principal offices in Berlin, filed with the International Centre for Settlement of Investment

Disputes (the “Centre” or “ICSID”) a request for arbitration against the Argentine Republic.

3. On 4 August 2004, the Centre acknowledged receipt of the Request in accordance with
Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration
Proceedings, and transmitted a copy of the Request and its accompanying documents to the

Attorney General of Argentina and to the Ambassador of Argentina in Washington D.C.

4, On 14 January 2005, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request and in
accordance with Institution Rule 7 notified the parties of the registration, inviting them to

proceed, as soon as possible, to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal.

5. On 18 March 2005, the Claimant requested that the Tribunal should be constituted in
accordance with the formula set forth in Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, according to
which one arbitrator was to be appointed by each party, and the third arbitrator, who would serve

as president of the tribunal, would be appointed by agreement of the parties.

6. On 4 April 2005, the Claimant appointed Judge Charles N. Brower, a U.S. national, as an
arbitrator.
7. On 13 April 2005, the Respondent appointed Professor Domingo Bello Janeiro, a Spanish

national, as an arbitrator.

8. By letters of 11 and 17 October 2005, the parties informed the Centre of their agreement

that the President of the Tribunal should be appointed by the two party-appointed arbitrators.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

9. Given that more than ninety days had elapsed since the date of registration without any
Tribunal being constituted, on 30 June 2006 the Claimant invoked Article 38 of the ICSID
Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 4, and requested the Chairman of the Administrative

Council to appoint the President of the Tribunal.

10. On 31 August 2006, the Centre proposed Professor Pierre-Marie Dupuy, a French
national, to serve as President of the Tribunal. By letters of September 8, 2006, the parties agreed

to the appointment of Professor Dupuy as President of the Tribunal.

ll. On 21 September 2006, the Secretary-General of ICSID, in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 6(1), notified the parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments
and that the Tribunal was therefore deemed to be constituted and the proceedings to have begun
on that date. The Tribunal was composed of Professor Pierre-Marie Dupuy (French), President;
Professor Domingo Bello Janeiro (Spanish); and Judge Charles N. Brower (U.S.). On the same
day, the parties were informed that Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson, Counsel, ICSID, would serve as

Secretary to the Tribunal.

12. On 27 January 2007, the Tribunal held a first session with the parties at the World Bank

headquarters in Paris.
13. On 10 August 2007, the Claimant filed its Memorial on the Merits.

14. On 4 January 2008, the Respondent filed a Memorial raising some objections to

jurisdiction (“Memorial on Jurisdiction”).

15. On 16 January 2008, following the Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, the Tribunal
confirmed the suspension of the proceeding on the merits in accordance with ICSID Arbitration

Rule 41(3).

16. On 17 March 2008, the Claimant filed its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction. On the
same day, the Claimant notified the Centre of the Claimant’s change of name from

DaimlerChrysler Services AG to Daimler Financial Services AG.
17. On 5 May 2008, the Respondent filed its Reply on Jurisdiction.

18. On 9 June 2008, the Claimant filed its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction.

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

19. On 19 December 2008, the parties were informed that due to Ms. Claudia Frutos-
Peterson’s extended leave of absence the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID had, in accordance
with ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulation 25, appointed Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Senior

Counsel, ICSID, to serve as Secretary of the Tribunal.

20. From October 2007 to March 2009, the parties filed a series of requests for the
production of documents. The Tribunal gave the parties opportunities to comment on these
requests and issued its decisions concerning the requests in the form of a series of Procedural

Orders.

21. On 27 February 2009, the Claimant referred to its letter of 17 March 2008 and requested
that the Centre change its name from DaimlerChrysler Services AG to Daimler Financial Services

AG.

22. On 4 March 2009, the Centre notified the parties that the Claimant’s name would be

changed to Daimler Financial Services AG, as requested by the Claimant.

23. On 27 August 2009, at the request of the parties, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order
No. 4 joining the objections to jurisdiction raised by the Respondent to the merits in accordance
with ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(4), and establishing the procedural calendar for the submissions

on the merits of the dispute.

24. On 17 April 2009, the Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial on the Merits.

25. On 3 August 2009, the Claimant filed its Reply on the Merits.

26. On 27 October 2009, the Respondent filed its Rejoinder on the Merits.

27. From 30 November through 7 December 2009, the Tribunal held a hearing on jurisdiction
and merits at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C. Present at the hearing were Professor
Pierre-Marie Dupuy, President; Professor Domingo Bello Janeiro, arbitrator; and Judge Charles
N. Brower arbitrator; Ms. Anneliese Fleckenstein, Case Counsel, ICSID and Mr. Gonzalo Flores,
Senior Counsel, ICSID. For the Claimant, Mres. Paul Doyle, Philip Robben, Michael H.
MacMahon, Nafees Nuruddin, Keith Vena, and Ms. Cathleen Condren, Julia A. Garza Benitez, of
Kelley Drye & Warren LLP. For the Respondent, Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino, Procurador
del Tesoro de la Nacion; Dr. Adolfo Gustavo Scrinzi, Sub-Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacion;

Dr. Gabriel Bottini, Director Nacional de Asuntos y Controversias Internacionales — Procuracion

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

del Tesoro de la Nacion; Mr. Mauricio Rosales Markaida, Director de Coordinacién Técnica y
Administrativa — Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacion; Mr. Ignacio Torterola, Enlace Procuracién
del Tesoro de la Nacion/CIADI; and from the Direccién Nacional de Asuntos y Controversias
Internacionales, Drs. Cintia Yaryura, Silvina Gonzalez Napolitano, Mariana Lozza, Carolina
Coronado, and Mrs. Igancio Pérez Cortés, Alejandro Turyn, Patricio Arnedo Barreiro, Nicolas

Duhalde, Diego Brian Gosis.

28. On 9 December 2009, the Tribunal was informed that due to the re-distribution of the
Centre’s workload, Ms. Anneliese Fleckenstein, Case Counsel, ICSID, was assigned to serve as

Secretary to the Tribunal.
29. On 29 March 2010, the Respondent filed its Post-Hearing brief.
30. On 30 March 2010, the Claimant filed its Post-Hearing brief.

31. On 20 August 2010, the Tribunal requested from the parties further information regarding
the Share Purchase Agreement of 12 June 2002 concluded between DCS Berlin (later DCFS, “the
Claimant”) and DCAG Stuttgart (“the Parent Company”).

32. On 28 September 2010, the parties submitted their responses to the Tribunal’s request of
20 August 2010.

Il. THE FACTS

33. Daimler Financial Services AG (variably “DFS”, “DCFS”, or “the Claimant”) is a
corporation organized and existing under the laws of the Federal Republic of Germany, with a
principal place of business at Eichhornstrasse 3, D - 10785 Berlin, Germany.' DFS is and was at
all relevant times throughout the history of this case wholly-owned by Daimler AG (“DAG” or
“the Parent Company”) or its predecessor DaimlerChrysler AG (“DCAG” or “the Parent
Company”), with a principal place of business at Epplestrasse 225, D - 70567 Stuttgart,

Germany.”

'  Claimant’s Request for Arbitration, para 1.

Ibid. At the time of the filing of the Request for Arbitration, the Claimant and its Parent Company were
known, respectively, as DaimlerChrysler Services AG and DaimlerChrysler AG. The reference to Chrysler
was dropped subsequent to the break-up of the Daimler and Chrysler corporations in 2007, and the
Claimant’s corporate name was eventually changed to Daimler Financial Services. The case name in the
present proceedings has been adjusted accordingly. Nonetheless, portions of the parties’ pleadings make
reference to the old names, and the Tribunal, where necessary, has followed the lead of the parties in

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

34, The Respondent is the Argentine Republic, represented in these proceedings by its Public
Prosecutor’s Office, Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacion, with its principal business address at

Posadas 1641, C1112 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

35. The Claimant bases its claim upon provisions of the Treaty Between the Federal Republic
of Germany and the Republic of Argentina for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of
Investments (“the German-Argentine BIT”, “the Treaty”, or “the BIT”). This Treaty was signed
by the Contracting State Parties on 9 April 1991 and entered into force on 8 November 1993.°

36. The facts alleged to underpin the claim, insofar as they are relevant to this Tribunal’s
jurisdiction, are as follows. In the early 1990s, Argentina undertook a series of legal and policy
reforms designed to stabilize its economy, which had previously been plagued by episodes of
rampant inflation and dramatic vacillations in economic growth. Among the reforms enacted by
the Government at that time were several that were intended to encourage foreign investment,
including, according to the Claimant’s description of the claim, the following:
a) Law 23,928 of | April 1991 (“the Convertibility Law”)*, which inter alia:
i) Made the Argentine peso convertible with the U.S. dollar on a 1:1 basis, thereby
“pegging” the value of the peso to the dollar; and
ii) Amended Section 619 of the Argentine Civil Code to provide that a debtor
obliged to deliver foreign currency would fulfill that obligation by payment in
foreign currency on the maturity date, rather than payment in local currency
according to the applicable exchange rate on the maturity date.
b) Law 21,382, as implemented by Decree 1853/1993°, together permitting foreign investors
to:
i) Invest in Argentina without registration or prior government approval, including
through merger, acquisition, or joint venture arrangements, on the same terms as
Argentine investors; and
ii) Repatriate capital and remit earnings abroad at any time.
c) A series of bilateral investment treaties (“BITs”) concluded with numerous countries —

including the above-mentioned German-Argentine BIT — which guaranteed foreign

 

referring to the Claimant variably as DFS and DCFS. The details of the corporate break-up between
Daimler and Chrysler have no bearing upon the jurisdictional questions now before the Tribunal.

> Exhibit B to Claimant’s Request for Arbitration.
Exhibit G to Claimant’s Request for Arbitration.

Claimant’s Request for Arbitration, paras 39-40.

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

investors important protections against, inter alia, capital movement restrictions,
expropriations, unfair treatment, and arbitrary or discriminatory treatment.°

d) The ratification of the ICSID Convention,’ which in concert with the newly enacted BITs

provided foreign investors with direct access to a neutral international arbitration forum
in the event of an investment-related dispute between a foreign investor and the

Government of Argentina.

37. The Claimant further points to various written and oral representations made by
Argentine government officials underscoring that the new regulatory regime established by these
reforms could be relied upon and would remain permanently in effect.* Key among these, in the
Claimant’s view, was a 1993 publication prepared in English and aggressively distributed by
Argentina’s newly created Undersecretariat of Investment, entitled “Argentina, A Growing
Country, A Compendium for Foreign Investors”.° As described by the Claimant, this
Compendium:

“stated that the Convertibility Law, which was the ‘cornerstone’ of the economic

reform, ‘virtually removed currency risk.’ It further explicitly represented to

prospective investors that, under Argentina’s laws, ‘/cJontracts can be
denominated and legally enforced in foreign currencies.””'

38. Beginning in 1995, in reliance upon the legal protections afforded by this new regulatory
framework, the Claimant resolved to make a series of investments in the commercial financing
business in Argentina. To effectuate this, the Claimant purchased a 99.9971% interest in a local
Argentine company then owned by Mercedes-Benz Argentina. Subsequent to the purchase, this
local company eventually became known as DaimlerChrysler Services, Argentina S.A. (“DCS
Argentina” or “the Argentine Subsidiary”). The Claimant describes the business of DCS
Argentina and its subsidiaries DCCF and DCLA (collectively “the Argentine Subsidiaries”) as

one of “extend[ing] loans and leases to Argentine dealers and purchasers of automotive goods

© — Respondent’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras 24-27 and corresponding footnotes; Claimant’s

Exhibit 80, Core Bundle 16.
Signed by Argentina on 21 May 1991, entered into force 18 November 1994.
Claimant’s Request for Arbitration, Exhibit I; Claimant’s Memorial, paras 61-65.
Claimant’s Memorial, paras 34-36.

Ibid at para 35 (emphasis in original).

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

manufactured primarily in Argentina by Mercedes Benz Argentina, as well as other non-

automotive capital goods”.'’

39. Following this initial acquisition, the Claimant made additional capital contributions into
the Argentine Subsidiary at various points.’ Throughout the history of the investment, the
Claimant funded the operations of the Argentine Subsidiary primarily with foreign financing
denominated in U.S. dollars.'? The Claimant asserts that this type of funding was both common
practice within the industry internationally and necessary to its particular investment in
Argentina, due to the unavailability of sufficient and economically viable domestic financing
sources.'* The liabilities column of the Claimant’s balance sheet thus largely consisted of U.S.
dollar denominated obligations. To offset this, the Claimant’s Argentine Subsidiary also wrote
all of its lease and loan contracts with its domestic Argentine customers in U.S. dollars, as was

permitted under the then-existing legal regime.'*

The Claimant emphasizes that the promised
stability of that legal regime was therefore essential to its decision to invest in Argentina. In the
Claimant’s words:

“because DCFS needed to ensure that the Argentine Subsidiaries would have

U.S. dollars on hand to repay the foreign U.S. dollar loans, a corresponding

legally protected right to denominate and enforce the domestic lease and loan

contracts in U.S. dollars was fundamental to undertaking the investment. DCFS

would never have entered the market without the legally guaranteed ability to

require repayment of the domestic lease and loan contracts in U.S. dollars.”'°

40. The Claimant submits that the business of its Argentine Subsidiaries steadily grew and
prospered between 1995 and 2001.'’ By 2001, however, as is by now well known, the Argentine
economy had again begun to experience grave difficulties.'* A full-fledged currency crisis

ensued, provoking political, social, and economic consequences so devastating that the

Claimant’s Request for Arbitration, para 7.
Ibid at paras 52, 57.
Ibid at para 75.
Claimant’s Memorial, paras 58-59.
Claimant’s Memorial at para 60.
‘6 Ibid.
"  Tbid at para 98.

The Tribunal need not, for purposes of its jurisdictional findings, probe the precise counters of the
crisis or its causes.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

”! The Government

Government of Argentina has termed them a “collapse of the state.
responded by enacting numerous measures in an attempt to stem the crisis. Some of these
measures, promulgated in 2001 and 2002, significantly altered the regulatory environment

governing the investment, and it is those measures which now form the basis of this claim.

4l. In particular, the Claimant alleges that the following measures, as applied to its

investment, violated its rights as a foreign investor under the German-Argentine BIT:

a) The Government’s December 2001 limitations on cash withdrawals from bank accounts,
restrictions on access to foreign exchange, and prohibitions on transferring cash abroad;”
b) Law 25,561 of January 2002 (“the Emergency Law”),”' which inter alia:
i) Abrogated many provisions of the 1991 Convertibility Law, including the
convertibility of the peso into US dollars;”
ii) Authorized the National Executive “to create a new currency system and to
restructure the obligations of certain debtors”;”? and
iii) Provided that “certain dollar-denominated obligations in domestic transactions
conducted with financial entities... would be ‘pesified’ and could be settled by

payments in Argentine Pesos at the exchange rate of AR $1 to U.S. $174

c) Executive Decree 214/2002, which made permanent the “mandatory pesification or
compulsory conversion of all U.S. dollar debt governed by domestic law into Argentine
pesos”;”°

d) Laws 25,563 and 25,589, which together modified earlier Law 24,522, thereby
suspending “important provisions of the bankruptcy law that had previously provided
protection for creditors such as DCS Argentina”;”* and

e) The Government’s repeated failures to:

i) Carve out necessary exceptions to pesification;””

Respondent’s Counter-memorial, Part VI.B.

Claimant’s Request for Arbitraiton, para 72.

Ibid at paras 64-71 and Exhibit J.

2 Ibid at para 66.

3 Ibid.

Claimant’s Memorial at para 121.

25 Tid at para 125.

Claimant’s Request for Arbitration, paras 73-74; Claimant’s Memorial, para 132.

Claimant’s Memorial at paras 130-131.

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

ii) Provide compensatory bonds to non-regulated financial entities such as DCS

Argentina on the same terms as those provided to regulated financial entities in
similar circumstances;* and

iii) Otherwise adequately compensate DCS Argentina, whose liabilities remained

denominated in foreign currency but whose assets were forcibly converted to

devalued pesos.”

42. The Claimant asserts that the combined impact of Argentina’s contested measures caused
“unique and devastating” losses to its investment,” bringing its once profitable Argentine
Subsidiary to the brink of bankruptcy.*' In the Claimant’s view, these measures violated several
provisions of the German-Argentine BIT, including: the fair and equitable treatment provision,
the protection against arbitrary and discriminatory measures, the most-favored nation provisions,
the protection against expropriation without adequate compensation, the umbrella clause, and the
guarantee of free transfers of capital.” The Claimant requests compensation for its alleged losses

as a result of these purported violations.

43. The Tribunal emphasizes that it makes no findings at present with respect to the veracity
of the above-listed assertions or any of the defenses raised by Argentina thereto. That analysis is
reserved for the merits of the case. Rather, the basic contours of the claim are noted here solely

for the purposes of determining the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

44, Before proceeding to an analysis of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, one further factual detail
bears mentioning. The Claimant’s Request for Arbitration was filed in August of 2004 and
officially registered by the ICSID Secretariat on 14 January 2005. It is common cause, however,
that the Claimant (DFS Berlin) had transferred the entirety of its shares in the affected Argentine
Subsidiary to its Parent Company (DCAG Stuttgart) with effect from 1 April 2002. This
transfer was done pursuant to a Share Purchase Agreement (SPA) between the Claimant and its
Parent Company, dated 12 June 2002. The transaction was approved by the Argentine Central
Bank on 19 June 2003. The Agreement set the initial purchase price at negative EUR 250 million

28 Tid at paras 164-172.

Ibid at paras 173-191.

Claimant’s Request for Arbitration, para 76.
3! [bid at paras 79-81.

* [bid at paras 91-102.

8 Claimant’s Exhibit 70.

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

and provided that the final price would be adjusted in order to take into account any expenditures
which either the buyer or seller might undertake on behalf of the Argentine Subsidiary up until
the date of the sale closing. The negative purchase price — which was meant to represent the fair
market value of the Argentine Subsidiary in an arm’s length transaction between disinterested
parties*’ — reflected the large outstanding liabilities of the Argentine Subsidiary relative to its
assets subsequent to the pesification of its domestic loan portfolios. The impact of this share

transfer upon the Tribunal’s jurisdiction will be evaluated below.*®

TI. APPLICABLE LAW

45. In the course of discussing particular objections to jurisdiction, both parties have referred
at various points to Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and to the sources of law enumerated in
Article 10(5) of the German-Argentine BIT. To the extent that these submissions are relevant,
they will be addressed below together with the specific jurisdictional objections to which they
refer. The Tribunal nevertheless finds it convenient to set out, as a preliminary matter, its

conception of the applicable law for purposes of the Tribunal’s jurisdictional findings.

46. This claim arises under the German-Argentine BIT, in conjunction with the ICSID
Convention. As both the BIT and the ICSID Convention are international treaties concluded
between sovereign States, both are subject to the usual customary law rules governing treaty
interpretation under public international law, as reflected in Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties (“Vienna Convention”). The Tribunal will apply these rules
in discerning whether all of the jurisdictional requirements of the ICSID Convention and the BIT

have been met.

47. The ICSID Convention sets forth its jurisdictional requirements in Chapter II. The

relevant provision, for present purposes, is Article 25, which states:

(1) “The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State ... and a national
of another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in
writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have given their consent,
no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

(2) ‘National of another Contracting State’ means:

(a) [..]
4 Ibid at Article 5(2).

* See Part V of this award below.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State
other than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties
consented to submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration... .”

48. It is common cause that the Respondent is a Contracting State Party to the ICSID
Convention” and that the Claimant is a national of the Federal Republic of Germany,” the latter
State also being a Party to the ICSID Convention. It is further common cause that the Claimant
has consented in writing to submit the dispute to the Centre. The sole questions for the Tribunal
to determine under the ICSID Convention are therefore: a) whether the Claimant has raised a
“legal dispute” between itself and the Respondent; b) whether the dispute arises “directly out of
an investment”; and c) whether the Respondent has also consented in writing, pursuant to the
relevant provisions of the German-Argentine BIT, to submit the dispute to the jurisdiction of
ICSID and consequently the competence of this Tribunal. These questions, in turn, depend upon
the specific legal obligations undertaken by the Respondent in the German-Argentine BIT and
upon that BIT’s definition of “investment”. The Tribunal will therefore apply the relevant
provisions of the BIT in assessing its jurisdiction in light of the Claimant’s claims and in

responding to each of the Respondent’s objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

49. Article 10(5) of the BIT specifies as follows the law to be applied by an arbitral tribunal

in the context of a dispute between an investor and one of the BIT’s Contracting State Parties:

“The arbitral tribunal shall arrive at its decisions on the basis of this Treaty and,
if applicable, other agreements made between the parties, the internal law of the
Contracting Party in whose territory the investment was made — including the
rules of international private law — and general principles of international law.”**

50. As to the internal law of Argentina, the Tribunal notes that the Claimant’s claim is based
in large part upon changes to the domestic regulatory framework governing the investment. The
law of Argentina may therefore become relevant, directly or indirectly, to an evaluation of the

merits of the claim. For purposes of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, however, the proper law to be

*© Above note 7.

*7 Above note 1.
** Unless otherwise specified, all citations to the German-Argentine BIT refer to the agreed English
translation of the BIT as prepared by the disputing parties. In the context of the present quote, the Tribunal
notes that the disputing parties’ agreed translation is not entirely accurate. The phrase “other agreements
made between the parties” actually refers to other treaties in force between the Contracting State Parties
(Spanish: “otros tratadoes vigentes entre les Partes”; German: “anderer zwischen den Vertragsparteien
geltender Ubereinkiinfte”).

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
applied is the German-Argentine BIT itself, in concert with the ICSID Convention, as interpreted

in the light of the general principles of international law.

51. As will become clear below, Argentina has also raised the 2002 Share Purchase
Agreement between the Claimant and its Parent Company as an objection to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. The law to be applied to the interpretation of this Share Purchase Agreement is a

distinct matter and will be addressed separately below.”

§2. Finally, as both parties have in their submissions cited extensively to the awards of
various other international investor-State and State-to-State tribunals, the Tribunal deems it
appropriate to comment upon the weight to be attributed to such decisions. The Tribunal agrees
with the parties in noting that there is no system of precedent in investor-State arbitration,”” nor
indeed could there be, given the large and diverse set of treaties presently applicable to various
investor-State claims. Each case must be decided on the basis of the applicable treaty texts and in
the light of the relevant facts. On the other hand, the Tribunal acknowledges that it is a
fundamental principle of the rule of law that ““‘like cases should be decided alike,’ unless a strong
reason exists to distinguish the current case from previous ones.”"' This latter consideration will
weigh more or less heavily depending upon: a) how “like” the prior and present cases are, having
regard to all relevant considerations; b) the degree to which a clear jurisprudence constante has
emerged in respect of a particular legal issue; and c) the Tribunal’s independent estimation of the

persuasiveness of prior tribunals’ reasoning.

53. In analyzing the questions raised by the parties in this proceeding, the present Tribunal

will therefore have regard for the decisions of prior tribunals in accordance with these criteria.

* See below, paras 134-139.

4° Both parties have urged the Tribunal to embrace the solutions adopted by particular previous tribunals

and to disregard the solutions adopted by others.

"Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. The Argentine

Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19 and AWG Group v. The Argentine Republic (UNCITRAL) (jointly
decided), Decision on Liability (30 July 2010), para 189.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

Iv. THREE PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

A. First Objection: The Claim Refers to Contractual Matters over which the
Tribunal Has No Jurisdiction in Light of the Contracts’ Forum Selection
Clauses

1. Position of the Respondent

54, In both its original memorial on objections to jurisdiction and its reply memorial on
jurisdiction, Argentina formulated this objection under two separate headings. The first
formulation reads: “the claim refers to contractual matters over which the ICSID has no
jurisdiction”. The second states: “the Tribunal lacks competence because all disputes relating
to the instruments invoked by Claimant must be submitted to the Argentine courts, pursuant to the
provisions of said instruments and the agreements between the parties.”“? Argentina’s arguments
on these two points are virtually indistinguishable, as both relate to whether ICSID is the proper

forum for the Claimant’s claims. The Tribunal will therefore deal with them together.

55. Argentina’s submissions concerning these objections are essentially four-fold. First, it
asserts that the claims are based upon losses allegedly suffered by the Claimant under its various
leasing agreements with its customers, which — according to their explicit forum selection clauses
—are subject to dispute resolution not before ICSID but before the domestic Argentine courts.“*

Secondly, Argentina argues that the Claimant’s contractual claims may not be brought within the

S

jurisdiction of the Tribunal by means of the BIT’s umbrella clause.*° Relying upon several

previous investor-State cases, Argentina asserts that the umbrella clause cannot transform
ordinary contract claims into treaty claims, because the contracts’ jurisdictional clauses constitute

a lex specialis, which must prevail over the more general treaty provision.*°

56. Thirdly, apparently in the alternative, even if the BIT’s umbrella clause could
theoretically be understood to encompass contractual claims, the Respondent asserts that this
cannot be the case here. It points out that it is the Claimant’s Argentine Subsidiaries, and not the

Claimant itself, who are parties to the leasing contracts.‘ The suggestion seems to be that since

®  Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, part IV.B; Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, part IIB.

3 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, part IV.C; Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, part II.C.

4 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras 86-87, 93, 108-110; Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction,

paras 90-97.

45 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras 88-89.

46

Ibid at paras 97-104.

“7 Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, para 86.

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

only the direct parties to a contract may rely upon its provisions, and since only German (and not
Argentine) investors may bring claims under the BIT, the German Claimant’s contract-based
claims on behalf of its Argentine Subsidiaries must be excluded from the purview of the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction.*

57. Finally, Argentina asserts that there can be no jurisdiction for claims brought under the
BIT’s umbrella clause because Argentina has made no specific undertakings to the Claimant.” It
asserts that only specific investment agreements between the Host State and the concerned
investor may potentially be covered by the Treaty’s umbrella clause” and stresses that no such
specific investment agreement exists in the present case.°' Argentina points out that the
Claimant’s financial and leasing contracts with its customers cannot be classified as specific

investment agreements between Argentina and the Claimant.”

2. Position of the Claimant

58. Following Argentina’s lead, the Claimant has also bifurcated its submissions on this
objection into two headings. Under the first heading, it asserts that its claims are “based upon
Argentina’s violations of the German-Argentine BIT and are subject to ICSID jurisdiction”.**
The Claimant stresses that it does not raise any breach of contract claims as between itself and its

customers under the lease contracts.™*

Rather, it seeks damages from Argentina caused by
Argentina’s sovereign interference with its contract rights, which, according to the Claimant,

violated several BIT provisions.**

59. With respect to the umbrella clause, the Claimant suggests Argentina has confused DFS’

treaty-based claims under this clause with the unrelated question of “purely contractual”

48 The question as to whether the Claimant may bring “indirect” claims on behalf of its Argentine
subsidiary is addressed separately in the next part of the award.

Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, paras 76-77, and 85.

*° [bid at para 78.

Ibid at paras 78 and 80.

* [bid at para 85.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, Point II.

Ibid at para 113. The Tribunal notes that the Claimant, in its submissions, does not always distinguish
between its own contractual rights and those of its Argentine Subsidiary. The relevance of such a
distinction for purposes of this claim is addressed in part IV.B. of the Award below.

$5 [bid at paras 110, 112-114.

  

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
matters.*° In its counter-memorial on jurisdiction, the Claimant posits its umbrella clause claim
as follows:
“Argentina, in officially written and disseminated documents upon which DFS
relied in making its investment, undertook an obligation to investors to permit
contracts to be written and enforced in U.S. dollars, and backed that promise with
a regulatory and legal regime that entrenched contract rights and the rule of law
that it promised it would be ‘irreversible’. DFS invested, and maintained its
investment, in reliance on those written representations and that legal regime.
After freely assuming and proclaiming these obligations, Argentina, by a
sovereign act, overrode the very laws that it had represented were permanent and
‘irreversible’, and unilaterally and fundamentally changed the terms of the
Argentine subsidiaries’ contracts, ultimately destroying, in significant measure,
DFS’ investment.”*”
The Claimant thus asserts that its umbrella clause claim stems not from the leasing contracts
themselves but from Argentina’s sovereign abrogation of DFS’ rights under those contracts.”*
The Claimant also disputes Argentina’s interpretation of the various investor-State cases cited in
its memorials and asserts that they are in any event inapposite or contrary to Argentina’s

position.”

60. Under a second heading, the Claimant asserts that “the dispute resolution provisions
contained in the lease and loan contracts between the Argentine Companies and their domestic
customers are irrelevant to the issue of this Tribunal’s jurisdiction to decide DFS’ treaty-based
claims against Argentina.”“ The Claimant points out that there was never any contract between

°' As such, there is

Argentina and itself, either with respect to the leasing contracts or otherwise.
no basis for Argentina’s assertion that the Claimant was contractually obligated to submit its
claims against Argentina to the domestic courts of Argentina. More fundamentally, the Claimant
emphasizes that the question before the Tribunal is whether Argentina violated its Treaty
commitments by using its sovereign power to abrogate certain of DFS’ rights altogether.” As

this question arises under the Treaty, the Claimant argues, the dispute resolution provisions

%6 [bid at para 111.

57 Tbid at para 112.

This argument is further elaborated in the Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, Point II.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras 116-122.

Ibid at Point III; see also Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, Point III.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras 115, 125.

© Tbid at para 126.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
contained in the commercial contracts between DFS’ Argentine Subsidiaries and their customers

oes 6B
are entirely irrelevant.

3. Considerations of the Tribunal

61. Argentina’s objections under this heading appear to be based upon a fundamental
misconception of the Claimant’s case. The forum selection clauses contained within DCS
Argentina’s lease and loan contracts with its customers pertain only to disputes arising between
the Claimant’s Argentine Subsidiary and its customers in relation to those contracts.“ Neither
DCS Argentina nor its customers are parties to this proceeding. Moreover, the Claimant does not
assert before this Tribunal any claims arising out of alleged breaches of the contracts between
DCS Argentina and its customers. Thus, the forum selection clauses of the lease and loan

contracts can have no bearing upon this Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

62. What the Claimant does allege is that the Republic of Argentina used its sovereign
powers to substantially diminish the value of the Claimant’s rights to returns from its
investment.® The Claimant asserts that Argentina’s sovereign interference with the contract
rights held by DCS Argentina and its subsidiaries violated not the contracts (to which Argentina
is in any event not a party) but rather several provisions of the German-Argentine BIT, including
its provisions on expropriation, fair and equitable treatment, and arbitrary or discriminatory
treatment. The Claimant’s allegations, if proven, would amount to violations of Argentina’s
international obligations under the BIT. This brings the claims within the purview of the ICSID
Convention’s requirement that the Claimant must raise a “legal dispute” between itself and the
Respondent. It also brings the claims at least prima facie within the purview of the investor-State
dispute resolution mechanism set forth in Article 10 of the BIT, which applies to “disputes which
arise between a Contracting Party and a national or company of the other Contracting Party

concerning an investment under the Treaty... .”°’ Since the Claimant's claims clearly arise out of

Ibid.

“The same is true of the lease and loan contracts between DCS Argentina’s own subsidiaries and their

respective customers.

5 The question as to whether the Claimant, as shareholder, may make claims for damages suffered by

reason of the abrogation of contractual rights held by its Argentine Subsidiary is addressed in the next part
of this Award.

6 Claimant’s Request for Arbitration, paras 91-102.

“7 Emphasis added.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
the Treaty and not the contracts, Argentina’s objections concerning the contracts’ forum selection

clauses must be rejected.

63. As to the parties’ arguments with respect to the Treaty’s umbrella clause (Article 7(2) of
the BIT), the Tribunal notes that there exists in this case no investment agreement or other
specific contractual agreement between the Claimant and the Respondent in respect of the
investment. This absence of a contract between the disputing parties distinguishes the present
case from other investor-State cases in which tribunals have had to grapple with whether the
presence of a forum selection clause within a specific investment or concession agreement could
“oust” the jurisdiction of a BIT-based arbitral tribunal with respect to claims concerning

violations of the contractual agreement.” That question simply does not arise here.

64. In the present matter, the Claimant does not attempt to equate a violation of its Argentine
Subsidiaries’ customer contracts with a violation of the Treaty’s umbrella clause. Instead, the
Claimant alleges that Argentina, in making certain representations regarding the stability of its
legal and regulatory framework, assumed additional obligations toward the Claimant’s
investment under Article 7(2) of the BIT.” The precise scope of Argentina’s obligations under
Article 7(2) and whether Argentina violated those obligations on the facts are questions for the
merits of the case. They need not be decided for purposes of determining the Tribunal’s

jurisdiction. What matters for present purposes is that the umbrella clause claim, as with the

1

Claimant’s other claims, arises directly under the Treaty."" Argentina’s jurisdictional objections

based upon the BIT’s umbrella clause therefore also fall to be rejected.

8 Article 7(2) of the German-Argentine BIT provides that “[e]ach Contracting Party shall fulfill any

other obligation it has assumed with regard to investments in its territory by investors of the other
Contracting Party.”

© See e.g. SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID Case No.
ARB/O1/13, Decision on Jurisdiction (6 Aug 2003) [hereinafter “SGS v. Pakistan”); Salini Construttori
S.p.A. and Italsttade S.p.A. v. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/13, Decision on
Jurisdiction (12 Nov 2004) [hereinafter “Salini”]; and Joy Mining Machinery Limited v. The Arab Republic
of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/11, Decision on Jurisdiction (6 August 2004).

70

 

 

See above note 68.

7 As noted by the Siemens tribunal:
“At this stage of the proceedings, the Tribunal is not required to consider whether the
claims under the Treaty made by [the Claimant] are correct. This is a matter for the
merits. The Tribunal simply has to be satisfied that, if the Claimant’s allegations would
be proven correct, then the Tribunal has jurisdiction to consider them.”

Siemens A.G. v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/07, Decision on Jurisdiction (3 Aug
2004) [hereinafter “Siemens”, para 180.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

B. Second Objection: the Claimant, as Shareholder, Lacks Ius Standi to bring an
indirect claim for damages allegedly suffered by the Argentine Subsidiaries

1. Position of the Respondent

65. Argentina asserts that the Claimant lacks ius standi to bring any claims arising out of the
damage allegedly suffered by its Argentine Subsidiaries.” Argentina points out that a company
and its shareholders are legally distinct entities and asserts that the latter cannot — absent an
explicit legal authorization — exercise any rights on behalf of the former.” Thus, in the
Respondent’s view, the Claimant as a mere shareholder in DCS Argentina cannot claim damages
on its behalf.” In support of this conclusion, Argentina argues that none of the four sources of
applicable law mentioned in Article 10(5) of the BIT — namely the Treaty, other treaties in force
between the State Parties, the law of the Host State, and the general principles of international law

—allows for “indirect” actions by shareholders.”*

66. With respect to the Treaty itself, Argentina alleges that the BIT only authorizes indirect
claims by shareholders in the limited circumstances set forth in Article 4, as supplemented by
Article 3 of the Protocol.” Article 4 of the BIT deals with expropriation and nationalization of

investments, while Article 3 of the Protocol states:

“A claim to compensation shall also exist when, as a result of measures named in
Article 4 regarding the company in which the investment is made, it suffers a
serious economic harm.”””

Argentina asserts that this protection would apply only if the company in which the investment
was made had been expropriated or nationalized. In Argentina’s view, since the Claimant has
failed to allege that its Argentine Subsidiary was actually expropriated, nationalized or seized,

this Protocol provision does not apply.” It further asserts that since the BIT does not authorize

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras 119, 121-122.
Ibid at para 120.
Ibid at para 121.

Ibid at paras 123-124. Article 10(5) of the German-Argentine BIT is set forth above in para 50 of this
award.

7 Respondent’s memorial on Jurisdiction, paras 125-126.

7 Unless otherwise noted, all English language quotations from the German-Argentine BIT reproduced

in this award are taken from the disputing parties’ agreed English translation of the Spanish and German
original texts.

78 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras 132-134.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
indirect claims in any situation outside of Article 4, all of the Claimant’s other claims must

necessarily fall outside of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.”

67. Argentina next argues that derivative or indirect actions are not permitted under
Argentine law.*’ It asserts that the Claimant’s Argentine Subsidiary, given its status as a local
Argentine company, is governed by the Argentine Commercial Companies Law (No. 19550).*!
Under this law, only the Argentine Subsidiary — through its management — may exercise defense
of the company’s rights. The law limits shareholders to two discrete types of remedies: 1)
corporate actions (claiming damages allegedly caused to the company by its managers) and 2)
individual actions (for alleged direct damage to the shareholder’s property)."’ Argentina notes
that the Claimant has not attempted to exercise either of these two types of shareholder rights and

concludes that its claims are therefore inadmissible under Argentine law.**

68. Concerning international law, Argentina raises three separate points in its memorial on
jurisdiction. First, it asserts that general international law does not allow for indirect actions by
shareholders.™* Instead, Argentina submits, claimants “can only claim for direct damages to their
specific rights” as shareholders.*° The Respondent quotes extensively from the ICJ decision in
Barcelona Traction,*° which held that “a distinction must be drawn between a direct infringement
of the shareholder’s rights, and difficulties or financial losses to which he may be exposed as the
result of the situation of the company.”*’ Argentina asserts that this formulation of shareholders’
rights under international law is applicable to the present case, notwithstanding the fact that

Barcelona Traction dealt with a case of diplomatic protection whereas the present proceedings

Ibid at para 127.
Ibid at para 134.
“Ibid.
® [bid at paras 137-140.
Ibid at para 141.
Ibid at para 142.
Ibid at para 144.
86 [bid at para 147.

Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited, Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 1970, p. 3, at p. 37,
para 47.

20

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
arise under the ICSID Convention and BIT. It argues that the ICJ’s conclusions were not
specific to the case of diplomatic protection.” In Argentina’s view:
“the difference between diplomatic protection and the protection afforded by the
ICSID Convention is related to who files the action: the State of which the

affected party is a national in the first case, and the affected party directly in the
second case. However, this is not related to what rights can be claimed.””

69. Argentina’s second contention under the “international law” heading is that “the ICSID
Convention does not allow indirect or derivative claims”.”' The Respondent points to the
Convention’s drafting history as summarized by Professor Schreuer, who remarked, in
connection with Article 25(2)(b), that a “suggested solution to give access to dispute settlement
not to the locally incorporated company but directly to its foreign owners was discarded.”””
Argentina notes that Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention instead provides for the possibility that a
company having the nationality of the Host State but subject to foreign control may be treated as
a national of another Contracting State by agreement of the Parties.”* It asserts, however, that no

such agreement exists in this case.”

70. Thirdly, Argentina submits that in “conventional international law, indirect claims are

exceptional and must be expressly provided for, which is not the case here.”*°

NAFTA, the US-Chile Bilateral Free Trade Agreement, and the US 2004 Model BIT, all of which
96

It points to the

expressly provide for indirect actions.” Argentina stresses that the German-Argentine BIT, by

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 149.
® Ibid.

Ibid.

°! Tid at IV.D.4.b).

Ibid at para 151, citing CHRISTOPH H. SCHREUER, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY
(Cambridge University Press, 2001) p. 291 (internal references omitted). The Tribunal notes, however, that
the Respondent appears to have taken this quote out of context. In fact, Professor Schreuer states that this
suggestion was discarded only because “this would not be feasible where shares are widely scattered and
their owners are insufficiently organized.” Professor Schreuer was nonetheless unequivocal in stating that
Article 25(2)(b) was included because a majority of the delegates who participated in the drafting of the
Convention “found that it would be unwise to exclude locally incorporated but foreign controlled
companies”. CHRISTOPH H. SCHREUER, THE ICSID CONVENTION: A COMMENTARY, 2d Ed (Cambridge
Univeristy Press, 2009), with Loretta Malintoppi, August Reinisch, and Anthony Sinclair [hereinafter
“SCHREUER — 2009” , p. 297 (internal references omitted).

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 152.

Ibid.
°S hid at para 153.
°° Ibid.

21

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

contrast, contains no such special provision.” Argentina expands upon this line of argument in
its reply memorial on jurisdiction, adding also a discussion of the U.S. federal law on derivative
suits by shareholders.”* It does so in order to underscore the important policy reasons underlying

what it identifies as a general presumption against the admissibility of indirect actions.”

71. Having thus addressed what it considers to be the applicable bodies of law under Article
10(5) of the BIT, Argentina then adds a further argument. It asserts that the Chile-Argentina BIT,
which the Claimant has invoked for other purposes by means of the German-Argentine BIT’s

most-favored-nation clause, also does not allow for indirect claims.'*

Argentina cites the
Chilean BIT’s failure to include a provision similar to that of the German BIT’s Protocol Article
3 as evidence that the former treaty did not intend to allow indirect claims even in the limited

101

circumstances envisaged by the latter treaty. The Respondent therefore argues that the

Claimant’s lack of ius standi cannot be cured by reference to the Chile-Argentina BIT.'”

72. Finally, in its reply memorial on jurisdiction, Argentina adds yet another dimension to its
arguments concerning ius standi by raising a factual challenge. It submits that the Claimant has
not sufficiently proven its alleged investor status nor what precisely constitutes its alleged
qualifying investment under the BIT.'® After surveying the information contained in the
Claimant’s balance sheets for the years 1994-2005, Argentina points out that the shareholdings in
the affected Argentine Subsidiary changed hands and the companies holding those shares
changed names several times during that period.'“ Argentina particularly notes that the Claimant
entered into a purchase and sale agreement on 12 June 2002, by which the Claimant sold the
entirety of its shares in the Argentine Subsidiary to its parent company, DaimlerChrysler A.G.'°°

Then, in 2005, Argentina alleges, the parent company transferred the entire shareholding in the

Ibid at para 154.

Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, paras 106-118.
°° Ibid at paras 119-128.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, Part 1V.D.5.
Ibid at para 155.

10 Ibid at para 158.

13 Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, para 98.
104 Tbid at para 99.

105 Tbid at para 100.

22

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

Argentine Subsidiary to DaimlerChrysler Argentina — a separate Argentine subsidiary of the
6

parent company.
2B. Argentina’s reply memorial on jurisdiction does not well explain its motivation for
raising these points. The Respondent appears to draw two conclusions from this set of facts.
First, Argentina seems to suggest that these share transfers demonstrate that the Claimant’s
shareholding in the affected Argentine Subsidiary is at most an indirect investment. Since
indirect claims are, in Argentina’s view, precluded under the BIT, the Claimant lacks ius
standi.'"" Second, Argentina remarks cryptically that even if the Claimant did have a protected
investment in Argentina, its claim “refers to investments that do not belong thereto (at least not
directly as the BIT applicable to this case requires).”"*

74. There are two possible ways of reading this latter assertion. Either it reiterates the
Respondent’s objection to the indirect nature of the investment (as suggested by the
parenthetical), or it raises a separate objection to the effect that the Claimant lacks ius standi
because it does not itself own the claims which it is now asserting before the Tribunal (by reason
of the share transfers pointed out above). Unfortunately, the Respondent’s intended meaning
does not appear clearly from its reply memorial. The assertion that the Claimant does not
actually own the claims before the Tribunal does emerge clearly, however, in the Respondent’s
rejoinder on the merits." This has led the disputing parties to address the question of ownership
during the hearings and in their post-hearing submissions. As such, the Tribunal will address this

objection separately below.

2. Position of the Claimant

75. The Claimant counters that it has standing under well-established law to assert claims for
harm done to its Argentine Subsidiaries.''° It begins by noting that it was the sole shareholder of

DCS Argentina and through that company it indirectly owned 100% of the subsidiaries DCCF

106 Ibid at para 101. Argentina did not document its source for this assertion. Section V of the
Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, however, indicates that the Argentine subsidiary allegedly harmed
by Argentina’s sovereign measures (DCSA S.A.) and the Argentine subsidiary to which the parent
company transferred that subsidiary’s shares in 2005 (DC Arg. S.A.) are two separate companies.

107 This seems to be the implication of paras 102-103 of the Respondent’s Reply Memorial on
Jurisdiction.

108 Tbid at para 105.
109 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras 67-69.

"0 Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, point IV.

23

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

and DCLA.'!' The Claimant asserts that this ownership position gives it standing to bring claims

«112
for harms done to those companies.

76. As a preliminary matter, the Claimant submits that Argentina has raised this same

objection concerning indirect ownership “in some 22 other international investment arbitrations,

oo 13

each time without success’ It also highlights seven other investment cases not involving

"Ibid at para 127. The Tribunal notes, however, that according to the documents filed by the Claimants,

DFS owned 99% of each of the three Argentine Subsidiaries, with the other 1% belonging to a Mr.
Macarenhas. Claimant’s Exhibit 70.

"2 Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 127.

"3" Ibid at para 129, citing: Lanco International Inc. v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.

ARB/97/6, Decision on Jurisdiction (8 December 1998), paras 9-10; CMS Gas Transmission Company v.
The Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/O1/8, Decision on Jurisdiction (17 July 2003) [hereinafter
“CMS — Jurisdiction”], paras 59, 63-65; CMS Gas Transmission Company v. The Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8, Decision on Annulment (25 September 2007) [hereinafter “CMS —
Annulment”), paras 68-76; Azurix Corp. v. The Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Decision
on Jurisdiction (8 December 2003), para 73; Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. The
Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3, Decision on Jurisdiction (14 January 2004), para 39;
Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3,
Decision on Jurisdiction (Ancillary Claim) (2 August 2004), paras 16-22, 25-46; Siemens, above note 71 at
paras 137-140; AES Corporation v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/17, Decision on
Jurisdiction (26 April 2005) [hereinafter “AES”], paras 86-89; Sempra Energy International v. The
Argentine Republic, (CSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Decision on Jurisdiction (11 May 2005), paras 67-79;
Camuzzi International S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, (CSID Case No. ARB/03/2, Decision on Jurisdiction
(11 May 2005) [hereinafter “Camuzzi 1”), paras 67-79; Camuzzi International S.A. v. The Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/2, Decision on Jurisdiction (10 June 2005) [hereinafter “Camuzzi 2”),
paras 43-46; LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp., and LG&E International, Inc. v. The Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on Jurisdiction (30 April 2004), paras 60-63; Continental
Casualty Company v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9, Decision on Jurisdiction (22
February 2006), paras 84-87; Gas Natural v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/10,
Decision of the Tribunal on Preliminary Questions on Jurisdiction (17 June 2005) [hereinafter “Gas
Natural”, paras 33-35; National Grid PLC v. The Argentine Republic, UNCITRAL, Decision on
Jurisdiction (20 June 2006) [hereinafter “National Grid”), paras 155-160; Pan American Energy LLC and
BP Argentina Exploration Company v. The Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/13 and BP
American Production Company et al v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/8 (jointly
decided), Decision on Preliminary Objections (27 July 2006), paras 217-218; Suez, Sociedad General de
Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and InterAguas Servicios Integrales del Agua S.A. v. The Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17, Decision on Jurisdiction (16 May 2006) [hereinafter “InterAguas”], paras 50-
51; Suez, Sociedad de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and Vivendi S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case
No. ARB/03/19 and AWG Group Limited v. The Argentine Republic (UNCITRAL Rules) (jointly decided),
Decision on Jurisdiction (3 Aug 2006) [hereinafter collectively “AWG”, paras 50-51; Total S.A. v. The
Argentine Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/04/01, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction (25 August 2006),
paras 77-81; Metalpar S.A. and Buen Aire S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/5,
Decision on Jurisdiction (27 April 2006), paras 86-98; El Paso Energy International Company v. The
Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/15, Decision on Jurisdiction (27 April 2006), paras 137-139;
and Compaiiia del Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. The Argentine Republic, 1CSID
Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Jurisdiction (14 November 2005) [hereinafter Vivendi I — Jurisdiction],
paras 36-41, 88-94, Note that while the Claimant specifically cited to each of these cases, the Tribunal has
in some instances altered the citation formats and paragraph references, both to clarify the citations and to
more precisely identify what the Tribunal considers to be the relevant passages. The Claimant also appears

 

  

24

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

Argentina in which it asserts that investment tribunals have allowed indirect claims.''* The

Claimant cites these decisions as evidence that both the ICSID Convention and the German-

Argentine BIT, as well as virtually all other BITs, give corporate shareholders the status of
investors, “regardless of whether they are majority or minority shareholders.”!'°

77. The Claimant then proceeds to raise three main points in support of its right to bring

claims for harm done to its Argentine Subsidiaries. First, it submits that the clear language of the

BIT permits indirect claims.''®

It argues that the BIT’s broad definition of investment
encompasses indirect claims and the BIT nowhere requires direct ownership of the assets in
question.''’ It points particularly to the Siemens tribunal’s analysis. That tribunal found that the
German-Argentine BIT’s references to “investor” and “investment” make no explicit reference to
direct or indirect investments and therefore do not exclude indirect investments.' The Claimant
also disputes Argentina’s assertions concerning Article 3 of the Protocol ad Article 4 of the BIT.
Again quoting Siemens, the Claimant states “there is ‘no merit in the allegation that the provision
for indirect claims in Article 4 and the corresponding provision of the Protocol are an indication

that such claims are not permitted under other provisions of the Treaty.””!"”

78. With respect to Argentina’s reliance upon Barcelona Traction, the Claimant submits that

120

this reliance is entirely misplaced. It argues that the reasoning of Barcelona Traction applies

 

to have cited to one additional award in error, as the passage cited deals with the calculation of interest and
not the question of foreign shareholders’ rights under the ICSID Convention or BITs.

"4 Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction at para 130, citing: Asian Agricultural Products Lid
(AAPL) v. Republic of Sri Lanka, ICSID Case No. ARB/87/3, Final Award (27 June 1990) [hereinafter
AAPL vy. Sri Lanka]; American Manufacturing and Trading, Inc. v. Republic of Zaire, \CSID Case No.
ARB/93/1, Award (21 February 1997); Antoine Goetz et consorts c. République du Burundi, 1CSID Case
No. ARB/95/3, Award (10 February 1999); Alex Genin and others v. Republic of Estonia, ICSID Case No.
ARB/99/2, Award (25 June 2001); CME Czech Republic B.V. v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Partial
Award (13 2001); GAMI ’S s Inc. v. the Ge of the United Mexican States,
UNCITRAL/NAFTA, Final Award (15 November 2004); and Maffezini v. Spain, ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/7, Decision on Jurisdiction (25 Jan 2000) (hereinafter “Maffezini”).

"5" Ibid at para 131.

 

"6 Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, Point IV.A.

Ibid at para 134.
Ibid at para 133; see also Siemens, above note 71 at para 137.
Ibid at para 136, quoting Siemens, above note 71 at para 140.
Ibid at para 141.

25

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

only to cases involving diplomatic protection and not to cases under BITs, wherein investors
1

enjoy a direct treaty-based right to arbitrate claims with Host States.'”
79. Secondly, the Claimant submits that the Treaty’s protections extend to the substance of
its investment, not merely the free enjoyment of the shares.’ It underscores the Treaty’s
provisions protecting the management, use, and enjoyment of the company comprising the
investment as evidence that the Treaty’s protections are “not confined to the exercise of rights
inherent in the position of the investor as a shareholder”.'”? On this logic, the Claimant asserts:
“rights under a contract held by a local company in which a company of a foreign investor of the
other Contracting Party has invested constitute an investment protected by the BIT.”'** The
Claimant again cites the decisions of several previous investor-State tribunals in support of this

argument. '”°

80. Thirdly, the Claimant denies that Argentine law is relevant to a determination of whether
it may bring indirect claims under the BIT.'”° In the Claimant’s view, Article 10(5) of the BIT
(the BIT’s “applicable law” provision) applies solely to the merits of the dispute.'” For purposes
of determining jurisdiction, on the other hand, “only Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and the
terms of the Treaty are relevant.”'** This is so, the Claimant submits, because the claims concern

129

breaches of the Treaty, not breaches under Argentine law. The Tribunal’s jurisdiction must

therefore be established by reference to the provisions of the Treaty, irrespective of whether
Argentine law would authorize a derivative suit by shareholders in similar circumstances.'””
Moreover, the Claimant contends, Argentine domestic law is irrelevant because the Treaty takes

precedence over Argentina’s internal law to the extent that there is any conflict between the

2! Ibid.

"2" Ibid at Point IV.B.
3° Ibid at para 142.

4 Ibid.

25" Ibid at paras 143-144,
6 Ibid at Point IV.C.
27 Ibid at para 148.
PS Ibid.

"Ibid.

80 Ibid.

26

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

131

two. The Claimant asserts that this is so both under Articles 27 and 31 of the Argentine

Constitution and under Article 27(1) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.'”

81. Finally, in a footnote, the Claimant disagrees with Argentina’s submissions as to the
Chile-Argentina BIT’s preclusion of indirect claims. It argues that even if Argentina’s assertions
concerning that BIT were correct (which the Claimant disputes):

“a claim for more favorable treatment under a provision of the Chile-Argentina

BIT does not entail being subject to all provisions of that BIT, including those

that may be less advantageous, and the Chile-Argentina BIT is therefore
irrelevant to the issue.”!**

3. Considerations of the Tribunal

82. The Tribunal has already noted that the Claimant’s claims, as posited, give rise to a “legal

dispute” as required by the ICSID Convention.'*

Argentina’s second jurisdictional objection
essentially raises the question as to whether this dispute arises out of an “investment” in the sense
defined by the German-Argentine BIT. Article 1(1) of the BIT defines investment as follows:
“The term ‘i ” shall include any kind of investment in d with
the laws of the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment is made in
accordance with this Treaty, in particular, but not limited to,

a

moveable and immoveable property and any other property rights such as
mortgages and liens;

b

shares or stock in a company or any other form of participation in a
company;

c

claims to money which has been used to create an economic value or
claims to any performance hailing an economic value;

d

intellectual property rights, in particular copyrights, patents, utility model
patents, industrial designs or models, trade or service marks, trade
names, trade or business secrets, technical processes, knowhow, or
goodwill;

e

business concessions under public law, including concessions to search
for or exploit natural resources”.'*°

Ibid at para 149.
"Ibid.

Ibid at note 158.
14 See para 63 above.

135 Emphasis added.

27

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

83. Subparagraph b) of this definition makes clear that the Claimant’s 99% shareholding in
DCS Argentina indeed constitutes a protected investment under the Treaty. Argentina argues that
this limits the Claimant’s protections under the Treaty to the free exercise of its rights as a
shareholder, which, it submits, have not been impinged by the Government’s disputed actions.
This assertion, however, completely overlooks the fact that shareholdings are only one element in
an otherwise broad and non-exhaustive definition that protects “any kind of investment.” The
Claimant’s additional capital infusions into the Argentine Subsidiary, for example, would
constitute “claims to money which has been used to create an economic value”. Likewise, its
right to returns'** from the repayment (with interest) of the lease and loan contracts falls squarely
within the concept of “claims to any performance hailing an economic value” under subparagraph

c) of the BIT’s definition of investment.

84. That the BIT’s protection extends beyond the mere free enjoyment of the Claimant’s

shares in the Argentine Subsidiary is confirmed by the Protocol, which states:
“(1) Ad Article 1

a) [..]
b

Income from the investment and, in the case of its reinvestment,
income from such reinvestment, shall enjoy the same protection as
the investment.”

c

‘Any other form of participation’ within the meaning of Article
1(1)(b) shall in particular include such investments which do not
convey any voting or control rights to the holder of the investment.

d

The claims to money referred to in Article 1(1)(c) encompass claims

arising from loans related to participation in a company and which in

their purpose and scope have the character of participation in a

company. The foregoing shall not include loans from third parties

such as bank loans under commercial conditions.”

Subparagraph b) specifies that not merely the shareholdings themselves but also the income to be

generated by the investment (whether through shares or otherwise) is protected by the BIT.
t h c) extends this p ion to types of participation which do not include voting or

control rights, while subparagraph d) further extends it to forms of participation which do not

even constitute a shareholding. Investors falling within the latter category would enjoy no rights

as shareholders at all, and yet their participation in “any kind of investment” is protected under

the BIT. The breadth of these Protocol provisions thus confirms that the BIT’s protections are

136 Also broadly defined by Article 1(2) of the BIT to include “amounts yielded by an investment and

includes profits, dividends, interests, license fees, and other remunerations”.

28

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

not limited to shareholders’ rights qua shareholders. The fact that the BIT nowhere distinguishes
between “direct” investments or claims and “indirect”/“derivative” investments or claims further

supports this conclusion.'*”

85. The Respondent’s arguments concerning article 4 of the BIT and article 3 of the Protocol
are misguided and do not lead to a different result. Article 3 of the Protocol (ad article 4 of the
BIT) provides that “[a] claim to compensation shall also exist when, as a result of measures

named in Article 4 regarding the company in which the investment is made, it suffers a serious

 

economic harm.”'** The only portion of article 4 referring to “measures” is found in article 4(2),

which states, in relevant part:

“Investments by nationals or companies of a Contracting Party may not be
expropriated, nationalized, or subjected to any other measure the effects of which

 

would be to expropriation or lization in the territory of the
other Contracting Party except for the public benefit and against
compensation.”'*”

86. The Respondent submits that article 4 thus authorizes compensation only in cases of

“direct” expropriations (e.g. the actual expropriation of the shares themselves), whereas article 3
of the Protocol “also” and exceptionally authorizes “indirect” claims by the foreign shareholder
for serious economic harm to the local company where that harm is caused by the types of

directly expropriatory measures referred to in article 4.

87. The Tribunal, however, notes that neither article 4 of the BIT nor article 3 of the Protocol
makes any reference whatsoever to “direct” versus “indirect” measures or harms. There is simply
no reason to infer that article 4 applies to “direct” expropriation claims while article 3 of the
Protocol applies to “indirect” claims. On its face, article 4 guarantees investors compensation in
case of expropriation or measures tantamount to expropriation. Article 3 of the Protocol then
adds that investors will “also” be entitled to compensation if the government’s expropriatory-like
measures cause a “serious economic harm” to the investment. A natural and ordinary reading of
the Protocol provision, then, suggests that the Contracting State Parties wished to additionally
specify the level of harm necessary to establish a claim to compensation in case of governmental

measures that fall short of full and outright expropriation. But the Tribunal need not explore the
‘57 On this point, see the analysis by the Siemens tribunal, which considered a nearly identical objection
by Argentina in relation to the same German-Argentine BIT. Siemens, above note 71 at paras 136-144.

138 Emphasis added.

189 Emphasis added.

29

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

precise scope of these compensation obligations here. It is sufficient to note that these provisions
in no way limit the scope of the term “investment” as discussed above. They can therefore have

no bearing upon the Claimant’s standing to bring the present claims.

88. As to the Respondent’s assertion that Argentine law does not authorize derivative actions
by shareholders in circumstances such as the present ones, the Tribunal has already stated that its
competence in this matter is determined by the relevant provisions of the ICSID Convention and
the German-Argentine BIT.' The Tribunal has concluded that the Claimant has raised treaty-
based legal claims in respect of a protected investment as defined under the BIT. The Argentine
law concerning the admissibility of derivative shareholder actions is simply irrelevant to the

analysis.

89. The Tribunal also finds Argentina’s assertions concerning ius standi under international
law unpersuasive. As to the ICSID Convention, it is true that article 25(2)(b) of that Convention
allows disputing parties to agree to treat a locally incorporated subsidiary as a qualifying foreign
investor for purposes of the Convention and that there is no evidence to suggest that the parties in
the instant case entered into any such agreement. However, DCS Argentina is not a party to the
claim and the Claimant has made no attempt to join its former subsidiary to the proceedings
before this Tribunal. Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention therefore has no application.
Article 25(2)(a) of the Convention, on the other hand, does apply, and the Tribunal has already

noted that the Claimant satisfies the necessary nationality requirement under that provision. '*'

90. Argentina’s arguments regarding the Barcelona Traction decision and what Argentina
terms “conventional international law” are equally unpersuasive. As noted both by the Claimant
and by numerous other investor-State tribunals, the Barcelona Traction decision dealt with an
attempt by one State to exercise diplomatic protection in favor of its nationals who had invested
in a company incorporated in a second State with respect to disputed measures taken against the

company by a third State.'*? This is a significantly different factual scenario from the present
one. Moreover, in reaching its decision to disallow the claim in Barcelona Traction, the ICJ itself
noted that international treaties could provide shareholders with a direct right of action against

3

foreign governments for certain claims.'** The present instance is precisely such a case. As

See part III of the award above.
See above para 49.
Barcelona Traction, above note 87 at paras 30-31.

‘3 Tbid at paras 61-63.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

noted by the CMS tribunal and affirmed by the ad hoc Committee in the CMS annulment

decision:

“nothing in general international law prohibits the conclusion of treaties allowing
‘claims by shareholders independently from those of the corporation
concerned... even if those shareholders are minority or non-controlling
shareholders.’ Such treaties and in particular the ICSID Convention must be
applied as lex specialis.”'“*

 

OL. The present Tribunal agrees with this conclusion. Indeed, some two-dozen previous
investor-State tribunals have confirmed that the ICSID Convention, in concert with the definition
of “investment” offered by numerous BITs, allows shareholders to bring claims for harms to their
investments in locally incorporated companies.'*” The Respondent has not been able to point to a
single case in which this objection to an investor-State tribunal’s jurisdiction has been upheld.
While the Tribunal is not bound to follow the example of prior tribunals, it can find no
justification either in the text of the German-Argentine BIT or in general international law to
depart from the overwhelming jurisprudence constante that has emerged around this particular

legal question.'“°

92. Nor does the Respondent’s reliance upon the recent U.S. treaty practice provide such a
justification. The Respondent has provided no evidence to suggest that the U.S. decision to
specifically authorize “indirect” claims in its recent investment agreements was prompted by a
desire to depart from what Argentina terms a “conventional international law” rule to the
contrary. It is equally plausible that the U.S. introduced this change in order to explicitly endorse
as correct the findings of the numerous investor-State arbitral tribunals referenced above. In any
event, the Respondent has not proven nor even suggested anything in the treaty practices of
Argentina or Germany — the relevant Contracting States for present purposes — that would support

its position.

93. Finally, Argentina’s reliance upon the Chile-Argentina BIT is equally misguided and
must be rejected. The Tribunal expresses no opinion as to whether that BIT does or does not
authorize shareholders to bring claims for harms suffered by their locally incorporated

investments. What matters, in terms of the present Tribunal’s jurisdiction, is that the German-

‘4 CMS — Annulment, above note 113 at para 69 (quoting CMS — Jurisdiction, above note 113 at para 48).

"5" See above notes 113 and 114.

'46 Indeed, none of the considerations mentioned above in para 53 of this Award would justify the

Tribunal in adopting a different resolution of the question in this case.

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

Argentine BIT allows such claims, and nothing in the BIT requires qualifying German investors
to be subject to the potentially more restrictive jurisdictional provisions of any third treaty. The

Chilean-Argentine BIT is therefore inapposite to the question at hand.

C. Third Objection: The claim refers to the adoption of general measures which
exceed the jurisdiction of the Centre

1. Position of the Respondent

94. Argentina asserts that all of the Claimant’s claims relate to general measures adopted by

the Argentine Government in response to a national emergency,'*”

and in particular, to the
Government’s decision to abandon the currency exchange system.'“* Citing the PCIJ decision in
Serbian Loans, Argentina insists that the regulation of its currency is a matter falling within its
exclusive sovereignty under international law.'’ It argues that since the BIT’s preamble

150

indicates its purpose is to increase the welfare of both countries,” the Treaty “cannot be

interpreted to prevent any of the party States from adopting measures aimed at safeguarding the
Nation’s welfare.”!*!

95. In addition, Argentina submits that the Tribunal does not have competence to review
general economic measures unless the Claimant can show not merely that it suffered adverse
factual effects as a result of the measures but that one of its /egal rights was prejudiced.'*
Argentina asserts that the Claimant has not shown any adverse legal effect for two reasons. First,
it submits that the Claimant does not itself possess any legal rights that could have been affected
by the Government’s measures, because all of its claims relate to contractual rights held by

3

separate legal entities.*’ This argument repeats Argentina’s second objection above and

therefore will not be dealt with again here. Second, Argentina reiterates that it never made any

specific commitments towards the Claimant.' The Respondent acknowledges the CMS

‘47 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 160.

'48 Ibid at paras 164 & 165.

‘9 Ibid at paras 162 & 164

‘50 According to the agreed English translation, the relevant phrase of the BIT’s preamble reads:

“R izing that the and 1 ion of such i are apt to stimulate
private business initiative and to increase the prosperity of both States...”.

 

‘5! Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 163.

12 Tbid at para 166.
3 Ibid.

‘4 Tbid at para 168.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

tribunal’s finding that general measures “adopted in violation of specific commitments given to
the investor in treaties, legislation or contracts” could fall within the jurisdiction of an ICSID
tribunal.'*° However, it asserts, this principle is not applicable in the present case, where the

Claimant has not proven any “specific commitments undertaken to it, negotiated with it, and

156

particularly, specifically and exclusively promised to it. This argument was raised by

Argentina under its first jurisdictional objection.'”

The Tribunal has already noted that the
tenability of the Claimant’s umbrella clause claims is a question for the merits.'** That analysis

will therefore not be repeated here.

96. In its reply memorial on jurisdiction, Argentina adds two further arguments. It asserts
that the Claimant’s position cannot be accepted, because allowing investment tribunals to review
the Government’s sovereign monetary policy would effectively nullify the existence of that
sovereign power, as it would render it impossible for Argentina to exercise the power without
incurring international responsibility.” Lastly it argues that the fact that the Claimant does not
agree with the general measures taken by Argentina in response to the crisis or does not otherwise

appreciate the remedies made available to its subsidiaries under the new laws is not sufficient to

bring the claims within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.'°

2. Position of the Claimant

r

97. The Claimant responds that it has clearly raised a legal dispute.'*' It notes that it has

explicitly alleged Argentina’s violation of its legal rights under the BIT.'® These allegations, it

contends, meet the ICSID Convention’s Article 25 requirement of a “legal dispute” as that phrase

3

is understood in international law.'® Citing several international courts and tribunals and the

writings of academic commentators, the Claimant explains that the claims “must raise legal issues

in relation with a concrete situation and the determination of the issue must have some practical

Ibid at para 167, quoting CMS - Jurisdiction, above note 113 at para 27.

86 Ibid.

'57 See para 58 of the Award above.

158 Above, para 65.

‘59 Respondent’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 135.

16 Tbid at paras 136-137.

‘el Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 152.

1° Ibid.

‘63 Claimant’s Memorial on the Merits at paras 212-213.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

s9164

and concrete consequences. It asserts that its claims arising under the BIT meet this

definition.’
98. As to the contention that general economic measures cannot fall within the jurisdiction of
ICSID tribunals, the Claimant responds, “ICSID tribunals confronting claims related to
Argentina’s emergency legislation have uniformly found the requisite ‘legal dispute.””'® The
Claimant asserts that some 16 ICSID and UNCITRAL tribunals have confronted the same
objection from Argentina, and:
“Ti]n each case, the tribunal found that, although Argentina, as a sovereign State,
was able to enact any measure that it saw fit, the tribunal had jurisdiction to
determine whether those measures violated binding commitments made by
Argentina to its investors and that the dispute thus arose specifically and
‘directly’ out of the investment rather than out of measures of general
applicability.”'°”
The Claimant does not dispute Argentina’s sovereign right to regulate its currency and
economy.'** However, the Claimant asserts, if in so doing Argentina violates its treaty

obligations, it must pay compensation.’

99. Finally, the Claimant disputes Argentina’s contention that ICSID jurisdiction may arise
only where Argentina has violated a specific commitment made to a specific investor, negotiated

‘7° Tt asserts that the very nature of BITs is to provide specific

individually with that investor.
protections to a broad class of investors.'”' This purpose, it submits, would be thwarted if only
investors in possession of an individually negotiated commitment from the Host State could

invoke the protection of BITs.'”

‘+ Tbid at para 214.

165 Tbid at para 215.
165 Ibid at para 217.
167 Ibid at para 222.
‘8 Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 155.
‘© Ibid.

Ibid at para 156.
"Ibid.

"Ibid.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

3. Considerations of the Tribunal

100. The Tribunal is mindful of the Respondent’s right to regulate its economy as it sees fit.
This right adheres in the sovereign Government of Argentina both in times of economic crisis and
otherwise. But the Respondent’s general sovereignty is not at issue in these proceedings. What is
at issue is the Respondent’s obligation to observe its treaty commitments under the German-
Argentine BIT. The Claimant has not alleged that Argentina may not exercise its powers to
regulate its economy nor that such regulation may never negatively affect the Claimant. Rather,
it has alleged that where Argentina elects to exercise its powers in a manner that contravenes one
of Argentina’s voluntarily assumed international obligations to German investors under the
German-Argentine BIT, and where such contravention specifically harms the Claimant’s

investment, Argentina must compensate the Claimant for the violation.

101. As stated by the AES tribunal in response to a nearly identical objection by Argentina:

“What is at stake in the present case, as it was in the CMS one, are not the
measures of a general economic nature taken by Argentina in 2001 and 2002 but
their specific negative impact on the investments made by [the Claimant]. As a
sovereign State, the Argentine Republic had a right to adopt its economic
policies; but this does not mean that the foreign investors under a system of

uarantee and protection could be deprived of their respective rights under the
instruments providing them with these guarantees and protection. Without
anticipating, at this stage, on the consideration of the issue, whether this delicate
balance between the respective rights of the Host State and those of the investor
were respected in substance, the present Tribunal states that it has jurisdiction for
considering [sic] this issue.”!”

 

102. The present Tribunal agrees with this analysis. As readily conceded by the Claimant, the
Tribunal is not authorized to pass judgment in an abstract way upon the measures adopted by
Argentina in 2001 and 2002 in response to its economic crisis. Its jurisdiction is limited to
deciding the specific impact of those measures upon the Claimant’s investment under the

German-Argentine BIT.

103. To return to the jurisdictional requirements of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, the
Tribunal has already found that the Claimant meets the Convention’s nationality requirement, that
it has raised a treaty-based “legal dispute” with the Respondent under the ICSID Convention and
the German-Argentine BIT, and that the Claimant’s investment is a protected “investment” as that

term is defined by the BIT.

"AES, above note 113 at para 57 (emphasis added).

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

104. | The Claimant has pleaded that its investment suffered specific damages as a direct
consequence of the Respondent’s disputed measures. In particular, the Claimant has alleged that
the value of its lease and loan contracts — which the Tribunal has already found to be a protected
stream of income falling within the BIT’s definition of “investment — was substantially reduced
by the Government’s revocation of the legal regime governing dollar-denominated contracts. The
Claimant has moreover alleged that this alteration of the legal regime violated some of
Argentina’s obligations under the BIT and brought its entire investment to the brink of financial
collapse, thereby giving rise to a duty of compensation. It is therefore clear that the Claimant’s
claims, as pleaded, satisfy the ICSID Convention’s requirement of a legal dispute “arising
directly out of an investment.” For all of these reasons, the Respondent’s third jurisdictional

objection is also rejected.

Vv. FOURTH OBJECTION TO JURISDICTION: DFS IS NOT THE PROPER
CLAIMANT BECAUSE IT NO LONGER OWNS THE CLAIM

A. Admissibility of the objection

1. Position of the Respondent

105. As noted above, the Respondent’s reply memorial on jurisdiction alludes to the factual

underpinnings for this objection.'™

Namely, according to the Claimant’s Exhibit CX 70, the
Claimant (DFS Berlin) sold its shares in the allegedly harmed Argentine Subsidiary (DCS
Argentina) to its parent company (DaimlerChrylser AG Stuttgart), by a share purchase agreement
dated 12 June 2002 (“the Share Purchase Agreement” or “SPA”).' It is not until the
Respondent’s rejoinder memorial on the merits, however, that the essence of Argentina’s
objection to jurisdiction in consequence of this Share Purchase Agreement becomes clear. In that
memorial, Argentina notes that the request for arbitration was filed on 2 August 2004 and objects
that by virtue of the sale, DFS no longer owned a protected investment under the BIT as of that
date.'” “As a consequence,” Argentina states, “the present case is inadmissible since at the

moment of expressing its consent to this arbitration Daimler Financial Services AG was not the

4 Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, para 100. These facts are summarized at para 45 above.

"5 The Tribunal notes that at the time of the share purchase agreement, the Claimant was called

DaimlerChrysler Services, AG. Sometime later, however, pursuant to the break-up between the Daimler
and Chrysler companies, the Claimant changed its name to Daimler Financial Services (DFS). This is how
the Claimant has referred to itself throughout these proceedings.

"6 Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits, paras 67-68.

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

owner and/or controlling company of the subsidiaries [which are the] object of the claim.”!””
Argentina reiterated this objection during the oral hearings and in its post-hearing written

submissions.

106. Argentina points to the ICJ’s decision in the Serbia Genocide case as evidence that the
Tribunal retains the authority to decide upon its own jurisdiction, if necessary proprio motu, even
at this late stage of the proceedings, since there have not yet been any jurisdictional findings by
the Tribunal constituting res judicata.'* The suggestion seems to be that Argentina’s late raising

of the objection should not render the objection inadmissible.

2. Position of the Claimant

107. At the hearings, the Claimant objected that Argentina raised this point too late and took
the position that it is therefore inadmissible. In its post-hearing submissions, the Claimant
emphasizes that Argentina first broached the point in its rejoinder memorial on the merits, only
one month before the hearings. '” Therefore, the Claimant asserts, Argentina must be deemed to

180

have waived the objection in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1),°" which states:

“Any objection that the dispute or any ancillary claim is not within the
jurisdiction of the Centre or, for other reasons, is not within the competence of
the Tribunal shall be made as early as possible. A party shall file the objection
with the Secretary-General no later than the expiration of the time limit fixed for
the filing of the counter-memorial, or, if the objection relates to an ancillary
claim, for the filing of the rejoinder — unless the facts on which the objection is
based are unknown to the party at that time.”

3. Considerations of the Tribunal

108. | ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1) aims at promoting arbitral efficiency by requiring disputing
parties to raise jurisdictional objections in a timely fashion, and the present Tribunal does not
doubt of its authority to dismiss an untimely objection in appropriate circumstances. The goal of
efficiency must be balanced, however, against the Tribunal’s duty not to exceed its competence,
as evidenced by ICSID Rule 41(2), which permits the Tribunal “on its own initiative [to]
consider, at any stage of the proceeding, whether the dispute or any ancillary claim before it is
7

Ibid at para 69.
"8 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Legal Submissions, pp. 6-7, citing Case Concerning the Application of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Bosnia and Herzigovina v. Serbia
and Montenegro), ICJ, Judgment of 26 Feb 2007, paras 118, 127.

™ Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions of Fact, paras 1211-1212.

‘80 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Legal Submissions, para 68.

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

within the jurisdiction of the Centre and within its own competence.” The Tribunal must in
addition observe its duty to ensure that both parties receive a full and fair opportunity to present

their cases. These are all matters for the Tribunal’s discretion.

109. Under the circumstances, the Tribunal finds that it would not be appropriate to dismiss
the Respondent’s objection on timeliness grounds. First, both parties here bear some
responsibility for the tardy discussion of the objection. The factual bases for the objection were
disclosed to the Respondent at an early stage of the proceedings, and certainly before the
completion of the written jurisdictional pleadings. The Respondent’s failure to sufficiently
articulate the objection within the time frame set by Rule 41(1) is therefore regrettable.'*' On the
other hand, the Claimant’s initial presentation of its claim was worded in such a manner as to lead
a reasonable reader to believe that the Claimant still owned the Argentine Subsidiary at the time

182 Moreover, while the Claimant disclosed the fact of the share transfer

of the filing of the claim.
in its memorial on the merits, it did so fleetingly in a section of its argument dedicated to
quantum issues, not jurisdictional matters. The Tribunal can therefore appreciate how the
Respondent might have failed to immediately realize the potential jurisdictional implications of
the disclosure, which comprised a single paragraph within the Claimant’s 229-page memorial.
This is particularly the case as the objection raises issues that appear to be novel within ICSID
jurisdictional practice, as will become clear below. Indeed, for this reason the Tribunal
eventually requested and received from both parties an additional round of briefing devoted

solely to the question of the effect of the SPA upon the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

110. Second, the parties here resolved — of their own initiative — to join the jurisdictional and
merits proceedings in this case. Thus, while the Respondent’s allusions to the SPA in its written
jurisdictional pleadings were oblique at best, it nonetheless clarified the grounds for its objection
before the close of the jurisdictional proceedings. Third, from the standpoint of fairness, both
parties received ample opportunity to address the objection not only at the oral hearings but also
in their post-hearing submissions and in a subsequent round of written briefs. There can therefore

be no unfairness to the Claimant from considering the objection at this point.

‘8! The Claimant first disclosed the sale in its 7 August 2007 Memorial on the Merits, at para 160. It

submitted a copy of the disputed Share Purchase Agreement (Claimant’s Exhibit CX 70) on the same date.
This was nearly a year before the 5 May 2008 filing of Argentina’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction and
more than two years before Argentina’s 27 October 2009 Rejoinder on the Merits, in which Argentina first
clarified its objection concerning the SPA.

'2 See e.g. Claimant’s Request for Arbitration at para 20, stating “this is a legal dispute arising directly

out of an investment in Argentina by DCS in its wholly-owned subsidiary, DCS Argentina...”.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

B. Substance of the objection

1. The Tribunal’s request for further submissions concerning the SPA

111. During the oral hearings the Tribunal requested, from both parties, post-hearing written
submissions concerning the law applicable to determining the correct meaning and impact of the
disputed Share Purchase Agreement. Regrettably, neither Party provided a clear response to this
request. The Tribunal therefore wrote to the parties on 20 August 2010 and again requested
further clarification of their respective positions. In that letter, the Tribunal provided a list of
specific questions to assist the parties in addressing the Tribunal’s concerns. The essential thrust
of the letter was as follows:

“The Tribunal notes that the referenced Share Purchase Agreement pre-dates the

present ICSID claim, which was registered on 3 August 2004. The Tribunal

further notes that the Parties did not, in their post-hearing briefs, respond to the
question posed by the Tribunal at the oral hearing concerning the law applicable
to_the meaning of the Share Purchase Agreement and the corresponding
relevance of that Agreement in relation to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction (Transcript
of Oral Hearings, Day 7, p. 2023, lines 16-22 - p.2024, lines 1-19).

The question as to whether the ICSID claim was transferred to the Claimant’s
Parent Company along with the shares may turn upon the intention of the
contracting parties to the Share Purchase Agreement. The Tribunal invites the
Parties, within 25 days, to file any supplementary submissions, including
supporting legal authorities, they may wish to lodge concerning the following
questions:

1. The law applicable to the interpretation of the Share Purchase
Agreement, whether German law or international law.

2. The proper interpretation of the Share Purchase Agreement under the
applicable law in relation to the ICSID claim, including whether, and if
so how, the Agreement governs the ownership of the ICSID claim and/or
the legal entitlement to any recovery from the ICSID claim.”

112. Both parties duly filed full written responses to the Tribunal’s questions, along with
supporting witness statements and expert legal opinions. They also provided brief responses to
one another’s arguments. These submissions have greatly assisted in clarifying the questions
before the Tribunal. The key contentions of the parties relating to the SPA objection, as they

eventually emerged through these various submissions, are set forth below.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

2. Position of the Respondent

113. Argentina stresses that the Claimant, before filing the present claim, transferred the
entirety of its shares in the Argentine Subsidiary to its Parent Company and that it did so without
reserving for itself any right to retain any BIT-based legal claims pertaining to the investment

subsequent to the transfer.'**

In support of its assertion that the Claimant did not reserve its right
to bring any ICSID claims, Argentina quotes the relevant portion of the 2002 Share Purchase
Agreement:

“.,, the Buyer [aka the Parent Company] hereby purchases from the Seller [aka

the Claimant] all the Seller’s present shares in the Company... and all rights to

future shares which result from any increase to capital until the Closing Date

(hereinafter referred to collectively as “the Sold Shares”), including all the rights

to dividends, all the voting rights, and any other rights pertaining to the Sold
Shares for all the Company’s profits which have not been appropriated to
shareholders of the Company until the date of signing of this Agreement.”'**

114. Argentina’s position is that the phrase “any other rights pertaining to the Sold Shares”
prima facie includes the right to bring an ICSID claim for damages allegedly done to the
shareholding. In support of this position Argentina makes two alternative arguments, one under
international law and the other under Argentine law. Its primary argument is that international
law should apply in determining the effects of the SPA upon the Claimant’s standing to file an
international arbitration claim.'*° The Tribunal should therefore apply the ICSID Convention, the

Argentina-Germany BIT, and the relevant rules of international law.'*°

115. As to the latter source of law, the Respondent cites three ICJ cases for the proposition
that general international law requires a claimant to hold a legally protected right or interest at the
time of filing the claim.'*” Here, it submits, the Claimant no longer held a legally protected right
or interest when it filed the claim because it had already transferred the investment to its Parent

Company. With respect to the ICSID Convention, Argentina submits that the critical date for

'8) Respondent’s Post-Hearing Summary of Arguments, para 2.
‘Exhibit CX 70, “Share Purchase and Assignment Agreement”, Article 1(1) (parenthetical in original)
(emphasis added by the Tribunal) (quoted by Argentina in its Post-Hearing Submissions of Fact, p. 69).

'85 Respondent’s post-hearing SPA submission of 28 Sep 2010, part I, para 1. Unless otherwise noted, all

paragraph numbers referring to this submission refer to the paragraph numbers appearing in parts I-V of the
submission and not to the paragraphs appearing in the introduction to the submission (which are separately
numbered).

186 Ibid at paras 2-3, 20-21.

'87 Ibid at paras 5-9 (citing the ICJ’s Barcelona Traction, Nottebohm, and South West Africa cases).

40

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

determining jus standi is the date on which the arbitral proceedings are commenced.'** It notes
that although other ICSID tribunals have held that the transfer of an investment to a third party
did not affect their jurisdiction, these tribunals dealt with scenarios in which the transfer was
made after the initiation of the arbitral proceedings.'*” Here, the transfer occurred before. For
these reasons, the Respondent submits, the Claimant lacks jus standi under both the ICSID

Convention and general international law.

116. The Respondent’s alternative argument is that Argentine law applies in determining the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction subsequent to the share transfer. It reaches this conclusion in two ways.
First, it argues, the international law relevant to the question includes article 10(5) of the BIT,
which refers inter alia to Argentine law, thereby confirming that Argentine law applies.'””
Second, it submits, if the Tribunal finds that the effects of the SPA upon its jurisdiction are to be
determined by a source of law other than international law, then German law applies to the
interpretation of the SPA per the SPA’s explicit choice of law clause.'”!

article 8(4) of the SPA, states:

That clause, found in

“So far as legally permitted, this Agreement shall be subject exclusively to the
laws of Germany barring the application of the international private law of both
Germany and Argentina.”'”*

117. Citing the expert opinion of Professor Wurmnest, a German specialist in private
international law, the Respondent maintains that “German law makes a distinction between the
agreement to transfer the shares in consideration for the payment of an amount of money [aka the
sale obligations under the SPA], and the actual assignment of the shares, rights and/or claims —
including ICSID claims.”'* On this basis the Respondent submits that German law applies to the
interpretation of the SPA in determining the obligations of the SPA contracting parties inter se
but that Argentine law — including its rules on private international law and in turn its substantive
law — applies to the determination of whether or not the ICSID claim was actually assigned to the
188 Ibid at para 23 (citing SCHREUER — 2009, above note 92 at p. 92, section 36).

189 Ibid at paras 24-26 (citing CSOB v. Slovakia, ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision on Jurisdiction (24
May 1999), para 31; and Vivendi II — Jurisdiction, above note 113, paras 60-63). The text of Article 10(5)
of the BIT is set forth in para 50 of this award.

190 Respondent’s post-hearing SPA submission of 28 Sep 2010, at paras 18-19.

Ibid at paras 10-11.

12 Article 10(4) of the SPA, Claimant’s Exhibit CX-70.

Respondent’s post-hearing SPA submission of 28 Sep 2010, at para 12, citing expert opinion of Prof.
Wurmnest.

41

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

M4

Parent Company.'” Pointing to the expert opinions of Argentine law professors Nissen and

Kielmanovich, who stress that Argentine law prohibits domestic derivative actions by former

195

shareholders except in very limited circumstances not present in this case,” the Respondent then

reaches the following conclusion:
“[C]onsidering that, from the very beginning, Claimant has claimed in its
capacity as shareholder of the Subsidiaries that were purportedly affected by the
measures challenged in the instant case, and that, under Argentine law, the

transfer of shares entails the assignment of all claims related to the ownership of
such interest, DFS has no standing to bring a claim before ICSID.”'”°

118. | The Respondent raises several additional points in support of its position. First, it asserts
that the defect in the Tribunal’s jurisdiction caused by the share transfer is fatal and cannot be
cured. It emphasizes that the Claimant has no standing under international law to bring a claim

7 Hf

on behalf of its Parent Company and points out that it has not in fact attempted to do so here.
adds that joining the Parent Company to the proceedings at this stage is impossible, as this would

require the consent of the Government of Argentina, which consent it emphatically refuses.

119. Second, the Respondent disputes the testimony of the Claimant’s witnesses to the effect
that the contracting parties to the SPA did not intend to transfer the ICSID claim. According to

the Respondent:

e the plain language of the SPA shows that the claim was in fact transferred, whatever the
parties’ ex post facto assertions, because the claim is included in the SPA’s use of the

phrase “any other rights pertaining to the sold shares”'”*;

¢ email exchanges between Daimler officials which form part of the record and which were
brought to the Tribunal’s attention at the hearings indicate that the possibility of an
ICSID claim was not even considered by DFS until sometime in 2004 (thus, since the
SPA was concluded in 2002, the contracting parties to the SPA cannot have intended for

the ICSID claim to be excluded from the scope of the transfer);'”” an

14 Tbid at paras 13-16, 22.
15 Tbid at paras 29-30.

196 Tbid at para 31.

197 Ibid at paras 23, 27.

18 Respondent’s Observations on the New Evidence Presented by Daimler Together with its Responses to
the Tribunal’s Additional Post-Hearing Questions, 3 December 2010, at para 24.

199 Ibid at paras 25-28.

42

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
e neither the DFS board’s resolution approving the share transfer nor the minutes of the
meeting at which it was approved mention anything about reserving the right to an ICSID
claim.*”
120. Third, the Respondent asserts that the evidence submitted by the Claimant in
corroboration of its witnesses’ testimony (set forth in the Claimant’s contentions below) is of no
probative value and should be disregarded by the Tribunal, because that evidence was not
contemporaneous to the conclusion of the SPA, was prepared solely for the purposes of this
arbitration, and does not derive from independent sources.7°!
121. Finally, the Respondent disputes that any ambiguity in the meaning of the SPA (as to
whether or not the ICSID claim was intended to be transferred) can be cured by the execution of
an ex post facto interpretive agreement between the SPA contracting parties. This is so, the
Respondent argues, because the ICSID claim was undoubtedly transferred upon the transfer of the
shares by operation of law — both international and Argentine law — irrespective of the contracting

parties’ intent.”

3. Position of the Claimant

122. The Claimant denies that its rights in the ICSID claim were transferred to the Parent
Company under the Share Purchase Agreement.”” It asserts that the Share Purchase Agreement’s
reference to “any other rights pertaining to the sold shares” is modified by the subsequent phrase
“for all the Company’s profits which have not been appropriated to shareholders.” The
Claimant therefore alleges that the phrase “any other rights”, under a plain language reading,
encompasses only those rights referring to the Argentine Subsidiary’s non-allocated (and
presumably already existing) profits, which would not include any potential recoveries pursuant
to an investment treaty claim. In the Claimant’s view, “[t]here is nothing in the Share Purchase

Agreement to indicate that the right to investment treaty claim [sic] was transferred and it was not

20 Thid at para 29.
21 Tbid at para 2. These claims are further elaborated in, inter alia, paras 16-21 and 41-43. The
Respondent also complains of certain formal defects in the Claimant’s evidence (ibid at paras 13-16),
which the Tribunal finds unnecessary to address in light of its below decision.

22 Respondent’s Observations on the New Evidence Presented by Daimler Together with its Responses to
the Tribunal’s Additional Post-Hearing Questions, 3 December 2010, at para 24.

23 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions of Fact, para 1199.

4 Ibid.

43

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

99205

necessary to specifically reserve those right [sic]. The Claimant buttresses this basic position
ry to sp 'y g) Pp

with arguments from both German law and international law.

123. As to the former, the Claimant states that German law is the law applicable to the
interpretation of the SPA. This is so, it argues, because the SPA contracting parties explicitly
selected German law to govern the contract (article 8(4) of the SPA) and also because “under the
BIT and general international law which applies to ICSID jurisdictional questions, questions
specifically pertaining to a corporation, including its capacity, corporate authority and governance
are all determined by the law of the state of incorporation or its legal seat, which, in this case is
Germany.”””° The Claimant points out that German law, international law, and Argentine law all
recognize and give effect to the choice of law selected by the parties to a contract.” It further
stresses that Argentine legal advice obtained by Daimler at the time of conclusion of the SPA
confirmed that German law could govern the contract.” Moreover, the Claimant argues, “[t]he
Argentine Government expressly accepted the application of German law to the interpretation of

the Share Purchase Agreement.”?”

The Claimant notes that Argentina, when reviewing the
proposed transfer for the purpose of registering the transfer of title to the shares, requested the
Claimant to submit legal opinions confirming the legality of the SPA under German law and EC
competition law. In approving the transfer, the Argentine Central Bank referenced the German
legal opinions provided by Daimler and stated that “[t]he agreement, insofar as it is permitted by
Law, will be exclusively subject to German law, preventing the application of both German and
Argentine international private law.””"°

124. As to the contention — raised by Argentina’s expert, Professor Wurmnest — that German
law distinguishes between the law applicable to the interpretation of the contract and the law
applicable to the transfer and assignment of the shares, the Claimant and its witnesses appear to
accept that this is correct. The Claimant explains that, because the transferred company was an

Argentine company and, as a financial entity, subject to regulation by the Argentine Central

°° Tid.
206 Claimant’s post-hearing SPA submission, para 3.
Ibid at paras 8-16

208 Thid at para 17.

207

Ibid at para 20.
21° Ibid.

44

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

Bank, its share titles were subject to registration with the Argentine authorities.”'' The phrase “so
far as legally permitted” in the choice of law provision in Article 8(4) of the SPA, it submits, was
inserted solely “to allow for the approval of the transfer of the shares by the Argentine Central

Bank and perfection of the transfer by notification and registration under Argentine law.”?!? In
short, the Claimant contends that Argentine law applies to the formalities of the title transfer and

registration, while German law governs the interpretation of the SPA itself.

125. German law, the Claimant submits, establishes that the right to assert the ICSID claim
was not transferred. First, German law would require such a transfer to be explicitly stated in the
SPA in order to be valid, and no such explicit transfer was recorded here.”"? Second, German law
gives effect to the “wirkliche Wille” or “true intention” of the parties, and it was not the intent of

214

the Claimant or its Parent Company to transfer the ICSID claim under the SPA. This is

evidenced, the Claimant submits, both by the terms of the SPA itself and by the subsequent

conduct of its contracting parties, including in particular the following facts:7'*

i. The negative purchase price paid for the local Argentine Subsidiary allocated all losses

allegedly arising out of the ICSID claim to DFS, not to its Parent Company.

ii. The SPA contracting parties did not adjust the negative purchase price in any way for the

estimated value of the ICSID claim.

iii.

Financial statements submitted by DFS show that all losses associated with the ICSID

claim were not only intended to be born by DFS but were actually born by DFS.

iv. DFS requested and received authorization to pursue the ICSID claim from its own board

and not from the board of the Parent Company.

v. Bookkeeping entries submitted by DFS show that DFS, and not the Parent Company, has

born the costs of the present arbitration.

vi. The Parent Company has not attempted to participate in the present arbitration in any way

and has not filed its own ICSID claim.

211" Thid at para 19.

Ibid at para 19.

213 Thid at paras 36-42.

Statement of Wolfgang Bauder, Senior Counsel of Daimler AG, at para 5(c).

Ibid at paras 25-36, 40-41, and Claimant's post-hearing SPA submission at paras 90-118.

45

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

vii. The Claimant and the Parent Company have submitted an “Interpretive Agreement and

Undertaking” confirming that the SPA contracting parties did not intend to, nor did they,

transfer the ICSID claim to the Parent Company, and this Interpretive Agreement is valid
and binding under German law in light of article 8(3) of the SPA.”"°

126. As to international law, the Claimant asserts that “neither the ICSID Convention nor the

Treaty require [sic] that the foreign investor retain continuous ownership of the investment for

217

jurisdictional purposes.’ The Claimant makes several interrelated points with respect to the
ICSID Convention. First, it asserts, the ICSID Convention does not require continuous
ownership of the investment, nor that the investor continue to own the investment at the time of
the request for arbitration or at any other defined time.”'* Instead, the ICSID Convention’s only
jurisdictional requirement is that there is a legal dispute arising out of an investment between a
Contracting State and a national of another Contracting State." This, the Claimant asserts, it has

duly shown.”””

127. Next, the Claimant stresses that Article 25 of the Convention defines the protected party

by its status as a “national” of the other Contracting State, not by its status as a current

5 221

“investor”. It asserts that the Convention’s only temporal requirement lies in article 25(2),
which specifies that the nationality of the investor is to be determined as of the date of the request
for arbitration.” It therefore maintains:
Daimler Financial’s claim fully complies with any ICSID or other authority
standing for the proposition that jurisdiction is determined on the date of the

request for arbitration, because on that date, it was a foreign national, with a legal
dispute that arose out of an investment.””*

216 Article 8(3) of the SPA states: “All amendments and supplements to this Agreement including this
clause must be in writing in order to be legally effective...”. The Claimant stressed the validity of the
subsequent Interpretive Agreement in its Post-hearing SPA submission at paras 70-73.

2!7 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Legal Submissions, Part III.A.(d).
218 Thid at paras 59, 61, 65, & 66.

219 Thid at paras 59, 64.

220 Thid at paras 69-84.

21 Thid at para 60.

2 Thid at para 62.

23° Tid at para 64.

46

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

128. Even if this were not the case, the Claimant asserts, it is enough that the Claimant is the
investor who suffered the actual harm at the time of the measures complained of. This is because
“it is not share ownership per se which gives standing; it is the share ownership at the time the
damage was done to the investment that accords standing.”*** The Claimant cites the decisions in
EnCana v. Ecuador, Mondey v. United States, and El Paso v. Argentina as evidence that the
arbitral jurisprudence has not recognized any criterion of continuous ownership in investor-State

arbitration.”

129. As to the BIT, the Claimant submits that the Contracting State Parties to the BIT could
have required the investor to own the investment at the time of the registration of the claim. In
the Claimant’s view, the fact that they did not do so in either the BIT or the Protocol — despite
narrowing the concept of qualifying investors and investments in other ways — shows that the

Contracting State Parties did not intend to require continuous ownership.””°

130. The Claimant submits that declining jurisdiction on the basis that the shares were
transferred to the Parent Company would also be inconsistent with the objects and purposes of

both the ICSID Convention and the BIT. It submits:

“Such a requi [continuous 07 ship of the ii ] would |

an investor from divesting itself of an investment which is failing due to the
treaty breaches of the host State, forcing it to choose between suffering
continuing harm or giving up its ICSID claim. It would also permit the State to
expropriate an investment with impunity because the foreign investor could not
bring a claim since it no longer owns the investment, despite the fact that it
suffered the harm and has a legal dispute with the State. Such a requirement
would frustrate the very purpose of the applicable treaty and deter foreign
investment.””””

131. | Moreover, the Claimant asserts, even if the parties had intended to transfer the ICSID
claim (which it denies), the only thing that legally could have been transferred would have been
the right to assert damages associated with the investment after the effective date of the transfer
of shares.”* This is because under international law, “the claims of an investor under a BIT

arising from damage to its investment at the time it held the investment are not bound to the

Claimant’s post-hearing SPA submission at para 34.
25 Thid at paras 60-63.

26 Claimant’s Post-Hearing Legal Submissions at paras 66-67.
Ibid at para 63.

Ibid at para 33.

47

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

shares of the vehicle that the investor used to make its investment. Rather, such claims are
personal to the investor and cannot be transferred merely by the transfer of the shares the investor

owns,”

132. Finally, the Claimant maintains that the notion of a transfer of the claim makes little
sense on the facts, since both DFS and its Parent Company each already possessed an
independent right to bring the present ICSID claim against Argentina as a result of the measures
complained of — DFS in its capacity as the direct investor, and the Parent Company in its capacity
as the indirect investor (given its 100% shareholding in DFS).”*” It cites several ICSID cases in
support of the proposition that the existence of multiple potential qualifying investors within a
corporate chain does not deprive a tribunal of its jurisdiction over any given qualifying investor’s
claim.**' Rather, the Claimant submits, any concerns as to possible multiple recoveries against a
Respondent arising out of the same set of facts can be dealt with at the damages phase.” The
Claimant asserts that such concerns are in any event inapposite here, as “Daimler AG has given
an undertaking that should the Tribunal accept jurisdiction over the claims in this proceeding and
accept the right of Daimler Financial to assert those claims, Daimler AG will not assert a claim

for the damages which has been asserted by Daimler Financial AG in this proceeding.””*

4. Considerations of the Tribunal

133. It is convenient to begin by summarizing the points on which the disputing parties agree:

* German law applies to the interpretation of the SPA and the question of intent. Both
parties and their relevant experts and witnesses agree that the choice of law clause
contained in article 8(4) of the SPA is a valid expression of the consent of the contracting
parties to the SPA. Therefore, German law governs the proper interpretation of the SPA,
including the question as to whether or not the contracting parties intended, by

transferring the shares, to transfer the ICSID claim.

e Argentine law governs the domestic formalities relating to the transfer of the shares.

Because the transferred shares were issued by a domestically incorporated and

22

Ibid at para 45. See also paras 57-64.
23

Claimant’s Post-Hearing SPA Submission at para 75.
331 Thid at paras 77-83, 88.

22 Thid at paras 84-86.

233 Thid at para 89.

48

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

domestically regulated Argentine company, the parties and their experts and witnesses
agree that Argentine law governs the transfer of title to the shares and the approval of the
sale and registration of the title transfer by the Argentine Central Bank. Both parties also
agree that the Argentine Central Bank did in fact approve the sale and that the necessary
formalities for transferring the title to the shares were observed. The requirements of

Argentine law in these respects were therefore fully met.

International law applies in determining the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and in determining the
effect of the SPA upon the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Both parties agree that the ICSID
Convention, the BIT, and the relevant rules of general international law apply to this

determination.

The Tribunal concurs with the parties in the above-listed points of agreement.

134.

The parties’ submissions also indicate numerous points of disagreement, the most

significant being as follows:

135.

Which specific provisions of the ICSID Convention and BIT apply in determining the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction;
Whether or not Argentine law has any relevance to that determination;
In what capacity the Claimant brings its claims, whether as a shareholder or otherwise;

Whether or not the intent of the SPA contracting parties is relevant in determining the

effect of the SPA upon the Tribunal’s jurisdiction;

Whether the right to bring the ICSID claim was actually transferred along with the shares

by operation of law, irrespective of the SPA contracting parties’ intent;

Whether there exists a continuous ownership criterion under the ICSID Convention, and

if so until what relevant date; and of course

Whether or not the Tribunal ultimately has jurisdiction over the claims.

Having carefully reviewed all of the disputing parties’ contentions, the submissions of

their witnesses and experts, and all of the relevant legal authorities and evidence, the Tribunal

concludes that the transfer of the shares occasioned by the SPA does not deprive the Tribunal of

its jurisdiction over the Claimant’s ICSID claims. This is so whether one analyzes the question as

one under international law (the law principally applicable to ICSID claims) or under German law

49

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
(the law applicable to the SPA). As will become clear below, Argentine law is irrelevant to the

analysis.

a) Applicable law

136. While the disputing parties agree that international law applies in determining this
Tribunal’s jurisdiction, they disagree as to which specific provisions of the ICSID Convention
and BIT govern the resolution of the present objection. The Tribunal has, however, already
decided this point above." That is, article 25 of the ICSID Convention applies, along with the
relevant jurisdictional provisions of the BIT — including the BIT’s definitions of “investment”,
“national”, “company”, “returns”, etc along with article 10(2)’s pre-requisites to jurisdiction — all
as interpreted in light of the relevant principles of general international law. As noted above, the
Claimant has shown that it satisfies all of the requirements of article 25 of the ICSID Convention
and that it meets the BIT’s definitional requirements as a “national” or “company” of the Federal
Republic of Germany having made a qualifying “investment” in Argentina. Also as noted above,
Argentine law is irrelevant in determining whether the Claimant has met these treaty-based
requirements. The Respondent’s assertion that article 42 of the ICSID Convention and article
10(5) of the BIT compel the Tribunal to analyze the question under Argentine law must therefore

be rejected.

137. Argentina’s alternative argument that German law, as the law governing the SPA, also
requires the Tribunal to apply Argentine law in determining the ownership of the ICSID claim is
likewise misguided. It appears to be based upon a misconstrual of the testimony of its expert,
Professor Wurmnest, a German specialist in private international law. Professor Wurmnest
indeed stressed that German law distinguishes between the law applicable to the interpretation of
a share purchase contract and the law applicable to the formal transfer and assignment of the
shares sold. On this basis he concluded that German law applies to the interpretation of the SPA
while Argentine law governs the formalities of the assignment such as the registration of the title
transfer. As to the ownership of the ICSID claim, however, Professor Wurmnest concluded that
this must be determined not under Argentine law but under international law. This much is clear
from the following excerpts of Professor Wurmnest’s carefully considered opinion:
“Under the German conflict-of-law rules, the law governing the transfer of title

to shares is the law applicable to the corporation whose shares are assigned (/ex
societatis). Assuming that Argentine law follows a similar approach... the

4 See above, Part III.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

proper law of the corporation is Argentine law because the Argentine subsidiaries
are incorporated in Argentina.” [...] From a German perspective, the /ex
societatis governs the assignability of the shares as well as the formal and
substantive requirements for an effective transfer of title to the shares. Moreover,
the /ex societatis determines which membership, management or financial rights
a shareholder enjoys vis-a-vis the corporation.”*°

The law applicable to the assignment of the ICSID claim has to be analysed from
a different perspective.” [...] “With regard to the law governing the formal
and substantive requirements to be met in order for DFS to effectively transfer
the ICSID claim to Daimler, the German conflict-of-law rules, as has been stated
earlier, call in principle for the application of the law governing the assigned
claim.””** [...] “Assuming that Argentine conflict-of-law rules follow a similar
approach, the issue whether the ICSID claim has been effectively transferred to
Daimler is governed by the law applicable to the ICSID claim.”*” “The ICSID
claim arises from the Bilateral Investment Treaty concluded between Germany
and Argentina itself. Thus, the preconditions for an effective assignment are in
principle governed by international law. The same result follows if all legal
aspects of the assignment of the ICSID claim are considered to be governed
directly by international law without reference to a conflict-of-laws analysis.”*””

138. In short, Argentina’s own expert witness agrees with the Claimant and its deponents, all
of whom affirm that Argentine law was relevant solely to the formalities of perfecting the share
transfer, and it is common cause that these formalities were duly observed. Professor Wurmnest
was careful to offer no opinion on the separate question he identified — namely, whether the
“preconditions for an effective assignment” of the ICSID claim were actually met under

241

international law.” It is upon the answer to this latter question that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction

hinges.

b) Was the ICSID claim effectively assigned under international law (and
does international law have a “continuous ownership requirement”)?
139. As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal notes that the opinions of Argentina’s experts
Nissen and Kielmanovich unfortunately provide no assistance in plumbing the requirements for

an effective assignment of an ICSID claim under international law. Professor Kielmanovich, an

235

Expert Opinion of Prof. Dr. Wolfgang Wurmnest, at para 18.
236 Thid at para 20.
37 Thid at para 21 (emphasis added).
Ibid at para 22.
Ibid at para 23.

40 Tbid at para 24 (emphasis added).
24

23

23

See ibid at para 9, stating: “This Opinion will limit itself to issues of conflict-of-laws under German
law. It will not touch upon issues pertaining to international law or Argentine law.”

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

expert in Argentine civil procedure and family law, opens his opinion by stating: “I have been

requested to provide a legal opinion on the effects of the Share Purchase Agreement ... under

9242

Argentine Law with regard to the Claimant’s right to file a claim. Professor Nissen, a

specialist in Argentine corporate law, similarly opens by noting: “I was asked to issue a legal
opinion regarding the rights that, under the Argentine legal system, derived from the holding of a
share in an Argentine company, and regarding the effects of a transfer of shares of the same kind
as the one established in the Share Purchase Agreement... under Argentine law.”** Both experts
eventually conclude that under Argentine law, DFS could no longer bring a claim in its capacity
as shareholder for damages done to the Argentine Subsidiary once it had transferred the entirety

of its shareholding in the Subsidiary to DCAG.**

140. This conclusion may well be correct. But as the Argentine law on derivative shareholder
actions does not govern the right to bring an ICSID claim under a bilateral investment treaty, it is
of no relevance to the question at hand. Moreover, both experts make clear in their reports that

their conclusions rest upon the assumption — apparently fed to them by the Respondent — that

245

DFS’s present claim is brought in its capacity as a shareholder.“ The Tribunal has, however,

already considered and rejected this assertion above, noting that: a) DFS explicitly grounds its
standing on its capacity as an investor, not as a shareholder; b) not all of DFS’ claims arise
exclusively from its shareholding in the Argentine Subsidiaries; c) the BIT authorizes qualifying
investors to bring claims for damages suffered even independent of any shareholding; and d) in

any event, the ICSID Convention and the BIT establish a different regime from the one prevailing

242

Kielmanovich Statement on SPA at para 1 (emphasis added).

243

Nissen Statement on SPA at para 2 (emphasis added).

4 See Kielmanovich Statement on SPA at para 5, stating: “[i]f DFS brought a claim in its capacity as

shareholder of the two Argentine subsidiaries and it currently (in fact, since 2002) is not a shareholder
thereof, it would lack procedural standing to make its claim”; and Nissen Statement on SPA at para 22(3),
stating:

“Pursuant to Argentine law, in order to file a claim for alleged damages directly suffered
by the corporation, a person who alleges having suffered said damages in his or her
capacity as shareholder for the same cause that affected the corporation and who, after
filing the claim, ceased to be a shareholder as a result of relinquishing his or her shares do
not have any legal standing.”

5 Professor Kielmanovich, in fact, explicitly acknowledges the possibility that DFS might still retain

other claims deriving from other sources of law. He notes that if DFS is attempting to bring a claim before
ICSID not in its capacity as a shareholder but rather by virtue of “those rights that remained in its equity
once the assignment was completed”, then the feasibility of the claim would “depend on the relevant
jurisdiction and admissibility rules; that is, the rules allowing the submission of disputes to international
arbitration proceedings by relying on the Argentina-Germany BIT and the ICSID Convention. In this
report, I do not pose an opinion on the scope and interpretation of these international law instruments.”

 

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

under customary international law by specifically authorizing investors to claim compensation for

246

certain damages done to their shareholdings.” For the same reasons, the Respondent’s renewed

arguments to the effect that general international law also prohibits derivative actions by
shareholders (citing Barcelona Traction) are once again inapposite and fall to be rejected.”
141. | Turning then to the requirements for the effective assignment of an ICSID claim under
international law, the parties have focused much attention on the so-called “continuous ownership
criterion.” Both the Claimant and the Respondent cite to investor-State cases in which a claimant
had sold its investment to a third party after initiating the arbitration. These cases have uniformly
held that the subsequent sale of an investment does not deprive an investor-State tribunal of its
jurisdiction to hear the claim. Some of the decisions have suggested that this is so because the
“critical date” under international law is the date upon which the arbitration is commenced.”“*
The Respondent argues that this implies that where an investment is sold before the
commencement of the arbitration, the tribunal will necessarily lack jurisdiction. However, as
pointed out by the Claimant, none of the tribunals cited by Argentina actually addressed that
question, and certain obiter dicta in the decisions suggest that at least some tribunals would have
been prepared to accept jurisdiction even if the sale had occurred prior to the arbitration’s
commencement. For example, the EnCana tribunal held:

“Provided loss or damage is caused to an investor by a breach of the Treaty, the

cause of action is complete at that point; retention of the subsidiary (assuming it

is within the investor’s power to retain it) serves no purpose as a jurisdictional
requirement, though it may be relevant to questions of quantum.”*”

142. | Other tribunals have noted there may be good reasons not to impose a continuous
ownership requirement. For example, in cases of expropriation, an investor will by definition no

longer own the investment at the time of lodging the arbitration claim. Yet this should not

46 See the Tribunal’s discussion in part IV.B.3. above.

47 Ibid.

48 See e.g. CHRISTOPH H. SCHREUER, THE ICSID CONVENTION, A COMMENTARY (2009), at p. 92, section

36, stating:

“Apart from specific rules about critical dates, the date of the commencement of the
proceedings is decisive. It is an accepted principle of international adjudication that
jurisdiction will be determined by reference to the date on which judicial proceedings are
instituted. This means that on that date all jurisdictional requirements must be met. It
also means that events taking place after that date will not affect jurisdiction.”

2” EnCana Corporation v. Ecuador, Award, LCIA Case No. UN3481, ILC 91 (3 February 2006), para
131.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

preclude the investor from obtaining the compensation due under the BIT.*’ Moreover, to
impose a continuous ownership requirement may defeat the ends of justice in cases where the sale
of the investment was forced — e.g. under domestic bankruptcy laws, where the bankruptcy itself

may have been caused by some act of the respondent state in violation of the BIT.

143. To this Tribunal’s knowledge, only the Loewen tribunal has actually declined jurisdiction
on a parallel (though not identical) ground. In that case, a NAFTA tribunal found that it lacked
jurisdiction on the basis that the investor failed to maintain a continuous nationality after a cross-
border bankruptcy proceeding forced the investor to undergo a corporate re-organization which

changed the investor’s nationality from Canadian to U.S.”*' But the Loewen tribunal’s imposition

2

of this continuous nationality requirement has been criticized from many quarters.”” As one

commentator noted:

“Indeed, in 2000 the International Law Commission’s rapporteur on diplomatic
protection concluded that there was no rule of customary international law with
respect to continuous nationality because opinions and practice as to the range of
dates on, which a claimant must have the requisite nationality had varied so
much.””

144. Of course, there is no problem with continuous nationality in the present case, since both
DFS and its Parent Company have remained German corporations throughout the history of the
present proceedings. But similar arguments can be made against the imposition of the continuous
ownership requirement proposed by the Respondent here. As the large and thriving global
market for distressed debt attests, most jurisdictions allow for legal claims to be either sold along
with or reserved separately from the underlying assets from which they are derived. The reason

is that such severability greatly facilitates and speeds the productive re-employment of assets in

259 See Mondev Int’l Ltd v. United States, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award (11 October 2001) at
para 91, finding that the international protection of investment should not “be overshadowed by technical
questions of the application of local property laws and the classification of local property interests affected
by foreclosure or other action subsequent to the failure of the investment.”

351 The Loewen Group Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United States of America, ICSID Case No.

ARB(AF)/98/3, Award (26 June 2003), at paras 225-238.

252

See e.g. EMMANUEL GAILLARD, LA JURISPRUDENCE DU CIRDI 788 (2004); Maurice Mendelson, The
Runaway Train: The “Continuous Nationality” Rule from the Panavezys-Saldutiskis Railway case to
Loewen, in INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT LAW AND ARBITRATION: LEADING CASES FROM THE ICSID,
NAFTA, BILTATERAL TREATIES AND CUSTOMARY INTERNATIONAL LAW (Todd Weiler ed., 2005); Noah
Rubins, Loewen v. United States: The Burial of an Investor-State Arbitration Claim, 21 ARB. INT’L 1
(2005); Jan Paulsson, Continuous Nationality in Loewen, 20 ARB. INT’L 213 (2004).

253

Andrea K. Bjorkland, “The Emerging Civilization of Investment Arbitration”, 113 PENN STATE L. REV
169 (2009) at p. 1280 (citing International Law Commission, Report to the International Law Commission
on Diplomatic Protection, A/CN.4/506/Add.1 (April 20, 2000)).

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

other ventures. The Respondent has pointed to no rule of general or customary international law
which would prohibit a similar result from obtaining for ICSID claims. Indeed, the rationale for
recognizing the severability of a damages claim from the underlying asset may be even stronger
in the case of ICSID claims, since a strong argument can be made that the ICSID Convention and
many BITs accord standing only to the original investor and not to any subsequent would-be

purchasers of the underlying investment.”

145. The better view would seem to be that ICSID claims are at least in principle separable
from their underlying investments. The Tribunal therefore rejects the Respondent’s contention
that the Claimant’s ICSID claims (or at least those connected with the shareholding) were
necessarily and automatically transferred along with the shares by operation of law. Rather, the
Tribunal finds that it should accord standing to any qualifying investor under the relevant treaty
texts who suffered damages as a result of the allegedly offending governmental measures at the
time that those measures were taken — provided that the investor did not otherwise relinquish its

right to bring an ICSID claim.

146. The next question to address is then whether the right to bring an ICSID claim was in fact
relinquished by the Claimant in favor of its Parent Company on the facts of the present case. As
noted above, the disputing parties disagree as to whether the SPA’s use of the phrase “any other
rights pertaining to the Sold Shares for all of the Company’s profits” indicates that the right to
bring an ICSID claim was intended to be transferred along with the shares. This is a question of
interpretation, and in interpretational matters, international law typically defers to the intentions
of the authors of the instrument in question.” As stated by the tribunal in Sapphire v. National
Iranian Oil Company, “i]t is a fundamental principle of law, which is constantly proclaimed by
international courts, that contractual undertakings must be respected. The rule pacta sunt

servanda is the basis of every contractual relationship.””*° It is for this reason that international

law also respects the choice of law clauses stipulated by parties to international contracts. On the
facts, the Claimant and its Parent Company chose German law to govern the interpretation of

their Share Purchase Agreement, and both the Claimant and the Respondent in the present

254 This follows from the nationality requirement of the ICSID Convention and most BITs, as well as from
the fact that most BITs afford standing to bring ICSID claims only to “nationals” or “companies” of the
other State Party which made an investment in the Respondent State prior to the advent of the facts or
circumstances giving rise to the dispute.

°55 Exceptions may exist in certain circumstances, for example where the parties’ intentions violate a

peremptory norm of international law, but no such exceptions arise on the present facts.

256 Sapphire v. National Iranian Oil Co., Arbitral Award (15 March 1963), LLL.R. 1967, 136 at 181.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
proceedings have accepted the validity of this designation. The Tribunal will therefore apply

German law in considering the meaning to be ascribed to the disputed phrase under the SPA.

c) Was the ICSID claim effectively assigned under German law?

147. As summarized above, the Claimant has submitted extensive arguments concerning the
proper interpretation of the SPA under German law. In particular, Dr. Wolfgang Bauder, Senior
Counsel of Daimler AG — who is a German lawyer with more than 25 years of experience and
was the individual responsible for drafting the SPA — has testified:
“Under German law, a right or claim owned by a shareholder against third parties is
not inherent in the share ownership, and cannot be and is not transferred by operation
of law. Instead, it must be explicitly delineated as being transferred in the agreement.
Consistent with German law in this regard, the Share Purchase Agreement did not
explicitly list or delineate any potential claim held by Daimler Financial against the
Argentine Republic as one of the rights transferred and assigned by the parties.”?*”
This position is commensurate with the above findings of the Tribunal under international law,
and the Respondent has not attempted to rebut Dr. Bauder’s characterization of German law on

this point.

148. As to whether or not the ICSID claim was encompassed by the phrase “any other rights
pertaining to the Sold Shares,” Dr. Bauder’s statement stresses the following principles of
German law on the interpretation of contracts:

i) § 157 of the German Civil Code specifies that “[c]ontracts are to be interpreted as

required by good faith, taking customary practice into consideration.””**

ii) § 133 of the German Civil Code “gives particular weight to ascertaining the will of the
parties” and “provides that the ‘true intention’ or ‘true will’ (the ‘wirkliche Wille’) of the

parties should prevail over the literal meaning of a declaration.”””

iii) While “both the subjective intent — ‘innere Wille’ — and objective factors — ‘bekundete

Wille’ — must be considered,”?”° “

[t]he focus in German law is so strongly on the parties’
subjective intent that the legal maxim falsa demostratio non nocet (‘an erroneous
designation does not vitiate’) is at times applied by the German courts. If the subjective

?57 Statement of Wolfgang Bauder on SPA at para 5(b).

258 Thid at para 16 (Dr. Bauder’s translation).

28

Ibid at para 15.

20 Thid at para 16.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

intent of the parties differs from the express agreement, the court will give effect to the

9261

subjective intent.

Dr. Bauder then devotes five pages of his testimony to explaining how the factual evidence
submitted by the Claimant and recorded by the Tribunal in paragraph 126 above proves that
neither DFS nor DCAG intended to transfer the ICSID claim to the Parent Company.

149. This interpretation is likewise endorsed by Gésta Dobler, Senior Counsel of DFS, who
executed the SPA at the time of its conclusion on behalf of the Claimant.” It is further affirmed
by Thomas Gruber, Director of Accounting and Financial Reporting for DFS, who — in explaining
how the contracting parties arrived at the SPA’s negative purchase price for the shares —
categorically states: “I am certain that the calculation of the negative purchase price did not
include any sums attributable to the value of any potential legal claims, including the claims
asserted in this arbitration.”** And lest there be any doubt, the SPA contracting parties have now
taken the extra step of reaffirming their intent by concluding an Interpretive Agreement and
Understanding which “confirms that the Contracting Parties did not intend to, nor did they,

”°°4 The Claimant submits that German law

transfer the claims at issue in this proceeding.
authorizes this sort of subsequent interpretive confirmation between contracting parties” and
notes that “[a]rticle 8(3) of the Share Purchase Agreement contemplates the possibility of such a
supplemental agreement and specifically authorizes it, provided it is in writing.”*

150. Again, the Respondent does not call into question the Claimant’s characterization of
German law on any of these points, and the Tribunal’s own analysis of the relevant provisions of
the German Civil Code has unearthed no major flaws in the Claimant’s analysis. Nor has the
Respondent attempted to directly rebut the Claimant’s factual evidence or the testimony of its
witnesses. Instead, the Respondent questions the probative value of the Claimant’s evidence and
urges the Tribunal to discount it on the grounds that it does not derive from neutral sources and

was prepared solely for the purposes of this arbitration.

261” Thid at para 17.

262

Statement of Gésta Dobler on SPA at para 6.
26 Statement of Thomas Gruber on SPA at para 9.
24 Claimant’s Post-Hearing SPA Submission at para 114.
265 Thid at para 70.

266 Thid at para 71.

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

151. The Tribunal notes, however, that of the items of evidence submitted by the Claimant in
corroboration of its assertion that the SPA contracting parties did not intend to transfer the ICSID
claim to DCAG, items i) and ii) listed in paragraph 126 above were contemporaneous to the
conclusion of the SPA while items iii) through v) were prepared in the normal course of business
operations. These items therefore do have probative value and the Tribunal finds them to be
highly persuasive indicators of the SPA contracting parties’ intent. In particular, by instituting
the present arbitration, the Claimant has signaled that it expects the value of its claim to be
positive and in fact rather substantial.” It would be counter-intuitive for the Parent Company to
“pay” a €250 million negative price to the Claimant for the transferred shares while acquiring a

valuable claim in exchange.

152. The Claimant’s sixth item of evidence concerns the Parent Company’s abstention from
participation in the present arbitration proceedings. This decision, obviously taken in advance of
the Claimant’s filing of the ICSID claim, would also make no sense if indeed the SPA contracting
parties had intended to transfer the claim to the Parent Company. Finally, with respect to item
vii) of the Claimant’s evidence, it is undeniable that the Interpretive Declaration was executed by
the SPA contracting parties in response to developments in this arbitration. However, given that
the Declaration is nonetheless authoritative and binding upon DFS and its Parent Company under
applicable German legal principles, the Tribunal would be ill-advised to disregard it entirely. At
the very least, it constitutes a relevant circumstantial confirmation of the SPA contracting parties’

original intentions.

153. | There remains one final evidentiary matter to address. Argentina has pointed to certain
email exchanges between DFS and DCAG tending to indicate that the two companies did not
even become aware of the possibility of filing an ICSID claim until sometime in 2004 — that is,
two years after the conclusion of the SPA. In the Tribunal’s view, this can only serve to confirm
that the SPA contracting parties did not intend to include the ICSID claim among the rights to be
transferred. One obviously cannot intend to transfer a right whose existence is unknown. The
Tribunal has already found that the claim was not transferred by operation of law, whether
German law or international law. And even if the Tribunal could accept Argentina’s assertion
that the ICSID claim prima facie falls within the scope of the phrase “any other rights pertaining

to the Sold Shares”, the large negative purchase price set for the shares would have to be read as

267 The Claimant’s damages estimates under various different theories of liability range anywhere from

$US 45.7 million to €272.7 million in 2002 currency, not including relevant interest up to the present date.

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

an implied reservation of the ICSID claim in favor of DFS. In short, all of the available evidence
points to the conclusion that DFS did not relinquish its right to bring the ICSID claim upon
execution of the SPA.

d) Conclusions

154. | The foregoing analysis shows that DFS enjoys standing as a qualifying investor to bring

the present ICSID claim for damages sustained during the time when it owned the investment

 

notwitl ding the suk transfer of its shareholding in the Argentine Subsidiary to DCAG.

 

As suggested by the EnCana tribunal, in the event that the evidence indicates that DFS has
already been compensated for its losses in some fashion, the Tribunal can address this at the
quantum stage of the proceedings. The fact that DCAG, as the Parent Company and 100% owner
of DFS, will be the ultimate beneficiary of any recovery by DFS is not relevant to the question of

the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to hear DFS’ present claim.

155. | The Tribunal’s jurisdiction is likewise unaffected by the fact that certain investor-State
jurisprudence suggests that DCAG may — as the indirect owner of the Argentine Subsidiary at the
time of the allegedly offending governmental measures — also enjoy an independent right to bring
its own claim for the same damages. The present Tribunal is not called upon to decide whether
the German-Argentine BIT authorizes claims by indirect investors and it expresses no opinion on
the matter. It notes, however, that in the event that some future tribunal should find itself faced
with a parallel claim by DCAG, that tribunal would have ample legal tools at its disposal to
prevent any double recovery against the Respondent arising out of the same set of facts and

circumstances as the present claim.

156. For all of these reasons, the Respondent’s fourth objection to jurisdiction falls to be

rejected.

VI. FIFTH OBJECTION TO JURISDICTION: THE MOST-FAVORED NATION
CLAUSE DOES NOT AUTHORIZE THE CLAIMANT TO BYPASS THE
REQUIREMENTS OF ARTICLES 10(2) AND 10(3) OF THE TREATY

157. Not surprisingly, this objection has given rise to the most heated debate between the
disputing parties. Both parties have filed voluminous submissions concerning the Treaty’s MFN
clauses and their relation to: a) the dispute settlement provisions of the German-Argentine BIT
(“the Basic Treaty”), and b) the dispute settlement provisions of other treaties — in particular the

Chilean-Argentine BIT (“the Comparator Treaty”) invoked by the Claimant. In support of their

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

respective positions, both parties have extensively discussed numerous investor-State arbitral
awards, scholarly commentary, and the decisions of other international courts and tribunals. A
complete recitation of all of the parties’ arguments is, however, unnecessary and would overly
burden this award. The Tribunal instead finds it convenient to enumerate in outline form only the
parties’ principal submissions. The Tribunal will refer to certain of the cited legal opinions in its

below considerations to the extent that it finds these relevant to its analysis.
A. Position of the Respondent

158. | Argentina denies that the Basic Treaty’s MFN clauses allow this Tribunal to base its
jurisdiction upon the Claimant’s satisfaction of the pre-arbitral requirements of article X of the

Comparator Treaty rather than those of Article 10 of the Basic Treaty.’

Its_ principal
submissions in support of this position are as follows:

a) The Basic Treaty requires the Claimant, before resorting to an arbitral tribunal, to submit
the dispute to the competent Argentine courts for a period of 18-months, which the
Claimant has not done.” Moreover:

i) This requirement constitutes a necessary condition of Argentina’s consent to

arbitration;?”’ and

ii) The requirement is not excessively formalistic.””’

b) The MFN clauses of the German-Argentine BIT cannot be applied to the BIT’s
provisions on dispute resolution because to do so would:
i) Conflict with the language of the MFN clauses themselves;”””

ii) Run counter to the demonstrated practice of the Argentine Republic;*”*
iii) Violate the ejusdem generis principle; and

iv) Violate the principle of effectiveness (effet utile).””°

268 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, Part IV.A.

26 Thid at paras 7-13.
Ibid at paras 8,9, & 11; Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, paras 70-75.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 12; Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, paras 54-69.
Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, paras 5-17.
3° Thid at paras 18-28.

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, part IV.A.2.a); Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, paras 47-

Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, part IV.A.2.b); Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, paras 51-

60

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

c) “Case law” confirms that MFN clauses do not apply to the Basic Treaty’s dispute

. «276
resolution provisions.

In particular:

i) The decisions in Salini v. Jordan, Plama v. Bulgaria, Telenor v. Hungary, and
Wintershall v. Argentina support Argentina’s position;*”

ii) Cases such as Maffezini and Gas Natural differ from the one under consideration

278

and should be distinguished accordingly,”” or in the alternative, they should not

be followed.”
B. Position of the Claimant

159. | The Claimant maintains that no prior recourse to the domestic Argentine courts was
necessary, because this requirement has been superseded by operation of the Basic Treaty’s MFN
clauses.”*” In support of this position, the Claimant submits the following arguments:

a

The language of the Treaty shows that the Contracting State Parties intended for the
MEN provisions to apply to dispute resolution.”*' In particular:
i) The Treaty’s context, including its title and Preamble, support a broad reading of
the MEN clauses.”**
ii) The ordinary meaning of the Treaty’s terms support a broad application of the

MEN clauses.”**

iii) The Contracting State Parties did not limit the definition of “activities in
connection with investments” so as to exclude dispute resolution."

iv) The additional MFN provision in Article 4 of the Treaty does not limit the broad

285

scope of the MFN provision in Article 3.

276 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, part IV.A.3.

277 Ibid. Argentina raised the Wintershall decision, which was issued after the parties’ jurisdictional

submissions had already been made, on the first day of hearings. See Hearing Transcripts, day 1, pp. 148ff.

278 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras 42-49.

2 Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, Part II.A.2.

280 Claimant’s Memorial, part ILE.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, Point 1.A.
282 Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, Point I.A.1.
*83 Ibid at Point L.A.2.
Ibid at Point I.A.3.

°° Tbid at Point LA.4.

61

286

287

288

289

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

Access to international dispute resolution is an essential treaty protection and is
encompassed by a treaty’s MEN provisions unless explicitly excluded.**°
Access to international dispute resolution following a 6-month negotiating period is more
favorable than the requirement to submit the dispute to the domestic courts for 18-months
before proceeding to arbitration.”*”
The cases cited by Argentina are inapposite because they dealt with factual situations
distinguishable from the present one.”**

i) On the contrary, investment tribunals have “uniformly” upheld the application of

MEN provisions to domestic dispute settlement requirements of arbitration

clauses.”

290 291

The ejusdem generis” and effet utile” principles both support the application of the

MEN clause to the Treaty’s dispute resolution provisions.
Argentina’s treaty practice shows it has no overarching policy to require domestic
dispute resolution and therefore the Basic Treaty’s MFN provisions should be read to
allow the domestic courts requirement to be superseded.”
The Basic Treaty’s 18-month domestic courts provision is a matter of procedure, the

293
In

strict application of which is unnecessary and would be excessively formalistic.
particular:
i) The provision is in essence a waiting period and is not a true exhaustion of
domestic remedies requirement; ”*

ii) Mere waiting periods have been repeatedly waived by other tribunals;””*

Claimant’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, Point I.B.
Claimant’s Memorial, para 235.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, Point I.C.

Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, Point ILC. The Tribunal notes that this submission was lodged

prior to the publication of the Wintershall decision, which found to the contrary.

290

291

292

293

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, Point I-D.
Ibid at Point LE.
Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, Point I.B.

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, Point I.F. This argument is further developed in the

Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, Point I.E.

294

295

Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 96.

Ibid at paras 97-102.

62

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
iii) Despite Argentina’s assertions to the contrary, it is “virtually impossible that the
dispute would be resolved in or outside Argentina within 18 months to the
satisfaction of both parties.”””°
h) Requiring the Claimant to satisfy the 18-month domestic courts provision would run
contrary to the Treaty’s purpose of promoting favorable conditions for investment” and
would be futile and lead to a situation which is manifestly absurd,””* because:
i) It would subject the Claimant to costs and delays not faced by other investors;”””
ii) It would lead to major, nonsensical inefficiencies in the dispute resolution
process;*”° and
iii) In any event, enforcing the provision on the facts of this case would be unjust on

account of Argentina’s efforts to impede domestic resolution."

C. Considerations of the Tribunal

1. Tribunal’s Interpretive Approach under Public International Law

160. | The Tribunal is keenly aware that the interpretation and application of MFN clauses has
proven to be one of the most controversial issues not only between the disputing parties in this
case but also within the world of international investment law more generally.*” For this reason,
the Tribunal considers it prudent to preface its analysis by setting out the general interpretive

approach it will apply in considering the parties’ respective submissions.*”*

296 Thid at para 104. See also ibid at para 107.

97 Thid at para 105.

Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction at Point I.D.
Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction at para 105.
30 Tbid at paras 107-108.

Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras 62-69.

For an overview of the divided case law, see Julie A. Maupin, “MFN-based Jurisdiction in Investor-
State Arbitration: Is There Any Hope for a Consistent Approach?,” Journal of International Economic
Law 14(1), 157-190 (March 2011).

*% It will be noted that portions of the analysis contained in this section overlap with the recently issued
decision in CS Inspection and Control Services Limited (United Kingdom) v. the Argentine Republic, PCA
Case No. 2010-9 (UNCITRAL Rules), Award on Jurisdiction (10 February 2012) [hereinafter JCS v.
Argentina]. This is because the two tribunals shared the same President, who presided over the drafting of
the two awards during the same time period and elected not to burden the parties with duplicative drafting
costs in respect of certain general points of law common to both cases.

63

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

a) Interpretive principles flowing from the bilateral nature of BITs

161. The investment treaty at the heart of this case is a bilateral investment treaty. In
considering its interpretation, it is essential to recall that BITs are reciprocal bilateral treaties
negotiated between two sovereign State parties. The general purpose of BITs is of course
primarily to protect and promote foreign investment; but it is to do so within the framework
acceptable to both of the State parties. These two aspects must always be held in tension. They
are the yin and yang of bilateral investment treaties and cannot be separated without doing
violence to the will of the states that conclude such treaties. It is in this context that the exact
wording of dispute resolution clauses plays a key role, as such clauses are one of the privileged
places where the imbalances between the interests of both parties are often precisely defined as a

result of the treaty’s negotiation process.

162. It would be an error to start from the assumption that the bilateral and synallagmatic
dimension of such treaties is of a mere rhetorical nature. In the present era of globalization and
rapid economic change at the world level, a growing number of investments are indeed bi-
directional, flowing not only from highly developed to developing countries but also in the

opposite direction.**

Moreover, the very essence of treaties is precisely to protect the respective
sovereign international policy decisions of the State parties by means of the formality inherent in

the legal nature of such instruments.

163. | The Tribunal must also bear in mind the important differences between ordinary contracts
and treaties. While both are based upon the will of the parties, the latter are concluded between
sovereign States. In this respect, the ever-increasing number of claims based upon an alleged
violation of the rules and principles of public international law as incorporated in the provisions
of BITs (“treaty claims” as opposed to “contract claims”) has changed the overall physiognomy
of the international arbitration of investment disputes. Where a treaty claim is invoked, arbitral
tribunals are called upon to interpret not merely the asymmetric contractual relationship between
a sovereign state and a private foreign investor, but to adjudicate whether a sovereign state has

actually respected or violated the international obligations which it accepted with regard to the

54 For instance, in the Maffezini case, the investor was an Argentine citizen and the Host State was Spain,
not the contrary. Maffezini, above note 114.

64

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

investments made by nationals of the other sovereign state party to the same treaty. Jan Paulsson

very suggestively qualified this as “arbitration without privity.”*”

164. | Now as international treaties, BITs constitute an exercise of sovereignty by which States

306

strike a delicate balance among their various internal policy considerations.”” For this reason,

the Tribunal must take care not to allow any presuppositions concerning the types of international
law mechanisms (including dispute resolution clauses) that may best protect and promote
investment to carry it beyond the bounds of the framework agreed upon by the contracting state
parties. It is for States to decide how best to protect and promote investment. The texts of the

treaties they conclude are the definitive guide as to how they have chosen to do so.

165. As explained by Professor Charles de Visscher, one of the most eminent judges at the
ICJ, when summarizing the jurisprudence of the Court:

“The judge is not asked to penetrate the intimate designs of the contracting
parties; he is expected to discover by the means at his disposal that part of their
intentions that external signs reveal. Now the words freely chosen by the parties
are par excellence or at least primarily the instrument of this externalization.
This, in turn, is a security factor. The security that the treaty affords the
contracting parties is measured by its capacity to withstand pressures that might
be brought to promote changes. Of this fundamental contractual guarantee the
text, the common work of the parties, is the essential instrument.”*””

L-]

What the Court does not allow is that in the course of interpretation the text
should be prematurely eclipsed by a teleological scrutiny that might distort its

5° J, Paulsson, “Arbitration Without Privity,” (1995) ICSID Review — Foreign Investment Law Journal
232. See also A. El-Kosheri, “ICSID Arbitration and Developing Countries”, (1998) ICSID Review —
Foreign Investment Law Journal 107.

5° The International Court, as far back as the PCIJ’s Wimbledon decision, has consistently emphasized
that international treaties are exercises — and not abdications — of State sovereignty, and for this reason, the
will of the contracting State parties must be respected:

“The Court declines to see in the conclusion of any Treaty by which a State undertakes to
perform or refrain from performing a particular act an abandonment of its sovereignty.
No doubt any convention creating an obligation of this kind places a restriction upon the
exercise of the sovereign rights of the State, in the sense that it requires them to be
exercised in a certain way. But the right of entering into international engagements is an
attribute of State sovereignty.”
Case of the S.8. “Wimbledon”, Judgment of 17 August 1923, Permanent Court of International Justice, Ser.
A, no. 1, p. 16,25.
3°7 CHARLES DE VISSCHER, THEORY AND REALITY IN PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW (revised ed.),
translated from the French by P.E. Corbett, (New Jersey, Princeton, 1968), p. 395.

65

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

meaning. Such precipitate reasoning may result in sacrificing respect for the text
to subjective considerations...”

166. This reasoning carries equal force in the context of international arbitration — whether ad
hoc or institutionally-based — between investors and States. International treaties must be
presumed to create objective obligations among contracting State parties. The basic interpretive
approach applied to such treaties should therefore remain consistent across adjudicative fora. The
Renta4 tribunal recently came to a conclusion similar to Professor De Visscher’s, stating in the
context of a BIT-based investor-State arbitration:

“To choose one of the contending policy theses as the reason to read a BIT ina

particular way may be presumptuous. The stakes are high and the policy

decisions appertain to the State-parties to the treaties. Speculations relied upon

as the basis of purposive readings of a text run the risk of encroachment upon

fundamental policy determinations. The same is true when ‘confirmation’ of a
hypothetical intention is said to be found in considerations external to the text.

The duty of the Tribunal is to discover and not to create meaning.”*”

167. | The present Tribunal agrees with this approach. It will therefore endeavor to ascertain
the interpretation of the German-Argentine BIT that is at once most consistent with the Treaty’s
stated objects and purposes and most respectful of the specific framework adopted by the
Contracting State Parties as their chosen means for furthering those objects and purposes. Only

by satisfying both criteria can the Tribunal properly fulfil its interpretive mandate.

b) Consent as the cornerstone of all treaty commitments

168. | Stepping back from the specific case of bilateral treaties, all international treaties —
whether bilateral, plurilateral or multilateral — are essentially expressions of the contracting
states’ consent to be bound by particular legal norms. They encapsulate voluntarily accepted
restraints upon the universally recognized principle of state sovereignty. Consent is therefore the

cornerstone of all international treaty commitments, at least insofar as those commitments exceed

5° [bid at p. 396. It should be noted that the teleological method of interpretation was also soundly
rejected by the International Law Commission in its drafting work concerning the law of treaties, which
eventually culminated in the text of the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. See ILC
Commentary on Draft Article 27 of the law of treaties, Yearbook of the International Law Commission,
1966, Vol. II, Reports of the Commission to the General Assembly [hereinafter “ILC Commentary on Draft
Articles on the Law of Treaties”), at pp. 220ff.

* Rentad S.V.S.A. v The Russian Federation, Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of
Commerce, Award on Preliminary Objections to Jurisdiction (20 Mar 2009) [hereinafter “Renta4”], para 93
(emphasis added).

66

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

310

the minimum requirements of customary international law. The primacy of the principle of

consent runs through all types of treaty commitments entered into by states. There is no
distinction between substantive treatment provisions, MFN clauses, dispute resolution clauses, or
otherwise. All are equally valid and equally binding to the full extent of the contracting State

parties’ consent.

169. Since all international treaty commitments arise from the same source (consent) all must
logically be interpreted according to the same basic interpretive principles without distinction as
to the type of treaty or type of commitment. This is precisely why the International Law
Commission was able to codify into a single convention — with the acceptance of an
overwhelming number of the world’s states — the now customary law rules on the interpretation

of treaties reflected in articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention.*"’

170. In this vein, several investor-State tribunals have rightly pointed out that dispute
resolution clauses of BITs should be interpreted no differently than any other treaty clause.*!”
This has been the prevailing position in investment arbitration at least since the first Amco Asia

matter, wherein the tribunal held:

“[L]ike any other convention, a convention to arbitrate is not to be construed
restrictively, nor, as a matter of fact, broadly or liberally. It is to be construed in

310 Even in the case of customary international law, it can be argued that consent, or at least the consent of
a majority of the world’s states, underlies all of the norms reflected in customary international law.
Without such consent (as demonstrated by the combination of a sufficiently broad, lasting and consistent
state practice and supported by opinio juris), those norms would not have evolved into customary law in
the first place. The Dissenting Opinion correctly points out that the consent underlying customary
international law is of an implied and not express nature. It stresses that “established rules of customary
international law can bind States that never granted, explicitly or otherwise, consent to individual acts of
the type that gave rise to the principles in question.” (Dissenting Opinion of Charles N. Brower at note 8).
Yet the existence of the persistent objector doctrine — which allows states not in agreement with an
evolving customary norm to avoid becoming legally bound by it — demonstrates that consent is nevertheless
fundamental to customary international law. The only major exception to the foundational nature of state
consent within public international law arises in the context of peremptory norms, among which a state’s
submission to the jurisdiction of an international arbitral tribunal cannot be counted.

*!! Whether or not these articles reflected customary international law at the time of their drafting is of
course open to debate. Even so, most scholars would concede that they have by now attained customary
law status.

52 See eg InterAguas, above note 113 at para 59 (“the Tribunal finds no reason for interpreting the most-
favored-nation treatment clause any differently from any other clause in the Argentina-Spain BIT”) and
para 64 (“dispute resolution provisions are subject to interpretation like any other provisions of a treaty,
neither more restrictive nor more liberal”). An identically composed tribunal made nearly identical
statements in a joint award concerning two closely related matters in AWG, above note 113 at paras 59-60.
Further examples of such statements can be found in: Siemens, above note 71 at para 81; and Renta4, above
note 309, Separate Opinion of Charles N. Brower at paras 7-9.

67

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

a way which leads to find out and to respect the common will of the parties; such
a method of interpretation is but the application of the fundamental principle
pacta sunt servanda, a principle common, indeed, to all systems of internal law
and to international law.”*"?

171. More recently, the prominent tribunal in Mondev v United States echoed this ex ante

neutral approach, observing:

“there is no principle either of extensive or restrictive interpretation of
jurisdictional provisions in treaties. In the end the question is what the relevant
provisions mean, interpreted in accordance with the applicable rules of

interpretation of treaties”.’'*

Judge and President Higgins came to a similar conclusion when considering a slightly different

question in her separate opinion in the Oil Platforms case, stating:

“[i]t is clear from the jurisprudence of the Permanent Court and of the
International Court that there is no rule that requires a restrictive interpretation of
compromissory clauses. But equally, there is no evidence that the various
exercises of jurisdiction by the two Courts really indicate a jurisdictional
presumption in favour of the plaintiff. [...] The Court has no judicial policy of
being either liberal or strict in deciding the scope of compromissory clauses:
they are judicial decisions like any other.”*!*

172. Indeed, as a matter of public international law, the uniform applicability of the Vienna
Convention’s customary law interpretive principles to all treaty clauses is beyond doubt. This
truism, however, in no way diminishes the underlying requirement of state consent. In
interpreting dispute resolution provisions in BITs — just as with any other treaty provision — the
ultimate goal is to determine what the contracting parties actually consented to. Thus, the fact
that dispute resolution clauses should be construed neither liberally nor restrictively does not

authorize international tribunals to interpret such clauses in a manner which exceeds the consent

33° Amco Asia Corporation v. Indonesia (Jurisdiction), 1 \CSID Reports 389 (1983), Award of 25 Sept.
1983 (B. Goldman, I. Foighel and E. Rubin, arbs), reprinted in 22 1.L.M. 351, 359 [1983] (emphasis in
original) [hereinafter “Amco I”).

54 Mondev, above note 250 at para 43 (citing Amco I, ibid, at p. 394 of ICSID Reports); and Ethyl
Corporation v. Canada, UNCITRAL/NAFTA, Award on Jurisdiction (24 June 1998) [hereinafter Ehy/],
at para. 55.

55 Qil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), Preliminary Objections, I.C.J.
Reports 1996, p. 857, para 35. It is important to note, however, that Judge Higgins was not specifically
addressing whether compromissory clauses should be read more narrowly than other treaty clauses.
Rather, she was arguing that the Court should make its jurisdictional findings in the same manner as its
findings on the merits — namely, on a definitive (as opposed to provisional) basis.

68

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
of the contracting parties as expressed in the text. To go beyond those bounds would be to act

ultra vires.

173. The Vienna Convention itself unequivocally emphasizes the foundational role of State
consent in the law of treaties. The Convention employs the word “consent” no fewer than 62

+16 Within the Convention’s interpretive prescriptions,

times, including in the titles to six articles.
it is well-known that article 31(1) begins by instructing interpreters to interpret a treaty “in good
faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their
context and in the light of its object and purpose.” While the article does not explicitly mention
consent, the reference to “good faith” nevertheless reinforces the duty of tribunals to limit
themselves to interpretations falling within the bounds of the framework mutually agreed to by
the contracting state parties. As stated by the International Law Commission in its commentary
to the draft version of Article 31, the requirement of interpretation in good faith “flows directly
from the rule pacta sunt servanda.”*"”

174. General respect for State consent is also manifested by the fundamental principle of
public international law according to which international courts and tribunals can only exercise
jurisdiction over a State on the basis of its consent. As noted by the Permanent Court of
International Justice in one of its first judgments, “[i]t is well established in international law that
no State can, without its consent, be compelled to submit its disputes ... either to mediation or to
arbitration, or to any other kind of pacific settlement”.*'*

175. This basic rule was often recalled by the International Court of Justice, as in particular in
the Ambatielos case*'” as well as in the Monetary Gold case.” Against this background, it is not
possible to presume that consent has been given by a state. Rather, the existence of consent must

be established. This may be accomplished either through an express declaration of consent to an

316 Articles 11-15, 17.
37 TLC Commentary on Draft Articles on the Law of Treaties, above note 308 at p. 221. The Dissenting
Opinion adds, and the Tribunal agrees, that the good faith principle is also “meant to encapsulate well-
established principles such as effet utile, honesty, fairness and reasonableness in interpreting a treaty,
protection of legitimate expectations [those of the Contracting State Parties, that is, and] avoidance of abuse
of rights” (Dissenting Opinion of Charles N. Brower at para 7).

318 Status of Eastern Carelia Case, Advisory Opinion, (1923) P.C.LJ. Series B. No. 5, p. 27.

31° Ambatielos case (merits : obligation to arbitrate), Judgment of May 19", 1953 : LC.J. Reports 1953, p.
10, 19 [hereinafter “Ambatielos I”).

°° Case of the monetary gold removed from Rome in 1943, Preliminary Question, Judgment of June 15",
1954, I.C.J. Reports 1954, p. 19, 32.

69

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

international tribunal’s jurisdiction or on the basis of acts “conclusively establishing” such

321
consent.

What is not permissible is to presume a state’s consent by reason of the state’s failure
to proactively disavow the tribunal’s jurisdiction. Non-consent is the default rule; consent is the
exception. Establishing consent therefore requires affirmative evidence. But the impossibility of
basing a state’s consent on a mere presumption should not be taken as a “strict” or “restrictive”
approach in terms of interpretation of dispute resolution clauses. It is simply the result of respect
for the rule according to which state consent is the incontrovertible requisite for any kind of
international settlement procedure. This was already established by the Permanent Court of
International Justice in the famous Lotus case of 1927*” and further recalled by the ICJ in the
case of the Aerial Incident of July 27, 1955°** as well as in the East Timor case of 1995.** What
is true of the very existence of consent to have recourse to a specific international dispute

resolution mechanism is also true as far as the scope of this consent is concerned.*”°

176. On the basis of the ICJ’s jurisprudence constante mentioned above, it must be clear that
states may elect whatever means of settlement of disputes relating to international investment
they so choose. They may also perfectly well decide in the framework of a BIT to extend the

bearing of a most-favored nation (MFN) clause to the international settlement of their disputes

°°! See Rights of Minorities in Upper Silesia (Minority Schools), Judgment, 1928 PCI (ser. A) No. 15 (26
April), p. 24, stating: “[T]here seems to be no doubt that the consent of a State to the submission of a
dispute to the Court may not only result from an express declaration, but may also be inferred from acts
conclusively establishing it.” (Emphasis added.) Note 34 of the Dissenting Opinion cites this passage with
approval. The Tribunal notes that the Noble Energy decision, also cited in note 34 of the Dissenting
Opinion, is not to the contrary, finding as it did that “consent is manifest from a number of elements which
the Tribunal will review...”. Noble Energy, Inc. and Machala Power Cia Ltd. v. Ecuador and Consejo
Nacional de Electricidad, (CSID Case No ARB/05/12, Decision on Jurisdiction (5 May 2008), para 194
(emphasis added).

2 Case of the S.S. Lotus, P.C.LJ. Series A. No. 10 (7 Sep 1927), p. 18.

323

 

Case concerning the Aerial Incident of July 27", 1955 (Israel v. Bulgaria), Preliminary Objections,
Judgment of May 26", 1959: 1.C.J. Reports 1959, p. 127, at 142.

324 East Timor (Portugal v. Australia), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1995, p. 90, at 102, para 29.
*°5 The Dissenting Opinion attempts to draw a neat dividing line between the establishment of consent to
be bound by a specific dispute resolution mechanism and the scope of that consent, suggesting that the
former can be founded on purely “formal indicia” such as the fact of signature and ratification of a treaty,
while the latter is a matter of textual interpretation (Dissenting Opinion at n. 15). This distinction is a red
herring. If the interpretive analysis reveals that the scope of Argentina’s consent to submit to the
jurisdiction of an international arbitral tribunal does not extend to the matter at hand, it is difficult to
understand in what sense the State’s consent to submit to that jurisdiction will have nevertheless been
“established” on the basis of the State’s mere signature and ratification of the Treaty. The relevant question
is not whether the Treaty was ratified - which it was — but what precisely the States consented to in
ratifying the Treaty. See e.g. Certain Questions of Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters (Djibouti v.
France), Judgment, 1.C.J. Reports 2008, p. 177, at paras 65ff (finding it necessary to determine the “extent
of the consent given by the Parties to the Court’s jurisdiction”).

70

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
relating to investments.*”° But this choice cannot be presumed or artificially constructed by the

arbitrator; it can only result from the demonstrated expression of the states’ will.

177. In addressing the different issues raised by the disputing parties in the present case, the
main task of the Tribunal is therefore to identify the true will of the Federal Republic of Germany
and the Republic of Argentina as it was stated in the 1991 Treaty which they agreed upon for the
“promotion and reciprocal protection of investments”. In particular, the Tribunal must determine
whether the State Parties, in concluding the German-Argentine BIT, intended to submit to the
jurisdiction of an international arbitral tribunal in circumstances wherein the investor has satisfied
the procedural requirements for international dispute resolution under a Comparator Treaty but
has not fully complied with the investor-State dispute resolution process laid down in the Basic

Treaty.

178. Following the order of arguments made respectively by Argentina and by the Claimant,
the Tribunal will in turn address the formulation and content of Article 10, which deals with the
international settlement of investor-State disputes, and of Articles 3 and 4, which set out the
most-favored nation clauses binding upon the two State Parties. The meaning and effect of each
of these articles will be examined in accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna
Convention. That is, the interpretation of each article will be conducted “in good faith in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in
the light of its object and purpose”.*” The Tribunal will also look to supplementary means of
interpretation as appropriate in accordance with Article 32 in order to “confirm the meaning
resulting from the application of Article 31, or to determine the meaning when the interpretation
according to Article 31: (a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or (b) leads to a result

which is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.”**

°°6 This appears to have been done by the United Kingdom in some of its BITs. See eg Article 3(3) of the

Agreement Between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Bosnia and
Herzegovina for the Promotion and Protection of Investments, signed 2 Oct 2002, which stipulates: “For
the avoidance of doubt it is confirmed that the treatment provided for in paragraphs (1) and (2) above
[MEN treatment] shall apply to the provisions of Articles 1 to 11 of this Agreement.”

7 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, art. 31(1).

*8 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, art. 32.

71

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

2. Analysis of the Dispute Resolution Clause in the German-Argentine BIT

a) Mandatory and sequential nature of the Treaty’s investor-State dispute
resolution provisions

179. Article 10 of the BIT regulates the settlement of disputes between foreign investors and

Host States arising under the Treaty. Article 10 provides:

(1) “Disputes which arise between a Contracting Party and a national or
company of the other Contracting Party concerning an investment under the
Treaty, shall, to the extent possible, be settled amicably.

(2) If a dispute referred to in paragraph 1 cannot be settled within six months
from the date either of the parties to the dispute formally announced it, it
shall be referred upon the request of either party to the dispute to the
competent courts of the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment
was made.

(3) Under either of the circumstances referred to below, the dispute may be
submitted to an international arbitral tribunal:

 

(a) at the request of a party to the dispute if, within a period of 18 months of
initiation of the judicial proceeding in accordance with paragraph 2, the
tribunal has not rendered a final decision or if such a decision has been
rendered but the dispute between the parties continues;

(b) if both parties have so agreed.

(4) Unless otherwise agreed between the parties to the dispute, in the instances
outlined in paragraph 3 of this Article, disputes between the parties shall
either be presented for arbitration in connection with the March 18, 1965
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of Other States or to an ad hoc tribunal established under the
arbitration rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law (UNCITRAL).

If within three months of a party to the dispute instituting an arbitration
proceeding no agreement has been arrived at, and providing both Contracting
Parties are party to the March 18, 1965 Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States, the
dispute shall be subject to an arbitration proceeding under the said
convention. Otherwise, the dispute shall be referred to the ad hoc tribunal
mentioned above.

(5) The arbitral tribunal shall arrive at its decisions on the basis of this Treaty
and, if applicable, other agreements made between the parties, the internal
law of the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment was made —
including the rules of international private law — and general principles of
international law.

72

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

(6) The arbitral decision shall be binding and shall be enforced in accordance
with national law.”*””

180. Three observations are immediately evident from this recitation. First, the article phrases
its dispute resolution process in mandatory terms. The repeated use of the word “shall”, which
faithfully reflects similar mandatory language used in both the Spanish and German original
versions of the text, indicates that the process laid down in Article 10 is of an obligatory and not

an optional character.

181. Among other obligations, the disputing parties shall attempt amicable settlement, failing
which the dispute shall be submitted to the domestic courts for at least 18 months. If the matter
proceeds to international arbitration, it shall be submitted to either an ICSID or UNICTRAL
tribunal. If there is no agreement between the two disputing parties, it shall be submitted to an
ICSID tribunal if both States are parties to the Convention; otherwise it shall be submitted to an
ad hoc UNCITRAL tribunal. This language makes clear that the disputing parties’ dispute
resolution options are tightly circumscribed under the Treaty. The parties shall — not may, but
shall — comply with the provisions as set down. As noted by the Wintershall tribunal, “[t]he word
‘shall’ in treaty terminology means that what is provided for is legally binding.”**°

182. | Second, by ordering the basic steps of the dispute resolution process into four discrete
paragraphs (paras 1-4) and imbuing each step with a mandatory character, Article 10 makes clear
that the Contracting State Parties intended for the steps to follow one another in sequential
fashion. Article 10 does not provide a menu of dispute settlement options available to disputing
parties on an a la carte basis. Rather, it provides a specific sequential process whose order must
be strictly observed. This is confirmed by the fact that each subsequent step refers explicitly back
to the prior step. Thus, paragraph 2 applies only to “a dispute referred to in paragraph 1”;
paragraph 3(a) comes into play only after fulfilment of the circumstances mentioned in paragraph
2, and paragraph 4 operates only “in the instances outlined in paragraph 3” of the article. The
intention of the Contracting Parties to make each step in the dispute settlement process contingent

upon the fulfilment of the prior step could not be clearer.**

°° Disputing Parties’ agreed English translation of the German-Argentine BIT (emphasis added).

330 Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/04/14, Award (8 Dec
2008) [hereinafter “Wintershall”], para 119 (emphasis in original).

331 See ibid at paras 121-122.

73

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

183. Thirdly, the “if-then” structure of paragraph 3 underscores that this mandatory and
sequential process applies also in the case of international arbitration. That is, a dispute may be
submitted to international arbitration only if: a) it has already been submitted to the domestic
courts for 18-months and no final decision has been rendered or the dispute otherwise continues
after that time, or b) the disputing parties so agree. The paragraph lists these two circumstances
and only these two circumstances. There is no mention of possible alternate scenarios under
which international arbitration against the Host States may be commenced. The paragraph does
not employ expansive phrases such as “inter alia” or “in circumstances including, but not limited

to, the following... .”. The clear implication is that satisfaction of one of the two stipulated

scenarios is a pre-requisite to commencing international arbitration.

b) Does the 18-month domestic courts requirement constitute a condition
precedent to Argentina’s consent to arbitrate or merely a procedural
directive or admissibility requirement?

184. The Claimant argues that the German-Argentine BIT’s 18-month domestic courts
requirement constitutes a mere procedural directive and not a true jurisdictional pre-requisite. In
support of this contention, it cites several investor-State cases wherein tribunals found they had
jurisdiction notwithstanding the claimants’ non-satisfaction of waiting periods prescribed by

certain BITs. It quotes, for example, the SGS v. Pakistan tribunal, which held:

“Tribunals have generally tended to treat consultation periods as directory and
procedural rather than as mandatory and jurisdictional in nature. Compliance
with such a requirement is, accordingly, not seen as amounting to a condition
precedent for the vesting of jurisdiction. ... Finally, it does not appear consistent
with the need for orderly and cost-effective procedure to halt this arbitration at
this juncture and require the Claimant first to consult with the Respondent before
re-submitting the Claimant’s BIT claims to this Tribunal.”***

185. The Claimant highlights five other cases in which waiting periods were waived by
investor-State tribunals.**’ It asserts that the German-Argentine BIT’s 18-month domestic courts

provision is “tantamount to a waiting or cooling off period”, because “it is virtually impossible

5% SGS v. Pakistan, above note 69 at para 184 (quoted in Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction,
para 101).
53 Claimant’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, paras 98-102.

54 Tbid at para 104.

74

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

that the dispute would be resolved in or outside Argentina within 18 months to the satisfaction of

both parties.”***

186. The Claimant however overlooks the fact that, in SGS v. Pakistan, the respondent
government had shown no interest in entering into negotiations with the claimant during the long
period that had elapsed prior to the registration of the BIT claim. Moreover, the tribunal noted,
the Government of Pakistan had no incentive to do so, since the Supreme Court of Pakistan had
already issued a binding decision adverse to the claimant’s position.*° The tribunal was
therefore of the opinion that requiring the claimant to observe any further negotiation period

would have been futile under the circumstances.

187. Likewise, in each of the five other cases cited by the Claimant, the tribunals allowed
claimants to skip prescribed waiting periods not as a general principle but rather on the basis of
the peculiar factual circumstances of each case.**” In each and every case, the tribunals stressed
that the prescribed waiting periods had, in any event, passed in the interim.*** It must be noted
also that not all investor-State tribunals have agreed that waiting periods may be treated as
procedural, rather than jurisdictional, provisions. In Enron v. Argentina, the tribunal found that

the 6-month waiting period had been satisfied on the facts. But it added, in obiter dictum:

“the conclusion reached is not because the six-month negotiation period could be
a procedural and not a jurisdictional requirement as has been argued by the
Claimants and affirmed by other tribunals. Such requirement is in the view of

85 Ibid.
336 SGS v. Pakistan, above note 69 at para 107.

#7 See e.g. Ronald S. Lauder v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL, Final Award (3 Sep 2001), paras 187-91
(waiving waiting period “in the circumstances of this case” because the respondent had failed to accept the
claimant’s invitation to enter into negotiations and had in fact not responded in any manner to the
claimant’s original notice of dispute prior to the filing of the request for arbitration); Bayinder Insaat
Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/29, Decision on
Jurisdiction (14 Nov 2005), paras 97-102 (finding government had sufficient actual notice of the dispute
and numerous opportunities to engage in negotiations, which it declined to do); Link-Trading Joint Stock
Company y. Moldova, UNCITRAL, Award on Jurisdiction (16 Feb 2001), pp. 5-6 (noting respondent's
refusal to respond to claimant’s complaints and fact that more than a year had passed since registration of
arbitration without any settlement); Ethyl, above note 314 at paras 84-85 (evidence suggested no
negotiations were possible and no purpose would be served by requiring claimant to wait, since 6-month
waiting period had in any event lapsed in the meantime); Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt,
ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on Jurisdiction (29 June 1999), 41 ILM 881, 885-86 (2002)
(respondent had, in any event, withdrawn the objection as to the 3-month waiting period on the grounds
that it could have been easily rectified).

538 See generally ibid.

75

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

the Tribunal very much a jurisdictional one. A failure to comply with that
requirement would result in a determination of lack of jurisdiction.”*”

188. Thus, with respect to negotiation periods, the prevailing line of reasoning appears to rest

upon two considerations: 1) the futility of the provision in the circumstances of the case, and 2)

whether the period has in any event passed.“

189. In the present case, it is certainly true that more than 18 months have passed since the
institution of the proceedings. Moreover, it is not clear whether a further waiting period would
lead to a voluntary settlement between the parties. However, these considerations are not in
dispute. What is in dispute is not a mere waiting period but a requirement that the dispute be
submitted to the domestic Argentine courts for potential judicial resolution for a period of at least
18 months. The above reasoning must therefore be applied not by rote but rather mutatis

mutandis.

190. Analogizing the logic of the negotiation period analysis to the case of an 18-month
domestic courts submission requirement (as the Claimant has urged the Tribunal to do), the
relevant questions become: 1) whether the dispute has, at least in the interim, been litigated for
18 months before the Argentine domestic courts, and 2) whether it would be futile to require the

Claimant to do so under the circumstances — as would be the case, for example, if Argentine law

permitted no remedy for the Claimant’s claims in the domestic courts.**!

58 Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets L.P. v. The Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3,
Decision on Jurisdiction, (14 Jan 2004), para 88. At least two other ICSID tribunals have recently taken a
similar position. See Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/O8/5,
Decision on Jurisdiction (2 June 2010), paras 310-318; and Murphy Exploration and Production Company
International v. Republic of Ecuador, \CSID Case No. ARB/08/4, Award on Jurisdiction (15 December
2010), paras 140-157.

4 Professor Schreuer, upon whom the Claimant also relies, concludes:

“It would seem that the decisive question is whether or not there was a promising
opportunity for a settlement. There is little point in declining jurisdiction and sending the
parties back to the iating table if negotiations are obviously futile. iati
remain possible while the arbitration proceedings are pending. Even if the institution of
arbitration was premature, the waiting period will often have expired by the time a
decision on jurisdiction is rendered. Under these circumstances, compelling the claimant
to start the proceedings anew would be uneconomical. A better way to deal with non-
compliance with a waiting period is a suspension of proceedings to allow additional time
for negotiations if these appear promising.”

 

SCHREUER — 2009, above n. 92 at p. 239.
+41 As should be evident from this analysis, the Tribunal agrees with Judge Brower’s objection, in para 14
of his Dissenting Opinion, that the analogy between the 18-months proviso and “cooling-off” or “good

76

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

191. On the facts, the first question must be answered in the negative. The second cannot,
based upon the evidence submitted to the Tribunal, be answered in the affirmative. The
Claimant has not demonstrated the futility of resorting to the Argentine courts in the
circumstances of this case. While the Claimant submitted an expert opinion suggesting that it
would have been “impossible” for the Argentine courts to deliver a final judgment on the

Claimant’s claims within 18 months,*””

the Respondent rebutted this opinion by citing examples
of cases which the Argentine Courts have indeed resolved in 18 months or less.*"’ It may be that
the delimitation of an 18-month period, after which claimants would be free to proceed instead to
international arbitration, would induce the domestic Argentine courts to ensure the prompt and
fair adjudication of investment disputes. One can only speculate in the present instance, as the
Argentine courts were never presented with DFS’ claims. In any event, nothing in either the BIT
or in any other source of applicable law guarantees the Claimant the right to have its claims
finally resolved within 18 months.** The point of Article 10(2) of the German-Argentine BIT is
to afford the domestic courts an opportunity to attempt to resolve investment claims in a prompt
manner, not to guarantee a specific time horizon for their final resolution. The Claimant has not
asserted that it lacked a cause of action before the Argentine courts or that it was in some other

way prevented from complying with the requirements of Article 10(2).*° As such, it has failed to

 

faith negotiation” periods is not an apt one. The Tribunal nevertheless finds it necessary to discuss this
analogy because the Claimant has specifically raised it in its pleadings.

+2 Expert Opinion of Javier Errecondo dated 4 June 2008 (submitted with Claimant’s Rejoinder on
Jurisdiction); Claimant’s Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, paras 65-80.

3 Respondent’s evidentiary submissions A RA 20 (“Judgments of the Argentine Supreme Court”) and A
RA 22 (“Final Judgments”), both submitted with the Respondent’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction.

4 Tf the ability to reach a final decision within 18 months were the relevant metric, then the present
Tribunal would be forced to declare its own proceedings futile, along with the proceedings of the vast
majority of investor-State arbitration tribunals. See below at n. 430 (noting the average length of
proceedings in ICSID cases).

“5 The recent Hochtief award makes much of the fact that Article 10(2) of the German-Argentine BIT
allows either disputing party to “request” that the dispute be referred to the domestic courts. The
suggestion seems to be that Argentina’s failure to institute proceedings against the claimant in its domestic
courts constituted a waiver of its right to subsequently invoke the BIT’s 18-month proviso. See Hochtief
AG v. The Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/07/31, Decision on Jurisdiction (24 October 2011)
(hereinafter Hochtief — Majority Opinion], paras 35-37, 89. This argument overlooks the fact that
Argentina most likely lacked a cause of action with which to seize its domestic courts. In the context of a
treaty-based investor-State dispute, it is the claimant, and not the respondent, whose treaty rights have
allegedly been violated. Thus, the only practicable way for Argentina to “request” a referral to the
domestic courts is to exercise its right to insist that the claimant satisfy the BIT’s 18-month proviso before
instituting arbitral proceedings. If Argentina had wished to waive its right to object to the arbitral tribunal’s
jurisdiction on these grounds, it could have done so in terms of Article 10(3)(b) of the BIT.

77

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
meet the burden necessary to invoke a waiver of the 18-month domestic courts provision on the

grounds of futility.

192. | One may ask whether the Tribunal may nonetheless waive the 18-month domestic courts
requirement on the grounds that it is merely procedural, not jurisdictional, and therefore within
the discretionary power of the Tribunal to observe or discard. Such is the case, for example, with
admissibility objections before domestic courts and tribunals. However, admissibility analyses
patterned on domestic court practices have no relevance for BIT-based jurisdictional decisions in
the context of investor-State disputes. In the domestic context, admissibility requirements are
judicially constructed rules designed to preserve the efficiency and integrity of court proceedings.
They do not expand the jurisdiction of domestic courts. Rather, they serve to streamline courts’
dockets by striking out matters which, though within the jurisdiction of the courts, are for one
reason or another not appropriate for adjudication at the particular time or in the particular

manner in question.*°

193. All BIT-based dispute resolution provisions, on the other hand, are by their very nature
jurisdictional. The mere fact of their inclusion in a bilateral treaty indicates that they are
reflections of the sovereign agreement of two States — not the mere administrative creation of
arbitrators. They set forth the conditions under which an investor-State tribunal may exercise
jurisdiction with the contracting state parties’ consent, much in the same way in which legislative
acts confer jurisdiction upon domestic courts. That this is so is particularly evident in the case of
the German-Argentine BIT, which describes its dispute resolution process in mandatory and
necessarily sequential language. In the words of the Wintershall tribunal:

“That an investor could choose at will to omit the second step [the 18-month

domestic courts requirement] is simply not provided for nor even envisaged by

the Argentina~-Germany BIT — because (Argentina’s) the Host State’s ‘consent’

(standing offer) is premised on there being first submitted to the courts of

competent jurisdiction in the Host State the entire dispute for resolution in the
local courts.”*7

6 Such is the case with the doctrines of ripeness, forum non conveniens, etc.

7 Wintershall, above note 330 at p. 99, para 160(2) (parentheticals in original).

78

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

194. Since the 18-month domestic courts provision constitutes a treaty-based pre-condition to
the Host State’s consent to arbitrate, it cannot be bypassed or otherwise waived by the Tribunal as

a mere “procedural” or “admissibility-related” matter.**

c) Relevance of whether or not the 18-month domestic courts requirement
is “nonsensical”
195. The Plama tribunal, commenting upon the Maffezini tribunal’s decision to evade, by
means of the MFN clause, the 18-month domestic courts requirement of the Spain-Argentina
BIT, stated the following:
“The decision in Maffezini is perhaps understandable. The case concerned a
curious requirement that during the first 18 months the dispute be tried in the
local courts. The present Tribunal sympathizes with a tribunal that attempts to
neutralize such a provision that is nonsensical from a practical point of view.
However, such exceptional circumstances should not be treated as a statement of

general principle guiding future tribunals in other cases where exceptional
circumstances are not present.”*”

196. This raises the question as to whether the Tribunal may waive the 18-month domestic
courts requirement on the grounds that it is “nonsensical”. Unfortunately, the Plama tribunal
nowhere explained in what sense the requirement was “curious”, “nonsensical”, or “exceptional”.
Perhaps the tribunal referred merely to the fact that the requirement is found only in Latin
American BITs. Or perhaps it meant to suggest, as does the Claimant here, that 18 months would

not prove sufficient, in most cases, to lead to a satisfactory resolution of the dispute.

197. | Whatever the Plama tribunal’s meaning may have been, Argentina insists that the
requirement is sensible, as it was included “for the purpose of giving domestic courts the
opportunity to settle the dispute”.**” Such a purpose cannot be said to be nonsensical, particularly
in light of the Governments assertions that the Argentine courts can and do frequently resolve

351

disputes in less than 18 months.” Even if this were not the case, one can easily imagine good

348,

 

See in this regard Case C Application of the ional Ce ion on the Elimi of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Georgia v. Russian Federation), Preliminary Objections (Decision of
1 April 2011), available at: http://www icj-cij.org/docket/files/140/16398.pdf, at paras 115-184 (finding
that the relevant treaty’s requirement of good faith negotiations between the parties constituted a procedural
condition for the seisin of the Court and further finding that the Court had no jurisdiction because this
precondition had not been met).

+ Plama v. Republic of Bulgaria, Decision on Jurisdiction (8 Feb 2005), ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24
[hereinafter “Plama”], para 224.

550 Respondent’s Reply on Jurisdiction, para 54.

351 Tbid at para 55.

79

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

reasons why a country might wish to include such a provision in some, but not all, of its BITs. In
the case of Argentina, it may have wished, for example, to provide its courts with occasional
opportunities to gain experience in administering treaty-based investor-State claims without
running the risk of overwhelming its courts with too many claims under too many treaties at
once.**”

198. More importantly, however, even if Argentina had not asserted sensible reasons for
including the provision, and even if the Tribunal were unable to posit such reasons of its own
initiative, the requirement for waiving treaty-based jurisdictional pre-requisites in international
law is not nonsensicality but futility. Sovereign States are free to agree to any treaty provisions
they so choose — whether concerning substantive commitments or dispute resolution provisions or
otherwise — provided these provisions are not futile and are not otherwise contrary to peremptory
norms of international law. As discussed above, futility has not been established on the facts of

3

the present case.*** Thus, the Tribunal’s estimation of the apparent sensibility of the Treaty’s

prescribed dispute resolution process is irrelevant to the inquiry.*™*

d) The timing aspect of standing — when may an MEN claim be raised
before an international arbitral tribunal?

199. The mandatory and sequential nature of the German-Argentine BIT’s dispute resolution
provisions raises an important temporal question: when, chronologically speaking, does an
aggrieved investor acquire standing to raise an MFN claim before an investor-State arbitral
tribunal under Article 10? As will be seen later in this decision, the BIT clearly empowers
investors to claim and receive compensation for MFN violations. The immediately foregoing

analysis, however, has indicated that fulfilment of the 18-month domestic courts submission

52 Tt may be argued that such a policy would be akin to placing a tax on certain nationalities of foreign
investors for the purposes of developing the Argentine judicial system. This may well be so. But this does
not change the fact that the development of a Host State’s judiciary cannot be assailed as an illegitimate or
arbitrary — let alone nonsensical — policy goal. Instead, the decision to saddle only particular groups of
foreign investors with the costs of that development would clearly be discriminatory and therefore
compensable under the BIT to the extent that these costs exceed the costs of otherwise directly available
investor-State arbitration under other BITs. The Tribunal will return to this issue below.

553 Nor can the subjugation of a sovereign State to the jurisdiction of an international arbitral tribunal be
said to constitute a peremptory norm of international law.

554 The imprudence of engaging in debates as to the desirability of particular treaty provisions within the
context of international arbitral deliberations was neatly demonstrated in the recent Hochtief matter. There,
the majority found the procedure prescribed in Articles 10(2)-(3) of the German-Argentine BIT to be
“pointless” and of “no necessary benefit”, while the dissent was able to point out several sensible
justifications for the 18-month proviso. Contrast Hochtief — Majority Opinion, above note 345, paras 51 &
87-88 with the Separate and Dissenting Opinion of J. Christopher Thomas, Q.C., paras 4-10.

80

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
provision constitutes a condition precedent to the Host State’s consent to submit a particular

dispute to investor-State arbitration.

200. Taken together, these two conclusions suggest that a claimant wishing to raise an MFN
claim under the German-Argentine BIT — whether on procedural or substantive grounds — lacks
standing to do so until it has fulfilled the domestic courts proviso. To put it more concretely.

since the Claimant has not yet satisfied the necessary condition to Argentina’s consent

to international arbitration, its MFN arguments are not yet properly before the Tribunal. The
Tribunal is therefore presently without jurisdiction to rule on any MFN-based claims unless the

MEN clauses themselves supply the Tribunal with the necessary jurisdiction.**°

201. That a prospective claimant wishing to raise an MFN claim must satisfy the conditions
precedent to international dispute resolution under the basic treaty is supported by the reasoning
of the ICJ in the Anglo-Iranian Oil case. In that case, the United Kingdom invoked an
obligation in a 1934 treaty between Iran and Denmark to the effect that Iran would provide “the
most constant protection” of the persons and property of Denmark’s nationals “in accordance
with the principles and practice of ordinary international law.”*” The UK attempted to enforce
this protection on behalf of a UK company by invoking the MFN clauses contained in two treaties

388 The

that the UK had concluded with the Government of Persia in 1857 and 1903, respectively.
difficulty was that Iran, in its 1932 Declaration accepting the Court’s compulsory jurisdiction,
had limited its acceptance to disputes arising out of treaties concluded after the coming into effect

of the Declaration. Thus, the Iran-Denmark treaty (the “comparator treaty”) fell within the scope

555 This in no way implies that the word “‘shall’ in Article 10 of the BIT somehow trumps the word ‘shall’
in Article 3 [one of the MFN clauses] of the same treaty.” (Dissenting Opinion of Charles N. Brower at
para 13.) First, the Tribunal’s underscoring of the word “unless” stresses that the MFN clause may well
provide the Tribunal with jurisdiction to hear the case. The Award’s separate analysis of both Article 10
(the dispute resolution clause) and Articles 3 and 4 (the MFN clauses) as independent potential bases for
the Tribunal’s jurisdiction evinces no “trump” of one type of clause over the other. Second, the word
“shall” in the context of the MEN clauses relates to Argentina’s obligation to provide protected German
investors and investments with treatment, in the territory of the Host State, which is no less favorable than
the treatment provided to investors and investments from other countries. Argentina’s obligation to
observe this commitment toward German investors and investments (an obligatory “shall”) remains in force
irrespective of whether or not a particular German claimant fulfills the necessary conditions precedent to
institute an international arbitration proceeding against Argentina under Article 10. Thus, both “shalls”
retain their obligatory character within their respective spheres of operation.

 

356 Anglo-Iranian Oil Co. case (jurisdiction), Judgment of July 22nd, 1952: 1.C.J. Reports 1952, p. 93.
557 Tbid p. 108.

558 Tbid p. 108. The 1857 Treaty appears to have related to consular protection, while the 1903 Treaty was
a “Commercial Convention.” Both parties accepted that the Government of Iran was legally bound by the
treaties in question as the legal successor to Persia under international law.

81

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
of Iran’s Declaration of consent to ICJ jurisdiction, while the two UK treaties (the “basic

treaties”) did not.**?

202. In explaining why it lacked jurisdiction to hear the UK’s MFN-based claims, the Court
said the following:
“But in order that the United Kingdom may enjoy the benefit of any treaty
concluded by Iran with a third party by virtue of a most-favoured-nation clause

contained in a treaty concluded by the United Kingdom with Iran, the United
Kingdom must be in a position to invoke the latter treaty. The treaty containing

the most-favoured-nation clause is the basic treaty upon which the UK must rely.

It is this treaty which establishes the juridical link between the United Kingdom
and a third-party treaty and confers upon that State the rights enjoyed by the third
party. A third party treaty, independent of and isolated from the basic treaty,
cannot produce any legal effect as between the United Kingdom and Iran: it is
res inter alios acta.”*”

203. In other words, in Anglo-Iranian Oil, Iran’s acceptance of the ICJ’s jurisdiction over
disputes arising under the two “basic treaties” (the UK-Persia treaties) was a condition precedent
to the UK’s standing to raise its MFN claims before the Court. Because that condition precedent

had not been fulfilled, the UK had no standing and the ICJ had no jurisdiction."

204. In the present matter, of course, Argentina’s consent to international arbitration is
contained within the same instrument as the MFN guarantees giving rise to some of the
Claimant’s jurisdictional arguments. But the physical location (external instrument versus within
the same treaty) of a State’s consent to a particular type of dispute resolution does not eviscerate
the requirement, stressed by the ICJ, that the State must have consented to the particular type of

dispute settlement in question before the claimant may raise any MFN claims before the

 

5° The important point to note here is that — just as in the proceedings before the present Tribunal — the
ICJ would have had jurisdiction over disputes arising out of the comparator treaty but did not have
jurisdiction over disputes arising out of the basic treaties. It was for this reason that the basic treaty’s MFN
clause could not be invoked.

56 Tbid p. 109 (emphasis added).

5! The core problem in Anglo-Iranian was one of ratione temporis. That is, the ICJ did not have

jurisdiction over disputes arising out of the two pre-1932 basic treaties because Iran’s declaration was
limited to disputes arising out of its post-1932 treaties. The ratione temporis problem in the present
arbitration differs in that the present Respondent chose to tie its prospective consent to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction not to a specific date (as was done in Anglo-Iranian) but rather to the satisfaction of a time-
bound condition precedent to arbitration. This difference in form does not, however, give the present
Tribunal license to disregard the temporal constraint laid down by the Contracting State Parties to the
German-Argentine BIT. The principle illustrated by the Anglo-Iranian Oil case remains apposite. Namely,
a tribunal must have jurisdiction under the basic treaty in order for a claimant to invoke the MFN clause of
that treaty and thereby reach the more favorable provisions of a comparator treaty.

 

82

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

designated forum. According to this logic, the Claimant may not yet have standing to raise any
MEN arguments at all before the Tribunal. This raises a significant impediment to the Claimant’s
attempts to bypass the 18-month proviso. However, this impediment might be surmounted by the
content of the MFN clauses in question, in particular if those clauses evince an intention, on the
part of the Contracting State Parties, to allow the Treaty’s conditions precedent to accessing
international arbitration to be altered by operation of its MFN provisions. The Tribunal will
therefore next consider the parties’ arguments as to the scope and meaning of the MFN clauses in

the Germany-Argentina BIT.

3. Analysis of the MFN Clauses in the German-Argentine BIT

a) The Treaty’s MEN texts and their interdependence

205. The German-Argentine BIT contains two MFN clauses. The first and most general MFN
clause appears in Article 3, which addresses both MFN treatment and national treatment.
According to the disputing parties’ agreed English translation of the German and Spanish original

texts, Article 3 reads as follows:

“Article 3

(1) Neither Contracting Party shall accord investments in its territory by
nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party, or investments in
which nationals or companies of the other Contracting Party are
participating, treatment less favorable than the treatment accorded
investments of its own nationals or companies or investments of nationals or
companies of any third country.

(2) With respect to their activities in connection with investments in its territory,
nationals and companies of the other Contracting Party shall not be accorded
treatment less favorable by a Contracting Party than its own nationals and
companies or nationals and companies of third countries.

(3) Such treatment shall not refer to privileges granted by a Contracting Party to
nationals or companies of third countries by virtue of their membership in a
customs or trade union, a common market, or a free trade area.

(4) The treatment granted in this Article shall not refer to advantages accorded
by a Contracting Party to nationals or companies of third countries under an
agreement for the avoidance of double taxation or other agreements
regarding tax matters.”

206. The second MFN clause appears in Article 4 of the Treaty. Paragraphs (1)-(3) of that

article deal with particular substantive protections, while paragraph (4) sets out a special MFN

83

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

provision relating exclusively to the subjects covered in Article 4. The full English text is set out

in a footnote,

207.

362

°° but for present purposes the operative portions proceed roughly as follows:

“Article 4

(1) ... [Full legal protection and security]

(2) ... [Expropriation, nationalization, and equivalent measures]

(3) ... [Losses owing to war or internal strife]

Nationals or companies of a Contracting Party shall enjoy most-favored-nation
treatment in the territory of the other Contracting Party in respect of the matters
provided for in this Article.”

Finally, paragraph 2 of the BIT’s Protocol relates to MFN treatment:

“Protocol

() [..]
(2) Ad Article 3

a) “Activity” within the meaning of Article 3(2) shall in particular, but not
exclusively, include the management, use, enjoyment, and disposal of an
investment. The following shall, in particular, but not exclusively, be
deemed treatment “less favorable” within the meaning of Article 3:
unequal treatment in the case of restrictions on the purchase of raw or

The English translation of the article reads:

(1) Investments by nationals or companies of a Contracting Party shall enjoy full legal

2

3

4

)

)

protection and security in the territory of the other Contracting Party.

Investments by nationals or companies of a Contracting Party may not be
expropriated, nationalized, or subjected to any other measure the effects of which
would be tantamount to expropriation or nationalization in the territory of the other
Contracting Party except for the public benefit and against compensation. Such
compensation shall be equivalent to the market value of the expropriated investment
before the date on which the actual or threatened expropriation, nationalization, or
comparable measure has become publicly known. The compensation shall be paid
immediately and shall carry interest at a normal commercial rate until the time of
payment; it shall be effectively realizable and freely transferable. The legality of any
such expropriation, nationalization, or comparable measure and the amount of
compensation shall be subject to review by due process of law.

Nationals or companies of either Contracting Party whose investments suffer losses
in the territory of the other Contracting Party owing to war or other armed conflict,
revolution, state of national emergency, or revolt, shall not be accorded treatment
less favorable by such other Contracting Party than that which the latter Contracting
Party accords to its own nationals and companies as regards restitution,
indemnification, compensation, or other consideration. Such payments shall be
freely transferable.

Nationals or companies of a Contracting Party shall enjoy most-favored-nation
treatment in the territory of the other Contracting Party in respect of the matters
provided for in this Article.

84

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

auxiliary materials; of energy or fuel, or of means of production or
operation of any kind and unequal treatment in the case of impeding the
marketing of products inside or outside the country. Measures which
have to be taken for reasons of public safety and public order, public
health, or morality shall not be deemed treatment “less favorable” within
the meaning of Article 3.

b

The provisions of Article 3 do not oblige a Contracting Party to extend to
natural persons and companies residing in the territory of the other
Contracting Party tax privileges, exemptions, and tax reductions which
according to its tax law are granted only to natural persons and
companies resident in its territory.

LP

208. From these recitations, three observations concerning the interrelation of these provisions
merit notice. First, the Protocol sheds light on the proper interpretation of Article 3 of the BIT. It
does so by illustrating, albeit in a non-exclusive fashion, the potential meanings of the terms
“activity” and “less favorable". This makes it necessary to interpret Article 3 in tandem with the

relevant portions of the Protocol.

209. Secondly, Article 3, Article 4(4), and the Protocol all make use of the word “treatment”,
although none of them defines it explicitly. It thus falls to the Tribunal to establish, in good faith,
the ordinary meaning of this term in its context and in the light of the Treaty’s object and

purpose.

210. Thirdly, the MFN clause in Article 4(4) applies only to the particular treatment standards
mentioned in Article 4. The MFN clause in Article 3, however, contains no such limitation. On
its face, the application of Article 3 is limited only by the proper meaning to be ascribed to such
words as “treatment”, “activities” and “less favorable”. In this sense, one may conceive of
Article 3 as a general MFN clause, while Article 4(4) is a more limited one. To the extent that
Article 3 — interpreted in the light of its own wording — may also be broad enough to cover the
substantive protections listed in Article 4, it may therefore prove necessary to clarify the
relationship between the two articles. This will depend upon the meaning that emerges from an

interpretive analysis of the two articles, which follows below.

b) Potential reach of the MFN clauses in light of the ejusdem generis rule

211. Before scrutinizing the specific texts of the MFN clauses in accordance with the Vienna
Convention, it is useful to consider the implications of the ejusdem generis rule as a preliminary

matter, since both of the disputing parties have raised it in their submissions. As summarized by

85

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

the Commission of Arbitration in the Ambatielos case, the ejusdem generis rule specifies that an
MEN clause “can only attract matters belonging to the same category of subject as that to which
the clause itself relates”. The International Law Commission has characterized the ejusdem
generis rule as one that is “generally recognized and affirmed by the jurisprudence of
international tribunals and national courts and by diplomatic practice”. Indeed, the ILC
codified the rule as follows in Article 9(1) of its 1978 Draft Articles on Most-Favoured-Nation

Treatment:

“Under a most-favoured-nation clause the beneficiary State acquires, for itself or
for the benefit of persons or things in a determined relationship with it, only
those rights which fall within the limits of the subject-matter of the clause.”**

212. Thus defined, the ejusdem generis rule advocates a common sense approach to the
interpretation of MFN clauses. It is probably for this reason that the rule appears to have gained
acceptance. The ILC’s Commentary on the Draft Articles on MFN Clauses sheds further light on

the operation of the rule:

“No writer would deny the validity of the ejusdem generis rule which, for the
purposes of the most-favoured-nation clause, derives from its very nature. It is
generally admitted that a clause conferring most-favoured-nation rights in respect
of a certain matter, or class of matter, can attract the rights conferred by other
treaties (or unilateral acts) only in regard to the same matter or class of matter.

The effect of the most-favoured-nation process is, by means of the provisions of
one treaty, to attract those of another. Unless this process is strictly confined to
cases where there is a substantial identity between the subject-matter of the two
sets of clauses concerned, the result in a number of cases may be to impose upon
the granting State obligations it never contemplated. Thus the rule follows
clearly from the general principles of treaty interpretation. States cannot be
regarded as being bound beyond the obligations they have undertaken.”*°°

213. In the present matter, both the Basic Treaty and the invoked Comparator BIT*” provide

not only substantive protections for investments but also investor-State dispute resolution

8 Ambatielos Claim (Greece, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Island), decision of the
Commission of Arbitration (6 March 1956), United Nations Reports of International Arbitral Awards, Vol.
XII p. 83 [hereinafter “Ambatielos IT” to distinguish it from the ICJ matter (Ambatielos 1), in which the
Court upheld the UK’s agreement to arbitrate with Greece], at p. 107.

54 Draft Articles on Most-Favoured-Nation Clauses, with Commentaries, text adopted by the
International Law Commission at its thirtieth session, Yearbook of the International Law Commission,
1978, vol. II, Part Two [hereinafter “ILC Commentary on Draft MFN Articles”], at p. 27.
365 Tp

Ibid.

36 Tbid at p. 30, paras 10-11 (internal citations omitted).

567 The dispute resolution provisions of the invoked Comparator BIT are set forth in note 427 below.

86

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

mechanisms for disputes arising out of qualifying investments. There is, in this sense, not only an
identity between the subject matter of the two invoked dispute resolution clauses but also between
the subject matter of the whole of both treaties. *** In this respect the two invoked treaties fall
within the mainstream of modern international investment agreements, almost all of which
include some sort of provision concerning the administration of justice in relation to the private

rights of investors arising under the agreements.

214. One may observe in the two treaties, to use the ILC’s words, “a substantial identity

95 369
d”.

between the subject-matter of the two sets of clauses concerne Moreover, there is a clear

and logical connection between the subject matter of the clauses and the subject matter of the
invoked treaties.*”

215. As such, the application of the ejusdem generis rule cannot on its own categorically
exclude international dispute resolution from the potential ambit of the German-Argentine BIT’s

MEN clauses. Nor, however, can it demonstrate that the ambit of the Treaty’s MFN clauses

58 The Tribunal notes that the ejusdem generis rule does not require the overall subject matter of the basic

and comparator treaties to be identical, but only the subject matter of the invoked clauses of the basic and
the comparator treaties. As the ILC Commentary notes:

 

 

“Tt is also not proper to say that the treaty or agreement including the clause must be of
the same category (ejusdem generis) as that of the benefits that are claimed under the
clause. To hold otherwise would seriously diminish the value of a most-favoured-nation
clause.”

  

ILC Commentary on Draft MEN Articles above note 364 at p. 30, para 12 (emphasis in original).
5 Tbid at p. 30, para 11. An interpreter can require no more than a substantial identity between the
subject matters of the two clauses. For if the complete identity between the clauses were required, there
would be no need to invoke the MEN clause in the first place.

57° As to the connection between the subject matter of the overall treaties and the subject matter of the
specific clauses in relation to which MEN treatment is invoked, the Arbitral Commission in the Ambatielos
II matter observed more than 50 years ago:

“It is true that ‘the administration of justice’, when viewed in isolation, is a subject-matter
other than ‘commerce and navigation’, but this is not necessarily so when it is viewed in
connection with the protection of the rights of traders. Protection of the rights of traders
naturally finds a place among the matters dealt with by Treaties of commerce and
navigation.

Therefore it cannot be said that the administration of justice, in so far as it is concerned
with the protection of these rights, must necessarily be excluded from the field of
application of the most-favoured-nation clause, when the latter includes ‘all matters
relating to commerce and navigation’. The question can only be determined in
accordance with the intention of the Contracting Parties as deduced from a reasonable
interpretation of the Treaty.”*”°

The same logic prevails here, although there are some important differences between the Ambatielos matter
(which involved the domestic administration of justice) and the present one (which involves international
dispute settlement).

87

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
necessarily includes international dispute resolution. The ejusdem generis rule merely identifies
the outer limit of the clauses’ field of application; it cannot tell us which particular subject
matters, within that outer limit, the clauses were actually intended to cover. As stressed by the
Ambatielos Commission, the latter question “can only be determined in accordance with the
intention of the Contracting Parties as deduced from a reasonable interpretation of the Treaty”.*”"
This is so, in the ILC’s words, because “States cannot be regarded as being bound beyond the
obligations they have undertaken.”*””
216. As applied to the German-Argentine BIT, then, the outer limits set by the ejusdem
generis rule are broad enough to encompass international dispute resolution within the meaning
of the Treaty’s MFN clauses. Argentina’s assertions to the contrary must therefore be rejected.
This conclusion renders the Claimant’s proposed interpretation plausible. It does not, however, in
any way diminish the present Tribunal’s duty to determine, upon a preponderance of all the
arguments, whether Germany and Argentina intended to include international dispute resolution
within the reach of the Treaty’s MFN clauses. The Tribunal therefore turns to examine the

meaning of those MFN clauses in light of their wording and context.

c) Ordinary meaning of the term “treatment” in the BIT’s two MFN
clauses

217. | The Treaty nowhere defines what constitutes “treatment”, despite employing the word 13

times across five different provisions of the Treaty and Protocol.°”

What may be observed,
however, is that in none of these instances does the text indicate that the word carries a special or
technical meaning. Nor has either of the disputing parties attempted to attach a special meaning
to the term, in the sense of Article 31(4) of the Vienna Convention. The Tribunal must therefore
endeavour to interpret the word in a manner which makes sense of all 13 usages in an ordinary

fashion.

218. In common usage, “treatment” evokes one party’s manner of dealing with or behaving
towards another party. In the international law setting, the term typically carries with it the sense
of how a State or other legal authority regulates, protects, or otherwise interacts with specified
actors, whether public or private. Within the investment law context, one arbitral tribunal has

defined treatment to include “the rights and privileges granted and the obligations and burdens

57! Ambatielos IT, above note 363 at p. 107.
ILC Commentary on Draft MFN Articles, above note 364 at p. 30, para 11.
“Treatment” is used in arts 1(1), 2(1)-(4), 4(3)-(4), 7(1), and Protocol para (2)(a).

88

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

imposed by a Contracting State on investments made by investors covered by the treaty.”°”
Another has stated that “‘[t]reatment’ in its ordinary meaning refers to behavior in respect of an

99375

entity or a person. Each of these formulations is extremely broad, and none suggests anything

inherent in the word “treatment” which would automatically include or exclude certain categories
of acts or omissions in relation to a defined investor. What is nevertheless beyond dispute is that
“treatment” deals with the actual behavior of the Host States towards a foreign private investment
as measured against the international obligations binding upon the State on the basis of treaty law

and general international law.

219. Notwithstanding this generality, public international lawyers have in recent years
engaged in a lively debate over whether the term should be understood to comprise only
“substantive” treaty protections, or whether it may also include “procedural” ones.*”
Commentators also split over whether international dispute resolution provisions in treaties
should be viewed as substantive protections in and of themselves, or whether they are merely
procedural mechanisms for enforcing the treaty’s other (presumably substantive) obligations.*””
The present Tribunal is not convinced that this debate is the most appropriate one.*”’ What
matters is not how the general term treatment potentially could or “should” be interpreted but
rather what meaning the Contracting State Parties to the specific Treaty in question have attached

to the term.

54 InterAguas, above note 113 at para 55.

575 Siemens, above note 7 lat para 85.

56 There appears to be broad consensus among the community of scholars, as well as between the

disputing parties in this case, that the term “treatment” in treaties relating to international trade, investment,
and commerce generally encompasses most, if not all, of the so-called substantive protections of such
treaties. In the case of BITs, this would typically comprise guarantees relating to expropriation, fair and
equitable treatment, etc — provided, of course, that the MFN clause in question does not itself indicate
limits to its subject matter scope. The question at hand, however, is whether the term treatment as used in
MEN clauses, or more precisely the German-Argentine BIT’s MEN clauses, also extends to its international
dispute resolution provisions.

577 See, in this regard, the comments of the Renta4 tribunal, above note 309 at paras 88-101, and
especially its conclusion in para 101, stating: “Rights and obligations may be classified as substantive or
jurisdictional or procedural. Such classifications are not watertight and in any event primarily of
pedagogical use.”

°8 In this respect, the Tribunal agrees with the Dissenting Opinion’s position that “it is difficult to
imagine a more fundamental aspect of an investor’s ‘treatment’ by a host Government than that investor’s
ability to exercise and defend its legal rights by prompt access to dispute settlement mechanisms, and fair
and efficient administration of justice.” Dissenting Opinion of Charles N. Brower at para 20. This
uncontroversial observation does not however imply an automatic entitlement to initiate international
dispute settlement against a State.

89

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

220. In order to shed light on whether the Contracting State Parties intended for the term
“treatment” to encompass the BIT’s international dispute settlement provisions, one must apply
the classical rule of interpretation known as the principle of contemporaneity. This principle,
particularly pertinent in the case of bilateral treaties, requires that the meaning and scope of the
term “treatment” be ascertained as of the time when Germany and Argentina negotiated the BIT.
This BIT was adopted in 1991. Unfortunately neither disputing party has submitted any direct
evidence — for example from the Treaty’s drafting history — revealing the particular understanding
of “treatment” maintained by Germany and Argentina as of that date. The Tribunal must
therefore look for clues to the meaning generally ascribed to the term by the broader international

community of States at the time.

221. 1991 was a time when the distinction between “treaty claims” and “contract claims”, as

inaugurated by the AAPL v Sri Lanka award*”

(facilitating the direct access of private investors
to ICSID tribunals) remained obscure. As a consequence, dispute resolution clauses were still
predominantly perceived in the context of international contracts, whether “state contracts” or
otherwise, between a private foreign investor and a sovereign state. At that time, inspired by
international commercial arbitration, scholars as well as arbitral awards insisted on the autonomy
or severability of the arbitral clause, aimed at protecting in any situation the right of the investor
to obtain reparation in case of arbitrary revocation or nullity of the contract by the state party”.
Treaty-based questions concerning the relation of MFN clauses to international investor-State

dispute resolution mechanisms had not yet arisen and remained entirely unexplored.

222. Also at that time, as reflected one year later by the World Bank Guidelines on the

Treatment of Foreign Direct Investment,**!

and in particular its Part III devoted to “treatment”,
the prevailing view among the Development Committee of the World Bank (an essentially
universal international organization and the host body of ICSID) was that treatment was meant to
cover discrete principles of conduct applicable to the State hosting the foreign investment, with a

view to safeguarding the investment from any discriminatory or unfair and inequitable practices

3 AAPL y. Sri Lanka, above note 114.

58° Fouchard, Gaillard, Goldmann, On International Commercial Arbitration, Kluwer Law Int’l (1999),
197-217; S. Schwebel, International Arbitration: Three Salient Problems, 2 (1987); P. Sanders,
“L ie de la clause issoire,” in Hommage a Frédéric Ei 32 (1978); C.M. Svernliv,
The Current Status of the Doctrine of Separability, Journal of International Arbitration, 1991, Vol. 8, N° 4,
37-50.

381

 

World Bank, Guidelines on the Treatment of Foreign Direct Investment (1992) [hereinafter “World
Bank Guidelines”), available at: http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/WorldBank.pdf.

90

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

within the Host State’s territory. That is, the treatment of investments was perceived as dealing
with the legal regime of the investment to be respected by the Host States in conformity with its
international obligations, whatever the national organs (whether legislative, executive, or judicial)

concerned with the actual application of this regime.

223. Part III of the World Bank Guidelines illustrates this basic approach. In its discussion of

382

“treatment”, it covers in particular: fair and equitable treatment;””” treatment as favorable as that

accorded to national investors in similar circumstances;** full protection and security; ***
treatment that does not discriminate among foreign investors on the grounds of nationality;*** the

prompt issuance of necessary licenses and permits;*** authorizations for the employment of key

foreign personnel;**’ the free transfer of revenues earned by or related to the investment;*** the

reinvestment of proceeds of the investment within the territory of the Host States;*” and finally

the prevention and control of corrupt business practices and the promotion of accountability and

390

transparency in dealings with foreign investors. While some of these concepts encompass

well-known customary international law obligations binding upon States in respect of foreign
investors’ access to fair and efficient procedures for the domestic administration of justice,”

nothing within the Guidelines’ discussion of “treatment” even touches upon the international (as

World Bank Guidelines, above note 381, Part III.2.
58 [bid at Part III.3(a).
Ibid.
585 [bid at Part III.3.(b).
38° [bid at Part III.5(a).
387 [bid at Part III.5(b).

Including salaries earned by foreign personnel, debt payments related to the investment, liquidation
proceeds of the investment, and any amounts paid to the investment by reason of the Host State’s
expropriation of or other interference with the rights of the investment. Ibid at Part III.6.1(a)-(e).

[bid at Part II1.7.

°° Tbid at Part II1.8.
°°! The Dissenting Opinion points out that the concept of fair and equitable treatment “includes proper and
timely access to dispute settlement, as well as observance of judicial and administrative due process.
Relatedly, there is no doubt that under customary international law as well as modern investor-State
jurisprudence denial of justice is closely linked to, if not a part of, the fair and equitable treatment
requirement.” (Dissenting Opinion of Charles N. Brower at para 20.) The Tribunal agrees. Yet this does
not alter the fact that these concepts, along with all of the case law to which the Dissenting Opinion points
in its footnotes 59-60, concern States’ obligations in carrying out the domestic administration of justice.
There is no basis for asserting that the inability of a claimant to proceed directly to international arbitration
against a State constitutes a denial of justice, or that the 18-months proviso somehow prevents claimants
from obtaining proper and timely access to dispute settlement or otherwise violates Argentina’s duty to
observe judicial and administrative due process.

91

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

distinguished from domestic) settlement of disputes. In fact, the Guidelines reference the
international settlement of investor-State disputes only once, and in an entirely separate

392

section, ~ thus suggesting that “treatment” and international dispute settlement were viewed at

the time as separate issues.*”*

224. The Tribunal recognizes that the World Bank Guidelines of 1992 were and are a “soft
law” instrument by nature and that they do not purport to shed any direct light on the meaning of
the word “treatment” as used in the German-Argentine BIT’s MFN clauses. The Guidelines
nevertheless provide an indication of the prevailing view among the community of states during
the period contemporaneous to the adoption of the German-Argentine BIT. Neither disputing
party has adduced any evidence to suggest that either Argentina or Germany maintained a
distinctive definition of treatment in the early 1990s that departed from the basic concept
prevailing among the international community of states at that time, as reflected in the
Guidelines. This leads the Tribunal to observe that there is, at the least, some evidence that the
term “treatment” was likely meant by the two State Parties, at the time of the conclusion of the
BIT, to refer to the Host State’s direct treatment of the investment and not to the conduct of any
international arbitration arising out of that treatment. While this evidence runs counter to the
Claimant’s position, it is not of a sufficient weight to be outcome determinative. The Tribunal
would indeed hesitate to make a definitive pronouncement as to the intended scope of the
Treaty’s MFN clauses on the basis of an isolated examination of the quite general word
“treatment”. The Treaty however provides several other textual clues all pointing in the same
direction. When considered in the aggregate, these textual clues do lead to a definitive

conclusion. The Tribunal now continues to examine each in turn.

> In a most classical way, Section V of the Guidelines provides for the possible resolution of investment
disputes either by recourse to national courts or to “the agreed mechanisms including conciliation and
binding independent arbitration”, the latter including “any ad hoc or institutional arbitration agreed upon in
writing by the State and the investor or between the State and the investor’s home State where the majority
of the arbitrators are not solely appointed by one party to the dispute”.

3 The Dissenting Opinion suggests that, because the overall document title is “World Bank Guidelines
on the Treatment of Foreign Direct Investment,” this somehow implies that each and every topic discussed
within the Guidelines constitutes a type of “treatment”. This suggestion is puzzling. A document's title
cannot function as more than a summary of its general topic, let alone an exhaustive statement of its entire
contents, Shakespeare’s Hamlet, for example, contains many passages which do not directly refer to the
fictional person in question.

92

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

d) Limiting effect of the words “in its territory” on the scope of the MFN
clauses

225. One salient textual feature of the German-Argentine BIT’s three MFN provisions is that
all three guarantee MFN treatment by the Host States in its territory.“ In other words, the MFN
guarantees are territorially limited. Notably, the concept of territorial application is explicit
throughout the German-Argentine BIT. Article 1(1) defines qualifying investments territorially;
Article 2 territorially limits the States’ obligations in respect of fair and equitable treatment and
arbitrary or discriminatory measures; Article 4 does likewise for the States’ obligations
concerning full legal protection and security, expropriation, and losses in cases of war or other
conflict. Indeed, nothing in the Treaty obligates the State Parties to act in any particular manner

outside of their own territories.

226. The territorial limitation upon the German-Argentine BIT’s MFN formulations appears
quite standard within the investment treaty universe. Indeed, with only one exception, every

MEN clause addressed in each of the publicly available investor-State awards that the Tribunal

395

has been able to examine has contained a territorial reference.” The ubiquity of the phrase is

striking. This is particularly so when one considers how the words “in its territory” may operate

°°4 The English translation of Article 4(4), as prepared by the disputing parties, faithfully conveys the
territorial limitation of the original languages, translating the German (“genieBen... im Hoheitsgebiet der
anderen Vertragspartei Meistbegiinstigung”) and Spanish (“gozordn en el territorio de la otra Parte
Contratante del trato de la nacién mas favorecida”) as “shall enjoy most-favored-nation treatment in the
territory of the other Contracting Party”. In Articles 3(1) and 3(2), however, the disputing parties’ English
translation misconstrues the qualifier “in its territory” by attaching it to the word “investments” rather than
to the word “treatment”. The mistake is perhaps understandable, as the translation was prepared primarily
from the German original, which — because of the highly complex sentence structure of the German
language — arguably renders the intended reference point of the phrase “in its territory” uncertain. By
contrast, Articles 3(1) and 3(2) of the Spanish text both clearly attach the phrase “in its territory” to the
word “treatment”. Since the final sentence of the BIT states that both the Spanish and German versions of
the text are equally “binding” or “authentic”, this minor inconsistency is easily resolved by Article 33(3) of
that Vienna Convention, according to which the terms of a treaty are presumed to have the same meaning
in each authentic text. In case of difference, Article 33(4) directs that the meaning which “best reconciles
the texts, having regard to the object and purpose of the treaty, shall be adopted.” Applying these rules to
the present discrepancy: since the Spanish text is clear as to the proper placement of the qualifier “in its
territory” while the German text leaves the question open, the interpretation given by the Spanish text must
be preferred.

°°5 The sole exception is the MFN clause in the Belgium/Luxembourg-Soviet BIT discussed in Vladimir
Berschader and Moise Bershcader v. The Russian Federation, Case No. 080/2004, Arbitration Institute of
the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, Award (21 April 2006) [hereinafter “Berschader”] (Todd Weiler
dissenting). That BIT states rather generically that “the most favoured nation clause shall be applied to
investors of the other Contracting Party in all matters covered by the present Treaty”, without bothering to
define the content of “the most-favoured nation clause” so referenced. However, given that the words “in
its territory” have been consistently included in nearly all other BITs’ MFN clauses, it seems at least likely
that the BelgoLux-Soviet BIT’s reference to “the MEN clause” also implicitly incorporates this phrase.

93

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

to limit an MFN clause’s use of the general word “treatment”. Where an MEN clause applies
only to treatment in the territory of the Host State, the logical corollary is that treatment outside

the territory of the Host State does not fall within the scope of the clause.*”°

227. This observation is of critical importance. It is noteworthy that the resolution of an
investor-State dispute within the domestic courts of a Host State would constitute an activity that
takes place within its territory. Thus, if a Host State were to accord to the investors of some third
State more favorable rights in relation to domestic dispute resolution than the rights accorded to
the investors of the other contracting State party to the BIT, this could give rise to a violation of

the MEN clause.*”” This position indeed accords with general international law principles on the

8

international responsibility of States.’ As is well known, a state is internationally responsible

for the conduct of its internal organs, including judicial ones, as reflected in Article 4 of the ILC’s

399

Draft Articles on State Responsibility.

228. The same cannot be said, however, of international arbitration, which almost without
exception takes place outside the territory of the Host State and which per definition proceeds
independently of any state control. This leads to an important result. Assuming, contrary to the
Tribunal’s above findings, that an unbounded reference to the word “treatment” was generally

understood by the international community of states in 1991 as encompassing not only

°°6 Despite its professed affinity for the Roman law maxim expressio unius est exclusio alterius, the

Dissenting Opinion overlooks this problem with the Claimant’s proposed interpretation of the MFN
clauses.

°°” The Ambatielos dispute provides a classic example of a case falling squarely within the bounds of the
traditional territorial limitation on the operation of MEN clauses. In Ambatielos, Greece invoked an MFN
clause in order to obtain for its national a type of treatment in the domestic courts of the Host State (the
UK) which the UK had accorded by treaty to the nationals of certain third states and which Greece alleged
to be more favorable than the treatment accorded to Greek nationals within the UK’s domestic courts.

°°8 Under a State responsibility analysis, there is no doubt that a number of principles of treatment —
including in particular the non-discrimination and fair and equitable treatment principles — bind Host States
not only during the period of the carrying out of the investment but also after it, if and when the occasion
for dispute resolution arises. This much is certain at least in so far as the adjudicative bodies engaged in
this dispute resolution are acting at the national level. In other words, a State must be held responsible for
any breach of the rules of treatment binding upon it which has been committed by any of its organs,
including its national courts when acting at the “procedural” stage. If, knowing of the investor’s claim, a
national court ignores one of the rules of treatment binding upon the Host State, it will create a situation
giving rise to the international responsibility of that State toward the other State party to the BIT. Within
the framework of a treaty claim under a BIT, this implies that the Host State also becomes directly
internationally responsible toward the foreign investor having the nationality of the other State.

 

°° Article 4 states: “the conduct of any State organ shall be considered an act of that State under
international law, whether the organ exercises legislative, executive, judicial or any other functions... .”
(emphasis added).

94

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

“substantive” protections but also the international dispute resolution provisions of investment

treaties, the German-Argentine BIT’s specific MFN clauses nevertheless do not reach

international arbitration here. The Host State’s obligation extends no further than providing the

covered investor with “treatment” in respect of domestic dispute resolution (aka dispute

resolution “in its territory”) that is no less favorable than the domestic dispute resolution
treatment provided to third-State investors.“””

229. Nor can it be said that a Host State’s consent to grant foreign investors access to

particular forms of international dispute resolution under particular conditions necessarily takes

 

place within the Host State’s territory, such that the Host State’s consent to such arbitration would
fall within the scope of the MFN obligation. States are at liberty to give their consent to
international treaty commitments anywhere in the world; they need not do so within their own
territories.“”'

230. In short, it seems that the very concept of extra-territorial dispute resolution and a Host
State’s consent thereto are both ill-fitted to the clear and ordinary meaning of the words
“treatment in its territory” as found in many BIT’s MFN clauses, including those in the present
matter. It is difficult to see how an MFN clause containing this phrase could be applied to
international arbitration proceedings without discounting the explicit territorial limitation upon
the scope of the clause. This pragmatic incongruity prevents the Tribunal from presuming — in
the absence of any supporting evidence — that the Contracting Parties to the present Treaty
implicitly intended to include international dispute resolution within the purview of the MFN
clauses. If such were their intent, it would seem strange that they should impose a territorial

limitation so at variance with that aim.

231. More importantly, to base a conclusion solely upon the arguably open-textured nature of
the word “treatment” without giving due account to the limiting effect of the words “in its
territory” would be to run afoul of the Vienna Convention’s requirement that a treaty be
interpreted “in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the
treaty in their context”. To do so would also risk violating the principle of effectiveness in
relation to the limiting phrase “in its territory”, as those words would essentially be
40 The present Claimant has not alleged that it would receive less favorable treatment than other foreign

investors within the Argentine courts.

491 Indeed, many international treaties are concluded in locations lying outside of the territory of both of

the contracting state parties. They are not, for this reason, any less binding, nor is their territorial
application altered by the place of their conclusion.

95

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

disregarded.“ With respect, the Dissenting Opinion commits a fundamental error in finding that
Article 10(2) of the BIT (the domestic courts proviso) itself constitutes treatment “in the territory”
of Argentina. Article 10(2) is a provision of an international treaty — nothing more or less. It no
more constitutes treatment in the territory of Argentina than does the BIT’s preamble, its
definition of investment (Article 1), or for that matter its provisions on ratification and entry into
force (Article 12).“°? The present Tribunal therefore holds that the Treaty’s clearly expressed
territorial limitation upon the scope of its MFN clauses establishes that the Contracting State
Parties to the German-Argentine BIT did not intend for the Treaty’s extra-territorial dispute

resolution provisions to fall within the scope of those clauses.

e) Significance of distinction between treatment of investments and
treatment of investors “with respect to their activities in connection with
investments”

232. Turning to the next textual query, it has already been noted that the Treaty contains more
than one MEN provision. Article 3(1) guarantees MFN treatment to qualifying investments,
while Articles 3(2) and 4(4) guarantee MFN treatment to qualifying investors “with respect to
their activities in connection with investments”. This raises the question as to whether the
Contracting State Parties intended for the word treatment to mean something different when used

in connection with “investments” as opposed to “investors.” The Tribunal finds no support in the

4 The Maffezini tribunal appears to have erred in this respect when it cited Spain’s practice of pursuing

direct access to international arbitration for Spanish investors abroad as evidence of its intent to allow
direct access to international arbitration for foreign investors in Spain (in circumvention of the basic BIT’s
clear 18-month domestic remedies requirement). Whatever may have been Spain’s practices in soliciting
protections for its own investors abroad, those were activities which occurred outside the territory of Spain,
and thus could not possibly run afoul of either the MFN standard or the national treatment standard. In the
BIT that was under consideration in Maffezini, both of those standards contained the usual limiting
territorial phrase. See Maffezini, above note 114 at paras 61 and 64.

43 For the same reason, the Tribunal cannot accept the Hochtief majority’s recent characterization of

Argentina’s decision to invoke the Treaty’s 18-months proviso as an act taking place within the territory of
Argentina. (See Hochtief — Majority Opinion, above note 345, paras 107, 111.) If sovereign states are free
to conclude international treaty provisions amongst themselves, then surely they are entitled to rely upon
those treaty provisions without this reliance itself constituting a treaty-violating or treaty-altering type of
“treatment” of third-party beneficiaries. The Hochtief tribunal posited an alternative ground for finding that
the German-Argentine BIT’s territorial limitation was satisfied — namely, because the consequences or
effects of the domestic courts proviso would be felt by the claimant within Argentina.“ This argument,
though more subtle, is equally misplaced. One can conceive of myriad international agreements whose
provisions may impact upon investors operating within the territorial boundaries of Argentina. Examples
include treaties addressing climate change, intellectual property rights, financial regulation, competition
policy, human rights, peace and security, and countless other topics. Argentina’s negotiation of and
adherence to such treaties would not automatically constitute direct “treatment” of foreign investors by
Argentina within its territory merely because they generate some effects which are felt within Argentina.

96

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

s0404

text for such a difference. The Treaty defines both “investment””™ and “activities in connection

. . oe 405
with an investment” in broad terms."””

The parallel breadth of these definitions suggests that the
Treaty’s grant of MFN treatment to both investors and investments was intended to be
complementary and not differential. The MFN guarantees offered to the two categories might
even be co-extensive, for it is difficult to imagine a type of MFN treatment enjoyed by an
investment that could not correspondingly be claimed by a qualifying investor in connection with
that investment.“

233. Moreover, the explanation for the Treaty’s distinction between investments and investors
in Article 3 becomes evident when one recalls the second major guarantee provided by Article 3:
that of national treatment. Investors are granted MFN and national treatment only in respect of
their “activities in connection with investments” so that they may not lay claim to the myriad of
non-investment-related personal rights and privileges that may be afforded by the Host State to its
own citizens.“"’ No such limitation was necessary in Article 4(4), since that MEN clause applies

only in respect of the particular investment protections enumerated in sub-paragraphs 4(1)-(3). In

44 Article 1(1) of the Treaty provides:

“The term ‘investment’ shall include any kind of investment in accordance with the laws
of the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment is made in accordance with this
Treaty, in particular, but not limited to:

(a) moveable and immoveable property and any other property rights such as
mortgages and liens;

(b)_ shares or stock in a company or any other form of participation in a company;

(c) claims to money which has been used to create an economic value or claims to
any performance hailing an economic value;

(d

intellectual property rights, in particular copyrights, patents, utility patent
models, industrial designs or models, trade or service marks, trade names, trade
or business secrets, technical processes, know-how, or goodwill;

(e) business concessions under public law, including concessions to search for or
exploit natural resources”.

45 Paragraph 2 of the Protocol, reproduced in para 208 above, is careful to emphasize that its broad

definition of “activity” is illustrative and not exclusive.

4° The Rentad tribunal articulated it well:
“Whether MFN treatment is stated in the relevant BIT to relate to investors rather than
investments is in principle of no moment. Investors will not claim access to international
arbitration by way of MEN treatment in the abstract. They will assert a breach and harm
in connection with a qualifying investment under the relevant BIT.”

Renta4, above note 309 at para 101.

497 Examples might include rights to health care, education, pension schemes, or even the right to vote in

political elections.

97

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

any event, since all three MFN provisions utilize the general word “treatment” and all three are
limited by the territorial qualification, the Treaty’s distinction between MFN treatment for
investors and MFN treatment for investments cannot constitute evidence that one or the other

type of MFN protection was intended to encompass the Treaty’s international dispute resolution

provisions. The Tribunal’s above analysis applies equally to all three MFN clauses.“°*

f) Significance of the MFN clauses’ failure to refer to “all matters” subject
to the Treaty

234. The disputing parties have also debated whether the German-Argentine BIT’s promise of
MEN treatment to investors and their investments evinces a narrower intended field of application
than other BITs promising MFN treatment “in all matters subject to” the BIT. Several arbitral
tribunals interpreting BITs of this latter variety have stressed the “broader” formulation of this
phrase, citing it as evidence that such BITs were intended to include international dispute
resolution within the scope of the MFN clause, even if BITs specifying only MFN “treatment”
were not. Likewise, some tribunals interpreting BITs lacking the phrase “all matters” have cited

the omission in support of their decisions to deny the extension of the MFN clause in question to

409

the treaty’s dispute resolution provisions.” Within the investor-State dispute context, this line of

argument extends back to the Maffezini tribunal, which stated:

“The Tribunal also notes that of all the Spanish treaties it has been able to
examine, the only one that speaks of ‘all matters subject to this Agreement’ in its
most favored nation clause, is the one with Argentina. All other treaties,
including those with Uruguay and Chile, omit this reference and merely provide
that ‘this treatment’ shall be subject to the clause, which is of course a narrower
formulation.”*"

235. The Berschader tribunal, however, devoted ten paragraphs to the observation that “all
matters” cannot really refer to all matters, since some matters covered in BITs — such as their
498 For this reason the Tribunal finds it unnecessary to parse the meaning of Article (2)(a) of the BIT’s
Protocol. The Tribunal agrees that, “[t]aken in their ordinary meaning, the ‘management use, enjoyment,
and disposal of an investment’ necessarily entail the defense and exercise of legal rights via dispute
settlement mechanisms” (Dissenting Opinion of Charles N. Brower at para 22). This explains why the
MEN clauses must be read as guaranteeing most-favored nation treatment to German investors in respect of
Argentina’s domestic administration of justice. But the Protocol nowhere authorizes the Tribunal to
jettison the MFN clauses’ clear territorial limitation.

4 This was in particular the view of the Wintershall tribunal, which addressed the interpretation of the
very same BIT that is at issue here. See Wintershall, above note 330 at para 172.

410 Maffezini, above note 114 at para 60. See also Gas Natural, above note 113 at para 30; InterAguas,
above note 113 at para 55. Indeed, even before Maffezini, the arbitral commission in the Ambatielos matter
seemed to suggest that this type of phrase might be particularly significant. See Ambatielos II, above note
363 at p. 107.

98

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

temporal and territorial application, their provisions on denunciation and renewal, etc — cannot be

extended by means of an MEN clause.*”’

By logical inference then, if some matters are
necessarily omitted from the MFN clause’s reference to “all matters”, who is to say whether
international investor-State dispute resolution is or is not among the omitted matters? The Plama
tribunal, which denied extension of an MFN clause to a BIT’s international dispute resolution
provisions, considered that the omission of the phrase “with respect to all matters” could “not
alleviate the doubt”.“’” The Siemens tribunal, which reached the opposite outcome, seems to have
agreed that the phrase was not determinative,*'* and at least two tribunals besides Siemens have
found that a BIT’s MEN clause could extend to international dispute settlement provisions even

absent any reference to “all matters” subject to the agreement.*"

236. The position of the present Tribunal is simply that the absence of the expression “all
matters” — a phrase that is indicative of an intention on the part of some contracting State parties
to cover the largest scope possible — is consistent with the conclusions which the Tribunal has
already reached on the basis of its analysis of the terms “treatment” and “in its territory” in the
German-Argentine BIT. The omission constitutes a supplementary indication that Germany and
Argentina, at the time of the conclusion of the Treaty, did maintain a distinction between the Host
State’s direct treatment of investments within its territory and the international settlement of

investor-State disputes.

g) Significance of the exceptions to MFN treatment listed in Articles 3(3)
and 3(4)
237. Some tribunals have relied upon the Roman law principle expressio unius est exclusio

alterius to conclude that, where a treaty lists certain exceptions to MFN treatment, any treatment

5

not specifically excluded is necessarily covered by the MFN clause.‘'* These tribunals have
pointed to exceptions concerning preferential treatment accorded by one State to investors of a

third State by reason of a customs union, regional economic integration area, or double taxation

ai

See Berschader, above note 395 at paras 184-194.

al

Plama, above note 349 at para 205;
4

Siemens, above note 71 at para 103.

44 See National Grid, above note 113 and RosInvest v. The Russian Federation, Case No: Arbitration V

079/2005 Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce, Award on Jurisdiction (Oct 2007)
[hereinafter “RosInvest”].

415 See eg National Grid, above note 113 at para 82. See also InterAguas, above note 113 at para 56

(applying the principle without naming it); and Siemens, above note 71 at paras 83-86 (same).

99

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

treaty as evidence that the contracting parties intended to include international dispute resolution

provisions within the scope of the MFN clause.

6

238. The German-Argentine BIT also includes these standard exceptions.*'* The present

Tribunal does not, however, view the presence of these exceptions as an indication that the State
Parties intended to include the Treaty’s international investor-State dispute resolution provisions
within the scope of its MFN commitments. This is so for two reasons. First, the MFN treatment
exceptions mentioned in the German-Argentine BIT — like those found in most BITs — refer
exclusively to types of treatment normally occurring within the territory of the Host State. Tax
treatment, the extension of trade advantages resulting from customs unions, etc — all of these
standard exceptions conform to the MFN clause’s territorial limitation while the availability or
form of international dispute resolution does not. It is therefore necessary for contracting State
parties to explicitly exclude the former but not the latter from the scope of a territorially bound

MEN clause if such is their intent.

239. Second, wherever one may stand on the debate over “substantive” investment protections
versus “procedural” dispute resolution mechanisms — it cannot be denied that all of the typical
exceptions to MFN treatment observed in international investment treaties (at least in treaties
concluded prior to the advent of the Maffezini decision) deal exclusively with the contracting

States’ direct treatment of foreign investments, never with the international resolution of investor-

47

State disputes arising out of that treatment. Overlooking the obvious differences between

rights and remedies would seem to push the principle expressio unius est exclusio alterius too far.

One cannot use the principle to prove the non-existence of apples based upon the existence of

416 See Articles 3(3) and 3(4) of the BIT, reproduced in para 206 above.

417 The Dissenting Opinion attempts to explain away this fact, stating: “the Award neglects to mention

that most if not all species of allegedly ‘direct’ treatment enumerated as exceptions to MFN treatment in the
BIT entail specific mechanisms of dispute settlement, usually outside the territory of the host State”
(Dissenting Opinion of Charles N. Brower at para 35). This argument amounts to a sleight of hand, since
all of the examples cited by the Dissenting Opinion involve State-to-State international dispute resolution,
not investor versus State. There would have been no need for the Contracting State Parties to specify that
the BIT’s MFN clauses could not be invoked by investors to reach the State-to-State international dispute
resolution provisions of these other treaties. Investors may not initiate such proceedings in any event. It
must further be noted that at the time of the conclusion of the German-Argentine BIT, there were no known
examples of regional trade investor-State dispute sett isions. The first
such hybrid agreement — the North American Free Trade Agreement — was signed by Canada, the United
States and Mexico in 1992 and went into force in 1994. (See generally the materials available at:
http: -ustr.gov/trad trad th-american-fi cd fia).
And even the Maffezini tribunal disavowed the invocation of a BIT-based MFN clause to reach the
international investor-State dispute settlement provisions of that “highly institutionalized system of
arbitration.” (Maffezini, above note 114 at para 63.)

 

100

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

oranges. The exclusion of certain types of domestic substantive treatment from the German-
Argentine BIT’s Article 3 MFN clauses therefore does not imply the inclusion of particular types
of extra-territorial dispute resolution procedures. Indeed, it seems more likely that the
Contracting State Parties, acting as they were prior to Maffezini, did not explicitly exclude
international investor-State dispute resolution provisions from the scope of the MFN clauses

simply because they never considered such an invocation of the clause to be possible.“"*

h) Requirement that the comparator treatment invoked must be more
favorable
240. Pursuant to the MFN guarantees in Article 3 of the BIT, the Contracting State Parties
may not, in their territory, subject the investments or investors of the other Contracting Party to
treatment that is “less favorable” than that accorded to third States’ investors and investments.
Article 4(4), within its more limited sphere of application, articulates the same idea in inverse
terms, requiring the Contracting States to afford “most-favored-nation treatment”. Thus, the
BIT’s MEN clauses apply only where the treatment accorded under the Basic Treaty is less

favorable or the treatment under a comparator treaty is more favorable. Since this Tribunal has

 

already concluded that the wording of Articles 3 and 4 of the BIT as centred on the phrase
“treatment in its territory” does not permit it to agree with the Claimant’s thesis, it is not strictly
necessary to examine the requirement that the comparator treatment invoked must be more
favorable. Even if such an examination were necessary, the Tribunal could not at present reach

the same conclusion as the Claimant on this point.

241. The words “less” and “more” are, by their nature, relative terms. They necessitate a
comparison between the two types of treatment invoked. Arbitral tribunals have adopted varying
approaches, but surprisingly few have actually engaged in any kind of comparative scrutiny.
Some appear to have accepted without question the claimant’s characterization of a comparator

treaty’s dispute resolution provisions as more favorable. This was the case, for example, with the

419

Maffezini and Siemens tribunals. Other tribunals have made explicit findings, but in

418 The Tribunal addresses this issue in paras 262-279 below (discussing the relevance of prior and

subsequent treaty practice).

419 Maffezini, above note 114 and Siemens, above note 71. A variation on this approach was employed by
the Renta4 majority, which suggested that since investors rationally believe international arbitration may be
more favorable to them than domestic dispute resolution, this necessarily renders “greater access” to
international arbitration more favorable. Renta4, above note 309 at paras 86 and 100.

101

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

420

conclusory fashion, without providing any reasoning. Still other tribunals appear to have

equated “no less favorable” with “same”. In the words of one tribunal:
“granting a treatment to Spanish investors that is no less favorable than that
granted to French investors would mean that the Spanish investors would be able

to invoke international arbitration against Argentina on the same terms as French
investors.”*”!

242. Yet neither the ILC in its Draft Articles on MFN clauses nor the much-cited Ambatielos
arbitral commission conflated MFN treatment with equal treatment, nor did they express any
unease with the task of objective comparison. The ILC specifically eschewed any reference to
the word “equal” in its Draft Articles on MFN clauses.*” In explaining why, the Commission’s
Commentary acknowledged that “the notion of ‘equality of treatment’ is particularly closely

attached to the operation of the most-favoured-nation clause.”*”

It also pointed out, however,
that “equal” is not the same as “identical”. This implies “different” does not automatically mean
“less favorable”. Rather, the point of MFN clauses is to ensure overall equality of treatment in
the sense of creating a level playing field between foreign investors from different countries, even

if this is sometimes accomplished through non-identical means.

243. More fundamentally, however, the “different = less favorable” hypothesis proves false in
situations where the provisions of the basic treaty may actually be more favorable than those of
the comparator treaty. As the ILC noted, “while most-favoured-nation treatment excludes
preferential treatment of third States by the granting State, it is fully compatible with preferential
treatment of the beneficiary State by the granting State”.“* Any tribunal called upon to interpret
and apply an MFN clause must therefore satisfy itself that the comparator treaty provision

invoked by means of the clause is indeed more favorable than that of the basic treaty. This

0 See eg Gas Natural, above note 113 at para 31 (“access to [international] arbitration only after resort to
national courts and an eighteen-month waiting period is a less favorable degree of protection than access to
arbitration immediately upon expiration of the negotiation period”).

#1 InterAguas, above note 113 at para 55 (emphasis added). See also AWG, above note 113 at para 55
(same quote, but referring to investments rather than investors).

#2 TLC Commentary on Draft MEN Articles, above note 364 at p. 22, para 5.
Ibid.
Ibid.

102

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

requires an objective determination by the tribunal; an invoking party’s bald assertions will not

425
suffice.

244. Applying these principles to the present matter, the Tribunal could not endorse the
Claimant’s proposed use of the MFN clause unless it could determine that the dispute resolution

provisions of Article 10 of the German-Argentine BIT (the “Basic Treaty”) are objectively less
favorable than those of Article X of the Chilean-Argentine BIT (the “Comparator Treaty”).‘”°
Article X of the Comparator Treaty allows investors to proceed to international arbitration

immediately upon fulfilment of a 6-month negotiation period.’ The Claimant asserts that this is

#5 The arbitral commission’s decision in Ambatielos provides a classic example. In that decision, the

tribunal undertook a searching comparative analysis of the basic and comparator treaties’ provisions on the
administration of justice. It eventually found that the comparator treaties’ provisions were not actually
more favorable, and therefore the MFN clause did not apply to the matter before it. Ambatielos II, above
note 363 at pp. 107-110. Despite frequently citing to the decision and lauding its finding that dispute
resolution provisions may potentially fall within the reach of an MEN clause, many recent investor-State
arbitral tribunals seem to have overlooked this crucial aspect of the commission’s approach.

#6 As noted by one commentary, “it would be invidious for international tribunals to be finding (in the

absence of specific evidence) that Host State adjudication of treaty rights was necessarily inferior to
international arbitration.” MCLACHLAN, SHORE AND WEININGER, INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT
ARBITRATION, SUBSTANTIVE PRINCIPLES (Oxford University Press, 2008), p. 257.

#7 Article X of the Chile-Argentina BIT, titled “Settlement of disputes relating to investments”, provides

as follows:

(1) “Any dispute relating to an investment within the meaning of the present Treaty,
between one Contracting Party and a national or company of the other Contracting
Party, shall, to the extent possible, be resolved by amicable consultations between
the parties to the dispute.

8

If the dispute has not been resolved within a period of six months from the moment
when a complaint was lodged by one or other of the parties, it shall be submitted at
the option of the national or company:

- either to the national jurisdiction of the Contracting Party implicated in the
dispute;

- ortoi i arbitration in the conditions described in h 3.

Once a national or company has submitted the dispute to the jurisdiction of the
relevant Contracting Party or to international arbitration, this election of one or the
other of these proceedings shall be definitive.

(3) In case of recourse to international arbitration the dispute shall be raised before one
of the following designated arbitral organs at the election of the national or company:

- The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID),
created by the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States, opened for signature in
Washington the 18" of March 1965, if each State party to the present
agreement has ratified that Convention. So long as this condition is not
fulfilled, each Contracting Party gives its consent that the dispute may be
submitted to arbitration in accordance with the Additional Facility Rules of
ICSID;

103

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

more favorable than Article 10 of the Basic Treaty, which requires investors to first submit the
dispute to the domestic courts of Argentina for 18 months before proceeding to international
arbitration. On the other hand, Article X of the Comparator Treaty contains a fork-in-the-road
clause, whereas Article 10 of the Basic Treaty does not. Thus, an investor operating under the
Basic Treaty’s dispute resolution provisions receives two bites at the apple: once before the
domestic courts, and — if the investor is still not satisfied — again before an international arbitral
tribunal. An investor operating under the Comparator Treaty, by contrast, receives only one
chance to obtain a satisfactory outcome. Such an investor must choose either domestic or
international dispute resolution, and once the choice is made, it is irrevocable.** = Which

provision is more favorable, then?

245. It might be tempting to simply accept the Claimant’s assertion that the Comparator
Treaty is more favorable under the assumption that it must be more favorable if the Claimant
prefers it. The problem, however, is that claimants’ preferences are subjective. It is certainly
conceivable that some future claimant may instead prefer to have two successive chances for a
favorable outcome under the Basic Treaty rather than proceed immediately to international
arbitration under the Comparator Treaty. This is particularly so since recent trends indicate that

the costs of international arbitration may be quite high relative to the costs of domestic dispute

 

- An ad hoc arbitral tribunal established in accordance with the rules of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

(4) The arbitral tribunal shall decide on the basis of the provisions of the present Treaty,
the law of the Contracting Party to the dispute, including its rules on conflict of laws,
and the terms of any specific agreement concluded in relation to the investment as
well as the relevant principles of international law.

(5) The decisions of the arbitral tribunal shall be definitive and binding upon the parties
to the dispute.

(6) The Contracting Parties shall abstain from pursuing, through diplomatic channels,
arguments concerning any arbitration or judicial process in progress and up until
after the proceedings have been concluded, unless the parties to the dispute have not
complied with the award of the arbitral tribunal or the sentence of the ordinary court
under the terms of implementation established in the award or sentence.”

(Tribunal’s translation).

#8 See Article X(2) of the Chile-Argentina BIT ibid. The Tribunal notes that the both of the other
comparator BITs invoked by the Claimant contain similar fork-in-the-road clauses. See United States-
Argentina BIT at Article VII(3)(a) and Panama-Argentina BIT at Article 9(2).

104

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

resolution,” and the average time required to resolve disputes via international arbitration may
0

equal or exceed that of domestic court processes."
246. Simply accepting a claimant’s assertions, therefore, could lead to a situation wherein the
terms “more” and “less” favorable have no objective meaning at all, but rather depend upon the
whim of the individual claimant in each particular case. It is difficult to believe that the
Contracting State Parties to the BIT intended to commit themselves to international legal
obligations which derive not from an objective appreciation of the text of the Treaty but from the

subjective perceptions of individual claimants.

247. Moreover, under Article 10 of the Germany-Argentina BIT, if the Claimant submits its
claims to the domestic courts of Argentina for 18 months and does not obtain satisfactory results
within that period, it remains at liberty to pursue international arbitration thereafter. Should it opt
to do so, it will be in a position to submit to an international arbitral tribunal objective evidence of
its treatment in the domestic courts of Argentina — including the actual costs expended therein,
any recompense obtained, and any opportunity costs suffered by reason of the delay in the full
satisfaction of its claims. In other words, the Claimant could add to its other claims an additional
claim concerning its treatment in the Argentine courts, which if proven would be fully

compensable, with interest, in the same manner as any other treaty violation. That is to say, any

#9 4 2005 UNCTAD study (now probably somewhat outdated) stated the following concerning the costs
of international investment arbitration:

“A cursory review of cost decisions in recent awards suggests that the average legal costs
incurred by Governments are between $1 million and $2 million, including lawyers’ fees,
the costs for the tribunal of about $400,000 or more, and the costs for the claimants,
which are about the same as those for the defendant.”

“Investor-State Disputes Arising from Investment Treaties: A Review”, UNCTAD Series on International
Investment Policies for Development (2005), available at: www.unctad.org/en/docs/iteiit20054_en.pdf at p.
8.

4° The present arbitration, which was first registered on 2 August 2004 (nearly 8 years ago), provides a
case in point. As a statistical matter, one recent study found that the average duration of ICSID cases
decided through 1 July 2009 was 3.6 years (1325 days), with the shortest case lasting 1.2 years and the
longest lasting 10.5 years. Sinclair, Fisher, and Macrory, “ICSID Arbitration: How long does it take”,
Global Arbitration Review Journal, Vol. 4, Issue 5 (2009). The present arbitration has already exceeded
the ICSID average. The Tribunal was not provided with reliable independent information indicating the
average duration and cost of domestic Argentine court proceedings. Argentina has asserted, however, that
its courts can and do regularly dispose of some matters within less than 18 months. Respondent's Reply
Memorial on Jurisdiction, para 55 and note 81, citing Respondent’s Exhibits: “Judgments of the Argentine
Supreme Court” (A RA 20), “Injunctions (A RA 21), and “Final Judgments” (A RA 22).

 

105

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

violation due to less favorable or discriminatory treatment would be compensated in accordance

with the ordinary general international law principle of full reparation.*"'

248. The BIT provides two avenues under which the Claimant could proceed. The first is

provided by the MFN clauses themselves*” and the second by its arbitrary and discriminatory

3

treatment clause." Both sets of clauses protect German investors such as the Claimant from

suffering less favorable treatment than that enjoyed by foreign investors under other BITs. If
domestic dispute resolution turns out to be ineffective, the Claimant can recuperate the costs of
this process in its subsequent international arbitration proceedings.** On the other hand, if the
Claimant’s claims are resolved to its satisfaction in the Argentine courts in a timely and cost
efficient manner, then the Claimant will have no basis for either an MFN claim or a

discriminatory treatment claim and will have no need to proceed to international arbitration.

4! This principle would allow the Tribunal to take account not only of the Claimant’s actual legal costs

within the Argentine courts for the duration of the 18-month requirement, but also the opportunity costs
associated with the delay in the resolution of the claims. Such a calculation presents its challenges, to be
sure, but no more so than the calculation of damages due for the violation of any other treaty provision.

482 Since the treatment received by the Claimant in the Argentine courts would constitute treatment within

the territory of the Host State, the territorial limitation of the BIT’s MFN clauses would no longer pose a
problem. The subsequently concerned arbitral tribunal could therefore consider, in light of the objective
evidence, whether Argentina has violated its MFN commitments by forcing the Claimant — in order to
vindicate its legal rights — to incur costs and delays in excess of those faced by similarly situated claimants
under third-state BITs. This would, of course, require said tribunal to make a definitive finding to the effect
that the treatment of an investor within the Host State’s domestic courts does fall within the purview of the
Treaty’s MEN clauses, even if international dispute resolution does not. In this Tribunal’s view, such a
finding follows naturally from a plain reading of the MFN clauses.

433 Even if the BIT’s MEN clauses did not provide sufficient protection, Article 2(3) of the BIT provides

the Claimant with a second avenue for remedying any less favorable treatment ultimately experienced by
reason of its compliance with the 18-month domestic courts requirement. Under Article 2(3):

“Neither Contracting Party shall in any way impair by arbitrary or discriminatory
measures the management, use, enjoyment, or disposal of investments of nationals or
companies of the other Contracting Party in its territory.”

Requiring German investors to fruitlessly (if such turns out to be the case) expend time and resources in the
domestic Argentine courts in order to vindicate their treaty-based legal rights while exempting Chilean
investors from the same requirement could be viewed as a discriminatory impairment of German investors’
rights. This is so even if Argentina could articulate a good policy reason for requiring some foreign
investors, but not others, to first submit their claims to the domestic courts.

44 Tt should be noted that this would not require the Claimant to make out a denial of justice claim
concerning its treatment in the Argentine courts, Nor would it require the subsequent arbitral tribunal to sit
in review over the actions of the domestic courts. Rather, the sole question would be whether the Claimant,
in order to vindicate its legal rights, was discriminatorily (on the grounds of its nationality) forced to bear
costs in excess of those imposed upon investors from third countries.

106

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

249. In either case, the basic purpose of the MFN clauses will have been fulfilled. The
Claimant will have been treated at least as well as the investors of third States. It will have
experienced no competitive disadvantage as a result of the 18-month domestic courts submission
requirement.“ At the end of the day, the Claimant will have enjoyed, alongside other foreign
investors, a “fundamental equality without discrimination among all of the countries

concerned”.**°

250. This Tribunal need not worry, therefore, that rejecting the Claimant’s bid to skip over the
Basic Treaty’s 18-month domestic court submission requirement will result in the Claimant
receiving treatment, in the territory of the Host State, that is ultimately less favorable than that
extended to Chilean investors under the Comparator Treaty. The Claimant may have to follow a
different procedural route than similarly situated Chilean investors. But that route will, at worst,

ultimately protect the Claimant’s rights*’”

on an equal par with those investors. At best, it may
even do so more quickly or cheaply. The weight of the arguments therefore does not indicate that
the Comparator Treaty’s dispute resolution provisions are objectively more favorable than those
of the Basic Treaty. As a consequence, the Basic Treaty’s MFN clauses do not presently come
into play. This finding is without prejudice to any MFN claims the Claimant may present at the

merits stage upon satisfaction of the Treaty’s jurisdictional pre-requisites.

i) Relationship between the Article 3 MFN clauses and the Article 4 MFN
clause

251. The final textual puzzle to be addressed is as follows: does the relationship between the
MEN clauses in Articles 3 and 4 of the Treaty reveal anything about whether or not the Treaty’s
international dispute resolution provisions fall within the ambit of one or more of the clauses?
The parties have once again made disputing submissions concerning this question. As the
Tribunal has noted, Article 4(4)’s MFN clause applies only in respect of the specific protections
enumerated in Article 4, whereas the MFN clauses in Articles 3(1) and 3(2) appear to apply more

generally. In the present matter, the Claimant’s claims concerning expropriation as well as full

45 The Dissenting Opinion expresses concern that if a foreign investor “subjected itself willingly to a

process prescribed under the BIT, foregoing MEN protection in the process,” it would then be foreclosed
from bringing an MEN claim in a subsequent arbitral proceeding (Dissenting Opinion of Charles N. Brower
at para 38). This concern is unfounded, since the claimant would not have “foregone” MEN protection but
would have rather fulfilled the necessary condition precedent to claiming such protection before an
international tribunal.

486 Case concerning rights of nationals of the United States of America in Morocco, Judgment of August

27", 1952, C.J. Reports 1952, p. 176.

437 Including its MEN rights.

107

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

legal protection and security fall within the scope of Article 4(4). Its claims concerning fair and
equitable treatment, arbitrary and discriminatory treatment, and the free transfer of payments all
fall within the scope of Articles 3(1) and 3(2). What is not clear is whether the specific
protections provided in Articles 4(1)-(3) of the Treaty simultaneously enjoy the MFN guarantees
of Articles 3(1)-(2) and that of Article 4(4), or whether the latter MFN clause ousts the operation

of the former two in respect of Article 4.

252. The Siemens tribunal concluded that Article 4(4) of the German-Argentine BIT was
inserted ex abundante cautela, because the protections listed in Articles 4(1)-(3) are of particular

importance to foreign investors.‘**

This may be so, although recent trends in investor-State
arbitration suggest that the fair and equitable treatment guarantee (which appears in Article 2)

may be at least as important to many investors, if not more so.

253. | Whatever the explanation for the separate MFN clauses, it is in any event irrelevant to the
present inquiry. The disputing parties have submitted no persuasive evidence as to the
overlapping or distinctive scope of application of the Treaty’s MFN clauses. Even if they had
done so, a determination one way or the other would have no effect upon the outcome. As
discussed above, the use of the word “treatment” is common to all three MFN clauses, as are the
limitations that the treatment invoked must be one occurring within the territory of the Host State
and must be either “more” or “less” favorable than the parallel treatment under some comparator
treaty. It makes little difference, therefore, whether the Claimant requests that an allegedly more
favorable comparator dispute resolution provision be applied to all of its claims under Articles
3(1) and 3(2) or whether it invokes Articles 3(1)-(2) in relation to some claims and Article 4(4) in
relation to others. The same considerations apply in either case.
j) Meaning of the MFN clauses in light of the objects and purposes of the
BIT

254. The Tribunal has analyzed the meaning of the constituent components of the German-
Argentine BIT’s MFN clauses by probing their ordinary meaning in context. In so doing, the
Tribunal has throughout its analysis born in mind the objects and purposes of the Treaty, as
required by Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention. It has not undertaken a separate three-step
analysis of each Treaty term — one step focusing on ordinary meaning, another on context, and

another on the “light” of the Treaty’s object and purpose — because in the Tribunal’s view the
438 Siemens, above note 71 at para 90.

108

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

Vienna Convention posits these as interrelated elements of a holistic approach to treaty
interpretation rather than as a set of discrete and sequential steps. It nevertheless seems prudent
to make a few explicit comments about the objects and purposes of the BIT so as to clarify the

Tribunal’s approach.

255. |The German-Argentine BIT expresses its objects and purposes in rather general terms in

its Preamble, which reads:

“Desiring to intensify economic cooperation between both States,

Intending to create favorable conditions for investments by nationals or
companies of one State in the territory of the other State,

Recognizing that the encouragement and contractual protection of such
investments are apt to stimulate private business initiative and to increase the
prosperity of both States,

Have agreed as follows:”

256. As formulated, the States resolved to encourage, protect, and create favorable conditions
for investments in order to: a) intensify economic cooperation (an amity objective); b) stimulate
private business initiative (an economic growth objective); and c) increase the prosperity of both
States (a welfare objective). It is important to note that these latter three points represent the
ultimate or outcome-based objectives of the States in concluding the Treaty, for which the
encouragement, protection, and creation of favorable conditions for investment serve as the

chosen instruments.

257. Articles 1 through 11 of the Treaty, as well as the Protocol, go on to specifically define
the manner in which the Contracting Parties mutually agreed to promote and protect investments
in pursuit of the Treaty’s specified objectives. The German-Argentine BIT thus conforms to the
classical nature of bilateral treaties between States: it commits the Contracting Parties to
mutually and reciprocally pursue a chosen set of objectives within a framework that both Parties

have deemed to be acceptable.

258. In considering the application of this framework to the present matter, one must bear in
mind that the Contracting State Parties adopted all of the provisions of the Treaty together as a
whole. In one fell swoop they nodded their assent not only to the BIT’s objects and purposes, as
expressed in the Preamble, but also to the various treatment standards set forth in Articles 1 to 9
(including the MFN clauses) as well as the international dispute resolution procedures set forth in

Article 10. This indisputably evinces the State Parties’ belief that all of these provisions —

109

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
including Article 10’s requirement of an 18-month submission of any claims to the domestic

courts of the Host State — are perfectly consistent with the objects and purposes of the Treaty.

259. The Claimant asserts that dispensing with the 18-month requirement, as the Argentina-
Chile BIT has done, would be more consistent with the objective of investment protection and
promotion. In a similar vein, the Dissenting Opinion asserts that allowing investors to choose
between different types of international dispute settlement “options” is inherently more favorable
to investors and therefore more conducive to investment promotion than not providing them with
options.“ With respect, both of these approaches confuse the real issue. The question is not
whether allowing the Claimant to import all or portions of a comparator BIT’s investor-State

440

dispute resolution clause would better protect and promote investment,” nor whether the

Claimant would prefer to be able to do so,“"' but rather whether Germany and Argentina, in
concluding the BIT, agreed to protect and promote investment in that particular manner. This
question cannot be answered by reference to external opinions as to which types of dispute
resolution may best protect and promote investment in the abstract. Nor can it be answered by
reference to a claimant’s preference for more options over fewer options. It can only be answered

by reference to the scope of the State Parties’ consent as expressed in the German-Argentine BIT.

260. The foregoing analysis of the Treaty’s text has revealed no indication whatsoever that the
Contracting Parties did, in fact, consent to protect and promote investment in the specific manner
invoked by the Claimant. Indeed none of the formal textual indicia examined herein — let alone
the balance of the indicia when examined collectively — affirmatively establishes the Contracting
State Parties’ consent to submit themselves, at the whim of individual investors, to a wide variety

of different possible combinations of international dispute resolution provisions contained within

2

third-party treaties.’ The same conclusion holds even if one were to limit the Claimant’s

4° Dissenting Opinion of Charles N. Brower at para 36.

“40 Whether in the Claimant’s view or that of the Tribunal.

“1 For another critique of this investor “choice” argument, see Impregilo S.p.A. v. Argentine Republic,

ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/17, Award (21 June 2011) [hereinafter “Impregilo”], Concurring and Dissenting
Opinion of Brigitte Stern, at paras 11-12 and 105-107.

42° In this regard, the Tribunal notes that the Dissenting Opinion of Judge Brower provides no indication

whatsoever that the State Parties consented to submit to the jurisdiction of an international arbitral tribunal
in the circumstances raised by this case. The most that can be said is that the word “treatment,” standing on
its own, is general enough to potentially encompass international investor-State dispute settlement. But this
argument falls away as soon as the word “treatment” is examined in connection with the limiting phrase “in
its territory.” Thus, the open-textured nature of the word “treatment” falls well short of fulfilling the
international law requirement that a State’s consent to submit to the jurisdiction of an international tribunal
must be established and not merely presumed.

110

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

“options” to supplanting the entirety of the Basic Treaty’s investor-State dispute resolution article
with the entirety of the Comparator Treaty’s corresponding article. Since, as noted above, the
international dispute resolution provisions of Article 10 of the Basic Treaty are not objectively

“8 it would be incorrect to

less favorable than those of the applicable Comparator Treaty,
characterize the Claimant’s position as more compatible with the Treaty’s objects and purposes
then the Respondent’s position. For these reasons, a separate consideration of the Treaty’s

objects and purposes does not assist the Claimant here.

k) Supplementary indications from state practice and international
jurisprudence
261. The Tribunal’s interpretation of the Treaty’s text in accordance with Article 31 of the
Vienna Convention has shown that the Claimant’s proposed use of the BIT’s MFN clauses does
not fall within the scope of the ordinary meaning of those clauses in their context and in the light
of the Treaty’s object and purpose. An examination of relevant supplemental materials pursuant
to Article 32 of the Vienna Convention serves to confirm this conclusion. The Tribunal will
begin with a consideration of the state practice of Argentina in the period immediately

surrounding the conclusion of the German-Argentine BIT.

262. In relation to the 18-month domestic courts proviso, Argentina presented evidence of its
prior and subsequent treaty practice in its submissions at the oral hearings. Appendices | and 2
below show 29 of Argentina’s bilateral investment treaties in chronological order according to the
date of signing and the date of entry into force, respectively. The tables also indicate, for each
treaty, whether or not it included the 18-month domestic courts requirement that is in contention
in this case. According to this evidence, of the 29 BITs signed by Argentina with various States
between 22 May 1990 and 17 May 1994, ten treaties contained the 18-month domestic courts
submission requirement while the other 19 did not. Only 17 of the 29 treaties concluded have so
far entered into force. Of these, nine contain the 18-month domestic courts requirement while

eight do not.

263. It is instructive to consider the chronology of these treaties in light of the principle of
contemporaneity and the principle of effectiveness (“effet utile”). As can be seen from Appendix
1, if Argentina had intended for its BITs’ MFN clauses to apply to their international dispute

resolution provisions, then it included the 18-month domestic courts submission requirement in
48° See above, paras 241-251.

111

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

no less than five subsequent treaties (those with Spain, Canada, Austria, the Netherlands, and
South Korea) for no good reason at all. If one takes dates of entry into force (Appendix 2) as the
relevant metric, then Argentina needlessly and inexplicably included the domestic courts

provision in nine subsequent treaties, including the German-Argentine BIT.

264. These patterns would seem strange indeed if the Claimant’s assertions concerning the
MEN clauses were accepted. In that case, the principle of effectiveness would be violated with

respect to the noted treaties, because the 18-month domestic courts requirement would have been

44s

void ab initio — immediately superseded by means of the treaties’ MFN clauses.” The principle

of contemporaneity avoids this incongruity by preferring the interpretation consistent with
Argentina’s demonstrated treaty practice — namely, that Argentina did not in 1991 understand the
phrase “treatment in the territory of the host state” as extending to the BIT’s international

arbitration procedures.

265. As to the state practice of Germany, a cursory examination reveals that the 18-month
proviso does not feature in the vast majority of Germany’s other contemporaneous BITs. This

suggests that while Germany was willing to agree to the proviso in the context of its negotiations

6

with specific Latin American countries,”° it did not place particular importance upon the 18-

month domestic courts requirement as a general policy matter. This does not imply, however,
that the German Government in 1991 embraced the Claimant’s proposed interpretation of the
MEN clauses. On the contrary, there are indications within Germany’s state practice suggesting
that the German Government — like the Argentine Government — never contemplated (let alone

endorsed) a possible invocation of the MFN clauses in the manner now proposed.

44 Those with Spain, Sweden, the UK, Canada, Italy, Germany, Belgium/Luxembourg, the Netherlands,
and Austria. The Tribunal notes that two of these treaties (the Netherlands and South Korea treaties) were
negotiated and signed at a time when at last one treaty omitting the 18-month requirement (the Poland
treaty) was already in force.

“5 The Dissenting Opinion suggests that Argentina’s practice of including thel 8-month proviso in some

later treaties would not have been pointless, since claimants remain at liberty to comply with the proviso
should they so wish (Dissenting Opinion of Charles N. Brower at para 28). This “choice” argument is
disingenuous in light of the Dissenting Opinion’s insistence that direct access to international arbitration is
inherently more favorable to claimants than international arbitration only following a mandatory 18-month
domestic court proceeding. In addition, if, in concluding its later treaties, Argentina understood
compliance with the 18-month proviso to have become optional, then it is difficult to understand why it
continued to word the proviso in mandatory terms.

46 See also Treaty between the Republic of Chile and the Federal Republic of Germany concerning the

promotion and reciprocal protection of investments, signed 21 October 1991, at art. 10 (containing the
same 18-month domestic courts requirement), available at:
http://www.unctad.org/sections/dite/iia/docs/bits/chile_germany_sp.pdf.

112

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

266. Prior to concluding its BIT with Argentina, Germany had concluded other BITs
authorizing investors to access international arbitration without any sort of prior recourse to the
domestic courts.““” The Claimant’s theory would imply that Germany, upon signing the German-
Argentine BIT, already recognized and accepted the inapplicability of the 18-month domestic
courts proviso to any potential investment claims by Argentine investors against the German
Government. In that case, one would expect Article 10 of the BIT to reflect this asymmetrical
state of affairs. Yet the Contracting State Parties worded Article 10 in entirely symmetric
language. There is no indication that — despite the reciprocal and bilateral nature of the rest of the
Treaty — Germany consciously consented to proceed directly to binding international arbitration
with Argentine investors in circumstances in which similarly situated German investors would
not be entitled to proceed directly to binding international arbitration against Argentina.“ This
inconsistency provides yet another indication that the Contracting State Parties did not subscribe
to the Claimant’s proposed interpretation of the MFN clauses at the time of the Treaty’s

conclusion.

267. From this

 

starting point, it becomes necessary to examine whether the meaning of the

phrase “treatment in its territory” has evolved over time in order to see whether an evolutive

9

interpretation is required in the present instance.” Such an interpretation would only be

permissible in the face of convincing evidence, reflected by state practice, doctrinal analysis and
international case law, that a coherent and generally accepted new meaning of the phrase has
since been accepted by states, and in particular by Argentina and Germany. In this regard, it is
striking to note that movements towards an enlargement of the scope of this phrase have stemmed
not primarily from state practice but from the investor-State arbitral case law. It was the
Maffezini decision of 25 January 2000 that, for the first time, initiated an enlarged interpretation

of the scope of “treatment” so as to cover not only investment protection standards but also

47 See e.g. Treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and Bolivia concerning the promotion and

mutual protection of investments (with protocol), signed 23 March 1987, at art. 11, available at:
http://www.unctad.org/sections/dite/iia/docs/bits/germany_bolivia.pdf.

#8 Since Argentina had not yet concluded any BITs omitting the 18-month requirement.
“© Contrary to the assertion of the Dissenting Opinion, this does not entail an “abandonment” of the
principle of contemporaneity. (Dissenting Opinion of Charles N. Brower at para 27.) Rather, the principle
of contemporaneity has revealed that the Contracting States did not likely endorse the Claimant’s proposed
interpretation of the MFN clauses’ use of the phrase “treatment in the territory of the host State” at the time
of the conclusion of the BIT. The Tribunal now turns to consider whether, in the alternative, the
Contracting States have since altered their original understanding of the Treaty’s terms so as to
subsequently embrace the Claimant’s proposed interpretation.

113

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

international dispute resolution provisions of BITs.*” It need hardly be stated that a BIT’s MFN
clause should not now be interpreted in an evolutionary manner solely because some investor-
State tribunals have followed, either in toto or in part, the interpretation initiated by one arbitral
award which, with due respect to its talented authors, remains one of the most highly

controversial awards in the history of contemporary investor-State arbitration.

268. A brief look at the ways in which various investor-State tribunals and States have since
resolved the question proves that neither the arbitral community nor more importantly (as public
international law is not made primarily by arbitrators) common state practice has yet reached a
consensus whereby an MFN clause’s reference to “treatment in the territory of the host State”
may nowadays be understood as covering the international settlement of disputes. To-date, at
least nine known investor-State arbitral panels have found that a particular BIT’s MFN clause

could be used to modify its international dispute resolution provisions*"' while another ten have

42

reached the opposite result. Eminent arbitrators have come down on opposite sides of the

debate, sometimes with respect to the very same treaty — including the Treaty presently under

consideration.’ This relatively even split shows that there is as yet no established opinio juris.

269. The Dissenting Opinion attempts to discount the bulk of the contrary authority by

4

asserting that those cases dealt with factually distinct situations.’ With respect, this is a

distinction without a difference. It is true that nine out of eleven arbitral panels have allowed

claimants to circumvent the 18-month domestic courts requirement of various Argentine BITs in

450 Maffezini, above note 114 at paras 38-64.

451 See RosInvest, above note 414; Maffezini, above note 114; Siemens, above note 71; National Grid, Gas

Natural, Camuzzi 2, InterAguas, and AWG, all above note 113 (in contrast to the dissent, the Tribunal
considers the InterAguas and AWG awards as comprising only a single finding, as they were issued around
the same time by the same panel of arbitrators and are, in large part, nearly verbatim identical); Impregilo
above note 441 (Brigitte Stern dissenting); and Hochtief, above note 345 (Christopher Thomas dissenting).

452 See Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed S.A. v. United Mexican States, ICSID Case No.

ARB(AF)/00/2, Award (29 May 2003); Salini v. Jordan, above note 69; Plama, above note 349;
Berschader, above note 395; Telenor Mobile Communications A.S. v. The Republic of Hungary, ICSID
Case No. ARB/04/15 Award (13 Sep 2006); Wintershall, above note 330; Renta4, above note 309 (Charles
Brower dissenting), Mr. Tza Yap Sum v. The Republic of Peru, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/6, Decision on
Jurisdiction and Competence (19 June 2009); Austrian Airlines v. the Slovak Republic, UNCITRAL, Final
Award (9 Oct 2009) (redacted version) (Charles Brower dissenting); and [CS v. Argentina, above note 303

453 The Wintershall and Siemens tribunals reached opposite conclusions concerning the German-Argentine
BIT whose interpretation is at issue in the present case. Most recently, the Hochtief majority came down

on the side of the Siemens tribunal, while the dissent sided with the Wintershall outcome.

454 Dissenting Opinion of Charles N. Brower at paras 23-24.

114

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

5

reliance upon MFN clauses.** It is also true, however, that several of the ten arbitral tribunals

denying the applicability of MFN clauses to BITs’ international dispute resolution provisions

have severely criticized both the reasoning and the outcome of the cases embraced by the

6

Dissenting Opinion.*° This is not surprising, given that none of the cases finding in favor of

MFN-generated extensions of jurisdiction has pointed to any principled textual basis for
distinguishing between those international dispute settlement provisions which may be altered by
operation of an MFN clause and those which may not. Nor does the Dissenting Opinion identify

any such basis.“

270. The legal question before the Tribunal is: did the Contracting State Parties intend for the
MEN clauses of the Basic Treaty to alter the scope of their consent to submit to the jurisdiction of
an international arbitral tribunal, at the option of the investor, by reference to the international
dispute settlement provisions of all existing and future comparator treaties? The particular type
of alteration sought by the Claimant is of no moment in answering this question, because the
treaty clauses themselves do not distinguish as to type. The Dissenting Opinion’s attempt to draw

a distinction is especially baffling in light of the fact that its distinguished author has already

“5 Ibid at n. 67.

4 See e.g. Salini, above note 69 at paras 113-115; Plama, above note 349 at paras 216-227; Wintershall,

above note 330 at paras 179-184. See also Impregilo, above note 451, Separate Opinion of Brigitte Stern.
For scholarly critiques, see Zachary Douglas, “The MFN Clause in Investment Treaty Arbitration: Treaty
Interpretation Off the Rails,” Journal of International Dispute Settlement, Vol. 2, No. 1, (2011), pp. 97-
113; Brigitte Stern, “ICSID Arbitration and the State’s Increasingly Remote Consent: A Propos the
Maffezini Case,” in STEVE CHARNOVITZ, DEBRA STEGER AND PETER VAN DEN BOSSCHE (EDS) LAW IN THE
SERVICE OF HUMAN DIGNITY. ESSAYS IN HONOUR OF FLORENTINO FELICIANO (Cambridge University
Press, 2005), pp. 246-260.

457 The Dissenting Opinion criticizes the Wintershall tribunal for expressing concern that expansive

interpretations of MFN clauses could allow claimants even to change the Basic Treaty’s designated arbitral
forum, e.g. from ICSID to UNCITRAL (Dissenting Opinion of Charles N. Brower at para 25). But the
Tribunal notes that the Dissenting Opinion is careful not to disapprove of that possibility. In fact, Judge
Brower has on at least one occasion gone so far as to suggest the application of MEN clauses to achieve a
still greater feat. Namely, in footnote 6 to his Austrian Airlines dissent (above note 452), he stated:

“While we need not decide the point, as it has not been put before us, I pose the question
whether, even if the Treaty is interpreted as barring arbitration of all claims for violation
of substantive provisions of the Treaty itself, it properly can be construed as precluding
an importable ‘new’ substantive provision [an umbrella clause, in that case] from
bringing with it an associated right to arbitration.”

In other words, Judge Brower envisions some circumstances wherein an MFN clause may authorize a
claimant to engage in international arbitration against a state under a basic treaty which contains no
investor-State arbitration clause at all.

115

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

found in favor of MFN-generated enlargements of a tribunal’s jurisdiction in some of the very
circumstances he now distinguishes and on the basis of the same reasons he now cites.***

271. As far as the evolution of state practice is concerned, one must respectively consider the
practice of the Treaty’s Contracting State Parties and that of other states. The disputing parties
have submitted no evidence concerning the subsequent state practice of Germany that would tend
to indicate any change in or clarification of that country’s position.” The Tribunal notes that the
most recent German Model BIT neither explicitly accepts nor rejects the Maffezini holding. It

does, however, retain the territorial limitation upon the scope of the MFN clause.“

272. As for Argentina, as noted by the National Grid tribunal:

“after the decision on jurisdiction in Siemens, the Argentine Republic and
Panama exchanged diplomatic notes with an ‘interpretive declaration’ of the
MEN clause in their 1996 investment treaty to the effect that, the MFN clause
does not extend to dispute resolution clauses, and that this has always been their

intention.”**!
Obviously, an interpretive declaration issued by a State after a treaty-based interpretive dispute
has already arisen cannot be considered as a definitive guide to the State’s original intentions —
particularly when the declaration relates to a different treaty. It merits notice, however, that the
Panama-Argentina BIT does not include the 18-months domestic courts proviso. Its dispute
resolution provisions are instead similar to those of the Chile-Argentina BIT relied upon by the
Claimant. The fact that Argentina and Panama nevertheless went out of their way to distance
themselves from the understanding adopted by the Siemens tribunal is therefore indicative of their

mutual disapproval of that holding.

48 See Austrian Airlines, above note 452, Separate Opinion of Charles N. Brower (finding, in

circumstances where the basic treaty stipulated that the scope of an international arbitral tribunal’s
jurisdiction was limited to claims concerning the amount or method of payment of compensation once the
occurrence of an expropriation had already been found by the domestic authorities, that an MFN clause
nevertheless entitled the tribunal to: 1) determine the preliminary question as to whether an expropriation
had occurred, and 2) decide the claimant’s fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security
claims); see also Renta4, above note 309, Separate Opinion of Charles N. Brower, at paras 5-24 (reaching
the same result on the basis of an MFN clause whose application was expressly limited to the fair and
equitable treatment standard).

49 The Tribunal is not aware of any instance in which Germany, as a respondent State in a BIT-based
arbitral claim, has had to take a position on the legal question raised by these proceedings.
46 German Model BIT, 2008, available at: http://www. italaw.com/investmenttreaties.htm.

461 National Grid, above note 113 at para 85 (emphasis added).

116

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1
273. Like the Contracting States’ own treaty practices, the recent treaty practices of other
States may prove illuminating. This is so because they may clarify whether the understanding of
the MFN clause’s scope of operation that prevailed among the general international community at
the time of the conclusion of the German-Argentine BIT has since evolved to acquire a larger
scope. In this regard, it should be noted that the only known clarifications issued by other States
since the advent of the Maffezini decision have gone in the direction of confirming that the
Contracting State Parties did not intend for the MFN clauses that are the subject of the
clarifications to reach international dispute resolution. This is the case, for example, with the
Central America-Dominican Republic-United States Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA),
wherein the parties inserted a footnote into the negotiating history indicating:
“The Most-Favored-Nation Treatment Article of this Agreement is expressly
limited in its scope to matters ‘with respect to the establishment, acquisition,

expansion, management, conduct operation and sale or other dispositions of

investments.’ The Parties share the understanding and intent that this clause does
not international dispute resolution hani: such as those

contained in Section C of this chapter, and therefore could not reasonably lead to
a conclusion similar to that of the Maffezini case.“

274. Switzerland and Colombia likewise appear to have clarified their investment treaty
practice in reaction to Maffezini on at least one occasion. In an agreement signed on 17 May
2006, the parties included an annex, which reads:
“For greater certainty, it is further understood that the most favourable nation
treatment ... does not encompass mechanisms for the settlement of investment

disputes provided for in other international agreements concluded by the Party
concerned.“

275. Finally, the European Commission (DG Trade), in view of its impending competence to
negotiate investment treaties on behalf of the European Community, published an Issue Paper on
30 May 2006 in which it advanced its suggested scope for any MFN clauses to be included in
future EU BITs. It recommended that “[t]he scope of the MFN clause is focused and limited to

4© Reprinted in A.R. Ziegler, “The Nascent International Law on Most-Favoured-Nation (MFN) Clauses

in Bilateral Investment Treaties (BITs)”, European Yearbook of International Economic Law 77 (Dec
2009), p. 93 (emphasis added). The same “vanishing footnote” was also inserted in the draft text of the
Free Trade Area of the Americas, which has yet to be adopted. (See fn. 13 to chap. XVII, Free Trade Area
of the Americas, draft of 21 November 2003, FTAA. TNC/w/133/Rev.3, available at: http://www.ftaa-
alca.org/ftaadraft03/ChapterXVII_e.asp.)

46° Thid at p. 95.

117

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

establishment, thus clearly signaling that it could not extend to BIT provisions on expropriation

and dispute settlement.”*™

276. It is striking that these statements by Argentina, Panama, Colombia, the DR-CAFTA
countries (including the US**), the EU Commission, and Switzerland (the latter three together
representing a majority of the world’s highly developed and capital exporting countries) all
converge in signaling that the specified MFN clauses do not, and were never intended to, reach
the international dispute resolution provisions of the respectively mentioned investment
agreements. By contrast there have been no known clarifications issued in which states have

embraced the Maffezini holding.“

277. The Dissenting Opinion attempts to turn all of this evidence on its head, arguing that the
clarifications issued by some states in respect of particular treaties prove that the MFN clauses in
all other treaties were in fact intended to extend to international investor-State dispute settlement

provisions. This argument once again gets the default rules of public international law

44 Thid at p. 94. It is of course obvious that this White Paper does not represent settled European policy
on the question, since the EU organs are still in the process of charting the future EU-wide investment
treaty policy. (See Dissenting Opinion of Charles N. Brower at para 32.) What may nevertheless be
observed is that no EU document has yet been issued endorsing the Maffezini approach or suggesting its
incorporation into EU policy.

465 The Tribunal notes that the United States recently concluded a review of its 2004 Model BIT. As part

of that process, the US State Department commissioned an expert report from the Advisory Committee on
International Economic Policy. A sub-group of the Committee members addressed the question of the
scope of application of the Model BIT’s MFN clause and recommended that the BIT be revised so as to
clarify that the MFN commitment does not extend to any international commitments — whether substantive
or procedural — undertaken by the United States in its treaties with third countries. (See Report of the
Advisory Committee on International Economic Policy Regarding the Model Bilateral Investment Treaty,
presented to the Department of State, 30 Sep 2009, Annex B: Particular Viewpoints of Subcommittee
Members, Collective Statement from Sara Anderson, Linda Andros et al, Part III, Recommendation 5,
available at: http://www.state.gov/e/eeb/rls/othr/2009/131118.htm#1.) The newly released US Model BIT
of 2012, however, includes no new provisions relevant to the proper interpretation of any MFN clauses as
may in future appear in any new US treaties to be concluded subsequent to the adoption of the 2012 US
Model BIT. It remains to be seen whether the US will adopt the same tactic of incorporating “vanishing
footnotes” into its BIT negotiations as it has used when negotiating the investment chapters of its recent
preferential trade agreements. In short, no conclusions as to the future state practice of the United States
can yet be drawn. All one can say at present is that the US has chosen to disavow the Maffezini holding on
at least one occasion.

 

466 The Dissenting Opinion points to the UK-Bosnia BIT as an example of a post-Maffezini treaty which

“explicitly applies that BIT’s MFN clause to that treaty’s dispute settlement provisions” (Dissenting
Opinion of Charles N. Brower at para 30). The UK-Bosnia BIT, however, does not appear to constitute a
change in or clarification of the UK’s policy, as it appears to have been based on a UK model BIT that was
already in effect prior to Maffezini. The UK’s distinctive and consistent policy thus does not imply an
evolution in the general understanding shared by the majority of states comprising the international
community.

118

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

backwards. International law does not construe a State’s silence as consent. Neither does it
require states to run around disavowing the jurisdiction of international tribunals in order to avoid
being ensnared by unanticipated jurisdictional tentacles every time a claimant invents a clever
new argument. Each state’s consent to submit to the jurisdiction of an international tribunal must
be established on the basis of objective indicators. The fact that some States — including
Argentina — have chosen to speak out against what they regard as errant rulings by certain

investor-State arbitral tribunals provides no such indication here.

278. In sum, none of the treaty materials which the Tribunal has been able to examine in any
way suggests that the Contracting State Parties to the German-Argentine BIT intended to include
international dispute resolution within the purview of the MFN clauses’ references to the Host
State’s treatment of investments within its territory. Nor do these materials authorize the
Tribunal to interpret the MFN clauses of the German-Argentine BIT in an evolutive way so as to
achieve the enlarged meaning desired by the Claimant. On the contrary, all of the relevant
supplementary materials confirm the conclusion reached by the Tribunal on the basis of the

Treaty’s text.

1) The Dissenting Opinion and the Concurring Statement

279. Judge Brower has seen fit to append a Dissenting Opinion in which he disagrees with the
Tribunal’s MFN analysis in vivid terms. The Tribunal has carefully considered each of the points
raised but has found that they fail to establish the consent of the Contracting State Parties to
submit to the jurisdiction of an international arbitral tribunal in the circumstances of the present
case. Notwithstanding this disagreement, the Tribunal has greatly benefited from the exchange of
views which has taken place among the Tribunal members in the course of the deliberations. The
Tribunal expresses its sincere gratitude to Judge Brower for the technical precision which his

criticisms have contributed to this Award.

280. Professor Bello Janeiro appends a Concurring Statement. He does so in order to explain
his reasons for subscribing to this Award, the result of which differs from that of the earlier

Siemens case, in which Professor Bello Janeiro also participated.

4. Summary of Tribunal’s MFN analysis

281. The Tribunal’s above analysis has led to the following conclusions:

119

Daimler v. Argentina

ICSID Case No. ARB/05/1

(1) The Claimant does not yet have standing to assert its claims under the German-
Argentine BIT, because it has not yet satisfied the Treaty’s Article 10 conditions
precedent to invoke international arbitration. As such, the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction

at present to entertain the Claimant’s MFN or any other claim.

(2) The most-favored-nation clauses contained in Articles 3(1), 3(2), and 4(4) of the BIT
do not alter this conclusion , as they do not authorize the Claimant to circumvent the

conditions precedent to arbitration laid down in Article 10 of the BIT.

(

YL

The Treaty’s MFN guarantees do not presently apply in any event, as the Claimant
has not shown that the dispute resolution process prescribed by Article 10 of the
German-Argentine BIT is objectively less favorable to the Claimant than that of any

comparator treaty.

(4) The Claimant remains at liberty, however, upon satisfaction of the Treaty’s
conditions precedent to arbitration, to assert any retrospective MFN claims it may
have in any future arbitration proceeding, including any claims relating to its

treatment by Argentina pursuant to the Treaty’s 18-month domestic courts proviso.

VII. COSTS

283. Each disputing party has requested the Tribunal to assess the costs of these proceedings
against the other party. The Tribunal sympathizes with the Claimant’s request in respect of
Argentina’s first three jurisdictional objections. The first objection was patently groundless while
the second and third objections largely repeated objections which Argentina has raised in myriad
other cases — each time without success. Nevertheless, the Respondent’s assertion of these
objections in the context of the present proceedings cannot be said to have been vexatious,
particularly considering that it chose to rest on its written pleadings without insisting upon any

further discussion of the issues at the oral hearings.

284. With respect to the fourth and fifth objections, the analysis of these questions was
difficult and complex. The fourth objection concerned a question that is novel in ICSID
jurisdictional practice, while the fifth concerned a point on which the existing jurisprudence is
dramatically split. Both parties presented sound legal arguments, and each side ultimately

prevailed on some points but failed on others.

120

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

285. In light of these considerations, the Tribunal finds it appropriate for the costs of the
arbitration to be split evenly between the parties, with each side bearing its own legal costs.

VIII. DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL

286. For the reasons stated above:

(1) The Tribunal rejects the Respondent’s first, second, third, and fourth objections to the

jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

(2) The Tribunal upholds the Respondent’s fifth objection to jurisdiction, and all claims

are accordingly dismissed in their entirety.

(3) All costs of the present arbitration proceedings to-date shall be split evenly between

the disputing parties, with each party bearing its own legal costs.

287. It is so ordered.

121

Done in English and Spanish, both versions being equally authoritative.

E> »

Pierre Marie Dupuy 0
CUnehs, i. Brewer President of the Tribunal August, "9 DA ¢

Charles N. Brower Domingo Bello Janeiro
Arbitrator Arbitrator
DVI 15 26 J

typo, aoe

122

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

APPENDIX 1: SELECT ARGENTINE BITS BY DATE OF SIGNING

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

BITs Entered into by Argentina Signed 18-Month Requirement
Italy 22 May 1990 YES
Belgium/Luxembourg 28 June 1990 YES
United Kingdom 11 Dec 1990 YES
Germany 09 April 1991 YES
Switzerland 12 April 1991 YES
France 03 July 1991 NO
Poland 31 July 1991 NO
Chile 02 Aug 1991 NO
Spain 03 Oct 1991 YES
Canada 05 Nov 1991 YES
United States 14 Nov 1991 NO
Sweden 22 Nov 1991 NO
Turkey 08 May 1992 NO
Egypt 11 May 1992 NO
Tunisia 17 June 1992 NO
Austria 07 Aug 1992 YES
Netherlands 20 Oct 1992 YES
China 05 Nov 1992 NO
Denmark 06 Nov 1992 NO
Hungary 05 Feb 1993 NO
Armenia 14 Apr 1993 NO
Romania 29 July 1993 NO
Bulgaria 21 Sep 1993 NO
Finland 05 Nov 1993 NO
Vi 1 16 Nov 1993 NO
Jamaica 08 Feb 1994 NO
Ecuador 18 Feb 1994 NO
Bolivia 17 Mar 1994 NO
South Korea 17 May 1994 YES

 

 

 

123

 

Daimler v. Argentina
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/I

APPENDIX 2: SELECT ARGENTINE BITS BY DATE OF ENTRY INTO FORCE

 

BITs Entered into by Argentina

Entered into Force

18-Month Requirement

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Poland 01 Sep 1992 NO
Spain 28 Sep 1992 YES
Sweden 28 Sep 1992 YES
Switzerland 06 Nov 1992 NO
United Kingdom 19 Feb 1993 YES
France 03 Mar 1993 NO
Canada 29 Apr 1993 YES
Italy 14 Oct 1993 YES
Germany 08 Nov 1993 YES
Egypt 03 Dee 1993 NO
Belgium/Luxembour, 20 May 1994 YES
China 01 Aug 1994 NO
Netherlands 01 Oct 1994 YES
United States 20 Oct 1994 NO
Armenia 20 Dec 1994 NO
Austria 01 Jan 1995 YES
Chile 01 Jan 1995 NO

 

124

 

