IN AN ARBITRATION UNDER CHAPTER TEN OF THE DR-CAFTA AND THE
UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES (2010)

between

DAVID AVEN ET AL.

Claimants

and

THE REPUBLIC OF COSTA RICA

Respondent

Case No. UNCT/15/3

 

FINAL AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Eduardo Siqueiros T., Presiding Arbitrator
C. Mark Baker, Arbitrator
Pedro Nikken, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Francisco Grob, ICSID

Place of Arbitration: London, United Kingdom
Date of dispatch to the Parties: September 18, 2018

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Representing David Aven et. al:

Mr. James Loftis

Ms. Justine Moxham
Mr. Alexander Slade
Ms. Louise Woods
Ms. Georgina Barlow
Vinson & Elkins RLLP
20 Fenchurch Street
24th Floor

London, EC3M 3BY
United Kingdom

Dr. Todd Weiler

2014 Valleyrun Blvd- Unit 19
Ontario N6G SN8

Canada

Mr. Peter Danysh

Mr. Robert Landicho

Vinson & Elkins LLP

1001 Fannin Street - Suite 2500
Houston, TX

United States of America

Representing the Republic of Costa Rica:

Ms. Adriana Gonzalez

Ms. Arianna Arce

Ms. Marisol Montero

Ms. Francinie Obando

Ministerio de Comercio Exterior

de Costa Rica

Autopista Prospera Fernandez, costado oeste
del Hospital Cima,

Apartado Postal 297 -1007 Centro Colon,
Escazt, Costa Rica

Mr. Christian Leathley

Mr. Laurence Shore

Ms. Amal Bouchenaki

Ms. Daniela Paez

Ms. Lucila Marchini

Ms. Florencia Villaggi

Herbert Smith Freehills LLP

450 Lexington Avenue, 14th floor
New York, NY 10017

United States of America

Il.

VI.

VIL

VIL.

Table of Contents

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Page

Introduction 1
A. The Parties 1
B. Overview 1
Jurisdiction: Consent of the Parties to Arbitration... cesses eesesseesesneeseeneeneesee 3
A. Jurisdiction Ratione VolUntatis ccc sess sesseeseeseeseeseesessessesssseeeeeeneenees 3
B. Jurisdiction Ratione Personae ......cecceccecceccececsees esses nesseeseeeeseeseesessecsssssseeeaeeneenes 3
C. Jurisdiction Ratione Materide ......cecccccecsececees sess sesseeeeseeseeseesesssssssssecseeneeneenees 3
Dz Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis ...c.cccccscssecssessssssessssesssesssessesesessseesseeeeeees 3
Law Applicable to the Arbitration 5
Procedural History 9
Submission of the United States of America Pursuant to DR-CAFTA Article 10.20.2.... 18
A. The Parties’ Positions regarding the United States Submission ..............00ese 22
B. The Tribunal’s View 24
Factual Background 24
A. Acquisition of Properties 36
B Claimants’ Permit Applications...
Cc. Concerns of Neighbors and Municipality Investigation
D. Injunctions Suspending Works, the Environmental Prosecutor’s Investigation and

Criminal Charges 49
E. The Complaints from Mr. Bucelato and Other Neighbors in Esterillos Oeste ......55
F. Criminal Trial of Messrs. Aven and Damjanac ..........cceeeeeeeeeseeeeseeeseeeeeeeeneees 57
The Parties’ Claims and Requests for Relief .........ccccsescssssesseseseeeseeseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeteee 59
A. Claimants 9
B. Respondent. 60
Jurisdiction 61
A. Nationality of Mr. Aven 63

1. The Parties’ Positions ..0.....0..c.ccsesesseeseessessessesseeseeseeseeseesssessnssneeseeseeneese 63

2. The Tribunal’s Analysis.........c.ccsccssssssesesseesseeeeseseeeseeeeeeesseeeeeeeseeeee 65
B. Whether the Investments by Mr. Shioleno and Mr. Raguso are Covered

Inv 78

 

1. The Parties’ Positions

2. The Tribunal’s Analys

    
 
 
 
  
 

Cc. Properties that are not owned by The Claimants
1. The Parties’ Positions

2. The Tribunal’s Analy:

(a) Legal Framework and Authorities

(b) Relevant Date for Determining Ownership

(c) Properties Over Which the Tribunal May Exercise Jurisdiction .. 90

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

D. The Concession Site 94
1. The Parties’ Positions . 94
2. The Tribunal’s Analys:
Admissibility of the Claims 100
A. Positions of the Partie: 100
1. Unlawful and Illegal Conduct in the Operation of the
Investment 100
2. Claims for Breach to provide Full Protection and Security... 103
3. Exhaustion of Domestic ProceedingS 00.0.0... cceeesseseeeeseeeseeseeeeeeeeeeneees 104
B. The Tribunal’s Analysi 105
1. Unlawful and Illegal Conduct in the Operation of the
Investment 105
2. Claims for Breach to provide Full Protection and Security... 105
3. Exhaustion of Domestic ProceedingS 00.0.0... cceeesseseeeeseeeseeseeeeeeeeeeneees 106
Alleged Liability under DR-CAFTA wu... ccseceseeceseeseseeteseceseeesestseetsestseeeseetseeaeseenets 110
A. The Submissions of the Parties ............cccccsseessessessesessessesseeseeseesessesssssseneeseeaeeness 110
1. The Claimants’ Submission: 110
(a) Article 10.5 DR-CAFTA and Annex 10-B as the Legal Basis for
the Claims. .........cecceccesseeseesssseseseesesseeseeseesessnssnssnssnseseesssneeaeeneess 110
(b) Article 10.7(1) and Annex 10-C DR-CAFTA Claims............0... 117
2. Respondent’s Submission 118
B. The Tribunal’s Approach 127
C. Costa Rica’s Environmental Law and Authorities.........0.0.cccccseessessesseeseeeeneeee 131
Dz Environmental Principles under Costa Rica Law .......ccsccseeseeeseeeseeeeseeneeeenes 139
E. The Tribunal’s Analysi 141

 

iii

XI.

XII.

1. Whether Respondent has breached Article 10.5 (FET) or
Article 10.7 (Unlawful Expropriation) of the DR-CAFTA ...... cee

(a) Process to Develop a Real Estate Project .........cceceeeeeeeeeeeeees
(b) Key Issues to be resolved by the Tribunal 0.0.0... cece
(c) Wetlands under the laws of Costa Rica .....c.ceeeeeeeeeeeeneseeneeeeees

(d) Forests under the laws of Costa Rica

 

(e) Does the Developer have the Burden of Disclosing the Existence

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

of Wetlands and/or Forests?. 163
() Fr ion 176
(g) Were Wetlands and Forests Damaged at the Las Olas Project Site
182
2. Whether the Prosecutor’s Office of Respondent failed the
Claimants 183
(a) The Claimants’ Position........ceccecseeeeseeeeeeeseseeeseesseeaseeeeeeeees 183
(b) The Respondent’s Position .........ccceecesseseeseeseeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeees 189
(c) The Tribunal’s Analysis.........c.ccecssecseeeesesteneeeeseeseeeeeeeneeeenes 195
Damage: 200
A. The Claimants’ Position on Damages........c.ccscssseeseeeseeeneeeeseeeeeeseeeeeseeeeeeeeee 200
1. Using this modified combined approach, the Claimants’
backgrounds are irrelevant to valuation. ..........csccseeseseeseseeseseeteeeeteeeenees 201
2. Claimants contend that Mr. Hart’s methodology is
inappropriate and does not assess the fair market value of
the Project. 204
3. Interest. 206
4. Moral Damages 206
5. Prejudgment Interest ..........ccecesecseseeseseceseeeseeeseeeseesseesseeeeeeeeeeeseneees 207
6. Consequential D: 208
B. The Respondent’s Position on Quantum... ceceeceeseseeseeeeeeeeeeeseeeeteeeeeeeeeeeeee 208
1. The quantification of Claimants’ damages should be based
on a cost- approach method
2. Dr Abdala’s approach is entirely speculative .......... ccs 211
3. Mr. Aven is not entitled to moral damages..........cceeeseseeseseeteeeeeeeeees 214
Cc. The Tribunal’s Analysi 215
Respondent’s Counterclaim 215

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. Respondent’s Position: Claimants are Liable for Environmental Damage and
therefore must Restore the Las Olas Ecosystem .......c.ccscsssssseeeseseeeeeeseeeeeeeee 215
1. The Tribunal has jurisdiction over counterclaims under
DR-CAFTA 215
2. The text of the DR-CAFTA envisages the possibility for
respondent states to bring counterclaims against investors «0.00.0... 216
3. Reasons of procedural economy and efficiency justify that
the claim and its counterclaim shall be resolved in the same
proceeding. 217
4. Respondent has proven the existence of damages to the
Ecosystems on the Project Site... ccna 219
5. Claimants unlawfully impacted a wetland, which caused
environmental damage to the Project Site. 0... 219
6. Claimants ought to repair the damage caused to the
ecosystem 221
B. The Claimants’ Position 223
Cc. The Tribunal’s Analysi 224
XIII. Costs 233
A. The Claimants’ Cost Submissions ............csscsssessessesessessesseeseesessssessseseeneeneenens 233
B. The Respondent’s Cost Submissions ...........:.ccccsseseseeseeseeeeseeeseeeseenseeeeeeneeeeeenee 234
C. The Tribunal’s Decision on Costs...........cessscsesssessesessessessessessessssesnssseneeseeneensess 234
XIV. Award 240

 

List OF DEFINED TERMS

 

2008 Environmental Viability Permit

SETENA Environmental Viability for Condominium
Section (Resolution No. 1597-2008-SETENA)

 

2008 SINAC Report

Report issued after an inspection to the Condo Section
of the Las Olas project on September 30, 2008,
identifying the existence of possible wetlands

 

2011 Injunction

Injunction issued on November 30, 2011 by the
Criminal Court at Parrita against continuance of works,
and ordered the Municipality to stop any construction
permit on designated lots

 

ACOPAC

Area de Conservacién Pacifico Central — a regional
branch of SINAC

 

Biodiversity Convention

Convention on Biological Diversity, signed by 150
government leaders at the 1992 Rio Earth Summit,
dedicated to the promotion of sustainable development

 

BIT

Bilateral Investment Treaty

 

Claimants or Investors

Mr. David Richard Aven, Mr. Samuel Donald Aven,
Ms. Carolyn Jean Park, Mr. Eric Allan Park, Mr.
Jeffrey Scott Shioleno, Mr. David Alan Janney, and
Mr. Roger Raguso

 

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief dated March 13, 2017

 

Ministry of Foreign Trade of the Republic of Costa

 

COMEX Rica
The right to use the beach area in front of the property
Concession owned by La Canicula, S.A., approved by the Costa

Rica Ministry of Tourism

 

Concession Site

The land that formed part of the maritime zone and that
was the subject of the Concession, where the beach
club would be located, with direct access to the ocean
and luxury hotel rooms and common area facilities to
which all residents of Las Olas would have access

 

 

Condo Section

 

The main part of the Las Olas Project that would
comprise 288 individual lots on which condominiums
would be built

 

vi

 

 

Costa Rica or the Respondent

The Republic of Costa Rica

 

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits dated
April 8, 2016

 

D1 Application

An application to secure an Environmental Viability to
be filled-out by a person interested in developing a real
estate project with the characteristics of the
development.

 

DCF

Discounted Cash Flow

 

December Hearing

Hearing on Jurisdiction and the Merits held from
December 5-12, 2016

 

DEPPAT

DEPPAT, S.A. a Costa Rican private environmental
consultancy company

 

DR-CAFTA or the Treaty

Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade
Agreement which entered into force in 2006 for the
United States and in 2009 for the Republic of Costa
Rica

 

Easements Section

Land on the western side of the Las Olas Project, to

which access would be gained via nine easements that
would run into the site from the main road to the west
of the property, containing a total of 72 residential lots

 

Enterprises

Las Olas Lapas Uno, S.R.L.; Mis Mejores Afios
Vividos, S.A. (formerly Caminos de Esterillos, S.A.,
Amaneceres de Esterillos, S.A., Noches de Esterillos,
S.A., Lomas de Esterillos, S.A., Atardeceres Calidos de
Esterillos Oeste, S.A., Jardines de Esterillos, S.A.,
Paisajes de Esterillos, S.A. and Altos de Esterillos,
S.A.); La Estacion de Esterillos, S.A. (formerly Iguanas
de Esterillos, S.A.); Bosques Lindos de Esterillos
Oeste, S.A.; Montes Development Group, S.A.; Cerros
de Esterillos del Oeste, S.A.; Inversiones Cotsco C &
T, S.A.; and Trio International Inc.

 

Environmental Organic Law (Law
7554)

Ley Organica del Ambiente — Ley No. 7554

 

 

Environmental Regent

 

The professional tasked with ensuring that the works
undertaken by a developer do not impact the
environment. This position is contemplated and
mandated under the Environmental Organic Law

 

 

 

Environmental Viability Permit or
“EV” or “EV Permit”

A permit issued by SETENA that examines and
approves the feasibility of undertaking a project after
having examined the environmental impact assessment
based on information incorporated into an application,
and several support documents that include an
engineering survey, an archeological survey, a
geological survey and a biological survey

 

Hearing to examine the Expert Witnesses on Damages

 

 

February Hearing held on February 7, 2017
FET Fair and Equitable Treatment
FMV Fair Market Value

 

Forestry Law (Law 7575)

Ley Forestal — Ley No. 7575

 

Forged Document

A document purportedly issued by SINAC dated
March 27, 2008 under number "SINAC 67389RNVS-
2008" with the forged signatures of Gabriel Quesada
Avendaiio, a biologist from SINAC and Ronald
Vargas, the Director of SINAC that certified that the
Las Olas Project was “not a threat to biodiversity in the
area”.

 

Geoambiente

Geoambiente, S.A., a private consulting firm
established in Costa Rica, which prepared an
environmental management plan (plan de gestion
ambiental) for the Condo Section.

 

Geoambiente Report

The environmental management plan (plan de gestion
ambiental) commissioned from Geoambiente, S.A., a
private consulting firm established in Costa Rica, by
Mussio Madrigal to be submitted as part of the D1
Application for the Condo Section.

 

Geotest

Geotest, Gedlogos Consultores, the firm entrusted by
Tecnocontrol, S.A. with the preparation of a geological
and hydrogeological study for the Condo Section

 

ICSID or the Centre

International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes

 

 

INGEOFOR

 

INGEOFOR Ingenieria y Ambiente, S.A., a Costa
Rican environmental consulting company

 

viii

 

 

INTA

The National Institute for Agricultural Innovation and
Technology Transfer of Costa Rica (Instituto Nacional
de Innovacion y Transferencia de Tecnologia
Agropecuaria)

 

INTERPOL Red Notice

An INTERPOL Red Notice is a request to locate and
provisionally arrest an individual pending extradition.
It is issued by the General Secretariat of the
International Criminal Police Organization at the
request of a member country or an international
tribunal based on a valid national arrest warrant. This is
the request that was made by the government of Costa
Rica to locate and provisionally arrest Mr. Aven.

 

Inversiones Cotsco

Inversiones Cotsco C&T, S.A., one of the enterprises
used by Claimants in which responsibility for
development of the villa component had been placed

 

January 2011 SINAC Report

The Report (ACOPAC-CP-003-11) dated January 3,
2011 issued by SINAC

 

KECE

Kevin Erwin Consulting Ecologist, Inc., an
environmental consulting firm located in Florida,
United States of America

 

La Canicula

La Canicula S.A., one of the enterprises used by
Claimants in which responsibility for development of
the Concession area, including hotel, had been placed

 

Claimants’ Memorial

Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits dated November
27, 2015

 

Ministry of the Environment, Energy, Mines and

 

 

 

 

 

MINAE (MINAET after 2008) Telecommunications (Ministerio del Ambiente,
Energia, Minas y Telecomunicaciones)
Ministry of Natural Resources, Energy and Mines
MIRENEM (Ministerio de Industria, Energia y Minas en
Ministerio de Recursos Naturales, Energia y Minas)
Mr. Arce Mr. Minor Arce Solano, a private forestry consultant
Mr. Aven Mr. David Richard Aven
Mr. Bricefio Mr. Jorge Antonio Bricefio Vega, Internal Auditor,

 

Municipality of Parrita

 

 

 

Mr. Bucelato

Mr. Steve Allen Bucelato, a neighbor of Las Olas, who
filed several complaints regarding the Project

 

Mr. Damjanac

Mr. Jovan Damjanac, Sales and Marketing Director for
Las Olas

 

Mr. Garro

Mr. Freddy Garro Arias, Mayor of the Municipality of
Parrita during the time many of the actions relating to
the Las Olas Project occurred.

 

Mr. Martinez

Mr. Luis Gerardo Martinez Zufiga, Criminal
Prosecutor, at the Deputy Environmental Agrarian
Prosecutor’s Office of Costa Rica

 

Mr. Morera

Mr. Néstor Morera Vazquez, a criminal attorney
retained by Claimants

 

Mr. Mussio

Mr. Mauricio Martin Mussio Vargas, an architect at the
firm Mussio Madrigal in Costa Rica

 

Mr. Pérez-Porras

Mr. Gavridge Pérez Porras, an attorney retained by
Claimants

 

Mr. Luis Picado Cubillo, Control and Protection

 

 

 

Mr. Picado Coordinator of the Sub-regional Office for SINAC at
Aguirre and Parrita
Mr. Ventura Mr. Manuel Enrique Ventura Rodriguez, an attorney
retained by Claimants
Ms. Diaz Ms. Hazel Diaz, Special Advocate at Defensoria de Los
a Habitantes (Office of the Ombudsman)
Ms. Murillo Ms. Paula Murillo, the personal assistant to Mr.

Richard Aven in Costa Rica

 

Ms. Priscilla Vargas

Ms. Priscilla Vargas, author of the Siel Report, and
examined as an expert witness on “Environmental
Impact Assesment Issues for the Las Olas Project”.

 

Ms. Vargas

Ms. Monica Vargas Quesada, the Environmental
Officer at the Municipality of Parrita

 

MTZ Law

Maritime Terrestrial Zone Law

 

 

Municipality Shutdown Notice

 

Order issued by the Municipality of Parrita dated May
11, 2011, ordering the cessation of future works in the

 

 

 

Las Olas Project site.

 

Mussio Madrigal

An architectural and engineering firm in Costa Rica
engaged by Claimants in April 2007 to prepare a
master site plan for the entire Las Olas Project and
apply for the Environmental Viability and construction
permits for the Condo Section.

 

NAFTA

North America Free Trade Agreement

 

Notice of Arbitration

Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim dated
June 10, 2013

 

National Wetlands Program (Programa Nacional de

 

PNH Humedales)
Geological Hydrogeological study prepared by Mr.
Roberto Protti, Geotest, S.A., Gedlogos Consultores, at
the request of one of the firms engaged by Claimants to
Protti Report prepare the D1 Application for the Condo Section. The

report noted and mapped the existence of a central zone
in the property that presented “swamp-type flooded
areas” (areas anegadas de tipo pantanoso) with poor
draining.

 

Ramsar Convention or the Convention
on Wetlands

Intergovernmental treaty that provides the framework
for national action and international cooperation for the
conservation and wise use of wetlands and their
resources

 

Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial

Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits dated October
28, 2016

 

Claimants’ Reply Memorial

Claimants’ Reply on the Merits dated August 5, 2016

 

Respondent or Costa Rica

The Republic of Costa Rica

 

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief dated March 13, 2017

 

SETENA

National Technical Environmental Secretariat
(Secretaria Técnica Nacional Ambiental), an agency of
MINAET

 

 

SETENA April 2011 Injunction

 

Injunction on further work on Las Olas Project site
(Resolution 839-2011-SETENA) issued by SETENA
dated April 13, 2011.

 

xi

 

 

Report issued by issued by Ms. Priscilla Vargas of Siel,
environmental consultants, of October 28, 2016, which

 

Siel Report is an Appendix to the Second KECE (Kevin Erwin
Consulting Ecologist, Inc.) Report
The National System of Conservation Areas (Sistema
SINAC Nacional de Areas de Conservacién), an agency of

MINAET

 

SINAC Injunction

Resolution number ACOPAC-CP-032-11 dated
February 14, 2011 containing an injunction (medida
cautelar administrativa) suspending all works in the
Condo Section

 

SINAC January 2011 Report

Report dated January 3, 2011 (ACOPAC-CP-003-11)
on the conclusions and recommendations resulting
from a visit to the site on December 2010. The report
concluded that the Las Olas Project site included
bodies of water, that “there may be” wetlands in the
Condo Section, the felling of trees, the construction of
a drainage channel, and also mentioned the Forged
Document.

 

SINAC May 2011 Report

Report dated May 18, 2011 (SINAC-GASP 143-11)
addressed to the Prosecutor based on a site visit on
May 13, 2011, concluding that a wetland area of
approximately 1.35 hectares existed on the Las Olas
Project; that the site’s topography had been directly
affected by a drainage channel and sewage system; and
that the palustrine wetland had been completely refilled
by Claimants.

 

SINAC October 2011 Report

Report dated October 3, 2011 (ACOPAC-CP-129-
2011-DEN) addressed to the Environmental Prosecutor
whereby SINAC confirmed environmental damages
and the cutting of trees

 

TAA

The Environmental Administrative Court (Tribunal
Ambiental Administrativo), an agency of MINAET

 

TAA Injunction

The injunction issued through Resolution 421-11-TAA
on April 13, 2011 whereby all works in the Condo
Section that could cause any environmental damage to
the alleged wetland, the felling of trees or the
construction of roads were suspended.

 

 

Tribunal

 

Arbitral Tribunal constituted on August 4, 2015,

 

 

 

composed by Mr. Eduardo Siqueiros, Mr. C. Mark
Baker and Professor Pedro Nikken

 

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules or the
Arbitration Rules

UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, as revised in 2010

 

United States non-disputing Party
Submission

The written submission filed on December 2, 2016 by
the United States of America pursuant to Article
10.20.2 of the DR-CAFTA.

 

VCLT

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

 

WACC

Weighted Average Cost of Capital

 

Wildlife Protected Area or “WPA”

The areas (Area Silvestre Protegida) classified by
Article 32 of the Environmental Organic Law, Law
7554. Their relevance is that continental and marine
wetlands must be classified to be part of a WPA.

 

 

ZMT Law

 

Maritime Terrestrial Zone Law (Ley sobre la Zona
Maritimo Terrestre or Law 6043)

 

xiii

 

I. INTRODUCTION
A. The Parties

1. The Claimants in this arbitration are Mr. David Richard Aven, Mr. Samuel Donald Aven,
Ms. Carolyn Jean Park, Mr. Eric Allan Park, Mr. Jeffrey Scott Shioleno, Mr. David Alan
Janney, and Mr. Roger Raguso. Evidence was provided of the U.S. nationality of each of

the Claimants (the “Claimants”)!.

2. The Claimants have made claims on their own behalf and on behalf of the following
enterprises incorporated in the Republic of Costa Rica: Las Olas Lapas Uno, S.R.L.; Mis
Mejores Afios Vividos, S.A. (formerly Caminos de Esterillos, S.A., Amaneceres de
Esterillos, S.A., Noches de Esterillos, S.A., Lomas de Esterillos, S.A., Atardeceres
Calidos de Esterillos Oeste, S.A., Jardines de Esterillos, S.A., Paisajes de Esterillos, S.A.
and Altos de Esterillos, S.A.); La Estacion de Esterillos, S.A. (formerly Iguanas de
Esterillos, S.A.); Bosques Lindos de Esterillos Oeste, S.A.; Montes Development Group,
S.A.; Cerros de Esterillos del Oeste, S.A.; Inversiones Cotsco C & T, S.A.; and Trio

International Inc (the “Enterprises”).
3. The Respondent is the Republic of Costa Rica (“Costa Rica” or the “Respondent”).

4. The Claimants and the Respondent are collectively referred to as the “Parties.” The

Parties’ representatives and their addresses are listed above on page (i).
B. Overview

5. The Claimants have submitted this dispute to arbitration pursuant to Chapter Ten of the
Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade Agreement (“DR-CAFTA”), which
became effective in 2006 for the United States and in 2009 for the Republic of Costa
Rica, and the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, as revised in 2010 (the “UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules” or the “Arbitration Rules”). As agreed by the Parties, the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”)

serves as the administering authority for this proceeding.

' Mr. Giacomo Anthony Buscemi was one of the originally named claimants in the Notice of Arbitration. By
agreement dated August 3, 2014, he transferred his interest in the Las Olas Project to Mr. David Aven. As of that
date, he is no longer a claimant in this arbitration (Exhibit C-168).

1

This dispute arises from an investment made by the Claimants through several
commercial entities established in accordance with the laws of Costa Rica which own (or
owned at the time of the submission of claims) several parcels of land comprising
approximately 37 hectares on the Central Pacific Coast, as well as a concession site, that
integrate a tourism project that they intended to develop to be known as “Las Olas
Project”. Claimants have alleged that they received in due course all requisite municipal
and national government permits and approvals, including environmental viability and
construction permits, and thus commenced the development of the project, as well as
sales and marketing activities. Claimants then allege, completely and unexpectedly, and
on the basis of unsupported complaints by neighbors to the site, that the Costa Rican
authorities began new inspections and identified alleged wetlands and forest grounds
within the project site; issued administrative and judicial actions that shut down the
project, thereby breaching Costa Rica’s obligations under the DR-CAFTA and resulting

in the complete destruction of the Claimants’ investment.

One of the Claimants, Mr. David R. Aven, has also claimed that he was unjustly
subjected to prosecution by unfounded claims that he violated the environmental laws of
Costa Rica, and was further wrongfully made the subject of an INTERPOL Red Notice

that has seriously affected his reputation and standing in the community.

The Respondent has argued that the protection of the environment is a key governmental
policy, which has been acknowledged under DR-CAFTA, and that the rights of
investment protection granted to investors under the Treaty may be subordinated to the
protection of the environment. Additionally, the Respondent argues that all of its actions
taken in respect to the Las Olas Project are entirely supported under applicable local
laws. Finally, Respondent has challenged the right of the Investors to bring the claim
based on jurisdictional grounds, alleging issues of nationality of the key Investor, lack of

ownership and illegal ownership of properties by the Claimants.

JURISDICTION: CONSENT OF THE PARTIES TO ARBITRATION
A. Jurisdiction Ratione Voluntatis

By submitting their claims to arbitration, and waiving their rights to seek compensation
for the alleged DR-CAFTA breaches in other fora, the Claimants have consented to
arbitration. Respondent’s consent, on the other hand, is provided in DR-CAFTA Article

10.17. Accordingly, jurisdiction ratione voluntatis exists”.
B. Jurisdiction Ratione Personae

Claimants have alleged that jurisdiction ratione personae exists because all Claimants are
nationals of the United States of America, thereby qualifying as “investors of a Party,” as
defined in DR-CAFTA Article 10.28°. Respondent, on the other hand, has challenged the
standing of Mr. Aven to bring the claim because it claims that he should be deemed to be

a national of Italy.
Cc. Jurisdiction Ratione Materiae

Claimants argue that each Claimant indirectly owns assets, in the form of property rights
in land, towards which he or she has committed capital with an expectation of gain,
consistent with the subparagraph (g) definition of “investment” under DR-CAFTA
Article 10.28(h). The governmental measures taken and which are described relate
directly to these investments, consistent with the terms of Article 10.1 of the DR-
CAFTA. Accordingly, the Tribunal possesses jurisdiction ratione materiae to adjudicate

the Claimants’ claims’.

D. Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis

As between U.S. investors and Costa Rica, the DR-CAFTA came into force on January 1,
2009. DR-CAFTA Chapter 10 applies to measures adopted or maintained in relation to

all “covered investments.” The only temporal limitation on covered investments is that

they must have existed on or after the date upon which the Agreement came into force.

? Consistent with the terms of Articles 10.16 and 10.18, the Claimants provided written consent to the arbitration on
or about January 24, 2014, with submission of the Notice of Arbitration, along with the submission of waivers
executed by the Claimants and by the enterprises they owned and/or controlled.

3 Claimants’ Memorial, 261, page 82.

4 Id., § 262, page 82.

Claimants have stated that all investments claimed in the arbitration satisfy this
requirement. In addition, all of the measures at issue were adopted or maintained after

January 1, 19995.

Further, arbitration was commenced within three years of the date upon which the
Claimants acquired, or should have acquired, knowledge of the breaches alleged herein,
and the losses flowing therefrom, consistent with the terms of DR-CAFTA Article
10.16(3)°.

Finally, Claimants have identified that arbitration was not commenced until more than six
months had passed, since the events giving rise to their claims, consistent with the terms
of DR-CAFTA Article 10.16(3). In addition, this arbitration was commenced more than
ninety days after the Claimants had submitted their Notice of Intent, on September 17,

2013, consistent with the terms of DR-CAFTA Article 10.16(2).

Respondent initially challenged the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on the basis of (i) the
effective and dominant citizenship of Mr. David R. Aven and (ii) the misconduct of
Claimants with respect to their investment, barring Claimants from any protection under
DR-CAFTA’. Subsequently, the position of Respondent has evolved to also include a
lack of jurisdiction over (iii) properties that Claimants do not own in the Las Olas Project,
(iv) over the Concession site, and re-characterized the misconduct as an issue of
inadmissibility of the claims based on: (a) the unlawful and illegal conduct in the
operation of their investment, and (b) the fact that Claimants have not put forward a claim
for full protection and security, while further arguing that Claimants have brought claims

that are not supported under Article 10.5 of DR-CAFTA®.

Respondent has not challenged the other tests of jurisdiction Ratione Voluntatis, Ratione
Personae (in respect of the Claimants other than Mr. Aven), Ratione Materiae or Ratione

Temporis.

The challenges to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal shall be examined by the Tribunal in

Section VIII below.

5Id., 4 263, page 82.

© Id., 4 264, page 82.

7 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, | 256-432, pages 65-107.
® Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, 595-760, pages 121-156.

4

TIL.

20.

LAW APPLICABLE TO THE ARBITRATION

The Claimants submitted their claim pursuant to Article 10.16.1(a)(i)(A) DR-CAFTA,
which provides that the claimant, as a disputing party, on its own behalf, may submit to
arbitration a claim that the respondent has breached an obligation under Section A of
Chapter Ten, provided that the Claimant “has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or
arising out of, that breach”. Although Article 10.16.3 allows the claimant to bring the
claim under the ICSID Convention, the ICSID Additional Facility Rules (depending on
whether or not the respondent or the country of which the claimant is a national are
Parties to the ICSID Convention) or under the UNCITRAL Rules of Arbitration of 1976,
Claimants elected to submit their claim under the latter. Thus, when Procedural Order
No. 1 was issued, the Parties and the Arbitral Tribunal agreed to have the proceedings
conducted in accordance with the UNCITRAL Rules of Arbitration, as revised in 2010,
except as those may be modified by Section B of Chapter 10 of the DR-CAFTA.

In this respect, the Tribunal is bound by the terms of Article 35(1) of the UNCITRAL
Rules of Arbitration, which provides that the Tribunal “...shall apply the law designated
by the Parties as applicable to the substance of the dispute.” and Article 10.22(1) DR-
CAFTA which provides: “... the tribunal shall decide the issues in dispute in accordance

with this Agreement and applicable rules of international law.”

The claim has been submitted by Claimants under Article 10.5 (Minimum Standard of

Treatment) and Article 10.7 (Expropriation), both of which provide:

Article 10.5: Minimum Standard of Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment in accordance
with customary international law, including fair and equitable treatment and full
protection and security.

2. For greater certainty, paragraph | prescribes the customary international
law minimum standard of treatment of aliens as the minimum standard of
treatment to be afforded to covered investments. The concepts of “fair and
equitable treatment” and “full protection and security” do not require treatment in
addition to or beyond that which is required by that standard, and do not create
additional substantive rights. The obligation in paragraph | to provide:

(a) “fair and equitable treatment” includes the obligation not to deny justice
in criminal, civil, or administrative adjudicatory proceedings in accordance with
the principle of due process embodied in the principal legal systems of the world;
and

(b) “full protection and security” requires each Party to provide the level of
police protection required under customary international law.

3. A determination that there has been a breach of another provision of this
Agreement, or of a separate international agreement, does not establish that there
has been a breach of this Article.

Article 10.7: Expropriation and Compensation

1. No Party may expropriate or nationalize a covered investment either
directly or indirectly through measures equivalent to expropriation or
nationalization (“expropriation”), except

(a) for a public purpose;
(b) in a non-discriminatory manner;

(c) on payment of prompt, adequate, and effective compensation in
accordance with paragraphs 2 through 4; and

(d) in accordance with due process of law and Article 10.5.
2. Compensation shall:
(a) be paid without delay;

(b) be equivalent to the fair market value of the expropriated investment
immediately before the expropriation took place (“the date of expropriation”);

(c) not reflect any change in value occurring because the intended
expropriation had become known earlier; and

(d) be fully realizable and freely transferable.

3. If the fair market value is denominated in a freely usable currency, the
compensation paid shall be no less than the fair market value on the date of

expropriation, plus interest at a commercially reasonable rate for that currency,
accrued from the date of expropriation until the date of payment.

4, If the fair market value is denominated in a currency that is not freely
usable, the compensation paid — converted into the currency of payment at the
market rate of exchange prevailing on the date of payment — shall be no less than:

(a) the fair market value on the date of expropriation, converted into a freely
usable currency at the market rate of exchange prevailing on that date, plus

(b) interest, at a commercially reasonable rate for that freely usable currency,
accrued from the date of expropriation until the date of payment.

5. This Article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory licenses
granted in relation to intellectual property rights in accordance with the TRIPS
Agreement, or to the revocation, limitation, or creation of intellectual property
rights, to the extent that such issuance, revocation, limitation, or creation is
consistent with Chapter Fifteen (Intellectual Property Rights).

It is relevant to note that the Parties to the Treaty agreed that Article 10.5 “shall
be interpreted in accordance with Annex 10-B”, and that Article 10.7 “shall be
interpreted in accordance with Annexes 10-B and 10-C”, both of which provide:

Annex 10-B
Customary International Law

The Parties confirm their shared understanding that “customary
international law” generally and as specifically referenced in Articles 10.5, 10.6,
and Annex 10-C results from a general and consistent practice of States that they
follow from a sense of legal obligation. With regard to Article 10.5, the
customary international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens refers to all
customary international law principles that protect the economic rights and
interests of aliens.

Annex 10-C
Expropriation
The Parties confirm their shared understanding that:

1. Article 10.7.1 is intended to reflect customary international law
concerning the obligation of States with respect to expropriation.

2. An action or a series of actions by a Party cannot constitute an
expropriation unless it interferes with a tangible or intangible property right or
property interest in an investment.

3. Article 10.7.1 addresses two situations. The first is direct expropriation,
where an investment is nationalized or otherwise directly expropriated through
formal transfer of title or outright seizure.

21.

4, The second situation addressed by Article 10.7.1 is indirect
expropriation, where an action or series of actions by a Party has an effect
equivalent to direct expropriation without formal transfer of title or outright
seizure.

(a) The determination of whether an action or series of actions by a Party, in
a specific fact situation, constitutes an indirect expropriation, requires a case-by-
case, fact-based inquiry that considers, among other factors;

(i) the economic impact of the government action, although the fact that an
action or series of actions by a Party has an adverse effect on the economic value
of an investment, standing alone, does not establish that an indirect expropriation
has occurred;

(ii) the extent to which the government action interferes with distinct,
reasonable investment-backed expectations; and

(iii) the character of the government action.

(b) Except in rare circumstances, nondiscriminatory regulatory actions by a

Party that are designed and applied to protect legitimate public welfare

objectives, such as public health, safety, and the environment, do not constitute

indirect expropriations.
Thus, the Parties to DR-CAFTA contemplated that claims to be brought by investors
before an arbitral tribunal under Chapter Ten should be settled by applying the terms of
the Treaty itself, and “applicable rules of international law”. In dealing with the minimum
standard of protection under Article 10.5, the DR-CAFTA Parties clearly established that
the protection should be “... in accordance with customary international law, including
fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security” but made subsequent
reference to Annex 10-B transcribed above for how customary international law should
be interpreted, i.e., that which “... results from a general and consistent practice of States
that they follow from a sense of legal obligation ...”. And in respect to the minimum
standard of treatment of aliens under Article 10.5, then customary international law “...
refers to all customary international law principles that protect the economic rights and

interests of aliens”.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On September 17, 2013, the Claimants delivered a “Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim to

Arbitration” to the Respondent.

On January 24, 2014, the Claimants commenced this arbitration by submitting a “Notice

of Arbitration” to the Respondent.
On February 24, 2014, Costa Rica responded to the Notice of Arbitration.

Pursuant to DR-CAFTA Article 10.19, the Claimants appointed Mr. C. Mark Baker, a
national of the United States as arbitrator, and Respondent appointed Prof. Pedro Nikken,

a national of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

On June 10, 2015, the Parties informed the Centre that they had agreed to refer the
appointment of the third, presiding arbitrator, to the Secretary-General of ICSID subject

to a strike-and-rank list procedure.

By letter dated June 16, 2015, the Secretary-General accepted this request and asked the
Parties for confirmation of some procedural aspects of their agreement. The Respondent
provided such confirmation on June 17, 2015, while the Claimants did so on June 19,

2015.

On June 26, 2015, the Secretary-General provided the Parties with a list of ten candidates
in accordance with their agreed method for constitution of the Tribunal. As scheduled,

each party submitted its ranking of candidates to the Secretary-General on July 8, 2015.

On the same date, the Centre informed the Parties that, pursuant to their agreement, the
overall most preferred candidate was Mr. Eduardo Siqueiros T., a national of the United
Mexican States, and invited the Parties to liaise with Mr. Siqueiros to discuss the terms of

his appointment.

On July 17, 2015, Mr. Siqueiros informed the Parties that he had no conflict of interest

and was available to preside over the Tribunal.

On August 4, 2015, the Parties sent a joint letter to Mr. Siqueiros confirming his
appointment as presiding arbitrator. They also agreed that the Tribunal was constituted as

of that date.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

On August 11, 2015, Mr. Siqueiros sent a letter to the Parties on behalf of the Arbitral
Tribunal to discuss certain preliminary issues relating to the organization of the

proceedings, including the possibility of having an arbitral institution administer the case.

By a joint communication of August 26, 2015, the Parties informed the Tribunal that they
agreed to designate ICSID as the administrating authority for the proceedings subject to

the Tribunal’s approval.
On August 26, 2015, the Tribunal informed the Parties that it welcomed their decision.

By a joint letter dated August 28, 2015, the Parties informed the Secretary-General of
ICSID that they had agreed to ICSID administration and asked the Centre to provide full
administrative services in relation to this case. On the same day, the Secretary-General

confirmed that ICSID would provide such services and sent the terms thereof.

By communications on August 31, 2015, the Parties confirmed their agreement to the

terms of ICSID’s letter of August 28, 2015.

On September 1, 2015, the Centre sent a letter to the Parties proposing the designation of
Mr. Francisco Grob, ICSID Legal Counsel, to serve as the Secretary of the Tribunal,

along with a short description of his background.

On September 2, 2015, the Parties confirmed that they had no objection to the

designation of Mr. Grob as Secretary of the Tribunal.

On September 3, 2015, the Tribunal held a procedural hearing with the Parties at the seat

of the Centre in Washington, D.C. Participating in this hearing were:

40.

Al.

42.

Tribunal:

Lic. Eduardo Siqueiros T.

Mr. C. Mark Baker
Prof. Pedro Nikken

ICSID Secretariat:
Mr. Francisco Grob

For the Claimants:
Mr. George Burn

President
Arbitrator
Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal

Vinson & Elkins RLLP

Mr. Peter Danysh Vinson & Elkins RLLP
Dr. Todd Weiler N/A

For the Respondent:

Mr. Christian Leathley
Ms. Amal Bouchenaki
Mr. José Carlos Quirce

Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
COMEX

Joining by phone:

Ms. Florencia Villaggi Herbert Smith Freehills LLP

Ms. Adriana Gonzalez COMEX
Ms. Karima Sauma COMEX
Mr. Julian Aguilar COMEX
Ms. Arianna Arce COMEX

Following the hearing, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, dated September 10,
2015. This order embodied the agreements of the Parties and the decisions of the
Tribunal on the issues with respect to which there was no agreement. Issues agreed upon
by the Parties included, inter alia, the applicable arbitration rules (i.e. 2010 UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules) and the place of arbitration, which was set in London, England. The
Parties also confirmed that the Tribunal had been properly constituted and that neither
party had an objection to the appointment of any of its members or the Tribunal’s

Secretary.
On November 27, 2015, the Claimants filed a Memorial on the Merits (the “Claimants’
Memorial”).

As scheduled in Procedural Order No. 1, the Respondent notified the Tribunal on
December 18, 2015, that it would not seek to file preliminary objections on jurisdiction
and admissibility separately, but alongside its counter-memorial on the merits.

Nevertheless, it proposed the bifurcation of the liability and damages phases.

ll

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

Sl.

The Tribunal invited the Claimants to respond, and the Claimants did so on December 22,

2015, opposing to the proposed bifurcation.

By letter of December 24, 2015, the Respondent contested the Claimants’ response,
asking the Tribunal to order that the questions of jurisdiction and liability run in tandem

while holding the assessment of quantum to a later phase.

On January 15, 2016, the Claimants filed observations on the Respondent’s bifurcation
request, which were followed by a reply from the Respondent on January 19, 2016, and a

rejoinder by the Claimants on January 25, 2016.

On February 4, 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, rejecting Respondent’s
bifurcation request and ordering the continuation of the proceedings as set out in

Procedural Order No. 1.

By letter of February 10, 2016, the Parties jointly requested the Tribunal to revise the
procedural calendar in order to grant the Respondent a two-week extension to file its
Counter-Memorial on the Merits. The Tribunal agreed to the proposed amendment to the

procedural calendar by a letter sent to the Parties on February 11, 2016.

On March 1, 2016, the Tribunal proposed to the Parties that case-related documents
referred to in Article 10.21.1 of the DR-CAFTA be posted on the ICSID’s website.

On March 7, 2016, the Respondent accepted the Tribunal’s proposal but requested the
redaction of the name of the individuals against whom Claimants allege misconduct

and/or acts of corruption.

On March 9, 2016, the Claimants responded to the Tribunal’s proposal and to the
Respondent’s comments agreeing to the publication of the aforementioned documents
and objecting to the Respondent’s request for redaction. The Respondent replied on
March 16, 2016, while the Claimants provided additional comments on March 30, 2016.

On April 5, 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 3 concerning publication of

case documents. Among other things, the Tribunal rejected Respondent’s request for

redaction.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

On April 9, 2016, the Respondent filed a Counter-Memorial on the Merits dated April 8,
2016 (“Respondent’s Counter-Memorial’”).

On June 17, 2016, the Parties filed simultaneous requests for the Tribunal to decide on

production of documents.

On July 1, 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 4 deciding on the Parties’
outstanding document production requests. The Parties agreed that the Redfern schedules

annexed to this order need not be translated into the other procedural language.

On July 23, 2016, the Claimants proposed to hold a separate one-day hearing for the
examination of the quantum experts. The Respondent accepted this proposal by letter
dated July 27, 2016, and this second hearing was set, as agreed upon by the Parties, for
February 7, 2017.

On August 5, 2016, the Claimants filed their Reply Memorial on the Merits (“Claimants’
Reply Memorial’).

On October 29, 2016, the Respondent filed its Rejoinder on the Merits (the
“Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial”), dated October 28.

On November 3, 2016, the Tribunal sent to the Parties a draft procedural order
concerning the organization of the hearings. The Parties were directed to confer on the

suggestions made in this draft and advise the Tribunal of any agreement.

After consulting the Parties, on November 16, 2016, the Tribunal sent a letter to the DR-
CAFTA non-disputing Parties, asking whether they wished to make any submission
pursuant to Article 10.20.2 of the DR-CAFTA.

Following exchanges by the Parties, on November 17, 2016, the Tribunal decided that
pre-hearing briefs would not be scheduled. It also ruled upon additional evidentiary

issues in preparation for the hearing.

On November 21, 2016, the United States of America asked for an extension until
December 1, 2016 to reply to the DR-CAFTA non-disputing Parties communication. It
also requested an opportunity to attend the hearing, urging the Tribunal to set aside some

time in case the United States decided to make an oral submission.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

The same day, on November 21, 2016, the Parties submitted a revised version of the draft
procedural order circulated on November 3, reflecting their agreements, the issues on

which they could not agree, and asking for Tribunal’s directions.

The Tribunal held a pre-hearing telephone conference with the Parties on November 22,
2016, to discuss these and other procedural matters in preparation for the hearing. The
Parties confirmed, inter alia, that they had no objection to the requests made by the

United States.

On November 25, 2016, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5 (“POS”) concerning

the organization of the hearings.

On December 2, 2016, the United States filed a written submission pursuant to Article
10.20.2 of the DR-CAFTA (the “United States non-disputing Party Submission”).

This submission is discussed where applicable in the sections below.

A hearing on Jurisdiction and the Merits was held at the World Bank Headquarters in
Washington, D.C. from December 5 to December 12, 2016 (the “December Hearing”).
As agreed by the Parties, it was also live streamed through ICSID’s Website. The

following individuals were present in the hearing room:

Tribunal:

Lic. Eduardo Siqueiros T. President
Mr. C. Mark Baker Arbitrator
Prof. Pedro Nikken Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat:

Mr. Francisco Grob

For the Claimants:

Mr. George Burn

Mr. Peter Danysh

Mr. Jerome Hoyle

Mr. Robert Landicho
Ms. Louise Woods

Ms. Carolina Albreo-Carrillo
Dr. Todd Weiler

Mr. Esteban De La Cruz
Mr. Herman Duarte

Mr. Raul Guevara

Mr. Roger Guevara

Secretary of the Tribunal

Vinson & Elkins RLLP
Vinson & Elkins RLLP
Vinson & Elkins RLLP
Vinson & Elkins RLLP
Vinson & Elkins RLLP
Vinson & Elkins RLLP
N/A

Batalla

Batalla

Batalla

Batalla

Mr. Manuel Ventura
Mr. David Aven

Mr. Samuel Aven

Mr. David Janney

Ms. Carol Park

Mr. Eric Park

Mr. Roger Raguso
Mr. Jeffrey Shioleno
Mr. Don Aven

Mr. Jeff Aven

Mr. Minor Arce Solano
Mr. Esteban Bermudez
Mr. Jovan Damjanac
Mr. Nestor Morera
Mr. Mauricio Mussio
Mr. Edgardo Madrigal
Mr. Ian Baillie

Mr. Gerardo Barboza
Dr. Robert Langstroth
Dr. Ricardo Calvo
Mr. Luis Ortiz

Ms. Nancy Muller

For the Respondent:

Mr. Christian Leathley

Ms. Amal Bouchenaki

Ms. Daniela Paez

Ms. Lucila Marchini

Ms. Elena Ponte

Mr. Michael Kerns

Mrs. Adriana Gonzalez

Ms. Arianna Arce

Mr. José Carlos Quirce

Ms. Marisol Montero

Ms. Francinie Obando

Mr. Julio Jurado Fernandez
Mr. Luis Gerardo Martinez Zufiga
Mr. Hazel Diaz Melendez
Ms. Priscilla Vargas

Ms. Monica Vargas Quesada
Dr. Timothy Hart

Mrs. Rebecca Velez

Mr. Kevin Erwin

Dr. Johan S. Perret

Dr. B.K. Singh

Ms. Rosaura Chinchilla Calderon

Facio Abogados
Claimant

Claimant

Claimant

Claimant

Claimant

Claimant

Claimant

Family of Claimant
Family of Claimant
Witness

Witness

Witness

Witness

Witness

Colleague of witness
Expert

Expert

Expert

Expert

Expert

Language Assistant

Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
COMEX

COMEX

COMEX

COMEX

COMEX

Witness

Witness

Witness

Witness

Witness

Credibility International
Credibility International
Kevin Erwin Consulting
Expert

Expert

Expert

67.

68.

69.

70.

Non-disputing Party:

Mr. Patrick W. Pearsall U.S. Department of State

Ms. Nicole C. Thornton U.S. Department of State

On December 12, 2016, the United States submitted a chart detailing the non-disputing
Party submissions it has made pursuant to DR-CAFTA Article 10.20.2 in response to a
question posed by the president of the Tribunal during the first day of hearing, on
December 5, 2016.

On December 12, 2016, the Claimants sought permission to submit additional evidence to

the record.

Following exchanges of correspondence by the Parties, the Tribunal rejected this

application by a letter dated January 18, 2017.

As scheduled, a one-day hearing was held at the World Bank Headquarters in
Washington, D.C. on February 7, 2017 (the “February Hearing”). As agreed by the
Parties, the hearing was live streamed through ICSID’s Website. The following persons

were present in the hearing room:

Tribunal:

Lic. Eduardo Siqueiros T. President

Mr. C. Mark Baker Arbitrator

Prof. Pedro Nikken Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat:

Mr. Francisco Grob Secretary of the Tribunal

For the Claimants:

Mr. George Burn Vinson & Elkins RLLP
Mr. Alexander Slade Vinson & Elkins RLLP
Mr. Robert Landicho Vinson & Elkins RLLP
Ms. Carolina Abreo-Carrillo Vinson & Elkins RLLP
Dr. Todd Weiler N/A

Mr. Roger Guevara Batalla Salto Luna

Mr. Esteban de la Cruz Batalla Salto Luna

Mr. David Aven Claimant

Mr. Jorge Bricefio Witness

Mr. Manuel Abdala Compass Lexecon

Ms. Daniela Bambaci Compass Lexecon

Mr. Charles Rice Compass Lexecon

71.

72.

73.

74,

75.

76.

For the Respondent:
Mr. Christian Leathley
Ms. Daniela Paez

Ms. Lucila Marchini
Mr. Michael Kerns
Mrs. Adriana Gonzalez
Ms. Arianna Arce

Mr. Tim Hart

Ms. Rebecca Velez

Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP
COMEX

COMEX

Credibility International
Credibility International

Mr. Keith Constance Credibility International
Non-disputing Party:

Mr. Patrick W. Pearsall
Ms. Nicole C. Thornton
Ms. Terra Gearhart-Serna

U.S. Department of State
U.S. Department of State
U.S. Department of State

By letter of February 13, 2017, the Tribunal sent to the Parties a list of questions to

consider in their respective post-hearing briefs.
As scheduled, the Parties filed simultaneous post-hearing briefs on March 13, 2017.

By means of two separate communications of the same date, March 13, the Respondent
informed the Tribunal of certain developments on the Las Olas Project Site and submitted
its views on a document prepared by the Claimants’ counsel in response to a question
posed during the December Hearing concerning US non-disputing Party submissions in

other DR-CAFTA cases.

At the Tribunal’s invitation, the Claimants commented on the Respondent’s allegations
concerning developments on the site in a letter dated March 24, 2017. With the
Tribunal’s approval, the Respondent responded to this letter on April 17, 2017 and the
Claimants replied on April 17, 2017.

The proceeding was closed on March 1, 2018.

The Parties filed their submissions on costs on March 15, 2018.

Vv. SUBMISSION OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA PURSUANT TO DR-
CAFTA ARTICLE 10.20.2

77. On November 16, 2016, the Tribunal invited the DR-CAFTA Parties to make a non-
disputing Party submission in accordance with the terms of Article 10.20.2., and also
invited them to participate at the December Hearing. Only the United States of America

accepted.

728. On December 2, 2016, the United States of America made its submission on questions of
interpretation of the DR-CAFTA, pursuant to Article 10.20.2°. In its submission, the U.S.
addressed the four issues relating to questions of interpretation: (i) Article 10.5; (ii) 10.7;
along with Annex 10-C which it believes must be interpreted in accordance with; (iii)
Article 10.11 in connection with the ability of governments under DR-CAFTA to take
measures otherwise consistent with Chapter 10; and (iv) the relationship among Chapters
10 and 17. The United States’ Submission cautioned that it did not take any position on
how its interpretation applied to the facts of this case, and that no inference should be

drawn from the absence of comment on any issue not addressed.

79. On the issue of the United States’ interpretation of DR-CAFTA Article 10.5, rather than
expressing a position, the United States stated that its views were already reflected in
paragraphs 11-24 of the non-disputing Party submission of April 17, 2015 in the DR-
CAFTA Chapter 10 case Spence International Investments, LLC, Berkowitz et al. v.
Republic of Costa Rica which it attached.

80. The United States’ position with respect to Article 10.5 was essentially the following '°:

(i). In citing the text of Articles 10.5.1 and 10.5.2, it confirmed that such
provisions demonstrate the States who are Parties’ express intent to establish the
customary international law minimum standard of treatment as the applicable
standard in DR-CAFTA Article 10.5, and that the minimum standard of
treatment is an umbrella concept reflecting a set of rules that, over time, has

° United States non-disputing Party Submission, dated December 12, 2016, signed by Lisa J. Grosh, Assistant Legal
Advisor, Patrick W. Pearshall, Chief of Investment Arbitration and Nichole C. Thornton, Attorney-Advisor of the
Office of International Claims and Investment Disputes, of the United States Department of State.

10 The United States Submission in the Spence International Investments, LLC, Berkowitz et al. v. Republic of Costa
Rica can be located at https://www.state.gov/documents/organization/242886.pdf.

18

crystallized into customary international law'', and establishes a minimum “floor
below which treatment of foreign investors must not fall”!?;

(ii). That customary international law has currently crystallized to establish a
minimum standard of treatment in only a few areas. One such area, which is
expressly addressed in Article 10.5, concerns the obligation to provide “fair and
equitable treatment” which includes, for example, the obligation not to deny
justice in criminal, civil or administrative adjudicatory proceedings. A denial of
justice arises, for example, when a State’s judiciary administers justice to aliens
in a “notoriously unjust” or “egregious” manner “which offends a sense of
judicial propriety”;

(iii). That DR-CAFTA Annex 10-B addresses the methodology for
interpreting customary international law rules covered by the agreement. The
annex expresses the treaty Parties’ “shared understanding that ‘customary
international law’ generally and as specifically referenced in Article [] 10.5...
results from a general and consistent practice of States that they follow from a
sense of legal obligation.” The United States adds that this two-element approach
— State practice and opinio juris — is “widely endorsed in the literature” and
“generally adopted in the practice of States and the decisions of international
courts and tribunals, including the International Court of Justice”. Relevant State
practice must be widespread and consistent and be accepted as law, meaning that
the practice must also be accompanied by a sense of legal obligation. Moreover,
the twin requirements of State practice and opinio juris “must both be identified
... to support a finding that a relevant rule of customary international law has
emerged” The annex provides important guidance for assessing whether an
alleged norm has been sufficiently demonstrated to be an element of customary
international law.

(iv). | That neither the concepts of “good faith” nor “legitimate expectations”
are component elements of “fair and equitable treatment” under customary
international law that give rise to an independent host State obligation. Although
an investor may develop its own expectations about the legal regime governing
its investment, those expectations impose no obligations on the State under the
minimum standard of treatment. The United States mentioned that it is aware of
no general and consistent State practice and opinio juris establishing an

'! As a means of describing the United States position, it cited Methanex v. United States of America,
NAFTA/UNCITRAL, Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility of Respondent United States of America (Nov. 13,
2000); ADF Group Inc. v. United States of America, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/1, Post-Hearing Submission of
Respondent United States of America on Article 1105(1) and Pope & Talbot (June 27, 2002); Glamis Gold Lid. v.
United States of America, NAFTA/UNCITRAL, Counter-Memorial of Respondent United States of America (Sept. 19,
2006) (“U.S. Counter-Memorial, Glamis”); Grand River Enterprises Six Nations, Ltd., et al. vy. United States of
America, NAFTA/UNCITRAL, Counter-Memorial of Respondent United States of America (Dec. 22, 2008) (“U.S.
Counter-Memorial, Grand River”). Spence International Investments, LLC, Berkowitz et al. v. Republic of Costa Rica
submission, page 4 (CLA-196).

'? In expressing these positions, it cited Glamis Gold, Ltd. v. United States of America, NAFTA/UNCITRAL, Award
| 615 (June 8, 2009) (“The customary international law minimum standard of treatment is just that, a minimum
standard. It is meant to serve as a floor, an absolute bottom, below which conduct is not accepted by the international
community.”) (RLA-38).

19

81.

obligation under the minimum standard of treatment not to frustrate investors’
expectations; instead, something more is required than the mere interference with
those expectations. States may modify or amend their regulations to achieve
legitimate public welfare objectives and will not incur liability under customary
international law merely because such changes interfere with an investor’s
“expectations” about the state of regulation in a particular sector;

(v). Further that, States may decide expressly by treaty to extend protections
under the rubric of “fair and equitable treatment” and “full protection and
security” beyond that required by customary international law. Extending such
protections through “autonomous” standards in any particular treaty represents a
policy decision by a State, rather than an action taken out of a sense of legal
obligation. That practice is not relevant to ascertaining the content of Article
10.5, which expressly ties “fair and equitable treatment” and “full protection and
security” to the customary international law minimum standard of treatment;

(vi). | Thus, the DR-CAFTA Parties expressly intended Article 10.5 to afford
the minimum standard of treatment to covered investments, as that standard has
crystallized into customary international law through general and consistent State
practice and opinio juris. For alleged standards that are not specified in the treaty,
a claimant must demonstrate that such a standard has crystallized into an
obligation under customary international law. To do so, the burden is on the
claimant to establish the existence and applicability of a relevant obligation under
customary international law that meets the requirements of State practice and
opinio juris; and

(vii). Once a rule of customary international law has been established, the
claimant must then show that the State has engaged in conduct that violates that
tule.

On the subject of the United States’ interpretation of Article 10.7 and Annex 10-C, the
United States likewise referred to its position expressed in the Spence International
Investments, LLC, Berkowitz et al. v. Republic of Costa Rica case (adding that Article
10.7 must be interpreted in accordance with said Annex 10-C), which is essentially the
following:
(i). It confirms that any expropriation that does not conform to each of the
specific conditions set forth in Article 10.7.1, paragraphs (a) through (d),

constitutes a breach of Article 10.7, and requires compensation in accordance
with Article 10.7.2;

(ii). Under international law, where an action is a bona fide, non-
discriminatory regulation, it will not ordinarily be deemed expropriatory, and
DR-CAFTA Annex 10-C, paragraph 4, provides specific guidance as to whether
an action, including a regulatory action, constitutes an indirect expropriation;

20

(iii). That determining whether an indirect expropriation has occurred
“requires a case-by-case, fact based inquiry” that considers, among other factors:
(i) the economic impact of the government action; (ii) the extent to which that
action interferes with distinct, reasonable investment-backed expectations; and
(iii) the character of the government action, and then briefly addresses each;

(iv). | With respect to the first factor, an adverse economic impact “standing
alone, does not establish that an indirect expropriation has occurred.” It is a
fundamental principle of international law that, for an expropriation claim to
succeed, the claimant must demonstrate that the government measure at issue
destroyed all, or virtually all, of the economic value of its investment, or
interfered with it to such a similar extent and so restrictively as “to support a
conclusion that the property has been ‘taken’ from the owner”;

(v). The second factor requires an objective inquiry of the reasonableness of
the claimant’s expectations, which may depend on the regulatory climate existing
at the time the property was acquired in the particular sector in which the
investment was made. For example, where a sector is “already highly regulated,
reasonable extensions of those regulations are foreseeable”;

(vi). | The third factor considers the nature and character of the government
action, including whether such action involves physical invasion by the
government or whether it is more regulatory in nature (i.e., whether “it arises
from some public program adjusting the benefits and burdens of economic life to
promote the common good”); and

(vii). Finally, it recalled that Annex 10-C, paragraph 4(b), further provides that
“[e]xcept in rare circumstances, nondiscriminatory actions by a Party that are
designed and applied to protect legitimate public welfare objectives, such as
public health, safety, and the environment, do not constitute indirect
expropriations.” This paragraph is not an exception, but rather is intended to
provide tribunals with additional guidance in determining whether an indirect
expropriation has occurred.

82. Regarding Article 10.11 DR-CAFTA, the United States points out that the provision
“informs the interpretation of other provisions of Chapter Ten, including Articles 10.5
and 10.7, and shows that Chapter Ten was not intended to undermine the ability of
governments to take measures otherwise consistent with the Chapter, including measures
based upon environmental concerns, even when those measures may affect the value of

an investment”!>.

83. The United States Submission then considered the relationship between Chapters Ten and

Seventeen of DR-CAFTA. After citing the text, it recognized that Article 10.2

'3 United States non-disputing Party Submission, {| 5, page 2.

21

84.

85.

86.

subordinates the provisions of Chapter 10 to the provisions in all other Chapters of the
DR-CAFTA, in cases where there is an inconsistency with another Chapter. Although it
stated that “... the jurisdiction of a Chapter Ten tribunal is limited, according to Article
10.16(1), to claims that a respondent Party breached an obligation of Chapter Ten
(Section A), an investment authorization, or an investment agreement”, it then goes on to
conclude that “The provisions of Chapter Seventeen, together with the Preamble and
Article 10.11, serve to inform the interpretation of other provisions of Chapter 10.
Specifically, these provisions demonstrate the Parties’ commitment to preserving policy
discretion in the adoption, application and enforcement of domestic laws aimed at
achieving a high level of environmental protection, provided that doing so is not otherwise

inconsistent with the express provisions of Chapter 10'4.
A. The Parties’ Positions regarding the United States Submission

At the end of the December Hearing, the Tribunal invited the Parties to comment on the
United States non-disputing Party Submission in accordance with the terms of Article
10.22.2. Both agreed to provide, and although they initially attempted to submit a
common position document, they failed to reach a common ground, and instead, each

elected to comment in their Post-Hearing Briefs.

Claimants have argued that the interpretation of the relevant provisions of DR-CAFTA
must be examined in light not only of the position that the United States of America has
supported in the past in respect to DR-CAFTA itself, but also in light of NAFTA (the
“North American Free Trade Agreement”), and also in light of how other tribunals

have interpreted those textually similar provisions in the past.

Claimants elected to comment primarily on two issues where they find that the
representatives for the United States have taken a restrictive position: first, on how
customary international law should be proved, and second, rejection of what they refer to
as “the firmly-rooted jurisprudence constant” on fair and equitable treatment concerning,
for example, the prohibition against arbitrariness, the obligation to accord due process, or

State responsibility arising from the frustration of legitimate expectations.

'4 Id. 99] 6-8, pages 2-3.

22

87.

88.

89.

90.

Claimants rejected how the United States’ representatives interpret the “customary
international law” reference argument in an Article 10.5 DR-CAFTA claim, which — they
argue, states that the only way for a claimant-investor to succeed is to either establish that
a denial of justice has occurred or prove the existence of a different customary

international law norm!>.

Secondly, on the subject of whether or not the Treaty supports a claim for frustration of
legitimate expectations, Claimants first mentioned that Respondent initially accepted, in
principle, the validity of Claimants’ claims, but then Respondent changed its stance,

adopting the position of the United States after the latter introduced its submission.

Claimants deem that the position of the United States has been inconsistent on so-called
“autonomous” versions of the “fair and equitable treatment” standard'®. They allege that
in those cases thus far submitted under Article 10.20(2), the United States holds that
Article 10.5 embodies the customary international law minimum standard of treatment.
Each submission also treats NAFTA Article 1105 as an analogous expression of the same
standard; resulting in a very narrow and limited construction of Article 10.5. The
argument, contend Claimants, has remained constant: that a tribunal interpreting a
“customary fair and equitable treatment” provision should never rely upon the reasoning
of a tribunal that interpreted an “autonomous fair and equitable treatment” provision;
instead!’ Claimants contrast this view with that of publicists they cite to, who were
members of the tribunals in the Mondev v. U.S.A., or the Railroad Development

Corporation v. Guatemala cases '*.

Respondent, on the other hand, supports the views of the United States of America on
certain issues. For example, in its Post-Hearing Brief Respondent agrees with the position
that Chapter 17 provides relevant context for purposes of interpretation of Chapter 10'°,
and how the Treaty should be read taking into account its preamble to “... demonstrate

the Parties’ commitment to preserving policy discretion in the adoption, application and

'5 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 116, page 54.

6 [d., 4 121, page 56.

"7 [d., 4 123, page 57.

'8 Mondev Int'l Ltd. v. U.S.A., ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award, October 11, 2002, f] 110-125 (CLA-50);
Railroad Development Corporation v. Guatemala, Award, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/23, IIC 553 (2012), June 29,
2012, $f 212-216 (CLA-193).

'° Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, 4 490, page 97.

23

91.

92.

VIL

93.

94.

enforcement of domestic laws aimed at achieving a high level of environmental

protection”?°.

On the subject of customary international law’s minimum standard of treatment,
Respondent supports the position of the United States, in the sense that this is a

minimum, “...a floor below which treatment of foreign investors must not fall”?!.

B. The Tribunal’s View

The Tribunal notes that while this classic academic divide between Investors and States
continues to be a part of so many investor-State arbitrations, the facts of this particular
dispute do not require the Tribunal to spend time analyzing the issue as will be detailed

below in the relevant sections.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

In 2001 and 2002 Mr. Aven—one of the Claimants—decided to explore investment
opportunities in Costa Rica, and identified a 37-hectare plot, composed of five parcels, in
Esterillos Oeste, on the Pacific Coast of Costa Rica. He believed the site was well served
by public roads, had a topography suited to development, excellent ocean views, and

access to the beach.

The five parcels were to comprise the Las Olas Project, which was to be divided into
areas reflecting the different uses to which the land would be put”. Although there were
four sections identified, importantly the Claimants always viewed the project as a whole.

This issue is relevant to the case, as will be examined below. The four sections were:

(a). The Concession Site, i.e., land that formed part of the maritime zone and
was the subject of the Concession, where the beach club would be located, with
direct access to the ocean and luxury hotel rooms and common area facilities to
which all residents of Las Olas would have access;

(b). The Easements, i.e., land on the western side of the property, to which
access would be gained via nine easements that would run into the Las Olas site
from the main road to the west of the property, also containing a total of 72
residential lots;

20 Id., $f] 498-499, page 98, citing the United States Submission, § 7.
2! Id., § 734, page 151, citing the United States Submission attaching its own submission in Spence v. Costa Rica,

q12.

22 Claimants’ Memorial, § 50, page 14.

24

95.

96.

97.

(c). Commercial and Condominium Area, mostly in the northwest and
northeast corners of the site, earmarked for commercial establishments, such as
supermarkets, restaurants, and possibly a gasoline station for the benefit of the
Las Olas residents; and

(d). Condominium or “Condo” Section, i.e., the main part of the site that
would comprise individual lots on which condominiums would be built. Under
an original plan, there was originally a smaller number of lots contemplated, but
under a plan revised in 2008 the number increased to 288.

The Parties to this dispute agree on the main facts surrounding the claims since these are
reflected in applications and permits issued by various State and municipal authorities of
the Republic of Costa Rica. However, there are significant disagreements on the
competence of various authorities to issue the relevant permits; the burden on the
applicant and the State with respect to the issuance of permits; the implications of a
permit; and the findings, determinations and scope of their respective conclusions. From
the Parties’ submissions and the hearing testimony of the various witnesses, it is clear
that there are many inconsistencies in documents and contradictions among various
governmental authorities during the period comprised between the dates Claimants
decided to make the investment and the time at which injunctions were issued and
criminal charges brought against Mr. Aven and the Sales and Marketing Director of the

Las Olas Project, Mr. Jovan Damjanac.

To address this highly complex factual background, the Tribunal invited the Parties on
November 17, 2016, to submit an agreed chronology, along with a dramatis personae and
list of issues in the arbitration. This invitation was confirmed in Procedural Order No. 5.
However, although the parties agreed and submitted on December 1, 2016, a joint
dramatis personae, the Parties advised on such date that they were not able to agree on
either a chronology or a list of issues. This failure was a severe burden on the Tribunal as
it was required to reconstruct the background through the Parties’ shifting allegations and

late introduction of evidence throughout this case.

Despite the absence of an agreed chronology, the Tribunal has prepared a chronology of
material events, which is found below. A description of the most relevant of such events

is examined in the body of this award.

25

 

Date

Event

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2002
02/06/02 An Option Agreement entered into among Mr. Aven and companies to acquire properties
(contingent on permits to develop).
03/05/02 The Costa Rica Institute of Tourism approves grant of Concession to La Canicula.
03/06/02 The Municipality of Parrita grants the Concession to La Canicula.
04/01/02 The Agreement for Purchase the shares of La Canicula and Inversiones Cotsco is
executed.
04/30/02 Termination of Trust Agreement for La Canicula shares.
04/30/02 New Trust Agreement to transfer 100% shares of La Canicula by Mr. Aven as trustor to
Banco Cuscatlan de Costa Rica, S.A. until ownership complied with CR law.
09/30/02 The first D-1 Application is filed at SETENA to receive an EV for Condo Section.
11/22/02 SETENA responds and requests an environmental impact study to continue with the
process to obtain an EV for the Hotel section (Resolution 1119-2002-SETENA).
2004
11/23/04 SETENA grants first EV for Villas La Canicula section, valid for a one-year term
(Resolution 2164-2004-SETENA).
10/04/04 Letter from Mr. Aven to the other Claimants describing ownership of shares structure in
companies owning properties: Sam Aven 44%, David Aven 25%, Carol Park 10%, Eric
Park 10%, Roger Raguso 5%, Jack Bucemi 3%, Jeff Shioleno 2% and David Janney 1%.
2005
01/26/05 La Canicula submits D-1 Application to receive an EV for Concession Site.
03/08/05 Mr. Aven transfers 51% of the shares of La Canicula to Paula Murillo to comply with
Costa Rica ZMT law.
09/16/05 Consolidation of properties into one parcel (Property P-142646) (Survey 1021869-05).
2006
01/20/06 SINAC issues Resolution that Concession Site is not within WPA.

 

 

26

 

 

03/01/06

Claimants appoint DEPPAT as Environmental Regent for Villas La Canicula.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

03/17/06 SETENA issues EV for Concession Site (Resolution No. 543-2006-SETENA).
2007

02/27/07 SETENA extends for one year the EV for Villas La Canicula section (Resolution 375-
2007-SETENA).

04/25/07 Architectural firm of Mussio Madrigal is hired to prepare D-1 Application to receive an
EV for the Condo Section.

07/07 Geotest/Geoambiente geological and hydrogeological study for the Condo Section (the
“Protti Report”) is issued for Condo Section.

08/13/07 The Municipality of Parrita issues permits for construction of cabin on easement site
(Permit 154-07).

11/08/07 Mr. Aven submits D-1 Application relying on the Geotest / Geoambiente Report for
Condo Section.

2008

01/10/08 SETENA visits Las Olas Project site on account of filing of the D-1 application.

02/13/08 SETENA requests information on account of filing of the D-1 application (SGP-DG-098-
2008).

03/14/08 Mussio Madrigal firm confirms there are no forests on the Las Olas Project site (P-
1244761-2007).

03/27/08 The alleged Forged Document is presented to SETENA.

04/02/08 SINAC issues new resolutions stating that the Condo Section is not within a WPA
(ACOPAC-OSRAP-00282-08) (P-1244761-2007).

04/17/08 SETENA extends for one year the EV for the Hotel section (Resolution 884-2008-
SETENA).

05/27/08 SETENA issues EV for Condo Section (Resolution No. DGI-878-2008-SETENA),
subject to certain covenants.

06/02/08 SETENA issues EV for Condo Section (Resolution No. 1597-2008-SETENA).

08/29/08 Construction permits for hotel, cabins & pool at Concession Site (Permit 165-08).

09/30/08 SINAC inspects because of neighbors’ complaints.

10/01/08 SINAC issues report and identifies two sites of possible wetlands (ACOPAC-SD-087-08).

10/07/08 Director of ACOPAC reports to SINAC that irregularities exist at the Las Olas Project site

 

which may affect the environment (ACOPAC-D-1063-08).

 

27

 

 

10/22/08

Ownership of Property P-142646 (condominium) transferred to Trio International Inc.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10/22/08 Trio International Inc. segregates “condominium section” to create 288 lots.
2009

03/00/09 Neighbors file before the Municipality of Parrita complaint on account of alleged harm to
the environment (filling of wetlands).

03/30/09 SINAC internal report stating legal issues on false signatures and documents in the file
(SINAC-SE-GASP-070).

04/3/09 DEPPAT resigns as Environmental Regent.

04/26/09 Ms. Vargas (Municipality) visits Las Olas Project site and confirms possible wetlands and
felling of trees, and suggests investigation (DeGA-049.2009).

2010

01/20/10 Ms. Vargas (Environmental Officer at the Municipality of Parrita) makes a second
inspection visit and confirms roads, evidence of wetlands and felling of trees.

05/05/10 Claimants request SINAC an extension to the 2008 EV, and confirm no works have been
undertaken at the site.

05/20/10 Ms. Vargas makes a third inspection visit and requests permits for work being done.

05/20/10 New Letter-Agreement with Paula Murillo to again transfer 51% of La Canicula to
comply with ZMT Law.

05/31/10 Ms. Vargas from the Municipality identifies further complaints by neighbors and requests
Municipality of Parrita information on the Project (DeGA-090-2010), and signage
(DeGA-092-2010).

06/01/10 Claimants (La Canicula, S.A.) file a request to SETENA to replace DEPPAT as
Environmental Regent for various breaches to applicable law.

06/02/10 EV scheduled to lapse for Condo Section.

06/14/10 Claimants notify SETENA (through DEPPAT) of start of works at Condo Section on June
1, 2010.

06/14/10 DEPPAT informs SETENA of its acceptance as Environmental Regent for the Condo
Section.

06/14/10 The Municipal Engineering department informs Ms. Vargas that construction permits
have expired because works were not completed and roads will be closed for lacking
permits (OIM-113-2010).

06/14/10 The Municipal Engineering department informs Mr. Aven that construction works lack

 

permits, and these should be applied for (OIM-1 14-2010).

 

28

 

 

07/16/10

Inspection report by SINAC concludes that it is not able to confirm existence of wetland
(provides requirements), but finds fell of trees (ACOPAC-OSRAP-371-2010).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

07/16/10 Municipality of Parrita issues Construction permits (7) for residences in easement section
(Permits 090-10 to 096-10).

07/5/10 Neighbors file a new complaint alleging the existence of wetlands.

07/16/10 The Municipality of Parrita advises Claimants that in order to issue construction permits
for a condo at property (P-1244761-2007), they must submit several documents including
an extension to the EV (OIM-133-2010).

07/22/10 DEPPAT submits land movement plan and intended works in easement.

07/20/10 Neighbors file a new complaint against the Las Olas Project.

07/20/10 Mr. Bucelato files complaint against the Las Olas Project before Defensoria de los
Habitantes.

07/23/10 Defensoria de los Habitantes acknowledges Mr. Bucelato complaint (08441-2010-DHR).

08/07/10 Mr. Manfredi (ACOPAC-OSRAP) reports of his visit to the Las Olas Project site and
advises that there are no wetlands on the site (ACOPAC-OSRAP-371-2010).

08/17/10 SETENA visits the Condo Section site on account of Mr. Bucelato complaint.

08/19/10 SETENA confirms there are no wetlands on condominium site (ASA-1216-2010-
SETENA).

08/07/10 Defensoria de los Habitantes requests information from Municipality (08947-2010-DHR),
SINAC (08948-2010-DHR), SETENA (08949-2010-DHR) and Administrative Tribunal
(08952-2010-DHR) in connection with neighbors’ complaint.

08/18/10 Municipality of Parrita responds to Defensoria de los Habitantes request, and advised on
multiple visits to the Las Olas Project site by MINAET, yet without issuance of reports on
whether wetlands exist (DeGA-200-2010).

08/19/10 SETENA internal document rejects complaint from Mr. Bucelato and confirms there is no
evidence of wetlands in Condo site.

08/27/10 Bogantes responds to Defensoria and confirms that based on SINAC Report of July 2010

there are no wetlands

 

08/28-29/10

Mr. Bogantes allegedly solicits bribe from Mr. Aven.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

09/01/10 SETENA rejects complaint from Bucelato and finds there is no evidence of wetlands) in
Condo (Resolution No. 2086-2010-SETENA).

09/7/10 Municipality of Parrita notes that the property (P-1244761-2007), is located within an area
of hills (Lomas y Colinas) and is subject to the relevant zoning.

09/7/10 Municipality of Parrita issues construction permit for works.

09/9/10 Municipality of Parrita notes in an internal report that documents required to secure
construction permits for condominium site are missing (ADU-012-10).

09/13/10 Municipality of Parrita advises Claimants documents required to secure construction

 

29

 

 

permits for condominium site are missing (ADU-013-10).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

09/13/10 Claimants submit an update of the Environmental Management Plan for the Las Olas
Project, advising of changes introduced since 2008.

11/18/10 Neighbors to the Las Olas Project file a new complaint before SINAC regarding the
Forged Document.

11/23/10 Defensoria de los Habitantes advises SINAC that neighbors have filed a complaint
regarding the Alleged Forged document.

11/25/10 SINAC confirms the Forged Document is indeed forged.

11/25/10 SINAC requests Luis Picado (ACOPAC) to make another visit to site in light of the new
complaints (ACOPAC-D-1519-10).

11/30/10 SINAC requests SETENA to suspend EV for Condo Section.

12/09/10 Defensoria de los Habitantes requests a report from ACOPAC on alleged damages to the

environment (13835-2010-DHR).

 

12/06-21/10

SINAC officials carry out site visits on December 6, 10, 17, and 21, 2010, and report is
submitted (ACOPAC-CP-003-11).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2011

OW/1I/11 Claimants request inspection visit from SINAC to the property to verify no harm to the
environment.

01/03/11 SETENA approves the update of the environmental management plan submitted by
DEPPAT (SG-ASA-04-2011).

01/03/11 SINAC issues report on conclusions and recommendations on site visit: (ACOPAC-CP-
003-11).
Concludes: There are bodies of water that may be wetlands, the felling of trees, and the
Forged Document
Recommends: Site inspection by PNH, a soil study by INTA, investigation by ACOPAC
on the origin of the Forged Document, issue an injunction to stop future works, and
commence criminal complaint for harm to forest.

01/28/11 SINAC Police report relating to the alleged Forged Document, the felling of trees and the
possible harm to wetland. (ACOPAC-CP-015-11-DEN).

02/04/11 SINAC instructs ACOPAC (Mr. Cubillo) to file criminal charges as recommended in its
January 3, 2011 report (ACOPAC-D-82-11).

02/04/11 SINAC requests PNH (ACOPAC-D-80-11) and INTA (ACOPAC-D-8 1-11) an inspection
to confirm whether or not wetlands exist in the property.

02/08/11 Environmental Prosecutor requests SINAC whether wetlands exist in the Las Olas Project

 

(35-FAA-11).

 

30

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

02/11/11 SINAC reports to the Environmental Prosecutor (ACOPAC-D-1 14-11) and Defensoria de
los Habitantes (ACOPAC-D-115-11) that it has requested PNH to report on the existence
of wetlands exist in the Las Olas Project.

02/14/11 SINAC issues an injunction suspending all works until such time as there is evidence of
permits, the legitimacy of the Forged Document and whether or not wetlands exist
(ACOPAC-CP-032-11) (“SINAC Injunction”).

02/23/11 Claimants file before SINAC an Appeal and request for annulment of the SINAC
Injunction.

02/25/11 SINAC confirms the SINAC Injunction (ACOPAC-CP-049-11).

02/25/11 Claimants file before SINAC ACOPAC a request for annulment of the SINAC resolution
of February 25, 2011.

02/25/11 Commence criminal complaint for Forged Document.

02/28/11 Defensoria de los Habitantes advises Mr. Bucelato that his procedure is suspended until
another complaint before the Environmental Prosecutor is resolved (02282-2011-DHR).

03/01/11 SINAC Police report addressed to the TAA confirming the Forged Document, the felling
of trees and the possible harm to wetland, and requests PNH determination (ACOPAC-
CP-052-11-DEN).

03/07/11 The Department of Maritime Terrestrial Zone reports to the Municipal Council that
complaints have been received, and submits document suggesting wetlands may exist
(DZMT-026-2011).

03/08/11 Municipal Council Resolution to request Mayor to issue injunction in light of the Forged
Document and neighbors’ complaints (SM-2011-0172).

03/18/11 SINAC issues a site inspection report and identifies that construction works have affected
a palustrine wetland, suggesting injunction (SINAC-GASP-093-11).

03/18/11 SINAC issues a new site inspection report and confirms that the palustrine wetland has
been filled, and requests correction measures (SINAC-GASP-143-11).

03/22/11 DEPPAT submits report to SINAC — ACOPAC and comments of site inspection reports.

03/30/11 Petition by neighbors to MINAET to stop construction works on the Las Olas Project in
light of refilling of wetlands Forged Document.

03/30/11 SETENA issues an injunction on any further works in the Condo Section (ASA-590-
2011-SETENA).

04/05/11 The Mayor of Parrita requests MINAE, ACOPAC and SINAC to submit reports on
actions taken because a decision has been taken to suspend all permits relating to Las Olas
Project.

04/05/11 SINAC issues internal report on site visit carried out on February 16, 2011, concluding
that there was no sign of refilled wetlands (ACOPAC-OSRAP-0233-11).

04/05/11 SINAC reports to Parrita Mayor that actions have been taken and a report from PNH is

 

pending on the existence of wetlands (ACOPAC-DP-308-11).

 

31

 

 

 

05/00/11

DEPPAT submits bi-monthly report (No. 6, 3-2011) to SETENA.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

04/13/11 SETENA issues injunction on further work on Las Olas Project site (839-201 1-SETENA).

04/13/11 TAA Injunction issued based on December 2010 inspection visits to the site, which
Claimants indicate they never received.

05/01/11 SINAC (Mr. Cubero) prepares report and concludes there are no wetlands.

05/05/11 INTA issues a report per SINAC’ s 02/04/11 request concludes that soil did not support a
wetland (DE-INTA-255-2011).

05/06/11 Mr. Aven appears before Environmental Prosecutors office and renders a statement,
agreeing not to continue construction works, but requests an inspection to verify existence
and delimit wetlands.

05/9/11 The Municipality of Parrita issues internal request to enforce the injunction issued by
SETENA — (DeGA-064-2011).

OS/11/11 The Municipality of Parrita notifies Claimants of an injunction (the Municipality
Shutdown Notice) based on the injunction issued previously by SETENA (839-201 1-
SETENA) — (OIM-119-2011).

05/12/11 SETENA issues an internal report informing that works at the Las Olas Project site
continue despite the injunction issued in April 2011 (DeGa-072-2011), and establishes an
injunction ordering no further works be conducted at the Condo Section at the Las Olas
Project.

05/14/11 Mr. Aven makes statements as an accused party before the Environmental Prosecutor.

05/16/11 SINAC issues photography report ACOPAC-CP-08 1-11 on the existence of wetlands
based on visits carried out.

05/18/11 SINAC issued a report (SINAC-GASP 143-11) addressed to the Prosecutor (Mr.
Martinez) based on a site visit on May 13, 2011, concluding that a wetland area of
approximately 1.35 hectares existed on the Las Olas Project which had been damaged by
construction works undertaken.

05/18/11 Internal report within the Municipality of Parrita informing that no construction permits
have been issued, and that Claimants had been given notice of the SETENA 2011
injunction (OIM-137-2011).

05/20/11 Federal Prosecutor requests SINAC ACOPAC to delimit wetlands and forests (143-FAA-
2011).

05/25/11 Claimants submit a plan for reparation of damages, without acknowledging any liability,
and offer planting of trees and a park for the community.

05/31/11 SETENA resolves to maintain injunction and orders Claimants to submit a mitigation
program to avoid erosion (1190-2011.SETENA)

06/10/11 The Municipality of Parrita issues an internal report regarding works being carried out in

 

 

32

 

 

the Las Olas Project site.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

06/23/11 Inspection visit by TAA where construction works are identified, and the possible
existence of wetlands.

06/27/11 Inspection visit by Parrita police where construction works are identified, later reported to
SETENA on June 28, 2011.

06/28/11 SINAC requests Parrita to monitor alleged works which have continued despite SETENA
injunction (ACOPAC-CP-097-11).

07/07/11 SINAC issues report to Environmental Prosecutor regarding a site visit to the Las Olas
Project on July 4, 2011, confirming the existence of a forest under the terms of the
Forestry Law (ACOPAC-CP-099-11).

07/08/11 The Municipality of Parrita notified Claimants of an inspection made on account of
neighbor complaints, and identified works carried out (OIM-244-2011).

07/11/11 The Municipality issues internal report on the unsuccessful attempt to deliver a notice to
Claimants, which Mr. Damjanac had refused to receive (DI-025-2011).

09/13/11 SETENA notified Claimants that a surety bond was released, and Mr. Aven equally
released of liability in connection with the “Villas La Canicula” project, which no longer
to be developed (2185-201 1-SETENA).

09/00/11 DEPPAT submits bi-monthly report (No. 8, August-September 2011) to SETENA.

09/16/11 Mr. Aven files criminal charges before the prosecutor’s office at Parrita against Mr.
Bogantes for alleged request of bribe in August 2010.

10/01/11 SINAC visits Las Olas Project site.

10/03/11 SINAC reports to Environmental Prosecutor of environmental damages & men cutting
trees (ACOPAC-CP-129-2011-DEN).

10/03/11 Environmental Prosecutor (Mr. Martinez) requests the Judge in Parrita to issue injunction
order restricting construction on the site and files criminal charges against Mr. Aven and
Mr. Damjanac on allegations of drainage and refilling of wetlands.

10/21/11 Environmental Prosecutor (Mr. Martinez) requests that criminal charges against Mr. Aven
are dropped because there is no evidence the SETENA injunction was served on him.

11/00/11 DEPPAT submits bi-monthly report (No. 9, October-November 2011) to SETENA.

11/07/11 SINAC submits report on site visit to the Las Olas Project site on October 25, 2011, with
recommendations to protect the site and verify protection of the possible wetland on site
(ACOPAC-OSRAP-784-2011).

11/10/11 Mr. Aven files request to suspend any criminal proceedings until the administrative courts
rule on whether environmental harm has been caused.

1/15/11 SETENA revokes injunction of 04/13/11 because it finds no reason to question the
validity of EV for Condo Section (Resolution 2850-201 1-SETENA)

LIV/I7/11 The Prosecutor files a civil action to recover damages caused to the environment in the

 

Las Olas Project site.

 

33

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11/30/11 Criminal Court at Parrita issues injunction against continuance of works in the
investigation being carried out against Mr. Aven and Mr. Damjanac, and orders the
Municipality to stop any construction permit on designated lots.

12/02/11 The Municipality of Parrita delivers to Claimants inspection reports prepared and
previously submitted to SETENA (OIM-456-2011).

12/00/11 INGEOFOR consultant finds there is no forest which may be classified under the Forestry
Law.

2012

01/00/12 DEPPAT submits bi-monthly report (No. 10, December 201 1-January 2012) to SETENA.

01/26/12 The Criminal Court in Parrita orders the Mayor of Parrita to suspend any construction
permits in certain zones of the Las Olas Project site.

03/00/12 DEPPAT submits bi-monthly report (No. 11, February-March 2012) to SETENA.

05/00/12 DEPPAT submits bi-monthly report (No. 12, April-May 2012) to SETENA.

06/08/12 DEPPAT issues statement in respect to alleged existence of wetlands and forest in the Las
Olas Project site.

07/00/12 DEPPAT submits bi-monthly report (No. 13, June-July 2012) to SETENA.

06/20/12 Preliminary hearing at the Parrita court in criminal case against Mr. Aven and Mr.
Damjanac.

06/14/12 TAA determines that based on the site visits carried out on June 4-8, 2012, evidence exists
to deem that wetlands were refilled (TAA-DT-129).

06/20/12 Preliminary hearing at the Parrita court in criminal case against Mr. Aven and Mr.
Damjanac.

07/17/12 The TAA resolves to merge cases of complaints filed by SINAC and Mr. Bucelato (695-
12-TAA).

07/24/12 SINAC report of the site inspections carried out during 2011 and the resolutions adopted
by several agencies on the Las Olas Project (ACOPAC-CP-064-12).

10/10/12 Internal report in the Municipality addressed to the Environmental Commission
describing the different resolutions issued between 2009 and 2012 regarding the Las Olas
Project by SETENA, INTA, TAA, ACOPAC and wetlands identified.

10/17/12 Request by several Municipality officials of the Environmental Commission to ACOPAC
to determine whether a palustrine wetland exists and to delimit same.

10/30/12 ACOPAC responds to the Environmental Commission and informs that it is not within its
powers to carry out the request made on October 17, 2012 (ACOPAC-D-736-2012).

11/05/12 The Municipal Council adopts a resolution lifting the injunction and to permit the

 

continuation of works at the Las Olas Project site, which is communicated to the Mayor
and Mr. Aven through letter of November 6, 2012 (SM-2012-802).

 

34

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11/19/12 Ms. Vargas the Environmental Manager of the Municipality submits ample report to the
Mayor of Parrita on the Las Olas Project status (DeGS-359-2012).

12/04/12 The Municipality of Parrita informs of the construction permits issued for the Condo
Section of the Las Olas Project (OIM-863-2012) (OIM-864-2012).

12/04/12 The Mayor of Parrita informs Mr. Aven that the Municipality has not commented any
legal action relating to the Las Olas Project as of such date (OAM-721-2012).

12/05/12 Criminal case commenced against Mr. Aven and Mr. Damjanac.

12/07/12 Mr. Aven send letter to SETENA Technical Director restating the terms of a meeting held
on November 21, 2012.

2013

01/29/13 The Criminal Judge in Parrita annuls the proceedings given that the sitting judge had been
ill January 24-31, 2013.

01/29/13 An habeas corpus petition is filed before criminal court requesting to issue an injunction
in light of breaches to the constitutional rights of Mr. Aven in light of suspensions in the
case.

02/02/13 Mr. Aven receives alleged threatening email.

04/15/13 Mr. Aven files a police report on account of event where the car was shot while driving in
a Costa Rica highway (Report 000-13-008096).

04/22/13 Mr. Aven receives second alleged threatening email.

05/00/13 Mr. Aven leaves Costa Rica

07/22/13 Mr. Aven receives third alleged threatening email.

09/30/13 Mr. Aven receives fourth alleged threatening email.

09/17/13 Notice of Intent to Arbitrate is delivered.

09/26/13 The Criminal Court in Puntarenas extends the 2011 Injunction until the end of the
criminal proceedings.

12/20/13 Mr. Morera (criminal counsel to Mr. Aven) advises the Puntarenas criminal court that Mr.
Aven has received threats, has left Costa Rica and will not attend the hearing, but requests
the possibility of doing so by video-conference.

2014

01/10/14 Mr. Morera (criminal counsel to Mr. Aven) confirms the willingness of Mr. Aven to
appear and render statements by videoconference.

01/13/14 The Puntarenas Criminal Court rejects petition and demands Mr. Aven appears in person

 

for trial.

 

35

 

 

02/12/14 After re-trial of Mr. Damjanac, the Puntarenas Criminal Court acquits.

 

 

 

03/04/14 The Attorney general of Costa Rica files appeal on the decision to acquit Mr. Damjanac.
05/25/14 Criminal court issues international arrest warrant against Mr. Aven (Interpol Red Notice).
05/28/14 TAA instructs the director of ACOPAC to submit an economic valuation report on

damages caused to the environment (391-14-TAA).

 

08/29/14 Appeals Court of the Third Circuit annuls the acquittal judgment which released Mr.

Damjanac.

 

12/02/14 TAA again instructs the director of ACOPAC to submit an economic valuation report on

damages caused to the environment (1103-14-TAA).

 

 

 

 

 

 

2015
09/11/15 Interpol issues a statement to the effect that Mr. Aven is not subject to an Interpol Red
Notice).
11/02/15 Mr. Aven sends a letter to Mr. Martinez (Environmental Prosecutor) inquiring as to the
status of the filing of charges against Mr. Bogantes in 2011.
A. Acquisition of Properties

98.

99.

In acquiring the 37-hectare plot in Costa Rica, Mr. Aven purchased the properties
through several commercial vehicles already established under the laws of Costa Rica,
identified and defined as the Enterprises. The percentage of each Claimant investor
differs among the Enterprises.

Specifically, on February 6, 2002, an option agreement to acquire the properties”? was

executed between Mr. Aven and Mr. Carlos Alberto Monge Rojas— the primary
shareholder in the Enterprises that owned the various properties. The option agreement
was contingent on Mr. Aven’s receipt of the permits required to develop the land as a
project. Even though Mr. Aven was acting under his own name, he has argued that he
was acting on behalf of the other Claimant investors, and on October 4, 2004, a letter’+
was issued by Mr. Aven to the other Investors describing the structure of the ownership

of the shares in the different companies that owned the properties.

23 Exhibit C-27.
4 Exhibit C-241.

36

 

100. An application was first submitted in 2002 on behalf of La Canicula, one of the
Enterprises, to secure a concession over the maritime zone, i.e., the beach area adjoining
the property. In March 2002, the Costa Rica Institute of Tourism approved the grant of

25

the Concession”, and a concession contract entered into with the Municipality of Parrita.

101. On April 30, 2002, once Claimants were satisfied that permits had been issued to develop

the project”, an agreement was executed among Mr. Aven and Mr. Carlos Alberto
Monge Rojas to purchase the shares representing the capital stock of La Canicula and
Inversiones Cotsco. However, considering that under the laws of Costa Rica foreign
nationals could not own a majority of the stock in a commercial company that held a
concession over the maritime zone contiguous to the beach, the shares of La Canicula
were placed in trust on April 30, 2002 as per an agreement executed with Banco
Cuscatlan de Costa Rica, S.A. showing transfer of the shares of La Canicula so that
ownership complied with Costa Rican laws’. Under its terms, this trust agreement was to
be terminated a year later, but by reason of inaction the shares continued in the Banco
Cuscatlan trust until actually terminated and the shares were transferred into another trust

with Mr. Aven’s lawyer, Juan Carlos Esquivel, as the beneficiary’®.

102. Then, on March 8, 2005, 51% of the shares of La Canicula were transferred to Ms. Paula
Murillo, a national of Costa Rica that was Mr. Aven’s long-term personal assistant in
Costa Rica”’. A new transfer agreement was executed among Mr. Aven and Ms. Murillo
on May 10, 2010 with the same purpose, i.e., transferring 51% of the stock of La

Canicula*’ to Ms. Murillo.

?5 Exhibits C-28 and R-2.

6 The dates on which this purchase agreement was executed have been the subject of debate. Although Mr. Aven
testified in his Second Witness Statement (and the Claimants in their Reply Memorial) that the SPA was executed
on April 1, 2002, Mr. Aven subsequently corrected this during his testimony at the December Hearing that the
transfer occurred on April 30, 2002.

27 Exhibit C-237. This trust agreement was submitted by Claimants after Respondent submitted evidence during the
arbitral proceedings of the termination of the initial trust agreement. Both are dated April 30, 2002.

28 Exhibit R-393.

29 Exhibit C-242. Ms. Murillo also acted before Costa Rican agencies as the legal representative of the Enterpris
various administrative proceedings.

30 Exhibit C-65. Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, § 537, page 251.

  

37

103.

104.

105.

B. Claimants’ Permit Applications

On September 23, 2002, Claimants submitted to SETENA their Preliminary
Environmental Assessment Form for the “Hotel La Canicula Project”?! located on the
Concession Site. Following an inspection conducted by SETENA on October 11, 2002,
the agency concluded that “[g]iven that the project is located in the maritime terrestrial
zone, the increase in the capacity of load of services, an [Environmental Impact Study] is
required”**. SETENA required from Claimants the submission of an environmental
impact study on November 22, 2002°*. Despite appointing Mr. Carlos Dengo Garron as
the consultant in charge of submissions regarding this matter, Claimants never filed

before SETENA any application to develop the hotel.

Then, in 2004, Mr. Aven commissioned a marketing and land planning study for the
project to help produce a conceptual design*+. Following the design, an application was
filed with SETENA to develop a condominium site referred to as “Villas La Canicula”.
SETENA issued the first Environmental Viability Permit to the “Villas La Canicula”
project?> on November 23, 2004, which covered the area for both the Condo Section, as
well as part of the Easements Section. No development was commenced but, on February
27, 2007, SETENA granted a one-year extension to this first Environmental Viability
Permit in light of the fact that Claimants “were still in the process of obtaining the
construction permits”*°. This original Environmental Viability Permit then lapsed one
year later. Since the Villas La Canicula project was not developed within its term,
SETENA closed its file on the project on September 13, 2011, returning the
environmental guarantee that had been deposited by Claimants when they applied for the

Environmental Viability Permit’.

Contemporaneously in the month of January 2005 La Canicula had applied for an

Environmental Viability permit for the “Hotel Colinas del Mar” projects on the

31 Exhibit R-3.

® Exhibit R-4.

33 Exhibit R-5.

3 Exhibit C-30.

35 Resolution File No. 2164-2004-SETENA, Exhibit R-9.
36 Resolution No. 375-2007 SETENA, Exhibit R-12.

37 Exhibit R-112.

38

106.

107.

108.

109.

Concession Site**, for which a permit was issued by SETENA on March 17, 2006°°.
Pursuant to SETENA’s requirements for the permit application, the Claimants obtained
confirmation from SINAC that the Concession Site was not within a Wetlands Protected

Area (“WPA”) as per communiqué dated January 21, 2006*°.

In order to consolidate the ownership of different plots into one single parcel, Mr. Aven
subsequently applied to consolidate properties, securing approval to consolidate various
properties into one (Property P-142646) in September 2005*!. Title to this merged
property was subsequently transferred, in October 2008%, to Trio International Inc., a
company owned by the Claimants, and 288 lots comprising the Condo Section of the Las
Olas Project were created.

In March of 2006, Claimants appointed DEPPAT, S.A. as the “Environmental Regent”
for the Villas La Canicula Project*®. An environmental regent is the professional tasked
with ensuring that the works undertaken by a developer do not impact the environment.
DEPPAT resigned from the position in April 2009 and notified SETENA of its
withdrawal due to Claimants’ failure to indicate a start date for the Villas La Canicula
project. DEPPAT nonetheless continued to be retained by Claimants for the remaining

projects in Las Olas.

In a major step towards the development of the Las Olas Project, the Claimants hired the
architectural and engineering firm of Mussio Madrigal in April 2007 to prepare a master
site plan for the entire project and apply for the Environmental Viability and construction

permits for the Condo Section*.

Mr. Edgardo Madrigal Mora, one of the partners in the firm, was in charge of the “D1
Application” process to secure the Environmental Viability for the Condo Section. As
part of the elements to accompany to the application, the Claimants were to provide to

SETENA an environmental management plan, a geotechnical survey, a physical

38 Exhibit R-10.

8 Resolution No. 543-2006-SETENA, Exhibit C-36.
40 Exhibit C-223.

4 Exhibit C-242.

2 Exhibit C-4.

8 Exihbit R-10.

+4 Exhibit C-43.

39

environmental protocol, an archaeological survey, and an anthropic risk certification. The
firm of Mussio Madrigal then commissioned these studies and reports from required third

parties.

110. In July 2007, Mussio Madrigal engaged another firm, Tecnocontrol, S.A., to undertake
several of the studies, among them a hydrogeological study**. Tecnocontrol, S.A. in turn
requested the study from Geotest, S.A. Gedlogos Consultores. This study was
undertaken, and a report prepared by Mr. Roberto Protti** (the “Protti Report”). For
reasons that are in dispute in this arbitration, the Protti report was not considered for the
environmental viability application, nor attached to the D1 Application subsequently
submitted. However, the Protti Report was later filed with SINAC in 2011, three years
after the Claimants obtained the EV for the Condo Site. Respondent has placed much
relevance on this fact because it says the Protti Report noted and mapped the existence of
a central zone in the property that presented “swamp-type flooded areas” (areas
anegadas de tipo pantanoso) with poor draining. Had SETENA been informed of the
findings in the Protti Report, Respondent adds, Claimants would have been required to go
through a much more demanding environmental impact process to obtain the necessary
permits for the development and would have been required to make extensive

arrangements to protect the ecosystems in the Project Site.

111. A month later, in August 2007, Mussio Madrigal commissioned an environmental
management plan (plan de gestién ambiental) for the Condo Section from Geoambiente,
S.A., a private consulting firm established in Costa Rica, which issued the relevant

report*” (the “Geoambiente Report”).

112. On November 8, 2007, the D1 Application was submitted by Claimants** to SETENA to
secure the Environmental Viability in respect of the Condo Section*’, relying on the
Geoambiente Report for the Environmental Management Plan, among other documents
that included a Geotechnical Survey performed by Tecnocontrol S.A. (which also
included a hydrogeological study); a Physical Environmental Protocol prepared by Mr.

45 Claimants’ Reply Memorial, § 245, page 84.

46 Exhibit R-11.

47 Exhibit R-1.

48 Mr. Aven signed on behalf of Inversiones Cotsco C&T, S.A.
4° Exhibit R-13.

40

113.

114.

115.

Eduardo Hernandez Garcia; an Archeological Survey prepared by Ms. Tatiana Hidalgo
that concluded there was no archeological evidence on site; and an Anthropic Risk
Certification from Mr. Edgardo Madrigal Mora that certified that there were no sources

of anthropic risk within the site™’.

As part of the ordinary process of the D1 Application, SETENA made an inspection visit
to the Condo Section of the Las Olas project on January 10, 2008°!. SETENA then
requested in February 2008 follow-up information from Mr. Aven regarding the D1
Application including: (i) a vegetation coverage map, (ii) the property’s registration
certificate, (iii) a statement by ACOPAC-MINAE confirming the main use of the soil,
(iv) confirmation as to the presence of forest areas, (v) a photographic record of the
project area, and (vi) a sworn statement by the developer not to commence works without

having received the Environmental Viability.

In response to the information request, and specifically in respect of (iv) of the prior
paragraph, Mussio Madrigal declared in a letter dated March 14, 2008 that there were no
forest areas at the Condo Section of the project despite the aerial photograph maps
showing them in the records of SETENA*. The firm separately requested confirmation
from SINAC that the site was not located within a Wildlife Protected Area (drea silvestre
protegida). On April 2, 2008, SINAC responded through a communiqué (ACOPAC-
OSRAP-00282-08) to the effect that Condo Section was not within a WPA*. The

relevance of this determination is disputed among Claimants and Respondent.

Shortly after the expiration on March 17, 2008 of the Environmental Viability Permit
issued two years earlier for the “Hotel Colinas del Mar” project at the Concession Site,
Claimants submitted a request for an extension, and this was granted for an additional

year on March 24, 2008.

5° The Geotechnical Survey of Tecnocontrol S.A. attached to the D1 Application did not correspond to the Las Olas
project, although neither Claimants nor Respondent realized this until the December Hearing. Claimants later
acknowledged that the Tecnocontrol, S.A. report in the SETENA file was a mistake, but that it was not possible to
determine whether this mistake was attributable Geoambiente or to SETENA.

5! Included as part of the file found in Exhibit C-222.

2 Exhibit R-16.

53 Exhibit C-48.

4l

116.

117.

118.

119.

On March 27, 2008, just days before the aforementioned SINAC communiqué was issued
confirming that the Condo Section was not within a WPA, a SINAC Report No.
67389RNVS-2008 was submitted to SETENA as part of the Las Olas Project file** which
has been referred to during the proceedings as the “Forged Document”. Both Claimants
and Respondent have distanced themselves from its origin, and many discussions among
themselves have arisen as to who had motivation to create and submit it, but it is still
unclear to the Tribunal who actually produced it. This document, purportedly signed by
Gabriel Quesada Avendajio (a biologist from SINAC) and Ronald Vargas (Director of
SINAC) stating that the criteria followed by the Las Olas Project for environmental
protection met SINAC’s requirements, concluded that the project “constituted no evident
threat to the biological area of Esterillos Oeste, nor affects in any way the biodiversity in
the Local National Wildlife Refuge”. This document was confirmed to be a forgery — but
not until November 2010. In the meantime, it appears as though SETENA relied on the

document.

On April 2, 2008, the Central Pacific Conservation Area of SINAC issued a confirmation
letter to Mauricio Mussio, one of the principals at Claimants’ architectural firm,
confirming that a certain property was not within a wildlife protected area (area silvestre
protegida)*>. This letter identifies property number P-1244761-2007, but this does not
appear to cover all of the properties, including the Easements Section of the Las Olas

Project®®.

On April 3, 2008, Claimants made a second submission to SETENA with the information

and documentation requested in SETENA’s February 2008 follow-up communication

regarding the D1 Application for the Condo Section*’.

Finally, on June 2, 2008, SETENA issued the Environmental Viability Permit
(Resolution No. 1597-2008-SETENA) for the Condo Section**. Among the conditions

established in the permit were (i) that in the event that the cutting of any tree was to

54 Exhibit C-47.

55 ACOPAC-OSRAP-00282-08, Exhibit C-48.

56 This property is not listed as having been owned by Claimants, either in Annex A to Claimants’ Memorial, nor in
Annex B to Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief. However, it is a plot plan attached as Exhibit 6 to the Barboza Expert

Report.

57 Exhibit R-18.
58 Exhibit C-52.

42

happen, a permit ought to be requested from the MINAE, and (ii) the need to notify

SETENA one month in advance of the beginning of construction at the property.

120. After receiving the Environmental Viability Permit from SETENA for the Condo
Section, Claimants applied for construction permits from the Municipality of Parrita. In
the month of August 2008, the Municipality issued construction permits for a hotel,
cabins and a pool at the Concession Site (Permit 165-08)°*. Although a construction
permit was also applied for in respect of the Condo Section at a later date, the
Municipality rejected the application on July 19, 2010 for several reasons; amongst them,
the fact that the Environmental Viability Permit issued for the Condo Site in 2008 had

lapsed. The municipal permit was finally granted on September 7, 2010.

121. SINAC (through the Central Pacific Conservation Area Parrita office) carried out an
inspection of the Condo Section of the Las Olas Project on September 30, 2008, and
issued a report (ACOPAC-SD-087-08 or the “2008 SINAC Report”), identifying the

existence of two (2) possible wetlands”!

. During this inspection, Mauricio Mussio of
Mussio Madrigal joined the inspectors on their visit. There was no follow-up on this

finding.
Cc. Concerns of Neighbors and Municipality Investigation

122. In March 2009, certain neighbors in the Esterillos Oeste community filed a formal
complaint with the Municipality®, alleging that in the Las Olas Project site there had
always been wetlands as evidenced by that area’s flooding during the rainy season and
the existence of fauna typical of a wetland. The neighbors accused Claimants of filling in

the lagoon, felling trees and building paved roads®.

123. On April 26, 2009, Ms. Monica Vargas-Quezada, Environmental Manager (Gestora
Ambiental) from the Municipality of Parrita made a visit to the Condo Section and
confirmed the felling of trees and the construction of roads“. Based on additional
neighbors’ complaints, on January 20, 2010, a second inspection visit was made by Ms.

© Exhibit C-40.

© Exhibit R-39.

6! Exhibit R-20.

© Exhibit R-23.

© Exhibit R-26.
Td.

43

124.

125.

126.

127.

Vargas, who again confirmed the construction of roads, evidence of wetlands, and felling

65

of trees”. A third inspection visit was made on May 21, 2010.

On May 31, 2010, Ms. Vargas prepared three internal reports to the Municipality after
her last visit to the project site, (a) detailing the visits conducted and requesting that the
relevant authorities undertake an official categorization of the area®’, (b) informing the
Construction Department of the Municipality of a complaint regarding the existence of a
wetland in the site and requesting information from the file’’, and (c) requesting
information from the Department of Permits of the Municipality regarding the existence

of permits at the Las Olas project®.

The Urban and Social Development Department of the Municipality of Parrita responded
to Ms. Vargas on June 14, 2010, and confirmed that the Las Olas Project did not hold any
construction permits to undertake earth movements or build private roads with

electrification.

On the same date, June 14, 2010, the Municipality attempted to serve Mr. Damjanac a
communiqué advising of the complaints that works were being performed without the
requisite construction permits”. Claimants have insisted that the letter was never received
by them. That same day, Claimants notified SETENA of the start of works in the Condo
Section, through a letter dated June 1, 20107!. Respondent asserts that although the letter
was dated June 1‘, it was not submitted until June 14". Respondent contends this is likely
because the Environmental Viability Permit corresponding to such area was scheduled to

lapse per its terms on June 2, 2010.

Then, Ms. Vargas filed a complaint on June 15, 2010, with the Environmental
Administrative Court (Tribunal Ambiental Administrative — “TAA”), a branch of the

Ministry of the Environment, requesting that it conduct an investigation of the Las Olas

6 Exhibit C-67.

Id.

67 Exhibit R-29.
68 Exhibit R-30.
© Exhibit R-34.
7 Exhibit R-35.
7! Exhibit R-31.

44

128.

129.

130.

131.

132.

Project in light of (i) concerns as to whether wetlands were being refilled; (ii) the

construction of roads; and (iii) the fact that “vegetation” had been cut down and burned”.

The next day, on June 16, 2010, Ms. Vargas informed SINAC of her findings and prior

reports issued regarding the Las Olas Project”.

Curiously, on the same day that Ms. Vargas made her concerns public, the Municipality
issued seven residential construction permits for the Easements Section of the Las Olas
Project’. A few days later, on June 22, 2010, DEPPAT—the Environmental Regent
engaged by Mr. Aven—submitted a land movement plan and intended works program

with respect to the Easement Section”.

On July 8, 2010, Mr. Bogantes—Chief of SINAC’s Regional Office in Quepos—and Mr.
Manfredi—also of SINAC—visited the Condo Section along with representatives from
SETENA”. SINAC (through the Central Pacific Conservation Area) issued a Report
(ACOPAC-OSRAP-371-2010) on July 16, 2010 finding that it was not able to ascertain
the existence of wetlands, but it confirmed the felling of trees’’, In this report, SINAC set
forth the elements that it considered necessary to determine its existence of wetlands and

concluded that it was not able to confirm these.

In the meantime, neighbors to the project continued to submit new complaints. On July
20, 2010, a complaint was submitted to the Municipality by Mr. Bucelato and others with
respect to the existence of wetlands that were being refilled, and other concerns regarding
environmental impact’*. The Defensoria de los Habitantes acknowledged and accepted

for investigation the complaint on July 23, 2010”.

As a consequence of the complaints from neighbors, on August 7, 2010, the Defensoria
de los Habitantes informed SETENA of the complaints, and requested a report from

SETENA as to whether it was aware of the complaint and whether the Las Olas Project

® Exhibit C-69.
73 Exhibit C-70.
7 Exhibits C-14 and C-71.
75 Exhibit R-42.
76 Exhibits C-72 and C-78.
77 Exhibit C-72.
78 Exhibit R-40.
Exhibit R-43.

45

133.

134.

135.

had relevant EV Permits*’. On the same date the Defensoria de los Habitantes sent
another letter to Mayor of Parrita alerting as to the complaints and also requested
information from the Municipality in order to conduct an investigation®!, The
Municipality responded to this communication on August 18, 2010*?, advising that an
inspection had been carried out in 2009, and requested MINAET to conduct a study since
the Municipality was not competent to determine the existence of wetlands. Within the
list of documents supporting the project, the Municipality included reference to the

Forged Document.

Based on the neighbors’ complaints regarding the damage to Wetlands, and flooding,
SETENA made another visit to the Las Olas Project on August 18, 2010 and issued an
internal report, confirming that there was no evidence of “land movements” or “bodies of
water (lakes)” in the Condo Section’. Consequently, SETENA issued a report the
following day (ASA-1216-2010-SETENA) recommending that the neighbors’ complaints

be rejected insofar as there were no wetlands or bodies of water (lakes) in the site™*.

SINAC then responded on August 27, 2010 through Mr. Christian Bogantes (head of the
Subregional Office for Aguirre and Parrita) to the Defensoria de los Habitantes advising
that, based on the different reports carried out, including the visit carried out by Mr.
Rolando Manfredi on July 8, 2010, there were neither wetlands nor bodies of water
(lakes) in the property*>.

On September 1, 2010 SETENA issued a Resolution (No. 2086-2010-SETENA) citing
the inspections and reports mentioned in the preceding paragraphs, and determined that
the complaints submitted by Mr. Bucelato should be rejected, insofar as there was no
evidence of earth movements, bodies of water (lakes) or wetlands in the site °°. SETENA
ordered Claimants to file within thirty business days an environmental management plan

for the Condo Section of the Las Olas Project.

8° Communication No. 08949-2010-DHR, Exhibit R-45.
8! Communication No. 08952-2010-DHR, Exhibit R-46.
® Exhibit R-49.
83 Exhibit C-78.
84 Exhibit C-79.
85 Exhibit C-80.
86 Exhibit C-17.

46

136.

137.

138.

On September 7, 2010 the Municipality of La Parrita issued Permit No. 130-10 to carry
out constructions in an area comprising 3,573 mts. in the Condo Section*’. Earlier, in
2008—as previously described—and then in July 2010, the Municipality had issued
several construction permits for the Easement Section**. Despite granting these
construction permits, the Municipality subsequently noted in a communiqué dated
September 13, 2010 that some information was still missing for these to be lawfully

issued®?.

Concerned over the constant allegations and complaints of Mr. Steve Bucelato, the most
vocal and most opposed of the neighbors to the Las Olas Project, Mr. Aven filed a

criminal complaint against him for defamation on October 20, 2010”.

The neighbors to the Las Olas Project then identified the existence of the Forged
Document”! allegedly issued by SINAC that had been submitted into the SETENA file
back in 2008 and, in a new complaint dated November 18, 2010 — but submitted to
SINAC on November 23, 2010 — these neighbors challenged the reliance by SETENA
and other authorities on the Forged Document”?

de los Habitantes advised SINAC of the filing of this complaint??. On November 25,

. Immediately thereafter, the Defensoria

2010, SINAC issued an internal communication” requesting that the criminal charges
filed by the Municipality, along with other information, be taken into account in the
preparation of a report. On the same date, SINAC confirmed that the document was
indeed a forgery”’. On January 17, 2011, SETENA requested” that Claimants present the
original copy of the Forged Document or, in the alternative, a certified copy authenticated
by public notary. Claimants replied to this request on February 9, 2011, denying any
connection to the Forged Document and also denying having submitted it to SETENA.

Claimants — through Mr. Aven—alleged that they would file another criminal complaint

*7 Exhibit C-14 and C-85.

88 Exhibits C-14, C-40 and C-71.

® Exhibit R-57.

°0 Exhibit C-89.

9°! Exhibit C-47.

°2 Communiqué CV-0081-2010, Exhibit C-91.

°3 Exhibit C-91.

°4 Communiqué ACOPAC-D-1519-10, Exhibit R-60.
°5 Communiqué ACOPAC-D-1520-10, Exhibit C-92.
°6 Exhibit R-65.

47

139.

140.

141.

against Mr. Bucelato, as he “had been seen with an original of the questionable
document”*’. However, no such complaint was subsequently filed, nor was evidence
submitted in this proceeding to support Mr. Bucelato’s possession of the original Forged

Document.

Upon being informed of the Forged Document, SINAC immediately initiated other
inspection visits to the Condo Section®® and on November 30, 2010, requested that
SETENA suspend the Environmental Viability Permit for the Condo Section based on the
identification of the irregular document”. Four additional inspections were carried out by
SINAC Director, Mr. Picado Cubillo, in December 2010, the results of which were
addressed in his January 3, 2011 report, described below.

On January 3, 2011, SINAC issued a report (ACOPAC-CP-003-11) (the “SINAC

January 2011 Report”)!

on the conclusions and recommendations resulting from the
site visits. The report concluded that the Las Olas Project site included bodies of water,
that “there may be” wetlands in the Condo Section, the felling of trees, the construction
of a drainage channel, and also mentioned the Forged Document. SINAC later
recommended that: (a) the agency Programa Nacional de Humedales (‘National
Wetland Program” or “PNH”) carry out an inspection'®!; (b) INTA carry out a soils
study'™; (c) an injunction be issued on further construction; and (d) that criminal
complaints be instigated with respect to the allegedly forged document, and damage

caused to the forest in the Condo Section.

SINAC responded to the request from the Defensoria de los Habitantes on February 11,
2011, advising that criminal charges had been filed on account of the Forged Document

and damages to a forest and possible filling of a wetland, and further advising that a

97 Exhibit C-111.

°8 Exhibit R-60.

%® Exhibit C-93.

100 Exhibit C-101 and R-262.

"© Communiqué ACOPAC-D-80-11, Exhibit R-68.
102 Communiqué ACOPAC-D-81-11, Exhibit R-67.
03 Exhibit C-122.

48

142.

143.

144.

145.

report had been requested from the PNH to determine whether wetlands existed on the
property!™*,

D. Injunctions Suspending Works, the Environmental Prosecutor’s

Investigation and Criminal Charges

Following the issuance of the SINAC January 2011 Report, SINAC requested the
Environmental Prosecutor’s Office in Aguirre on January 28, 2011, to make a site visit to
verify the (i) refilling of wetlands, (ii) illegal felling of trees, and to issue an order to
suspend all work that could affect the ecosystem until such time as it was confirmed

whether Claimants had all permits and wetlands did not exist!>.

On February 3, 2011, Mr. Bucelato also filed a criminal complaint against Mr. Aven,
with the TAA! on account of environmental damages (earth movement, the construction

of roads, and the filling of wetlands), as well as the use of forged documents.

Then on February 4, 2011, per the instructions of the Environmental Prosecutor, SINAC
requested from the PNH an official determination as to whether there were wetlands

located at the Project Site!”

; and also requested the National Institute for Agricultural
Innovation and Technology Transfer!"* (Instituto Nacional de Investigacion e Innovacion
en Transferencia de Tecnologia Agropecuaria - “INTA”), an agency of the Ministry of

Agriculture, perform a survey of the soil.

Shortly after SINAC made its request for an official determination of whether or not there
were wetlands at the Las Olas Project site, it issued Resolution ACOPAC-CP-032-11
dated February 14, 2011!°, containing an injunction (medida cautelar administrativa)
suspending all works and provided notice thereof to Mr. Aven on February 18, 2011. The
SINAC Injunction ordered the immediate suspension of the project, as well as any other
activity related to the clearance of minor and major vegetation, the opening of new roads,
or other earth movements, until such time as could be determined whether the protected

areas had been affected or invaded, and wetlands have been drained or filled. Although

04 Communiqué ACOPAC-D-1 15-11, Exhibit R-72.
105 Exhibit R-66.

106 Exhibit C-110.

107 Exhibit R-68.

108 Exhibit R-67.

109 Exhibit C-112.

49

146.

147.

148.

149.

Claimants initially challenged the SINAC injunction!!®, they later abandoned said

challenge.

On March 2, 2011, SINAC filed a claim with the TAA against Mr. Aven, as legal
representative of Inversiones Cotsco C&T, S.A., for damage to wetlands and illegal tree
cutting!'!', The claim marked the third complaint filed with the TAA concerning the Las
Olas Project. A few months later, on July 27, 2012, the TAA would consolidate the
complaints into one record given that the subject matter and the defendants were the

same! !?,

Mr. Bucelato then appeared before the Municipality on March 6, 2011, with an attorney,
to present the SINAC January 2011, Report''? and requested that an injunction be issued
to stop construction on the Las Olas Project. This complaint was memorialized by an
internal report issued on March 7, 2011 by Mr. Marvin Mora Chinchilla, Head of the
Terrestrial Maritime Zone of the Municipality of Parrita at the time, addressed to the

Municipal Council!'*.

On March 8, and based on the above complaints, the Municipal Council issued a
resolution urging the Mayor of Parrita to issue an injunction'!>- separate from that issued
days earlier by SINAC. Thereafter, the Municipality of Parrita issued several letters to
authorities on April 4, 2011, inquiring as to the status of the complaints since it had

resolved to suspend any permits, and not to issue additional ones in respect to the project.

The PNH presented a wetlands study to SINAC on March 18, 2011, concluding, inter
alia, that there was a wetland in the property; that there was machinery operating at the
site moving land and installing sewage systems; and that a wetland had been adversely
affected by the construction of roads and sewage!!®. The PNH concluded that the
principle in dubio pro natura should be applied and immediate measures to prevent more

harm should be taken, in accordance with the Biodiversity Law (Law No. 7788).

110 Exhibit C-146.

1 Exhibit R-73.

12 Exhibit R-121.

13 Exhibit C-101.

14 Exhibit R-74.

'l5 Municipal Council Accord No. AC-03-2362-2011, Exhibit R-75.
16 Exhibit R-76.

50

150. On April 13, 2011, a temporary injunction (Resolution No. 412-11-TAA) was issued by
the TAA!!’, which was notified to Claimants on the same date!'®, and SETENA likewise
issued an injunction!!? (Resolution 839-2011-SETENA) prohibiting further works on the
site under the 2008 Environmental Viability Permit, on the basis of an official
communication from SINAC dated November 30, 2010, requesting suspension of the
Environmental Viability permit in order to investigate allegations concerning the forged
SINAC document. As a result, the Municipality of Parrita issued a report and resolution
on May 12, 2011'° advising that in light of the SETENA April 2011 Injunction, it would
not issue any type of construction permit for the site. The Municipality was clear to
identify in its resolution that it was not the issuer of the injunction, but was acting in
conformity with the principle of administrative coordination. Despite such resolution
issued by the Municipality, Respondent has claimed that Claimants continued working on
the Condo Section. Several inspections were carried out in the following weeks, and it

was confirmed that works continued'”!.

151. On April 29, 2011, Claimants appealed the SETENA April 2011 Injunction, and

requested that it be declared null and void.

152. Just a couple of weeks after the SETENA April 2011 Injunction, however, conflicting

decisions were issued by agencies of Costa Rica.

153. First, on May 5, 2011, INTA issued a report (DE-INTA-255-2011)!”? - in response to
SINAC’s February 4, 2011 abovementioned request, concluding that despite the gley

soils that were present, soil studies carried out did not support the existence of

wetlands!>,

17 Exhibit C-121.

18 Exhibit R-78.

119 Exhibit C-122.

120 Exhibit C-125.

121 As indicated by Ms. Vargas in a report (DeGA-01 11-2011) to SETENA and to the Municipal Council of June 29,
2011 informing as to earth movement and construction activities being continued. (Exhibit C-133).

122 Exhibit C-124.

'23 One of the conclusions of the report states that “the anthropic affectation that has been given for decades to this
sector (road infrastructure, deforestation, cattle raising) and the definition of Management Unit for | 4 do not give
rise [to conclude] that the soils on this site can be classified as typical of wetland ecosystems” (La injerencia
antropica que por varias décadas se ha dado en este sector (infraestructura vial, deforestacién, ganaderia) y la
definicién de Unidad de Manejo del punto 4 no dan pie a que los suelos de este sitio se cataloguen como tipicos de
ecosistemas de humedal) (Exhibit C-124).

Sl

154.

155.

156.

157.

158.

Then, on May 16, 2011 SINAC issued a photographic report (ACOPAC-CP-081-11)!74
addressed to the Prosecutor (Mr. Martinez) to which report was made after visits to the
site on December 6 and December 21, 2010 identifying felled trees and construction

works.

On May 18, 2011 SINAC issued another report (SINAC-GASP 143-11)!?° also addressed
to the Prosecutor (the “SINAC May 2011 Report”) based on a site visit on May 13,
2011, concluding that a wetland area of approximately 1.35 hectares existed on the Las
Olas Project; that the site’s topography had been directly affected by a drainage channel
and sewage system; and that the palustrine wetland had been completely refilled by
Claimants. Further, SINAC recommended requesting from Claimants a restoration plan

in respect to the damage caused to the ecosystem!”°.

SETENA subsequently upheld the injunction it had issued on April 13, 2011, through
Resolution 1190-2011-SETENA of May 31, 2011'’, taking note that such injunction had
not been complied with by Claimants. It also ordered Claimants to submit a mitigation
plan to avoid erosion of land, and a notice was ordered to be given to the environmental
prosecutor (Fiscalia Agrario Ambiental) in light of the fact that Mr. Aven was deemed to
be in contempt of the earlier order.

Next, on July 7, 2011, SINAC submitted another report (ACOPAC-CP-099-11) to the
Prosecutor which confirmed the existence of a forest and damages caused to the forest in
the Las Olas Project Condo Section!?*.

On June 8, 2011, SETENA issued a new resolution with respect to the Environmental
Viability for the Concession Site (1309-2011-SETENA), reflecting the modified layout

of the proposed project for the Concession Site, although the description of the project

124 Exhibit C-126.
25 Exhibit R-265. The date of the report wrongfully states as its date March 18, 2011 (18 de marzo de 2011)
considering that the site visit was made on May 13, 2011.

126

SINAC confirmed the geographic coordinates of the site visit carried out on May 13, 2011 in its report of May

23, 2011 (SINAC-GASP 154-11).
127 Exhibit R-100.
128 Exhibit C-134.

52

159.

160.

161.

162.

was modified at the request of Claimants by reason of errors in the prior resolution, by a

subsequent SETENA resolution (2030-201 1-SETENA) on August 23, 2011!”°.

Four months later, on October 1, 2011, and as a consequence of another neighbor’s
complaint, Mr. Picado Cubillo from SINAC made a visit to inspect the Las Olas Project
site, and issued a report to the Environmental Prosecutor (ACOPAC-CP-129-2011-DEN)
on October 3, 2011 (the “SINAC October 2011Report”)'*°, whereby it confirmed
environmental damages and the cutting of trees. Mr. Manfredi from SINAC made another

visit on October 25, 2011, and issued another report confirming the above findings!*!.

Following these reports, the Environmental Prosecutor, Mr. Luis Gerardo Martinez,
charged Mr. Aven on October 21, 2011, with the crimes of (i) ordering the draining and
drying of wetlands in violation of Article 98 of the Wildlife Conservation Law, and (ii)
invading a conservation area in violation of Article 58 of the Costa Rican Forestry Law.
Mr. Damjanac was also charged but in this case with illegal exploitation of a forest in

violation of Article 61 of the Costa Rican Forestry Law!”

Contemporaneously, on October 14, 2011, the Prosecutor requested'** that the Criminal
Court of Quepos, Costa Rica, issue a judicial injunction against the continuance of works
at the Las Olas Project site. This injunction was granted on November 30, 2011,'*4,
ordering Claimants to stop all work where there may be a wetland or forest on the site,
and to stop all water damage from the wetland, it also ordered both Mr. Aven and Mr.
Damjanac to stop from taking any other works affecting the environment. The
Municipality was ordered not to issue any construction permits on the lots identified in

the order. This 2011 Injunction remains in effect to this date.

In a surprising turn of events, on November 15, 2011 SETENA issued Resolution 2850-
2011-SETENA, whereby it “revoked the injunction that SETENA itself had issued on
April 13, 2011, because it found “... no grounds or defects justifying annulment ...” of

the Environmental Viability Permit for the Condo Section since there was insufficient

129 Exhibit C-138.
130 Exhibit C-141 and R-264.
131 Exhibit C-143.
132 Exhibit C-142.
133 Exhibit R-114.
134 Exhibit C-187.

53

163.

164.

165.

166.

167.

evidence to prove that Claimants were responsible for the Forged Document!*>. In
essence, SETENA confirmed the Environmental Viability Permit for the Condominium

Section.

The Attorney General’s Office, on behalf of the Republic of Costa Rica, then filed a civil
claim against Claimants on November 17, 2011, seeking damages for the environmental

damage caused to the ecosystems!*°.

On November 30, 2011, the Criminal Court of Quepos’ accepted the petition from the
Environmental Prosecutor, and issued an injunction and ordered Claimants to stop all

works wherever there may be a wetland or forest as per the report issued by SINAC!?’.

Despite SETENA’s revocation of its own suspension order, by this time there were three
separate injunctions issued against the continuance of works at the Las Olas Project site:
(a) the SINAC Injunction of February 14, 2011!8; (b) the TAA Injunction of April 13,
2011!°°; and (c) the Criminal Court of Quepos’ injunction of November 30, 2011.

In December 2011, following Claimants’ commissioning of a forestry report from
INGEOFOR, a Costa Rican private environmental consulting company, a report was
issued finding that the Las Olas site did not contain a forest, but largely consisted of
cattle pasture. Specifically, the report found that the majority of the trees in the Condo
Section did not require a tree felling permit and that nothing that would be considered a

forest—within the definition established under the Forestry Law—was found!?.

One year later, as the criminal case was ongoing, the Municipality of Parrita requested its
Environmental Commission on October 10, 2012, to prepare a report on the Las Olas
Project and whether or not a palustrine wetland existed'*!. The Environmental Manager
then submitted a report on November 19, 2012 (DeGA-359-2012), with a detailed

narrative of the events taking place in respect to the Las Olas Project, the permits issued;

135 Exhibit C-144.
136 Exhibit R-200.
137 Exhibit C-146.
138 Exhibit C-112.
139 Exhibit C-121.
140 Exhibit C-148.
‘41 Communiqué DeGA-328-2012, Exhibit R-126.

54

168.

169.

170.

the determinations as to the existence of wetlands and forest on site, and the injunctions

issued.

While this report was in process, the Municipal Council issued on November 6, 2012,
Resolution SM-2012-802' addressed to the Mayor, approving the lifting of its own
injunction issued as a consequence of SETENA’s Resolution of April 13, 2011. This
decision was based on the fact that SETENA had itself revoked such resolution. In
accordance with the Municipal Council Resolution, the continuance of the Las Olas

Project was approved, subject to compliance with applicable law.

There were contemporaneous internal investigations in the Municipality. The Internal
Auditor of Parrita, Mr. Jorge Antonio Bricefio Vega, issued two communications in
October and November of 2012'** - addressed to the TAA and the Municipal Council,
and to the Major of Parrita, respectively, questioning whether the actions taken in the
complaint before the TAA were properly motivated by Ms. Vargas as Environmental
Manager of the Municipality; and whether the resolution issued by the Municipal Council
suspending the Las Olas Project was appropriate in light of the information available. Mr.

Bricefio submitted recommendations.
E. The Complaints from Mr. Bucelato and Other Neighbors in Esterillos Oeste

Throughout their submissions, Claimants have expressed multiple references to
complaints filed by Mr. Bucelato, whether these were filed by himself or jointly with
other neighbors of Esterillos Oeste, during the period comprised between March 2009
and March 2011. Some of these complaints were submitted as evidence in the
proceedings'*+ by both Claimants and Respondent. According to Claimants, the
meddling of Mr. Bucelato and “... his unsubstantiated, recycled and rejected complaints
about alleged wetlands and an Allegedly Forged Document ... a disgruntled neighbor
with a vendetta against the Project and Mr. Aven ... allowed investigations to spiral out

of control without a shred of conclusive evidence and with no regard for the Claimants’

12 Exhibit R-129.

48 DAMP-153-2012, dated October 16, 2012, addressed to the Administrative Environmental Court (Exhibit C-
282); DAMP-154-2012, dated 29 October 2012, addressed to the Municipal Council and to Mr. Freddy Garro Arias,
Municipal Mayor of Parrita (Exhibit C-283); and DAMP-159-2012143, dated November 5, 2012, addressed to the
Municipal Council (Exhibit C-284).

M44 Exhibits C-79, R-23, R-37, R-44, R-59, R-74.

55

171.

172.

145

due process rights, is outrageous and a clear breach of the Respondent’s DR-CAFTA
obligations vis-a-vis foreign investors”'*>. This merited the preparation by Claimants of
Annex “A” to their Post-Hearing Brief which maps the different complaints, separating
them as regarding wetlands, the Forged Document, or a criminal complaint, and what
they reveal to be a series of actions which they believe are unmerited, overlapping

injunctions and Municipality Shutdown Notices.

The record shows that the complaints alleging the existence and damages to the wetlands
were investigated by the proper Municipal authorities, which then triggered further
investigations from SINAC, SETENA and the TAA. These have been commented above.
Indeed, Ms. Monica Vargas, who was the Environmental Manager at the Municipality,
inspected the Las Olas Project site after the first complaint received relating to an alleged
refilling of a wetland in March 2009, and subsequently in January and May 2010,
producing reports'*° and filing of complaints to MINAE and the TAA’. In turn, these
reports and complaint provoked action on the part of Defensoria de los Habitantes
directing the Municipality of Parrita, the Major, as well as the TAA and SETENA"** to
take action. When a complaint relating to the Forged Document was sent by Mr. Bucelato
directly to Defensoria de los Habitantes, the latter passed on the complaint to SINAC
which entrusted an inspection visit in December 2010, and thereafter issued its injunction

in February 2011'*°.

Further as has been identified above, after receiving Ms. Vargas’ request for an
investigation, Mr. Bucelato’s complaint and SINAC’s complaint, the TAA initiated an
administrative process against the Las Olas Project and issued in April 2011 the TAA
Injunction'®*. Although the injunction is temporary in nature, during the process of
investigation and until the TAA’s final decision, respondent has complained of this action
and has stated that “... due to the chilling effect of this arbitration, agencies like the TAA

have held back from continuing with the proceedings in the fear of issuing a decision that

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, §| 18, page 17.

146 Exhibits R-29 and R-30.
147 Exhibit C-67.

148 Exhibit

 

R-44, R-45, R-46, R-61, R-75, R-76 and R-77.

149 Exhibit R-58.
150 Exhibit C-121.

56

173.

174.

175.

176.

177.

could be inconsistent with any findings from this tribunal or could have an adverse effect

on Costa Rica’s defense”!*!.

Mr. Bucelato also filed complaints regarding the [then allegedly] Forged Document, and
filed also a criminal complaint against Mr. Aven in February 2011 in respect thereto.
Claimants allege that the Prosecutor, Mr. Martinez also pursued without justification the
complaint, but the record shows that the Prosecutor also acted on the basis of a complaint

filed by SINAC.

It is evident to the Tribunal that serious animosity existed among Mr. Bucelato and Mr.
Aven. Months before Mr. Bucelato filed the criminal complaint against Mr. Aven, Mr.
Aven had already filed his complaint on defamation, but failed to pursue it when

requested by the Prosecutor.
F. Criminal Trial of Messrs. Aven and Damjanac

The criminal court conducted a preliminary hearing in Mr. Aven’s and Mr. Damjanac’s
cases on June 19, 2012, when it was determined that the Prosecutor had gathered

sufficient evidence and the criminal charges should proceed to trial.

On December 5, 2012, the criminal trial commenced. However, following a suspension
of the proceedings because of the December holidays in Costa Rica and the subsequent
illness of the presiding judge, and the absence of an agreement among Mr. Aven and the
prosecution to continue the case in light of a procedural rule found in the criminal
procedure laws of Costa Rica, which shall be addressed in detail below in Section X, a

mistrial was declared.

The new trial was set for December 2013, and counsel to Mr. Aven advised that his client
would not be attending the hearing scheduled for December 20, 2013, because of fear for
his life, and requested the possibility of conducting the trial through video conference!*?.
Since the Costa Rican criminal system does not recognize judgments in the absence of
the accused, the court rejected the petition and scheduled a trial hearing on January 13,

2014. Since Mr. Aven did not appear to face trial because he had left Costa Rica based on

151 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, 874, page 183.
152 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, {| 584, page 142. Exhibit R-144 contains the letter submitted by Mr. Morera to
the criminal court.

57

178.

179.

180.

181.

the fact that he alleged to have received anonymous threatening emails and was the
victim of a shooting incident while driving in a Costa Rican highway'*, the court then

issued the so-called INTERPOL Red Notice.

On February 5, 2014, Mr. Damjanac was re-tried and subsequently acquitted of all
charges, although the decision was appealed by the Attorney General Office and later

reversed. Accordingly, a new trial against Mr. Damjanac is pending.

Contemporaneously with the criminal proceedings, Claimants allege inaction on the part
of the authorities in Costa Rica in light of the threats received, and the murder attempt
which Mr. Aven stated to have suffered. These allegations will be addressed in Section X

below.
On January 24, 2014, Claimants filed their Notice of Arbitration with Respondent.

As is evident from the above description of events, a myriad of issues arise from the
confused and complicated facts and what appears to be the contradictory and/or
inconsistent reports, resolutions and actions taken by the Costa Rican authorities, which
shall be addressed below by the Tribunal. Among other issues that need to be examined
are: Were there wetlands and forests on the Las Olas Project site? Which is the agency
that is entrusted with determining the existence of wetlands? Is the agency a different one
for forests? Which is the agency that is responsible for issuing an environmental viability
permit? What are the rights of the investor once such a permit is received? Who has the
authority to revoke? Finally, what is the relationship among the municipal and the central

government when it comes to issuing permits for the development of property?

'53 Claimants’ Memorial, {fj 206-21 1, pages 60-61.

58

Vil.

182.

183.

THE PARTIES’ CLAIMS AND REQUESTS FOR RELIEF

As expressed in their respective submissions the Parties seek the following relief:

A.

Claimants

Claimants seek the following relief'*+:

(1) A DECLARATION that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the claims
presented by the Claimants;

(2) A DECLARATION that the Respondent, for the reasons set out herein or any
of them, breached Article 10.5 of the DR-CAFTA;

(3) A DECLARATION that the Respondent, for the reasons set out herein or
any of them, breached Article 10.7 of the DR-CAFTA;

(4) A DECLARATION that the Respondent, by reason of any breach or breaches
of Articles 10.5 and 10.7 of the DR-CAFTA found by the Tribunal, damaged the
Claimants and caused them to suffer loss;

(5) AN ORDER that the Respondent pay to the Claimants damages in the sum of
US$ 69,100,000, plus interest up to the date of the award calculated by Dr.
Abdala to make a total of US$ 97,400,000 at today’s date or, in the alternative,
AN ORDER that the Respondent pay to the Claimants damages in the sum of
US$ 92,000,000 [as at the date of filing of their Reply Memorial], or such other
sum as the Tribunal may find owing in respect of the value of the Las Olas
project;

(6) AN ORDER that the Respondent pay to Mr. David Aven moral damages in
the sum of US$ 5,000,000, or such other sum as the Tribunal may find owing;

(7) AN ORDER that the Respondent shall immediately and permanently
terminate, and forever desist from instituting in respect of the subject-matter of
this dispute, any criminal proceedings against Mr. David Aven and steps aimed at
his extradition to Costa Rica;

(8) AN ORDER that the Respondent pay interest on any and all sums awarded to
the Claimants, at the WACC calculated by Dr. Abdala, from the date of any
award until payment is received by the Claimants or, in the alternative, interest at
such rate and compounded at such steps as the Tribunal may find to be
appropriate;

(9) AN ORDER that the Respondent pay all of the Claimants’ costs and expenses
of this arbitration, including all expenses that the Claimants have incurred or
shall incur in respect of the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, ICSID, legal
counsel, expert witnesses and consultants; and

(10) Such other relief as the Tribunal may consider appropriate.

'S4 Claimants’ Reply Memorial, page 148.

59

184. In their Post-Hearing Brief'**, the Claimants adjusted the following paragraphs:

a. in respect of paragraph (5) of the request for relief contained in the Reply
Memorial, the Claimants respectfully request that the Respondent be ordered to
pay damages in the sum of US$66,500,000, plus interest (and less sales revenue
after May 2011) up to the date of the award calculated by Dr. Abdala to make a
total of US$ 95,400,000 at February 7, 2017, or such other sum as the Tribunal
may find owing in respect of the value of the Las Olas Project.

b. in respect of paragraph (8) of the request for relief contained in the Reply
Memorial, the Claimants note that the request for interest should (i) include a
request for such interest from February 8, 2017 until the date of the Award; and
(ii) be based on the combined land and WACC rate calculated by Dr. Abdala,
rather than simply the WACC.

B. Respondent
185. Respondent, on the other hand, seeks the following relief'*°:

1. Declare that Mr. Aven’s lack of standing on the grounds of nationality
precludes the Tribunal from seizing jurisdiction of this arbitration vis-a-vis Mr.
Aven and thereby prevent Mr. Aven from seeking redress under the Treaty;

2. Declare that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction to hear any claims relating to Mr.
Raguso and Mr. Shioleno on the grounds that they do not hold a covered
investment under DR-CAFTA;

3. Declare that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the properties that Claimants
do not own on the basis that they do not qualify as a covered investment under
DR-CAFTA;

4. Declare that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the Concession or the
Concession site and any claims relating to La Canicula;

5. Declare that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear any late submitted claims
regarding the purported violation of the full protection and security standard
contained in Article 10.5(2)(b), due to Claimants’ failure to seek leave to amend
its claim;

6. Declare that Claimants’ claims are inadmissible on the basis of the illegalities
enunciated herein and thereby prevents Claimants from seeking redress under the
Treaty;

In the alternative,

7. Dismiss all the claims in their entirety and declare that there is no basis of
liability accruing to Respondent as a result of: 5.1. Any claim of violation by
Costa Rica of DR-CAFTA Articles 10.5 and 10.7; 5.2. Any claim that Claimants

155 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 714, page 322.
'56 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, | 1131, page 251.

60

186.

VIII.

187.

suffered losses for which Costa Rica could be liable; or 5.3. Any claim for the
Tribunal’s interference with Mr. Aven’s ongoing criminal trial before the courts
in Costa Rica;

8. Furthermore, declare that Claimants have caused environmental harm to Costa
Rica;
9. Order Claimants to pay Respondent damages in lieu of the reparation of the

environmental damage Claimants caused to the Las Olas Ecosystem;

10. Order that Claimants pay Respondent all costs associated with these
proceedings, including arbitration costs and all professional fees and
disbursements, as well as the fees of the arbitral tribunal; and

In the alternative, and where appropriate,

11. Reject as inflated and unsupported, Claimants’ valuation of their alleged
losses, as well as Claimants’ methodology as to the interest rate that would apply
to any monetary award that might be issued by this Tribunal; and

12. Grant such relief that the Tribunal may deem just and appropriate.

The Arbitral Tribunal shall address the petitions, as required, and first examine those
relating to the challenges to jurisdiction raised by Respondent. Once the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal has been confirmed, the issues on the merits of the case can thereafter be
addressed. If there are breaches found to the obligations of Respondent under DR-
CAFTA then the Tribunal will examine whether damages have been caused to Claimants

and the amount thereto.

JURISDICTION

As identified in Section VI above, Claimants stated in their Memorial of Claims that the
Tribunal has jurisdiction on the basis of four tests: (a) their consent to submit to
arbitration under DR-CAFTA, with their submission on or about January 24 of the Notice
of Arbitration and their waivers to seek compensation for the alleged breaches in other
fora, including the submission of waivers executed by the Claimants and by the
Enterprises owned and/or controlled in the terms of Articles 10.16 and 10.18 DR-CAFTA
(Jurisdiction Ratione Voluntatis); (b) of the nationality of Claimants in accordance with
Article 10.28 DR-CAFTA (Jurisdiction Ratione Personae); (c) on the nature of the

investment in real property made in Costa Rica pursuant to Article 10.1 of the DR-

61

188.

189.

190.

191.

CAFTA (Jurisdiction Ratione Materiae); and (d) the timely filing of the claim in
accordance with Article 10.16(3) DR-CAFTA (Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis).

At the time Respondent submitted its Counter Memorial, it challenged the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal on the basis of two tests: (i) that the effective and dominant citizenship of
Mr. Aven is not that of the United States of America; and (ii) the fact that the misconduct
of Claimants in respect to their investment bars them from any protection under DR-
CAFTA!*’, Respondent did not challenge the other tests of jurisdiction Ratione
Voluntatis, Ratione Personae (with respect to the other seven Claimants), Ratione

Materiae or Ratione Temporis.

However, in its Rejoinder, and based on the information gathered in the document
production stage, Respondent also argued that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction over: (i)
certain properties that Claimants did not own in the Las Olas Project; and (ii) the

Concession Site.

Subsequently, Respondent re-characterized in its Post-Hearing Brief the misconduct of
Claimants’ investment as an issue of “inadmissibility of the claims” based on: (a) the
unlawful and illegal conduct in the operation of their investment, and (b) the fact that
Claimants have not put forward a claim for full protection and security, while further
arguing that Claimants have brought claims that are not supported under Article 10.5 of

DR-CAFTA!®,

Thus, Respondent’s position in respect to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is to challenge it
based on: (A) Mr. Aven not being a protected investor under DR-CAFTA (Ratione
Personae); (B) Mr. Shioleno and Mr. Raguso’s failure to make an investment; (C) the
properties that Claimants do not own; and (D) the Concession Site (the last three, Ratione

Materiae). The Tribunal proceeds to examine the four challenges.

157 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, §] 256-432, pages 65 -107.
'58 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, | 718-726, pages 147-149.

62

192.

193.

194.

A. Nationality of Mr. Aven
1. The Parties’ Positions

Respondent has claimed that Mr. Aven is a dual citizen of the United States of America
and Italy, and that he appeared as an Italian national during his residency in Costa Rica
and in his making of the investment, having expressly acknowledged this fact!*?.
Respondent submitted evidence to the effect that during the application process
undertaken by Mr. Aven to seek residency in Costa Rica, he identified himself as an
Italian national, and his residency immigration card issued by the relevant office stated
his nationality as Italian'®. Respondent further argues that Mr. Aven also took other
actions related to his investment identifying himself as a national of Italy; for example, in
the filing of a criminal complaint against Mr. Steve Bucelato, a neighbor in the area of
the Las Olas project, and before Christian Bogantes, a SINAC inspector; in applying for
inspections to the property; and even upon submitting his sworn declaration before the
Prosecutor’s Office when the criminal charges were brought against him and Mr.

Damjanac!*!.

At the time of their Reply Memorial, Claimants did not dispute the fact that Mr. Aven
conducted himself as an Italian national in respect of some of his dealings, but added that,
he had done so because of a perceived “bias against Americans”!“?. They also stressed
that the dual nationality of Mr. Aven did not preclude him from the protection of DR-
CAFTA!®,

Claimants agree with Respondent that the use of the expression “dominant and effective
nationality” by the DR-CAFTA Parties in the Article 10.28 definition of “investor of a
Party”, intends to incorporate by reference the applicable standards of customary
international law for the treatment of multiple nationality in diplomatic protection cases,
but alleged that Respondent failed to express the customary international law rules

governing allegations of multiple nationality in diplomatic protection practice. Claimants

'59 Respondent points out to the acknowledgement found in the Second Witness Statement of David Aven, §j 22.
160 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, § 264, page 68.

161 1d., 99] 266-432, pages 68-69.

162 Second Witness Statement of David Aven, 22.

163 Claimants’ Reply Memorial, 27 — 37, pages 9-12.

63

195.

196.

argue that the International Law Commission has given serious consideration to the
treatment of nationality in the field of diplomatic protection and, as such, its Draft
Articles on Diplomatic Protection are arguably the only reasonable source from which to
commence an analysis in a nationality dispute under DR-CAFTA Article 10.28. In this
regard, Article 6 of the ILC’s mentioned Draft Articles provides: “[a]ny State of which a
dual or multiple national is a national may exercise diplomatic protection in respect of
that national against a State of which that person is not a national.” Claimants allege that
the restrictions found under Article 10.28 would prevent a claim when the “dominant
and effective” nationality was that of the country against which a claim is to be brought,

ice., Costa Rica in the case at bar!®+.

In response, Respondent made reference to the terms of Article 17 of the 2006 ILC’s
Draft Articles, which provide that: “The present draft articles do not apply to the extent
that they are inconsistent with special rules of international law, such as treaty provisions
for the protection of investments” and that the issue of dual nationality is already

expressly addressed under DR-CAFTA!®.

Respondent also interprets Article 10.28 differently. First, it states that there is no need to
enter into an unnecessary discussion on the customary law of nationality because DR-
CAFTA already expressly provides the solution to cases of dual nationality. Respondent
has indicated that the “well defined test” under DR-CAFTA is that a natural person who
is a dual national (like Mr. Aven) shall be considered exclusively a national of the State
of his or her “dominant and effective nationality”, and that qualification as “Investor of a
Party” is not restricted to scenarios where the dominant and effective nationality is one of
the contracting states, but also a third State'®°. In Respondent’s view, the provision was
designed to limit the protection of Chapter 10 to “real investors” and, in the context of a
multilateral agreement such as DR-CAFTA, to have treaty protection granted only to

nationals of States which are Parties to such treaty!®’.

164 Id. 49] 35-39, pages 11-12.

165

Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, 4] 141-143, page 39.

166 Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, §¥] 122-123, page 35.
‘67 Id., 4 127, page 36.

64

197.

198.

199.

200.

201.

202.

In other words, Respondent argued that the definition of an “Investor of a Party” in the
DR-CAFTA is limited to the confirmation of a “dominant and effective nationality” to

avoid problems of “treaty shopping” by foreign investors!®.

Respondent alleges that Mr. Aven is a national of Italy, a State that is not a party to the
Treaty, and therefore that the Tribunal lacks jurisdiction over him and his investments.
Further, that Mr. Aven’s claims as a U.S. national constitute an exercise of treaty

shopping, the consequence of which should deny him the protection of DR-CAFTA.

For these reasons, Respondent insisted in its Rejoinder that since Mr. Aven acted in the
context of the investment as an Italian national, his investment claim should therefore be

barred from protection under DR-CAFTA.

In their Post-Hearing Brief, Claimants concentrated on the fact that Mr. Aven’s
“dominant and effective” nationality was that of the United States of America, and
addressed how, in his examination during the hearing, Mr. Aven had expressed that he
had visited Italy only a handful of times in his entire life; had no attachments; no
business; property; or bank accounts in Italy, nor had he ever lived in Italy. On the
contrary, Mr. Aven testified he had lived all his life in the United States except for the

time period he lived in Costa Rica!®.

In the analysis of Mr. Aven’s nationality, the Respondent’s position in its Post-Hearing
Brief was to insist on the claims as to the “dominant and effective” nationality, and the
fact that he sought treaty protection after the Government of Costa Rica commenced to

take actions to protect the environment!”°.

2. The Tribunal’s Analysis

Despite other arguments relating to nationality, it can be stated that both Claimants and
Respondent agree that under the express language of DR-CAFTA, jurisdiction ratione
personae is dependent upon the investor’s “dominant and effective nationality”, because
a dual national shall be deemed to be exclusively a national of the State of his or her

dominant and effective nationality.

168 Id., 4 144- 156, pages 39-42.
69 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, §] 262, page 131.
170 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief 4 596-599, page 121.

65

203.

204.

205.

206.

207.

In Article 10.28, DR-CAFTA defines “Investor of a Party” as follows:

Investor of a Party means a Party or state enterprise thereof, or a national or an
enterprise of a Party, that attempts to make, is making, or has made an
investment in the territory of another Party; provided, however, that_a natural
person who is a dual national shall be deemed to be exclusively a national of the
State of his or her dominant and effective nationality'’!. (Emphasis added)

Accordingly, the Tribunal must verify (1) the effectiveness of Mr. Aven’s claimed U.S.
nationality; and (2) Mr. Aven’s purposes for choosing to represent himself initially as an

Italian national during the development process of the Las Olas Project.

Through inclusion of the expression “dominant and effective nationality” in Article 10.28
definition of “Investor of a Party,” the DR-CAFTA Parties intended to incorporate by
reference the applicable standards of customary international law for the treatment of
multiple nationalities in diplomatic protection cases, as reflected in the Nottebohm Case

(Liechtenstein v. Guatemala)'”.

In Nottebohm, the International Court of Justice established the “general link” theory as
the standard to be applied in international law to determine the effective nationality of
individuals. The Court defined nationality in the following terms:
Nationality is a legal bond having as its basis a social fact of attachment, a
genuine connection of existence, interests and sentiments, together with the

existence of reciprocal rights and duties. It may be said to constitute the juridical
expression of the fact that the individual upon whom it is conferred...is in fact

    

than with that of any other State'”*. (Emphasis added)
Pursuant to Nottebohm, then, the Tribunal should engage in an ad hoc factual inquiry to
determine which country—the U.S. or Italy—should be deemed the dominant and
effective nationality of Mr. Aven. The Nottebohm Court instructed:

Different factors are taken into consideration, and their importance will vary

from one case to the next: the habitual residence of the individual concerned is an
important factor, but there are other factors such as the centre of his interests, his

"7! Dominican Republic — Central America Free Trade Agreement, 7 October 2007, Chapter 10 Article 10.28.
'2 Nottebohm Case (Lichtenstein v. Guatemala), Judgment, 1955 ICJ Reports 4, April 6, 1995, at page 24 (CLA-

132).

"3 Id., at page 23.

66

208.

209.

210.

211.

174 Yq,

175
176

family ties, his participation in public life, attachment shown by him for a given
country and inculcated in his children, etc!”.

No argument to the contrary exists among Claimants and Respondent. The Parties
disagree, however, in their understanding of how “dominant and effective” should be

interpreted under both customary international law and DR-CAFTA.

In its Counter Memorial, after acknowledging the Nottebohm standard, Respondent cited
Champion Trading v. Egypt to assert that in the context of investment arbitration, the
nationality used to establish an investment must be considered as a relevant factor in
cases of dual nationality'”. In essence, Respondent relies on this case to impose another
factor into the Nottebohm calculus. The Tribunal in Champion Trading stated:
What is relevant for this Tribunal is that the three individual Claimants, in the
documents setting up the vehicle of their investment, used their Egyptian
nationality without any mention of their U.S. nationality...[This] clearly qualifies

them as dual nationals within the meaning of the Convention and thereby based
on Article 25 (2)(a) excludes them from invoking the Convention'”’.

The tribunal reached this conclusion despite the fact that all three Claimants were born in
the United States, had hardly any ties to Egypt, and only possessed Egyptian nationality
by virtue of an Egyptian legal provision wherein the child of an Egyptian father
automatically acquires at birth Egyptian nationality if at that time the father holds

Egyptian nationality, regardless of the child’s country of birth'”’.

Accordingly, Respondent reasons that because Mr. Aven, while possessing dual
nationality, manifested himself as an Italian citizen throughout the documentation process
to actualize the investment, he is effectively an Italian national for all effects and
purposes with respect to this dispute. To support its reasoning, Respondent cited as
mentioned above Mr. Aven’s use of his Italian—and not his U.S.—nationality in the
conduct of business both outside of and in Costa Rica!”* as well as his almost exclusive
use of his Italian citizenship in carrying out the Las Olas Project and exclusive use of his

Italian citizenship in his residency and immigration paperwork in Costa Rica.

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, § 262.
Champion Trading Co. v. Egypt, at 17.

177 Td. at 10.
"78 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, {| 263.

67

212.

213.

214.

215.

In their Reply Memorial, Claimants take issue with the applicability of Champion
Trading to the matter at hand stating that Respondent failed to express the customary
international law rules governing allegations of multiple nationalities in diplomatic
protection practice. Champion Trading involves an investor whose dual nationality is
shared between the U.S. and the host country of the investment whereas Mr. Aven’s
second nationality is neither the host country nor a Party to the Treaty. Accordingly, the
case is not readily applicable to Mr. Aven’s case as his second nationality is Italian and
not Costa Rican, the host country of the investment. Claimants’ proposition is echoed by
the Champion Trading Tribunal’s assertion that “dual nationals are excluded from
invoking the protection under the [ICSID] against the host country of the investment of

which they are also a national”!”?.

To support their assertion, Claimants rely on Article 6 of the ILC’s Draft Articles on
Diplomatic Protection'®® cited above. This idea is expanded upon in the ILC’s
commentary on Article 6 with the Commission explaining that “unlike the situation in
which one State of nationality claims from another State of nationality in respect of a
dual national, there is no conflict over nationality where one State of nationality seeks to

protect a dual national against a third State”!*!.

In other words, the Article 10.28 reference to customary international law rules governing
nationality for diplomatic protection “would preclude an investor possessing the
nationality of Party A from pursuing a claim against Party B in the event that his
dominant and effective nationality was that of Party B”!*?. Consequently, Mr. Aven is not
automatically barred from the protections of DR-CAFTA based on his Italian nationality

alone.

The Tribunal agrees with Claimants’ reasoning with respect to the customary
international law rules regarding dual nationals. Through reference to the dominant and

effective party language, DR-CAFTA seeks to provide protections for foreign investors

"79 Champion Trading Co. v. Egypt, at | 16.
'80 CLA-141, United Nations, International Law Commission's Draft Articles on Diplomatic Protection, 2006

 

 

available at: http://legal.un. ilc/texts/1 ie: 8 2006.pdf, accessed 1 August 2016,
at 41.
181 Jd. at 42-43.

'82 Claimants’ Reply Memorial, § 35.

68

216.

217.

218.

183

who are characterized by their lack of proximity and experience with the host country. As
a result, dual nationality becomes relevant where an investor seeks to take advantage of
the substantive protections contained within Chapter 10, while possessing a legal right to
citizenship in the host country. The dominant and effective test would then determine
whether the investor is truly a foreigner or the investor enjoys the same degree of
personal connection to the host State that any other of its nationals enjoys. In this sense,
Article 10.28 provides a mechanism to avoid punishment of legitimate investors
deserving of protection in spite of the fact that they might possess the legal right to
nationality of the host State. Thus, the Tribunal believes that the fact that Mr. Aven is a
national of both the United States of America and Italy, whose investment lies in Costa

Rica, does not trigger Article 10.28’s mechanism for dealing with dual nationals.

Accordingly, Respondent’s conclusion that “Mr. Aven’s claims are barred since DR-
CAFTA excludes claims by dual nationals whose dominant and effective nationality is of

9183

a non-Contracting State”’*” neither follows logically from the precedent cited nor does it

reflect the meaning of Article 10.28.

Another case cited by Respondent in support of its position of the dominant and effective
test leads the Tribunal to a similar conclusion. In Eudoro Armando Olguin v. Republic of
Paraguay, the claimant was a dual national of both Peru and the U.S. who resided in
Miami, Florida. The respondent in that case sought to contest Mr. Olguin’s access to
ICSID arbitral jurisdiction based on a bilateral investment treaty between Peru and
Paraguay since the Peruvian legal system establishes that in cases of dual nationality, the

person’s registered address will determine the exercise of specific rights by that person.

However, in O/guin, the Tribunal noted that “in the case of a dual national’s diplomatic
protection, either of his mother countries has the capacity to act on his behalf against a
third country, and the third country would have no way of invoking rules, on an
international scale, that would serve ... to transfer the responsibility for such protection

... to the other co-mother country, on account of the person’s registered address or other

Respondent's Rejoinder Memorial, § 143.

69

219.

220.

221.

similar factor”'**+. Instead, what was relevant for the O/guin Tribunal was simply whether
the Claimant had Peruvian nationality and if that nationality was effective. Thus, the
Tribunal found that Mr. Olguin’s Peruvian nationality was effective to determine that he

could not be excluded from the protections of the BIT.

Here, Respondent, like the Republic of Paraguay, intends to invoke additional factors to
negate the effectiveness of Mr. Aven’s U.S. nationality. However, the Tribunal notes that
Nottebohm stands as the standard for the analysis of dominant and effective nationality
for the purpose of diplomatic protection. Therefore, any “other similar factor”—including
Mr. Aven presenting Costa Rican authorities with his Italian passport—cannot be used to

successfully contest this Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

Nevertheless, under either the dominant and effective ad hoc approach, or Claimants’
more persuasive argument of the inapplicability of such approach to this case, the
Tribunal finds that Mr. Aven’s U.S. nationality is effective to garner the protections
afforded under DR-CAFTA for investors of the Parties to the Treaty based on the facts
presented in his witness statements—i.e., that Mr. Aven was born in the United States,
completed his schooling exclusively in the U.S., has never lived in Italy, nor does he have

185" Pursuant to the factors

any personal, financial, or business connection to Italy
articulated by the Nottebohm Court and the standards of customary international law, Mr.

Aven has met his burden of proof with respect to the effectiveness of his U.S. nationality.

Although that is true, the Tribunal needs to examine further the elements that can allow
identifying what was “effective and dominant”. During the December Hearing Arbitrator
Baker asked Mr. Aven to comment on the allegations of Respondent. Mr. Aven testified
that: “I do have dual nationality. But I don’t have any attachments to Italy. My dominant
residence has always been the United States. I don’t do any business in Italy. I don’t
have any bank accounts, own property. I don’t vote there. I don’t have anybody I
correspond with over there. I haven’t been there in ten years. I mean, been totally to Italy
probably five times in my life. So--so my dominant residence is, no question, United

States. I was born in New Castle, Pennsylvania, graduated high school there. Graduated

184 Mr, Eudoro Armando Olquin v. Republic of Paraguay, 1CSID Case No. ARB/98/5, Award, July 26, 2001, § 61
(RLA-63).
185 See First Witness Statement, David Aven and Second Witness Statement, David Aven.

70

222.

223.

224.

college from Baylor University in 1964. So--and been living and working in the United

States all of my life except for the time period I was living in Costa Rica”!*°,

In its Rejoinder Memorial, Respondent elaborates on another argument briefly mentioned
in its Counter-Memorial. Respondent alleges that Mr. Aven only decided to appear as an
American citizen when bringing this claim against Costa Rica; that is after wetlands were
discovered by authorities on the Las Olas Project site and the state apparatus reacted to
prevent continuing damage to the environment. This conduct, according to Respondent,
constitutes an exercise of treaty shopping and ultimately, prevents Mr. Aven from
availing himself of DR-CAFTA’s protections'*’. Respondent argues that because he
“consistently interacted with the Costa Rican authorities and judiciary as an Italian
national, Mr. Aven cannot now claim that he should benefit from the protections of DR-
CAFTA in relation to those same interactions, but this time as a U.S. national”!**, In
tandem with its view that Mr. Aven’s conduct amounts to treaty shopping, Respondent
also characterizes Mr. Aven’s conduct as undermining principles of good faith and

reciprocity and indicative of an abusive exercise of rights'*?.

The Tribunal believes that a brief overview of the legal concepts that underpin
Respondent’s allegation is called for prior to an analysis of the facts of this case. ‘Treaty
shopping’ refers to the conduct of foreign investors managing their nationality for the
purpose of acquiring the benefits of investment treaty protection in their host State

through third countries!’

The principle of good faith has been recognized by the International Court of Justice as
“one of the basic principles governing the creation and performance of legal
obligations”!*!. This principle addresses the conduct of the Parties, requiring them to deal

fairly with each other, to represent their motives and purposes truthfully, and to refrain

186 Transcript Pages 890:20, 891:12.

187 Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, § 144.

188 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, § 267.

189 Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, § 144.

190 Matthew Skinner, Cameron A. Miles, and Sam Luttrell, “Access and advantage in investor-state arbitration: The
law and practice of treaty shopping” (2010) 3(3) Journal of World Energy Law & Business, p. 260 (RLA-77).

191 Nuclear Tests Case (New Zealand v. France), Judgment, ICJ Rep (1974), 4 46 (RLA-55).

71

225.

226.

227.

228.

229.

from taking unfair advantage!”. Indeed, it is a well-established general principle of law

that good faith is a keystone of the Law of Treaties.

The Tribunal shall address whether Mr. Aven’s change in position as to his nationality,
from Italian to American, may be deemed to constitute an abuse of his rights, and
whether the timing of the investment or the claim could affect his access to the protection

under DR-CAFTA.

Similarly, the principle of reciprocity—on which investment agreements are based—
prevents unfair and unwarranted advantages. Respondent explains that “investment
treaties are purported to establish reciprocal rights and obligations between the
contracting states. However, the principle of reciprocity will be breached if allowing
investors with no substantial ties to a contracting state to unfairly benefit from investment
treaty protection, even if the actual home state does not assume any of the converse

obligations”?

Breach of the aforementioned doctrines may constitute an abuse of rights. As Hersch

Lauterpacht noted:

There is no legal right, however well established, which could not, in some
circumstances be refused recognition on the ground that it has been abused!™*.

In essence, Respondent has asked the Tribunal to find that Mr. Aven’s use of Italian
nationality renders his legal rights as a U.S. national revoked with respect to this matter,

and thereby, find him unprotected by the provisions of DR-CAFTA.

The Tribunal now considers the relevant case law presented by Respondent wherein
international investment tribunals have found an abuse on the part of an investor when he
employs another nationality after the dispute with the host state has arisen. It should be
noted that the following cases involve the abuse of rights doctrine in the context of
corporate restructuring. Respondent has asserted the applicability of these cases to

analyze the matter of Mr. Aven, although he is an individual investor.

'%2 Phoenix Action, Ltd v. The Czech Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Award, April 15, 2009 (hereinafter
Phoenix Action v. Czech Republic), § 107 (RLA-75).

193

Respondent's Rejoinder Memorial, § 152.

194 RLA-54, Hersch Lauterpacht, The Development of International Law by the International Court (Stevens & Sons
Limited 1958), page 158.

72

230.

231.

232.

233.

234.

195

These cases urge, as does the Respondent, that the timing of the investment and the
timing of the subsequent claim are key factors in determining whether the shift in

nationality is bona fide or amounts to an abuse of rights!”>.

In Phoenix Action, Ltd v. The Czech Republic, the Claimant, Phoenix, was controlled by a
former Czech national who fled his country and later gained Israeli citizenship.
Thereafter, he incorporated Phoenix as an Israeli company and used the company to
acquire an interest in two Czech companies owned by members of his family. Prior to the
acquisition, legal action had already been taken by the Czech Republic against these
companies. Two months after the acquisition, Phoenix notified the Czech Republic of an

investment dispute and shortly thereafter, commenced ICSID arbitration.

The Tribunal examined the timing of the investment and the timing of the claim to reach
its conclusion. With respect to the timing of the investment, the tribunal noted that “all
the damages claimed by Phoenix had already occurred and were inflicted on the two
Czech companies, when the alleged investment was made.” Further, after the acquisition
of such companies, Phoenix did not make any further investment or implement any new
business strategies with respect to their recent acquisition. The Tribunal stated that “the
whole operation was not an economic investment, based on the actual or future value of
the companies, but indeed, simply a rearrangement of assets within a family, to gain

access to ICSID jurisdiction to which the initial investor was not entitled’””!®.

Importantly, the Tribunal concluded that “if the sole purpose of an economic transaction
is to pursue an ICSID claim, without any intent to perform any economic activity in the
host country, such transaction cannot be considered as a protected investment”!*’.
(Emphasis added). The Tribunal’s conclusion in Phoenix Action was concerned with
ensuring that the ICSID mechanism does not protect domestic investments disguised as

international investments for the sole purpose of access to this treaty dispute mechanism.

In Venezuela Holdings, B.V., et al v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the importance of

the sole purpose factor once again comes to light. In that case, the Claimants, Venezuela

Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, {| 154; Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, 597.

96 Phoenix Action v. Czech Republic, § 136.
"7 1d.,4 93.

73

235.

236.

Holdings, restructured their corporate structure after claims had already been launched
against them by the Respondent, Venezuela. Prior to the restructuring, the Respondent,
Venezuela, began levying a series of rate and tax increases on private petroleum interests
that culminated in a decree that would nationalize Venezuela Holdings’ investments.
After Venezuela Holdings had become subject to some of the rate and tax increases, the
company restructured its corporate structure under the laws of the Netherlands to avoid
the nationalization of their assets and to take advantage of a BIT between the Netherlands

and Venezuela in the event of future disputes.

With respect to Venezuela’s claim of abuse of rights, the Tribunal found that
restructuring to protect their investments against breaches of their rights by the
Venezuelan authorities by gaining access to ICSID arbitration through the BIT was a
“perfectly legitimate goal as far as it concerned future disputes.” However, with respect
to disputes that pre-existed the restructuring, the tribunal declined to exercise jurisdiction
and cited Phoenix Action stating that “to restructure investments only in order to gain
jurisdiction under a BIT for such disputes would constitute...’an abusive manipulation of
the system of international investment protection under the ICSID Convention and the
BITs’”!°8, (Emphasis added). Therefore, the Tribunal in Venezuela Holdings was
primarily focused on the timing of the claims to determine whether it had jurisdiction to

hear the matter.

Finally, Phillip Morris Asia Ltd. v. The Commonwealth of Australia dealt with a situation
where corporate restructuring took place not before a claim had already arisen, but at a
time when there was a reasonable prospect that the dispute would materialize, leading to
the conclusion that such restructuring was carried out for the sole purpose of gaining
Treaty protection. Accordingly, the Tribunal found that the legal tests for abuse of rights
revolve around and are broadly analogous to the concept of foreseeability!””. In that case,
Phillip Morris Asia acquired an Australian subsidiary prior to the implementation of

Australia’s tobacco plain packaging laws. Australia’s public health initiative to decrease

'°8 Venezuela Holdings, B.V., et al v. Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, \CSID Case No. ARB/O7/27, Award, June
10, 2010, | 185 (RLA-1).

199 Phillip Morris Asia Ltd v. The Commonwealth of Australia, PCA Case No. 2012-12, Award on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility, December 17, 2015, 554 (RLA-90).

74

237.

238.

239.

240.

smoking had already been publicized and accordingly, the Tribunal determined that
Phillip Morris Asia had reason to believe that a dispute under the BIT between Hong

Kong and Australia with respect to the new law was foreseeable.

After determining that the dispute was foreseeable prior to the restructuring, the tribunal
turned to the Claimant’s reasons for restructuring. In the view of the tribunal, it would not
normally be an abuse of rights to bring a BIT claim in the wake of a corporate
restructuring, if the restructuring was justified independently of the possibility of bringing
such a claim?”°. Ultimately, the tribunal concluded from all the evidence on file that the
main and determinative, if not sole, reason for restructuring was the intention to bring a

claim under the Treaty?°!

and subsequently declined to exercise jurisdiction over Phillip
Morris’ claims. The decision in Phillip Morris shows yet another tribunal using the
timing of the claim to inquire into whether the sole purpose for the switching of
nationality was to bring a claim under a Treaty whose protections were previously

unavailable.

The Tribunal has found that Mr. Aven’s dominant and effective nationality is that of the
United States of America and under the express language of DR-CAFTA, he is a

protected Investor of a Party.

The Tribunal considers that Mr. Aven did not engage in an abuse of rights by initially
choosing to represent himself to Respondent as an Italian national and later bringing a
claim under DR-CAFTA as a U.S. national because such a conclusion requires that Mr.
Aven changed his nationality for the ‘sole purpose’ of pursuing a claim. His effective and
dominant nationality was that of the U.S.A. even before he made, along with the other

interests, the investment.

Timing of Investment. First, unlike the facts in Phoenix Action, nothing indicates that Mr.
Aven acquired the Las Olas Project in 2002 as an investment for the sole purpose of
pursuing a claim under DR-CAFTA. To the contrary, Mr. Aven purchased the property,
took steps to begin development, and navigated Costa Rican administrative and

environmental agencies—facts that all serve as indicators of his intention to economically

200 fd, at | 570.
201 Id. at ] 584,

75

241.

242.

develop the land as a bona fide investment. While Respondent argues that Mr. Aven
conveniently switched his nationality to take advantage of DR-CAFTA’s protections,
such change of professed nationality did not coincide with the timing of his investment in
the Las Olas Project, which long preceded the arising of Respondent’s claims against

him. Accordingly, no red flag is raised with respect to timing of the investment.

Timing of Claim. Second, while it may be true that Respondent initiated criminal claims
against Mr. Aven before he decided to present himself as a U.S. national before
Respondent, what differentiates the case of Mr. Aven is that he did not profess his U.S.
nationality “only in order to gain jurisdiction,” which would amount to a manipulation of
the Treaty and international law. As explained in the previous section, Mr. Aven already
had access to DR-CAFTA by virtue of his dominant and effective U.S. nationality. In
other words, even though throughout the administrative proceedings with respect to the
Las Olas Project Mr. Aven used his Italian passport to identify himself, his dominant and

effective nationality was of the U.S at the time the investment claims arose.

Sole Purpose. Perhaps most significantly, even if the timing of the Claimants’ arbitral
claim is determinative, each and every cited case turns on whether or not the switch in
nationality occurred for the sole purpose of gaining benefit from a Treaty’s provisions.
However, there is no evidence that Mr. Aven used his Italian passport in numerous
transactions with the Costa Rican authorities for any legal advantage, which is the issue.
Instead, the Tribunal finds Mr. Aven’s explanation reasonable and credible that he was
trying to avoid “bias against Americans” and most likely, to avoid being yet another U.S.
national attempting to do business in Costa Rica. What Mr. Aven surely sought, and that
which he describes as the “convenience” of the Italian passport, was the privilege of
holding two passports in, at times, a hostile world. As he provided in his Second Witness
Statement:
T elected to get an Italian passport for the sole reason that it was available to me,

and because there were (and still are) many Americans targeted while traveling

abroad. I thought it would be a good option to be able to travel on a non-U.S.

passport”.

202 Id., at 417, page 5.

76

243.

244.

245.

246.

247.

Mr. Aven’s Italian passport was bestowed on him by virtue of his grandfather’s Italian
citizenship. While the State of Italy is free to determine that the citizenship of one’s
grandfather is a basis for conferring naturalization on an individual, under the DR-
CAFTA and the law of international treaties generally, such naturalization does not
render Mr. Aven an Italian for the effects and purposes of this dispute even though he

presented his Italian passport to Respondent.

In reality, Mr. Aven has no substantial ties to Italy. He has never lived there, has not
established any residences or bank accounts, and has only visited the country a handful of
times. The only country to which the Tribunal could fairly say Mr. Aven has “substantial
ties,” is in fact the United States. Consequently, Mr. Aven could not have “switched” his
nationality for the sole purpose of taking advantage of DR-CAFTA, because he already
was a protected party under the Treaty by virtue of his dominant and effective U.S.

nationality.

Additionally, with respect to the principles of good faith and reciprocity, Mr. Aven has
substantiated the fact that he, many times, used and has been recognized by his American
nationality in his interactions and business dealings with both Costa Rican businesses and
Costa Rican authorities and in official submissions with Governmental authorities.°°. In
this sense, Respondent had notice of the possibility of a claim being brought under DR-

CAFTA. As such, neither good faith nor reciprocity has been breached by Mr. Aven.

In conclusion, it is the decision of the Tribunal that it can exercise jurisdiction over the
claims of Mr. Aven as an investor of a Party pursuant to Article 10.28 of DR-CAFTA,

based on his dominant and effective American nationality.

Because the Tribunal has found that Mr. Aven is a national of the U.S. for purposes of the
protections enshrined in the DR-CAFTA, the Respondent’s argument that Mr. Aven does
not qualify as an “Investor of a Party” under applicable standards of international law

fails.

203 Id., at § 22, page 6.

77

248.

249.

250.

251.

252.

B. ‘Whether the Investments by Mr. Shioleno and Mr. Raguso are Covered
Investments

1. The Parties’ Positions

In its Post-Hearing Brief, Respondent raised for the first time during the arbitration a
challenge to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal on the basis that Claimants presented no
evidence of any capital contributed by Mr. Shioleno or Mr. Raguso to the Las Olas
Project, and that Article 10.28 DR-CAFTA requires that an asset have characteristics of
an investment to be considered a protected investment under the Treaty. Specifically,
according to Respondent the Treaty requires that an investor commits capital or other

resources for it to be considered the holder of a “covered investment”?°*.

Respondent quoted Mr. Shioleno during his examination at the December Hearing?”,
who acknowledged that he committed no resources. His involvement was limited to
marketing efforts in Tampa, Florida, and he acknowledged also that the project did not

realize any sales during the period of his efforts.

In the case of Mr. Raguso, Respondent adds, he provided no services to the investment
because he was supposed to act as construction manager in mid-2011 when the
suspension of the works was ordered. Though Mr. Raguso might have an expectation of
gain from his conversations with Mr. Aven, that, by itself, does not equate such
conversations and expectations to actually having contributed some resource with an

assumption of risk to the alleged investment in Costa Rica”.

Respondent further contended that neither Mr. Shioleno nor Mr. Raguso ever received
any stock certificates, nor were they registered as shareholders in the registries of the

Enterprises.

Given that this challenge was brought by Respondent in its Post-Hearing Brief, Claimants
were not afforded the possibility to comment. The Tribunal did not deem this necessary
since prior statements made by Claimants in their Notice of Arbitration, Memorial and

their Post-Hearing Brief provide sufficient argument. Claimants have explained that Mr.

24 Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, {| 600-605, pages 122 and 123.
205 Cross Examination of Jeffrey Shioleno, Day 2 Transcript, 365:2-7, 371:4-10, and 366:4-6.

206

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, 4] 604, page 123.

78

253.

254.

255.

256.

257.

2207

Shioleno’s, investment was “sweat equity”’’’ on marketing efforts to develop brochures

and other marketing literature and similar references were made as to Mr. Raguso.

2. The Tribunal’s Analysis

Although there is indeed no reference to monetary contributions made by Messrs.
Shioleno and Raguso, Claimants have made it clear that they both contributed their

marketing and real estate development experience.

DR-CAFTA does not restrict an investment to monetary contributions. When the Treaty
defines “Investment” in Article 10.28, it states that the term means “every asset that an
investor owns or controls, directly or indirectly, that has the characteristics of an
investment, including such characteristics as the commitment of capital or other
resources, the expectation of gain or profit, or the assumption of risk”. Thus, the Treaty
expressly acknowledges that the investment may be in the form of a commitment of

capital or other resources or the assumption of risk.

The Article then lists a series of forms the investment may take. Amongst these are
“intellectual property rights” (letter (f)) which by definition do not necessarily require a
monetary contribution but rather creativity and effort to develop, whether these are in the

form of a copyright, a trademark, a patent, or simply “know-how”.

Albeit it is clear that this reference in Article 10.28 relates to a protected “investment”
under the Treaty, and not the contribution itself of the investors in an enterprise, the

principles equally apply.

If intangible assets are to be contributed, and deemed to be an investment, there needs to
be proof that the non-monetary contribution has been received as participation in the
enterprise. Under Costa Rican law, this must be proven through the issuance of shares

and the registration in the shareholders registry book?"®.

207 Claimants’ Memorial, §{] 49 and 124, pages 14, and 35, respectively, and in Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 27,

page 20.

208 Exhibit C-4 to the Notice of Arbitration contains certificates issued by each of the Enterprises attesting to the
ownership of the stock of each company, including that of Messrs. Shioleno and Raguso.

79

258.

259.

260.

261.

262.

The Tribunal therefore believes that work undertaken and/or commitments made by
Messrs. Shioleno and Raguso therefore qualify as an investment, and therefore the

objection brought by Respondent is dismissed.
Cc. Properties that are not owned by The Claimants
1. The Parties’ Positions

Respondent argued in its Rejoinder that its agencies carried out a thorough investigation,
including of the information received from Claimants during the document production
stage of the proceedings, and concluded that a relevant number of the properties alleged
to be owned by Claimants were in fact not owned by Claimants, whether directly or
through the Enterprises. Respondent stated that Claimants had failed to provide proof of
ownership of all of the properties that make up the Las Olas Project. Some of these
properties, Respondent added, had never been owned or had been sold during the course

of the arbitration?”

Respondent stated that of the 288 lots in the Condo Section, 28 lots had been sold to third
Parties between 2010 and 2015, and further, that of the 81 lots in the Easements Section,
50 did not belong to the Claimants, either directly or through the Enterprises”'°. To this
end, Respondent submitted exhibits R-322 and R-323 that relate to either properties
which it alleged Claimants wrongfully included as part of their alleged investment, or as

properties that at that time were no longer owned by Claimants.

At the closing of the February Hearing, the Tribunal invited Claimants to address in their
Post-Hearing Brief the issue of ownership of the 78 properties alleged by Respondent not
to be owned by Claimants, and to identify which properties had been sold before and

after the Notice of Arbitration was submitted in January of 2014.

Claimants then provided in their Post-Hearing Brief (Annex B) a detailed table
explaining the ownership structure of the properties, and confirmed the information found
in several slides of Dr. Abdala’s presentation at the February Hearing. In their listing,
Claimants acknowledge that they sold properties before and after the submission of the

Notice of Arbitration but take the position that they are still protected under DR-CAFTA.

2 Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, { 166, page 44.
210 Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, {| 167-170, pages 44-45.

80

263.

264.

After Respondent questioned on March 8, 2017, the works that were being undertaken in
the Las Olas Project site at the end of January and early February 2017, which
Respondent argued could be “illegal” in light of the injunctions in place issued by
SINAC, the TAA and the criminal court in Quepos, Costa Rica, Claimants swiftly
responded on March 10, 2017, indicating that Claimants had recently entered into an
agreement with Mr. Carlos Alberto Mora Solano, pursuant to which Mr. Mora intended
to purchase “the whole of the Olas Project site”?!' but that, given the timing of the
transaction, they were waiting to make this disclosure precisely in their Post-Hearing
Brief. Then, after Respondent submitted another communication on March 13, 2017,
detailing works being carried out, and questioning how Claimants could allege not having
been aware of such works as they were still owners of the properties, Claimants provided
in a letter of March 27, 2017 additional information on the sale of the properties to Mr.
Mora?!?, and even made reference to other properties in Easements Nos. 1 and 2 that had

been also previously sold to Mr. Mora and his sister, Ms. Yesenia Venegas Alvarado.

Claimants have also acknowledged in their Post-Hearing brief that on March 3, 2017 they
concluded an agreement to sell to Mr. Carlos Alberto Mora Solano, a local of Esterillos,
the “majority of the areas of Las Olas Project site which they still owned”, specifically
the commercial sites at the northern boundary of the Las Olas Project, the remaining lots

in the Condo Section, and the land in the Concession Site”!>.

The Claimants added that they had been attempting to sell the remainder of the Las Olas
property for a number of years, in mitigation of the losses that they have suffered due to
Costa Rica’s shutdown of the project, and that these efforts had always failed because of
the status of the project and the land following Costa Rica’s actions?!*, Claimants accept
that the purchase price of US$650,000 dollars is much lower than they seek but readily
argue that it reflects the fact that the land is still the subject of: (i) injunctions preventing

construction work; (ii) allegations of wetlands from the Costa Rican authorities; and (iii)

2! Letter of Claimants dated March 10, 2017, addressed to Respondent.
?!2 Letter of Claimants dated March 10, 2017, addressed to the Tribunal.
213 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 4] 545, page 253.
214 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, {| 547, page 285.

81

265.

266.

267.

268.

269.

215 yd.

the Claimants’ inability to develop the property due to the actions of the Costa Rican

authorities.

The Claimants stated they decided to accept this “very low offer for the property”
because of the aforementioned conditions of the properties and the absence of any
representations they had to make as sellers as to the injunctions still in place on the

property and the permits issued?!>.

Considering such sale, Claimants asked their valuation expert, Dr. Manuel Abdala of
Compass Lexecon, to adjust the valuation of the properties to recalculate their value by
including this recent sale to estimate the proceeds of the sales of land that took place after
May 2011 rather than by using an estimated residual price of the unsold land as he had

previously done?!®.

In Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, Respondent maintained its objection and requested
the Tribunal to decline jurisdiction to hear any claims arising out of the 78 properties that

are not part of Claimants’ alleged investment.
2. The Tribunal’s Analysis
(a) Legal Framework and Authorities

As Respondent correctly asserts, Claimants have the burden to prove the legitimate
ownership of their investment. First of all, Article 27(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules of
Arbitration provides that “[e]ach party shall have the burden of proving the facts relied on
to support its claim or defense.” Further, Article 20(4) of such Rules also imposes a duty
on a claimant to include, along with the statement of claim, “... all documents and other
evidence relied upon by the claimant, or contain references to them”. Therefore, if the
ownership of the properties that are the subject of alleged expropriation is not proven by

Claimants, there is no protection under Article 10.28 of DR-CAFTA.

To recall, Claimants filed a claim against Respondent alleging breach of Articles 10.5
(Minimum Standard of Treatment) and 10.7 (Expropriation and Compensation) of DR-

CAFTA with respect to their Investment.

216 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 41548, page 254.

82

270.

271.

272.

273.

274.

The Tribunal recalls once more the definition of “Investment” under Article 10.28 of DR-
CAFTA, which encompasses, other things, property: “investment means every asset that
an investor owns or controls, directly or indirectly, that has the characteristics of an
investment, including such characteristics as the commitment of capital or other

resources, the expectation of gain or profit, or the assumption of risk.”

Additionally, Claimants were required to provide all necessary documentation to support
such claims of ownership pursuant to Section 3 of the same UNCITRAL Rules of
Arbitration provision, which directs that “[a]t any time during the arbitral proceedings the
arbitral Tribunal may require the Parties to produce documents.” Indeed, considering the
lack of information submitted by Claimants, the Tribunal directed Claimants in its post-
hearing questionnaire to “... provide a detailed ownership structure of each enterprise
which owns the different properties comprising the development, and attach a table
listing the ownership structure at the time the Notice of Arbitration was submitted based

on the following schedule example””!”.

Likewise, case law evoked by the Respondent also shows such obligation. In CCL v.
Kazakhstan, the Tribunal emphasized the Claimant’s burden in light of the Respondent’s
statements which questioned the legitimacy of the ownership of the investment.
In consequence hereof it must be a procedural requirement that a Claimant party,
requesting arbitration on the basis of the Treaty, provides the necessary
information and evidence concerning the circumstances of ownership and
control, directly or indirectly, over [Claimant-investor] at all relevant times. This

is especially the case when reasonable doubt has been raised as to the actual
ownership of and control over the company seeking protection?!*.

Because the claimant in Kazakhstan did not provide the necessary evidence to prove the
ownership of the investment despite repeated requests from the respondent, the tribunal

denied jurisdiction on the basis of the Treaty.

In a similar disagreement, the tribunal in Perenco Ecuador v. Ecuador navigated the

difficulties of proving ownership and reviewed information presented to corroborate the

?!7 Letter of February 13, 2017, whereby the Tribunal sent to the Parties a list of questions to consider in their
respective post-hearing briefs.
218 CCL y. Republic of Kazakhstan, SCC Case No. 122/2001, Jurisdiction Award, January 1, 2003, at | 82 (RLA-

155).

83

275.

276.

277.

investor’s claim to the investment”!®. In that case, a witness statement served as the only
evidence “produced” by the claimant to substantiate their ownership. The tribunal found
that although the claim was brought under a BIT between Ecuador and France and the
claimant company was not directly controlled by French nationals but by a Bahamian
company, the evidence contained in the witness statement sufficiently demonstrated that

the French nationals had sufficient control of the companies to invoke jurisdiction.

The examples of Kazakhstan and Perenco Ecuador demonstrate the tendency of tribunals
to hold claimants to their burden of proof and further demonstrate the factual inquiry that
tribunals engage in to determine whether the burden has been met. This of course is not a
particularly revelatory practice, however, the misinformation supplied by Claimants
regarding the sale of properties and their unwillingness to refute Respondent’s statements
of Claimants’ non-ownership forces the Tribunal to more thoroughly consider Claimants’

failure to meet its burden and whether or not consequences should follow from the same.

In Europe Cement Investment v. Turkey, the tribunal drew an adverse inference against
the claimant due to the deficiency of evidence produced to rebut the Respondent’s
allegation of lack of ownership:
The Claimant’s failure to provide any serious rebuttal to the Respondent’s
arguments strongly suggests that it never had such ownership, at least at the

relevant time for jurisdiction and that perhaps it never had ownership at all. The

burden to prove ownership of the shares at the relevant time was on the Claimant.

It failed completely to discharge this burden*”°.

The tribunal in Europe Cement Investment later went on to examine circumstantial
evidence to determine ownership of the investment in the absence of documentation
provided by the Claimant and ultimately determined that the investment was not covered

under the Treaty.

219 Perenco Ecuador Ltd. v. The Republic of Ecuador and Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador),
ICSID Case No. ARB/08/6, Decision on Remaining Issues of Jurisdiction and on Liability, September 12, 2014
(RLA-21).

220 Europe Cement Investment & Trade S.A. v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/07/2, Award, August
13, 2009, at 4] 166 (RLA-27).

84

278.

279.

280.

281.

282.

283.

Accordingly, the relevant case law and basic procedural mechanisms affirm that the
Claimants had an unequivocal duty to provide the information requested by the Tribunal

to substantiate their claims to ownership over the properties in question.

In the case at hand, it appears that Claimants initially chose to ignore their own omissions
and focus only on the valuation of the Project Site in May 2011 rather than fully

answering Respondent’s requests for information.

Claimants did not only include properties that did not belong to them as part of their
alleged investment but also failed to disclose ongoing sales of the lots to third Parties
during the course of this arbitration. This duty of Claimants extended to report to the
Tribunal and the Respondent when properties were sold after the submission of the
Notice of Arbitration and once arbitral proceedings were ongoing. Perhaps not each lot

individually, but certainly a report by the December Hearing.

Despite such duty to provide the information, the Tribunal was forced to instruct
Claimants at the end of the February Hearing to “confirm which lots within the project as
a whole have been sold, before and after the Notice of Arbitration”. It was only after the
Tribunal specifically asked the Claimants to identify which lots encompassing the Las
Olas Project had been sold, that Claimants provided in their Post-Hearing Brief a
comprehensive and detailed list of properties comprising the Las Olas Project site
identifying when these were purchased, through which Enterprise, and when and to
whom these had been sold. This information should have been clearly submitted earlier,

and would have avoided much discussion and time of the Respondent and the Tribunal.

Thus, the Tribunal believes that the Claimants should have acted with more diligence and
properly defined the properties that they owned at the moment of initiating the arbitral

proceedings or better disclose the reasons for failing to do so.

Whereas in Kazakhstan the claimant-investor did not provide the necessary
documentation to evidence ownership based on a desire to keep the identity of the
investors confidential, here, Claimants did not offer any explanation as to why they
initially failed to provide any answers. Rather than an actual intent of gaining benefits

improperly, it would appear that the issue was one of lack of order and due diligence.

85

284.

285.

286.

287.

Respondent characterized Claimants’ maneuver of selling the remainder of the Las Olas
Project site without fully divulging such transactions as an “attempt to dissipate the assets
they own in Costa Rica in order to prejudice any collection from Costa Rican agencies in

99221

pending local proceedings The Tribunal declines to comment on Respondent’s

condemning account of the Claimants’ motives.

Claimants urge the Tribunal that the date they performed a valuation of the properties,
May 2011, is the relevant date from which to determine the value and ownership of the
lots at issue. They characterize any post-May 2011 sales as being relevant with respect to
damages only to the extent that the residual value of the project land is reduced to
account for the fact that the Claimants no longer own certain lots. Similarly, Claimants
recognize that the sales themselves have generated some small revenue in mitigation of

the alleged damages suffered, which is to be deducted from the damages figure?”?.

Although Claimants have taken the position that sales to third parties are not relevant to
their case, and that the income should be considered as an effort to mitigate damages and
be taken into account for purposes of the calculation of damages in a Final Award, this
argument cannot ignore a duty of good faith and transparency towards Respondent and

the Tribunal.

The Tribunal finds it pertinent to spell out the actions and omissions: (1) Claimants’
submission of numerous charts to the Tribunal listing their various Enterprises as the
owners of certain properties, despite the continued selling of these properties from 2014-
present; and (2) the failure to adequately answer the Tribunal’s request to identify which
lots had been sold after the Notice of Arbitration, as evidenced by the absence of any
sales made to Corazon de la Tierra en Esterillos S.A. in Annex B to the Claimants’ Post-
Hearing Brief; (3) Failure to provide documentation regarding the sale of the remaining
areas of the Las Olas Project Site to Mr. Alberto Mora via Claimant’s Enterprise Corazon
de la Tierra en Esterillos S.A. until their April 26, 2017 letter—after Respondent had
requested clarification; (4) the Claimants’ alleged lack of knowledge regarding works

being carried out on the properties sold to Mr. Mora despite their longstanding

221 Respondent’s counsel April 17, 2017 letter to Tribunal, § 25.
222 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 647, page 293.

86

288.

289.

290.

291.

292.

relationship with him and the commencement of such works in February 2017, a month

before the sale allegedly took place.

Nevertheless, since the Claimants have now stated without qualification the ownership of
the properties included in Respondent’s challenge, the Tribunal will consider the

evidence on the record to determine which properties fall under its jurisdiction.
(b) Relevant Date for Determining Ownership

As Claimants have acknowledged that they sold properties before and after the

submission of the Notice of Arbitration?

, and even sold practically the remainder
portion of the Las Olas Project site shortly before the filing of their Post-Hearing Brief,
the central dispute between the Parties is whether the properties sold before and during

this arbitration should be included in the Claimants’ investment.

On the one hand, Respondent relies on Costa Rica’s National Registry for evidence that
the Claimants simply do not own the lots in question. Respondent notes, as described
above, that the Claimants have not disputed their lack of ownership of the properties and,
accordingly, Respondent takes the position that Claimants have not met their burden to
prove the legitimate ownership of their investment. Therefore, Respondent asks the
Tribunal to deny jurisdiction over the 78 properties it has identified as not owned by

Claimants as of October 28, 2016—the date of their Rejoinder Memorial.

Therefore, it is for the Tribunal to decide which of the 78 properties that Claimants do not
presently own should be deemed part of the Investment of Claimants, based on their date

of sale, for purposes of this arbitration.

As a preliminary matter, the Claimants urge the Tribunal that their Investment should
always be regarded as the entirety of the investment in the Las Olas Project, not discrete
elements thereof?*4. However, based on the sales of the 78 properties in question, the
Claimants’ actions do not support their assertion. Hence, the Tribunal will consider
whether or not the individual lots that have been sold can form part of the Investment

pursuant to Article 10.28 of DR-CAFTA.

23 Jd. Annex B.
24 Id. at 4130, page 61.

87

293.

294.

295.

296.

To facilitate the Tribunal’s determination, an overview of another ICSID Tribunal with
respect to the timing of the disposal of property that is the subject of the arbitral

proceeding is merited.

In CSOB v. Slovakia, the Claimant assigned its interest in the investment following
initiation of arbitral proceedings. The tribunal stated that jurisdiction is determined based
on the state of the investment interest upon the date of arbitration’s commencement.

[I]t is generally recognized that the determination whether a party has standing in

an international judicial forum for purposes of jurisdiction to institute
is made by dit

F to the date on which such are
deemed to have been instituted. Since the Claimant instituted these proceedings
prior to the time when the two assignments were concluded, it follows that the
tribunal has jurisdiction to hear their case regardless of the legal effect, if any, the
assignments might have had on Claimant’s standing had they preceded the filing
of the case”, (Emphasis Added)

Respondent further asserts that due to the Claimants’ failure to “establish by reference to
credible evidence that such qualifying investments have been made and continue to
exist”° (emphasis added), this Tribunal cannot exercise jurisdiction. The tribunal’s
decision in CSOB v. Slovakia instructs that the relevant date for which the claimants are
required to prove ownership of their investment is the date upon which arbitral

proceedings have commenced, not thereafter.

Therefore, the Tribunal finds that the relevant precedent articulates that investments
liquidated or transferred after the initiation of arbitral proceedings are covered
investments in DR-CAFTA proceedings. In line with Article 3(2) of the UNCITRAL
which states that “arbitral proceedings shall be deemed to commence on the date on
which the notice of arbitration is received by the respondent”, the Tribunal determines
that the date of the Notice of Arbitration — in this case, January 20, 2014 — is the date
which should delineate which properties were sold after the initiation of this arbitration
and thereby, which have the character of a covered investment under Article 10.28 of

DR-CAFTA. Accordingly, the Tribunal expressly rejects Claimants’ assertion that all lots

25 CSOB vy. Slovakia, 1CSID Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, May 24, 1999, at 431
(CLA-177).

226

Respondent's Rejoinder Memorial, {| 164, page 44.

88

sold after May 2011 are covered investments. Instead, the threshold date of sale stands as
January 20, 2014.

297. In the Las Olas Project, properties were not only sold after arbitral proceedings began,
but also before. To that end, Mondev International, Ltd. v. United States, a matter that
arose under Chapter 11 of NAFTA, proves instructive. In that case, the investor lost
ownership of its investment as a result of the foreclosure of a mortgage due to delays in a
real estate development project imputable to the city of Boston. Unlike the situation in
CSOB v. Slovakia, such ownership was lost prior to the initiation of arbitral proceedings.
The tribunal found that the NAFTA dispute settlement procedures

will frequently have to be applied after the investment in question has failed. In

most cases, the dispute submitted to arbitration will concern precisely the
question of responsibility for that failure. To require the clamant to maintain a
continuing status as an investor under the law of the host State at the time the
arbitration is commenced would tend to frustrate the very purpose of Chapter 11,
which is to provide protection to investors against wrongful conduct including
uncompensated expropriation of their investment and to do so throughout the

9227

lifetime of an investment up to the moment of its ‘sale or other disposition
(Emphasis added).

298. Thus, in Mondev, the tribunal exercised jurisdictions because the investment had failed
due to the actions of a third party— the city of Boston. In this sense, Mondev provides an
exception to the general rule that an investor must own the investment at the date of

Notice of Arbitration to benefit from treaty protection.

299. Claimants seem to evoke the Mondev tribunal’s reasoning with their assertion that the
Las Olas Project had been destroyed by the Respondent’s actions through the
Municipality Shutdown Notice in May 2011, resulting in the subsequent sales of lots
made “at a fraction of their value (absent the shutdown), solely in an effort to mitigate the

992

Claimants’ losses”??®. To that effect, the issue becomes whether or not Respondent’s
imposition of a shutdown of the Las Olas Project, exhibits the same level of direct
causation as evidenced by the city of Boston’s actions in Mondev to warrant the exercise

of jurisdiction over all properties sold after May 2011.

227 Mondev International, Ltd. v. United States, 1CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award, October 11, 2002, 4 91.
(CLA-50).
228 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, at | 132, page 62.

89

300.

301.

302.

303.

The Claimants have failed to show whether the sales made between May 2011 and
January 20, 2014 were for distressed prices compared to those previously earned on sales
made prior to May 2011. In their Post-Hearing Brief Claimants allege those sales were

made in a distressed situation, but fail to show the impact on the sales price”.

To summarize, the Tribunal finds that the relevant case law instructs that in general
terms, an investment sold after the date of Notice of Arbitration meets the criteria for an
“investment” in the terms of DR-CAFTA. On the other hand, an investor who disposes of
ownership of the investment in question before arbitral proceedings should not be eligible
to seek the Treaty’s protection, unless special circumstances are present. Such
circumstances include, inter alia, the loss of the investment by the actions of a third party
or the retroactive application of a treaty, neither of which are applicable to the matter at
hand.
(c) Properties Over Which the Tribunal May Exercise
Jurisdiction

Now that the relevant date has been established as January 20, 2014—the date of the
Notice of Arbitration, the Tribunal considers evidence presented by both Parties to
determine which of the 78 properties disputed by Respondent will be included in “the
investment” as defined by Article 10.28 of DR-CAFTA.

The following table compiles all of the properties that (i) Claimants have acknowledged
were sold prior to the Notice of Arbitration, and (ii) with respect to which Respondent

agrees, and has provided evidence to confirm in its Annex II to its Rejoinder?’.

 

Lots Sold Prior to Notice of Arbitration (January 20, 2014)

 

Lot Number Location Owner Registration Date

 

158363-000 Easement/Other ‘Carosomu noventa y tres 21 May 2008

 

158362-000 Easement/Other Leon & Mussio, S.A. 11 December 2008

 

 

 

158411-000 Easement/Other Vistas de Esterillos 02 July 2009

 

 

 

 

29 Id, 4 648(g). page 294.
230 The information contained in the table was provided in Annex II of Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, and is
sourced from the Costa Rican National Registry.

90

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4 158366-000 Easement/Other LO con guacamayas siete 02 September 2009
5 158367-000 Easement/Other Las Olas beach resort 01 October 2009

6 158360-000 Easement/Other Pozas tranquilas de Esterillos 02 October 2009

7 159610-000 Easement/Other Famosos de vista en el tropico 28 January 2010

8 159611-000 Easement/Other Costal life properties 26 April 2010

9 159612-000 Easement/Other Noelani Costa Can, S.A. TI May 2010

10 | 79301-F-000 | Condominium Maes Family Corp, S.R.L. 05 July 2010

11 | 158361-000 Easement/Other LO Esterillos nueve 12 August 2010

12 | 158414-000 Easement/Other Las Olas Limpias Cinco 13 August 2010

13 | 79303-F-000 | Condominium Las Olas y los Arboles Diez, S.R-L. 22 September 2010
14 | 159849-000 Easement/Other Las Olas y La Selva Cuatro 03 November 2010
15 | 159848-000 Easement/Other Las Olas Monos Tres 09 December 2010
16 | 79304-F-000 | Condominium Las Olas Mas Bellas Seis, S.R.L. 03 February 2011
17 | 79305-F-000 | Condominium Puerta Azul Al Mar Uno, S.R.L. 23 February 2011
18 | 159850-000 Easement/Other Bandera de Mar Dos 25 February 2011
19 | 79363-F-000 | Condominium The Dull’s Investment, S.R.L. 14 March 2011

20 | 79344-F-000 | Condominium Puerta Azul Al Mar Uno, S.R.L. 28 March 2011

21 | 79346-F-000 | Condominium ‘Andata de la Playa Cero Uno, S.R.L. 06 June 2011

22 | 79345-F-000 | Condominium Isla Maui Internacional, S.A. 24 June 2011

23 | 159552-000 Easement/Other Manuel Rojas 19 January 2012
24 | 158408-000 Easement/Other Honorable Cartulario Nocturno 04 May 2012

25 | 79375-F-000 | Condominium Las Olas y Los Mangos Ocho, S.R.L. 21 November 2012
26 | 158412-000 Easement/Other CRG Group Holdings TI January 2013
27 | 158413-000 Easement/Other CRG Group Holdings TI January 2013
28 | 79309-F-000 | Condominium Three Oceans International, S.R.L. O1 April 2013

29 | 79310-F-000 | Condominium Three Oceans International, S.R.L. O1 April 2013

30 | 79311-F-000 | Condominium Three Oceans International, S.R.L. O1 April 2013

31 | 79314-F-000 | Condominium Three Oceans International, S.R.L. O1 April 2013

32 | 79315-F-000 | Condominium Three Oceans International, S.R.L. O1 April 2013

33 | 79316-F-000 | Condominium Three Oceans International, S.R-L. O1 April 2013

 

 

 

 

 

91

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

34 159553-000 Easement/Other Sand Group Investments, S.A. 29 April 2013

35 159554-000 Easement/Other Sand Group Investments, S.A. 29 April 2013

37 159607-000 Easement/Other Sand Group Investments, S.A. 29 April 2013

38 159608-000 Easement/Other Sand Group Investments, S.A. 29 April 2013

39 159609-000 Easement/Other Sand Group Investments, S.A. 29 April 2013

40 79323-F-000 Condominium DW Blue Group, S.A. 29 May 2013

41 79324-F-000 Condominium DW Blue Group, S.A. 29 May 2013

42 79332-F-000 Condominium DW Blue Group, S.A. 29 May 2013

43 79348-F-000 Condominium DW Blue Group, S.A. 29 May 2013

44 79349-F-000 Condominium DW Blue Group, S.A. 29 May 2013

45 79350-F-000 Condominium DW Blue Group, S.A. 29 May 2013

46 79317-F-000 Condominium Three Oceans International, S.R.L. 30 May 2013

47 793 18-F-000 Condominium Three Oceans International, S.R.L. 30 May 2013

48 79319-F-000 Condominium Three Oceans International, S.R.L. 30 May 2013

49 79320-F-000 Condominium Three Oceans International, S.R.L. 30 May 2013

50 79321-F-000 Condominium Three Oceans International, S.R.L. 30 May 2013

51 79322-F-000 Condominium Three Oceans International, S.R.L. 30 May 2013

52 162482-000 Easement/Other Three Oceans International, S.R.L. 04 July 2013

53 162483-000 Easement/Other Three Oceans International, S.R.L. 04 July 2013

54 162484-000 Easement/Other Three Oceans International, $.R.L. 04 July 2013

55 162485-000 Easement/Other Three Oceans International, S.R.L. 04 July 2013

56 162486-000 Easement/Other Three Oceans International, S.R.L. 04 July 2013

57 162487-000 Easement/Other Three Oceans International, $.R.L. 04 July 2013

58 159847-000 Easement/Other Samuel Bermiidez 11 December 2013

304. Respondent identified in Annex II to its Rejoinder another lot which was sold before the

filing of the Notice of Arbitration which Claimants have not contested, nor have provided
information acknowledging the sale either.
Lot Number Location Owner Date Sold

59 159556-000 Easement/Other Sand Group Investments, S.A. 29 April 2013

 

 

 

 

 

 

92

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

305. On the other hand, the following lots were identified by Claimants in their Annex B to
their Post-Hearing Brief as having been sold before the Notice of Arbitration (albeit
without identifying the date on which transfer occurred) but either (i) were not identified
by Respondent, or (ii) were identified by Respondent to have been sold after the Notice
of Arbitration. In this respect, it suffices for the acknowledgement of Claimants of the
date of disposition prior to the Notice of Arbitration for the Tribunal to accept as
accurate.

Lots Sold Prior to Notice of Arbitration (January 20, 2014)
Lot Number Location Owner Date Sold
60 159555-000 Easement/Other Samuel Bermiidez Pre-Notice Arbitration
61 159557-000 Easement/Other Soluciones Unica Fiesta Pre-Notice Arbitration
62 159558-000 Easement/Other Soluciones Unica Fiesta Pre-Notice Arbitration
63 159559-000 Easement/Other Soluciones Unica Fiesta. Pre-Notice Arbitration
64 159851-000 Easement/Other Bandera de Mar Dos Pre-Notice Arbitration
65 159852-000 Easement/Other Rolando Solano Romero Pre-Notice Arbitration
66 159853-000 Easement/Other Rolando Solano Romero Pre-Notice Arbitration
67 159854-000 Easement/Other Rolando Solano Romero Pre-Notice Arbitration

306. Accordingly, a total of 67 lots were sold prior to the Notice of Arbitration, 66 of which
have been acknowledged by Claimants; for the one lot not acknowledged by Claimants,
however, Respondent has provided evidence to the effect that a new owner was registered
in the Costa Rican National Registry before the Notice of Arbitration was filed.
Therefore, the Tribunal concludes that a total of 67 properties are not protected
investments under Article 10.28 and the Tribunal will refrain from exercising jurisdiction
over these properties”!

307. The Tribunal expresses concern over the failure of the Claimants to submit a careful

report from the outset of the arbitration, but in any case, after Respondent challenged

initially the properties. Not only do Claimants have the burden of proving the facts relied

3! Although Respondent alleged that 78 properties were not protected investments, the Tribunal notes that
Respondent’s figure included properties sold after the Notice of Arbitration and two properties which were recorded
under the former names of the Claimants’ Enterprises — which the Costa Rican registry has not updated.

93

308.

309.

on to support its claim or defense under the UNCITRAL Rules of Arbitration, but under a
duty of candor towards the Tribunal, Claimants also have the duty to submit a detailed
identification of properties owned and, even if Claimants desire to take the position that
the sale of properties made prior or after the submission of the Notice of Arbitration does
not affect their claim and may still be treated as part of their investment for purposes of

the valuation of damages, to disclose this fact in their submissions.
Dz. The Concession Site
1. The Parties’ Positions

The allegations over the protection of the investment made by Claimants in the
Concession Site are more complex. Initially, in the Counter-Memorial Respondent
objected to protection on the basis of the fact that Claimants had failed to comply with
the rules applicable to the Concession. Among other reasons, because Claimants had
failed to pay taxes to the municipality for the fourteen years they held the Concession,
because they failed to begin construction within one year after grant, or within the grant
of the construction permits, and because the ownership of the capital of La Canicula, S.A.
- the Costa Rica commercial entity that owned the property and held the Concession title,
was not maintained in accordance with applicable law- the Maritime Terrestrial Zone
Law (the “MTZ Law’) since a Costa Rican national failed to hold at all times at least
51% of the shares of said company”.

In Claimants’ Reply Memorial and Mr. Aven’s Second Witness Statement, evidence was

submitted in respect of payment of the taxes to the Municipality?*?

along with arguments
concerning the fact that the Municipality was aware of the failure to commence
construction, but nonetheless issued the relevant construction permits. In addition, these
materials contained evidence advising of the valuation of the constructions to be
completed. On the subject of ownership of La Canicula, Claimants explained how the
purchase of this property was made in 2002, and how the purchase of one of the portions

was contingent upon receipt of the Concession title from the Municipality of Parrita;

upon receipt, Mr. Aven closed the purchase on April 1, 2002. Thereafter, on April 30,

232 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, §§] 309-317, pages 78-80.
233 Claimants’ Reply Memorial, | 296, page 100. (C-269).

94

310.

311.

2002, all of the shares in trust were placed in trust with Banco Cuscatlan, S.A. with Mr.
Aven listed as one of the beneficiaries. Additional evidence was produced to the effect
that an agreement was executed on March 8, 2005 whereby “... Ms. Paula Murillo was
assigned 51% of the shares in La Canicula and that Ms. Murillo agreed to assign all
future profits generated by the La Canicula development to the Claimants””**. Claimants
affirmed that they ensured that a Costa Rican national held, at all times, the requisite 51%

of the shares in La Canicula in accordance with Costa Rican law??>

. Again, on May 10,
2010, they assigned to Ms. Murillo 51% of the shares”*° to meet the legal requirement.
However, there is no evidence that Ms. Murillo was registered as a shareholder in the

shareholders registry book, as prescribed by Costa Rica’s law.

In the Rejoinder, Respondent challenged the structure described by Claimants, and
asserted that Claimants had failed to identify details of termination of the initial trust, of
payments made when the 49% were sold to other Claimants, and the satisfaction of legal
formalities for the transfer. Respondent also highlighted that Mr. Aven, alone or with
other Claimants, had owned all of the shares of La Canicula during a period of time in
breach of Costa Rica law, which had as a consequence that the Concession would be
forfeited under the MTZ Law?’. To support their position, they referred to the witness

238

statement of Dr. Julio Jurado***, arguing that the acquisition and/or holding of 100% of

the stock of La Canicula at any time would render the Concession to be null and void.

In their Post-Hearing Brief, Respondent confirmed its objection to the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal over any claims relating to the Concession Site because Mr. Aven owned the
totality of shares in La Canicula in violation of Articles 47 and 53 of the MTZ Law?
insofar as Mr. Aven had admitted that he purchased on April 1, 2002 the totality of the
shares in La Canicula from Mr. Monge, and kept them under his ownership even after the

trust to hold the shares had expired”4°, despite Claimants’ later correction of the date of

2 This agreement was submitted as Exhibit C-242.

235 Claimants’ Reply Memorial, | 337, page 116.

236 {d., 4 339, page 117, Second Witness Statement of David Aven, § 37.

237 Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, if] 180-188, pages 47-49. The Maritime Terrestrial Law was submitted as
Exhibit C-221.

238 Second Witness Statement of Julio Jurado, §f] 204, 205 and 216.

239 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 608, page 123.

240 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, §"] 636-652, page 131-134.

95

312.

313.

314.

315.

acquisition to April 30, 2002. Furthermore, based on the fact that there was no evidence
that at least 51% of the shares in La Canicula had been transferred to a Costa Rican
national, and the purported transfer to Ms. Paula Murillo was not definitive’!,
Respondent alleged that Claimants were therefore in breach of Article 47 of the MTZ
Law. The acquisition of the investment in violation of the laws of the host State has been
recognized by international investment case law as trumping the jurisdiction of the

arbitral tribunal”.

In response to the argument of Claimants that Articles 2.1 and 10.28 DR-CAFTA only
require the investors to prove prima facie that they have “ownership or control” of an
investment, Respondent argues that this position has been examined by other tribunals in
the context of ratione personae jurisdiction and not, as in this case, in dealing with an

issue of ratione materiae™.

Regarding the several cases involving de facto control by the investor cited by Claimants,
Respondent provided counter arguments to each, distinguishing them in light of the
alleged illegality of the acquisition of the property comprising the Concession Site. In
response to the argument that tribunals have historically been reluctant to deny standing
on the basis of non-compliance with formalistic/technical rules, Respondent stated that
while it did not disagree with this premise, it denied that Claimants’ violation of the MTZ
Law can be considered a mere formality. In his witness statement, Dr. Jurado categorized

this as constructive or legal fraud.

Respondent has added that Claimants have the burden of proving the legitimate
ownership of their investment, not only under UNCITRAL Rules but also under the

international case law that it cited?“+, and that Claimants have failed to meet such burden.

Furthermore, in an attempt to demonstrate the Claimants’ failure to meet the

requirements of the laws of Costa Rica Respondent presented a thorough analysis of the

241 [d., | 657-665, page 135-138.

22 {d., 4 609, page 123. Respondent cited Inceysa v. El Salvador, Award, August 2, 2006, $f] 238-239 (RLA-11),
Phoenix v. Czech Republic, Award of April 15, 2009, | 145 (RLA-75), Alpha Projektholding Gmbh v. Ukraine,
ICSID Case No ARB/07/16, Award, November 8, 2010 (RLA-163) §] 294, Saba Fakes v. Republic of Turkey, 1CSID
Case No ARB/07/20, Award, July 14, 2010, f] 147-156 (RLA-162).

24 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {| 612-627, pages 124-127.

244 Id. 44] 631-635, pages 129-130.

96

316.

317.

318.

chronology of the acquisition by Mr. Aven of the shares in La Canicula, the transfer into
trust with Banco Cuscatlan, S.A., the subsequent termination of the bank trust, and the
transfer to Ms. Murillo**>. The failure to comply with the MTZ Law at several instances
(including at the time of the original acquisition and upon termination of the bank trust),
should forfeit the Claimants’ acquisition of the Concession Site property, and therefore,

by operation of law deprive the Claimants of any rights over the property.

During the December Hearing there was discussion regarding the constitutionality of the
MTZ Law that requires a Costa Rican national to own at least 51% of the shares in a
company owning property along a coastal beach. With respect to the same, Respondent
argued in the Post-Hearing Brief that Claimants’ expert, Mr. Ortiz, failed to justify the
alleged unconstitutionality of the provision, under either argument of alleged violations
of international human rights (because the case cited by Mr. Ortiz - Ivcher Bronstein v.
Peru did not, in any way, address any discrimination issues comparable to the 51% rule
whatsoever), or the decisions rendered by the Constitutional Chamber of Costa Rica,
since in its Decision No. 11351 of June 29, 2010 the Constitutional Chamber has already
upheld as constitutional the rationale behind the 51% rule contained in Article 47 of the
ZMT Law. The dissenting opinion by one of the Justices referenced by Mr. Ortiz, aside
from dealing with an issue of transparency and not discrimination of a foreign national, is

irrelevant as it is not binding in nature?*°.

Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief addressed the allegations on the timing of the execution of
the agreements and corrected the date of acquisition of the shares (to April 30, 2002) to
coincide with the date these were placed in trust with Banco Cuscatlan de Costa Rica
S.A. Further, Claimants asserted that the ownership of the shares in trust did not conclude
simply by reason of expiration of the agreement, but rather continued until a new trust

was executed with Mr. Aven’s former lawyer, Juan Carlos Esquivel.

Claimants also argued in their Post-Hearing Brief that Respondent failed to raise this
particular jurisdictional objection in due course, i.e., by the time it submitted its statement

of defense (as identified under Article 23(2) of the 2010 UNCITRAL Arbitration

245 Jd., $9] 636-659, pages 131-136.
6 1d., | 660-665, pages 136-138.

97

319.

320.

321.

Rules”), but rather did so at its closing arguments during the December Hearing. The

 

cited provision indicates: “A plea that the arbitral tribunal does not have jurisdiction shall
be raised no later than in the statement of defence.” It would be manifestly unfair, and
constitute a grave prejudice to the Claimants, if the Respondent were permitted to raise
such objection so very late in the proceedings — particularly since it would be after the

point at which the Claimants could submit all relevant evidence to rebut it.

Finally, as to control over the Concession Site, Claimants argued that Municipal officials
at Parrita were well aware that the U.S. investors exercised control over the Concession at
all relevant times”“*. They added that in Costa Rica, there is general practice of non-
enforcement of the so called 51% Rule, and that Respondent had never raised any issue
regarding the Claimants’ alleged non-compliance with the 51% Rule until this

arbitration”?.

2. The Tribunal’s Analysis

The issue to address at this time deals with whether the Tribunal can examine the claims
of the Claimants in respect of the investment made in the Concession, and not on whether
the structure initially made by Claimants or subsequently amended was appropriate or

even whether it was legitimate under the laws of Costa Rica.

During the examination of Mr. Aven during the December Hearing, Arbitrator Siqueiros
asked Mr. Aven about the structure utilized where a Costa Rican person holding the 51%

of the shares in La Canicula was only a service provider, and not an investor; this because

250

the agreement executed” expresses a service to be provided by Ms. Murillo rather than a

true transfer of ownerships. He responded that:

This is one of those quirky things in Costa Rica you have to understand. That
they have this law that if you--foreigners invest--buy property on the Concession,
that a foreign national (sic) has to have 50--own 51 percent. But it’s understood
that this--and normally the foreign nationals are attorneys or people--you know,

247 Article 23(2) of the 2010 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules provides: “A plea that the arbitral tribunal does not have
jurisdiction shall be raised no later than in the statement of defence.”

248 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, ff] 134-137, page 62-64.

249 Td. 4300, page 147.

250 The one-page agreement provides for no purchase price to be paid by Ms. Murillo, but rather that Ms. Murillo
assigns all future profits to the US Investors and she will transfer the shares received to whomever the US Investors
appoint in the future. Finally, that she will be compensated “for her services”. (C-242).

98

322.

323.

324.

people, you know, you have confidence in. They won’t steal it. But normally
it’s understood that they’re just holding it. You know, it’s like a placeholder.
Okay. And you generally have an arrangement where, okay, they’re holding this
as a placeholder, but they’re holding it like--almost like in trust for the--the
person that bought it, the foreigner that bought it.

He then added
The Costa Rican didn’t put any money in. This was just a--one of the quirky
things in Costa Rica law. And it’s done commonly. This is the way it’s done
down there. We didn’t invent this, the way things are done. We--again, another

example of following the rules that are established in Costa Rica. So this is the
way it’s done**!.

The Tribunal acknowledges based on evidence reviewed that such arrangements appear
to be common throughout Costa Rica, and the government of Costa Rica has elected not
to enforce the laws that could void such structures. During the examination of Mr. Julio
Jurado, the Attorney General for Costa Rica, who had been presented an Expert Witness
Report on behalf of Respondent, he responded to questions from Arbitrator Siqueiros,
and on the subject of the Concession Site shareholder arrangement he accepted that the
structure where Costa Rican nationals would simply “lend their name” used by Claimants
was not uncommon, although he referred to it as “legal fraud”. When asked whether he
had ever handled a case, or ever known of a case that was brought to courts, he responded

in the negative”.

The Tribunal will first examine whether on the merits of the arguments this is a valid
challenge, and whether procedurally Respondent is entitled to challenge the jurisdiction
for having failed to exercise this until its Post-Hearing Brief, and not at the time it

submitted its statement of defense as required under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules.

Costa Rica was aware of the situation in La Canicula, and it never challenged the
Concession on the ground of Articles 47 and 53 of the MTZ Law. The Tribunal believes
that, insofar as the Respondent has knowledge of these structures, and according to the
testimony of Dr. Jurado, the Attorney General’s office has even discussed the issue with
the municipalities which have the authority to issue the MTZ concessions, but the

government of Costa Rica has elected to tolerate said structures, and not take any action

251 Transcript Page 927-16 931 -13.
252 Transcript 1540-2 / 1541-4,

99

325.

326.

327.

328.

253

against any of the existing concessions that may be similar in nature, implies their tacit
acceptance. Perhaps this is made in an effort to promote tourism and/or investment in the

country and not deter real estate developments along the coasts.

Accordingly, the Tribunal believes that Respondent’s longtime tolerance of analogous
structures bars it from challenging the legality of the structure in the instant case. On the
other hand, the fact that the challenge has been found to be barred implies that the
Tribunal needs not examine the second part dealing with procedural timing of its

submission.

Likewise, the challenge argued by Respondent based on the fact that Claimants had failed
to pay municipal taxes for several years should be dismissed because neither the
Municipality nor Respondent took any action prior to the filing by Claimants of the
Notice of Arbitration to remedy such failure, whether by fining the concession holder or
initiating a procedure to revoke the Concession. In any case, Claimants submitted

evidence during the proceedings in respect of payment of the taxes to the Municipality”.

ADMISSIBILITY OF THE CLAIMS
A. Positions of the Parties
1. Unlawful and Illegal Conduct in the Operation of the Investment

In addition to the challenges to the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal based on the
allegations of Ratione Personae and Ratione Materiae, the Respondent has also raised
challenges to the admissibility of the Claimants’ claims arguing that under international
law Claimants cannot avail themselves of the protections of DR-CAFTA due to the

illegalities committed during the operation of their alleged investment in Costa Rica”**.

Respondent initially raised a challenge to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal in its Counter-
Memorial, based on the illegalities allegedly committed by Claimants during the

development of Las Olas project and their subsequent failure to comply with the

See Exhibit C-268 with a receipt of taxes paid to the Municipality, which lists payments made by La Canicula,

S.A., in respect to the Consession Site as well.
254 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, § 112, page 29, Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, {| 198, page 51.

100

329.

330.

331.

applicable laws of Costa Rica with respect to construction and the damages caused to the

environment».

In its subsequent Rejoinder, Respondent clarified its position by stating that if there is
illegal conduct in the acquisition of the investment, then there can be no property rights
and no “investment” for purposes of the Treaty, and a tribunal would lack jurisdiction
ratione materiae. But in the present claim, Respondent added, the issue is whether a
claim based on serious misconduct by Claimants during the operation of the investment
should be heard by this Tribunal, allowing Claimants to (potentially) receive the
protection of the DR-CAFTA”**. Respondent thus changed its objection on the basis of
“admissibility” of the claim, arguing that the inadmissibility of claims based on
investments which have been operated in an illegal manner is supported by the DR-
CAFTA itself since one of the aims of the DR-CAFTA is to strengthen the rule of law
among the State Parties, and thus, the substantive protections of the DR-CAFTA cannot

apply to investments that are conducted contrary to law’.

Respondent insisted in the Post-Hearing Brief that under international law investors are
barred from the substantive protection of an investment treaty when they have obtained
or operated their investment illegally, and that Claimants (i) misled Costa Rican
authorities by deliberately omitting key information which, at the same time, enabled
them to lessen the extent of the environmental impact of their Project; and (ii) acted
against the requirements of Costa Rican law and international law*. Citing the case
Plama y. Bulgaria*? where investor misconduct was not viewed as a jurisdictional issue,
but as an issue that affected the substantive inadmissibility of the claim, Respondent
argued that the illegalities committed by Claimants during the performance of the

investment should constitute a barrier to the admissibility of Claimants’ claims.

On the question of whether the DR-CAFTA or the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules allow

the Tribunal to reject or admit claims on the basis of non-compliance with the host State

255 Id, $258, page 66, and 270, page 70.

256 Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, {| 527 and 528, pages 134-135.

257 [d., 4 531, page 136.

258 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, § 679, page 140.

259 Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, 1CSID Case No. ARB 03 24, Award, August 27, 2008.
(RLA-12).

101

law, Respondent first argued that this is an inherent power of the Tribunal, despite the
absence of express provisions under the Treaty or the arbitration rules”. Although
Respondent recognizes that DR-CAFTA does not explicitly require an investment to be
in accordance with the law of the host State, Respondent contends that it implicitly
provides for the inadmissibility of claims based on investments which have been operated
in an illegal manner. Respondent reaffirmed an argument made in the Rejoinder asserting
that the ultimate aim of the Treaty is to strengthen the rule of law among the State Parties,
which entails that the Treaty should be interpreted in a manner consistent with this
objective, and any attempt to provide substantive protection to an investment operated
contrary to the law will be clearly against such purpose”*!, while citing several cases in

support of this proposition”.

332. During the December Hearing and in their Post-Hearing Brief, Claimants addressed that
the objections of Respondent were premised upon examples in which a respondent
alleged that serious criminality or fraud had materially contributed to establishment of the
investment and cited precedents in other international investment cases”°? where
compliance with municipal law is construed as a legality requirement, and that the
temporal scope of the legality requirement is limited to the establishment of the
investment, but does not extend to the subsequent performance. In any event, it is the
Respondent, they claim, that has the burden of proof to establish that the investment was

procured by fraud or non-compliance with municipal law”.

333. Finally, although Claimants object that Respondent had not addressed the illegality of

complaints prior to this arbitration, and suggest that Respondent advanced “ex post facto

260 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, § 696, page 143.

261 Id., 44 699-702, page 144.

26 In addition to Plama v. Bulgaria above, Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the
Philippines [11], ICSID Case No. ARB/I1/12, Award, December 10, 2014, para. 332 (RLA-14), Gustav F W
Hamester GmbH & Co KG v. Republic of Ghana, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/24, Award, June 18, 2010, para. 123
(RLA-161).

26 Quiborax SA and others v. Bolivia, Decision on Jurisdiction, ICSID Case No ARB/06/2, IC 563 (2012),
September 27, 2012, at {| 266, (cited in Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 139, page 64) Yukos Universal Limited v.
Russian Federation, Final Award, PCA Case No AA 227, IIC 652 (2014), ICGJ 481 (PCA 2014), July 18, 2014, at
4 1352-1354 (CLA-199) and Copper Mesa Mining Corporation v. Ecuador, Award, PCA Case No 2012-2, IIC 841
(2016), March 15, 2016, at §§] 5.54-5.55, and 5.59 (CLA-179).

264 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, §f] 141-142, page 66.

102

334.

335.

336.

allegations” of Claimants’ alleged illegalities?®,

Respondent mentions that where
illegalities were found before the commencement of this arbitration, Claimants were duly
informed. With respect to those illegalities that were identified after the commencement
of the arbitration, Respondent asserts that given such “concealment of information from
local agencies” upon the disclosure of information on these proceedings, it is the
Tribunal’s duty to determine whether the legality requirement is met as a finding of fact
in order to adjudicate this dispute. Therefore, it is not necessary — adds Respondent, to
have a local court’s decision declaring that an investment has breached the law to allow

the Tribunal to conclude that it is illegal?®.
2. Claims for Breach to provide Full Protection and Security

Claimants argued that a host State’s failure to “properly to investigate, or punish, credible
complaints by a foreign investor about corruption” would constitute a failure to honour
the due diligence obligation to provide “protection and security” under customary
international law, and that Prosecutor Martinez’s refusal to perform a good faith
investigation of credible corruption charges leveled was an example of failing to honor

this minimum standard of protection?®’.

Respondent has also raised an objection to what it refers to a “new cause of action”
brought by Claimants at the end of the December Hearing, wherein Claimants allege a
breach by Respondent of the full protection and security standard. Prior to the December
Hearing, Claimants had exclusively raised breaches to fair and equitable treatment in
their Notice of Arbitration and then, in their Reply, that Respondent had (i) frustrated
Claimants’ legitimate expectations; (ii) failed to afford due process; (iii) were arbitrary;

and (iv) implied an abuse of rights”°*. These claims are examined below.

In its Post-Hearing Brief Respondent has requested that the Tribunal declare as
inadmissible any claims from Claimant regarding alleged breaches of the duty to provide
full protection and security to the investors, since this allegation was raised only at the

closing of the December Hearing, and not as a claim in the Request for Arbitration or

265 Jd., 4599, page 274.

266 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, §{ 707-717, pages 145-147.
267 Claimants’ Reply Memorial 370, page 124.

268 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, 720, page 147.

103

337.

338.

339.

subsequently”®, and that Article 10.16.2 DR-CAFTA sets forth the need for a “Notice to
submit a claim to arbitration” and establishes that such notice must specify the provision
of the Treaty alleged to have been breached as well as the “legal and factual basis for

each claim’?””.

Respondent made reference to Supervision y Control, S.A. v. The Republic of Costa Rica
where the Tribunal, in a decision issued against Costa Rica, nonetheless established that:
Additionally, the Tribunal would like to remind the importance of proper notice,
which is an important element of the State’s consent to arbitration. Indeed, proper

notice allows the State to examine and possibly resolve the dispute through
negotiation.

The failure to duly notify the State receiving the investment of the existence of a
dispute constitutes a violation of Article XI.1 of the Treaty. This implies that any
claim that has not been notified is inadmissible in the respective proceeding,
because the prior negotiation process agreed to by the Parties has not been
exhausted.

In the event the Investor notifies certain claims to the State, but upon presenting
the Request for Arbitration of its Claims Memorial it adds as claims different and
not directly related to those previously presented, all the claims not notified will
be inadmissible. Thus, the proceeding will only address the previously notified
claims under the requirements set forth in Article XI of the Treaty?”.

3. Exhaustion of Domestic Proceedings

Respondent argues that Claimants have asserted an unsupported claim for Respondent’s
failure to afford due process and arbitrary conduct with the clear purpose of avoiding the
high threshold that a claim of denial of justice entails: exhaustion of local remedies, or in

the event that it has not been complied with it, futility of the remedies available”.

Claimants allege that the DR-CAFTA does not contemplate exhaustion of local remedies.
There is no provision under Chapter 10, they state, that could permit the Respondent to
unilaterally impose an exhaustion requirement, and Article 10.18(3) permits an investor-

claimant to “initiate or continue an action that seeks interim injunctive relief and does not

269 Id, $$] 718-726, pages 147-149.

2 Id., 44722, page 148.

21 Supervision y Control S.A. v. Republic of Costa Rica, 1CSID Case No. ARB/12/4, Award, January 18, 2017,
49 339-341 (RLA-169).

2n

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {| 867, page 182.

104

340.

341.

342.

343.

344.

 

involve the payment of monetary damages” simultaneously with the pursuit of a damages

claim under Article 10.167.

Claimants further stress that any such measures would be prohibited under Chapter 10
since the Treaty parties provided investor-claimants with the right to pursue both

arbitration and a local remedy simultaneously*’*.

On the other hand, Claimants reject that they have brought a denial of justice claim?”,

and challenge the right of Respondent to re-characterize their claim as such.

B. The Tribunal’s Analysis
1. Unlawful and Illegal Conduct in the Operation of the Investment

The Tribunal has not found evidence that Claimants acted fraudulently in the
establishment of the investment made in the Las Olas Project, and sides with the temporal
scope of the legality requirement premised in the Quiborax, Yukos Universal and Copper
Mesa Mining cases that have been cited. It should not extend to the subsequent actions
during the performance of the investment. Respondent failed to establish that the
investment was procured by fraud or non-compliance with applicable law. Thus, the
challenge to the admissibility of the Claimants’ claims due to the illegalities committed

during the operation is dismissed.
2. Claims for Breach to provide Full Protection and Security

The Tribunal will now address the issue of whether the alleged failure by Claimant to
argue in the Request for Arbitration the breach by Respondent to the duty to provide full
protection and security to the Investors, and only brought the claim at the closing of the
December Hearing, as Respondent states, bars them from now making the claim under

Article 10.16.2 DR-CAFTA.

The Tribunal agrees that the State’s consent to arbitration under DR-CAFTA presupposes
the compliance with the requirement for the submission of a claim, including but not

limited to those under article 10.16(2), which establish the need to include in the notice of

laimants’ Post-Hearing Brief {¥] 143-144, page 67.

274 Article 10.18(3) DR-CAFTA, which allows an investor-claimant to “initiate or continue an action that seeks

inter’
25 Cy

im injunctive relief and does not involve the payment of monetary damages”.
laimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, $f] 430-434, pages 206-209.

105

345.

346.

347.

intent not only a factual description for each claim, but also the “legal basis” thereof. It is

a right of the Respondent to have a clear framework of the claims from the outset.

Claimants failed to expressly plead a claim for breach of full protection and security. The
Tribunal takes note that Claimants referred to the duty to provide protection and security
to the investors only in passing in their Memorial?”, and claimed a breach of Article
10.5, which covers both standards of fair and equitable treatment and full protection and
security. In their Reply, they added the following passage: “What the Claimants stated in
their Memorial was that the manner in which the Respondent investigated those
complaints amounted to a breach of the Claimants’ DR-CAFTA fair and equitable
treatment and full protection and security standards”?’’. It is relevant to note that the
same facts alleged by Claimants were primarily framed by them as breaches of fair and

equitable treatment.

The Tribunal finds that even though there were limited mentions in Claimants’ Memorial
and Reply to breaches on the part of Respondent to the standard of full protection and
security, Article 10.16.2 DR-CAFTA requires more from a Claimant. The “Notice to
submit a claim to arbitration” must specify not only the specific provision of the Treaty
alleged to have been breached, but the ‘legal and factual basis for each claim’. Similar
provisions are found in UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules Article 20. The need to timely
and properly submit a claim is evident: to allow a respondent State to prepare and argue
its defense. Therefore, since Claimants failed to timely plead a claim for breach of full
protection and security, it declares this claim as inadmissible in limine. The Tribunal
nonetheless expressly states that this does not prejudice the rest of the claims timely

presented by Claimants, and these will be examined below.
3. Exhaustion of Domestic Proceedings

The positions of both Parties in this arbitration in respect of the requirement of
exhausting domestic proceedings need to be examined in the light of certain general

principles under international law.

276 Claimants’ Memorial, §f 268-270, pages 84-85.
277 Claimants’ Reply Memorial, | 95(k), page 39.

106

348.

349.

350.

351.

On the subject of whether there is a need to exhaust local remedies, to which Respondent
argues that the Claimants must be forced to exhaust any and all remedies available under
the applicable law of Costa Rica, Claimants’ position is that, by operation of Articles
10.16 to 10.18 DR-CAFTA, the Treaty Parties established a /ex specialis regime for the
resolution of disputes under the Treaty that perforce displaces the customary international
law rule in favor of exhausting local remedies*”*. Otherwise, the text of Article 10.18(3)

would be superfluous?”’.

The Tribunal cannot accept the argument of Claimants on the ground that DR-CAFTA
does not does not require the exhaustion of internal remedies for admissibility of a claim.
What Respondent has alleged in this regard does not appear to be directed to questioning
the admissibility of the claim, but rather an issue of the merits of the dispute, as it is to
establish whether a denial of justice claim has been configured, as a component for the
standard of fair and equitable treatment in accordance with Article 10.5.2.a,. DR-CAFTA.
Alleging that domestic remedies have not yet been exhausted within the internal
jurisdiction to oppose the admissibility of the claim would be manifestly impertinent. On
the other hand, it is valid to allege the failure to exhaust such remedies to challenge an

alleged breach of fair and equitable treatment claim.

Claimants have the burden to prove that domestic tribunals failed to afford proper
protection which the State is bound to provide under customary international law. Failure
to do so does not in any way oppose to the admissibility of the claim, but the merits of the

claim should be discarded.

In the framework of the admissibility of an international claim, the rule for previous
exhaustion of internal remedies is established for the benefit of the respondent State
before an international tribunal, and expresses respect to its sovereignty. It provides the
State accused of a breach of international law, in detriment of a national of another State,
the opportunity to address in litigation under its own means prior to taking this before an

international tribunal.

28 Id., 475, page 26.
2” Id., 4478, page 27.

107

The rule that local remedies must be exhausted before international proceedings
may be instituted is a well-established rule of customary international law; the
tule has been generally observed in cases in which a State has adopted the cause
of its national whose rights are claimed to have been disregarded in another State
in violation of international law. Before resort may be had to an international
court in such a situation, it has been considered necessary that the State where the
violation occurred should have an opportunity to redress it by its own means,
within the framework of its own domestic legal system”. (Emphasis added).

352. Ina procedural instance not exhausting internal remedies is always a means of defence
that the respondent State has, and may be waived either in an express or tacit manner by

the relevant State benefited therefrom.

353. In respect of the nature of the rule for exhaustion of internal remedies, the predominant
precedents and legal scholars, as well as treaties that address this principle lean toward
considering it as a procedural requirement, and not one of merits. The International
Court of Justice has treated it as a preliminary defence, directed at objecting to the
admissibility of a case, as a raison d’étre of this rule. Likewise, the Articles on
Diplomatic Protection of the International Law Commission (Article 14.1) contemplate it
as an admissibility requirement”*', as it is also explicitly referred to in certain Human

Rights conventions”*?.

354. In customary international law rules and minimum standard of treatment, denial of justice
occurs when a State breaches an international obligation to provide non-nationals access
to justice and due process for the determination of their rights and duties through
competent, independent and impartial courts, as per internationally recognized
standards”**. This implies a certain degree of connection and sometimes intertwined
relationships between exhaustion of domestic remedies as a condition for admissibility of
a claim and denial of justice as a substantive of unlawful action. The International Court

of Justice so established in the Barcelona Traction case:

280 Interhandel Case, Judgment of March 21st, 1959: LC. J. Reports 1959, p. 27.

28! “A State cannot present an international claim in respect to a harm caused by one of its nationals or one of the
persons referred to under draft article 8 before the harmed person has exhausted in domestic remedies” (emphasis
added).

282 Article 35 of the Convention on Human Rights, Article 46 of the American Convention on Human Rights, among
others.

283 The due process right which is acknowledged and protected by most relevant conventions on Human Rights is
more generous than that arising from minimum standard of treatment to non-nationals, but is applied in a different
arena, which does not differentiate among nationals and non-nationals, and has its source in law and not custom.

108

355.

356.

357.

[...] this is not a case where the allegation of failure to exhaust local remedies
stands out as a clear-cut issue of a preliminary character that can be determined
on its own. It is inextricably interwoven with the issues of denial of justice
which constitute the major part of the merits*’. (emphasis added).

This proximity, however, does not mean in any way identity. When the victim of an
illegal action exhausts domestic remedies to attempt to resolve his/her claim internally,
not only does he/she seek justice, but also clears the way to make such claim admissible
by an international tribunal examining diplomatic protection, regardless of whether the
original claim referred to denial of justice, or any other breach to an international duty of
the respondent State. Obviously, if the claim relates to denial of justice and the claimant
alleges that he/she has not been able to exhaust domestic remedies because these are non-
existent, illusory or the decision is to be delayed unjustifiably, then the claimant-victim
shall have the burden to assert this situation to ensure the admissibility of the
international claim, and also to address the merits of the case. But no confusion should
exist among the preliminary requirement of exhausting domestic remedies, as a
procedural issue, and the denial of justice as an international unlawful act. For the latter
to arise, it is necessary that internal remedies have been commenced without result, or are

non-existent or illusory.

This Treaty, as most of those that deal with the international protection of investments
differentiates itself clearly from diplomatic protection. DR-CAFTA does not require prior
exhaustion of internal remedies as a requirement of admissibility to access international
investment arbitration. This, however, does not mean that the DR-CAFTA does not
recognize denial of justice as an unlawful act, which may be caused against an investor of
one of the Parties to the Treaty. On the contrary, DR-CAFTA suggests that fair and
equitable treatment has as a fundamental component of denial of justice; “fair and
equitable treatment” includes the obligation not to deny justice in criminal civil or
administrative adjudicatory proceedings in accordance with the principle of due process

embodied in the principal legal systems of the world; Article 10.5.2.a DR-CAFTA.

Therefore, the claimant investor alleging the breach of the obligation to afford fair and

equitable treatment has the burden of proof to show denial of justice, insofar as Article

28 Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited, Preliminary Objections, Judgment. I.C. J. Reports
1964, p. 44

109

358.

359.

360.

10.5.2.(a) DR-CAFTA may be applicable. The investor may not be released of such
burden invoking that DR-CAFTA does not require the prior exhaustion of domestic
remedies to have access to arbitration, because what is at play is not the admissibility of
the claim but the merit of the claim. Certainly, for the admissibility of a claim within
DR-CAFTA, it is not necessary to have exhausted domestic remedies, but to establish the
merits on the basis of denial of justice it is necessary to evidence that the State which
receives the investment breaches its international obligation to provide investors of the
other Parties to the Treaty, access to justice and due process for the resolution of their
rights and obligations through competent, independent and impartial courts, under

generally recognized international standards.

Accordingly, Claimants late filed claim for breach of full protection and security is
rejected. The same facts as alleged breaches of fair and equitable treatment are

considered below.

ALLEGED LIABILITY UNDER DR-CAFTA
A. The Submissions of the Parties
1. The Claimants’ Submissions

(a) Article 10.5 DR-CAFTA and Annex 10-B as the Legal Basis for
the Claims.

Claimants expressed the legal basis of their claim in the Notice of Arbitration, and
subsequently in their Memorial of Claims and Reply, which are examined below. But in
their Post-Hearing Brief they concluded that they commenced this arbitration both on the
basis of (a) sub-paragraph (1)(a)(i)(A) of Article 10.16 DR-CAFTA, each on his or her
own behalf, and also on behalf of the Enterprises each respectively and/or collectively
owned and/or controlled, and (b) under sub-paragraph 1(b)(i)(A) of DR-CAFTA Article
10.16, which deal with allegations that a Party has breached an obligation contained in

Section A of Chapter 10 of the Treaty”*.

In the Notice of Arbitration, they alleged that “... Costa Rica has violated the fair and
equitable treatment (“FET”) standard of DR-CAFTA Article 10.5, as it did not treat the

285 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Memorial, §] 85, page 41.

110

361.

362.

363.

364.

Investors and their Investments fairly and equitably. Specifically, Costa Rica’s conduct
violated the Investors’ and their investments’ rights to transparency, due process and
treatment that is not arbitrary, among other fundamental tenets of fair and equitable
treatment. Costa Rica’s actions also violated the Investors’ legitimate expectation that
Costa Rica would uphold the rule of law and act in accordance with its own laws and

validly-issued permits”?*°.

Claimants complained that the municipal, the appellate and the supreme courts of Costa
Rica gave the Prosecutor a chance “... to resuscitate a case that should have resulted in
the acquittal of Mr. Aven following the Prosecutor’s failure to prove any liability. This
type of harassment and re-trial is outlawed in Costa Rica and in any rule-of-law

system’”?*7,

In addition, Claimants asserted in the Notice of Arbitration that Respondent “... has also
breached its obligation to afford U.S. investors and their investments non-discriminatory

treatment under DR-CAFTA Articles 10.3 and 10.4”?**.

Finally, Claimants alleged that, Costa Rica violated Article 10.7 DR-CAFTA by
indirectly expropriating the Investors’ right to the value of their investment without
compensation, since Respondent had “effectively deprived the Investors of their right to
develop the Project and to enjoy the profits from their investments”?**. Article 10.7
provides that no Party may expropriate or nationalize a covered investment either directly
or indirectly through measures equivalent to expropriation or nationalization except “(a)
for a public purpose; (b) in a non-discriminatory manner; (c) on payment of prompt,
adequate, and effective compensation and (d) in accordance with due process of law and

Article 10.5.”

In their Memorial of Claims, Claimants expressed that Article 10.5(2) DR-CAFTA
confirms the Parties’ consensus opinion that the standards of “fair and equitable
treatment” and “full protection and security” are not only treaty standards, but also

standards of customary international law, and that the provision in the Treaty constitutes

286 Notice of Arbitration, 4 53, page 16.
287 [d., | 54, page 16.
288 Id., 4 55, page 16.
28 Id., 4 60, page 17.

dll

365.

an admission, on the part of Costa Rica and the other DR-CAFTA Parties, that they
regard themselves as being bound by these two standards as a matter of customary
international law — ie., even if the terms “fair and equitable treatment” and “full
protection and security” did not appear anywhere in the Treaty’. They added that, in
agreeing to Article 10.5(1) the Parties have undertaken to “accord to covered investments
treatment in accordance with customary international law,” and through Article 10.16 the
Parties have consented to be held to account for breaches of Article 10.5. Annex 10-B
defines the category of customary international law “included” by the Parties in Article
10.5 as: “all customary international law principles that protect the economic rights and

292

interests of aliens”??!. Also, Claimants assert that the Parties’ reference to “principles” in
Annex 10-B DR-CAFTA signifies their acceptance of the fact that the “customary
international law minimum standard of treatment of aliens” is evolutive by nature, rather
than being trans-substantive. Its content is “... perennially subject to renewal, through the
application of general legal principles to evermore disputes arising from forever changing

patterns of fact...”?°.

Further, Claimants affirmed in their Memorial of Claims that “... Costa Rica and the
other DR-CAFTA Parties have — given the language of Chapter 10 — inescapably
renounced any right to rely upon the customary international law rule on exhaustion of
local remedies as a defense to claims brought under Article 10.5. The Parties’ constitutive
renunciation of the customary exhaustion defense is manifested in one of the conditions
precedent they have established in order for their consent to arbitration under the
Agreement to be valid”. They add that before the investor can proceed with her
prospective claim, “... she must first provide written proof to the would-be respondent
that she has irrevocably waived her “right to initiate or continue before any
administrative tribunal or court under the law of any Party, or other dispute settlement
procedures, any proceeding with respect to any measure alleged to constitute a breach

referred to in Article 10.16.””°.

290 Claimants’ Memorial, 268, page 84.
21 Id, 4270, page 85.

22 Jd., 4.271, page 85.
°3 Id.

112

366.

367.

368.

According to Claimants, the text of Annex 10-B, read in conjunction with Articles
10.5(1) and 10.16(1), recognizes the right of “investors of another Party” to pursue
arbitration against DR-CAFTA Parties for any conduct/measure that is demonstrably
inconsistent with “all [i.e. any] customary international law principles that protect the
economic rights and interests of aliens.” Such right of action is for the investor to
exercise at his discretion, and must not be dependent upon whether he can prove that he

has already exhausted local remedies”.

Claimants continue and mention that when the Parties to DR-CAFTA referred to

“customary principles of international law,” they intended for treaty interpreters to
approach the matter of how Article 10.5(1) should be construed and applied, in any given
case, through recourse to relevant and applicable principles of international law, and that
they further intended that relevant principles would be the ones oriented towards
protection of individual economic rights and interests, ensuring, in this way, that the
protection offered under Article 10.5 would continue to reflect modern conceptions of
protection for foreign investors, whilst preventing the provision from being injudiciously
expanded to include non-economic and/or communal specimens of customary

international law?°>.

To support their argument, Claimants then expressed that two general principles of
international law critically inform the construction and application of Article 10.5(1) DR-
CAFTA for this case: (a) the principle of good faith and (b) the principle of due process.
From the general international law principle of good faith flow two injunctions against
host State behavior that results in: (1) frustration of the foreign investor’s legitimate,
investment-backed expectations; and/or (2) arbitrary and/or discriminatory exercise of
governmental authority, whether by willful intention or neglect. From the general
international law principle of due process flows the obligation to accord procedural
fairness to foreign investors, with respect to all decision-making processes, whether

legislative, executive or judicial in nature’®®. Claimants then proceed to examine both

24 [d., 4277, page 88.
285 Id, 4 281, page 90.
286 Id., 4 282, page 90.

113

369.

370.

principles in detail, and examine different decisions from international investment

tribunals and treatises from renowned publicists””’.

Claimants summarize the argument of frustration of the foreign investor’s legitimate,
investment-backed expectations, and state that customary international law protects the
foreign investor who is engaged in making important decisions concerning the
establishment, expansion, and/or operation of his investment in the territory of the Host
State. Informed by the principle of good faith, customary international law entitles the
investor to expect that municipal administrative, regulatory and adjudicative regimes —
and the officials responsible for operating them — will function in a transparent, stable
and predictable manner’. The foreign investor, they add, is not entitled to expect
perfection from these regimes, but he is entitled to expect officials to execute their
responsibilities in good faith, with consistency and in a lawful manner. The investor thus
enjoys the absolute right to be free from demands for illegal payments by host State
officials — on the threat of withholding or revoking the permits required for the
investment to succeed, and should a bribe ever be solicited, his complaint to the host
State about the crime will be immediately and thoroughly investigated, in good faith,
without suffering any retribution for having reported it to the proper authorities. These
are the expectations that Claimants say have been sanctioned under customary
international law and vouchsafed through Costa Rica’s participation in the DR-

CAFTA”.

On the subject of arbitrariness in the exercise of governmental authority, Claimants make
the argument that the current position is to concentrate on finding evidence of manifest
procedural unfairness in the exercise of discretionary authority, or by determining
whether the overall outcome of the discretionary act appears manifestly unjust,

unreasonable, arbitrary, and/or patently discriminatory, such that the adjudicator can still

257 [d., 4283-307, pages 102-106.

2°8 CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentina, Award, ICSID Case No ARB/O1/8 (May 12, 2005), §§ 274-277
(CLA-62); CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentina, Annulment Decision, ICSID Case No ARB/O1/8
(September 25, 2007), 4] 89 (CLA-82).

2° Claimants’ Memorial, {| 291, page 95.

  

114

371.

372.

373.

recognize and maintain appropriate deference to the sovereign authority under which the

scrutinized decision was made*?.

The third element that Claimants examine is how the principle of good faith informs the
customary minimum standard, specifically in relation to the doctrine on abuse of right, in
order to address the connection between abuse of right and corruption on the part of
public officials vested with discretionary authority to make decisions that could have a
material impact upon the investment*”!. Article 10.5 is also breached, Claimants argue, in
the event that the proper authorities in a host State fail to either maintain appropriate
procedures for the prosecution of the crime of bribery or they fail to maintain appropriate
measures to protect persons — obviously including foreign investors — who have reported
the occurrence of such crimes to the host State. In drafting and agreeing to the terms of
Article 18.8, Costa Rica and the other DR-CAFTA Parties committed themselves to
serious obligations upon which legitimate expectations of future behavior can clearly be

2
based*™,

Examining the principle of due process, Claimants differentiate this principle from that of
good faith (while recognizing that the two principles are closely associated with one
another) because the due process approach is more concerned with identifying procedural
flaws that may have contributed to decisions affecting an investment — either because the
decision-maker erred in observing existing procedural rules or because no such rules
existed, whereas the good faith approach requires one to focus on the ultimate outcome
for investors affected by the exercise of discretionary power by administrative and

regulatory decision makers*”?.

Claimants believe that, informed by the general principle of due process, Article 10.5
DR-CAFTA and the minimum standard require the Republic of Costa Rica to: (1) ensure
that investors receive notice of important rules or decisions that could negatively impact
upon their investments; (2) provide investors with a meaningful opportunity to have their

objections and/or recommendations heard; (3) not refuse to enforce valid judgments

300 7d., 4305, page 101.
301 7d., 4310, page 104.
302 Jd., 4312, page 105.
303 7d, 9] 313-321, pages 106-110.

115

374.

375.

376.

377.

issued by municipal courts, even if perceived as unfavorable to the government’s
interests; (4) make decisions based only upon relevant criteria, and for legitimate reasons
of public policy, which can be known by those affected by that decision before it is made;
(5) not make decisions on the basis of discriminatory criteria, such as nationality, local
content, gender, race or creed; and (6) guarantee freedom from coercion, whether to
participate in corruption or to accept terms less favorable than that to which the investor

would otherwise be entitled under the municipal legal regime*™*.

Therefore, Claimants submit that: (1) if an official cannot produce convincing evidence
that contemporaneous consideration of the factors mentioned in Article 18.8 DR-CAFTA
actually did occur, and (2) the decisions actually taken by that official appear to have
been out-of-proportion, or otherwise not in accord with the principle of due process, then

a prima facie breach of Article 10.5 DR-CAFTA shall exist*>.

Claimants have stated that under Article 10.22(1) DR-CAFTA the governing law for
claims filed under those two provisions is limited to the Treaty itself and “applicable
rules of international law.” And, they argue, both Parties are in agreement that the
customary international law rules of treaty interpretation constitute “applicable rules of
international law” under Article 10.22(1) DR-CAFTA. and that such rules are reflected in

the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (the “VCLT”)™.

Because the only relevant substantive norms concerning this dispute are, in the opinion of
Claimants, found in Section A of Chapter Ten DR-CAFTA, the Respondent has no legal
basis for asserting — as a defense to the charge that it has failed to comply with Section A
obligations such as Articles 10.5 or 10.7 — that its conduct was either required or

authorized under some other international norm>°”.

In their Reply, Claimants defended their position from the challenges submitted by
Respondent by identifying the evidence and cases cited, while they argued that

Respondent concentrated its view to a very limited number of cases.

304 7d., 49317, page 107.

305 7d., 44 321, page 110.

306 Jd., 243, page 74.

307 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, § 87, page 42.

116

378.

379.

380.

(b) Article 10.7(1) and Annex 10-C DR-CAFTA Claims

Claimants have also alleged as a legal basis of their claim Respondent’s unlawful

expropriation of said investment.

In their Memorial of Claims they first make reference to, Article 10.7 and Annex 10-C
DR-CAFTA, and then mention that the orthodox test for determining whether a measure,
or combination of measures, constitute an “indirect expropriation” is whether such
measure substantially interferes with the foreign investor’s ability to derive the full
economic benefits from (i.e. to “use and enjoy”) an investment established in the territory
of the host State. Thus, the host State conduct rises to the level of an expropriation under
Article 10.7 when it leads to a substantial deprivation of the investment, or effectively
neutralizes the enjoyment of an investment*’*. The operative question is not whether an
investment, per se, has been taken or destroyed, but rather on the individual rights,
through which an investment is established, maintained, operated or alienated in
exchange for a fair return*°’. This is reinforced by the inclusion of the DR-CAFTA
Parties of paragraph (2) to Annex 10-C which expropriation must arise in relation to
“interference with a tangible or intangible property right or property interest in an
investment”. Further, Claimants argue that the definition of “investment” in Article 10.28

sub-paragraphs (g) & (h) should be construed as including, inter alia, “... (g) licenses,
authorizations, permits, and similar rights conferred pursuant to domestic law; and (h)
other tangible or intangible, movable or immovable property, and related property rights,
such as leases, mortgages, liens, and pledges”*"®. In their Reply, Claimants focus on the
erroneous interpretation of their claim taken by Respondent in the Counter Memorial, and
indicate that it is not the Claimants’ position that their “investment” constituted solely of
“construction permits.” Rather, they possessed property rights in land, the use of which

was enhanced by the granting of various certifications and permissions*!'.

Therefore, if the host State conduct has the effect of substantially interfering with a

foreign investor’s use of permits granted with respect to property rights he exercises in an

308 Claimants’ Memorial, | 394, page 138.

309 Id., 4 395, page 138.

310 Id., | 396, page 139.

31! Claimants’ Reply Memorial, 382, page 129.

117

381.

382.

383.

384.

investment, or deprives him of the use and enjoyment of that investment, and these
circumstances remain for more than a “merely ephemeral” period of time, which will be
found based on the particular circumstances of each case, then this constitutes an indirect
expropriation of his investment, contrary to DR-CAFTA Article 10.7(1)*!*. The relevant
question, they add, is whether the claimant-investor would have been able to recover from
the State’s actions given the financial exigencies and commercial/market circumstances

actually at play in his case.

Claimants also remind that all indirect expropriations are per se unlawful because they
are not accompanied by the payment of prompt, adequate and effective compensation —

and they remain so until such time as the stipulated compensation has been paid*!*.

In their Post-Hearing Brief Claimants did not strongly argue the indirect expropriation
claim, and primarily made reference to their prior allegations in their Memorial of
Claims*!*, and certain actions that in their view constitute a separate prima facie breach
of Article 10.7 DR-CAFTA, which they referred to as expropriatory measures: (i) the
ongoing Municipal permit suspension; (ii) the TAA injunction; and (iii) the criminal
proceedings injunction, for which Respondent refuses to pay prompt, adequate and

effective compensation?'>.

Claimants also argued how Article 10.7(1)(d) DR-CAFTA deals with the concept of “due

process” and that it applies to procedural matters in environmental regulation*'®.
2. Respondent’s Submissions

Respondent rejected the notion that it has indirectly expropriated the investment of

p!7

Claimants. First, it argued in its Counter-Memorial*'’ the systematic analysis that the

Tribunal should undertake based on an analysis of Article 10.7 and Annex C DR-

312 Claimants’ Memorial, 4 398, page 139. In making the reference to a merely ephemeral” period of time, Claimants
cite Tippetts, Abbett, McCarthy, Stratton v. TAMS-AFFA Consulting Eng’rs of Iran, 6 Iran-U.S. Cl. Trib. Rep. 219
(1984) 225-226 (CLA-30) and SD Myers Inc. v. Canada, UNCITRAL/NAFTA Tribunal, First Partial Award,
November 13, 2000, (2001) 8 ICSID Rep 18, (2001) 40 ILM 1408, (2003) 15(1) World Trade & Arb. Mat. 184,
(2002) 121 ILR 72, § 283 (CLA-43).

313 Claimants’ Memorial, § 407, page 142.

314 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 441, page 210.

315 Id, 44] 660-667, page 278.

316 Jd, 4578, page 267.

317 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, § 611-613, pages 149-152.

118

385.

386.

CAFTA, and conclude that none of the requirements for an indirect expropriation are
present in this case*!*. The construction permits are not covered investments to this
allegation, the actions of Costa Rica are non-discriminatory regulatory actions designed
and applied to protect the environment, these actions have not permanently deprived
Claimants of the value or control of their investment, Respondents actions have not
interfered with Claimants’ reasonable expectations. And the actions taken are bona fide

exercise of police powers.

From the outset in their Response to the Notice of Arbitration, Respondent has argued
that Claimants failed to refer to Article 10.11 DR-CAFTA (Investment and
Environment), pursuant to which “nothing shall be construed to prevent a Party from
adopting, maintaining, or enforcing any measure otherwise consistent with this Chapter
that it considers appropriate to ensure that investment activity in its territory is
undertaken in a manner sensitive to environmental concerns.” Respondent contends that
the suspension of Claimants’ real estate project was conducted by the Government of
Costa Rica in pursuit of legitimate environmental interests protected under DR-CAFTA,
as well as in accordance with the implementation of Costa Rica’s international
obligations and the provisions of the Environmental Organic Law, precisely to ensure
that investment activity in its territory is undertaken in a manner sensitive to the
protection of wetlands. Respondent further states that these rules were in place prior to

the alleged investment of Claimants?!”

and that enforcement of such laws and policies is
consistent with Article 17.2 DR-CAFTA (Enforcement of Environmental Laws), which
states that “it is inappropriate to encourage trade or investment by weakening or reducing
the protections afforded in domestic environmental laws.” Based on the above, and given
that Claimants breached Costa Rica’s environmental laws and policies in connection with
their alleged investment, Respondent argued that Claimants are not entitled to the

protection they claim under DR-CAFTA*”®.

Respondent also rejects that it breached Article 10.5 DR-CAFTA, since Claimants have

not been deprived of a fair and equitable treatment, nor have they been denied justice in

318 Jd, 44] 615-646, pages 152-160.
319 Response to the Notice of Arbitration, § 12, page 4.
320 7d. 413, page 4.

119

387.

388.

criminal, civil, or administrative adjudicatory proceedings in accordance to the principle
of due process and, as a matter of fact, it was Claimants who proceeded deliberately
against the environmental provisions recognized in Costa Rica’s laws and policies.
Rather than a breach of the duty to afford non-discriminatory treatment or a treatment no
less favorable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to its own investors or investors
of any other Party or of any non-Party, which is a right under Articles 10.3 and 10.4 DR-
CAFTA, Respondent indicated that the rationale behind the measure to suspend the real
estate project was based on environmental protection, and not on the investor’s
nationality**!. Finally, Respondent also rejected the claim that Claimants’ property has
been expropriated by the Government of Costa Rica, either directly or indirectly. On the
contrary, Respondent stated not only had it not expropriated the investment but that
Claimants could fully exercise their property rights in compliance with Costa Rica’s

environmental laws and policies”.

Respondent confirmed the view that the arbitration is conducted under the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules, and that Article 35(1) thereof provides that the Tribunal “...shall apply
the law designated by the Parties as applicable to the substance of the dispute”, and that
Article 10.22(1) DR-CAFTA provides: “the tribunal shall decide the issues in dispute in
accordance with [DR-CAFTA] and applicable rules of international law”. As a
consequence, Respondent argues that Claimants completely misconstrue the meaning of
Chapter 17 of the DR-CAFTA, and in so doing fundamentally overlook the principal
obstacle to the legitimacy of their claims, as the ability for DR-CAFTA signatories to
implement sound and efficient measures to protect the environment is key to the

implementation of the Treaty**.

Respondent highlights and provides relevance to the object and purpose of Chapter 17
DR-CAFTA, and specifically the language in the first two articles which reaffirm the
right of the host State to establish laws, policies and measures within their territory to

ensure high levels of environmental protection, and to enforce such laws.

321 d., 4 14-16, pages 4-6.

32 d., 417, page 6.

323 Respondents Counter-Memorial, § 434, page 108.
324 1d., 4 436, page 108.

120

389.

390.

391.

Respondent stated that Chapter 17 DR-CAFTA contains a clear articulation of how the
Parties to the Treaty agreed that environmental matters would not be subject to the same
kind of protection envisaged in Chapter 10, as expressed by Article 10.2(1), providing:
“In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter, the other
Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency”*?>. The DR-CAFTA Parties
established an entire Chapter of the DR-CAFTA, it adds, to expressly reserve a policy
space for environmental issues. In doing so, they enunciated the Parties’ intention to not
apply other Chapters of the DR-CAFTA, including Chapter 10, by virtue of Article
10.2(1)°?6. Respondent states that Article 17.1 constitutes a statement of how pre-existing
“levels of domestic environmental protection” that already meet the desired standards of

environmental protection, will be maintained going forward.

In response to a challenge by Claimants as to how these principles could or should be
incorporated into the analysis by the Tribunal in this case, Respondent argued that since
Article 10.22(1) of the DR-CAFTA provides in pertinent part: “the tribunal shall decide
the issues in dispute in accordance with [DR-CAFTA] and applicable rules of
international law”, environmental rules and principles provided both in domestic and
international law become applicable**’. Then, Respondent ties-in Article 17.22(1) DR-
CAFTA, which expressly allows the application of environmental agreements to which
the Parties are also a party in order to establish that those treaties must become applicable
to achieve the environmental objectives stated under DR-CAFTA**, and finally, cites
several of the multiple multilateral agreements to which Costa Rica is a party that

recognize this principle’.

Although there are provisions in the DR-CAFTA that recognize the right to effective
enforcement, and the means to address under-enforcement of environmental laws,

Respondent argues that when Article 17.2(1)(b) establishes discretionary powers to the

35 Id. 4 440, page 108.

326 Id., 4 442, page 109.

327 Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, { 66, page 21.

328 Id. 44] 69-70, page 22.

>> Among them, the Convention on Biological Diversity, Rio de Janeiro, 5 June 1992, in force 29 December 1993
(RLA-39), the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 1992 (RLA-40), the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (RLA-107), and the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer,
Montreal, 16 September 1987 (RLA-108). Rejoinder, §§| 71-78, page 21-23.

121

392.

393.

394.

member Party to the Treaty with respect to investigatory, prosecutorial, regulatory and
compliance for enforcement of environmental matters, this implies a manner of ensuring
that a Party can, as it sees fit, implement its own environmental laws without fear of

violating DR-CAFTA?”’.

Thus, Respondent concludes this point by stating that, even if there is an inconsistency
between the applicable standards recognized in Chapter 17 and the standards recognized
in Chapter 10, Article 10.2 would operate to marginalize the standards contained in

Chapter 10, in favor of those contained in Chapter 17°*!.

On the other hand, Respondent further contends that Costa Rican environmental law is
entirely applicable because Article 10.22 DR-CAFTA establishes that the Tribunal shall
decide the issues in dispute in accordance with the Treaty, with Articles 17.1, 17.2 and

17.3 allowing this application.

In any case, Respondent has also argued, neither the Treaty, nor customary international
law, exonerates Claimants from complying with Costa Rica’s framework for the
protection of its environment. Costa Rican constitutional law exalts the “protection of a
healthy and ecologically balanced environment”***. Costa Rica’s constitutional and
administrative case law, as well as the practice of its decentralized administrative
agencies has developed around this imperative of prevention of environmental damage*?.
The principle of preventative action, reflected in Costa Rica’s constitution, requires Costa
Rica to prevent damage to the environment, and to otherwise reduce, limit or control
activities which might cause or risk such damage***. This principle was recognized in the
1972 Stockholm Declaration on the Human Environment and is embodied in the
Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration, the RAMSAR Convention and the Biodiversity
Convention, all three of which were signed by both the United States and Costa Rica, a
relevant fact under Article 17.12 DR-CAFTA, which provides: “The Parties recognize
that multilateral environmental agreements to which they are all party play an important

role in protecting the environment globally and domestically and that their respective

330 Respondents’ Counter-Memorial, 451, page 110.

331 Jd., 4 459, page 112.

322 The 1949 Constitution of Costa Rica, Article 50, Exhibit R-214.
333 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, § 464, page 113.

34 d., 4 468, page 114.

122

395.

396.

397.

implementation of these agreements is critical to achieving the environmental objectives

of these agreements (...)”>*°.

On the subject of “treatment” afforded to Claimants, Respondent has indicated that
Claimants were treated fairly and equitably, and therefore, it corresponds to Claimants to

prove their case.

In connection with the argument submitted by Claimants as to their legitimate
expectations to develop a project on the Las Olas site based on the Tecmed v. Mexico
award**°, Respondent rejected the notion that the purported standard as a part of the fair
and equitable standard of protection is a valid standard recognized under international
law. Further, recent tribunals have clarified that qualifying elements that must be met
include: (i) legitimate expectations may arise only from a State’s specific commitment or
representation made to the investor, on which the latter has relied, (ii) the investor must
be aware of the general regulatory environment in the host country, and (iii) investors’

expectations must be balanced against legitimate regulatory activities of host countries**’.

In response to the allegation in the Claimants’ Reply Memorial that they should have the
“... legitimate expectation that they would be able to act on the permits granted to them,
and to be free from being shaken down for payment by corrupt local officials”,
Respondent confirmed in its Rejoinder the argument that not all expectations are
protected, and the issue is whether Claimants’ belief was justified and reasonable, from
an objective point of view, in light of Costa Rican law and the circumstances surrounding
the Parties and their interactions’. The deficient Environmental Viability D1
Application misled SETENA as to the real physical conditions on the Las Olas Project
Site, Respondent argues, which resulted in the issuance of an EV Permit that Claimants
were not entitled to obtain nor reasonably rely upon as a State assurance. Accordingly,

Respondent adds, this EV Permit could not have generated a legitimate expectation that

335 Jd., 4 470, page 115.

336 Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed SA v. Mexico, I\CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2, Award, May 29, 2003,
(CLA-54).

537 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, § 481, page 117, citing United Nations Conference of Trade and Development,
UNCTAD Series on Issues in International Investment Agreements II, Fair and Equitable Treatment, p. 68.

338 Claimants’ Reply Memorial, §] 69, page 23.

339 Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, § 795, page 200.

123

Claimants’ development would not be stopped in the event that they caused damage to

the environment™”.

398. Respondent then argued in its Post-Hearing Brief that legitimate expectations cannot be
considered under the umbrella of the “fair and equitable treatment” protection under
customary international law that gives rise to an independent state obligation, and cites

several cases where this has been expressed by DR-CAFTA Parties**!.

399. On the subject of alleged abuse of authority, Respondent states that there is no express
provision under DR-CAFTA addressing prohibition or arbitrary measures or abuse of
authority, and so the analysis therefore that the Tribunal needs to make deals with
whether minimum standard of customary international law prohibits arbitrary measures

and abuse of authority*?,

adding that only egregious and shocking conduct can be
deemed as part of the minimum standard of treatment that host States must apply to

foreign investments.

400. Respondent also denied in its Counter-Memorial that Costa Rican public officials failed
to conduct themselves in a manner consistent with the principle of due process. To that
effect, Respondent asserted that public officials involved in the actions acted only in
protection of the environment, and certain actions taken were a consequence, inter alia,
of Claimants’ misleading or concealment of information pointing to the existence of
wetlands and forests in the site*“*. In its Post-Hearing Brief, Respondent argues that in
accordance with international law, no claim for denial of justice can be leveled in the
absence of domestic proceedings having been exhausted, or proven to have been futile.
Therefore, in light of the plain text of the Treaty, due process is not an independent
obligation of the host State. Because DR-CAFTA frames the obligation of due process
alongside the promise not to deny justice, lack of due process is not a standard of

protection unless it could be considered a denial of justice*4>. Claimants rejected that they

340 7d, 4 802, page 202.

+41 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, | 742-746, pages 153-154.

32 Id. 4748, page 154.

343 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, §, {4 506-562, pages 123-137.

+4 Article 10.5.2 (a) DR-CAFTA reads “ ‘fair and equitable treatment’ includes the obligation not to deny justice in
criminal, civil, or administrative adjudicatory proceedings in accordance with the principle of due process
embodied in the principal legal systems of the world.” (Annex E to Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief).

+5 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, §] 751, page 155.

 
  

124

401.

402.

have brought a denial of justice claim**°, and challenged the right of Respondent to re-

characterize their claim as such.

Besides, Respondent added, a careful analysis of the text shows that neither the concept
of legitimate expectations, arbitrariness, due process nor abuse of authority are standards

347, referencing

of protection that DR-CAFTA Parties envisaged to be part of the Treaty
the United States non-disputing Party Submission made during this arbitration on the
extent of the protection that DR-CAFTA Parties intended to provide to investors pursuant
to Article 10.5 thereof*#*. Respondent argues that in order to avoid any misunderstanding
as to the scope of Article 10.5(1) DR-CAFTA which requires that each Party “accord to
covered investment treatment in accordance with customary international law, including
fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security”, the Parties to the Treaty
included a clarification in the second paragraph of Article 10.5 on the meaning of
“treatment in accordance with customary international law”, and in this regard expressly
agreed that that is “the minimum standard of treatment to be afforded to covered
investments.” In addition, they agreed that the concepts of “fair and equitable treatment”
and “full protection and security” do not imply treatment in addition to or beyond that
which is required by the standard and, most importantly, they do not create additional

substantive rights*’.

Respondent stated that, the United States of America made it clear in its Submission, that
very few areas have been sufficiently crystallized into customary international law as to
be considered a “minimum standard of treatment”, and that DR-CAFTA Parties seemed
to have identified those areas because they expressly included the obligation to provide
“fair and equitable treatment” (Article 10.5.2(a)) on the one hand, and “full protection
and security” (Article 10.5.2(b)) on the other. The former includes the obligation, as
provided in the text of the Treaty, not to deny justice. Furthermore, according to
Respondent, the DR-CAFTA Parties included in Annex 10-B an understanding of what

they consider customary international law rules covered by Article 10.5 of the Treaty,

546 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 4f] 430-434, pages 206-209.

347 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, §] 731, page 151.

¥8 This submission is examined in more detail above in Section V.
9 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, §] 733, page 151.

125

403.

404.

requiring general and consistent practice of States and opinion iuris; i.e. practices that
they follow from a sense of legal obligation. Thus, “the annex provides important
guidance for assessing whether an alleged norm has been sufficiently demonstrated to be

an element of customary international law”>*°.

In its Post-Hearing Brief, Respondent requested that the Tribunal dismiss as inadmissible
the claim that Respondent has violated the standard of full protection and security, insofar
as the alleged breach of the duty to provide protection and security to the investors was
never raised as a claim in the Request for Arbitration or subsequently, until the closing of
the December Hearing**', and that Article 10.16.2 DR-CAFTA sets forth the need for a
“Notice to submit a claim to arbitration” and establishes that such notice must specify the
provision of the Treaty alleged to have been breached as well as the “legal and factual

basis for each claim”?>?.

On the subject of the claims for indirect expropriation of the investment of Claimants in
Costa Rica, Respondent first argued in their Counter Memorial that before any measure
can be considered as such there are several factors that the Tribunal needs to take into
account: (i) first, examine the definition of investment provided in Article 10.28 which
includes the definition of “investments” covered in DR-CAFTA; (ii) give consideration
to the express exception provided in Annex 10-C.4(b) of the Treaty, and assess whether
the actions of the host State are non-discriminatory regulatory actions by a Party that are
designed and applied to protect legitimate public welfare objectives, such as public
health, safety, and the environment; (iii) analyze the economic impact of the actions
under Annex 10-C.4(a)(i); (iv) consider in accordance with Annex 10-C.4(a)(ii) whether
the actions have interfered with reasonable expectations of the investor; (v) analyze under
Annex 10-C.4(a)(iii) the character of the State’s actions, and whether the actions display
the characteristics of a bona fide exercise of police powers by the host State; and finally
(vi) if the actions fall under all the categories above then, it is necessary to consider

whether the expropriation is legal or illegal for compensation purposes**?.

380 Jd., $9] 736 and 737, page 152.
351 Jd., 44] 718-726, page 147-149.
382 Jd. 4722, page 148.

353

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, § 612, page 150.

126

405. Although Respondent challenged the position taken by Claimants on whether all indirect
expropriations are unlawful, and cited a couple of recent cases to that effect?*, it elected
not to “extend the debate” insofar as it had determined that there was no expropriation in
this case**>,

B. The Tribunal’s Approach

406. The Arbitral Tribunal is faced with the need to determine whether the protection afforded
under Chapter Ten DR-CAFTA to investors is subordinate to the laws enacted by the
Parties to the Treaty seeking the protection of the environment, and under which
circumstances can a State that is party to DR-CAFTA establish laws, policies and/or
adopt measures to that end.

407. Claimants have based their claims under paragraphs (1)(a)(i)(A) of Article 10.16 DR-
CAFTA (as individuals), and under sub-paragraph 1(b)(i)(A) of DR-CAFTA Article
10.16 (on behalf of the Enterprises each respectively and/or collectively owned and/or
controlled). Each of these provisions relates to a breach of Costa Rica to an obligation
under Section A of Chapter Ten. Of the different obligations that have been alleged to
have been breached, these are in Articles 10.5(1) and (2), as well as 10.7(1).

408. The text of those provisions of DR-CAFTA that have been cited by Claimants in respect
to protection of their investment are:

Article 10.5: Minimum Standard of Treatment

1. Each Party shall accord to covered investments treatment in accordance with
customary international law, including fair and equitable treatment and full
protection and security.

2. For greater certainty, paragraph | prescribes the customary international law
minimum standard of treatment of aliens as the minimum standard of treatment
to be afforded to covered investments. The concepts of “fair and equitable
treatment” and “full protection and security” do not require treatment in addition
to or beyond that which is required by that standard, and do not create additional
substantive rights. The obligation in paragraph | to provide:

354 Venezuela Holdings, B.V., Mobil Cerro Negro Holding, Ltd., Mobil Venezolana de Petréleos Holdings, Inc.

Mobil Cerro Negro, Ltd. and Mobil Venezolana de Petréleos, Inc. v. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, \CSID
Case No. ARB/07/27, Award, 9 October 2014, ¥ 302-306 (RLA-1).
385 Respondents Counter-Memorial, § 612, page 151.

127

(a) “fair and equitable treatment” includes the obligation not to deny justice
in criminal, civil, or administrative adjudicatory proceedings in accordance with
the principle of due process embodied in the principal legal systems of the world;
and

(b) “full protection and security” requires each Party to provide the level of
police protection required under customary international law.

3. A determination that there has been a breach of another provision of this
Agreement, or of a separate international agreement, does not establish that there
has been a breach of this Article.

Article 10.7: Expropriation and Compensation

1. No Party may expropriate or nationalize a covered investment either directly
or indirectly through measures equivalent to expropriation or nationalization
(“expropriation”), except for a public purpose; in a non-discriminatory manner;
on payment of prompt, adequate, and effective compensation in accordance with
paragraphs 2 through 4; and in accordance with due process of law and Article
10.5.

2. Compensation shall: be paid without delay; be equivalent to the fair market
value of the expropriated investment immediately before the expropriation took
place (“the date of expropriation”); not reflect any change in value occurring
because the intended expropriation had become known earlier; and be fully
realizable and freely transferable.

3. If the fair market value is denominated in a freely usable currency, the
compensation paid shall be no less than the fair market value on the date of
expropriation, plus interest at a commercially reasonable rate for that currency,
accrued from the date of expropriation until the date of payment.

4. If the fair market value is denominated in a currency that is not freely usable,
the compensation paid — converted into the currency of payment at the market
rate of exchange prevailing on the date of payment — shall be no less than: the
fair market value on the date of expropriation, converted into a freely usable
currency at the market rate of exchange prevailing on that date, plus interest, at a
commercially reasonable rate for that freely usable currency, accrued from the
date of expropriation until the date of payment.

5. This Article does not apply to the issuance of compulsory licenses granted in
relation to intellectual property rights in accordance with the TRIPS Agreement,
or to the revocation, limitation, or creation of intellectual property rights, to the
extent that such issuance, revocation, limitation, or creation is consistent with
Chapter Fifteen (Intellectual Property Rights).

409. On the other hand, although Respondent does recognize said Treaty obligations,

Respondent makes reference to other provisions which establish the rights of DR-

128

410.

CAFTA Parties to adopt, maintain and enforce measures to protect their environment.

These are found in Chapters Ten and Seventeen:

Article 10.11. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from
adopting, maintaining, or enforcing any measure otherwise consistent with this
Chapter that it considers appropriate to ensure that investment activity in its
territory is undertaken in a manner sensitive to environmental concerns.

Article 17.1. Levels of Protection. Recognizing the right of each Party to
establish its own levels of domestic environmental protection and environmental
development policies and priorities, and to adopt or modify accordingly its
environmental laws and policies, each Party shall ensure that its laws and policies
provide for and encourage high levels of environmental protection, and shall
strive to continue to improve those laws and policies

Article 17.2. Enforcement of Environmental Laws.
Article 17.2(1)

“(a) A Party shall not fail to effectively enforce its environmental laws, through
a sustained or recurring course of action or inaction, in a manner affecting trade
between the Parties, after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

(b) The Parties recognize that each Party retains the right to exercise discretion
with respect to investigatory, prosecutorial, regulatory, and compliance matters
and to make decisions regarding the allocation of resources to enforcement with
respect to other environmental matters determined to have higher priorities.
Accordingly, the Parties understand that a Party is in compliance with
subparagraph (a) where a course of action or inaction reflects a reasonable
exercise of such discretion, or results from a bona fide decision regarding the
allocation of resources.

Article 17.2(2). The Parties recognize that it is inappropriate to encourage trade
or investment by weakening or reducing the protections afforded in domestic
environmental laws. Accordingly, each Party shall strive to ensure that it does not
waive or otherwise derogate from, or offer to waive or otherwise derogate from,
such laws in a manner that weakens or reduces the protections afforded in those
laws as an encouragement for trade with another Party, or as an encouragement
for the blish acquisition, expansion, or ion of an i in its
territory.

Thus, the debate among Claimants and Respondent revolves not only on whether there is
any subordination by the rights to protection under Chapter Ten to the right to adopt and
enforce the laws and measures under Chapter Seventeen, but also as to whether there has
been a breach to the standards of “fair and equitable treatment” and “full protection and

security” under the Treaty, and under customary “international law” as well.

129

411.

412.

413.

The Tribunal believes that the rules of treaty interpretation provide the answer. As
Claimants have noted*»°, the Parties are in agreement that the customary international law
rules of treaty interpretation constitute “applicable rules of international law” under DR-
CAFTA Article 10.22(1), and that such rules are reflected in the VCLT**’. Article 31(1)
VCLT provides that “a treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the
ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of
its object and purpose”. Further, Sub-paragraph (3)(c) of such Article 31 provides that:
“any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the Parties”
must be taken into account, together with the context, in interpreting treaty texts. This
section thus provides an additional ground for treaty interpreters, such as the Tribunal, to
take into account not only other provisions of the DR-CAFTA, general principles of law,
but also custom, in construing in context the proper meaning of DR-CAFTA provisions,

such as Articles 10.5 and 10.7.

Although the express terms of Article 10.11 essentially subordinate the rights to investors
under Chapter Ten to the right of Costa Rica to ensure that the investments are carried out
“in a matter sensitive to environmental concerns”, this subordination is not absolute in the
view of the Tribunal. It requires that the actions to be taken by the States Parties to DR-
CAFTA act in line with principles of international law, which require acting in good
faith. It is not a question of “not-applying” those provisions under Chapter Ten, but rather
giving preference to the standards of environmental protection that were stated to be of

interest to the Treaty Parties at the time it was signed.

Although Respondent argues that when Article 17.2(1)(b) establishes discretionary
powers to the Treaty member Party with respect to investigatory, prosecutorial,
regulatory and compliance for enforcement of environmental matters, this implies a
manner of ensuring that a Party can, as it sees fit, implement its own environmental laws
without fear of violating DR-CAFTA**, the Tribunal believes that this is not an absolute
right either that may be exercised in any manner Respondent desires. By signing the

Treaty, Respondent has agreed that there are limits to the manner in which a Party may

386 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 4 86, page 42.
357 See Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, May 23, 1969, 1155 U.N.T.S. 331.
388 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, 451, page 110.

130

414.

415.

416.

417.

implement and enforce its own environmental laws. It must do so in a fair, non-
discriminatory fashion, applying said laws to protect the environment, following

principles of due process, not only for its adoption but also for its enforcement.

The question then becomes, did Costa Rica exercise its rights under DR-CAFTA and act
vis a vis the investors and the investment in a manner that is compliant with both the

Treaty and customary international law?

Claimants do not argue that the laws enacted by Respondent are in breach of the Treaty,
or that it has lowered its standards to attract trade or investment. During the Opening
Statement made by Claimants’ counsel during the December Hearing, counsel stated that
they did not challenge the validity of any law or regulation, but added that the case was
one about enforcement of such laws**®. Hence, the Arbitral Tribunal does not need to
examine whether the laws enacted by Costa Rica are compliant with the Treaty and
customary international law. What the Tribunal needs to decide, however, is whether the
manner in which such laws were applied as regards the Claimants is compliant with the

DR-CAFTA and customary international law.

To determine whether enforcement was proper and lawful, it makes sense to undertake a
brief review of the key legislation applicable to the investment. For obvious reasons, even
though the objective is to examine environmental legislation that might have been
applicable to the investors and the investment, the analysis will be focused on the two

types of protected areas involved in this case: wetlands and forests.
Cc. Costa Rica’s Environmental Law and Authorities

It is widely acknowledged that the protection of wetlands is a key objective sought by all
civilized nations. The Convention on Wetlands (known as the “Ramsar Convention”) is
the oldest of the modern global intergovernmental environmental agreements. The treaty
was negotiated during the 1960’s by countries and non - governmental organizations
concerned about the increasing loss and degradation of wetland habitat for migratory

water birds. It was adopted in the Iranian city of Ramsar in 1971 and came into force in

559 Claimants’ Opening Statement, Transcript 80: 1-22, and 81:1-2.

131

418.

419.

420.

360

  

1975°®. Costa Rica signed and ratified the Ramsar Convention in 1992, and it became
effective in the country on April 27, 1992. There are currently 169 contracting Parties and
a total of 2,280 “Ramsar Sites” of protection registered around the world, of which 12
sites have been designated as Ramsar Sites in Costa Rica alone with a surface area of

569,742 hectares*°!.

Another treaty seeking protection of wetlands, the Convention on Biological Diversity
(known as the “Biodiversity Convention”), was entered into at the Earth Summit held in
Rio de Janeiro in 1992*°?, which a total of 196 countries have signed and ratified*®.
Costa Rica executed and ratified the Biodiversity Convention in 1992 and 1994,

respectively.

Costa Rica has stated throughout the proceedings its high regard for the protection of the
environment, and how it has received recognition for its efforts; for example, Costa Rica
was recognized as a leader in sustainable policy and practice by the United Nations
Environment Program, which has called Costa Rica “‘a leader in sustainable policy and
practice”; it was awarded the Future Policy Award for its Biodiversity Law “as a
milestone of excellence in meeting the goals of the UN Convention on Biological
Diversity”, at the United Nations Summit on Biological Diversity in 2010; and was
ranked first in the Americas and fifth globally for the quality of its environmental
performance by the Environmental Performance Index 2012°. Respondent has cited
several precedents from the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court of Justice and
the Contentious Administrative Tribunal that highlight the relevance of these

international Conventions*®.

Intimately linked to such recognition, one must acknowledge that international tourism —
which is recognized as an important contributor to the local economy given the flows of
foreign currency, is strongly dependent on the variety and current status of ecosystems

available in Costa Rica. It is therefore not surprising that the country has adopted internal

http://www.ramsar.org. A copy was submitted by Respondent as exhibit R-192.
36! http://www.ramsar.org/wetland/costa-rica.
2 Copy submitted by Respondent as exhibit RLA-39.

5% https://www.cbd. int/information/Parties.shtml.
364 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, 4 54, page 12.
365 Id, 44] 61-69, pages 14-17.

132

421.

422.

423.

legislation seeking to protect nature, in parallel to efforts to protect the health and well-

being of its population.

At the time that the DR-CAFTA Parties executed the Treaty, they recognized their ability
to implement and enforce their own internal laws, particularly regarding the environment,
and to regulate investments that could have an impact thereon. Respondent has placed
special emphasis on Article 10.11 that recognizes that nothing prevents the Treaty Parties
“... from adopting, maintaining, or enforcing any measure otherwise consistent with this
Chapter that it considers appropriate to ensure that investment activity in its territory is

undertaken in a manner sensitive to environmental concerns”.

This is what Costa Rica has argued it has implemented within its territory. Thus, the
Tribunal needs to examine whether the actions taken by Respondent were contrary to its
obligations under DR-CAFTA. To this end, it is helpful to determine not only the
applicable law but also which authorities are entrusted with applying the law in Costa
Rica. A careful analysis of these two points will assist the Tribunal in defining a position
in this case.
The environmental legal framework in Costa Rica that applies to this dispute is
essentially comprised of the following laws and regulations:

(a). | The 1949 Constitution of Costa Rica*;

(b). | The Convention on Wetlands (or Ramsar Convention)**’;
368,

(c). The Biodiversity Convention

(d). | The Environmental Organic Act (Ley Organica del Ambiente or Law
7554);

(ce). The Biodiversity Law (Ley de Biodiversidad or Law 7788)°”, and its
Regulations (Reglamento a la Ley de Biodiversidady*"';

(f). The Forestry Law (Ley Forestal or Law 7575)°”?;

366 Exhibit R-214.
367 Exhibit RLA-41.
36 Exhibit RLA-39.
3 Exhibit C-184.
370 Exhibit C-207.
37! Exhibit R-15.
3? Exhibit C-170.

133

(g).

(h).

(i).

()-

(k).

The Wildlife Conservation Law (Ley de Conservacion de la Vida Silvestre
or Law 7317)°”;

Environmental Impact Assessment Regulations (Reglamento General
sobre los Procedimientos de Evaluacion de Impacto)*"*;

SETENA Guidelines Executive Decree N. 34522 — MINAE (Reglamento
para la Elaboracion Revision y Oficializacion de las Guias Ambientales
de Buenas Practicas Productivas y Desempeio Coeficiente)”;

SETENA Guidelines D1 Decree (Manual de Instrumentos Técnicos para
el Proceso de Evaluacion de Impacto Ambiental)*”°; and

Provisions about the Organization of SETENA, Decree N. 36815
(Reglamento de Organizacion de la Estructura Interna de Funcionamiento
de la Secretaria Técnica Nacional Ambientaly”’.

424. The government agencies entrusted with the enforcement of the above environmental

legislation as it applies to this claim are:

(a).

(b).

(c).

(d).
(e).

(fp.

Ministry of Environment and Energy (Ministerio de Ambiente y Energia -
“MINAE”);

National System of Conservation Areas (Sistema Nacional de Areas de
Conservacion - “SINAC”);

National Technical Environmental Secretariat (Secretaria Técnica
Nacional Ambiental — “SETENA”);

National Wetland Program (Programa Nacional de Humedales or “PNH”)

National Institute for Agricultural Innovation and Technology Transfer
(Instituto Nacional de Investigacion e Innovacion en Transferencia de
Tecnologia Agropecuaria - “INTA”), an agency of the Ministry of
Agriculture; and

Departments of Environmental Management (Departamento de Gestion
Ambiental) in each of the Municipalities.

425. The following chart is helpful in identifying how these agencies interrelate within the

government of Costa Rica.

373 Exhibit C-220.
344 Exhibit C-208.
375 Exhibit C-214.
376 Exhibit C-215.
377 Exhibit C-212.

134

426.

427.

 

 

 

SINAC is entrusted with, and is responsible for the planning, development and control of
wildlife in Costa Rica*’*, Several laws apply to its responsibilities, including the
Biodiversity Law and the Wildlife Conservation Law, which grant SINAC authority,
inter alia, to establish the technical guidelines for the use, conservation and management
of wildlife in Costa Rica; to protect, supervise and manage—as it relates to ecosystems—
wetlands and determine the qualification of national or international importance; to create
and manage the programs related to the use, control, surveillance and investigation of
wildlife; and to coordinate with other agencies responsible for the prevention, mitigation,
attention and monitoring of damage to wildlife. SINAC also has jurisdiction under the
Biodiversity Law, over matters involving forestry, wildlife, protected areas and the
protection and use of river basins and hydrological systems, and over the regulation and
protection of, among others: (i) wetlands and mangroves; and (ii) forest management and
exploitation, including permits for cutting trees*””. Both Parties agree that the SINAC is
the authority in charge of registering Wildlife Protected Areas (dreas silvestres
protegidas) created by Executive Decree which may be located within wetlands and

forests, and also that SINAC has the authority to delineate a wetland or a forest*°.

SINAC divides its jurisdiction among eleven different territories in Costa Rica known as
“conservation areas” or areas de conservacién, with each of the conservation areas in

charge of applying environmental legislation within its respective territory**'. The Las

578 Article 6, Wildlife Conservation Law (C-220).

579 Jd., Articles 6-7, and Articles 5-6 of the Forestry Law (C-170).

380 Respondents Counter-Memorial, 4 183, page 49, and Claimants’ Reply Memorial, 217, page 76.
381 Article 28 (C-207).

135

428.

429.

430.

431.

432.

Olas project corresponds to the Central Pacific Conservation Area (Area de Conservacion

Pacifico Central or “ACOPAC”).

SETENA - which is created under the Environmental Organic Law**?, is entrusted, on
the other hand, to examine the impact on the environment of “production processes”. It
reviews applications by land developers as to the likely impact of their projects on the
environment, and will be charged with monitoring compliance by the permit holder with

any conditions attached to the Environmental Viability**?.

Public officials from MINAE and SINAC have police power authority (autoridad de
policia) which gives them legitimate powers to enter and inspect private properties in
order to investigate irregular activities taking place at the sites***. MINAE officials,
inspectors and technicians must cooperate with the Environmental Prosecutor’s Office
(Fiscalia Agrario Ambiental) on the investigation of environmental crimes and are

empowered file criminal complaints before the competent authorities**°.

The PNH is the specialized agency under SINAC, created by Executive Decree No.
28058 of September 23, 1999 that is entrusted with the promotion, planning and
development of wetlands in Costa Rica. By express provision of such decree, however, it

is SINAC which remains primarily responsible for the management of wetlands.

INTA has authority under the Regulations to the National Institute for Agricultural
Innovation and Technology Transfer Law to provide laboratory services, among others,
of physio microbiological-chemical analysis of soil**°. Although it may draw conclusions
regarding soil samples, it is not the competent agency to determine the existence of

wetlands.

In addition, Costa Rica’s regulatory structure includes judicial and administrative courts,
as well as bodies that are either specialized or competent in examining and deciding on

environmental related matters:

3® Article 83 (C-184).

383

Claimants’ Reply Memorial, 4208, page 73.

384 Article 54 of the Forestry Law (C-170) and Article 15, Wildlife Conservation Law (C-220).
385 Article 284 of the Criminal Procedure Code (R-197).
386 Articles 35-37 of the Regulations of May 19, 2004 (R-203).

136

433.

434.

435.

(a). | The Environmental Administrative Tribunal (Tribunal Administrativo
Agrario or “TAA”), also created under the Environmental Organic Law;

(b). The Environmental Prosecutor’s Office;

(c). Municipalities; and

(d). The Defensoria de los Habitantes, which is a body that directly reports to

the Legislative of Costa Rica.

The TAA is an administrative tribunal that has authority under the Environmental
Organic Law to, inter alia, (i) hear and decide complaints against public or private
entities for violations to environmental protection laws, (ii) issue injunctions such as the
enjoinment of works, and (iii) establish the corresponding compensation for damage
against the environment**’, Under the “precautionary principle”, it also has authority to
issue precautionary measures sua sponte with the purpose of enjoining the violation of
any legal provision or preventing the possible commission of damage to the environment
or the continuation of harmful actions thereto, which powers include, among others, those
to establish partial or total restrictions, suspension of the relevant administrative actions,
and temporarily closing, in whole or in part, any activities that give rise to damage to the
1388,

environment It also has the power to issue sanctions that include warnings,

suspensions, cancellation of permits, and enforcement of environmental guarantees.

The Environmental Prosecutor’s Office is a specialized agency within the Attorney
General’s Office of Costa Rica that focuses exclusively on the prosecution of criminal
offenses against the environment. Its prosecutors have a duty to investigate every
complaint filed with the institution. These complaints can be filed by any individual or
may even be filed anonymously**’. Upon receipt of a complaint, the prosecutor can
request the issuance of precautionary measures to prevent any damage or further impact

on the environment®””.

In addition to the agencies of the central government of Costa Rica, there are the
Municipalities which are political subdivisions of the Costa Rican State that have

authority in respect to the development of a real estate project such as Las Olas. Their

387 Article 111 of the Environmental Organic Law (C-184).

388 Article 99 of the Environmental Organic Law, and Articles 11, 45 and 54 of the Biodiversity Law.
389 First Witness Statement, Luis Gerardo Martinez Zuiiga, 4 9, page 3.

39 Jd., 4 79-80, pages 20-21.

137

436.

437.

438.

competence includes, inter alia: (i) the issuance of certificates of land use, (ii) the
approval of permits for earth movement works, (iii) the approval of construction permits,
and (iv) the supervision of construction works to verify compliance of the developer with

the approved permits*”!.

In each municipality there is a Department of Environmental Management whose role is
to act ex officio, or upon the filling of complaints, in cases where there is a suspicion of
an impact on the environment. This department shall inform specialized agencies such as
SINAC, SETENA and/or the TAA, and has an obligation to report possible breaches of

environmental regulations and to monitor the cases*””.

The Defensoria de los Habitantes is a type of Ombudsman in Costa Rica. Rather than
being a part of the Executive branch of government as the other agencies previously
examined, it is part of the Legislative branch of government of Costa Rica, albeit with

functional and administrative independence*™

. Its stated purpose is to oversee the
conduct of public officials in accordance with law, morality and justice, and it has the
authority to initiate investigations ex officio or at the request of any party which has a
complaint in relation to acts or omissions of such public agencies***. Within its structure
there are specialized areas, including the Department of Quality Life (Direccién Calidad

de Vida), which is involved in environmental matters.

As part of the standard procedures required for determining whether the public
administration acted in accordance with the law, the Defensoria de los Habitantes may
request information from those agencies involved in the relevant complaint, and each
investigation concludes with a report determining whether a violation of rights has been
proven or not. In those situations where a violation has been proven, a recommendation is

made to take the appropriate corrective action®™>.

31 Urban Planning Law (Ley de Planificacién Urbana) articles 28-29 (C-219), Constructions Law (Ley de
Construcciones or Law 833) Articles, 2,9,11,55,74,83-87 (C-205); Municipal Code (Cédigo Municipal or Law
7794) Articles 1-5,75-76 (R-266), as cited by Respondent. Counter-Memorial, §] 98, page 22.

392

393

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, 4 99, page 23, citing the First Witness Statement, Hazel Diaz Meléndez.
To learn more http://www.dhr.

go.cr/la_defensoria/quienes_somos.aspx.

   

394 First Witness Statement, Monica Vargas Quesada, § 8 and 10, page 3.
35 Id, 4 17, page 5.

138

439,

440.

441.

442.

443.

396

The Arbitral Tribunal believes that Respondent has both adopted international
conventions and has enacted internal legislation in environmental matters that are not
only consistent with most international conventions, but are at the forefront of most
jurisdictions.

However, as the above description of laws and agencies shows, there is a high possibility
that two or more agencies may become involved in the investigation of any action that
threatens the environment and in the issuance of measures to enforce applicable laws,
there is concurrent jurisdiction among them which may trigger, in the best of cases, full
coordination, but in unfortunate instances, overlapping, inconsistent and conflicting
measures.

D. Environmental Principles under Costa Rica Law

The conduct of these agencies is guided by seven “guiding principles” that Respondent
has referred are found under the Constitution and Environmental legislation, which

principles are designated to acknowledge and protect nature in Costa Rica*”*:

(a). Equality of all citizens in their access to, and benefit from the protection of
the environment;

(b). Sustainability in the use of natural resources;

(c). Precautionary principle;

(d). Preventative principle;

(e). _ Restorability principle;

(f). Strict liability (“one who pollutes, pays”); and

(g). Citizen participation.
Although all seven principles are relevant, three are of particular interest given the
emphasis placed on them in this arbitration: (i) the precautionary principle; (ii) the
preventative principle; and (iii) citizen participation. These are addressed in more detail
below.
Precautionary Principle. Under this principle, the mere risk of impact to the environment

triggers an obligation for the competent authorities to act and protect the environment

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, § 60, page 13.

139

444,

without necessitating that such risk be supported by scientific evidence. Respondent has
stated that public agencies in Costa Rica need to comply with the precautionary principle
when it comes to their knowledge that there is a mere likelihood of an adverse impact to
the environment*’’. The relevant agency does not have to be certain of the existence of
damage, but likelihood thereof is sufficient for it to undertake the necessary measures to
prevent any impact on the environment. The Supreme Court of Justice of Costa Rica’
has referred to it as a “principle of prudent avoidance” that is contained in the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development, the so-called “Rio Convention”,
which provides: “Principle 15. In order to protect the environment, the precautionary
approach shall be widely applied by States according to their capabilities. Where there
are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of absolute scientific certainty shall not
be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental
degradation.” Further, said Court has determined that “Properly understood, the
precautionary principle refers to adopting measures, not against the lack of awareness of
risk generating facts, but against the lack of certainty of whether those facts will actually

cause harmful effects to the environment”.

One of the main consequences of the application of the “precautionary principle”,
Respondent argues, is that there is a shifting of the burden of proof; it is reversed on the
party allegedly causing a risk of harm*°’. This means that the relevant person must evince
that it is not going to hurt the environment with the actions it intends to take rather than a
burden on the government to prove the existence of harm. This principle is recognized in
Article 109 of the Biodiversity Law, which provides: “The burden of proof, of the
absence of non-permitted contamination, degradation or damage, shall correspond to
whom requests the approval, the permit, or the access to biodiversity, or whom is accused

of having caused the environmental harm*?!”,

397 Id., 4357, page 89.

398 Decision 9773-00, Constitutional Chamber, Supreme Court of Justice, November 3, 2000 (R-188).

3 Decision 3480-03, Constitutional Chamber, Supreme Court of Justice, May 2, 2003 (R-201), as cited in the
Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, | 358, page 89.

400 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, 471, page 115, and Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, {| 98-99, page 30.

401 The original Spanish language text is: “La carga de la prueba, de la ausencia de contaminacién, degradacién, 0
afectacién no permitidas, corresponderd a quien solicite la aprobacién, el permiso 0 acceso a la biodiversidad 0 a
quien se le acuse de haber ocasionado el dafio ambiental”. Exhibit C-207.

140

445.

446.

447.

Preventative Principle. Under this principle, action is warranted in the event that a project
is assessed to cause damage to the environment. The TAA or Contentious Administrative

Tribunal*

has stated that it refers to the assumptions which are made in relation to the
damaging consequences of certain actions. Preventive policies are issued to try to avoid
such harm in advance; for example, through environmental impact assessments. This
principle is recognized in the Constitution of Costa Rica which mandates the prevention
of damage to the environment and to otherwise reduce, limit or control activities which
might cause or risk such damage. It is also acknowledged in the Stockholm Declaration

on the Human Environment*.

Citizen Participation. As the TAA also recognized, while making reference to Article 10
of the Rio Convention: “Citizen participation in matters of the environment is a
consequence of the principle of democracy and includes the right to access information
relating to environmental projects or projects which may cause harm to natural resources
and the environment, as well as the opportunity to participate in the decision-making
process ...”4°4. It has been recognized by the TAA*”> in at least in one decision cited by
Respondent, and can also be identified through the possibility of filing anonymous

complaints relating to harm to the environment.

E. The Tribunal’s Analysis

1, Whether Respondent has breached Article 10.5 (FET) or Article 10.7
(Unlawful Expropriation) of the DR-CAFTA

The position of Claimants and the defense of Respondent in respect to allegations on

frustration of their legitimate expectations and expropriation are essentially dependent,

first, as to whether (a) there were wetlands and forests in the Las Olas Project site during

the relevant periods when the government actions took place, and (b) whether these were

adversely impacted.

402 Decision 0083-2013, Contentious Administrative Tribunal, Section IV, September 16, 2013 (R-190), as cited in
the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, § 64, page 15.

403,

This principle is also acknowledged by Principle 21/2 of the Stockholm Declaration on the Human Environment,

1972 (RLA-43), as cited in the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, § 468, page 114.
404 Cited in Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, § 69, page 16.
465 Decision 0083-2013, Section IV, September 16, 2013 (R-190).

141

448.

449.

450.

451.

Although they argued throughout the case that neither wetlands nor forests were present
at relevant times, Claimants stress that even though wetlands could have been present,
that does not affect the failure of Respondent to accord fair and equitable treatment to the
investors, or excuse the unlawful expropriation of their investment; assuming such
wetlands and/or forests existed and these were damaged, Claimants have challenged that

the Respondent acted within its authority to deal with Claimants’ actions or omissions.
(a) Process to Develop a Real Estate Project

It is not an easy or unencumbered endeavor being an investor, and less so being an
investor in another jurisdiction where the laws and practices are different from those that
with which one is familiar. Such laws and practices may be on occasions stricter, while in
other occasions these will be more lenient, but the investor has the burden to be well
informed and advised thereof. This is particularly true in dealing with real estate projects,
where there may be not only a complex mixture of issues to be addressed that involve
land and construction, but also two levels (or more) of regulation, including those of a
federal, state and/or municipal nature. In each such case, success of a development is
necessarily dependent on proper structure and implementation of the project. And to
achieve success it is indispensable to have proper advice from experts and counsel who

will lead the investor through a path, sometimes obscure and full of unknowns.

The Arbitral Tribunal believes that despite the efforts and good faith actions of Claimants
which they have expressed in their submissions, it does not appear they sought and
received proper advice to develop the Las Olas Project, and if they did, they chose to

ignore it.

An unfortunate situation in the case of this investment is that, even though it appears that
Mr. Aven was closely involved in the day-to-day issues involving the project, it also
appears that when the issues dealt with regulatory matters he relied on the advice and
action taken by his subordinates or third parties who were engaged to assist. Despite his
interest in Costa Rica, and the years living there, he did not learn to speak, read or write

in Spanish. Mr. Aven was quite clear on his language limitations during the December

142

452.

453.

454.

Hearing*”°. He openly disclosed “So, I was relying on these professionals. I never
actually was involved in any of that. And I relied totally on the professionals. As you
said, I don’t speak Spanish, I don’t read Spanish, I don’t write Spanish. And so, I relied

totally on the professionals that I had employed”*"’.

This impacted the extent of the knowledge he and other Claimants had over the legal

implications and information he knew about the applications being filed for the project.

When questioned during the hearing as to whether he received any advice regarding
disclosure obligations in the D1 Application, he responded that he did not “... recall any
of that whatsoever, because my understanding from the lawyers, [ ...], was that they were
the team that had expertise in shepherding a project through the permitting process, and
they knew the requirements”. Further, he did not seem to be involved with the
authorities, whether SETENA or any other relating to the project. This was dealt with by

those third parties*”*.

In respect of one of the critical documents alleged by the Respondent to have impacted
the accuracy of the information submitted to the Costa Rican environmental authorities,
the so-called “Protti Report”, which was not submitted along with the D1 Application,
but subsequently submitted to SETENA after the Environmental Viability was secured
for the Condo Section, Mr. Aven testified during the December Hearing that the letter
submitting the report to the authorities was written by “... my attorney, Sebastian Vargas.
He had me sign it. He didn’t do a translation of this document. He just told me this was
a document that we were objecting to--objecting to the illegal shutdown letter he sent me
on--earlier than this February 23rd date”. In an open acknowledgement he responded
further to that same question:

But he sent it. And he wrote it. I didn’t write this letter. As you know, I don’t

read--write--read or write or speak Spanish.

Now, again, this is a situation where I’m relying on attorneys. All right? Now,
maybe the best thing for him to have done was give me a translation in English

406 Transcript, Page 818-17:22, and 819:1-6.

407 Statement made by Mr. Aven, see Transcript, Page 819:1-6.

408 He testified during the December Hearing that “but during the early phases of this whole permitting process, I
never even talked to anybody at these agencies ever” Jd, Pages 819-820.

143

and say, David, read this thoroughly, and make sure you understand it
thoroughly, and then sign it.

He didn’t do that. He just wrote it. He told me--again, confirming, like, what I
said, that most of the time, this was--what the attorneys told me were
verbal--maybe they didn’t want to take the time to explain it, you know, do the
translation from Spanish to English and explain things to me. They said--they
just put documents in front of me and said verbally what they were for, and I
signed them, and he sent them...*°°.

455. Claimants’ counsel during the December Hearing also questioned Mr. Aven during re-
direct examination:
[Mr. Burn] Q. Did you need to take advice to understand the significance of
being truthful in an official application?

A. No, I don’t need to take advice to be truthful. I generally act that way--acted
that had way most of my life. In that particular--like when he--the documents
like the D1 document--most of the documents--official documents that I execute,
I signed, was in Spanish.

I’m relying on the professionals that I engaged to do various things for me. And
all of those official things were done in the Spanish language. And, you know,
when they got something--like the D1 is a perfect example. It was presented to
me by the professional. And I--I signed it as something that was necessary to--to
get executed and submitted.

[Mr. Burn] Q. And subject to that point that these were documents--the D1
application was prepared by others and you relied on others and so on and so
forth, which you’ve made clear, is it your understanding that the D1 application
was accurate?

A. Of course. Absolutely*!”.

456. Arbitrator Baker then asked Mr. Aven whether he had hired anybody or consult with
anybody before he made the purchase of the land in respect to development restrictions or
environmental regulations in Costa Rica. Mr. Aven responded that he did not. But he
added that he afterwards consulted with Juan Carlos Esquivel, his attorney, with whom
he “... talked a lot about what the procedures would be to do a development project. And

he stepped me through that. And he was a key guy--the key attorney that--that really

409 See Transcript, Pages 839-18 to 840-13.
410 Transcript Page 871:2-22, 872:1-2.

144

457.

458.

459.

handled things from 2002 until I moved down there in 2005. He was the one handling

everything for me after we bought the Project--the property’4!!.

The absence of close involvement in regulatory issues was compounded by the lack of
written legal advice from Costa Rican or other counsel. Although Claimants stated in
their Reply Memorial that they sought and received legal advice from counsel*!?, during
the December Hearing Mr. Aven acknowledged that he did not recall any written legal
advice in connection with the Las Olas Project, or in relation to the enforcement actions
that that were taken against him, nor in relation to the injunctions that were placed on the
property*!>,

The above acknowledgements on the part of Mr. Aven, the key investor, are revealing to
the Tribunal because it shows that his involvement in the decisions being taken were
decisions on the basis of not understanding the language or the relevance of commitments
being undertaken or documents being signed. The absence of written legal advice on
major aspects of the Las Olas Project is likewise revealing, as it makes it almost
impossible to prove diligent understanding. If Mr. Aven or the other Claimants who
might have resided temporarily in Costa Rica were unable to understand the Spanish
language conversations and/or, most importantly, the documents, applications and
permits that were being examined, submitted or issued, and be aware of the extent to
which they would affect the project, at minimum a prudent investor should require that
his/her counsel provide written comments and opinions which could be examined and
discussed. But no such contemporaneous documentation was ever provided by the

Claimants.

This lack of involvement was also evident when Mr. Aven acknowledged that when the
so-called Protti Report was submitted to Costa Rican authorities, he was unaware of what
was being actually submitted, and apparently he was not concerned with the lack of

information.

411 Transcript Page 897:2-8.
412 Claimants’ Reply Memorial, | 95, page 34.
413 See Transcript, Page 831:13-22: 832:13-15, 17, 21-22; 833: 2-3, 5-6, 10-12,14-17, 834:6-9.

145

460.

461.

462.

463.

464.

Although Mr. Aven repeatedly indicated that he was relying on his attorneys, this is not a
valid justification because such reliance cannot be a substitute for diligence in a situation
where he elects not to read, understand what is being submitted or even said, and fails to
react with prudence when his attorney “‘... didn’t want to take the time to explain it, you

know, do the translation from Spanish to English and explain things ...”*!4.

(b) Key Issues to be resolved by the Tribunal

The immediate questions for the Tribunal include: (i) Were there wetlands and/or forests
within the property at the time the D1 Application was filed by Claimants? (ii) Which
determine whether a wetland and/or forest exist in Costa Rica? Did Claimants have an

obligation to timely disclose the existence of wetlands and/or forests in their property?

Related issues to address in this arbitration, on which there has been some disagreement,
include: what precisely a “wetland” is; whether or not it is necessary that a prior
determination of a wetland is made by an Executive Decree; and which is the competent

entity to determine its existence.

After these questions are answered, the Tribunal will be in a position to then examine
whether or not Claimants took actions to drain and/or refill the wetlands, damaging such
ecosystem, and whether or not Respondent acted within its rights under DR-CAFTA, or
whether there was a breach to its obligations thereunder or under principles of customary
international law. All this becomes relevant not only in respect to the alleged illegality in
securing the Environmental Viability but also in respect to the appropriateness of
criminal charges brought against Messrs. Aven and Damjanac for presumably draining
and filling wetlands. The same issue applies in respect of forests, and the alleged illegal

felling of trees.

(c) Wetlands under the laws of Costa Rica

Article 40 of the Environmental Organic Law‘!

originally defined a wetland. At the
time, it provided that “Wetlands are the ecosystems dependent on water regimes, whether
natural or artificial, permanent or temporary, lentic or lotic, fresh, brackish or salt,

including marine extensions, up to the rear boundary of sea-grass beds or coral reefs or,

414 Transcript, page 840:8-10.
415 Exhibit C-184.

146

465.

466.

in their absence, up to six meters deep at low tide”*!®.

However, this definition dates to
1995 when the Environmental Organic Law was enacted, and the legal framework in
Costa Rica has clearly become more detailed and sophisticated since, rendering this
language obsolete in light of the Executive Decree 35803-MINAE published in 2016
providing the Technical Criteria for the Identification, Classification and Conservation of

Wetlands*!’,

Executive Decree 35803-MINAE provides for the “essential ecological characteristics”
that identify a wetland, regardless of whether or not they have been created by decree or
law, or whether or not they need to be protected and conserved by MINAET through the
National Conservation Areas Systems (Sistema Nacional de Areas de Conservacion). The
three characteristics are*!*:

(a). hydrophilic _vegetation, made up of types of vegetation associated to

aquatic and semi-aquatic environments, including phreatophytic vegetation that
grows in layers of permanent water or shallow water tables;

(b). hydric soils, defined as those soils that develop in conditions with a high
degree of humidity up to reaching a point of saturation; and

(c). hydric condition, characterized by the climatic influence of a determined
territory, in which other variables, such as geomorphic, topographic, soil
makeup, and occasionally other processes or extreme events are involved.

Article 5 of the Executive Decree then defines what must be understood as (a)
hydrophilic vegetation — which are those floristic plant species that grow and develop in
aquatic environments which have life cycles that are associated with aquatic
environment, and (b) hydric soils, which are those that in their natural condition are
saturated, flooded or water logged, or pooled for large periods of time which allow the
development of anaerobic conditions in their upper zones. A note to this article adds that
wetland soils will generally correspond to soil classes VII and VIII under Executive
Decree 23214-MAG-MIRENEM and are to be used only as preservation areas for flora

and fauna, areas of aquifer recharge, genetic reserve and scenic beauty*!?.

416 Exhibit C-184 (T).

417 published in the Costa Rica Gazette 73 on April 16, 2010. (C-64 and C-218).
418 Exhibit C-218, Article 6.

419 {d, Article 6 (b), second paragraph.

147

467.

468.

469.

The same Executive Decree classifies wetlands into groups: (a) fluvial, which include

 

those aquatic environments contained in drainages that periodic, permanent or
temporarily maintain water in movement, but it excludes those environments with
dominance of trees, shrub or persistent emerging vegetation; (b) estuarine, which include
deep water habitats and adjoining land with influence of tides, commonly semi-enclosed

by land, where ocean water is diluted with fresh water flowing inland, (c) marine, which

 

are those areas that are exposed to the tides of ocean waters; (d) lacustrine, aquatic
habitats in depressed topography, such as lakes, or dammed whether naturally or
artificially; and (e) palustrine, which include wetlands of non-tidal nature, with the
following characteristics: may contain or not vegetation, which may consist of trees,
shrubs, emerging vegetation; have depths not exceeding two meters, and salinity levels

from ocean water do not exceed 0.5% *°.

Finally, the Decree identifies that palustrine wetlands include the following*”!:

(a). Swamps/estuaries/permanent saline/brackish/alkaline pools;

(b). Swamps/estuaries/seasonal pools/intermittently saline/brackish/alkaline;
(c). Swamps/estuaries/permanent fresh water pools; pools (less than 8 has);
(d). Swamps and estuaries on inorganic soils, with emergent vegetation

underwater at least during the majority of the growth period;

(e). Swamps/estuaries/seasonal pools/intermittent freshwater on inorganic
soils; includes flooded depressions (charge and discharge lagoons), potholes,
seasonally flooded plains, cypress swamps;

(f). Treeless marshes, includes shrub or open bogs, fens, bogs, and lowland
marshes; and

(g). Fresh water forest wetlands, includes fresh water swamp forests,
seasonally flooded forests, tree swamps on inorganic soils.

The above are generally utilized concepts. In respect to criminal matters, there are similar
but not identical characteristics to determine the existence of a wetland. Under the 2010
Guidelines for the Prosecutorial Investigation of Environmental Crimes there are three
characteristics established to demonstrate the existence of a wetland, which

characteristics are similar, but not the same, as to those issued by the Executive Decree

#20 Id. Article 7.
2 Id,

148

470.

471.

472.

473.

35803-MINAE: (1) soil permeability; (2) the presence of hydrophilic vegetation; and (3)
a slope below or equal to five degrees*””. Respondent has downplayed those differences
because of the hierarchy of laws principle, where the Guidelines are not law or executive
decree but an administrative ruling issued in September 2010 by the Costa Rican
Prosecutors Office; are an instrument binding only on prosecutors; and are further
superseded by the MINAE Executive Decree which applies, and has erga omnes effects

in the country.

Despite such minor differences, it is relevant to mention that both Parties in the case have
relied on the MINAE Executive Decree as to the determination of what are the

characteristics of a wetland’.

However, Claimants have introduced another issue that has relevance from their
standpoint. Claimants indicated that prior to September 2009 - and for the reasons
explained below, wetlands were required to be created and delimited by Executive decree
issued by MINAE, in accordance with the Organic Environmental Law and the Wildlife

Conservation law.

Further, they have argued that before such date there were two other Executive Decrees
that confirmed the requirement that wetlands be delimited by executive decree: (a)
Executive Decree No. 31849 of 2005**4 (Regulations for the Environmental Impact
Assessment Procedure), which defines “environmentally fragile areas” (drea
ambientalmente fragil) (including wetlands) as those declared by the State by means of
an Executive Decree or law and those located on public property belonging to the State;
and (b) Executive Decree No. 35803-MINAE*> which establishes in Articles 2 and 3 that
continental and marine wetlands must be part of a Wildlife Protected Area (drea silvestre
protegida), reinforcing the need for an Executive Decree in order to conclude the

existence of a wetland.

Claimants acknowledge, though, that the two articles last referenced (Articles 2 and 3)

were later declared unconstitutional, and explained that the law pertaining to the

22 Exhibit C-297, 3.3 [Lakes, non-artificial lagoons, and other wetlands}.

423

For example, Barboza Expert Report, Section 4, page 13.

44 Exhibit C-208.
#5 Exhibit C-218.

149

474,

475.

476.

delimitation of wetlands in Costa Rica changed on September 9, 2009 because, on that
day, a ruling of the Constitutional Chamber*”° declared unconstitutional one part of the
Wildlife Conservation Law, Article 7, which now reads as follows: “The delimitation of
wetlands shall be done by executive decree, based on technical criteria”. The deletion of
the words “creation and” before “delimitation” was confirmed by Constitutional Chamber
Resolution 016938-2011 of December 7, 2011, which modified Articles 2 and 3 of
Executive Decree 35803-MINAE”’.

The declaration was made after the relevant environmental and construction permits were
issued to the Las Olas Project*?*. Therefore, Claimants argue, prior to September 2009
(that is, prior to SETENA’s issuance of the Environmental Viability for the Las Olas
Project), all wetlands in Costa Rica had to be created by executive decree. They support
this argument with criminal court judgments that are cited in their Post-Hearing Brief
dealing with the creation of wetlands that reflect “the Wildlife Conservation Act
establishes the following as functions of the Directorate General of Wildlife of the
Ministry of Environment and Energy: ‘Administer, monitor, and protect wetlands. The
creation and demarcation of wetlands will be made by executive decree, according to

technical criteria’”*”? (emphasis added).

Claimants also stated that under Article 32 of the Environmental Organic Law, the
Executive, through the MINAE, is empowered to establish wildlife protected areas (areas
silvestres protegidas), which may or may not include wetlands, and that Article 7 of the
Wildlife Conservation Law also provides that the creation and delimitation of wetlands

shall be carried out by Executive decree.

Another argument of Claimants is that SINAC is now empowered to follow the technical
criteria set out in Executive Decree 35803-MINAE (mentioned and analyzed above) in

order to determine the existence of a wetland, while the delimitation of any wetland still

#6 Resolution 14288-2009, issued by the Constitutional Chamber of Costa Rica.
7 Exhibit C-64.

#8 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, footnote 391, page 126.

429 Exhibit R-236, cited in Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 448, page 213.

150

477.

478.

479.

needs to be done by Executive decree, as determined by the Constitutional Chamber in its

September 9, 2009 ruling**?.

Since SINAC lacks the requisite technical expertise to carry out all the studies necessary
to determine whether or not a wetland exists, Claimants add, SINAC therefore relies on
the assistance of INTA as the national authority that administers and enforces Executive
Decree 23214-MAG-MIRENEM™**|, establishing the methodology that has to be followed
in the identification and determination of wetland soils, in accordance with Article 5(b) of

Executive Decree 35803-MINAE*”.

Thus, Claimants conclude, in the absence of an Executive Decree, a wetland could not be
deemed to exist in the Las Olas Project site before September 9, 2009 for the purposes of
the Environmental Organic Law**. It had not been created and delimited by Executive

decree.

On a separate but related argument that has a direct connection to the criminal case
brought against Messrs. Aven and Damjanac, Claimants have mentioned that the Wildlife
Conservation law was amended by the passage of Article 1 of Law 8689 on December 4,
2008 which, although adopted in December 2008, did not actually come into effect until
June 24, 2009. Since the law did not have retroactive effect, then they argue that, in
accordance with the Costa Rican Constitution and the Costa Rican Criminal Code, any
alleged offenses before that date would be irrelevant because such offenses would need to
be assessed under the pre-existing law, where a fine was contemplated, which fine did not
exceed US$500 dollars***, This is especially relevant, they add, because Messrs. Aven
and Damjanac were charged with violating Article 98 of said law by draining and filling

of a wetland*>

when, Claimants argue, the legal provision that made such action
punishable with a prison term of up to three years did not become effective until June 24,

200949,

80 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 459, page 217.

431 Exhibit R-401.

+82 Exhibit C-64.

+33 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 243, page 124.

+4 1d., 4239, page 122.

+85 Criminal charges filed against David Aven and Jovan Damjanac, October 21, 2011 (C-142).
+86 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 4] 248, page 126.

151

480.

481.

482.

483.

Respondent takes a different view. Although it confirms the legal provisions cited by
Claimants, it disagrees with the manner in which Claimants describe the law and the
interpretation given by Costa Rican courts, including the Constitutional Chamber of
Costa Rica’s Supreme Court. The essence of Respondent’s view is that wetlands may be
of two different types: (a) those that are located within a “wildlife protected area” and (b)
those which are not; and only those wetlands falling within the first group require the

determination of an Executive decree to be created or delimited.

Indeed, although Article 42 of the Environmental Organic Law grants MINAE the
authority to delimit “protected areas” (zonas protegidas or zonas de proteccion) in
determined maritime and coastal areas and wetlands, this does not mean that a wetland
must necessarily be deemed to be a protected area in the sense of the regulations. Thus,
not every wetland to be found is to be declared as a “protected area” within the meaning
of such law. Therefore, as Costa Rica’s expert has stated, there may be wetlands that are
included within a “protected area” by express declaration of MINAE, and wetlands

located on private property, that do not lose their nature for that reason**”.

Respondent has indicated that the Constitutional Chamber of Costa Rica’s Supreme
Court confirmed this position in a 2011 decision*** by resolving that the protection of
wetlands is not exclusive to those that are within a “protected area”; the obligation to
conserve wetlands is not simply after they have been created and delimited in a
“protected area” but rather the obligation to conserve arises from the duties under the
RAMSAR Convention.

If in the specific case MINAE certifies that the property of the private is not

within a Wildlife Protected Area, according to the areas administered by it, that

does not imply in any form that the wetland that was found [there] does not have

to be protected. We ought to remember that the International Convention

subscribed by our country established the obligation of a state party to promote

the conservation of wet zones and aquatic birds that create natural reserves in the
wetlands, regardless of their inclusion or not in the ‘List’ [...] (Emphasis added)

A similar decision was issued even before - in 2005, by the Criminal Court of Appeals of

Costa Rica - which ruled that when the Wildlife Conservation Law was enacted, wetlands

437 First Witness Statement, Julio Jurado, § 61, page 98.
438 Decision 12817-2011, Constitutional Chamber, Supreme Court of Costa Rica, December 14, 2001 (R-172), as
quoted by Respondent in its Counter-Memorial, { 387, page 98.

152

484.

485.

486.

487.

were not “wildlife protected areas” and therefore any declaration of wetlands inside
public property was required to be done through an Executive decree. However, the court
reminded that by express provision of the Environmental Organic Law, wetlands were
nonetheless deemed of public interest and, therefore, subject to protection’. Indeed,
Article 41 of the Environmental Organic Las deems conservation of every wetland in
Costa Rica of “public interest”: “Wetlands and their conservation are hereby declared of
public interest, for being of multiple use, whether or not protected by the laws governing

this matter”,

The Tribunal requested the Parties to address in their Post-Hearing Briefs which is the
competent authority in Costa Rica to determine the existence of wetlands. Both

Claimants and Respondent examined the issue, and both concluded that it is SINAC**!.

Claimants state that the final authority for the determination of wetlands and issues
related to wetlands is SINAC, in accordance with Executive Decree 35803-MINAE,
which in turn specifies that Executive Decree 23214-MAG-MIRENEM be applied for the
determination of hydric soils”, but add that delimitation of that wetland must be carried

out by Executive Decree, which did not occur in the Las Olas Project“.

Respondent agrees that it is SINAC who is entrusted with the responsibility for providing
protection and control to wetland ecosystems, but places the legal support on Article 7(h)
of the Wildlife Conservation Law, which exclusively assigns to SINAC the management
and protection of wetlands, as well as their classification. Mr. Jurado, expert witness of

Respondent, confirmed SINAC’s powers“4.

Thus, although both Parties accepted SINAC’s competence, they disagree on the scope of
the authority. The main difference lies on whether an Executive decree is required, as
Claimants allege, to delimit the wetlands in order for this species to be protected under

the laws of Costa Rica. The Tribunal disagrees that such requirement applies to determine

439 Decision 01209-2005, Criminal Court of Appeals, November 15, 2005 (R-177), as quoted by Respondent in its
Counter-Memorial, {| 389, page 98.

440 The Spanish language is: “Se declaran de interés piiblico los humedales y su conservacién, por ser de uso
multiple, estén o no estén protegidos por las leyes que rijan esta materia”.

441 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, ] 450; Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, | 887.

42 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, {| 463, page 218.

48 Id., 4 464, page 218.

44 First Witness Statement of Julio Jurado, {ff 22-26, pages 9-10.

153

488.

489.

490.

the existence of wetlands within private property, and based on the above analysis finds
that it will only apply in those cases where wetlands to be delimited that are found within
a “protected area” or zonas protegidas or zonas de proteccién, but not in those instances
of wetlands located on private property, as in the Las Olas Project site. It would make
little sense that an Executive decree would be required to make a determination of the

existence of such a highly protected species.

Now, were there wetlands on the Las Olas Project site? Or were the merely “swamp-type
flooded areas with poor draining” areas of the property that failed to meet the statutory
requirements under Costa Rican law to conclude the existence of a wetland? The record

shows that the Las Olas Project site did contain at least one wetland area.

A difficulty in this case is that there were inconsistencies in the positions of authorities
that were called-in to determine whether wetlands existed on the property. In the
background section of this Award, an analysis has been made which depicts the various
determinations. Absent the determinations made by SINAC in May 2011, Claimants
could have relied in the findings of some agencies that found none were present.
However, those findings that support the position taken by Claimants have a flaw: they
appear to have omitted examination in the relevant areas of the Las Olas Project site, or
failed to make the examination at the relevant times. The three reports prepared by
SINAC in 2011, i.e., the SINAC January 2011 Report, the SINAC May 2011 Report and
the SINAC October 2011 Report did find the existence of wetlands.

Although Respondent has identified through the Expert Witness Reports of KECE
prepared by Mr. Kevin Erwin that a total of eight wetlands on the site of the Las Olas
Project were found, Claimants originally rejected the existence of any wetlands on the
site during the arbitration proceedings. However, in their Post-Hearing Brief Claimants
did not dispute the existence of wetlands in the studies and reports carried out in 2016,
but argued that there is no proof that those conditions existed during the relevant time
(2007-2011), and that neither Mr. Erwin or the Green Roots experts were present when
SETENA issued the Condo Section Environmental Viability in 2008, nor were they
present when INTA found no hydric soils in 2011.

154

491.

492.

493.

494,

495.

In this regard, Claimants have argued that in reaching its conclusions of protected forest
and wetlands, Respondent “willfully ignores an abundance of external factors which
could have, and have had, an impact on the current status of the Las Olas site”**>. This
implies their acceptance that wetlands may exist in the site.

Respondent countered and stated that if wetlands exist now, then they almost certainly

existed at the time Claimants acquired the land®.

As addressed below, KECE identified in their report various sites where wetland were
found within the Las Olas Project Site, and numbered these from | to 7. Claimants have
alleged that Mr. Erwin failed to meaningfully consider soil data in alleged wetlands 2-7;
that his assertion of soils in wetland 8 is not credible; and that the hydrophilic vegetation

found is not the species to be found in wetlands**’.

Claimants appear not to dispute the
existence of the wetland referred to as “Wetland 1” in the area of easements 8 and 9, but
they nonetheless disputed that the determination by Green Roots was based on a
“fundamental misapplication of the USDA Keys to Soil Taxonomy” used for this

classification.

Moreover, Claimants have argued that INTA made no finding of hydric soils at the time
of the measures taken in 2011. It is a fact that INTA conducted a soils study of the
alleged wetlands at the Las Olas Project site in April 2011, and concluded that no hydric
soils were present. Thus, Claimants argue that there simply were no wetlands at Las Olas
in 2008 either when the EVs were issued, or in 2011 when the Respondent issued the

injunctions***.

Although Mr. Gerardo Barboza — Wetlands Expert presented by Claimants, rejected the
existence of wetlands, during the December Hearing he testified that his conclusions
were reached from a document review made by him, and not because of a site visit to
confirm whether or not these existed. This, despite the fact in his initial expert report‘?

he stated that when there is a “possible existence” of a wetland it becomes necessary to

+45 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 525, page 247.

446

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {| 358, page 70.

+47 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 4 488-498, pages 227-233.
48 1d., 4.475, page 222.
+49 First Barbosa Expert Report, § 4.b)., page 11.

155

496.

497.

carry out a precise, qualitative and quantitative site visit, he never carried out such a visit.
When questioned during the December Hearing, he testified that his “... task was not to
identify a wetland on the site. It was just to assess/to evaluate the SINAC documents
relating to the topic’”**°. Further, he agreed that if the possible existence of a wetland was
known during the preparation of a D1 Application, that such a “precise, qualitative and

quantitative” site visit would be merited**!.

The First and Second Expert Reports from KECE conclude the existence of at least seven
(7) wetlands on the Las Olas Project site, of which one was impacted. In addition, KECE
was able to identify the location of another wetland outside of the project site but within
what he referred to as the “Las Olas Ecosystem”, based on the existence of the elements
which the RAMSAR Convention and Costa Rica’s law establish: (i) the dominance of
hydrophytic vegetation; (ii) the presence of hydrological indicators, and (iii) the presence
of hydric soils*?. These sites were referred to in a numerical order, starting from the
southwestern end of the property, and then in a clockwise order along the property*®.
Thus, Wetlands # | and 2 are located in the area of Easements, while the rest are located
in the Condo Section. Wetland # 4 is located adjacent to the northwestern portion of the
property***. It is worthwhile to note that the site of defined Wetlands in the KECE
Report matches those under the Baillie Reports; for example, KECE # 5 would
correspond to “Bajo B2”; KECE 3 would correspond to “Bajo B4”; and KECE 2, would

correspond to “Bajo B6”.

The wetlands are deemed by KECE to be palustrine freshwater wetlands, hydrated by
rainfall, groundwater seepage and flow from adjacent higher elevations; seasonally
inundated, with alternating periods of saturation/inundation and drought that are directly

related to the region’s wet and dry seasons, respectively*>.

450 Transcript 1921:16-18.
451 Transcript -1631:16:22, 1632:1-3.

452

Mr. Erwin testified during the December Hearing that the definition of wetlands under the laws of Costa Rica

strictly adheres to the RAMSAR definition. The language, he added “... if you hold them up side by side, is nearly
identical”. Transcript 1868:19-20.

453 KECE First Expert Report, 4 55, page 15.

454 Figure 2, “Las Olas Ecosystem Wetlands Map”, Appendix 12 of the First KECE Expert Report.

455 KECE Expert Report, §ff 56 and 188, pages 15 and 51.

156

498.

499.

500.

During the examination of environmental expert witnesses (wetlands and soils) during
the December Hearing the discussion centered at one point on whether the soils in the
wetlands alleged by Respondent to exist actually had hydric soils. Dr. Baillie argued in
his report that he had not found such conditions, but when examined as to whether he
shared the findings of Green Roots, Dr. Baillie indicated that he had not drilled to the
depth of 105 cms, which is the depth of drills used by Green Roots, which they deemed
necessary because in some of the areas there had been work undertaken. In other words,
had the ground be untouched, the drills could be closer to the ground, but when it was
clear that works had been performed, that it was indispensable to go deeper. And these
works were precisely over the wetland referred to by Dr. Baillie as “Bajo 1” which is the
same as that referred to in the KECE Report as Wetland # 1. Dr. Baillie indicated that he
did not feel it was appropriate to drill that location as there had been development works
there, and article 5(b) of the Executive Decree No. 35803-MINAE contemplates a

definition of hydric soils under natural conditions.

The report prepared by Drs. Calvo & Langstroth has as its scope to determine whether the
site contains or has previously even contained wetlands. Dr. Calvo was questioned during
the December Hearing as to whether his firm had carried out a soils survey, which
Claimants allege (and Respondent does not dispute) is necessary because it is a
component to determine the existence of hydric soils, which is one of the three elements
of a wetland. Dr. Calvo acknowledged that they did not carry out such survey, because
that is something they do not do, but rely on the soils study undertaken by a third party.
This meant in the view of the Tribunal that their conclusion as to the existence of
wetlands was flawed from the outset, since without such soils study they could not reach
the determination of the existence of wetlands. This was acknowledged by Dr. Calvo

during examination**°.

In their report on the existence of hydric soils on Wetland # 1, Messrs. Johan S. Perret &
B.K. Singh of GreenRoots indicated that Dr. Baillie, as well as INTA, and Mr. Cubero,
used soil augering. This is the main tool used for soil exploration. In the case of Dr.

Baillie, they added that he used “mini-pits”, which are very shallow, and do not go any

486 Transcript 1763:17-22, 1764:1.

157

S01.

502.

503.

deeper than 60 centimeters in depth. Their soil taxonomy methodology, they added,
required they go deeper; that is why they went to 1.6 meters**’. Further, they criticized
the fact that Dr. Baillie did not access a road inside of the area were a wetland was

deemed or alleged to exist.

Upon a direct question by Arbitrator Baker, who asked whether Dr. Calvo deferred to the
soils experts to determine the existence of wetlands, Dr. Calvo confirmed*** that he did

because they had found the other two elements existing in the site.

On the other hand, KECE mentioned that such soils study was not indispensable, and
their Report shows that soil samples were only taken within a relatively small area in the
Las Olas Project site, i.e., that comprised by Wetland # 1, excluding the other wetlands
identified by other expert witnesses presented by Respondent. When asked by Arbitrator
Baker during the December Hearing as to the reason why he had not undertaken the soil
samples in the others, Dr. Erwin responded that in his practice he first looks at the
hydrology and then the vegetation; and if he has both, his experience is that there will be
hydric soils. His visits to the site showed all of the wetland areas under water, and that
fact gave him the assurance he needed to conclude the existence of hydric soils, since
these do not disappear with drainage. However, he mentioned that he would only carry
out the soil sampling, as he did in this case, when there is litigation or arbitration
involved. He added that in his belief Dr. Baillie had not found these because he did not

“look enough”**?.

In their examination, Messrs. Perret and Singh discussed how they were able to conclude
without doubt as to the existence of a wetland that had been drained and covered to build
the road and explained how there was organic matter (leaves and other organic material)
that was evident in their soil analysis and showed this in several slides of their
presentation*. Their conclusions were that there are hydric soils in Wetland # 1, which

have been buried with the aid of machinery within the prior ten years. Dr. Perret was

457 Transcript 1940:21-22, 1941:1-6.
458 Transcript 1795:18-22, 1796:1-22.
459 Transcript 1924:19-22, 1925:1-6.
460 Slides corresponding to Soil Pit #9.

158

504.

505.

506.

507.

461 7,
462

 

463,

logic and clear: “Organic matter is less dense than water; therefore, it will never

accumulate below soil unless it has been buried’”*“!.

In addressing the point raised by Dr. Baillie in the sense that the soils which are not in
their natural state and have been modified, present an impediment to properly determine
their conditions, the Green Roots report indicates that under the USDA definition of
hydric soils these include those “soils in which the hydrology has been artificially
modified are hydric if the soil, in an unaltered state, was hydric”. Also, the soil
taxonomy shows that the soils profile has an aquic moisture regime, with very poor

drainage, and ground water near soil surface.

Most of the wetlands identified are located on the western side of the Las Olas Project, in
the Easements Section. Claimants have alleged that the development of this portion of the
project was exempt from an Environmental Viability, and hence there was no need to
submit a D1 Application and no need to advice as to the possible existence of wetlands.
They have expressed that under applicable regulations in Costa Rica, the nature and size
of the nine easements — small developments with access via the main road and no more
than six lots fronting an easement each, for a total of 72 residential lots, only required
construction permits from the Municipality, which they secured in September 2007 for
the first, and on July 16, 2010 for the rest**?. By the time the Municipality Shutdown
Notice was issued by the Municipality of Parrita, in May 2011, five of the nine easements

had been completed, with all electrical, water and waste/drainage connections made*®.

In light of the above analysis, the Tribunal concludes that there were wetlands in at least
one location: that referred to was “Wetland # 1” in the easements 8 and 9. And this is
sufficient in the determination for purposes of the analysis.

(d) Forests under the laws of Costa Rica

On the subject of forests, these are primarily regulated by the Forestry Law (Ley
Forestal). A “forest” (bosque) is defined as “ecosystem native or autochthonous,

intervened or not, regenerated by natural succession or other forestry techniques, that

ranscript 1976:10-12.
‘onstruction permits attached as Exhibits C-14, C-40 and C-71.
Claimants’ Memorial, {| 441, page 155.

159

508.

509.

510.

occupies an area of two or more hectares, characterized by the presence of mature trees of
different ages, species and of diverse sizes, with one or more canopy levels that cover
more than seventy percent (70%) of the area and where there are more than sixty trees per

hectare of fifteen or more centimeters of diameter at breast height”**.

A “forestry tree” on the other hand, is defined under the Regulations to the Forestry Law
as a: “perennial, woody and elevated trunk that branches to greater or lesser height of the
soil, which is source of raw material that gives raise to industries such as sawmills,

sheets, matches, cellulose, essential oils, resins and tannins™®°.

Although both Parties agree that it is MINAE, which has the authority to determine the
existence of “forests”, Claimants argue that MINAE failed to employ sound methodology
in determining whether a forest existed at the site during its 2011 determinations because
it (i) failed to define the study area; (ii) failed to evaluate the parameters required for
defining a forest as a matter of Article 3 of the Forestry Law; and (iii) MINAE included
“all trees” in its study, including trees that are not included in the legal definition of a

forest under Costa Rican law “°°.

The KECE Expert Report compares the INGEOFOR Technical Forestry Report prepared
in December of 2011 to the MINAET Report conducted in June of 2011 and identifies
the inconsistencies among both. Whereas the INGEOFOR Report shows an average of
117 trees per hectare, the MINAET Report identifies an average of 544 trees per hectare,
with the lowest density plot having 433 trees per hectare. KECE deems that the
discrepancy is problematic because they apparently sampled the same portion of the Las

Olas Project site*”.

KECE believes that the difference may be in selective samples in
tree plot based on criteria such as plot area or species. Another explanation is the
possibility that a large number of trees had been felled and removed between the dates of
the two reports, i.e., between the report from MINAET of June 2011 and that of

INGEOFOR of December 2011, as documented in the police report of October 201 14°.

464 Article 3 (Definitions), section d) of the Forestry Law (C-170).
465 Article 2, Regulations to Forestry Law, 1997 (R-567).

466 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 478, page 222-223.

497 First KECE Expert Report, {| 128- 133, pages 41-42.

468 A COPAC-CP-129-2011—DEN (R-264).

160

S11.

512.

513.

Article 3(d) of the Forestry Law defines and thereby establishes the requirements for a
forest: an “ecosystem native or autochthonous, intervened or not, regenerated by natural
succession or other forestry techniques, that occupies an area of two or more hectares,
characterized by the presence of mature trees of different ages, species and of diverse
sizes, with one or more canopy levels that cover more than seventy percent (70%) of the
area and where there are more than sixty trees per hectare of fifteen or more centimeters
of diameter at breast height (DBH)”. In its report, KECE concludes that INGEOFOR
appears to only consider trees that have a diameter of more than 15 cm at breast height
(DBH). While a “forestry tree” under the above-mentioned law is indeed one that is equal
to or exceeds such measurement, and KECE acknowledges that there is a requirement
that there be also at least 60 trees per hectare, KECE does not believe that this is a formal
requirement, but rather that it is one that “... should not be used to eliminate other

criteria’4

, and gives relevance to tree canopy. The Tribunal disagrees with this view.
The statutory terms of the Forestry Law are not expressed as a mere “formal

requirement”.

Respondent argued that Claimants caused environmental damage to the Las Olas
ecosystem, because they cut down trees with no permits to do so. It added that under
Costa Rican law it is not only a crime impacting a forest but merely cutting a tree with no

permits*”?

, and that Mr. Damjanac was charged with this particular crime. Respondent
also recalls the definition of a “forestry tree” under the laws of Costa Rica mentioned in
earlier paragraph, but clarified that no distinction is made as to the diameter or height of
the tree, but in general, all trees are protected from felling without legal permits, adding
that during their development of the Las Olas Project, Claimants never obtained one sole

permit for the cutting of trees 4”.

KECE then used its data collected in certain areas of the site to calculate canopy of
recorded trees having a trunk DBH of 15 cm or more, and found an average of 60.6% for
trees greater than 15 cm DBH, which ranged from 22.5% in one of the plots to 100% in

another plot of the site. According to their findings, the discrepancies in recorded

469 First KECE Expert Report, § 141, page 44.
410 Articles 27 and 61 (a), Forestry Law (C-170).
471 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {| 427-428, page 86.

161

514.

S15.

516.

517.

densities led them to question whether the 2011 INGEOFOR Report was reliable, and

they conclude that it was not.

KECE then evaluated the MINAET Reports of July 7, 2011 and October 31, 20114”,
which documented, among others: (i) the presence of tree species, and determined the
existence of trees per hectare with a DBH higher than that established under the Forestry
Law (density ranging from 66.67 to 400 hectare) in the three plots examined, a
significant amount higher than that reported by INGEOFOR in their Report and (ii) an
area that had been cleared within the previous 30 day period, and even observed several
individuals involved in tree cutting activities, which they photographed.

In his Witness Statements*”?

, Minor Arce — the Costa Rican forestry expert submitted by
Claimants — alleged that he believes MINAET had a poor methodology in its 2011 report
(failure to define study area, to evaluate parameters under the law, and that it included all
trees rather than only those permitted under local law)*”, and that based on his 2010 and
October 2011 site reviews the species of trees that were identified by MINAET should
not be counted, since these included some which cannot be deemed to be a “forest tree”
under the Forestry Law (specifically mentioning Guarumo and Guacimo trees).
Claimants have stressed that to make a finding of a forest under Costa Rican law, there

are mandatory requirements to be met under the Forestry Law*”>.

KECE disagrees and argues that even though they branch out at different height, they are

still used as a source of raw materials for different types of forestry industries.

In turn, KECE critiques the reports from Mr. Arce because these reports ignore the fact
that logging activities were undertaken on site, and that Mr. Arce’s 2012 report was
mainly addressed to critique the 2011 MINAET study that reported unpermitted logging.
KECE concludes that the majority of the Las Olas Project site ecosystem can be

considered as forested, albeit with different percentages of canopy closure*”®.

4? First KECE Expert Report, {§] 152-166, pages 45-47.

473 Id., 4175, page 49.

474 First Witness Statement of Minor Arce, ff] 18-26.

475 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, $f 520-522, pages 242-244.
476 First KECE Expert Report, 4 53, page 13.

162

518.

519.

520.

521.

522.

Based on the KECE Expert Report findings, the Tribunal concludes that the conditions in
the Las Olas Project site in the period of question allow for a determination that a “forest”
existed within the definition of the Forestry Law.
(e) Does the Developer have the Burden of Disclosing the
Existence of Wetlands and/or Forests?
In their Memorial, Claimants acknowledged that in order to commence development of a
real estate project in Costa Rica, it was necessary to apply to several different ministries

477 and submitted a list of

and government authorities for a number of different permits’
the permits required and the agencies that administer them*’*. As would be expected in
any jurisdiction, the number of procedures and permits is extensive; in this case, the
permits exceeded thirty. The permits range from drinking water availability to fire

management approval.

Of concern in this arbitration, the most important of the permits that the Claimants

identified, is the Environmental Viability Permit issued by SETENA. Respondent agreed.

Claimants described the documents that were required to support a D1 Application or
“environmental assessment document” to SETENA: (a) a duly signed D1 form; a (b)
basic engineering survey; (c) a basic archaeological survey; and (d) a basic geological
survey. In the event that a proposed project is located in or close to an environmentally

fragile area (area ambientalmente fragil)*”

then a basic biological survey was also
required. An environmental fragile area is defined in Exhibit 3 to the EIA Provisions and
includes wetlands that are not designated as part of a Wildlife Protected Area (drea

silvestre protegida), areas covered by a forest, and the maritime terrestrial zone.

In order to submit a D1 Application form, Claimants added that it was also necessary to
submit a number of authorizations obtained from other agencies, including a certification
from SINAC - the National System of Conservation Areas - stating that the proposed
project area is not within a WPA**°. Once SETENA verifies the information in the D1

Application, SETENA shall then determine the type of environmental impact assessment

477 Claimants’ Memorial, | 51, page 18.
478 Exhibit C-202.

4” Claimants’ Memorial, 4] 58, page 20.
480 [d., 4 54, page 20.

163

523.

524.

it requires from the developer to complete; this may be an Environmental Impact Study,
an Environmental Management Plan, or a Sworn Declaration of Environmental

Commitments**!,

Respondent has essentially agreed on the process and the requirements***, but adds a
significant amount to detail to the process. It described how the D1 Application is a pre-
established Excel matrix where the developer fills out the characteristics of the
development, and the matrix automatically calculates the points of environmental
relevance; the more points the project has, the higher the impact the project will have on
the environment. Also, if the area where the project is located contains an “environmental
fragile area”, such as forests or wetlands, then the score can increase significantly. If the
score is above 1,000, the developer needs to submit an Environmental Impact Study
(“EIS”) which constitutes the most complex environmental evaluation instrument, which
the developer must submit in relation to an activity, work or project, prior to its
execution. Its objective is to predict, identify, evaluate and correct the environmental
impact which certain action could cause the environment and define the environmental

feasibility (permit) of the project, work or activity the object of the study.

There is no conflict among the Parties that the support documents that should have
accompanied the D1 Application by Claimants were submitted. Respondent confirmed
that an application was submitted to SETENA by the firm of Mussio Madrigal on
November 8, 2007 for the Condo Section, and the following information/ documents

were made part of the application:

a). Form D1;
b). An Environmental Management Plan prepared by Empresa Geoambiente
S.A.;

c). A Geotechnical Survey performed by Mr. Roger Esquivel on behalf of
TecnoControl S.A.*%3;

48! Claimants’ Reply Memorial, {| 206, page 73.

482
483,

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, {§] 135-137, page 36.
It was noted during the December Hearing that the TecnoControl S.A. Geotechnical Survey that was part of the

file and submitted as Exhibit R-13 was not in reality a study that pertained to the Las Olas Project, but rather to a
different site, unconnected to the Claimants. The Parties had failed to identify this error during the arbitration,
despite the relevance of the document. At the request of the Tribunal, Claimants indicated in their Post-Hearing
Brief that this was surely a mistake; that they had originally submitted the correct document to SETENA, and that

164

525.

526.

527.

d). A Physical Environmental Protocol prepared by Mr. Eduardo Hernandez
Garcia;

e). An Archeological Survey conducted by a consultant, Ms. Tatiana
Hidalgo, that concluded there was no archeological evidence on the Project Site;
and

f). An Anthropic Risk Certification from Mr. Edgardo Madrigal Mora that
certified that there were no sources of anthropic risk within the site.

Where there is dispute among the Parties is that Respondent alleges that Claimants failed
to: (i) identify the ecosystems the land held (i.e. the presence of wetlands and forests); (ii)
conduct a biological survey to identify the great number of species that lived in those
ecosystems; and (iii) propose measures to protect those species from the impacts of the
development. According to Respondent, this omission was an undeniable failure on the
part of Claimants — on whom the responsibility rested, in accordance with Costa Rican
law**+, Respondent has alleged that the Claimants should have disclosed information that
had been gathered during the process of carrying out the studies that would be attached to

the D1 Application.

This issue has a direct impact on whether or not there is a burden of proof imposed under
Costa Rican law on the party that wishes to develop a real estate project and a duty to
disclose any sensitive environmental area or potential damage to environment. If the
answer is in the affirmative, then the question is whether or not this was complied with

by Claimants.

This includes whether there is a duty to disclose in a D1 Application situations or facts
known to applicant that, in carrying out the development these could affect the
environment, and whether there is a burden of proof on the applicant to evidence that
there will be no adverse environmental impact. Whereas Claimants have taken the
opposite position, Respondent has repeatedly argued that the burden of proof exists on

applicant, and closely ties it to the so-called “precautionary principle”.

 

the SETENA Resolution 1507-2008 that granted the Condo Section Environmental Viability refers to the proper
report; otherwise, SETENA would not have been able to issue its decision. Respondent did not comment. Whether
or not the proper document was submitted by Claimants is not for the Tribunal to decide, primarily because
Respondent has not challenged that the environmental viability was procured on the basis of the failure to make
proper disclosures as to the existence of wetlands.

484 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, 44 158, page 43

165

528.

529.

Claimants’ position is that the Respondent fundamentally misconstrues the “burden of
proof” standard of Article 109 of the Biodiversity Law which only applies, they argue, in
a formal adversarial legal proceeding involving environmental protection, and that
Respondent erroneously applies the standard to any environmental procedure, including
the submission of the D1 Application to secure an Environmental Viability, which is not
an adversarial proceeding***. Because the D1 Application is not an adversarial legal
proceeding to which the Article 109 “burden of proof” applies, Claimants add, the
Respondent’s post-hoc claim that the Claimants had the burden of disproving any and all
of the Respondent’s hypothetical environmental challenges fails**°. Claimants cite the
interpretation given by Respondent’s counsel during Mr. Mussio’s cross examination at
the December Hearing, describing a provision falling under Chapter IX of the
Biodiversity Law entitled “Procedures, Processes, and Penalties in General”
(Procedimientos, Procesos y Sanciones en General), pertaining to adversarial

proceedings brought against the developer in administrative or regular courts**”

, and also
the response provided by Dr. Jurado, who indicated that in a legal proceeding, the burden

of proof applies to determine whether or not there is a damage to the environment.

Respondent, on the other hand, places the utmost relevance to this particular issue. It
argues that any applicant submitting a D1 Application to secure an Environmental
Viability has the burden to identify wetlands, or any other fact that may be relevant to the

D1 Application***.

Although Respondent agrees that the provision that gives rise to this
obligation is inserted in Chapter IX of the Biodiversity Law, it argues that not only does a
proper interpretation of the law not support the conclusion of Claimants, but further that
Claimants’ own advisors have acknowledged and accepted Respondent’s position.
Assuming, Respondent adds, that there was a proceeding commenced in connection with
a possible penalty to be imposed, then the relevant party would need to able to show that,
at the time, before they were about to develop the land, there were no wetlands. Since it is
incumbent on Claimants to be able to show there were no wetlands before they started to

develop the Las Olas project, this placed the burden on Claimants at the time they were

+85 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 4] 346, page 168.

486 J.

487 Exhibit C-207, page 44.
488 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {| 156-157, page 30.

166

530.

531.

planning their development, to be sure there was no wetland**’. The D1 Application
process clearly imposed on Claimants an obligation to disclose all elements and facts of

relevance that may impact the environment.

The Tribunal notes that the project development advisor at the time the D1 Application
was submitted was the firm of Mussio Madrigal. Mr. Mussio indicated in his Witness
Statement that when a project such as Las Olas is to be carried out, it is required to, inter
alia, undertake various visits to the land along with professionals specializing in the
different areas, according to the needs and type of project, which might include:
geologists, forestry experts, land surveyors, biologists, agronomists, archaeologists,
hydrologists and sociologists, among others, as well as coordination with government
entities, with regulatory competencies in environmental and urban development matters,
responsible for carrying out the legal and technical project feasibility analyses. He added
that when the property might have environmentally sensitive areas, then one or more
visits to the property are necessary, with whatever experts are necessary, in order to
finally conclude whether or not these exist, and then the relevant governmental

authorities must be informed*”°.

Mr. Mussio stated in his Witness Statement that his experience in wetlands was “broad”
and that he was “familiar with the characteristics of a wetland”, and whenever he noticed
a sensitive area, his firm would act in accordance with their internal procedures, ice.,
contract a suitable professional to prepare a concluding report on the subject**!. Thus, he
acknowledged that “... in cases in which we have identified an area that might be
classified as a wetland or any other protected wildlife zone, in my capacity as consultant
director, I coordinate with the technical experts that may be required to draft technical
reports following the visits to the area, in order to present such reports to the various
government entities seeking to obtain a definitive reply when there are any doubts on the

matter’”4?,

489 Id., $8] 164-166, page 31-32.

490 Mussio Witness Statement, {| 12-13, pages 5-6.
491 Id. § 13.

42 1d. 414.

167

532.

533.

534.

His firm was responsible for coordinating the different specialized studies and engaging
the relevant firms but not responsible for the preparation of the actual studies and reports
for the D1 Application. The specialized studies were carried out by third parties. Mr.
Madrigal, Mussio’s partner, was closely involved and actually executed some statements
of the application. Further, it is clear from the record that they then engaged Geoambiente
—a consulting firm, who, in turn, contracted other specialists, including TecnoControl,
S.A., who then engaged at least another. This appears to be customary for similar projects
in Costa Rica. Several firms were involved in the preparation and completion of the

application and the preparation of reports. Not all were engaged directly by Claimants.

During the process of getting the D1 Application together, Tecnocontrol entrusted the
firm Geotest, S.A. to prepare a geological and hydrogeological report on the property to
be developed. This report was prepared by Mr. Roberto Protti Q., and delivered to
Tecnocontrol in July of 2007. In his report, Mr. Protti identified that the land where the
development was to be undertaken showed good drainage conditions but in the central
portion of the land there were “swamp-type flooded areas” (areas anegadas de tipo
pantanoso) with poor draining**’. Respondent placed significance on this report, which
has been referred to by Respondent as the “Protti Report’**4. And the interest in the
report is because it contains, according to Respondent, findings on the existence of
potential wetlands. The statement on the swamp type flooded areas with poor drainage
was a clear indication in respect to the existence or potential existence of wetlands in the
property. However, neither this so-called “Protti Report” nor its findings were made a
part of the D1 Application that was eventually submitted to SETENA. Years later, it was
subsequently submitted by Mr. Aven, long after the Environmental Viability had been

issued, as will be examined below.

The question arises, what is or was the relevance of this so-called Protti Report? Was
there a deliberate omission in keeping it from SETENA? Respondent has alleged that
even though it had not been evident to them during their examination of the property that
wetlands existed, the findings in such report should have given Claimants sufficient

knowledge from an expert as to the potential existence of wetlands in the area, but that

4°3 Section 3, page 2 of the report.
494 Exhibit R-11.

168

535.

536.

537.

Claimants decided to ignore such information and intentionally omitted disclosure to
SETENA. The Tribunal agrees with the allegation that Claimants should have at least

examined the situation in more detail.

As indicated above, in his Witness Statement, Mr. Mussio clearly identified that internal
procedures in his architectural firm directed that they should contract a suitable
professional to prepare a concluding report on the subject to determine whether wetlands
existed, and if so, the governmental authorities must be informed. But neither were
additional studies undertaken nor appropriate authorities informed. On the contrary, the
D1 Application was submitted without reference as to whether wetlands or potential
wetlands existed, even though the purpose of such an application is precisely to assess the

environmental impact based on the information and documentation attached.

Respondent’s position regarding the legal burden on the applicant of a permit to
evidence, among others, that no harm will be done to the environment derives from
article 109 of the Biodiversity Law. It was surprising to the Tribunal to listen to Mr.
Mussio acknowledge during the December Hearing that he was not familiar with the
provision*®> because, even though his firm is primarily of architectural discipline, they act
as project coordinators, including of environmental specialists, and they signed several of
the statements and reports in the D1 Application. Naturally, even if they are not to be
expected to be specialists in Costa Rican law, if they have the overall responsibility for
the project, they cannot be unaware of the terms of this provision. Even if his firm did not
actually make the ministerial filings to SETENA, they were the coordinators; arranged

specialists, prepared their own reports and delivered the package to Mr. Aven.

This is especially surprising in light of the affirmation in his witness statement
transcribed above in respect to his firm’s internal procedures of engaging a suitable
professional to prepare a concluding report “... in cases in which we have identified an

496

area that might be classified as a wetland or any other protected wildlife zone .. as

well as acknowledging his unawareness as to whether the D1 Application that was

495 Transcript 411:1-6.

496

First Witness Statement of Mauricio Martin Mussio Vargas, § 14.

169

538.

539.

540.

47 Transcript 416:16-22, 417:1

submitted to SETENA for Las Olas Project for the Condo Section identified or not the

sensitive areas*?”,

Respondent has supported its position not only with the testimony of Dr. Jurado, but also
that of Mr. Ortiz*®, Claimants’ witness on local law; Mr. Gerardo Barboza Jimenéz*”?,
Claimants’ wetlands expert, and Mr. Bermtdez*”, the environmental regent for the

project, all of whom accepted the application of this principle.

Mr. Esteban Bermudez, the Environmental Regent designated by Claimants for the
Condo Section of the Las Olas Project, acknowledged during cross-examination at the
December Hearing that the responsibility to submit all necessary studies is shared by the
developer and the environmental consultant to prove the absence of pollution,
unauthorized degradation or impact, and that this was in line with the “precautionary
principle” embodied in Article 109 of the Biodiversity Law. He even acknowledged that
such principle applies even if there is no scientific certainty; it would still be necessary
even if one had only had reason to suspect the existence of a wetland*”!. Likewise, Mr.
Barboza stated that if the existence of a possible wetland was known during the
preparation of a D1 Application, a precise, qualitative and quantitative site visit would be

merited prior to filing.

But in any case, Respondent added that the D1 Application itself contains language to the
effect that the applicant is submitting information that is current and truthful, as a “sworn
affidavit”. Indeed the form reads “... Based on the data provided, SETENA could make
decisions regarding the Environmental Viability of the activity, work or project proposed,
so in the event that false or erroneous information is provided, the signatories will not
only be responsible for this offense, but also for the consequences of the decisions that

SETENA has incurred in when relying on that data”.

 

 

“8 Transcript, 1329:20-22; 1330:1-6.

49 Transcript, 1639:6-12.

500 Transcript, 535:22; 536: 1-7, 538:19-22; 539:1-15 and 607:14-22; 608:1-5.
50 Transcript 538:13-22, 329:1-10.

170

S41.

542.

543.

544.

545.

546.

Respondent complements that the duty of “transparency and good faith” also supports the

need to place the burden on the applicant*?.

Accordingly, there was a burden on Claimants (like any other D1 applicant) to ensure

that information was not only accurate*? but also not misleading.

Although Claimants accept that a developer has the obligation to submit complete and
accurate information when filing a D1 Application to secure an Environmental Viability,
they add that the failure to do so may give rise to an action by MINAE or SETENA to
annul an Environment Viability previously issued through the “/esividad” administrative
process”. But, they argue, there has been no annulment proceeding has been initiated by

Respondent in this case.

After the D1 Application is filed with SETENA, along with the required documents,
SETENA may determine whether there is additional information that is required and, if

so, request same from applicant.

This gives rise to another area of controversy among Claimants and Respondent which
relates as to whether, once a D1 Application has been filed, SETENA has the duty to
inspect the site or whether it simply has the option to carry out such inspection.

Claimants have argued the obligation of SETENA to duly review and examine the
information submitted by a D1 applicant, and to control for its accuracy and that, to do
so, SETENA cannot decline the exercise of the powers nor can delegate them to someone
else. This entails the duty to inspect the site for which the Environmental Viability is
requested. They cite in support of this position the testimony of Mr. Ortiz, their witness
on Costa Rican law, and Mr. Bermudez, the Environmental Regent. SETENA, they add,
has the responsibility to review and assess the information submitted and identify and
request any missing documents; if it fails to make an inspection, this should not affect the

developer.

5°? Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, | 174, page 33, 4 276-278, page 71.
503 Jd., 4175-176, page 34.

504 Claimants’ Reply Memorial, 232, page 81.

505 Jd., 4 235-236, page 82.

171

547.

548.

549.

550.

Respondent rejects the position taken by Claimants, and argues that the inspection by
SETENA is an option, and therefore the failure to carry out such inspection should not

trigger any consequence as suggested by Claimants.

During the cross examination of Dr. Jurado during the December Hearing, he was quite
clear to the effect that there is no legal obligation on SETENA to conduct such an

inspection, stating that it would be “absurd” to expect the authority to conduct an
inspection to the site for each application submitted*”°. Under the relevant law, he added
this constitutes an option on the part of SETENA, rather than an obligation. The system,
“... has been organized so that the developer provides information, biological studies,
hydrological studies; all studies required are provided by the developer, and the ...
Administration accepts them under a relationship of trust. Now, if they think there is

some information that’s not true, then they would make an inspection”*°”.

It would appear that the above issue is moot, because SETENA did carry out an
inspection to the Condo Section of the Las Olas project on January 10, 2008 prior to
issuing the Environmental Viability on June 2, 2008 (Resolution No. 1597-2008-
SETENA). It is not moot, however, insofar as the implications of the argument in this
case go further. If there was an obligation to carry out the inspection, the conclusion
could be that any information deficiently reported or described by applicant would be

cured. The Tribunal shall examine this issue below.

The Tribunal notes the terms of article 84 of the Organic Law on the Environment which
provides the competencies of SETENA, and within those there is section (d) which states
that SETENA has as a junction to “carry out the corresponding in situ inspections before
issuing its resolutions”*°*. The Claimants have argued that the words “finciones” which
is included in said provision reflect the “duties” of SETENA, and these include the
obligation to perform visits after a D1 Application is submitted. Respondent claims, on
the other hand, that it describes the competencies; in other words, that SETENA may

carry out the various activities, but is not bound to do so.

506 Transcript, 1431:9-13.
507 Transcript, 1432:11-18.
508 The Spanish text is “d) Realizar las inspecciones de campo correspondientes antes de emitir sus acuerdos”, (C-

184),

172

S51.

552.

553.

Respondent acknowledges that SETENA and other competent authorities may have
overlooked the existence of wetlands, or determined that none existed when they did
carry out an inspection. But, it adds, this is incidental to the conclusions reached by its
agencies, because the permits were obtained unlawfully, since Claimants were
responsible to search for, identify, and disclose the existence (or even the “possible

existence”) of wetlands*”.

The Tribunal sides with Respondent and finds a duty on an applicant for an
Environmental Viability to advise the competent authority in matters that affect any
impact to the environment, and that this duty arises under the Biodiversity Law and is
confirmed under the precise terms of the statement made as an oath in the D-1
Application. The reading of the provision imposes the duty on those “requesting a
permit” or those “accused of having caused an environmental harm”. Hence, even though
Claimants are correct in stating that Article 109 of the Biodiversity Law*! applies in a
formal adversarial legal proceeding involving environmental protection, where they are
wrong is that this is not exclusive. It applies also in respect of those who request an

approval or, permits, or request access to biodiversity.

Thus, this duty transfers the burden of proof to the applicant of a permit. And the burden
is to evidence the “absence of non-permitted pollution, degradation or affectation”, all of
which the Tribunal acknowledge are broad concepts. Thus, at the time the Claimants filed
their D1 Application, the burden was on Claimants to evidence that no such adverse
impact on the Las Olas Project site was to occur as a consequence of the development.
The duty evidently carries a strong component of conducting oneself in good faith which,
in turn, implies not only the duty to disclose existing conditions known to, or suspected
by the applicant, but also the same duty as was expressed by Mr. Mussio in his witness
statement as a “protocol” of his firm in situations similar to those of this project. Faced
with the potential existence of wetlands, the duty is to entrust those additional studies as

may be required to ascertain whether or not such wetlands exist and, regardless of

50 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, 4 11-12, page 2.

5" Exhibit C-207. The text of this Article 109 provides “The burden of pro. ” (La carga de la prueba, de la
ausencia de dacién 0 afectacién no } 4 a quien solicite la aprobacién,
el permiso 0 acceso a la biodiversidad o a quien se le acuse de haber ocasionado el dato ambiental”).

 

173

554.

555.

556.

whether there is a report affirming the existence of wetlands or not, disclose the
information that is relevant to the authority (SETENA, in this case) so that the authority
can carry out further studies it deems appropriate before issuing the Environmental

Viability to the relevant project.

This duty cannot be relieved, as Claimant intends, by shifting the burden to Respondent’s
agencies to verify the accuracy of the information disclosed by Claimants in the D1
Application. The application not only relies on the burden of proof that is incorporated
into Costa Rican law, but also involves the general principle of good faith because it
presupposes that the applicant himself will be acting in good faith and does not withhold

any information that may be relevant.

This responsibility is further strengthened by the language incorporated into the D1

Application, which the Tribunal translates from the Spanish original*!':

The undersigned represent under oath that all of the information supplied and is
included in this application is accurate and current and is provided in accordance
with the technical knowledge available. The foregoing [representation is made]
under the penalties established under law for the crimes of perjury and false
statements and aware of the following Environmental Liability Clause”.

The environmental consultant and the developer who sign the D-1 Application

shall be directly liable for the technical scientific information that they supply

therein. Therefore, the National Environmental Technical Secretary (SETENA),

as environmental authority of the Costa Rican State, shall review that this

document has met with the technical guidelines established for the completion,

and if these are satisfactory will accept the information presented as accurate and

truthful, as a sworn Based on the data provided, SETENA could make

decisi ding the Envir | Viability of the activity, work or project

d, so in the event that false or erroneous information is provided, the

signatories will not only be responsible for this offense, but_also for the

of the decisions that SETENA has incurred in when relying on that

data. (Emphasis added)

Accordingly, there was a burden on Claimants (like any other D1 applicant) to ensure
that information was accurate*!?. Applicant represents to SETENA (and this is what
Claimants did) that it may rely on the information supplied, which information is

represented to be “accurate and current”. When the form stated that liability leads to

5! Exhibit R-13.

512

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, | 176, page 34.

174

557.

558.

559.

decisions to be made in reliance to the information, the Tribunal is clear that a further

duty underlies: to act in good faith and to not be misleading.

This language in the D1 Application in the form of a “sworn affidavit” leaves no doubt as
to the duty of an applicant to submit information that is both current and truthful.
Considering this, there is little doubt that SETENA is empowered to rely on the
information as “accurate and current” in order to carry out its “desktop examination” of
the information without being required to verify the accuracy thereof on site, as is
suggested by Claimants. If one were to construe the terms of Article 84 of the Organic
Law on the Environment to mean that SETENA is obligated to perform a site visit to the
project site this would render the representations made under oath by the applicant
useless. Although Claimants have argued that SETENA has the shared obligation to
make an examination and verify the information submitted by the developer, and failure
to carry out such inspection should not affect the developer, the Tribunal takes the
opposite position. The Tribunal believes that it is an option of SETENA to perform site
visits after an application is submitted, and not an obligation, and that under the limited
financial and human resources of SETENA its efforts need to be concentrated in those

cases where risks to the environment have been expressed in an application.

If Claimants had submitted in their D1 Application the information relating to the
existence of potential wetlands as described in the so-called Protti Report, it is more
likely than not that SETENA would have exercised its powers and verify the conditions
on site prior to issuing the Environmental Viability and perhaps SETENA would have
subject the Las Olas Project to some limitations in its development to protect the potential
wetlands identified. In such instance, the real estate development would likely have
proceeded to conclusion, albeit with some additional costs, but the Parties would not be

involved in this case.

Since Claimants had the duty to advice SETENA at the time they filed their D1
Application of the existence of the “swamp-type flooded areas with poor draining” or
potential wetlands, and Claimants failed to do so, they thus cannot now attempt to shield
their omission on the alleged failure of SETENA to inspect the property to verify the

existence of wetlands.

175

560.

S61.

562.

(f) Fragmentation

Fragmentation of land through the use of easements is permitted in Costa Rica*!, and this
is precisely what Claimants allege they carried out, completing all of the process and
allowed the Municipality to take into account a consultative process to verify and issue a
land use certification based on the Municipality’s regulatory plan. Claimants have further
argued that these permits are “final acts” which have inherent effects on third parties and
grant lasting rights and obligations upon which the Claimants could rely*'*. Claimants
have indicated that they secured these even before they obtained an Environmental

Viability for the condominium section of the Las Olas Project.

Claimants have also stated that, even though Respondent has argued that the
fragmentation of the land, was illegally undertaken in light of Article 94 of the
Biodiversity Law which provides that an Environmental Impact Assessment for a single
project must be done “globally”, i.e., in its entirety, despite the project being carried out in
different stages, that Costa Rica’s agencies never raised this issue before in a proceeding,
either to challenge the issuance of the construction permits for the Easements, or to
challenge the “illegal fragmentation” of the Easements Section from the rest of the
property. The Respondent’s failure to apply its law in good faith, they add, breached DR-
CAFTA Article 10.5’s prohibition against the frustration of the Claimants’ legitimate
expectations by illegally shutting down the project through sustaining interim injunctions

515

indefinitely According to Claimants, the proper venue to have brought that process

is in Costa Rica administrative courts, at the time of the alleged infraction, through a

principal procedure to annul the EVs or the construction permits*!°.

Respondent has challenged the argument of Claimants to the effect that no Environmental
Viability was necessary to develop the Easement Section, and cited Articles 2 and 3 of
the General Regulations on the Procedures for Environmental Impact Assessment (2004)

which specify that work that is segregating urban projects must still seek EV approval,

53 Under the Regulations for the National Control of Fragmentation and Urbanization issued by the INVU (R-409).
Also applicable is the Land Use Methodology set forth in Executive Decree No. 20501-MAG-MIRENEM (R-401).
514 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 154, page 75, | 160, page 77.

515 Id., 44 420-421, pages 203-204.

516 Id, 44 426, page 205.

176

563.

564.

565.

566.

and referenced the Siel Siel Report from Ms. Priscilla Vargas*!’, who testified during the

December Hearing that exemptions contemplated do not apply to the case*!®.

Costa Rica has indicated further that Mr. Bermudez, the Environmental Regent appointed
by Claimants, informed the Municipality of Parrita, as part of a report that was required
to be submitted before construction could commence in the area, that an EV had already
been issued for the overall project that covered the Easements Section as well,
misrepresenting the authority>!°. Mr. Bermudez admitted during his examination at the
December Hearing that he never corrected this report®”°, and therefore the Municipality

had been misinformed all along.

The record shows that the Las Olas Project - the investment carried out by Claimants -
was originally conceived as a single project, albeit composed of several stages and uses
(such as the beach concession, the condominium site and the commercial zone). It was
not until years later that the easement section was devised as a separate unit of
development. Therefore, the Tribunal deems that the same should follow in respect of the
permits and approvals. Permits should have been requested as if the project was one,

without distinctions as to sections— whether easements or others.

It follows that, for purposes of the Claim, the investment itself (i-e., the Las Olas Project)

should equally be treated as one.

Respondent also challenged the allegations of Claimants in respect to the fact that
construction permits were timely issued for easements 8 and 9 in the Easement Section,
and the fact that these were likely lost within the Municipality’s records due to flooding
occurring. The Municipality of Parrita itself rejected the idea that such permits had been
issued**!, and provided a communication dated November 14, 2016, stating that no such

permits had been issued for the easements 8 and 9 in 2008 or 20095.

517 Siel Siel Report, {| 83-90, pages 157-158, attached as Appendix “F” to the Second KECE report.

518 Transcript, 1828:17-22, 1829:1-22, 1830:1-13.

59 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {fj 294-303, pages 59-60. The Environmental Contingencies Plan for Land
Movements, dated July 22, 2010, Exhibit R-42.

520 Transcript, 574:1-7.

521 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {| 308-340, pages 61-66.

522 Exhibit R-521.

177

567.

568.

569.

570.

The relevance of these specific topics is because the location of one of the wetlands — that

identified as Wetland No. 1- is precisely located within easements 8 and 9.

There are three issues that arise from this past debate. The first two deal with the legality
of the manner in which the Easements Section was created and work was carried out
within, and the third examines whether wetlands were illegally damaged. The Tribunal
will first analyze whether the easements were developed with a significant business
purpose other than avoiding the EV’s for that section of the Las Olas Project; second,
assuming that no EV’s were even required under Costa Rican law for the easements as
Claimants argue, whether the Claimants had proper construction permits, and finally,
whether the works carried out in easements 8 and 9 illegally covered one of the wetlands

sites identified by Respondent.

In respect of the first issue, the Tribunal finds that the easements were developed by
Claimants as a separate project without any apparent reason beyond the avoidance of the
EV for such area. It is evident from the information submitted in the arbitration that
Claimants did not consider a development with an easements section until 2007, but even
then, they nonetheless continued to view the Las Olas Project to be one single project. In
his First Witness Statement, Mr. Aven described one project, comprised of five phases of
development*”* (i) the Easements, (ii) the beach club, (iii) the Condo Section; (iv) the
hotel across the beach in the Concession Site, and (v) the commercial/condo time shares.

This was confirmed in various marketing efforts for the Las Olas Project.

This was not only the view of the developers, but also of the environmental consultants to
the project. DEPPAT, the Environmental Regent submitted in July 2010 on behalf of

Claimants an Environmental Contingencies Plan for Land Movement>**, a document

prepared to describe the works to be undertaken in the Easements Section, and mitigation
measures to be adopted. In this document, DEPPAT describes the Las Olas Project (then
referred to as Villas La Canicula) as a whole, and considered the Easements Section only
as “one of the components”*”>. As a separate matter this document also refers to the fact

that “...the project as a whole has the respective environmental viability granted by

523 First Witness Statement of Mr. Aven, §{] 53-60, pages 17-22.
524 Exhibit R-42.
525 Id.

178

S71.

572.

SETENA...” which Respondent has alleged is clearly a misrepresentation and which the
Tribunal coincides. At the time it was filed, the project as a whole did not have an
Environmental Viability. Although during his examination at the December Hearing Mr.
Bermudez testified that he was somewhat confused because he was not familiar with the
Condo Section of the Las Olas Project**°, this is hardly credible because he had been
appointed since 2006 as the “Environmental Regent” for the project as a whole, and had
been involved in the various stages of the project since. It is relevant to note, however,
that in a response made to a question from Arbitrator Siqueiros he confirmed that at the

time he understood the easements to be part of the whole project*?’.

Determining whether it is one project or not, will allow the Tribunal to define whether it
is even possible to argue that no environmental viability is required for an easement that
meets the criteria expressed by Claimants. Taking aside the defense from Respondent that
the easements required not only a construction permit, but also an EV as part of the
permitting process (which Claimants dispute), what is acknowledged by the Parties is that
if the Las Olas Project was deemed as a whole, then the Environmental Viability would
have required to be secured also as a whole. The Tribunal recalls that Article 94 of the
Biodiversity Law*® provides expressly that “The environmental impact assessment as it
relates to biodiversity shall be undertaken in its entirety, even when the project is
programmed to be developed in stages”. This means that the Environmental Viability
needs to consider the whole of the project so that the governmental authority can assess it
in its entirety. During his examination at the December Hearing, Mr. Bermudez, the
Environmental Regent, also acknowledged this interpretation, and confirmed that it is the

529

developer who determines the scope of a project®*’, and that a project, even though it is

developed in stages, needs to be examined as a whole. He further testified that the

Easements Section was not covered by the Condo Section Environmental Viability>*?.

When asked during the December Hearing on the business rationale of the fragmentation

of the Easements Section, Mr. Aven indicated that it was his attorney, Juan Carlos

526 Transcript, 571:13-17.

527 Id., 609:
5°8 Exhibit

  

22, 610:1-7.
207.

2° Transcript, 567:4-15.
530 Jd, 572:21-22, 573:1-4.

179

Gavridge Pérez, who suggested that these be developed because the properties could be
developed fairly quickly without need of going through an extensive permitting process
“..and you don’t have to be concerned with the EV because it is along the main road”™*!.
Mr. Aven acknowledged this was his motivation, based upon legal advice from his

attorney.

573. The Tribunal believes that a project that was to be built in stages, as Claimants also
acknowledged in the Memorial of Claims, cannot be then fragmented so as to avoid

securing the environmental viability. But this is precisely what Claimants did.

574. Taking advantage of certain benefits or relief granted by the law is not unlawful, but what
may be is to structure an investment and carry out a development in such manner as the
effect is to avoid having to request permits, procedures or consents that involve steps or
disclosures which would trigger the need for scrutiny or subsequent studies, permits or
conditions by simply applying the terms of law taken out of context. The full context

must be considered in such instances.

575. The Siel Siel Report presented by Ms. Priscilla Vargas evidences how the SETENA
alleged exemptions do not apply. Although Mr. Luis Ortiz testified**? that there were
three resolutions issued in 2004 and 2008***, whereby SETENA excluded certain kinds of
activities from obtaining an Environmental Viability, because they have very low

potential environmental impact, Ms. Priscilla Vargas identified that these did not apply to

534

the Las Olas Project insofar as there was an environmentally fragile°** area containing

wetlands, there were easements that constituted not individual homes, but rather a group

531 Transcript, 935:4-19. His testimony on what one of his attorneys - Juan Carlos Gavridge Pérez said to him “...
Look, you got road frontage all around the Project. [...] And the law in Costa Rica is if you’re on a road that you can
get access to, you don’t--you don’t need to get--to do extensive permitting processes with--with EV--EV process.
But you can, you know, just come off of the main road, put a--put a--get a permit for that for whatever reason you
want to get and--and build. [...] So that was the--that was the motivation for that. It was--but it was based upon
legal advice from an attorney. And as far as--as far as I was told, it was perfectly legal. So that’s why it was done.
Because it was easy to get to along the main road, you could have access to these various lots. And you could--and
the business plan was that you could develop these things fairly quickly because according to Costa Rican law
now--you know, again, I want to stress that we followed the law.”

52 Witness Statement of Luis Ortiz, § 34, page 24.

533 Resolutions No. 2370-2004 dated December 7, 2004, No. 583-2008 dated March 13,2008, and No. 2658-2008
dated September 23, 2008.

534 During her presentation at the hearing she made clear reference to how the advisors for Claimants had identified
environmentally fragile areas, specifically in Mussio Witness Statement, § 30. Transcript 1835-16-17.

180

576.

577.

578.

579.

of 72 lots without services available and requiring the construction of new roads, all of

which are not contemplated under said SETENA resolutions>*>.

The second issue to address is whether Claimants had valid permits to work on easements
8 and 9, which are located in the southernmost portion of the Easements Section. It does
not become necessary to examine permits for any other of the easements, as the
allegation of the existence of wetlands in these two easements makes it sufficient for the
Tribunal to determine whether actions undertaken in those two were or were not

lawful>*°,

Claimants have stated that permits were received but were lost by the Municipality of
Parrita. The Tribunal finds it hard to believe that permits presumably issued both in 2008
and 2009 were lost in the “Alma” storm, as alleged by Claimants. Especially since the
storm occurred in May of 2008**’. But also because it is hard to fathom that from all the
various files corresponding to the Las Olas Project that are available to the Claimants and
the Municipality, all documents are available and only the alleged construction permits
have been lost. The coincidence is extreme. But assuming, for the sake of analysis, this
was the case then it shows the lack of diligence by the owner and/or contractor in
safeguarding documents that are critical for any development, and this would be
revealing of the diligence with which the legal aspects of the development were being

handled.

There is no evidence that work that was undertaken by Claimants in said easements 8 and
9 was validly authorized by construction permits issued by the Municipality, or approved

plans for those easements from INVU, or the National Cadastre or the National Registry.

From the foregoing analysis, the Tribunal concludes that the fragmentation made by

Claimants did not have a business purpose in and for itself, and that by doing so

535 Siel Siel Report, and Transcript, 1832:11-22; 1833:1-11.

536

Whether or not an EV is required in an instance where an easement is created from a fragmentation of a larger

property is debated among the Parties. Ms. Priscilla Vargas, expert testifying on behalf of Respondent stated that the
exemptions contemplated under local laws and regulations do not apply, in contrast to the position taken by Mr.
Ortiz, expert on behalf of Claimants. But the Tribunal believes that it is unnecessary to examine this issue, insofar as
there is no dispute on the application of article 94 of the Biodiversity Law and that that a project needs to be
examined in its entirety from an environmental standpoint. And the Las Olas Project was definitely one single
project, divided into five phases.

537 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tropical_Storm_Alma.

181

580.

581.

582.

583.

584.

Claimants evaded improperly the need to secure an EV precisely in the area were a
wetland has been confirmed to have existed. Since the Las Olas Project was deemed to be
a single development project, Easement Section should have been part of the D1
Application as well.
(g) Were Wetlands and Forests Damaged at the Las Olas Project
Site

There have been allegations and expert reports submitted by Respondent as to the
existence of wetlands in other sites of the Las Olas Project, but also strong allegations to

the contrary on the part of Claimants.

During his presentation during the December Hearing, Mr. Kevin Erwin confirmed that
of the seven wetlands found in the Las Olas Project site, Wetland # 1 contained hydric

soils and was an impacted wetland that had been drained and filled.

There is clear evidence to the fact that the location of the wetland is precisely in the
Easement Section — in easements 8 and 9, and works were undertaken precisely in that
site. The evidence includes not only the reports prepared by SINAC, but also aerial
photography and the KECE Report that performed the drills to confirm the existence of

hydric soils in the areas where road work and other works were carried out.

The Parties agree that one of the elements that define a wetland is the existence of hydric
soils. Regardless of whether there are such conditions in other areas within the property,
it is an accredited fact to the Tribunal that these existed at the time the Las Olas Project

was being developed and, more importantly, at the time works were carried out.

The report submitted by KECE contains aerial photographs that show (i) the wetland area
in 2005, the area of activity and construction work carried out in 2009 and 2010 by
Claimant***, and the situation of such area in 2016. There is no dispute among the Parties
that such photographs show the area corresponding to easements 8 & 9 during the periods

identified by the expert witness. Further, the KECE Report identifies the location of the

538 Figure 10, Second KECE Report.

182

585.

586.

587.

588.

589.

bore holes made in their analysis*°, and it is precisely in those locations that they found

the existence of wetlands that had been drained and filled.

The Tribunal determines that such wetland was indeed impacted by works undertaken by
Claimants, and that the reaction taken by Respondent as a consequence was merited
under the laws of Costa Rica, which are not inconsistent with international law. Further,
that the actions taken by the Respondent are not arbitrary nor in breach of the obligations

under DR-CAFTA.

Forests were also impacted. This is clearly identified in the KECE Report aerial
photographs that were attached to the Report comparing the forest canopy in 2005, 2010,
2011 and 2016*°.

As to whether a construction permit was secured where Wetland # 1 was located, the
Tribunal concludes that the works performed in the easements 8 and 9, where Wetland #1

is located, were undertaken without a permit.

2. Whether the Pr °s Office of R dent failed the Claii

Pp

(a) The Claimants’ Position

In their submissions, Claimants expressed the alleged breach on the part of Respondent to
its obligations under Article 10.5 DR-CAFTA by carrying out actions which constitute
abuse of rights under customary international law, or the failure to undertake a good faith,

criminal investigation of the bribes allegedly solicited from Claimants**!

, or conducting
the criminal prosecution below the customary international law minimum standard as

reflected in the prohibition against arbitrariness*”.

Claimants have stated that the conduct of Prosecutor Martinez with regard to “... the
criminal investigation, prosecution, and trial of Mr. Aven epitomizes arbitrary and
discriminatory treatment in every respect”*“?. They add that Mr. Martinez’s conduct in
regard to Mr. Aven “... goes far beyond incompetence, and demonstrates such a level of

disregard for the evidence, the law, and professional standards, that the only conclusion

539 Jd, Figure 3.
540 Jd, Figures 6,7,8 and 9.
541 Claimants’ Reply Memorial, {f] 366, 371, 379, pages 123-127.

542

 

laimants’ Memorial, {{] 369-380, pages 128-132.

43 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Memorial, 208, page 104.

183

590.

S91.

592.

54 Id.

that can be drawn is that Mr. Martinez intentionally targeted Mr. Aven due to reasons

that had nothing to do with actual criminal culpability”**.

They contend that once the investigation regarding the criminal charges was commenced,
Mr. Aven was fully cooperative, and met with Mr. Martinez, the prosecutor,
approximately three weeks after the SETENA April 2011 Injunction**, whereby further
works on the site under the 2008 Environmental Viability Permit were prohibited *4°. Mr.
Martinez then instructed, as has been described above in Section VI, additional
environmental reports from INTA (asking to take soil samples from the site of the alleged
wetland at Las Olas in order to determine, in accordance with the legally applicable
criteria, whether the soil was characteristic of a wetland), and from MINAE. Although the
INTA report of May 5, 2011 indicated that there were no wetlands on the property, the
report issued by MINAE (ACOPAC-CP-081-11), reached the opposite conclusion and

determined that the Las Olas Project site did contain wetlands.

According to Mr. Aven and Mr. Damjanac, Mr. Martinez then conducted a site visit on
May 13, 2011 in search of the alleged wetlands referenced in the MINAE report, and during
the site visit Mr. Martinez also accused them of unlawfully cutting down trees in
violation of Costa Rican forestry laws. They have argued that two forestry experts later
confirmed through expert reports and testimony offered at trial that the cutting of the type

of trees identified was not prohibited under the laws of Costa Rica™”.

Claimants have argued that despite the fact that under Costa Rican law criminal liability
requires proof of intent to commit a crime, and that Mr. Martinez’s criminal investigation
revealed overwhelming evidence that Mr. Aven and Mr. Damjanac did not intend to
commit crimes — but rather that they had been diligent in seeking an Environmental
Viability from SETENA and construction permits from the Municipality of Parrita and in
enlisting the support of qualified experts such as their Environmental Regent to ensure
that they were in compliance with Costa Rican law — Mr. Martinez not only failed to

abandon his investigation and decline to file criminal charges, but formally filed criminal

545 Resolution 839-201 1-SETENA dated April 13, 2011, (R-122).
546 Claimants’ Memorial, | 174, page 48.
547 1d., 4,178, page 50.

184

593.

594.

595.

charges on October 21, 2011 against Mr. Aven and Mr. Damjanac with the Criminal Court
of Aguirre and Parrita in the Second Judicial Circuit of Puntarenas’. Mr. Aven was
charged with two crimes: (1) ordering the draining and drying of wetlands in violation of
Article 98 of the Wildlife Conservation Law; and (2) invading a conservation area in
violation of Article 58 of the Costa Rican Forestry Law, while Mr. Damjanac was charged
with illegal exploitation of a forest in violation of Article 61 of the Costa Rican Forestry

Law.

Claimants have argued before the Arbitral Tribunal that any alleged offenses predating
June 24, 2009 would be irrelevant to the application of Article 1 of Law 8689, and would
have to be assessed under the pre-existing law, where the crime of draining and filling a
wetland carried an economic sanction of less than US$500, rather than the possibility of a
three-year prison sentence contemplated in the new law *4°. This, because the Wildlife
Conservation Law was amended by the passage of Article 1 of Law 8689 on December 4,
2008, which did not come into effect until June 24, 2009, and did not have retroactive
effect in accordance with Section 34 of the Costa Rican Constitution and Section 11 of
the Costa Rican Criminal Code. This means, in addition, that under the previous law, Mr.
Aven’s extradition could not be sought through an INTERPOL Red Notice if the crime

was punishable only by an economic sanction*’.

These allegations demonstrate that, in the view of Claimants, Mr. Martinez failed to
consider the timeline of the alleged offenses of draining and filling of wetlands that took
place in or around early 2009 when determining the criminal law that was applicable to

Mr. Aven, and also failed to apply that law in good faith.

Claimants have also indicated that as Prosecutor, Mr. Martinez failed to follow the
Guidelines for the Prosecutorial Investigation of Environmental Crimes, which expressly
state at paragraph 3.3 [Lakes, non-artificial lagoons, and other wetlands] that in order to
demonstrate the existence of a wetland, three criteria must be established: (i) soil

permeability; (iii) the presence of hydrophytic vegetation; and (3) a slope below or equal

548 Exhibit C-142.
4 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 4] 239, page 122.
550 Jd., 4240, page 122.

185

596.

597.

598.

to five percent**!. If the reports that Mr. Martinez commissioned failed to establish the
mandatory criteria for the existence of wetlands, and there was no other documentary
evidence establishing those criteria either, then Mr. Martinez was expressly prohibited

by the guidelines from filing criminal charges?

   

The criminal complaint failed to provide credible evidence in the opinion of Claimants,
who also alleged that they timely submitted the INTA May 2011 report®>? concluding
there were no wetlands, and a report from Mr. Minor Arce Solano, the Costa Rican
forestry consultant, who conducted multiple site visits before concluding in a September

2010 report that the Las Olas property did not contain a forest*™*;

and that findings from
such report were consistent with a December 2011 report issued by INGEOFOR, a Costa
Rican environmental consulting company which — after reviewing the findings of MINAE
mentioned above disagreed and also determined that the Las Olas Project site did not

contain a forest, but largely consisted of a cattle pasture™>>.

Besides the above allegations, Claimants have argued that under Article 7 of the Wildlife
Conservation Law, until September 2009, wetlands were required to be created and
delimited by Executive decree, and have cited a series of criminal court cases that in their
belief are particularly relevant to this point. Three of four cases addressing wetlands
before Resolution 14288-2009 of Constitutional Chamber of September 9, 2009,
concluded that such decree was necessary because this would presuppose a process of
expropriation and payment of compensation in dealing with an affectation of private
property*°. Thus, prior to September 2009, in the absence of an Executive decree, a

wetland did not exist for the purposes of the Wildlife Conservation Law.

The record shows that the criminal court scheduled a preliminary hearing in Mr. Aven
and Mr. Damjanac’s case on June 19, 2012, at which time the judge had the opportunity
to determine whether the prosecutor had enough evidence to take a case to trial; if not,

the judge might dismiss certain charges or the prosecutor might choose not to pursue

551 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 230, page 118.

532 Jd., 4.233, page 119.

583 DE-INTA-255-2011 (C-124).

54 Minor Arce Solano Forestry Report, September 2010 (C-82).
585 INGEOFOR Forestry Report, December 2011 (C-148).

586 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 4/242, pages 123-124.

186

599.

600.

601.

certain charges. Mr. Aven has alleged he presented the relevant environmental permits
and reports, including the INTA May 2011 report and the INGEOFOR report, while the
government attorneys presented no additional evidence. In Claimants’ view, despite the
“overwhelming evidence” presented in support of Mr. Aven’s case, the judge determined

that three of the charges should proceed to trial**’.

The criminal trial of Mr. Aven and Mr. Damjanac began on December 5, 2012.
According to Claimants, the defense strategy proved to be effective in exposing the
multiple flaws in the prosecution’s case, but due to the application of an obscure
procedural rule, it did not lead to a favorable outcome for Mr. Aven or Mr. Damjanac.
Claimants described the inconsistencies found by the Judge in the proceeding, Mr. Rafael
Solis Gullock, and the fact that the prosecution’s witnesses repeatedly made
unsubstantiated and contradictory assertions that severely damaged their credibility,
while the defense presented extensive documentary evidence demonstrating that there were
no wetlands or forests on the property and that the Las Olas Project had properly obtained

the necessary government permits and approvals>*.

Taking the above into account, Claimants contend that Prosecutor Martinez’s failure to
comply with the principles of objectivity is strong evidence of the Respondent’s violation
of Article 10.5’s prohibition against arbitrariness and breach of the minimum standard of
treatment*. Specifically, Respondent has breached the Article 10.5 fair and equitable
treatment standard’s prohibition against arbitrariness in making a manifestly arbitrary
decision to pursue a criminal prosecution of Mr. Aven, in contravention of applicable law
and the prosecutorial guidelines for the alleged “draining and filling of a wetland.” Mr.
Martinez lacked, they add, any basis to prosecute a crime premised on the assumption

that a wetland existed at Las Olas*°°.

Claimants have argued against the application of the so-called “ten-day rule” found under
Article 336 of the Costa Rican Criminal Code, which provides that if a criminal trial has

been suspended for ten days or more, the proceedings must be discontinued and the trial

587 Claimants’ Memorial, | 187, page 53.

558 Jd., 4] 188 - 197, pages 54-57.

59 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 209, page 106.
560 Jd., 4210, page 107.

187

must start over; a re-trial is generally automatic under Article 336 after the ten-day lapse,
unless the Parties agree to proceed with the trial despite the ten-day interruption. As the
trial was about to close, it was “abundantly clear that the prosecution had failed to meet
its burden, and had committed a series of drastic missteps in regard to its witnesses and

lack of documentary evidence”**'.

The proceedings were suspended because of the
December Holidays of 2012, and scheduled to resume in mid-January 2013. Then, upon
the closing of arguments to be made by Mr. Aven’s counsel and the prosecutor several
days later, Judge Solis was required to take a leave for a medical condition, which
provoked an extension of days that triggered a suspension of more than ten days.
Although Mr. Aven’s counsel sought to obtain the consent of the Prosecutor (Mr.
Martinez), Claimants argue that he unjustifiably refused to waive the rule. As a
consequence, “... all of the evidence presented by the defense, including the all of the
expert reports, expert testimony, government permits, and resolutions, would have to be
presented in their entirety a second time at a new trial. In addition, the prosecution would
unfairly have the opportunity to study the contradictory and un-substantiated statements

made by its own witnesses to ensure that this did not happen a second time”**.

602. Despite the allegations and statements from Respondent in its defense, Claimants
confirmed in their Post-Hearing Brief that the parties in the criminal case were entitled to
agree to waive the ten-day rule and wait until Judge Solis was prepared to return so that
the trial could resume. They alleged that, Mr. Aven’s attorney offered to enter into such

an arrangement with Mr. Martinez, but the latter refused.

603. There were two other matters alleged by Claimants on unfair treatment and denial of
proper judicial protection. The first relates not only to the unfair criminal prosecution of
Mr. Aven on the part of Respondent, but also the failure to investigate and act on the
formal complaint and charges filed by Mr. Aven against Mr. Bogantes for the alleged
bribery attempt which Mr. Aven states to have occurred*?. Mr. Aven has no reason to
believe that his complaint was ever even considered, as it was arbitrarily dismissed,

without any notice to Mr. Aven, based on a “lack of evidence.” There was a failure on

561 Jd., 4198, page 57.
Id., §§ 201, page 59.
563 Criminal complaint against Christian Bogantes, September 16, 2011 (C-139).

  

 

188

604.

605.

606.

the part of Costa Rica as a host State to “properly to investigate, or punish, credible
complaints by a foreign investor about corruption”, and how Prosecutor Martinez’s
decision to flout minimum standards, by refusing to perform a good faith investigation
of credible corruption charges levelled against Mr. Bogantes, was an example of this
constitutes a “failure to honour the due diligence obligation to provide “protection and

security” under customary international law”>*.

Secondly, Mr. Aven has alleged that he, along with Mr. Damjanac, received email threats

565

to his life and security°®, and was also the victim of a shooting incident while driving in

a Costa Rican highway.

When Mr. Aven reported the incident to proper local police
authorities, Claimants argue that authorities failed to take action®®’. It was in light of
these circumstances and context that they decided to leave Costa Rica and not return to

face the new trial and risks.

But this came at a huge cost to Mr. Aven, because he was unable to stand trial in Costa
Rica when his trial was rescheduled. Given his decision to leave Costa Rica, a warrant for
his arrest was issued and Costa Rica issued an INTERPOL Red Notice, by way of which
all INTERPOL member countries were advised that the extradition of Mr. Aven was
sought. Claimants have argued that given the nature of the alleged offense, this action
represented an enormous overreaction by the Respondent**, and Mr. Aven has testified
that he suffered financially, physically and emotionally during the period the Red Notice
was in place, and continues to have adverse effects because of the stress resulting from

the above incidents*.

(b) The Respondent’s Position

Respondent flatly rejects the claims submitted on this issue. It has stated that Costa Rica
has the right to investigate environmental crimes and that, upon filing of criminal

complaints by Mr. Steve Bucelato — the neighbor to the Project Site - on February 2,

564 Claimants’ Reply Memorial at §f] 370-371, page 124, and Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 252, page 128.

565

Email messages from an unknown person, exhibits C-164, C-165 and C-166.

56 David Aven First Witness Statement, {| 232-233, page 71.
567 Claimants’ Memorial, §¥] 206-211, pages 60-61.

568 Jd, 44] 213-211, pages 61-62.

56 Mr. Aven First Witness Statement, § 248 page 75.

189

607.

608.

2011, and the report issued by SINAC on January 3, 2011°”, and the instruction to
ACOPAC (through Mr. Picado Cubillo) of January 28, 2011 to file criminal charges*”!,
such case was assigned to Mr. Martinez, who had already been involved in criminal

charges filed against Mr. Aven because of the alleged Forged Document.

As described earlier, once the criminal complaints were filed the Prosecutor requested
SINAC to confirm the existence of wetlands at the Project Site. SINAC in turn requested
that (i) the PNH — the specialized agency in wetlands that is under its jurisdiction — to
provide an official determination as to whether there were wetlands located at the Las
Olas Project site, and (ii) INTA to provide a soils study. Based on the studies performed
on site by PNH and INTA on March 16, 2011, they issued their respective reports.
Respondent indicates that PNH issued the report on March 18, 2011, concluding that
there were wetlands that had been affected by works being carried out at the site, and
INTA found on May 5, 2011 that although the land presented hydrological
characteristics, it did not meet the typical criteria of a wetland. In view of the
conclusions, the Prosecutor ordered further studies from PNH, which were carried out on
May 13, 2011, to delimit the extension of the wetland. Subsequent reports from SINAC
on July 7, 2011, and from ACOPAC on October 3, 2011, confirmed damages to the
ecosystem and found alleged illegal felling of trees, respectively. It was at this point that

the Prosecutor concluded that there was sufficient evidence to file criminal charges*”?.

Respondent recalled that Mr. Martinez’ duty was to enforce Costa Rica’s environmental
laws and apply the in dubio pro natura principle, and testified as to the analysis he
undertook of the INTA Report and his rationale for relying on the PNH Report on
wetlands rather than the INTA Report. Specifically, because (i) INTA has no competence
to determine the existence of wetlands in Costa Rica, as it is a body dependent on MAG
(the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock) and charged with the improvement and
sustainability of the agricultural and livestock sector in Costa Rica, not focused on the

environment; (ii) the methodology that Mr. Cubero relied on to carry out his survey

570 SINAC site visit report (ACOPAC-CP-003-11) requesting, among others, that a criminal complaint be filed in
light of the damage to the wetlands, felling of threes and the alleged Forged Document. Exhibit 5 to the Barboza
Expert Report.

57! ACOPAC-CP-015-11-DEN dated January 28, 2011 (R-66).

57 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, § 206-211, pages 60-61.

190

609.

610.

constitutes an agricultural instrument rather than a hydric soils specialized instrument;
and (iii) the findings of Mr. Cubero were undermined by his conclusion that “the soils in
the area were not typical of a wetland” since Martinez never requested from INTA a
report on whether there was a wetland or not on the Project Site, and Mr. Cubero

exceeded his competence by concluding that there was not a wetland on the site?”’.

On the allegation by Claimants that they suffered a “systemic miscarriage of
administrative justice, which involved multiple agencies (whilst apparently excluding
others) over a span of two years that has few analogues in modern arbitral practice”>”*,
Respondent argues that the Claimants’ entire argument on the alleged “arbitrariness” of
Costa Rican officials is based on the alleged conduct of ONLY one individual- the
Prosecutor, Mr. Martinez*”>. But at the same time, Respondent contends that since
Claimants assert the existence of “chronic problems with the Costa Rican criminal justice
system”, it therefore requested that their claim be considered pursuant to international
law under the test for “denial of justice” because it is obvious that Claimants’ case is
based on the conduct of the judiciary”*”*. If this is the case, Respondent then argued that
for an investor to allege a violation under the denial of justice standard, it is necessary
that all the available judicial remedies have been exhausted. As the tribunal in
Pantechniki v. Albania held°”’, “Denial of justice does not arise until a reasonable
opportunity to correct aberrant judicial conduct has been given to the system as a whole.
...This is a matter of a simple hierarchical organization of civil-law jurisdictions: first
instance/appeal/cassation. One cannot fault Albania before having taken the matter to the
top.” However, as stated above, Claimants rejected that they brought a denial of justice

claim>’’,

In response to the allegations of Claimants regarding the December 2012 trial of Messrs.

Aven and Damjanac, Respondent addressed these, pointing to the strength of the case and

573 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, 941, pages 203-204, and citing {| 78 and 98 of First Witness Statement of
Mr. Luis Martinez.
574 Claimants’ Memorial, | 367, page 128.

575

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, § 522, page 126.

576 1d., 49 567, page 139.

577 Id., 4 568, page 139. RLA-36, Pantechniki

 

|. Contractors & Engineers v. Albany, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/21,

30 July 2009, 4 96; 102.
578 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, {fj 430-434, pages 206-209.

191

6ll.

612.

the witnesses presented by the prosecution. In his testimony>”

, Mr. Martinez confirmed
his request to the criminal court to suspend the case because of scheduling issues and to
renew within ten days. The fact that the Judge was not able to resume the trial within
such period meant that any judgment rendered, in breach of Article 336 of the Criminal
Code, could be subject to annulment on appeal, because the 10-day rule is a guarantee to
the defendant and therefore a right that cannot be waived. Mr. Martinez researched the
current state of the law (at the time), consulted with his supervisor, and jointly agreed
with the representative of the Attorney General’s Office not to waive the rule because the
most recent case law at the time of the events pointed to a nullification of the proceedings

if the ten-day rule was waived **°.

Respondent claims that the case that was brought against Messrs. Aven and Damjanac
was not groundless, but rather was diligently handled. Mr. Martinez had collected
substantial evidence supported by documents, results from technical studies he
commissioned, numerous witnesses, and had first-hand knowledge of the damage caused
by Claimants to the environment because he visited the Project Site**' on several
occasions. In its Post-Hearing Brief, Respondent provided value to the fact that Mr.
Martinez was also accompanied by Mr. Jorge Gamboa from the National Wetlands
Program (PNH) on both visits to the Las Olas Project Site, who was able to provide

reference to the vegetation, water conditions and soils***.

Respondent has also alleged that the experience of the criminal counsel engaged by
Messrs. Aven and Damjanac — Mr. Néstor Morera, was primarily in the intellectual
property field as reflected not only in his bio but also acknowledged during the cross-
examination at the hearing, highlighting the discrepancies between Mr. Morera’s
allegations and the realities of Costa Rican law. In its Post-Hearing Brief, Respondent
presented a table purporting to show what it alleges to be serious flaws in his knowledge

and experience>*.

57 First Witness Statement Luis Martinez Zuniga, {| 120-121, page 28.

589 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {| 957-958, pages 208-209, citing the Cross Examination of Luis Martinez,
Day 4 Transcript, 1121:5-14.

581 Jd., 4 589, page 144.

582 Jd., 4915, page 194.

583 Jd. | 920, pages 195-197.

192

613.

614.

615.

Although Claimants allege different violations and the fact that under Article 1 of Law
8689, any alleged offenses for draining and filling a wetland predating the date it came
into effect (June 24, 2009) carried just an economic sanction of less than US$500,
Respondent first argued that this argument was newly brought by Claimants at the
December Hearing, but further that despite such allegation, the argument fails to take into
account the existence of “continuing crimes” (delito continuo o de efectos permanentes)
prescribed in Article 32 of Costa Rica’s Criminal Procedure Code, pursuant to which the
commission can take place during a continuing period of time (i.e. the refilling of a
wetland). In the “statement of facts” of the criminal complaint against Mr. Aven and Mr.
Damjanac filed by Mr. Martinez, he described the facts upon which he based the criminal

complaint as beginning in or around April 2009 and continuing until February 20115*4.

In response to the argument that there was no evidence of intent because Mr. Aven was
acting under the presumed authority of SETENA’s Environmental Viability Permits and
construction permits, and therefore he lacked the intent required to have committed the
crime***, Respondent points to the fact that Mr. Martinez’s discretion “allowed him to
decide that he had sufficient evidentiary elements to show Mr. Aven’s intent to commit
the crime”, and that the record showed that there were a series of irregularities during the
operation of the Las Olas Project that were documented which allowed a finding of intent

on the part of Mr. Aven**°,

On the subject of the Claimants’ allegations that Mr. Martinez supposedly failed to apply
the Prosecutor Guidelines for the Prosecution of Environmental Crimes of 2010—which
Respondent alleges Claimant introduced for the first time at the cross-examination of Mr.
Martinez, Respondent indicated that the prosecutor’s underlying evidence under the
Guidelines is a visual inspection of the site, preferably accompanied by a hydrogeologist
or any other specialist in wetlands. Further, the lack of documentation regarding the
existence of the wetland before drainage works began can be supplemented with

testimony from people who knew the site before the event, and that the contradiction

584 Attached as Exhibit C-142, page 4, and quoted in Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, 934, page 201.

585

Respondent indicated that at the December Hearing Mr. Morera conceded that his “most powerful argument wé
the lack of intent. The lack of the demonstration of the intent by the disregarding of the objectiveness principl

   

rather that violations of constitutional rights, quoting Redirect Examination of Néstor Morera, Transcript, 776:14-16.

586

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, 921, page 197.

193

616.

617.

618.

619.

between the requirements contained in the Guidelines and those established in the
MINAE Decree No. 35803 regarding the three basic requirements for a wetland to
exist— (i) soil permeability; (ii) hydric vegetation; and (iii) a slope of no less than or
equal to 5%—, can easily be resolved through the application of the hierarchy of laws

principle, which would determine that the MINAE Decree has a higher standing**’.

But, Respondent argues, it was ultimately for the judge assigned to Mr. Aven’s case to
rule on his criminal liability and not Mr. Martinez; the latter’s duty was to present to the
judge a hypothesis based on probability and it was for the judge to balance the evidence

presented by both Parties to decide whether Mr. Aven could be found guilty***.

As described previously, when the new trial was set for December 2013, and counsel to
Mr. Aven advised that his client would not be attending the hearing because Mr. Aven
had left the country of fear for his life, a trial hearing was re-scheduled for January 13,
2014. The Court then issued the INTERPOL Red Notice since Mr. Aven did not appear

to face trial.

Respondent has advised that the Court held re-trials only against Mr. Damjanac,
acquitting him by judgment dated February 5, 2014. The decision was appealed by the
Attorney General Office, however, and the Court of Appeals reversed the lower court’s
ruling and ordered a new trial. Therefore, a new trial against Mr. Damjanac is currently

pending>®’.

On the subject of the complaint on the alleged bribery attempts by Mr. Bogantes (the
SINAC officer who allegedly solicited a bribe from Mr. Aven) that occurred in July and
August of 2010, Respondent first questions the motivation of filing the charges a year
later (in September 2011) once Claimants’ project had already been suspended by a series
of injunctions issued by SETENA, SINAC and the TAA and the criminal proceedings

against Mr. Aven had already been initiated®*®. In any case, Respondent added that the

587 Jd., $9] 960-965, pages 209-211.

588 Jd., 4.927, page 199.

58 Jd., 4 586, page 143.

590 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, {4 597-600, page 146.

194

620.

621.

investigation did not actually advance because of a lack of cooperation and lack of

interest by Mr. Aven®?!.
(c) The Tribunal’s Analysis

The Tribunal has examined the allegations and the record of the criminal case, and
believes that the Prosecutor (Mr. Martinez) had sufficient elements under the laws of
Costa Rica to file charges against Messrs. Aven and Damjanac. These were initially
based on the SINAC January 2011 report containing its conclusions and
recommendations after its multiple visits to the Las Olas Project site in December 2010,
which were later confirmed by SINAC. The Prosecutor then commenced his own
investigation and gathered evidence through interviews with SINAC and Municipality
officials, personal visits to the site, including interviews with workmen carrying out
construction work and Mr. Aven, neighbors’ complaints, and reports issued by different
agencies to determine the existence of wetlands, and the damages to the ecosystem in the

Las Olas Project.

Although Claimants expressed during the December Hearing an argument that Mr. Aven
was charged under Article 98 of the Wildlife Conservation Law with a crime that did not
exist prior to September 2009, because the provision was amended on December 4, 2008
with the passage of Article 1 of Law 8689, and therefore that Mr. Aven should not be
charged retroactively, the Tribunal deems that the Prosecutor had reasonable grounds to
treat such conduct as a continued crime (delito continuo o de efectos permanentes) under
the Code of Criminal Procedure of Costa Rica. Indeed, during the December Hearing
Judge Chinchilla, expert witness on criminal law for Costa Rica submitted by
Respondent, explained that refilling of a wetland falls within the category of a continuing
crime contemplated in Article 98 of such Code because its commission can take place
during a continuing period of time*”’. The Tribunal notes that in the factual background
of the of the criminal complaint against Mr. Aven and Mr. Damjanac, Mr. Martinez
described the facts upon which he based the criminal complaint as “beginning in or

around April 2009 and continuing until February 2011”.

591 Jd., 4 601, page 146.
52 Transcript, 1582:4-22 and 1583: 1-4.

195

622.

623.

624.

625.

626.

Whether or not the conduct of Mr. Aven could be considered as a “continued crime” or
not, and whether the evidence gathered by Mr. Martinez was sufficient to proceed into
trial, is not for this Tribunal to determine. This is an issue that would need to be decided
by the criminal judge taking knowledge of the case in Costa Rica. At the time, the
criminal judge had access to arguments and evidence from both the prosecution and the
defense to weigh whether there were elements, including intent to commit the crime, i.e.,
refilling the wetland. And based on that evidence and arguments, he determined that the

matter should proceed to trial.

This means that the fact that the Prosecutor filed charges based on what he believed to be
supported by local regulations and sufficient factual elements did not, per se,
immediately affect Messrs. Aven and Damjanac. Both were provided the opportunity to
be represented by counsel of their choice and were subject to the laws and procedures

available in Costa Rica.

The record in this arbitration shows that a trial was properly scheduled, but holidays and
a medical circumstance involving the Judge at Parrita subsequently arose, which events
triggered the need to have a new trial based on the so-called “ten-day rule” that has been
challenged by Claimants and discussed above. None of these events can be deemed to be
attributable to a deficiency on the part of Respondent, nor the fact that the new trial has

not been commenced and concluded.

The laws of Costa Rica do contemplate the so-called “ten-day-rule” for the protection of
a defendant in a criminal case. Article 336 of the Code of Criminal Procedure*” provides
that a trial hearing must be continuous and may be suspended for not more than ten days.

If it is delayed, then there needs to be a new trial.

There is no evidence to the effect that such rule was improperly applied in this case.
Although Claimants have strongly argued that the Prosecutor failed to agree to waive
such rule at the request made by Mr. Aven through his attorney, and that decision was
unjustified, the Respondent has argued the risk that accepting such a request had been

deemed by courts in Costa Rica, including the Supreme Court of Costa Rica through its

5°3 Cédigo Procesal Penal, Law No. 7594.

196

627.

628.

629.

Constitutional Chamber to be a direct and immediate cause for a mistrial, since the

immediacy is part of a due process.

The evidence presented by the Parties in respect of this point is not consistent, and each
has submitted conflicting precedents in each direction**. Claimants, to the effect that the
waiver agreed by the defendant and the prosecution is to be respected, while Respondent
with the contrary position. Some court precedents cited by each of the Parties are also in
conflict, and these have not been resolved. However, it is to be noted that the prevailing
position at the time of the decision of the Prosecutor (January 2013) indeed risked an
annulment of the criminal proceedings. Judge Chinchilla confirmed this in her expert

report®?>,

, indicating that the criminal system was amended in 2012 and therefore the valid
legal precedents to be taken into account rise afterwards, and that the most recent case at
the time was in support of the Prosecutor’s position. She made reference to the terms of
the current Criminal Code which clearly provides that certain defects in the proceeding

cannot be cured, even with the agreement of the parties involved.

The Tribunal takes note that the criminal trial in first instance found Mr. Damjanac not
guilty of having committed a crime. Although the sentence was subsequently reversed
and a final outcome is pending because of the filing of this claim by Claimants, no final

judgment has been rendered.

There have also been allegations to the effect that the Prosecutor, Mr. Martinez, was not
open to settling the case in a manner satisfactory to the parties involved. Both Claimants
and Respondent acknowledged that prior to the trial there was a settlement offer. Mr.
Morera, the attorney engaged by Mr. Aven, further indicated that even the judge
overseeing the case promoted the idea, when in Mr. Morera’s belief this is not normal or
the ordinary course during the trial stage. But this was not pursued, primarily because Mr.
Aven was not interested. During his cross-examination at the December Hearing, Mr.
Morera indicated “And at that moment [Mr. Aven] said he was not interested because it
was already a matter of--of a personal thing, a matter of pride to wipe out his name, to

clean his name before he, his family, and his investors and the society because David

594 See First Witness Statement of Gerardo Martinez, | 125, and Exhibits C-231, C-234.
595 Expert Report of Judge Rosaura Chinchilla, 71, $f] 69-71, pages 27-29.

197

630.

631.

632.

633.

Aven was already an investor and with other investments in Costa Rica with other

businesses”**®,

Thus, the Tribunal believes that there is no evidence that the Prosecutor or the judicial
system in Costa Rica acted or failed to take actions that are not in accordance with its

internal laws.

Claimants’ position on the issuance of an INTERPOL Red-Notice equally fails. They
also rely on the arguments regarding the amendments to the Wildlife Conservation Law,
and that the amendment did not apply retroactively; however, the Tribunal has deemed
that the charges brought were reasonably supported and when Mr. Aven failed to appear
to the new trial, there was justification on the part of the Respondent to issue such Red
Notice. Perhaps the use discretion could have suggested that a different action be taken
by Respondent considering the fact that the crime allegedly committed by Mr. Aven was

not for a more serious offense, but the discretion validly resided on Respondent.

On the subject of the first of the other two allegations dealing with actions or inaction
taken by the authorities in Costa Rica, Claimants have taken the position that the
Municipality and other authorities took action against the Las Olas Project based on
accusations found in the complaints submitted by Mr. Bucelato, which accusations were

7

unsubstantiated, baseless accusations*”” expressed because of a “personal vendetta” of

Mr. Bucelato- who meddled through a “campaign” to cancel the Las Olas Project.

As has been argued by Respondent in the case, under the laws of Costa Rica individuals

598 and

have the right to submit complaints in respect to environmental projects
authorities have the duty to investigate and take action’. Thus, the fact that the
Municipality, the Defensoria de los Habitantes and other authorities took action based on
those complaints was justified under applicable laws, and the principle of citizen
participation recognized by Costa Rican administrative courts. Besides, the complaints
were supported. There were allegations related to the felling of trees and the construction

works in wetlands areas, which have been evidenced to have occurred. Further, the

5% Transcript 762:3-9.

57 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 18 and 19, page 17.

598 First Witness Statement, Luis Martinez Zufiga, § 9.

5° Expert Report of Rosaura Chinchilla, §]. 56; First Witness Statement of Luis Martinez, {f]. 9 and 16.

198

634.

635.

Tribunal noted that it was not only Mr. Bucelato who filed complaints, but their various

other neighbors in Esterillos Oeste also signed the various complaints.

The argument of Claimants that the investigation by Mr. Martinez of the criminal
complaint filed by Mr. Bucelato against Mr. Aven on the grounds of damages to the
wetlands and forest, as well as the forgery of official documents, was unjustified and that
he could have sought a higher burden of proof and examine the background of prior
complaints made by Mr. Bucelato, is equally without merit. It is a matter of record that
Mr. Martinez found no evidence that Mr. Aven had prepared the alleged Forged
Document, and this supports the position of Respondent as to his independence and
investigation. It is clear to the Tribunal that there was a reciprocal animosity among Mr.
Aven and Mr. Bucelato. Mr. Aven himself filed criminal charges for defamation against
Mr. Bucelato in October of 2009°°, which charges were not subsequently supported,

ratified of followed.

Regarding the alleged inaction on the part of the prosecutor’s office to take action on the
filing of a criminal complaint against the alleged bribes solicited by Mr. Bogantes, the
Tribunal also finds that there are no merits to the allegations on “abuse of authority”
expressed by Claimants. Although the solicitation of bribes is indeed a punishable crime
in Costa Rica, and should not be tolerated under any jurisdiction, there is no
corroborating evidence to the fact that there was such a solicitation except for the
statement made by Mr. Damjanac. Even though in their Notice of Arbitration, Claimants
stated that “The Investors have in their possession a tape recording of the solicitation of
this bribe”, such supposed tape recording was never produced as evidence during the
arbitration. There is also no evidence that there was retributory action against Claimants
for having failed to comply and pay the bribe. Quite the contrary; the Tribunal notes that
one day before the date of the alleged bribe solicitation (on August 29 or 30, 2010), Mr.
Bogantes had responded to Defensoria de los Habitantes, as head of the Subregional
Office for Aguirre and Parrita of SINAC, confirming that, based on the SINAC Report of

602

July 2010, there were no wetlands in the Las Olas Project site’ How could he have

600 Exhibit C-89.
61 Claimants’ Notice of Arbitration, §] 31, page 10.
602 Exhibit C-80.

199

636.

Xi

637.

solicited a bribe one day later from Mr. Damjanac? It doesn’t make sense. There were
subsequent reports indeed issued by Mr. Bogantes as an employee of SINAC as to the
existence of wetlands; but rather than these having turned to be incorrect — which could
allow an outside observer to understand why a bribe could be solicited as a means of
extortion, the existence of wetlands has been supported by evidence in this arbitration.
Finally, the Tribunal notes that neither Mr. Damjanac nor Mr. Aven filed any charges of
the alleged attempt to receive a bribe until one year later - on September 16, 2011.
Although Claimants were within their rights to file at any time prior to any statute of
limitations, the fact that they did so until after Mr. Aven and Mr. Damjanac were the
subject of investigation creates uncertainty in motive. For the above reasons, the Tribunal

equally rejects this claim.

Claimants do not meet the standard for bringing a denial of justice claim. Rephrased as
part of their case in chief, the Tribunal finds that the Claimants have not carried their
burden. Mr. Aven made a choice to leave Costa Rica and not return for his re-set trial.
This inexorably set in motion the machinery about which he chiefly complains and the
courts of Costa Rica were not given any opportunity to fix the problems he alleged

existed.

DAMAGES
A. The Claimants’ Position on Damages

In their Post-Hearing Brief, Claimants indicate that their claims can be categorized into
four categories: frustration of legitimate expectations, violations of the prohibition
against arbitrariness, abuses of delegated public authority, and failures to observe due
process, and then attempt to argue that their damages have been incurred as provided
under Article 10.16 (1)(a)(ii) of the DR-CAFTA which places a burden on the Claimants
to demonstrate that they, or the Enterprises upon whose behalf they have also claimed,
have “incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of...” the breaches they have

proved under Articles 10.5 or 10.7.°4.

603 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paragraphs 552-583, pages 255-267.
604 74., 604, page 277.

200

638.

639.

640.

641.

Claimants argue that the theoretical basis for Dr. Abdala’s approach on quantum is both
clear and not really disputed by Mr. Hart. Recognizing that prior investment-treaty
Tribunals have found fault with applying a pure discounted cash flow (“DCF”) valuation
to a pre-operational asset, Dr. Abdala combined the DCF approach and the appraisal
approach®>. Claimants believe this approach provides an excellent means of valuing pre-
operational assets and overcomes previous Tribunals’ reluctance to adopt the DCF
methodology in cases such as this one.
1. Using this modified combined approach, the Claimants’ backgrounds
are irrelevant to valuation.

Claimants believe that Respondent’s quantum expert incorrectly focuses on the
backgrounds of the Claimants and is overly critical of their approach to the management
of the Las Olas Project®®. Claimants noted that this irrelevant theme continued during
the February Hearing, when Mr. Hart continued to make disparaging assessments about
the individual Claimants’ prior business dealings and lack of prior successful resort

business experience.

Claimants believe the irrelevance of Mr. Hart’s testimony was shown during
Respondents’ cross-examination of Dr. Abdala. Dr. Abdala showed that as a general
matter of valuation, the Claimants’ characteristics are relevant, but only to a very limited
extent:

it [the specifics of the investors] might be [an important factor] if the view is just

that, say, the owners of the asset are the ones to continue. But it also may not.

Maybe that the assessment is done as to what would be the probabilities of
success if anyone else takes [the project]°”

it’s not that it’s not relevant [the business management skills of an investor]; it’s
just that in a fair market value assessment, you are not only assessing what the
existing owners could do, but also what the willing buyers could do with the

asset, in particular where you have an asset that is at a pre-operational stage™*.

Thus, in the view of Claimants Dr. Abdala made it clear that in his view that there are

really only two potentially relevant issues: (i) the price at which the willing seller would

05 1d., 625, page 284.
606 7d., 4 627, page 285.
607 Transcript, 2153:15-19.
8 Transcript, 2155:7-12.

201

642.

643.

consider selling the asset (which may well depend on the individual characteristics of the
seller, since it is influenced by what they would expect to achieve if they remained in
control of the project); and (ii) the price at which a willing buyer would consider
purchasing the asset (which does not depend on the characteristics of the seller at all,

since the buyer would be coming in and taking over the operation of the project)”.

Accordingly, as Dr. Abdala argued, the skill or lack thereof of the seller is simply not
relevant because the underlying assumption of his valuation exercise is that the whole
project is sold to a buyer who would take over the management of the project. Claimants
contend that Mr. Hart conceded that this was the relevant benchmark for the valuation
exercise because Mr. Hart admitted that the objective of the quantum exercise in this case
is to assess the fair market value of the project. However, as the Claimants noted in their
oral closing, after appearing to agree with Dr Abdala, Mr. Hart then ignored fair market
valuation methodology by testifying that the only appropriate valuation method for a pre-
operational asset is a sunk costs valuation — the provable sunken costs are equivalent to

“fair market value” for pre-operational assets according to Mr. Hart*!®

In summary, while Claimants believe that both experts agreed on the fundamental
theoretical basis for valuation: a transaction between a willing seller and a willing buyer,
Claimants note that Respondent never produced any such expert opinion meaning that the
Tribunal was presented with only one correct economic evaluation — Dr. Abdala’s®!!.
Claimants then contrast this with the many inaccuracies present throughout Mr. Hart’s
reports and testimony. For example, Claimants note that Mr. Hart claimed that “Las Olas
is not a beachfront property. The property has 150 meters of beachfront that you walk

99612

through a property they don’t own onto a concession area”®’'*. Claimants say this is a

reference to the hotel site’?

and that this part of the Project Site was owned by the
Claimants in May 2011, the proper date of valuation. Claimants admit that while this

property was sold subsequently for a fraction of its true value -- because it was subject to

609 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paragraph 630, pages 285.
610 Jd., 44 633-634, page 288.

S11 Id., 44 635-636, page 289.

612 Transcript, 2245:8-11.

613

The section of the Las Olas Project site behind the concession area - over the public road - coloured green on the

map on page 14 of Mr. Hart’s PowerPoint presentation at the hearing. Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, paragraph
640, pages 290-291.

202

644.

645.

646.

S14 Jd,

the injunction prohibiting construction -- this attempt to mitigate the losses caused by
Costa Rica’s unlawful acts cannot affect the valuation of its fair market worth because
they did still own the land at the date of valuation. In sum, Claimants assert that the
Respondent’s argument that the Las Olas Project, absent Costa Rica’s unlawful acts, only
had access to the Concession through an area of land the Claimants did not own is
completely factually incorrect®!*. And they point to other substantial inaccuracies in Mr.

Hart’s evidence that 77 lots were sold before May 2011°'.

The Claimants contend the simple fact is that they were not: Annex II to the Rejoinder,
on which Mr. Hart relies for his map, includes the date of the sales. On the basis of the
data in Annex II, only 22 lots were sold before May 2011 (analyzed by the date of

inscription, which is the only form of date provided in Annex II).

Again, Claimants argue that Post-May 2011 sales have no relevance whatsoever to the
fair market valuation of the Las Olas Project in this arbitration. The only relevance these
sales have to damages is that the residual value of the land is reduced to account for the
fact that the Claimants no longer own certain lots, and the sales themselves have
generated some (very small) revenue in mitigation of the damage suffered by the
Claimants, which should be deducted from the total valuation damages figure®!®. Dr
Abdala explained in his opening presentation that he has done just that exercise in his
model®'’. Claimants finally note that an additional adjustment has now been made to
account for the fact that the Claimants have (subject to the payments being made) sold

the remaining project land.
In summary, the Claimants’ position®'* in respect of ownership of the physical land is:

The Claimants’ investment is much wider than just the physical land purchased
in 2002. It is not the case that the sale of a lot means that that lot is somehow not
part of the Claimants’ protected investment;

As a result, there is no distinction to be drawn between areas of land which were
sold before the Notice of Arbitration, and those that were sold after the Notice: in

S15 Id., 4 642, page 291.

816 Jd., 4 647, page 293.

617 Transcript, 2139:8-2143:2.

618 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 648, pages 293-295.

203

both cases the lots remain part of the Claimants’ investment for the purposes of
this arbitration;

Like Los Suefios, or any other resort development, the purpose of the Las Olas
Project was not simply to sell plots of land, but to achieve revenue from those
lots even once they had been sold to purchasers. So, it is not the case that once a
lot is sold, it is irrelevant for valuation purposes: there was still a lot of revenue
to be gained by the Project from that lot;

Any sales after May 2011 are not relevant to considering the value of the Las
Olas Project as at May 2011, for the self-evident reason that in May 2011 they
remained available for sale;

Any sales of lots pre-May 2011 do reduce the number of lots available to be sold
as at May 2011, and therefore must be removed from the lot sales element of the
valuation model;

All lots sold pre-May 2011 remain, however, part of the valuation of the other
revenue streams for the Las Olas Project (house building, rentals, etc.); and

Sales post-May 2011 were made in a distressed situation, with the prohibition on
construction work in place and the dispute with Costa Rican agencies already
crystallized. They are therefore not relevant to the valuation exercise, save that
the value of the Claimants’ land today is reduced to account for the fact that the
Claimants no longer own these parts of the property, and there is a corresponding
decrease in damages, as credit is given for the residual value of these sold lots.

647. Claimants also contend that the position in respect of the Concession Site is a legal
question to be resolved by the Tribunal, and not one for the quantum experts to
determine.

2. Claimants contend that Mr. Hart’s methodology is inappropriate and
does not assess the fair market value of the Project.

648. Having agreed on a fair market valuation, Claimants note that Mr. Hart focuses on an
entirely different methodology: an analysis of what he calculates to be the sums spent by
the Claimants on the Project®!®. Claimants say this cost approach has no basis in
economic theory, or in common sense contrary to Mr. Hart’s testimony that his approach

is “commonly used in real estate valuations”.

649. Claimants note®! that Mr. Hart’s method has several major flaws:

619 Id., | 672, page 306.
620 Second Expert Report, Timothy Hart, 217, page 110.
21 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 673, pages 306-307.

204

650.

651.

His version of what constitutes a “cost” approach is at odds with the financial
literature, which has a very different formulation of what constitutes a “cost”
approach;

His version of a “cost” approach does not provide a fair market valuation of an
asset, such that a willing seller and willing buyer would transact at that price, and
therefore does not perform the quantum exercise he admits he is supposed to
have performed;

His only attempt at providing support for the use of the “cost” approach is based
on the report issued by HVS Consulting and Valuation Services (the HVS
Report), which actually uses an income approach to value the asset, not a cost
approach (but Mr. Hart’s selective quotations from the HVS Report in his
Supplemental Report disguise this fact);

In any event, the cost approach considered in the HVS Report is an entirely
different exercise from Mr. Hart’s “cost” approach, further demonstrating the
flaws in his analysis; and

Clearly, the most appropriate asset valuation of a real-estate project must have, as
its basis, a recent appraisal of the property, by a qualified appraiser (to which
further value may then be added).

Claimants respond that it is quite clear that the historic sums spent do not necessarily bear
any relation to the sums required to replace the full value of the asset as at May 2011°?.
For a start, it is clear that the cost to purchase the physical land, with construction permits
and partial infrastructure works in May 2011 would not be the sum paid for the bare land
in 2002 plus costs (which is what Mr. Hart’s methodology supposes). Rather, as Dr
Abdala noted, in a real estate context, for a true cost valuation the value of the land must
be assessed at its highest and best use. In this case, the highest and best use is the
successful operation of the Las Olas Project. It is therefore quite obvious that a market

appraisal would be required to assess the market value of the Project.

It is abundantly clear that a historic costs valuation can never arrive at a “fair market
value’” for a project such as the Las Olas Project. By definition, such a valuation does not
even look at the market for the asset in question, or what price a willing buyer and willing

seller would agree.

2 Id., 4 676, page 307.

205

652.

653.

654.

655.

3. Interest

Both parties agree that interest is recoverable as damage. The dispute between the parties
is in respect of the applicable interest rate. Mr. Hart advocates for the “risk free” rate -
10-year U.S. Treasury bonds. Claimants respond that the mere mention of the fact that
such bonds are regularly used to determine the risk-free rate for the purposes of the
discount rate in a DCF calculation shows clearly that it is not an appropriate interest rate
to be applied to an award of damages. It is uncontroversial that an award of interest is
designed to compensate a party from having been kept out of money to which it was
entitled and has therefore been unable to use that money to generate income. Applying
the risk-free rate does not achieve that aim, since it awards essentially the lowest possible

rateo™4,

Claimants note that Article 10.7.3 DR-CAFTA provides that in the case of a lawful
expropriation, interest is to be paid at a “commercially reasonable rate”. Whilst this case
is not concerned with a lawful expropriation, it should be uncontroversial that the interest
paid in respect of unlawful breaches of the DR-CAFTA should not be any less than that
to be paid in respect of a lawful expropriation. The risk-free rate, for the reasons set out
above, simply is not a commercially reasonable rate, and so in the view of Claimants Mr.

Hart’s proposal does not accord with the requirements imposed by the DR-CAFTA™>.

Dr. Abdala’s approach is to assess the interest rate which matches the characteristics of
the asset the Claimants have lost as a result of Costa Rica’s actions®°. This is a
commercially reasonable rate, they add, because it is reasonable to assume that the
Claimants, faced with the destruction of their investment, would have used funds paid out

at that time to replicate (as far as possible) the investment they lost.
4. Moral Damages

The issue of moral damages was not addressed in much detail during the hearings;

however, Claimants insist it is an important part of their case. The Reply Memorial

3 1d., 4,700, page 318.
4 Id,

5 Id., 4701, page 319.
6 Jd., 4702, page 319.

206

656.

657.

658.

considered in detail the justifications for Mr. Aven’s claim for moral damages®?’. In
short, Claimants say Mr. Aven has suffered enormously from the actions of the Costa
Rican authorities. Mr. Aven dreamt of building a life in Costa Rica, with a successful
development at Las Olas. Instead, he has been extorted for bribes, prosecuted on the basis
of incredibly flimsy evidence which is contradicted by reports from other Government
agencies, accused of forgery (which accusation was swiftly dropped when it came to
court), received threatening emails, been shot at, been subjected to an artificially created

mistrial, and finally been placed on the INTERPOL Red List°?’.

Claimants strongly argue that this final move was clearly taken with no motive other than
vindictively to increase the psychological pressure on Mr. Aven. The INTERPOL system
is not intended to be used for these types of alleged crimes. That the INTERPOL system
was being abused by Costa Rica is clear from the fact that the entry was quietly removed
in 2015, but not before it had serious consequences from Mr. Aven’s future ability to

carry on business, as described in the Memorial and Reply Memorial®”’.

According to Claimants, it is clear that the Costa Rican authorities have targeted and
harassed Mr. Aven, over and above their unlawful treatment of the Claimants’
investment. He has borne the brunt of being the face of the Las Olas Project, and has
suffered significantly as the certificates from his doctor, his witness statements and the
unchallenged witness statement of Mr. Valecourt attest. That damage is both general in
nature and specific, in that the unchallenged evidence shows that Mr. Aven lost, as a
direct consequence of the INTERPOL Red Notice, a superb commercial opportunity with

Google”.

5. Prejudgment Interest

Claimants acknowledge that one issue which was not addressed in any real detail during
the February Hearing is the question of pre-judgment interest. Claimants thus note that

the Respondent does not dispute that, if the Claimants are awarded damages as of May

7 Claimants’ Reply Memorial, Section IV.D(2), pages 138 — 143.
©8 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, | 703, page 319.

9 Id., 4 704, page 320.

0 Jd., 4,705, page 320.

207

659.

660.

661.

662.

663.

2011, the Respondent ought also to pay interest on those damages from May 2011 until

payment of the Award®!.

6. Consequential Damages

On this topic Claimants argue that Mr. Aven and the Las Olas Project sold lots to buyers
on the basis that the Project would proceed to conclusion. But for Costa Rica’s shut down
of the Project, these buyers would have gone on to own holiday, investment or retirement
homes on the Costa Rican coastline and now, as a direct result of Costa Rica’s actions
and through no fault of the Claimants, the purchasers have been left with worthless plots
of land with no hope of the infrastructure, and the Project to which they signed up, being

completed®?.

As Mr. Aven confirmed in his evidence in the December Hearing, these buyers have
made claims against the Project, and the Project is liable to repay $2.7 million to buyers

and investors who purchased lots and options®*.

As a result, Claimants request that a damages award in this case must include a further
sum of $2.7 million, on top of the damages calculated by Dr. Abdala, to compensate the

Claimants for the money they will have to pay back to their buyers.
B. The Respondent’s Position on Quantum

In the event that the Tribunal considers that Respondent should be held liable due to the
violations of standards of protection under DR-CAFTA, it is Respondent’s position that
(i) the quantification of Claimants’ damages should be based on a cost approach method,

and (ii) Mr. Aven is not entitled to moral damages*™4.

Respondent adds that Claimants have presented a damages claim that is grossly inflated.
The property was acquired for a mere fraction of the total amount claimed and has not

been developed. There is no evidence whatsoever that there is a track record of any

1 Jd. 4710, page 322.

2 Id. 4711, page 322.

633 These figures are set out in the table on page 10 of Mr. Aven’s First Witness Statement.
34 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, | 1039, page 228.

208

664.

665.

666.

667.

668.

profits, as there are no structures or infrastructure on the Las Olas Project Site. Therefore,

Claimants’ damages claim is an exercise of pure speculation™>.

Investment arbitration is not the realm in which pure speculation can or should occur. It is
the forum to redress loss. There is no evidence of loss by Claimants. A theoretical
concoction of a potential project that bears no relation to what exists at the Las Olas

Project Site today is not evidence®**.

The investment is a plot of land. Although, admittedly, in a lovely location and relatively
close to the coast, the mere location does not, however, convert it into a US$100 million

profitable project.

Dr Abdala’s report projects sales that have never existed. He projected construction that
had never begun. Dr Abdala projected interest from buyers that never manifested itself.
He projected successful purchases by wealthy and persistently keen timeshare owners

that never showed up.

In reality, the Claimants are amateur investors with little to no clue on how to develop
resorts, let alone one in Costa Rica. Moreover, Dr Abdala’s report relies on a
methodology never before seen in investment arbitration. Claimants and Dr Abdala have
no authority or basis to invent a previously never-seen cash flow. Dr Abdala ultimately
tries to hedge his overly creative theory by introducing some kind of risk factor - to
arbitrarily reduce the number claimed based on the likelihood of success - a likelihood

grounded in US practice, but the US is as irrelevant to this case as any other country.

At the time of submission of its Post-Hearing Brief, Respondent argued that Claimants
continued to own the land (as much as the evidence showed they do), and it has not been
expropriated. Therefore, according to Claimants, if they overcome the environmental
challenges they currently face and start developing the project as they seemingly wish to
do (and could be entitled to do), they would then be set to make the US$ 100 million Dr.
Abdala insists they could make, having already pocketed US$100 million from the

Republic of Costa Rica in this arbitration®’.

35 Id., | 1040, page 232.
6 Jd., 4 1041, page 232.
7 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, {| 1048, page 229.

209

669.

670.

671.

672.

673.

1. The quantification of Claimants’ damages should be based on a cost-
approach method
Respondent points out that both quantum experts have agreed that in order to calculate

Claimants’ damages they have to determine the fair market value (the "FMV") of the Las

1938 1939,

Olas Projec and the nature of the Las Olas Project as a pre-operational project

Nevertheless, both experts disagree on the method to determine the FMV of a
pre-operational project company: while Dr. Abdala proposes a hybrid, combined
approach based on a DCF method and the market approach, Mr. Hart considers that the
cost approach to be the most appropriate method because the Las Olas Project cannot be
considered a going concern. Claimants, in effect, admitted in December 2010 -- very
close to May 2011, the date of valuation -- that the Project was raw land, in a dead

market, with almost no sales™°. This is not a going concern.

In attempting to calculate the potential damages under the cost method, Dr Hart had to
base his calculations on Claimants’ disorganized accounting. He was able to identify a
total of US$1,840,385 in costs which seem to be legitimately related to the Las Ola

Project, plus US$1,647,000 for the original purchase price of the entire property™!.

Nevertheless, Dr Hart had to reduce this figure in light of the fact that Claimants did not

2 Because Claimants have not

own all of the lots that comprised the Las Olas property’
provided detailed costs per lot, Dr Hart estimated that the damages must be reduced by at
least 22% based on the proportion of the square meters of these non-Claimants owned

lots. Therefore, his final estimation of total damages is US$2,720, 160°.

Respondent stands by Dr. Hart’s reports as to the determination of valuation day (May
2011) and interest (pre-award at the 10-year U.S. Treasury Rate or the 6-month
LIBOR+2)“.

638 Transcript, 2125:17-18; Transcript 2241:21.

69 Transcript, 2123:8-11; Transcript 2256:17-18.

64 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, | 1056, page 230.

64 Second Hart Report, {{ 230-231, page 115; Exhibit 12 to Second Hart Report (C-27).

2 Second Hart Report, § 232, page 116; Exhibit 6 to Second Hart Report, Map of Las Olas Property showing lot
ownership.

68 Second Hart Report, § 233, page 116.

#4 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, | 1062, page 232.

210

674.

675.

676.

677.

678.

2. Dr Abdala’s approach is entirely speculative

Respondent contends that Dr. Abdala’s methodology is completely inappropriate to
estimate the damages in this case, and it does not resemble a valuation that would be used

by a real-life buyer or seller®>.

Dr. Abdala says he based his novel approach in
literature, but the only scholar quoted is Professor Damodaran™*. Dr. Abdala has not
provided any example, Respondent adds, in which the proposed model was applied in

the real world, or by any other investment arbitration tribunal.
The "hybrid" model proposed by Dr. Abdala can be summarized as follows°*7:

[Value of the project as a going concern (based on a DCF model) * a supposed
success rate] + [supposed value of the land with existing permits and partial
construction (based on pre-existing appraisal) * supposed failure rate] - Value of
the land under its restricted used (based on a comparable approach)

Since Dr Abdala could not purely rely on a DCF model (due to the acknowledged pre-
operational character of the Las Olas Project), he mixed two valuation approaches for
each component of the calculation: income approach (DCF) and market approach (pre-

existing appraisal and comparables)*.

Respondent further argues that although the DCF model is introduced as an element of
his complex analysis, the largest portion of damages is based on the value of the project
as a going concern, which has to be calculated using a DCF, a model that cannot be
applied to this case from any perspective. DCF is not applicable because Las Olas has
never been a going concern. There are minimal sales in order to extrapolate certain future
cash flows. Even worse, Claimants did not even provide the necessary supporting

documentation for these minimal sales™?.

DCF is also not applicable because there are no historical figures upon which to base
critical inputs such as sales volume, net sales prices, construction costs, and operational

costs. This was recognized by Dr. Abdala during the Hearing®°.

5 Id., | 1063, page 232.

6 First Abdala Report, 4/54, page 31 (CLEX-041).

7 As cited in Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, | 1064, page 233.

#8 Td., | 1065, page 233.

© Id., 4 1066-1067, page 233.

60 Jd., | 1069, page 234, citing the cross-examination of Dr. Abdala, Transcript, 2202:16-22; 2203: 1-6.

211

679. Consequently, any amount derived from Dr. Abdala’s estimation calculation is inflated
and uncertain, since each of the inputs of the key drivers that Dr Abdala used to calculate
the value of Las Olas as a going concern (lots, houses, condos, timeshares, and hotel) are
totally speculative®*!.

680. Respondent includes in its Post-Hearing Brief a table detailing how the comparables used

by Dr Abdala as part of the market approach calculation are based on inappropriate and

unrealistic data which does not relate to the Las Olas Project at all°:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Component of Data on which Dr. Abdala eyes
+ 5 Criticism
calculation relies
Lots Prices from Remax website | ¢ Prices are not from 2011
in 2015
¢ No adjustments for any
Prices from E-mail from El | changes in the real estate
Mistico in 2015 market
* El Mistico is not similar to
Las Olas
Hotel Profit margin based on hotel | Not clear how these hotels
sale transactions in Panama, are comparable to a hotel in
Mexico and Central America | Costa Rica
Value as a going Condos : eae from Remax website | ¢ Prices are not from 2011
in
concern El Mistico is not similar to
¢ Prices from E-mail from El | Las Olas
Mistico in 2015
Houses ¢ Buyers would have held the | The survey only includes
properties 10 years before data for US households, not
selling, and 90% of the comparable to Costa Rica
properties will be sold after
that period, based on
statistics from the National
Association of Realtors
investment and vacation
home buyers
But for expected | Probability of © Statistical evidence of ¢ US data is not comparable
value success survivorship from the Bureau | to data for business in Costa

 

651 Second Hart Report, Section 7.2.

652

Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, | 1071, page 234.

212

 

 

of Labor and Statistics

¢ Successful comparable
resorts such as Los Suenos,

Rica

The resorts are not
comparable

El Mistico, Residencias
Malaga and Costa del Sol

 

Residual Value Prices from Remax website | ¢ Prices are not from 2011
(Value of the in 2015

Land in its current ¢ No adjustments for any
state) ¢ Three comparable changes in the real estate

properties market

¢ No detailed listings
associated with the three
comparable properties

 

 

 

 

 

 

681. Respondent alleges that these examples show that Dr Abdala’s calculation is based on
information which does not relate to the Las Olas Project, it is too uncertain, subjective,
and dependent upon contingencies’. Respondent adds that tribunals have been
understandably reluctant to rely on this type of information, suggesting that extreme
caution is required in assessing any claim for compensation under the DCF methodology
when the project does not have a record of profitability. In Siag v. Egypt, where Dr.

Abdala also acted as an expert, the Tribunal held:

Mr Abdala of LECG was asked by the Tribunal a question concerning the
differences in valuing the future profits of a business which has been
operating for several years, as compared to a "business opportunity “which is
still in the development phase. Mr Abdala very candidly acknowledged that
there is one particular difference and this is that "... inthe [case) that you have a
track record of profitability you could say that you have a higher degree of
certainty as to what to expect of the performance of the business in the future.

[J
682. Points such as those just mentioned tend to reinforce the wisdom in the established
reluctance of tribunals such as this one to utilise DCF analyses for “young” businesses

lacking a long track record of established trading. In all probability that reluctance ought

63 Jd., | 1072, page 235.

213

683.

684.

685.

686.

to be even more pronounced in cases such as the present where the business is still in

its relatively early development phase and has no trading history at all.

In other words, a DCF would be perfectly applicable to a scenario of an ongoing project
because the prospective buyer would estimate the cash flows and discounts to the
valuation date, applying a discount rate that accounts for the various types of risks that

cash flows are subjected to, as well as the time value of money®>.

However, the future cash streams of a project must be estimated with a reasonable degree
of certainty, which does not exist in this case. The Las Olas Project cannot qualify as an

ongoing project when it has generated only 16 sales in 9 years®°.

Respondent then concludes that, in light of the pre-operational character of Las Olas (no
historical figures upon which to base critical inputs such as sales volume, net sales prices,
construction costs, and operational costs), that the most appropriate method to calculate

any damages is the cost approach method suggested by Dr. Hart®*’.
3. Mr. Aven is not entitled to moral damages

Respondent emphasizes that the claim made by Claimants to the effect that a finding of
the Tribunal of a bribery solicitation "would be worthy of sanctions and moral damages

658 ig a totally unsupported

would be one of the options to [provide] that sanction’
statement®?. Respondent notes that in the only case where a Tribunal awarded moral
damages to the claimant, the tribunal found that the claimant was exposed to physical
duress and the state’s breach of the treaty was deemed malicious®®’. Respondent adds

that the facts of Desert Line v. Yemen certainly cannot be applied to the case at hand

654 Waguih Elie George Siag and Clorinda Vecchi v. The Arab Republic of Egypt, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/15,
Award, June 19, 2009, §§[ 567 and 570 (RLA-173); Sounthern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited y. Arab
Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/84/3, Award on the Merits, May 20, 1992, § 189 (CLA-38).

655 Second Hart Report, § 106.

656 Exhibit C-98.

657 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, | 1091, page 239.

658 Claimants’ Opening Statement, Day | Transcript, 115:21-22.

65° Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, 44 1106-1129, pages 276 - 281.

660 Desert Line Projects LLC v. The Republic of Yemen, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/17, Award, February 6, 2008
(CLA-85).

214

687.

688.

XII.

689.

690.

where Claimants have not even brought clear and convincing evidence to support the

alleged bribe solicitations™'.

Respondent concludes that the other two cases that Claimants rely on were decided ex
aequo et bono or had as applicable law domestic rules so their reasoning cannot support a

finding of moral damages under international law.

C. The Tribunal’s Analysis

Considering that the Tribunal has determined that Respondent has not breached its
obligations under DR-CAFTA, whether under Article 10.5 and Annex 10-B, or Article

10.7(1) and Annex 10-C,%? the Tribunal equally concludes that there are no damages or

other compensation due to Claimants.

RESPONDENT’S COUNTERCLAIM

A. Respondent’s Position: Claimants are Liable for Environmental Damage and
therefore must Restore the Las Olas Ecosystem

During its submissions, Respondent has argued that Claimants undertook works that

adversely impacted the Las Olas Project Site considerably, affecting the environment.

The evidence rendered supports Respondent’s counterclaim, and hence, the Tribunal

should order Claimants to repair the damages caused by their activity noting that (i) the

Tribunal has jurisdiction over counterclaims under DR-CAFTA; (ii) Respondent has

proven the existence of damages to the Las Olas ecosystem®>.
1. The Tribunal has jurisdiction over counterclaims under DR-CAFTA

Respondent argues that the Tribunal has jurisdiction over the counterclaim raised by
Respondent since (i) the text of the DR-CAFTA envisages the possibility for

respondent states to bring counterclaims against investors for misconduct for which they

661 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, | 1093, page 240.

662

Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, § 1106.

63 See Section X.E.585 above.

664 Respondent’

665

 

Counter-Memorial, | 647-655; Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, Section XI.

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, | 1095, page 241.

215

are liable, and (ii) reasons of procedural economy and efficiency justify that the claim

and its counterclaim shall be resolved in the same proceeding™.

2. The text of the DR-CAFTA envisages the possibility for respondent
states to bring counterclaims against investors

691. To determine whether an investment tribunal has jurisdiction over counterclaims, the
Tribunal has to look at the text of the Treaty. DR-CAFTA neither excludes nor
prohibits an investment tribunal to exercise its jurisdiction over counterclaims under

Chapter 10. The relevant provisions provide as follows:

Section B: Investor-State Dispute Settlement
Article 10.15: Consultation and Negotiation

In the event of an investment dispute, the claimant and the respondent should
initially seek to resolve the dispute through consultation and negotiation, which
may include the use of non-binding, third-party procedures such as conciliation
and mediation.

[.]
Article 10.16: Submission of a Claim to Arbitration

In the event that a disputing party considers that an investment dispute cannot be
settled by consultation and negotiation:

(a) the claimant, on its own behalf, may submit to arbitration under this Section
aclaim

(i) that the respondent has breached
(A) an obligation under Section A,
(B) an investment authorization, or
(C) an investment agreement;

and

(ii) that the claimant has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or
arising out of, that breach; and

(b) the claimant, on behalf of an enterprise of the respondent that is a
juridical person that the claimant owns or controls directly or indirectly,
may submit to arbitration under this Section a claim

(i) that the respondent has breached

66 Jd., 4 1096, page 241.

216

692.

693.

694.

695.

(A) an obligation under Section A,
(B) an investment authorization, or
(C) an investment agreement.
and
(ii) that the enterprise has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or
arising out of, that breach." (Emphasis added).
These provisions are completely neutral as to the identity of the claimant or respondent in
an investment dispute arising between the parties, allowing a State Party to sue an
investor in relation to a dispute concerning an investment in that country. Accordingly,
Respondent believes that the text of the DR-CAFTA encompasses counterclaims by

respondent States within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

Furthermore, the only provision referring to “counterclaims” in contained in Article
10.20.7 of DR-CAFTA, clarifies that:

A respondent may not assert as a defense, counterclaim, right of set-off, or for

any other reason that the claimant has received or will receive indemnification or

other compensation for all or part of the alleged damages pursuant to an
insurance or guarantee contract.

It follows that, except for a counterclaim by a respondent State alleging that “claimant
has received or will receive indemnification or other compensation for all or part of the
alleged damages pursuant to an insurance or guarantee contract,” Respondent’s right to
counterclaim under the Treaty is contemplated and falls within the scope of jurisdiction
of a tribunal constituted under the Treaty”.
3. Reasons of procedural economy and efficiency justify that the claim
and its counterclaim shall be resolved in the same proceeding.

Respondent’s counterclaim is based on the damages suffered by Costa Rica as result of
Claimants’ operation of the Las Olas Project, and thus, the relationship between the claim

and the counterclaim is direct. Therefore, reasons of procedural economy and efficiency

661 1d., 41100, page 242.

217

696.

697.

justify that the groundless claim put forward by Claimants and this counterclaim be

adequately resolved by this Tribunal in the same proceeding.

In this sense, the tribunal in Urbaser v. Argentina found that because Argentina’s
counterclaim was related to the investment and related to the same concession, there was
enough support to establish a connection between the investor’s claim and the

counterclaim. The tribunal held:

The Tribunal observes that the factual link between the two claims is manifest.
Both the principal claim and the claim opposed to it are based on the same
investment, or the alleged lack of sufficient investment, in relation to the same
Concession. This would be sufficient to adopt jurisdiction over the
Counterclaims well. The legal connection is also established to the extent the
Counterclaim is not alleged as a matter based on domestic law only.
Respondent argues indeed that Claimants’ failure to provide the necessary
investments caused a violation of the fundamental right for access to water,
which was the very purpose of the investment agreed upon in the Regulatory
Framework and the Concession Contract and embodied in the protection
scheme of the BIT. It would be wholly inconsistent to rule on Claimants’ claim
in relation to their investment in one sense and to have a separate proceeding
where compliance with the commitment for funding may be ruled upon in a
different way. Reasonable administration of justice cannot tolerate such a
potential inconsistent outcome™.

Respondent also points to Burlington v. Ecuador — a recent decisions in the field in
addition to Urbaser v. Argentina, where Tribunals have admitted jurisdiction to hear
counterclaims brought by respondent states for violations of human rights and
environmental damage®”’. In this case, the Tribunal imposed an award of US$ 39.2
million on the investor for environmental damage. This trend is likely to continue and
shows that investment tribunals are ready to hear counterclaims when dealing with

investor wrongdoing®”!.

68 Spyridon Roussalis

 

Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/1, Separate Opinion of Michael Reisman, November

28, 2011 (hereinafter Spyridon Roussalis v. Romania) (RLA-99).
&9 Urbaser 8.A. and Consorcio de Aguas Bilbao Bizkaia, Bilbao Biskaia Ur Partzuergoa v. The Argentine
Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/26, Award, December 8, 2016 (hereinafter Urbaser v. Argentina), 41151 (RLA-

174).

6 Urbaser v. Argentina (RLA-174); and Burlington Resources Inc v. The Republic of Ecuador, ICSD Case No.
ARB/08/5, Decision on Counterclaims, February 7, 2017 (hereinafter Burlington v. Ecuador) (RLA-175).
© Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, | 1104, page 243.

218

4. Respondent has proven the existence of damages to the Ecosystems on
the Project Site.

698. Respondent requests that, after the Tribunal asserts jurisdiction to adjudicate
Respondent’s counterclaim under the Treaty, the Tribunal should find that (i) Claimants
unlawfully impacted a wetland, which caused environmental damage to the Project Site;
and therefore, (ii) Claimants ought to repair the damage caused to the ecosystem*”.

5. Claimants unlawfully impacted a wetland, which caused
environmental damage to the Project Site.

699. To develop the Las Olas Project, Claimants assumed investment obligations which gave
rise to bona fide expectations by Costa Rica that their investment would indeed be made
ensuring the protection to the environment. By failing to make their investment
appropriately, Claimants violated domestic provisions as well as the obligation under
customary international law to respect the environment. Such obligation is binding not
only upon sovereign States, but also upon legal and natural persons such as Claimants:

The Tribunal may mention in this respect that international law accepts corporate
social responsibility as a standard of crucial importance for companies operating
in the field of international commerce. This standard includes commitments to
comply with human rights in the framework of those entities’ operations
conducted in countries other than the country of their seat or incorporation. In
light of this more recent development, it can no longer be admitted that

companies operating internationally are immune from becoming subjects of
international law. (Emphasis added)

700. Furthermore, the text of DR-CAFTA supports such understanding when it allows

investors to invoke rights resulting from international laws:

If the BIT therefore is not based on a corporation’s incapacity of holding
rights under international law, it cannot be admitted that it would reject by
necessity any idea that a foreign investor company could not be subject to
international law obligations.

701. Accordingly, Claimants’ conduct shall be analyzed under the concept of international
responsibility:

[t]o the extent that international organizations and other legal and natural
persons may also be subjects of international law, the concept of "state

© Id., 4 1105, page 243.

219

702.

703.

704.

705.

responsibility". may also inform the principle of the liability of other
international persons under the rules of public international laws.

Thus, Claimants’ unlawful works which caused environmental damage to the Project Site
entail a wrongful act on their part under the rules of international responsibility which has

to be repaired.

Respondent has proven that Claimants unlawfully impacted a wetland by filling and
drainage works, causing environmental damage to the Project Site. Recalling that
Claimants allege that Respondent has not shown causation between Claimants’ conduct
and the damage to the ecosystem®”, Respondent argues that the requirement of causation
is in direct connection with the burden of proof that Claimants must bear on
environmental matters under Costa Rican law. Under the precautionary principle,
Respondent added, the burden of proof showing no environmental harm always falls on

the developer.

This was also recalled in Burlington v Ecuador in the context of a counterclaim on
environmental damage. Although the Tribunal had to apply domestic law, the

principles to be applied were similar -if not the same- as in the case at hand:

Applied to the present case, the rule contained in Article 397(1) means that once
Ecuador has made a showing of the existence of environmental harm reasonably
related to the Consortium’s risky activities, for example by way of the IEMS
sampling exercise, Burlington then carries the burden of demonstrating that
there is no harm or, if there is harm, what its limits are®. (Emphasis added)

Therefore, when it comes to the environment, proof of causation is not required by the
party alleging it. The precautionary principle reverses the burden of proof on the

developer and causation is presumed:

While the Tribunal will revert to the issue of successive tort liability, it
disagrees with Burlington’s position that Ecuador must prove that the
harm was caused during the time of the Consortium’s operations. Indeed,
proof of causation is not required. Causation is presumed, with the result
that liability ensues from the mere exercise of a risky activity and the occurrence
of harm that is plausibly connected to such activity as far as the type and
location of the harm is concerned®”*. (Emphasis added)

3 Claimants’ Reply Memorial, 449, page 146.
4 Burlington v. Ecuador (RLA-175), § 227.
68 Id, 4232.

220

706.

707.

708.

709.

710.

Even though it was Claimants’ burden to evidence their lack of liability regarding the
damage to Las Olas, Respondent has conclusively shown that Claimants are liable for the
refilling of Wetland No. 1 and the consequential environmental damage caused to the
ecosystem. Respondent relies on the First and Second KECE Reports as well as the

Green Roots Report’s conclusive findings.

During the Hearing, Claimants tried to blame the Municipality for the works that
impacted Wetland No. 1. As described in Section X, those assertions are baseless because
the Municipality at all times undertook works off-site and Claimants’ own construction

logs show that drainage works were carried out by Claimants’ employees onsite®”®.

As Respondent has demonstrated in this proceeding, Claimants unlawfully impacted a
wetland by refilling and draining works, breaching imperative norms of environmental
protection in several respects. Respondent has also shown -although it did not have
the burden to do so- how Claimants impacted the biodiversity and the ecological

conditions of the Project Site, causing environmental damage.
6. Claimants ought to repair the damage caused to the ecosystem

Having demonstrated Claimants’ wrongful act, it is a well-established principle under
international law that a wrongful act involves responsibility, as recognized in Article 1 of
the ILC Articles on the Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts (2001).
The obligation to make reparation has been developed by the Permanent Court of

677

International Justice in the Chorzow Factory case' and the approach has been

reaffirmed, in the environmental context, by the International Court of Justice in the Case

Concerning the Gabcikovo-Nagymaros Project®”®.

DR-CAFTA envisages that reparation of an injury caused by an international wrongful

act shall take the form of compensation and/or restitution:

616 Minute of Inspection #2, April 4, 2011 (R-509); Minute of Inspection #3, April 12, 2011 (R-510);

Minute of Inspection #4, April 18, 2011 (R-511); Minute of Inspection #6, May 2, 2011 (R-512).

© Case Concerning the Factory of Chorzéw (Germany v. Poland), Claim for Indemnity, Merits, Judgment No. 13,
PCH, September 13, 1928, p. 21 (RLA-53); In Von Pezold v. Republic of Zimbabwe, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/15,

Award, July 28, 2015, | 682 (RLA-52).

8 Case Concerning Gabcikovo-Nagymaros Project (Hungary y. Slovakia), CJ Judgment, September 25, 1997, p.

149 (RLA-176).

221

Article 10.26: Awards

1. Where a tribunal makes a final award against a respondent, the tribunal may
award, separately or in combination, only:

(a) monetary damages and any applicable interest;

(b) restitution of property, in which case the award shall provide that the
respondent may pay monetary damages and any applicable interest in lieu of
restitution. (Emphasis added)

711. Restitution is aimed at re-establishing or restoring the situation which existed before the
wrongful act was committed, provided and to the extent that it is not materially

679

impossible’ In effect, restoration of environmental harm has been upheld by

international investment tribunals®°.

712. Thus, under international law principles for reparation and Article 10.26(b) of the Treaty,
the Tribunal should order Claimants to repair the damage caused to Respondent by

restoring the ecosystems’ natural conditions.

713. In the case at hand, Annex C of the First KECE Report contains a feasible restoration
plan that can be put into place to restore the environmental damage caused to Wetland

No. 1. This includes:
e Remove all fill placed in Wetland No. 1;
e Plug and/or backfilling drainage ditches in Wetland No. 1;

e Re-grade terraced hills in those areas within the project site that were once
forested and have been cleared;

e Remove unpermitted roads that have significantly affected the condition of the
wetlands and forests on the Las Olas Site;

e Plant and/or direct seed a ground-cover of native, herbaceous plant species in order
to accelerate vegetative cover in the restored wetland and to stabilize the re-
graded; and

e Plant a specified number and species of native forest trees as seedlings to accelerate
the recovery of the forest, rehabilitate and stabilize the soils, as the last phase of the

restoration.

6” Philippe Sands, Principles of International Environmental Law (CUP 2003, 2 Ed) 883 (RLA-37).
0 Burlington v. Ecuador (RLA-175).

222

714.

715.

716.

717.

Mr Erwin reminded the Tribunal during the Hearing of the possibility of restoring the Las
Olas Project Site:
So, what’s actually required to restore this site and put the ecosystem back
together is basically to reverse the existing drainage where the roads are cut
into the hillsides with ditches, where ditches have been constructed across a

wetland, like in Wetland Number 1, removing at least some amount of the fill
in Wetland Number to make it--to make it whole again®!.

Based on the above, without prejudice to Respondent’s jurisdictional and admissibility
objections, in light of the damage caused to the Las Olas Ecosystem, and the feasibility of
restoration of the land, Respondent respectfully requests that the Tribunal order
Claimants to pay damages to Respondent in order to restore “the situation that existed

prior to the occurrence of? Claimants’ wrongful impact of the Project Site.
B. The Claimants’ Position

In their Reply, Claimants argue that the counterclaim is not grounded in law or in fact,
and should be dismissed. They state that dispute settlement under Chapter 20 of the DR-
CAFTA is exclusively limited to disputes involving Parties to the Agreement. It is thus
impossible for a “respondent,” as the term is used in Article 10.26, to be anything other

than a host State.

Claimants also contend that even though DR-CAFTA Article 10.20(7) seems to
contemplate the existence of some sort of counterclaim (“A respondent may not assert as
a defense, counterclaim, right of set-off, or for any other reason that the claimant has
received or will receive indemnification or other compensation ...”) the provision’s
counterclaim reference is general in application, intended to cover any potential rights of
counterclaim, set-off, or the like under municipal law or indeed any other potential for a,
and that this type of clause has been included in every US Model BIT since the beginning

of the program in the early 1980s°*.

6! Transcript, 1887:15-22

682

Articles on State Responsibility
683 Claimants’ Reply Memorial, §] 447, page 145.

 

, p. 213 (CLEX-273).

4 1d., | 448, page 145.

223

718.

719.

720.

721.

722.

Finally, they claim that Respondent has failed to show (beyond mere assertion by Mr
Erwin in his Expert Report) that the Claimants have caused damage to the environment at

Las Olas, resulting in loss to the Respondent.
Cc. The Tribunal’s Analysis

Respondent’s Counterclaim against the Claimants was originally introduced in its
Counter Memorial“ based on the findings listed in Annex C of the First KECE Report,
according to which there are man-made activities on the Las Olas Project Site,
summarized as follows:

[C]learing of forest, terracing hill slopes, constructing roads, excavating drainage

ditches, installing culverts and inlet structures and the construction of one single-
family residence in a filled wetland®°.

Costa Rica charges the Claimants with the alleged considerable environmental damage
caused by them. Those charges include: a) The construction of the roads, excavation of
ditches, placement of culverts and the removal of the vegetative strata of the forest; b) the

increasing of soil sedimentation; c) the filling and draining of wetlands.

Costa Rica asserts that the Claimants were aware of the ecological sensibility of Las Olas
site through the Protti Report, but they decided to disregard it and failed to disclose the
report to the competent authorities. They omitted to describe crucial elements of the
ecosystems onsite, and fragmented their EV application to avoid communicating to
SETENA an assessment of the full project site. In the Respondent’s view, such conduct
breached imperative norms of environmental protection so the Claimants must be liable

for it.

Regarding the evidence of the alleged infractions by Claimants, Respondent basically
refers to the KECE Expert Report. For the purpose of reparation, Respondent enunciated
the steps for the site restoration as per the KECE Report®*’. Regarding the quantum of
damages, Costa Rica observed that:

The cost of restoration can only be quantified upon review of an appropriate
restoration plan to be prepared by Claimants and presented for approval to a

5 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, $f 647-662 pages 160-164.
686 First KECE Report, Annex C.
7 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, §] 657 page 162.

224

723.

724.

725.

726.

competent authority in Costa Rica. Moreover, quantification of such restoration
plan would require a dedicated site visit. That notwithstanding, Mr Erwin
anticipates that the restoration required for the Las Olas Ecosystem would be
unlikely to be quantified at less than USD 500,000 to USD 1,000,000.

In its Rejoinder, Costa Rica ratified its position. Regarding the evidence, it added that

“the First and Second KECE Reports speak from themselves as to damage caused to the

27689

Project Site by Claimants’ and “that there is not more conclusive proof than the

7690,

findings on the actual conditions of the Project Site With respect to the reparation,

Costa Rica merely stated that:
Since Claimants did not advance any argument regarding the reparation approach

under international law nor the Restoration plan, Respondent stands by the
arguments developed in this regard in its Counter Memorial.

In its Post-Hearing Brief, Costa Rica further detailed its Counterclaim. In addition it
submitted several photos and graphics, and for the first time advanced its views on
causation and burden of proof on environmental damages. On this issue, Costa Rica
stated:
The requirement of causation is in direct connection with the burden of proof that
Claimants must bear on environmental matters under Costa Rican law. Under

the precautionary principle, the burden of proof of the inexistence of
environmental harm always falls on the developer®”.

In the same direction, Costa Rica concluded, “it was for Claimants to demonstrate that no

harm to the environment had occurred in Las Olas Project. They have failed to do so”.

Claimants has challenged the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over counterclaims, as analyzed
below, and criticized the terms of Costa Rica’s Counterclaim, observing that even in the

case the Tribunal decides it holds jurisdiction on the issue,

...the Respondent has failed to show (beyond mere assertion by Mr Erwin in his
Expert Report) that the Claimants have caused damage to the environment at Las
Olas, resulting in loss to the Respondent. The Respondent has made no attempt to
explain how any of the allegedly detrimental activities described by Mr Erwin in
his Expert Report and repeated by the Respondent at paragraphs 647 and 648 of

88 [d., | 658.
9 Respondent’s Rejoinder Memorial, § 1150 page 285.
0 Id., 4 1154, page 286.

Hd.

2 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, | 1110 page 244.
3 Id., 4 1113, page 245.

225

its Counter Memorial can be attributed to the Claimants’ actions, nor has it
evidenced the alleged environmental harm as a result.

727. Claimants consider that the Respondent did not make “real effort to substantiate its vague
‘damage’ claims”**>. Regarding damages, Claimants observed
...the Respondent has made no effort — beyond the bald assertions of Mr Erwin

in his First and Second Reports — to quantify the alleged damage to the
environment the Claimants would allegedly have caused.

728. Regarding Respondent’s Counterclaim, the first point this Tribunal needs to determine is
whether it has jurisdiction to examine it. As indicated above, Respondent affirms the

Tribunal’s jurisdiction on three main grounds:

e On the interpretation of some articles of DR-CAFTA, which, in the opinion of Costa
Rica, have no sense but because counterclaims are admitted. Particularly articles
10.26.1 and 10.26.8 are referred to “the respondent”, in general, and not to the host
State, what would mean that the respondent might be the investor. Costa Rica also
invokes article 10.20.7 because it refers to some issues that a “respondent may not
assert as a defense, counterclaim, right of set-off, or for any other reason...” what
would mean a contrario “that counterclaims which do not fall within the exception are
within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal”.

e On reasons of procedural economy and efficiency, as Professor Michael Reisman
exposed in his Declaration in Roussalis Case.

e In the Post-Hearing Brief, Respondent invoked also some recent decisions of

Investment tribunals, particularly in the Urbaser Case.

729. Claimants strongly challenge the jurisdiction of the Tribunal over counterclaims. For
them, dispute settlement under DR-CAFTA “is the reserve of state Parties to the Treaty.
As such, it is impossible for a “respondent” as described in Article 10.26 to be anything
other than a host state Party to the DR-CAFTA”. Furthermore, the Claimants consider
that in any case, the Treaty does not give the Tribunal any authority to award the
restitution Respondent demands because if “the Parties to the DR-CAFTA intended

respondent States to have the ability to pursue counterclaims, they would have specified
4 Claimants’ Reply Memorial, § 449, page 146.
65 Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, 435, page 209.
66 Id., 4 438, page 210.

226

730.

731.

732.

the Tribunal’s authority in this regard in the same way as they did in the case of

investors’ claims.”

Notwithstanding, the Claimants made a short reference to the merits of Respondent’s

counterclaim:
Even if this Tribunal were to disagree with the Claimants on the question of
admissibility of any counterclaim, the Respondent has failed to show (beyond
mere assertion by Mr Erwin in his Expert Report) that the Claimants have caused
damage to the environment at Las Olas, resulting in loss to the Respondent. The
Respondent has made no attempt to explain how any of the allegedly detrimental
activities described by Mr Erwin in his Expert Report and repeated by the
Respondent at paragraphs 647 and 648 of its Counter Memorial can be attributed
to the Claimants’ actions, nor has it evidenced the alleged environmental harm as
a result®”.

The Tribunal agrees that, in general, the dispute settlement under DR-CAFTA is
conceived for claims against host States. According to Article 10.16 any claim must
indicate that the respondent has breached an obligation under Section A. Further, in
Article 10.28 “claimant” is defined as “an investor of a Party that is a party to an
investment dispute with another Party” and “respondent” is equally defined as “the Party
that is a party to an investment dispute”. There is no doubt as to what the Treaty Parties
intended when they made reference to this terms in articles 10.26.1 and 10.26.8. By the
same token, however, if only a State that is a Party to DR-CAFTA can be a “respondent”,

then the Treaty Parties also contemplated the possibility of counterclaims.

In general, Section A of Article 10 sets out only State’s obligations, so it may be
deducted that only States can be sued and that the investors cannot be respondents even
in a counterclaim. It could be argued that Section A also contains, at least implicitly,
some obligations to investors, especially with respect to the environmental laws of the
host State. Article 10.9.3.c stipulates:

... paragraphs 1(b), (c), and (f), and 2(a) and (b), shall not be construed to

prevent a Party from adopting or maintaining measures, including environmental
measures:

(i) necessary to secure compliance with laws and regulations that are not
inconsistent with this Agreement;

7 Claimants’ Reply Memorial, | 449, page 146.

227

733.

734.

735.

736.

(ii) necessary to protect human, animal, or plant life or health; or

(iii) related to the conservation of living or non-living exhaustible natural
resources.

In turn, Article 10.11 establishes that:
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prevent a Party from adopting,
maintaining, or enforcing any measure otherwise consistent with this Chapter

that it considers appropriate to ensure that investment activity in its territory is
undertaken in a manner sensitive to environmental concerns.

Furthermore, Article 10.1 makes it clear that Article 10.11 covers all investments in the
territory of the Party. A logical effect of Article 10.11 could be that the “measures”
adopted by the host State for the protection of the environment should be deemed to be
compulsory for everybody under the jurisdiction of the State, particularly the foreign
investors. Therefore, following said interpretation the investors have the obligation, not
only under domestic law but also under Section A of Chapter 10 of DR-CAFTA to abide
and comply the environmental domestic laws and regulations, including the measures
adopted by the host State to protect human, animal, or plant life or health. No investor
can ignore or breach such measures and its breach is a violation of both domestic and
international law, so that the perpetrator cannot be exempt of liability for the damages

caused.

Thus, if it could be interpreted that these provisions impose affirmative obligations on
investors, it is not impossible either de facto or de jure, that a foreign investor could be
found to breach an obligation under Section A, by the violation the environmental
domestic laws and regulations. Does it mean that host States may sue investors before an

international arbitral tribunal under Section B of Article 10 of DR-CAFTA?

The answer to that question is not simple. Most international investment tribunals have
not recognized jurisdiction over the counterclaims introduced before them in the absence
of an explicit agreement between the parties to submit the counterclaim to the arbitral

1998

tribunal®*’*. However, recently, although outside the scope of DR-CAFTA, some tribunals

8 Im Saluka, an UNCITRAL tribunal asserted its prima facie jurisdiction on a counterclaim presented within the
framework of the BIT between The Nederland and the Czech Republic, but eventually, on the ground of some
particularities of that case, it decided it was “without jurisdiction to hear and determine the counterclaim put
forward by the Respondent in its Counter-Memorial”. Saluka Invetments B.V. v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL,

228

737.

738.

have asserted their jurisdiction over a counterclaim, in particular the Tribunals of
Urbaser v. Argentina and Burlington v. Ecuador, both within the framework of the
ICSID Convention and of two BITs (Spain-Argentina and USA-Ecuador, respectively).
In Burlington, the issue of jurisdiction was not at the stake, because the Parties reached
an agreement where they “expressed their agreement and consent that this arbitration is
the ‘appropriate forum for the final resolution of the Counterclaims arising out of the
investments made by Burlington Resources and its affiliates in Blocks 7 and 21, so as to
ensure maximum judicial economy and consistency””*”’. Consequently the investor
(Burlington) did not challenge the tribunal’s jurisdiction to decide the counterclaims.
Additionally, in Burlington, the Tribunal mentioned Article 46 of ICSID Convention,
which empowers ICSID tribunals to decide “counterclaims arising directly out of the
subject-matter of the dispute provided that they are within the scope of the consent of the
parties and are otherwise within the jurisdiction of the Centre”. In that case, the consent
of the Parties was explicit and unambiguous. So the Burlington jurisprudence is not

indeed useful for this case, where there is no consent expressed in similar terms.

The Urbaser tribunal instead, based on Argentina-Spain BIT, ICSID Convention,
international human rights law and general international law, including general principles
of international law, concluded, “it has jurisdiction to deal with Respondent’s
Counterclaim in accordance with Articles 25 and 46 of the ICSID Convention and Article
X of the BIT”. Some aspects of this decision may help to elucidate the issue of the
admissibility of a counterclaim. In fact, environmental law is integrated in many ways to
international law, including DR-CAFTA. It is true that the enforcement of environmental
law is primarily to the States, but it cannot be admitted that that a foreign investor could
not be subject to international law obligations in this field, particularly in the light of

Articles 10.9.3, 10.11 and 17 of DR-CAFTA.

Under international law of investments, particularly under DR-CAFTA, the investors
enjoy by themselves a number of rights both substantive and procedural, including the

right to sue directly the host State when it breaches its international obligations on foreign

 

Decision on Jurisdiction over the Czech Republic’s Counterclaim, 7 May 2004.
° Burlington v. Ecuador (RLA-175), 4 60.
200 Urbaser v. Argentina (RLA-174), 4 1155.

229

739.

740.

TAL.

investment (Section A of Article 10 in DR-CAFTA). What about the investor’s
obligations arising of the investment according to international law? This Tribunal shares
the views of Urbaser Tribunal that it can no longer be admitted that investors operating
internationally are immune from becoming subjects of international law”'. It is
particularly convincing when it comes to rights and obligations that are the concern of all
States, as it happens in the protection of the environment. It is pertinent to recall the
observation of the International Court of Justice regarding this kind of obligations: “In
view of the importance of the rights involved, all States can be held to have a legal

interest in their protection; they are obligations erga omnes”.

Under Article 10, Section A of DR-CAFTA, foreign investors have the obligation to
abide by and comply with the measures taken by the host State to protect the
environment. The claims subject to arbitration according to Article 10.16 must indicate
that the respondent has breached an obligation under Section A. Normally it is the State
who is in such position but, what happens if the foreign investor breaches an obligation
that is deemed to have been imposed to it by Section A? Are foreign investors immune to
be sued either directly or through a counterclaim before an arbitral tribunal established
according to DR-CAFTA? There are no substantive reasons to exempt foreign investor of
the scope of claims for breaching obligations under Article 10 Section A DR-CAFTA,

particularly in the field of environmental law.

Moreover, Article 10.15 is referred in general to “an investment dispute” while Article
10.16 is applicable when an “investment dispute cannot be settle by consultation or
negotiation”, which covers the disputes giving rise to counterclaims. The language of
Articles 10.15 and 10.16 of DR-CAFTA is in principle wide enough to encompass
counterclaims and that Article 10.16 does not imply that it applies only to disputes in

which it is an investor which initiates claims.

Additionally, the admission of counterclaims has several practical advantages on

procedural economy and efficiency, for the benefit of both the host State and the foreign

701 d., 41195.
72 1CJ, Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited, Repott,1970, §| 33.

230

742.

743.

744,

investor, as Professor Reisman has highlighted in his vote in Spyridon Roussalis v.

Romania Case:
It is important to bear in mind that such counterclaim jurisdiction is not only a
concession to the State Party: Article 46 works to the benefit of both respondent
state and investor. In rejecting ICSID jurisdiction over counterclaims, a neutral
tribunal — which was, in fact, selected by the claimant — perforce directs the
respondent State to pursue its claims in its own courts where the very investor
who had sought a forum outside the state apparatus is now constrained to become
the defendant. (And if an adverse judgment ensues, that erstwhile defendant
might well transform to claimant again, bringing another BIT claim.) Aside from
duplication and inefficiency, the sorts of transaction costs which counter-claim
and set-off procedures work to avoid, it is an ironic, if not absurd, outcome, at
odds, in my view, with the objectives of international investment law’.

Consequently, the Tribunal does not find any reason of principle to declare inadmissible a
counterclaim in which the Respondent State claims that the foreign investor has breached
obligations falling within the scope of Article 10, Section A DR-CAFTA. Thus, the

Tribunal has prima facie jurisdiction over the counterclaim filled in by the Respondent.

The foregoing notwithstanding, the Tribunal finds two issues that need to be addressed
prior to examining the merits of the counterclaim. First, the Tribunal believes that the
language of articles Article 10.9.3.c and 10.11 seeks to ensure that States retain a
significant margin of appreciation in respect of environmental measures in their
respective jurisdictions, but they do not -in and of themselves- impose any affirmative
obligation upon investors. Nor do they provide that any violation of state-enacted
environmental regulations will amount to a breach of the Treaty which could be the basis

of a counterclaim.

Secondly, counterclaims are also subject to the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules whose
Article 21 establishes that “the provisions of article 20, paragraphs 2 to 4, shall apply to a

counterclaim...” In turn, Article 20 reads as follows:

Article 20

2. The statement of claim shall include the following particulars:

(a) The names and contact details of the parties;

73 Spyridon Roussalis v. Romania, (Exhibit RLA-99).

231

745.

746.

(b) A statement of the facts supporting the claim;
(c) The points at issue;
(d) The relief or remedy sought;

(e) The legal grounds or arguments supporting the claim.

4. The statement of claim should, as far as possible, be accompanied by all
documents and other evidence relied upon by the claimant, or contains references
to them.

A counterclaim is a separate claim, autonomous with respect to the respondent’s
statement of defense, although it is usual that materially it is a part of that statement. As
such, the counterclaim must satisfy by itself the requirements Articles 20.2 and 20.4 of
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, in the same way that the main claim does. In the
Tribunal’s opinion, Costa Rica did not meet such requirements. In its Counter Memorial
(statement of defense under Art. 21 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules) as well as in its
Rejoinder, Costa Rica only made a general reference to environmental damages in the
Las Olas Project site attributed to the Claimants’ activity. There is no precise statement of
the facts supporting the claims but rather a reference to expert reports attached to those
pleadings. There is no specification of the relief sought but in very general terms and the
quantification is much approximated, based only in the personal experience of an expert
rather than any accurate method of valuation. Moreover, the evidence that Costa Rica has
mentioned is diluted in its statement of defense, without specifying clearly and precisely
the facts to be proved within the counterclaim, particularly the evidence that the

Claimants are the perpetrators of all environmental damages.

In the Post-Hearing Brief, Costa Rica was more thorough and tried to amend to some
extent those failures, specifying certain evidence and including several photos and
graphics. However, it happened out of time, because the Post-Hearing Briefs were
submitted simultaneously so the Claimants had no opportunity to challenge the late
assertions of Costa Rica. Except the allegations raised at the Hearing, the Tribunal does
not see any valid reason for Costa Rica to wait until the Post-Hearing Brief to clarify the
facts supporting the claim and its legal ground on some relevant issues as the burden of

the proof or causation. Such delay deprives the Claimants of their right to control the

232

TAT.

XIII.

748.

749.

evidence and new reasoning submitted by the Respondent, according to due process in
law. Therefore, the statement on counterclaim introduced for the first time in the

Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief is not admitted.

The Tribunal therefore concludes that the Counterclaim filled in by the Respondent does
not meet the requirements of Articles 21 and 20 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and

should be dismissed.

COSTS
A. The Claimants’ Cost Submissions

In its submission on costs”, the Claimants argued that the Respondent should bear the
total arbitration costs incurred by Claimants, including legal fees and expenses totaling
US$8,856,433.53 Dollars, broken down as follows: (a) US$5,276,096.55 in respect of
Vinson & Elkins’ fees and disbursements; (b) US$563,937.71 in respect of Mr Weiler’s
fees; (c) US$535,033.24 in respect of Batalla’s fees; (d) US$76,581.51 in respect of
witness costs and expenses; (e) US$1,299,784.52 in respect of expert fees and expenses;
and (f) US$ 1,105,000.00 in respect of advances towards Tribunal and ICSID
administrative fees. In addition, Claimants seek the Tribunal to order the Respondent to
pay interest at 8% per annum on all sums awarded in respect of costs, from the date of the

Award until payment is received by the Claimants.

The Claimants make their claim on the basis of Article 10.26(1) DR-CAFTA and Article
40 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, which allow the Tribunal to award costs and

attorney’s fees’, and argue that it “... has been extensively demonstrated in the
arbitration, Costa Rica acted in an intentional and unlawful way that resulted in the
destruction of the Claimants’ investment. The Claimants were forced to resort to
arbitration under DR-CAFTA in an effort to recover their investments. The cost of doing
so ought to be borne by Costa Rica, since Costa Rica is the guilty party that has breached

the terms and conditions of the Treaty”.

704 Claimants’ submission of March 15, 2018.
705 Jd., page 2.
706 Jd. 49, page 3.

233

750.

751.

752.

B. The Respondent’s Cost Submissions

In its submission on costs’°’, the Respondent submits that the Claimants should bear all
the costs and expenses of these proceedings, including the Respondent’s legal fees and
expenses totaling US$2,461,747.58 Dollars, broken down as follows: (a) US$899,914.00
for advances towards Tribunal and ICSID fees; (b) US$230,000.00 for Credibility
Consulting LLC (Mr Tim Hart); (c) US$295,000 for Kevin Erwin Consulting Ecologist
(Mr Kevin Erwin); (d) US$17,080.00 for Green Roots Consultants S.A. (Drs Johan M
Perret and B.K. Singh); (e) US$6,300.00 for Siel Siel Asesores Ambientales (Ms.
Priscilla Vargas); (f) US$970,000.00 for Herbert Smith Freehills New York LLP fees,
and (g) US$43,543.58 on account of allowances and costs of the witnesses and
representatives of the government of Respondent. Respondent also requests that
Claimants pay any interest at a reasonable commercial rate applicable from the date of

the award is rendered until the date costs are paid in full.

The Respondent argues that costs are reasonable to the extent that: (i) Costa Rica had to
reply to voluminous presentations submitted by Claimants; (ii) Respondent had to carry
out extensive work considering the complexity of the case; and (iii) Claimants' conduct

during the proceedings aggravated the costs by prolonging the process unnecessarily””*.

Cc. The Tribunal’s Decision on Costs

Article 10.26(1) of DR-CAFTA provides that “A tribunal may also award costs and
attorney’s fees in accordance with this Section and the applicable arbitration rules”.
Considering that the applicable rules are precisely the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the
Tribunal notes that Article 42 defines the standards for cost allocation, as follows:

1. The costs of the arbitration shall in principle be borne by the unsuccessful

party or Parties. However, the arbitral tribunal may apportion each of such costs

between the Parties if it determines that apportionment is reasonable, taking into
account the circumstances of the case.

2. The arbitral tribunal shall in the final award or, if it deems appropriate, in any
other award, determine any amount that a party may have to pay to another party
as a result of the decision on allocation of costs.

797 Respondent’s submission dated March 15, 2018.
708 Id., page 3.

234

753.

754.

755.

756.

This provision gives the Tribunal discretion to allocate all costs of the arbitration,
including attorney’s fees and other costs, between the Parties as it deems appropriate.
Article 40 (2) defines “costs” to include specified list of items as follows:

(a) The fees of the arbitral tribunal to be stated separately as to each arbitrator

and to be fixed by the tribunal itself in accordance with article 41;

(b) The reasonable travel and other expenses incurred by the arbitrators;

(c) The reasonable costs of expert advice and of other assistance required by the
arbitral tribunal;

(d) The reasonable travel and other expenses of witnesses to the extent such
expenses are approved by the arbitral tribunal;

(e) The costs for legal representation and assistance of the successful party if
such costs were claimed during the arbitral proceedings, and only to the extent
that the arbitral tribunal determines that the amount of such costs is reasonable;

(f) Any fees and expenses of the appointing authority as well as the fees and
expenses of the Secretary-General of the PCA.

In order to ascertain the meaning of the text of Article 42(1), the Tribunal must interpret
the words “in principle.” The Oxford English Dictionary (3rd edition 2007) defines “in
principle” as “theoretically; in general, but not necessarily in individual cases.” Thus, one
may interpret article 42(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules as providing that in
general the unsuccessful party is to bear the reasonable costs of the arbitral proceeding
but not necessarily in the individual case where a tribunal determines that
“circumstances” exist to apportion them in some other way between the parties. As

d’, the difference between the two

already the Thunderbird Tribunal has observe
paragraphs of Art 42(1) is that the first paragraph sets forth a rule with an exception to that
tule, whereas the second paragraph gives an arbitral tribunal unfettered discretion to deal

with that exception

Therefore, the general principle is that the unsuccessful party must pay the successful one
all the costs. The principle “loser pays” may be inferred from the rule of customary
international law requiring “full reparation” to the party injured by a breach of an

international obligation. The underlying concept is the restitutio in integrum, since the

%9 International Thunderbird Gaming Corporation v. Mexican United States. NAFTA/UNCITRAL Case. Award of
26 January 2006, § 213 (hereinafter Thunderbird v. Mexico) (CLA-70).

235

757.

758.

759.

760.

winning party suffered damages when having to finance its defense that proved to be
useless and unnecessary and that would have been avoided if the defeated party had
recognized the prevailing rights of the other to avoid litigation. To deny the successful
party recovery of costs incurred pursuing its case would have the effect of denying that
party’s “full reparation” as required by international law. As stated the tribunal in the SD
Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada,

The logical basis for this policy appears to be that a “successful” claimant has in

effect been forced to go through the process in order to achieve success, and

should not be penalised by having to pay for the process itself. The same logic
holds good for a successful respondent, faced with an unmeritorious claim™!°.

On the other hand, the rule “loser pays” plays also a dissuasive roll pointed to avoid

either reckless or frivolous claims or defenses.

The Tribunal observes that both Parties have claimed, from their first written
submissions, that the other party be ordered to pay the totality of the costs, including the
costs of representation and legal assistance and those caused by payments to ICSID”!!.
Those requests were ratified in their Costs Submissions of March 15, 2018. Therefore,
any of them can expect this Tribunal to decide the apportionment of such costs. However,
the Tribunal has the duty to assess “the circumstances of the case” (Rules, Art. 42.1) and
the reasonability of the costs (Rules, Art. 40.2), in order to determine to depart from the

application of the rule /oser pays and that the apportionment of costs is reasonable.

The Rules do not specify what “the circumstances of the case” may be, but they give the
Tribunal discretion to identify such circumstances and to decide the apportionment of

costs.

The Tribunal considers that a first set of circumstances results from a party has succeeded
on the merits of the case, while the other one has been successful with respect to some
specific issues decided in that case. Here, both parties are to some extent unsuccessful so
it can be argued that the meaning of “unsuccessful party” is not completely clear. The

rate of success of each party has been considered as an objective benchmark for the

20 SD Myers, Inc. v. Government of Canada, NAFTA/UNCITRAL Case, Final Award on Costs, 30 December 2002,
415. Also, PCA Case No. 2010-17, European American Investment Bank Ag (Austria) v. The Slovak Republic.
Award on Costs, 20 August 2014, 41.

711 Claimants’ Memorial, | 501(IX), Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, | 720.6.

236

761.

762.

apportionment of costs”!.

In this case, the Claimants are unsuccessful regarding the
merits, but the Respondent is unsuccessful on the Counterclaim so the Tribunal shall take
into account such “circumstance of the case” in order to decide on the apportionment of

costs.

Other potential factor for consideration among the “circumstances of the case” is the
conduct of the Parties’'*. The Tribunal recognizes that, in general, the Parties acted
properly during the proceedings. Nevertheless, the Claimants included in the Claim 67
lots that were registered in favor of another owner for the date of the Notice of
Arbitration (see Section VIILC., above), which is a reprehensible fact. The inclusion in
the Claim of real state not owned by Claimants lacks any reasonable excuse. Claimants
had to know that those 67 lots did not belong to them. It is a matter of manifest
negligence and disregard of their duties and burdens as a Party to the arbitral proceeding.
Doing so, Claimants harmed the Respondent who, for example, paid for a valuation based

on wrong information furnished by the Claimants, on facts they know or had to know.

The complexity of the issues may be considered as another potential factor of particular
“circumstances of the case”. The Tribunal thinks that the issues that were submitted to its
judgment, although showing some technical complexity, by themselves are not especially
complex from a legal point of view. The complexity of this case arises rather from the
actions and omissions of the parties than from the litigated issues. The Tribunal already
has observed above (Section VI. Background, above) it is clear that there are
inconsistencies in documents and contradictions among various Costa Rica’s authorities
during the period comprised between the dates Claimants decided to make the investment
and the time at which injunction was issued and criminal charges were brought against
Mr. Aven and the Marketing and Sales Director, Mr. Damjanac. Costa Rica also brought
before this Tribunal some alleged wrongdoings of Claimants regarding the Concession
and the development of Las Olas itself, but the State omitted the application of domestic
law to such situations. Moreover, the complexity of environmental legislation and the

number of agencies enabled to apply it can explain the contradictions mentioned above,

72 Thunderbird v. Mexico (CLA-70), § 213. Also, David Caron and Lee M. Caplan, The UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules: A Commentary (2d Ed. 2013), pp. 870-71.

113

Caron and Caplan, op. cit., pp. 871-73.

237

763.

764.

765.

766.

but also can misguide the people dealing with environmental issues. All this confusion

has been, to some extent, an invitation to litigate.

The Claimants on the other hand lacked transparency in their development of Las Olas.
They acted in order to avoid showing the features of the land that could disturb their
business. They omitted the disclosure of the Protti Report (paragraph 111, above) and
also fragmented the land in order to avoid the requirement of submitting a D1
Application to secure an EV permit for the easements (section X.D.1.(f), above). Such
kind of actions not only undermined the Claimants’ case, but also darkened its

understanding.

Finally, the economic weakness of the unsuccessful investor may be taken into account
when dealing with the apportionment of costs, on the general basis of considerations of
access to justice. This issue is especially taken into consideration by the Tribunal, as the
Claimants do not appear to be wealthy institutional investors, and have likely already
risked a substantial amount of their own patrimony in attempting to develop the Las Olas

Project.

In light of the foregoing analysis, the Tribunal resolves that Claimants should bear their,
and Respondent’s portion of the arbitrators’ fees and expenses, as well as the ICSID
administrative expenses, together with direct expenses of the arbitration. Each Party shall

bear its own legal costs and expenses.

The costs of the arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, ICSID’s

administrative fees and direct expenses, amount to (in USD)’"*:

74 The ICSID Secretariat will provide the Parties with a detailed Financial Statement of the case account.

238

 

 

 

 

 

 

Arbitrators’ fees and expenses
President Siqueiros 666,961.81
Mr. Baker 690,360.37
Prof. Nikken 446,450.43
ICSID’s administrative fees 148,000.00
Direct expenses’!° 230,037.6
Total 2,181,810.21

 

 

 

767. The above costs have been paid out of the advances made by the Parties in equal parts”!®.

768. Accordingly, the Tribunal orders Claimants to pay Respondent USD 1,090,905.10 for the

expended portion of Respondent’s advances to ICSID.

7'5 This amount includes charges relating to court reportering and interpretation, catering and courier, and estimated

charges relating to the dispatch of this Award (courier, printing and copying).
716 The remaining balance will be reimbursed to the Parties in proportion to the payments that they advanced to
ICSID.

239

XIV. AWARD

For the reasons set forth above, the Tribunal decides as follows:

qd

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

The Tribunal has jurisdiction over certain Claimants’ claims, as identified, and over

Respondent’s counterclaim;

Denies Claimants’ claims under Article 10.5 DR-CAFTA and Annex 10-B;
Denies Claimants’ claims under Article 10.7 DR-CAFTA and Annex 10-C;
Denies Respondent’s counterclaim under Article 10 DR-CAFTA;

Orders Claimants to pay Respondent USD 1,090,905.10 for Respondent’s portion
of the advances paid by Respondent to ICSID on account of arbitrators’ fees and
expenses, ICSID administrative expenses, as well as direct expenses of the

arbitration; and

Denies any other claim or request for compensation.

Made in London, United Kingdom, in English and Spanish, on September 18, 2018.

240

[Signed] [Signed]

 

Mr. C. Mark Baker Prof. Pedro Nikken
Arbitrator Arbitrator

[Signed]

Lic. Eduardo Siqueiros
President of the Tribunal

241

