INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
(ADDITIONAL FACILITY)

In the interpretation proceeding between
DAVID MINNOTTE AND ROBERT LEWIS

Claimants

and

REPUBLIC OF POLAND

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/10/1

 

DECISION ON THE REQUEST FOR INTERPRETATION OF THE AWARD

 

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Vaughan Lowe, QC, President
Professor Maurice Mendelson, QC, Arbitrator
Professor Eduardo Silva Romero, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms Geraldine R. Fischer

Date of dispatch to the Parties: October 22, 2014

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES

Counsel for the Claimants:
Colson Hicks Eidson, P.A.

Mr. Joseph M. Matthews
208 11" Street, SE

Washington, D.C. 20003, U.S.A.

and
Greenberg Traurig LLP

Mr. David Baron
2101 L Street, NW

Washington, D.C. 20037, U.S.A.

Counsel for the Respondent:
K&L Gates Jamka Sp.K.

Mr. Maciej Jamka and

Dr. Wojciech Sadowski

Pl. Malachowskiego 2

00- 066 Warsaw, Poland

and

State Treasury Solicitors’ Office
Ms. Katarzyna Szostak-Tebbens

ul. Hoza 76/78
00-682 Warsaw, Poland

I. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

1.

On June 20, 2014, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or the “Centre”) received a Request for Interpretation of the Award rendered on
May 16, 2014 in ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/10/1, David Minnotte and Robert Lewis v.
Republic of Poland (the “Request’”’), submitted by the Claimants pursuant to Article 55 of
the ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules. On the same day, the Centre also

confirmed its receipt of the prescribed lodging fee.

Article 55(2) of the ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules provides that “[t]he
Tribunal shall determine the procedure to be followed” in relation to requests for
interpretation. By letter of June 24, 2014, the Tribunal invited both parties to provide

their views on certain procedural proposals made by the Tribunal in that letter.

Having received and considered the parties’ respective responses to the Tribunal’s letter
on June 27, 2014, and having noted that there was agreement that the interpretation
proceeding should proceed on the basis of written pleadings and without an oral hearing,
on July 10, 2014 the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, concerning the procedure to

be followed in this phase of the case.

In accordance with Procedural Order No. 1, Claimants submitted their Supplement to the
Request for Interpretation (the “Supplement”) by July 18, 2014, and Respondent
submitted its Observations on the Request for Interpretation of the Final Award of 16

May 2014 (the “Observations”) by August 1, 2014.

II. THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION

5.

Having read and considered these submissions and deliberated, the Tribunal has decided
as follows.

A. THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

. The Request and Supplementary Request for interpretation were based solely upon

ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rule 55. Questions of jurisdiction and of the
admissibility of the Request must therefore be determined by reference to ICSID

Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rule 55, which reads as follows:

Article 55 Interpretation of the Award

a

Within 45 days after the date of the award either party,
with notice to the other party, may request that the
Secretary-General obtain from the Tribunal an
interpretation of the award.

(2) The Tribunal shall determine the procedure to be
followed.

GB

The interpretation shall form part of the award, and the
provisions of Articles 52 and 53 of these Rules shall
apply.

7. The actual request for interpretation was summarized as follows in paragraph 2 of the

Request:

INTERPRETATION REQUESTED BY CLAIMANTS
2. Claimants seek an Interpretation of the Final Award as follows:

A. In order to properly effectuate the stated principle that the costs
of this proceeding should follow the events, Claimants request that
the Tribunal take more care to evaluate the numerous decisions
contained within the Award as well as interim decisions and
conduct prior to the Award in order to determine whether an
Award of the entire sum of costs sought by Respondent actually
complies with the principle that the costs follow the event.

B. In light of the Tribunal’s rejection of Respondent’s
jurisdictional defense based on the alleged fraud (paragraphs 128-
140) Claimants request that the Tribunal specifically exclude the
extensive fees and costs that were incurred by virtue of this
defense, which was specifically not sustained.

C. In light of the Tribunal’s conclusions rejecting Respondent’s
other jurisdictional and admissibility defenses (paragraphs 141-

' Request, {[ 1; Supplement { 20.

151) Claimants request that the Tribunal specifically exclude fees
and costs that were incurred by virtue of this defense, which was
specifically not sustained.

D. In light of the Tribunal’s conclusions rejecting Respondent’s
defense on the merits of the BIT claims on the basis of fraud and
deceit (paragraphs 153-164) Claimants request that the Tribunal
specifically exclude fees and costs that were incurred by virtue of
this defense, which was specifically not sustained.

E. In light of the Tribunal’s conclusion that it does not question
that Claimants initiated and presented the claims in good faith, and
specifically in light of the obligation under Article [X(2) of the
BIT that the parties should seek initially to settle the dispute by
consultation and negotiation and the absolute refusal of the
Respondent to even meet with Claimants prior to commencement
of the ICSID proceeding, Claimants request that the Tribunal
reconsider the award of costs in their entirety or, in the alternative,
make a significant adjustment to the costs sought by Respondent
based on its pre-arbitration conduct in violation of the BIT.

F. In light of the absence of recitation of several procedural matters
from the Award that had significant impact on the cost of the
proceedings, including specifically the Respondent’s refusal to
meet with Claimants prior to commencement of this proceeding
and the tardy disclosure by one of the Tribunal members of a
significant relationship that required careful investigation and
analysis of the privilege to challenge said arbitrator, Claimants
request that the Tribunal reconsider and exclude fees and costs for
such proceedings.

G. In light of Respondent’s refusal to accept Claimants’ proposal
of a single arbitrator, including the proposal that such arbitrator be
Professor Vaughan Lowe, and subsequent agreement to Professor
Lowe as President of the Tribunal, Claimants request that the
Tribunal reduce the amount awarded for arbitrator compensation.

H. In light of the secret criminal proceedings against Claimants
and the extensive fees and costs that were necessitated by the need
for Claimants to request and be granted in part emergency
measures that resulted in the change of venue of the proceedings,
Claimants request that the Tribunal reconsider and exclude fees
and costs for such proceedings.

8. In the Conclusion of the Request, Claimants stated that:
CONCLUSION

28. For all of the foregoing reasons, Claimants respectfully request
that the Tribunal enter an order interpreting the Award pursuant to
ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rule 55.

29. Pursuant thereto, Claimants respectfully request that the
Tribunal establish an appropriate procedure to consider a proper
cost allocation that will follow all of the events decided by this
Tribunal and the Award, not merely allocate every dollar of the
costs incurred against Claimants.

30. Alternatively, Claimants respectfully request that the Tribunal
reverse its Award of Costs entirely based upon the failure of
Respondent to comply with the BIT obligation to meet and attempt
to resolve disputes.

9. In the Supplement, Claimants put forward further arguments in support of their position.

The Conclusion of the Supplement stated that:

20. For all of the foregoing reasons, Claimants respectfully request
that the Tribunal enter an order interpreting the Award pursuant to
ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rule 55.

21. Pursuant thereto, Claimants respectfully request that the
Tribunal adjust its Cost allocation and reduce the sum awarded
against Claimants to effect the true intent that the costs should
follow all of the events in this proceeding, not just the outcome on
the merits of a claim pursued in good faith.

10. In the Respondent’s Observations, it moved that the Tribunal dismiss the Request and
Supplement with costs. As well as (among other things) challenging the Claimants’
characterisation of the Award, it observed:

Both the Request and the Supplement aim to reverse the
dispositive part of the Award with respect to the ruling on costs of
arbitration. Such action manifestly exceeds the purpose and
confines of the procedure instituted by Claimants under Article 55
of the ICSID (Additional Facility) Arbitration Rules.”

11. The Tribunal considers that, as it was put in the Wena Hotels case, there are:

* Observations, J 2(a).

two main conditions for the admissibility of an application for
interpretation: first, there has to be a dispute between the original
parties as to the meaning or scope of the award; second, the
purpose of the application must be to obtain an interpretation of the
award.?

12. In the present case, the complaint is not that it is unclear what this Tribunal decided: it is
that on the basis of the facts in this case the Tribunal could and should have come to a
different conclusion, even applying the principles that the Tribunal’s award indicated that
it was applying. That is not a request for interpretation of its decision. It is a request that

the Tribunal reconsider and alter its decision.

13. This request plainly falls outside the scope of ICSID Arbitration (Additional Facility)
Rule 55. The Tribunal has no legal power to do what the Claimants request of it, even if it

were minded to do so. It accordingly declines the “request for interpretation” of its award.
B. COSTS OF THE INTEPRETATION PROCEEDING

14. In its Observations, the Respondent requested that the Tribunal order the Claimants to
reimburse the Respondent for: (i) its legal fees, and (ii) the costs of this proceeding, as

established by the Tribunal.‘

15. Because there is no genuine dispute over interpretation, it is appropriate that the
Claimants, as the unsuccessful applicants, should bear all reasonable costs of this

interpretation proceeding.>

* Wena Hotels Ltd v Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on the Application for
Interpretation of the Award dated 8 December 2000 issued on 31 October 2005, | 76. Although the interpretation
proceeding in the Wena case was conducted in accordance with Article 50 of the ICSID Convention, the same
requirements are useful guidance for interpretation proceedings initiated pursuant to Article 55 of the ICSID
Arbitration (Additional Facility) Rules.

* Observations, {| 38.

5

The costs of the interpretation proceeding include, inter alia, the arbitrators’ fees, the Tribunal’s expenses and the
Secretariat’s fe
interpretation proceeding cos

  

. At the time of the Decision this amount is US$14,368.75, which consists of the
of US$14,148.75 and estimated charges of US$220.00 for the costs incurred in

   

connection with the dispatch of the Decision (e.g., costs related to courier services, binding and photocopying). The
ICSID Secretariat will provide the parties with a detailed Financial Statement as soon as all invoices are received

7

16. On September 22, 2014, the Tribunal invited the Parties to submit a statement of their
costs and fees incurred with respect to the preparation of this interpretation proceeding.
After reviewing Respondent’s letter of September 26, 2014, the Tribunal has determined

that the legal representation costs referenced in this letter are reasonable.

x

. Consequently, the Claimants are ordered to pay the Respondent: (i) the Respondent’s
share of the interpretation proceeding costs, i.e. one half of the total costs for the
interpretation proceedings, amounting to US$7,184.38; and (ii) US$15,915.08 for the
Respondent’s costs for legal representation for the interpretation proceeding. Therefore,

the Claimants are ordered to pay to the Respondent a total amount of US$23,099.46.

Ill. OPERATIVE PART

FOR THE REASONS STATED ABOVE

18. The Tribunal decides:

(1) That the Claimants’ request for the interpretation of the Award is dismissed;

(2) That the Claimants should bear all reasonable costs of the interpretation

proceedings, including all the ICSID arbitration costs and expenses, reasonable

costs and expenses incurred by the Respondent in the preparation of its legal case

related to the interpretation proceeding and their own expenses; and

(3) As a consequence, the Claimants shall pay US$23,099.46 to the Respondent.

 

and the account is finalized. Any remaining balance in the case account will be reimbursed to the parties in
proportion to the payments that they advanced to ICSID.

[Signed] [Signed]

Professor Maurice Mendelson, QC Professor Eduardo Silva Romero
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: [6 October 2014] Date: [13 October 2014]
[Signed]

Professor Vaughan Lowe, QC
President

Date: [22 October 2014]

