ARBITRATION UNDER
THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
AND THE 2010 UNCITRAL ARBITRATION RULES

Between

DETROIT INTERNATIONAL BRIDGE COMPANY
(on its own behalf and on behalf of its enterprise The Canadian Transit Company)

Claimant

and

THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA
Respondent

(and together with the Claimant, the “disputing parties’)

PCA Case No. 2012-25

 

AWARD ON JURISDICTION

 

Arbitral Tribunal
Mr. Yves Derains (Chairman)
The Hon. Michael Chertoff
Mr. Vaughan Lowe, Q.C

 

Table of Abbreviations

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

BSTA Bridge to Strengthen Trade Act

CTC Canadian Transit Company

DDC United States District Court for the District of Columbia
DIBC Detroit International Bridge Company
DRIC Detroit River International Crossing
DRIC EA DRIC Envirc LA

FCC Federal Court of Canada

FHWA United States Federal Highway Admini ion
IBTA International Bridges and Tunnels Act

UC International Joint Commission

ILC International Law Cc ission

LGWEM Let’s Get Windsor-Essex Moving Strategy
MDOT Michigan Department of Transportation
MTO Ontario Ministry of Transportation
NAFTA North American Free Trade Agreement
NEPA National Environmental Policy Act

NIT New International Trade Crossing

ONSC Ontario Superior Court

The Parkway The Windsor-Essex Parkway

TC Transport Canada

VCLT Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

 

 

2/99

Table of Contents

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

IL THE PARTIES 4
IL. THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL 0... ...ceceesessseesseesseesseesseeseesseeeseesnessneesnetsneesssseseseseeee 6
Il. THE APPLICABLE LAW 6
IV. FACTUAL BACKGROUND..........csscesseesseesseesseeseessesssesesesseesseessesesseseessessseeseeeaeesy 7
Vv. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND ......ccssessceseeseestestesnessesnestestestesesseeseeseeseeseeneeseenees 29
VI. | SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS AND RELIEF SOUGHT............. 42
A. Respondent’s Position 42
(1) Preliminary Statement 42
(2) International legal principles for establishing the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ........ 43
(3) — The Tribunal has no jurisdiction because DIBC has failed to comply with
NAFTA Article 1121 44
(4)  DIBC’s Highway 401 Road Access Claims and IBTA Claim are Time
Barred under NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) .....e.eeeeeseeeeeteteeeteeeeeteeeee OD,
(5) | Canada’s Request for Relief. 62
B. Claimant’s Position 63
(1) Preliminary Statement 63
(2) International Legal Principles for Establishing the Tribunal’s Jurisdiction...... 64
(3) | DIBC Has Complied with NAFTA Waiver Requirement under Article
1121 65
(4) DIBC’s Roads Claim and New Span Claim are both Timely.........0..0.0.02.75
(5) DIBC’s Request for Relief... ccc cece eeeeee tees eseseeteneessneaeeneeeeeneaes 83
VII. THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ....0...cccscesscesseesseesseessessseeesessessessnssseeesnsssecsseesseesees 84
A. Preliminary considerations...
B. Does Claimant Comply with NAFTA Article 1121? octets 85
(1) Timing and Relevant Waiver ...........
(2) The Jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal based on the First NAFTA NOA
and the First Waiver 86
(3) | Were the Second NAFTA NOA together with the Second and/or Third
Waiver able to cure the initial lack of jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal?... 92
(4) Tribunal’s conclusion 97
VIII. HOLDING 98

 

ANNEX I - Separate Jurisdictional Opinion by The Hon. Michael Chertoff

3/99

I. THE PARTIES
A. CLAIMANT

The Claimant, Detroit International Bridge (“DIBC or Claimant”)', is a United States
company, duly incorporated and existing under the laws of the State of Michigan. DIBC’s
principal place of business is 12225 Stephens Road, Warren, Michigan 48089, United States

of America.

DIBC owns and controls the stock of The Canadian Transit Company (“CTC”), a Canadian
company established by a Special Act of Parliament. CTC’s principal place of business is at

4285 Industrial Drive, Windsor, Ontario, NOC 3R9, Canada.

DIBC and CTC, respectively, own the United States and Canadian sides of the Ambassador
Bridge. They operate the Ambassador Bridge in cooperation with each other pursuant to a

joint cooperation agreement.
This arbitration is brought by DIBC on its own behalf and on behalf of cTc?
Claimant is represented in this arbitration by:

Mr. Jonathan D. Schiller

BOIES, SCHILLER & FLEXNER LLP
575 Lexington Avenue

7" Floor

New York, NY 10022

United States of America

Tel: +1 212 446 2300

Fax: +1 212 446 2350

E-mail: jschiller@bsfllp.com

and

Mr. William A. Isaacson
Mr. Hamish P.M. Hume
Ms. Heather King

Ms. Amy L. Neuhardt

' Claimant is the successor in interest to the entities that received the statutory rights to construct and own the Ambassador
Bridge. For the sake of simplicity, this award refers to the Claimant and its predecessors-in-interest collectively as
“Claimant” or “DIBC”.

? DIBC’s Statement of Claim, {1

4/99

Mr. Ross P. McSweeney

BOIES, SCHILLER & FLEXNER LLP

5301 Wisconsin Avenue, NW

8" Floor

Washington, DC 20015

United States of America

Tel: +1 202 237 2727

Fax: + 202 137 6131

E-mail: wisaacson @bsfllp.com
hhume @bsfllp.com
hking@bsfllp.com
aneuhardt @bsfllp.com
rmesweeney @bsfllp.com

B. RESPONDENT

The Respondent is the Government of Canada (hereinafter “Canada”, “Respondent” or
“disputing Party”), which is a State Party to the North American Free Trade Agreement
(“NAFTA”).

Respondent is represented in this arbitration by:

Ms. Sylvie Tabet

Mr. Mark A. Luz

Mr. Adam Douglas

Mr. Reuben East

Ms. Heather Squires

Trade Law Bureau (JLT)

Foreign Affairs and International Trade Canada

Government of Canada

125 Sussex Drive

Ottawa, Ontario KIA 0G2

Canada

E-mail: mark.luz @international.gc.ca
sylvie.tabet @international.gc.ca
adam.douglas @international.gc.ca
reuben.east @international.gc.ca
heather.squires @international.gc.ca

In accordance with the practice in NAFTA Article 1139, the (capitalized) terms “Party” and

“Parties” refer to the States Parties to NAFTA. The term “disputing parties” refers to the

5/99

9.

disputing investor (i.e., the Claimant) and the disputing Party (i.e., the Respondent) in this

case.

Il. THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

Co-Arbitrator appointed by Claimant:

The Hon. Michael Chertoff
Covington & Burling LLP

1201 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20004-2401
U.S.A.

Tel.: 00 1 202 662 5060

E-mail: mchertoff@cov.com

10. Co-Arbitrator appointed by Respondent:

Mr. Vaughan Lowe, Q.C.
Essex Court Chambers

24 Lincoln’s Inn Fields
London WC2A 3EG

United Kingdom

Tel.: 00 44 20 7813 8000
E-mail: vlowe@essexcourt.net

Presiding Arbitrator jointly appointed by the disputing parties:

Mr. Yves Derains

Derains & Gharavi

25, rue Balzac

75008 — Paris — France

Tel.: 00 33 (0) 1 40 555 972

E-mail: yderains @derainsgharavi.com

Til. THE APPLICABLE LAW

12. Pursuant to paragraph 11 of Procedural Order No. 1, the governing law for this arbitration is

the NAFTA and applicable rules of international law.

6/99

13.

14.

The applicable arbitration rules are the 2010 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, pursuant to the
disputing parties’ agreement, except to the extent that they are modified by Section B of

Chapter 11 as per NAFTA Article 1120(2).

FACTUAL BACKGROUND

This arbitration arises from a dispute between DIBC and Canada related to DIBC’s ongoing
investment in the Ambassador Bridge, a privately owned international toll bridge that

connects Detroit, Michigan and Windsor, Ontario.

Since the Ambassador Bridge opened for service on November 11, 1929, Claimant has owned
the Bridge, including the associated toll-collection rights. Claimant directly owns the relevant
rights with respect to the U.S. side of the bridge, and Claimant’s wholly owned subsidiary

CTC owns the relevant rights with respect to the Canadian side of the bridge.

The Ambassador Bridge includes a bridge span, customs and toll plazas, approach roads,
duty-free shops, and other associated facilities on both sides of the border. The Ambassador
Bridge is the busiest crossing between the United States and Canada, facilitating

approximately one quarter of the USD 750 billion in trade between the two countries.*

The U.S. side of the Ambassador Bridge is connected to I-75 and I-96, two of the three main
interstates roads near the Ambassador Bridge, and indirectly connected to the third main
interstate road, I-94. On the Canadian side the Huron Church Road is the primary access route
to the Ambassador Bridge. In the 1950’s, urban planners ended Highway 401 — today one of
the busiest highways in North America and a vital link in Canada’s transportation
infrastructure — outside the city limits of Windsor. There is today no direct highway
connection between the Ambassador Bridge and Highway 401. Instead, on the Canadian side
traffic must exit Highway 401 and traverse local Windsor roads, including the Huron Church

Road.

From 2001 to 2005, governments got together in a Bi-National Partnership (the “Partnership”)
- ie., The U.S. Federal Highway Administration (“FHWA”), Transport Canada (“TC”) which
is a federal ministry in charge of promoting an efficient and environmentally responsible

transportation system in Canada, the Michigan Department of Transportation (“MDOT”), and

* Exhibit C-123.

7199

20.

the Ontario Ministry of Transportation (“MTO”)- with the purpose of improving the safe and
efficient movement of people, goods and services across the U.S./Canadian border at the
Detroit and St. Clair Rivers, including improved connections to national, provincial and
regional transportation systems, such as I-75 and Highway 401.4 The Partnership was to
evaluate and identify long-term trans-border transportation infrastructure (the Detroit River
International Crossing or ‘DRIC’) improvements by means of an integrated planning and
environmental study process which should result in a single product (“end-to-end solution’),
which should meet the requirements of all members of the Partnership (“DRIC process”,

“DRIC EA” or “DRIC study”).>

On September 25, 2002, the Governments of Canada and Ontario signed a Memorandum of
Understanding (the “2002 MOU”) whereby they “jointly commit{ted] up to three hundred
million dollars ($300M) investment in the Windsor Gateway over five years, commencing in
2002/03. [...| This investment is[was] being made in recognition that improvements are[were

necessary to the existing border crossings and their approaches in advance of the completion

   

of the Canada-United States-Ontario-Michigan Bi-National Partnership process currently

196
underway.

According to the 2002 MOU, a Canada-Ontario Joint Management Committee
should be appointed to identify potential transportation projects, consult with the public and
report back on a short and medium term action plan for investment in transportation
infrastructure.’ The action plan recommended by such committee should be coordinated with

the long term strategies being developed by the DRIC study.®

On December 20, 2002, the Governments of Canada and Ontario released the Joint
Management Committee’s Windsor Gateway Action Plan (the “Action Plan”) to relieve
congestion and improve traffic flow at the existing border crossings. The Action Plan
included among its objectives, inter alia, “work with the Canadian Transit Company

(CTC)/Ambassador Bridge, in collaboration with the City of Windsor and the local

4 Exhibit C-35, p. 3.
5 Exhibit C-35, p. 2.
° Exhibit C-126, 4 1.
7 Exhibit C-126, 94.
8 Exhibit C-126, 917.

8/99

21.

22.

23.

community, to pursue the development of a dedicated truck route from Ojibway Parkway at

EC Row Expressway to the Ambassador Bridge.”

On May 27, 2003, the Governments of Canada and Ontario published a press release
announcing the steps in the implementation of a nine-point “Windsor Gateway Action Plan’,
also known as the Nine Point Plan, based in substantial part on the recommendations of the
Canada-Ontario Joint Management Committee. In that press release, the Governments of
Canada and Ontario announced that they had agreed, inter alia, to “[Point N° 4] work together
with proponents, the Canadian Transit Company (Ambassador Bridge) and the Detroit River
Tunnel Partnership in their efforts to build connections to the border crossings, concurrent

with the Bi-National Planning Process [DRIC study]”."°

On March 11, 2004, the Governments of Canada, Ontario and the City of Windsor announced
in a press release new measures that were part of the joint $300 million federal-provincial
investment to help improve the Windsor Gateway, called the “Let’s Get Windsor-Essex
Moving strategy” (“LGWEM”), which replaced the Nine-Point Windsor Gateway Action
Plan.'' The LGWEM strategy included, inter alia, improvements to the Windsor-Detroit
Tunnel Plaza and to the Industrial Road/Huron Church Road intersection to support the

development of a pre-processing facility on Industrial Road."

In May 2004, the DRIC Environmental Assessment Terms of Reference (“DRIC EA Terms of
Reference”) were released, providing a framework to guide the preparation of the DRIC EA,
because the bi-national aspect of the border transportation improvements would require
several environmental assessment studies to be completed and submitted for approvals to the
various Canadian and U.S. authorities. The DRIC EA Terms of Reference established seven
key factors to be considered in the evaluation of the bridges, bridges options, customs plaza
options and highway options: i.e. (i) changes in air quality; (ii) protection of

community/neighborhood characteristics; (iii) consistency with existing and planned land use;

° Exhibit C-30, p. 15, item 2(a).
'° Exhibit C-32, p. 1.

" Exhibit R-34.

"2 Exhibit R-34, p. 4-5.

9/99

24.

25.

26.

27.

(iv) protection of cultural resources; (v) protection of the natural environment; (vi)

improvement of regional mobility; and (vii) constructability and minimization of cost.'3

In June 2005, a Public Information Open House was held to announce the 15 initial crossing
alternatives (i.e., X1 to X15) that the DRIC study would analyze. The option called X12
referred to an assessment of whether or not the option of a twinned Ambassador Bridge,
consisting of two spans together with a larger customs plaza and highway connections, was a
feasible alternative.'4 For each crossing alternative there were multiple different connecting

route alternatives for linking the new or expanded crossing to Highway 401.'°

On November 14, 2005, a press release announced that the governments of Canada, United
States, Ontario and Michigan had made significant progress towards developing a new river
crossing at the Detroit-Windsor Gateway. The press release announced, inter alia, that
“twinning the existing Ambassador Bridge was determined to not be practical based on the

community impacts of the proposed plaza and access road in Canada.”'®

On November 15, 2005, DIBC wrote to MTO and MDOT stating that:

“We have participated with the Detroit River International Crossing Study (DRIC)
throughout the past several years. During this time, we have raised numerous
questions regarding the methodology and the results that we find at times absurd and

-]

[...] DRIC has lost its focus and has become purely a political exercise to achieve a

not based on historic data or current border realities.

 

pre-determined result. Therefore, with true frustration and regret, we are
withdrawing from further participation in the DRIC process and ask that you
disassociate us from that proce.
consultants and will continue independently of the DRIC to forward our plans to

improve the Windsor/Detroit corridor’"”

 

. We have commissioned our own engineers and

   

On November 29, 30 and December 1, 2005, a Second Public Information Open House was
held for discussions regarding the DRIC EA, where the set of alternatives was narrowed to an
“area of continued analyses”. At page 35 of the presentation made on that occasion, the
recommendations of the Partnership with respect to option X12 were the following:

'’ Exhibit R-50.

4 Exhibit C-129; R-47, p. 6-11.

'S Exhibit C-129, p. 12.

'6 Exhibit R-13, pp.1-2; See also Exhibit R-54, pp. 1-2.
"7 Exhibit R-35

10/99

28.

29.

30.

31.

“The disadvantages of the Crossing X12 alternative outweighed the advantages. The
U.S. plaza of the Ambassador Bridge with the improved connections to the interstate
freeway s

 

stem will be carried forward within the Area for Continued Analys
lB

 

Sasa
possible U.S. plaza site for a new crossing.
On the same page of the slide presentation, the following advantages and disadvantages were

set forth with respect to option X12:

Advantages:

“Relatively low negative impacts on the U.S. side in terms of benefits provided to
mobility. The alternative provides improved regional mobility for the border
transportation network on both sides of the river”

Disadvantages:

“Relatively high negative impacts on the Canadian side [...] High community
impacts to the residential area impacted by the expansion of the Canadian bridges

plaza and the expansion of Huron Church Road to a freeway facility, and the

potential for disruption to border traffic during construction.””?

In early 2006, parallel to the DRIC process, CTC submitted a project description to regulatory
authorities in Canada and the United States based on the addition of a second span to the

existing Ambassador Bridge (“The New Span”).””

On February 1, 2007, the International Bridges and Tunnels Act (“IBTA”) was enacted in
Canada. It entered into force on April 25, 2007.2! Article 6 of the IBTA determines that “no
person shall construct or alter an international bridge or tunnel without the approval of the

Governor in Council” >

On May 24, 2007, in an article published in the Daily Commercial News, MTO declared that

it had no plans to provide a direct connection to the Ambassador Bridge.?*

'S Exhibit C-130, p. 35.

'° Exhibit C-130, p. 35.

°° Canada’s Brief Statement on Jurisdiction, { 46.
2! Exhibit C-94, p. 1 and 23.

» Exhibit C-94, p. 2.

* Exhibit R-154.

11/99

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

On July 30, 2007, Canada wrote to DIBC’s legal counsel Mr. Patrick Moran stating that the
“Crown’s view is that the International Bridges and Tunnels Act applies [sc., to] Centra, Inc.

and the related companies [i.e. CTC and DIBC] in accordance with its terms [jo

On August 24, 2007, Mr. Patrick Moran replied to Canada’s letter mentioned in the previous
paragraph maintaining its disagreement with Canada on the IBTA and other issues addressed

in such letter.”°

According to the Witness Statement of Ms. Helena Borges, an Associate Deputy Minister of
Transport, Infrastructure and Communities at Transport Canada, Ms. Borges “[...] along with
other Transport Canada officials held several meetings with DIBC representatives in April,
July and October 2007, at DIBC’s request. At those meetings, ... DIBC demanded that
Canada build a complete highway connection between Highway 401 and the Ambassador

Bridge, but Canada did not agree to this demand.[...]”

On October 3, 2007, the Canadian Minister of Transport, Mr. Lawrence Cannon, wrote to the

president of CTC, Mr. Dan Stamper, where he stated inter alia that:

“[...] Contrary to what is stated in your letter, the [$300million] funding was not
solely targeted to improve Huron Church Road or to extend Highway 401 to the
Ambassador Bridge. Rather, projects are being selected in cooperation with local
governments, with a focus on improving road safety and traffic flow [...].

[...] further to your request earlier this year, I would be pleased to meet with the
Ambassador Bridge representatives at the earliest convenient opportunity to disci

ss

 

these and other issues that, I understand, have already involved various discussions

with Transport Canada officials. {...)7°°

On October 30, 2007, Transport Canada wrote to CTC regarding CTC’s “major works close

to the existing Ambassador Bridge’. In the same letter, Transport Canada informed CTC that:

“[...] federal legislation requires approval for work, including construction or
alteration, with respect to existing or new international bridges. Specifically, the
International Bridge and Tunnels Act (IBTA) provides that no person shall construct
or alter an international bridge without the approval of the Governor in Council.
[...] As Transport Canada is unaware of any application made by CTC under the

* Exhibit R-39,
* Exhibit R-111
°6 Exhibit C-110, p. 3.

12/99

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

IBTA or the NWPA in relation to the work identified above, Transport Canada would
like to ensure that the work has not inadvertently been undertaken without the

nec pr

 

sary regulatory approval [..

On the same day, CTC respondent to Transport Canada stating, inter alia, that:“[...] the work
that is now complete on the Windsor plaza was properly undertaken in accordance with our

agreements and with the proper permits.”
On November 23, 2007, Canada wrote back to CTC stating, inter alia, that:

“[...] I am aware that the Canadian Transit Company (CTC) has initiated an
environmental assessment process with regulatory authorities in Canada and the
United States to construct a new span adjacent to the existing Ambassador Bridge.
[...] J wish to confirm that Transport Canada is committed to and will continue to
fulfil all of its legal responsibilities under the various legislation it is charged with
administering in respect of your project, including the International Bridges and
Tunnels Act, the NWPA and CEAA, in a diligent, objective, reasonable and effective

928
manner.

On December 4, 2007, Claimant submitted an environmental impact statement to Transport
Canada for the Ambassador Bridge New Span and an updated environmental impact

12

statement in April 201 The environmental assessment is ongoing.

On May 1, 2008, the DRIC study team announced The Windsor-Essex Parkway (the
“Parkway”), as “the technically and environmentally preferred alternative for the access road
extending Highway 401 to a new [at the time undefined] inspection plaza and river crossing
in West Windsor”.*°

In June 2008, the preferred location for the international bridge crossing and the Canadian
plaza were announced. At the occasion of the announcement, the DRIC study team presented
a broad review of the study, as well as the analysis and evaluation process leading to the
selection of the Parkway, Plaza B1, and Crossing X-10B (the site of the planned NITC/DRIC)

as the technically and environmentally preferred alternative.*!

*7 Exhibit R-122.

* Exhibit R-123.

» Exhibit C-89,

* Exhibit C-125

*! Exhibit R-10, pp. 1-3 and 1-4.

13/99

42.

43.

45.

46.

47.

By letter of April 23, 2009, the Deputy Ministry of Transportation of Ontario wrote to DIBC

informing it that:

“As we discussed at our meeting of January 16, 2009 and reiterated in Minister
Bradley’s letter to you of January 30, 2009, the Ministry of Transportation
recognizes the important role played by the Ambassador Bridge as part of a larger
cross border transportation network. We see that role continuing into the future.
Given that important role, the Ministry indicated its willingness to explore, with our
municipal partners, what improvements could be made to roadways leading to the
border facilitating the efficient movement of people and goods across the Detroit
River. [...]

As agreed, ministry staff sought out the City of Windsor’s willingness to explore
possible improvements to Huron Church Road north of the EC Row Expressway.
Ministry stall was advised the City of Windsor was not prepared to participate. The
ministry commits to approaching the City of Windsor again, in the future, and should
their position change we will advise you accordingly.”

 

On May 14, 2009, DIBC challenged the DRIC EA in the United States under the National
Environmental Policy Act. DIBC’s claims were dismissed by the United States District Court

for the Eastern District of Michigan on April 5, 2012.5

The DRIC EA™ was approved by Ontario and Canada in August 2009 and December 2009°°,

respectively.

On December 31, 2009, CTC filed an application at the Federal Court of Canada for judicial
review of the DRIC EA.*°

On January 25, 2010, DIBC filed its First NAFTA Notice of Intent to Arbitrate against
Canada (“First NAFTA NOI’).””

On February 24, 2010, CTC filed a Statement of Claim in the Ontario Superior Court of

Justice against the Corporation of the City of Windsor, Edgar Francis et al (“Windsor

* Exhibit C-160.

** Exhibit R-2.

“4 DRIC EA Report, Exhibit R-47.
* Exhibit C-93.

°¢ Exhibit R-14.

*” Exhibit R-44.

14/99

48.

Litigation”).** In its Statement of Claim in the Windsor Litigation, CTC requested the

following relief:

“(a) a declaration that By-law Nos. 22-2009, 23-009, 24-2009, 27-2009, 28-2009,
29-2009, and 30-2009 (“By-laws”) of the City of Windsor are unlawful and invalid;

(b) a declaration against all of the Defendants that the By-laws were enacted in bad
faith and for an unlawful purpose;

(c) such interim or interlocutory relief as the Plaintiff may request and this
Honourable Court may deem just to ensure that justice is done and rights are
preserved pending the final outcome of this litigation;

(d) as against the personal Defendants, jointly and severally: (i) damages in the
amount of $125,000 for: (A) misfeasance in public office; (B) unlawful interference
with economic interests; and (C) conspiracy;

(d) pre-judgment and post-judgment interest on the above amounts calculated in
accordance with the Courts of Justice Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.C.43, as amended;

(f) costs of this action on a substantial indemnity basis; and

(g) such further and other relief as may be requested and this Honourable Court may
deem just.”

On March 22, 2010, both DIBC and CTC commenced litigation in the United States District

Court for the District of Columbia (“DDC”) by filing a complaint (the “Washington

p39

Complaint against Canada, the United States, and various US government agencies (the

“Washington Litigation’). In the Washington Complaint, DIBC and CTC requested the

following relief:

“(1) A declaratory judgment against the FHWA Defendants and Canada under 28
U.S.C §§2201-2202 that the construction and operation of the planned DRIC Bridge
across the Detroit River would violate the obligations of Canada and the United
States to DIBC and CTC;

(2) A declaratory judgment against the FHWA Defendants, the Coast Guard
Defendants and Canada under 28 U.S.C. §§2201-2202 that DIBC and CTC have a
right to continue to own and operate the Ambassador Bridge, and a right to build a
second span of the Ambassador Bridge across the Detroit River without interference
by Canada or the United States, subject only to the conditions set forth in the Special
Agreement;

 

*S Exhibit R-29.
* Exhibit R-17.

15/99

49.

50.

(3) A declaratory judgment against the Coast Guard Defendants under 28 U.S.C.
§§2201-2202 that DIBC has satisfied all the requirements for a Finding of No
Significant Impact and a bridge permit for the Ambassador Bridge New Span;

(4) A declaratory judgment against Canada under 28 U.S.C. §§2201-2202 that (a)
DIBC and CTC have a right to determine the level of tolls to be charged on the
Ambassador bridge, subject only to the conditions set forth in the Special Agreement,
and (b) DIBC and CTC have a right to transfer their corporate ownership or
ownership of any of their property rights;

(5) A judgment against the FHWA Defendants under 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) setting aside
all decisions by the FHWA to proceed with the construction of the DRIC bridge or to
select its location;

(6) A judgment against the Coast Guard Defendants under 5 U.S.C. § 706(2) setting
aside the Coast Guard’s decision to terminate consideration of DIBC’s applications
for a permit to construct the Ambassador Bridge New Span and a Finding of No
Significant Impact;

(7) A judgment in the nature of mandamus against the Coast Guard Defendants
under 5 U.S.C. § 706(1), directing them (a) to process promptly DIBC’s application
for a permit to construct the Ambassador Bridge New Span and, if necessary, a
Finding of No Significant Impact, and (b) to grant such permit and, if necessary,
Finding of No Significant Impact;

(8) An injunction against the FHWA Defendants and Canada prohibiting each such
defendant from taking any steps to construct, prepare for construction of, or arrange
for construction of the planned DRIC bridge or any other bridge across the Detroit
River between Canada and the United States;

(9) Damages against Canada in an amount to be determined in trial;

(10) Costs, attorney’s fees and expenses of this litigation to the extent permitted by
law or rule;

(11) Interest on all amounts awarded; and

(12) Any other appropriate relief.”

On March 23, 2010, DIBC filed its Second Notice of Intent to Arbitrate under the NAFTA.
(“Second NAFTA NOI”).

On June 22, 2010, CTC filed a Second Statement of Claim in the Windsor Litigation,”! where
CTC requested the following relief:

4° Exhibit R-17, pp. 458-47.

16/99

Sl.

52.

“ (a) an order quashing City of Windsor By-law Nos. 22-2009, 23-2009, 24-2009,
27-2009, 28-2009,29-2009 and 30-2009 (the “By-laws”), Interim Control By-law
19-2007 (the “Interim By-law”) and Demolition Control By-law 20-2007 (the
“Demolition Control By-law”);

(b) a declaration that the By-laws, the Interim Control By-law and the Demolition
Control By-law are unlawful and invalid, enacted in bad faith and/or for an
improper purpose;

(c) in the alternative to the relief sought in paragraphs I(a) and (b), a declaration
that the By-laws, the Interim Control By-law and the Demolition Control By-law are
unlawful and invalid to the extent that they affect the properties owned by the
plaintiff;

(d) such interim or interlocutory relief as the plaintiff may request and this
Honourable Court may deem just;

(e) damages as against the defendant in the amount of $ 250,000;

(f) pre-judgment and post-judgment interest in accordance with the Court of Justice
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.C. 43, as amended;

(g) costs of this action on a substantial indemnity basis; and

(h) such further and other relief as the plaintiff may request and this Honourable
Court may deem just.” ?

On September 21, 2010, CTC joined the litigation initiated by other plaintiffs, challenging the
Windsor By-laws. The Court stayed CTC’s February and June 2010 complaints pending

outcome of the By-law challenge.

On October 18, 2010, the Canadian Minister of Transport issued a ministerial order

containing the following order:

“... the Minister of Transport, pursuant to section 9 of the International Bridges and
Tunnels Act, hereby orders the Canadian Transit Company to refrain from
proceeding with the construction in Canada of its new proposed international bridge
between the City of Windsor, Ontario and the City of Detroit, Michigan until such
time as Governor in Council approval is obtained for the construction of this new
proposed international bridge under section 8 of the International Bridges and
Tunnels Act.”**

 

*' Exhibit R-30,

® Exhibit R-30, p. 3, 1.
* Exhibit R-87

“ Exhibit C-137.

17/99

53.

On April 29, 2011, DIBC initiated this arbitration against Canada under NAFTA Chapter
Eleven by filling the Notice of Arbitration (“First NAFTA NOA”) together with a waiver
(“First NAFTA Waiver”). In its First NAFTA NOA, Claimant indicated that this arbitration

arises from the decisions by Canada, the Province of Ontario, and the City of Windsor:

“(a) to locate the Windsor-Essex Parkway so as to bypass the Ambassador Bridge
and steer traffic to the planned DRIC Bridge,

(b) to fail to provide comparable improvements in road access to the Ambassador
Bridge, because of its ownership by a United States investor; and

(c) to take traffic measures with respect to the Huron Church Road to divert traffic
away from the Ambassador Bridge and toward the Detroit-Windsor Tunnel and the
planned DRIC Bridge.

49. The points raised in this arbitration are (a) whether those measures are
inconsistent with Canada’s obligations under Chapter 11 of NAFTA, including
national treatment under Article 1102, most-favored-nation treatment under Article
1103 and the minimum standard of treatment under Article 1105; and (b) if so, what
is the appropriate amount of damages.”

54. The First NAFTA Waiver submitted by DIBC and CTC reads as follows:

55.

“[...] [DIBC and CTC] waive their right to initiate or continue before any
administrative tribunal or court under the law of any Party, or other dispute
settlement procedures, any proceedings with respect to the measure of the disputing
Party that is alleged in the foregoing Notice of Arbitration to be a breach referred to
in Article 1116 or Article 1117, namely the decisions by Canada, the Province of
Ontario, and the City of Windsor to locate the Windsor-Essex Parkway so as to
bypass the Ambassador Bridge and steer traffic to the planned Detroit River
International Crossing (“DRIC” )Bridge, and to take traffic measures with respect to
the Huron Church Road to divert traffic away from the Ambassador Bridge and
toward the Detroit-Windsor Tunnel and the planned DRIC Bridge, except for
proceedings for injunctive, declaratory or other extraordinary relief, not involving
the payment of damages, before an administrative tribunal or court under the law of
the disputing Party. For the avoidance of doubt, this waiver does not and shall not
be construed to extend to or include any of the claims included in the Complaint filed
on or about March 22, 2010, in the action titled Detroit International Bridge
Company et al. v. The Government of Canada et al., in the United States District
Court for the District of Columbia.” (Emphasis added)

 

On May 4, 2011, the Federal Court of Canada reviewed the DRIC EA’s decision to drop

option X12 and concluded that “an informed person viewing the matter realistically would

45 Exhibit C-140, { 48-49.

18/99

56.

57.

58.

not have a reasonable apprehension of bias regarding the Partnership’s decision to eliminate
the X-12 Option’ *° CTC appealed that decision to the Federal Court of Appeal. The appeal

was dismissed.*”

On June 6, 2011, DIBC filed its First Amended Complaint against Canada in the Washington
Litigation (“Washington First Amended Complaint’).”* In the Washington First Amended
Complaint, DIBC and CTC requested the following relief:

“(1) Against Canada and the FHWA Defendants, a permanent injunction prohibiting
each of them from taking any steps to construct, prepare for construction of, or
arrange for construction of the planned DRIC Bridge or any other bridge across the
Detroit River between Canada and the United States;

(2) Against the Coast Guard Defendants, a judgment in the nature of mandamus:

(a) setting aside the Coast Guard’s decision to deny DIBC’s application for a permit
to construct the Ambassador Bridge New Span;

(b) ordering the Coast Guard defendants to process promptly DIBC’s application for
a permit to construct the Ambassador Bridge New Span and, if necessary, a Finding
of No Significant Impact; and

(c) ordering the Coast Guard to grant such permit and, if necessary, a Finding of No
Significant Impact;

(3) Against Canada, damages in an amount to be determined in trial; and

(4) Against all defendants:

(a) appropriate preliminary injunctive relief or other interim relief;

(b) appropriate declaratory relief;

(c) costs, attorney’s fees and expenses of this litigation to the extent permitted by law
or rule;

(d) interest on all amounts awarded; and

(e) any other appropriate relief.”

On September 6, 2011, CTC’s By-law challenge was dismissed by the Court in the Windsor

Litigation.”

On October 3, 2011, Canada wrote to DIBC alleging that DIBC’s First NAFTA Waiver was
defective and inconsistent with the requirements of NAFTA Articles 1121(1)(b) and
1121(2)(b).!

46 Exhibit R-9, {[ 108.

“” Exhibit R-15

“S Exhibit R-18

* Exhibit R-18, pp. 67-68.
°° Exhibit R-31

19/99

59.

60.

On November 29, 2011, DIBC withdrew the Washington First Amended Complaint against

Canada without prejudice and reserved its right to file again.

On February 15, 2012, CTC filed its Statement of Claim against the Attorney General of
Canada before the Ontario Superior Court (the “CTC Litigation”), whereby it requested the

following relief:

“(a) A declaration that CTC was granted, pursuant to its enabling legislation, An Act
to incorporate the Canadian Transit Company, 11-12 George V., 1921, c. 57, as
amended (the “CTC Act”), a perpetual and exclusive right to own, operate and
collect tolls from the Canadian half of an international bridge crossing in the vicinity
of the Ambassador Bridge;

(b) A declaration that CTC was granted, pursuant to special agreement (the “Special
Agreement”) entered into in accordance with the Boundary Waters Treaty Act of
1909 (the “Boundary Waters Treaty”), a perpetual and exclusive right to own,
operate and collect tolls from the Canadian half of an international border crossing
in the vicinity of the Ambassador Bridge;

(c) A declaration that CTC and the Attorney General of Canada (the “Canadian
Government”) are parties to an implied agreement (the “Implied Agreement”)
granting CTC a perpetual and exclusive right to own, operate and collect tolls from
the Canadian half of an international border crossing in the vicinity of the
Ambassador Bridge;

(d) A declaration that, pursuant to the terms of the November 29, 1990 agreement
entered into between the Canadian Government, CTC and others (the “1990
Settlement Agreement”), the issue of CTC’s perpetual and exclusive right to own and
operate the Canadian half of an international border crossing in the vicinity of the
Ambassador Bridge was finally determined with prejudice in favour of CTC;

(e) A declaration that, pursuant to the terms of the 1990 Settlement Agreement and
the January 31, 1992 agreement entered into between the Canadian Government and
CTC (the “1992 Agreement”), the parties agreed to maintain the Ambassador
Bridge as the model international border crossing between Canada and the U.S.;

(f) A declaration that the Canadian Government is estopped from challenging CTC’s
rights as granted under the CTC Act, the Special Agreement and the Implied
Agreement, and as finally determined pursuant to the 1990 Settlement Agreement,
including but not limited to being estopped from acting as proponent for the

 

*! Exhibit R-21
© Exhibit R-24,

20/99

construction of a new international border crossing that is located in the vicinity of
the Ambassador Bridge and/or that would disturb the right of CTC;

(g) If the declarations in (a) to (f), or any of them, are granted:

(i) A declaration that the construction of a new bridge in the vicinity of the
Ambassador Bridge, of which the Canadian Government is a proponent, is an
unlawful breach of the rights granted to CTC pursuant to the CTC Act and a
breach of the terms of the Special Agreement;

(ii) A declaration that the International Bridges and Tunnels Act, S.C. 2007, c. 1
(the “IBTA”) does not derogate from any rights that were granted to CTC
pursuant to the CTC Act, the Special Agreement and the Implied Agreement;

(iii) A declaration that CTC has the right and/or duty under the CTC Act, the
Special Agreement and the Implied Agreement to maintain an international
border crossing in the vicinity of the Ambassador Bridge for public benefit,
including a right and/or duty to construct and maintain a second span to the

existing Ambassador Bridge (“Second Span”);

(iv) A declaration that steps taken by the Canadian Government to prevent or
hinder CTC from building a Second Span constitute a breach of the rights granted
to CTC pursuant to CTC Act, Special Agreement and the Implied Agreement;

(h) In the alternative and in the event of the construction of a proposed new
international border crossing in the vicinity of the Ambassador Bridge,

(i) a declaration that CTC is entitled to composition for de facto expropriation of
the rights granted to it pursuant to the CTC Act, the Special Agreement and the
Implied Agreement; and

(ii) compensation from the Canadian Government for loss of income in an amount
to be proved in trial for: (A) nuisance; (B) trespass to land including interference
with property rights; (C) breach of contract; and/or (D) negligent
misrepresentation;

(i) prejudgment interest in accordance with section 128 of the Courts of Justice Act,
R.S.O. 1990, c.C.43, as amended;

(j) postjudgment interest in accordance with section 129 of the Courts of Justice Act;

(k) the costs of this proceeding, plus applicable taxes; and

(1) such further and other relief as this Honourable Court may deem just

* Exhibit R-20, { 1, pp. 3-6.

21/99

61.

62.

63.

64.

On June 12, 2012, Canada and Michigan signed an agreement (“Crossing Agreement’) to
construct the DRIC Bridge by a private-public-partnership (“P3”) whereby a private sector
concessionaire would build, finance and operate the DRIC Bridge and associated facilities
under the oversight of a joint Canada-Michigan public authority akin to another crossing
authorities which own and operate international bridges and tunnels along the Canada-U.S.

5.
border.**

On August 13, 2012, CTC abandoned its appeal in the Windsor Litigation, but the February

and June 2010 complaints remained pending.»

On September 6, 2012, CTC was ordered to pay Windsor’s legal costs in the Windsor

Litigation.*®

On November 9, 2012, DIBC filed its Second Amended Complaint in the Washington
Litigation (the “Washington Second Amended Complaint”) and a Motion to re-join Canada to
the Washington Litigation.” In the Washington Second Amended Complaint, DIBC and CTC

requested the following relief:

“(a) A declaratory judgment against the Secretary of State, the State Department,
and Canada declaring that the IBA does not constitutionally delegate to the
Secretary of State the power to approve the Crossing Agreement, and declaring the
Crossing Agreement to be void and unenforceable;

(b) An injunction against the Secretary of State and State Department precluding
those defendants from approving the Crossing Agreement;

(c) A declaratory judgment against all defendants declaring that plaintiffs own an
exclusive franchise to own and operate an international bridge between Detroit and
Windsor, or, in the alternative, declaring that no additional bridge may be
authorized between Detroit and Windsor absent a special agreement under the
Boundary Waters Treaty authorizing such an additional bridge, and declaring that
no such special agreement currently exists;

(d) An injunction against the Secretary of State and State Department precluding
those defendants from approving any aspect of the NITC/DRIC Application;

* Exhibit C-64,
* Exhibit R-33
°° Exhibit R-32,
*7 Exhibit R-19,

22/99

(e) A declaratory judgment against all defendants declaring that plaintiffs own a
statutory and contractual franchise right to build the New Span, and that any
conduct by any defendant that seeks to prevent plaintiffs from building the New Span
is a violation of those rights, including in particular any conduct that seeks to
accelerate the regulatory approvals of the NITC/DRIC and/or to delay the
regulatory approvals of the New Span;

(f) As an alternative to the injunction request in paragraph (d), an injunction against
the State Department and the Secretary of State precluding them from approving the
NITC/DRIC Application unless and until the Application is able to demonstrate that
the NITC/DRIC is necessary even after the New Span is built;

(g) A declaratory judgment declaring that the Coast Guard defendants have acted
contrary to law and arbitrarily and capriciously in returning DIBC’s application for
a navigational permit under the 1906 Bridge Act to construct the New Span; or, in
the alternative, a judgment declaring that the Coast Guard defendants have
unlawfully or unreasonably withheld their decision on whether to issue a
navigational permit to allow DIBC to construct the New Span;

(h) An injunction requiring the Coast Guard to issue a navigational permit under the
1906 Bridge Act to allow DIBC to construct the new Span;

(i) An injunction preventing the FHWA from taking any further action to approve the
NITC/DRIC, or to construct, prepare for construction, or support construction of the
NITC/DRIC or its related approaches, unless and until the New Span has been fully
approved and unless and until the NITC/DRIC satisfies all regulatory requirements
based on the assumption that the New Span will be constructed first;

(j) A declaratory judgment that defendants’ actions in supporting the construction of
the NITC/DRIC, and in preventing plaintiffs from exercising their right to build the
New Span, constitute a taking of plaintiffs

 

private property rights without payment
of just compensation, in violation of the Taking Clause of the Fifth Amendment and
of international law;

(k) Any and all other injunctive relief necessary to prevent defendants from taking

 

any action that infringes upon plaintiffs’ exclusive statutory and contractual

franchise rights under their Special Agreement; and

(1) Any such other and further relief as may be just and proper;”**

*§ Exhibit R-19, pp. 90-92

23/99

65.

66.

67.

In December 2012, Canada enacted the Bridge to Strengthen Trade Act (“BSTA”). The

BSTA expressly exempted the NITC/DRIC from the requirements of the IBTA, which

requires any new bridge to obtain special approval from the Canadian Governor in Council.?

On January 15, 2013, DIBC submitted an amendment to its First NAFTA NOA against
Canada under the NAFTA (“Second NAFTA NOA”) along with its Second NAFTA Waiver.
In its Second NAFTA NOA, Claimant indicated that this arbitration arises from the decisions

by Canada, the Province of Ontario, and the City of Windsor:

“(1) to discriminate against DIBC, violating Claimant’s exclusive franchise rights to
operate a bridge between Detroit and Windsor, and also violating Claimant’s
franchise rights by precluding the construction of the New Span;

(2) to prevent or delay DIBC’s ability to obtain Canadian approval to build the New
Span;

(3) to locate the Windsor-Essex Parkway so as to bypass the Ambassador Bridge and
steer traffic to the planned Canadian-owned NITC/DRIC Bridge, in breach of prior
commitments and agreements to improve the connections to the Ambassador Bridge
through the Ambassador Bridge Gateway Project;

(4) to fail to provide comparable improvements in road access to the Ambassador
Bridge as was previously provided to the Blue Water Bridge and is currently being
provided to the non-existent NITC/DRIC Bridge, because the Ambassador Bridge is
owned by a United States investor; and

(5) to take traffic measures with respect to Huron Church Road to divert traffic away
from the Ambassador Bridge and toward the Detroit-Windsor Tunnel and other
crossings not owned by a U.S. investor.

136. The points raised by this arbitration are (a) whether those measures are
inconsistent with Canada’s obligations under Chapter 11 of NAFTA, including
national treatment under Article 1102, most-favored-nation treatment under Article
1103, and the minimum standard of treatment under Article 1105; and (b) if so, what

is the appropriate amount of damages.”

The Second NAFTA Wavier submitted by DIBC and CTC reads as follows:

5° Exhibit CLA-53, §35.
© Exhibit C-116, 9] 135-136.

24/99

68.

69.

“[...] [DIBC and CTC] waive their right to initiate or continue before any
administrative tribunal or court under the law of any Party, or other dispute
settlement procedures, any proceedings with respect to the measure of the disputing
Party that is alleged in the foregoing Notice of Arbitration to be a breach referred to
in Article 1116 or Article 111, namely the decisions by Canada, the Province of
Ontario, and the City of Windsor to locate the Windsor-Essex Parkway so as to bypass
the Ambassador Bridge and steer traffic to the planned Detroit River International
Crossing (“DRIC”)Bridge, to take traffic measures with respect to the Huron Church
Road to divert traffic away from the Ambassador Bridge and toward the Detroit-
Windsor Tunnel and the planned DRIC Bridge, and to block and delay the approval
and construction of the Ambassador Bridge New Span. Consistent with NAFTA’s

i iver is for proceedings for

 

injunctive, declaratory, or other extraordinary relief not involving the payment of
Le For the idance of doubt, this waiver does not and shall not be construed
to_extend to or include any of (a) the claims included in the action titled Detroit
International Bridge Company et al. v. United States Coast Guard et al. in the United
States District Court for the District of Columbia (including all claims contained in
the Second Amended Complaint plaintiffs are currently seeking to file in that action),
which seeks only declaratory and injunctive relief, or (b) the claims contained in CTC
v. Attorney General of Canada, Court File No. CV-12-446428, pending in the Ontario
Superior Court of Justice (Toronto).” (Emphasis added)

On February 19, 2013, CTC filed its Amended Statement of Claim in the CTC Litigation. In
its Amended Statement of Claim, CTC added the following request for relief at paragraph 1,
item h(i):

“(h) In the alternative and in the event of the construction of the proposed new
international border crossing in the vicinity of the Ambassador Bridge: [...]

(ii) compensation from the Canadian Government for loss of income in an amount to
be proved in trial for the _de facto expropriation of the_rights granted _to CTC

 

pursuant to the CTC Act, the Special Agreement, and the Implied Agreement; [...P!
(highlighted in the original)

 

On May 29, 2013, DIBC filed its Third Amended Complaint in the Washington Litigation
(“Washington Third Amended Complaint”) Washington Litigation.” In the Washington Third
Amended Complaint, DIBC and CTC requested the following relief:

°! Exhibit C-119, ‘p. 5.
© Exhibit C-141

25/99

“(a) A declaratory judgment declaring that the State Department defendants have
acted contrary to the standards set forth in 5 U.S.C § 706(2) in granting the
NITC/DRIC proponents a Presidential Permit, and setting aside that Presidential
Permit as invalid, unlawful, void, and of no legal effect;

(b) A declaratory judgment declaring that the State Department defendants have
acted contrary to the standards set forth in 5 U.S.C § 706(2) in granting approval of
the Crossing Agreement, and setting aside that approval as invalid, unlawful, void,
and of no legal effect;

(c) A injunction requiring the State Department defendants to terminate the
Presidential Permit and revoke any and all approvals given to the NITC/DRIC or the
Crossing Agreement;

(d) A declaratory judgment against the Secretary of State and the State Department
declaring that the IBA {i.e., the (US) International Bridge Act of 1972] does not
constitutionally delegate to the Secretary of State the power to approve the Crossing
Agreement, and declaring the Crossing Agreement to be void and unenforceable;

(c) An injunction against all of the United States defendants precluding those
defendants from taking any further action based on any purported approval of the
Crossing Agreement;

(f) A declaratory judgment against the U.S. defendants that, under U.S. law,
plaintiffs own an exclusive franchise to own and operate an international bridge
between Detroit and Windsor; or, in the alternative, declaring that no additional
bridge may be authorized between Detroit and Windsor absent a special agreement
under the Boundary Waters Treaty authorizing such an additional bridge, and

 

declaring that no such special agreement currently exists;
(g) A declaratory judgment against the U.S. defendants that, under U.S. law,
plaintiffs own an exclusive franchise to own and operate an international bridge
between Detroit and Windsor; or, in the alternative, declaring that no additional
bridge may be authorized between Detroit and Windsor absent express
Congressional legislation specifically authorizing a new bridge between Detroit and

 

Windsor and expressly modifying the plaintiff's statutory and contractual franchise;

(h) A declaratory judgment that the general 1972 IBA does not authorize the
approval of any new bridge between Detroit and Windsor and does not impliedly
repeal or otherwise modify plaintiffs’ statutory and contractual franchise rights to
operate the Ambassador Bridge and to build the New Span to the Ambassador
Bridge;

(i) A declaratory judgment against Canada that, under Canadian law, plaintiffs own
an exclusive franchise to own and operate an international bridge between Detroit
and Windsor; or, in the alternative, declaring that no additional bridge may be
authorized between Detroit and Windsor absent a special agreement under the

26/99

Boundary Waters Treaty authorizing such an additional bridge, and declaring that
no such special agreement currently exists;

(j) An injunction against the Secretary of State and State Department precluding
those defendants from providing any purported future approvals of any aspect of the
NITC/DRIC or any future NITC/DRIC application;

(k) A declaratory judgment against the U.S. defendants declaring that, under U.S.

 

law, plaintiffs own a statutory and contractual franchise right to build the New Span,

 

and that any conduct by any of the U.S. defendants that seeks to prevent plaintiffs
from building the New Span is a violation of those rights, including in particular any
conduct that seeks to accelerate the regulatory approvals of the NITC/DRIC and/or
to delay the regulatory approvals of the New Span, or otherwise to discriminate in
favor of the NITC/DRIC and against the New Span;

(1) A declaratory judgment against Canada declaring that, under Canadian law,
plaintiffs own a statutory and contractual franchise right to build the New Span, and
that any conduct by Canada that seeks to prevent plaintiffs from building the New

 

Span is a violation of those rights, including in particular any conduct that seeks to
accelerate the regulatory approvals of the NITC/DRIC and/or to delay the
regulatory approvals of the New Span, or otherwise to discriminate in favor of the
NITC/DRIC and against the New Span;

(m) As an alternative to the injunction requested in paragraph (f), an injunction
against the State Department and the Secretary of State precluding them from
approving any future NITC/DRIC Application unless and until such application is
able to demonstrate that the NITC/DRIC is necessary even after the New Span is
built;

 

(n) A declaratory judgment declaring that the Coast Guard defendants have acted
contrary to law and arbitrarily and capriciously in returning DIBC’s application for
a navigational permit under the 1906 Bridge Act to construct the New Span; or, in
the alternative, a judgment declaring that the Coast Guard defendants have
unlawfully or unreasonably withheld their decision on whether to issue a
navigational permit to allow DIBC to construct the New Span;

(o) An injunction requiring the Coast Guard to issue a navigational permit under the
1906 Bridge Act to allow DIBC to construct the New Span;

(p) An injunction preventing the FHWA form taking any further action to approve
the NITC/DRIC, or to construct, prepare for construction, or support construction of
the NITC/DRIC or its related approaches, unless and until the New Span has been
fully approved and unless and until the NITC/DRIC satisfies all regulatory
requirements based on the assumption that the New Span will be constructed first;

(q) A declaratory judgment that U.S. defendants’ actions in supporting the
construction of the NITC/DRIC, and in preventing plaintiffs from exercising their
right to build the New Span, constitute a taking of plaintiffs’ private property rights

27/99

70.

without payment of just compensation, in violation of the Taking Clause of the Fifth
Amendment and of international law;

(r) A declaratory judgment declaring that the U.S. defendants have violated
plaintiffs’ rights under the Equal Protection Clause and an injunction precluding
them from taking any further action to promote the NITC/DRIC and to discriminate
against the New Span;

(s) Any and all other injunctive relief necessary to prevent defendants from taking
any action that infringes upon plaintiff's exclusive statutory and contractual
franchise rights under their Special Agreement; and

(t) Any such other and further relief as may be just and proper.”

On March 20, 2014, during the Hearing on Jurisdiction in this arbitration, Claimant submitted
a Supplemental Waiver and Consent (“Third NAFTA Waiver”) in order to address Canada’s
allegations that the Second Waiver was defective because it did not include the term “not
involving the payment of damages”, which was present in the First NAFTA Waiver. The
Third NAFTA Waiver is worded as follows:

“SUPPLEMENTAL WAIVER AND CONSENT

Pursuant to Articles 1121.1 and 1112.2 of the North American Free Trade
Agreement (“NAFTA”), Detroit International Bridge Company and The Canadian
Transit Company each hereby consent to arbitration in accordance with the
procedures set out in NAFTA, and waive their right to initiate or continue before any
administrative tribunal or court under the law of any Party, or other dispute
settlement procedures, any proceedings with respect to the measure of the disputing
Party that is alleged in the Notice of Arbitration dated January 15, 2013 to be a
breach referred to in Article 1116 or 1117 including, but not limited to, the decisions
by Canada, the Province of Ontario, and the City of Windsor to locate the Windsor-
Essex-Parkway so as to bypass the Ambassador Bridge and steer traffic to the
planned Canadian NITC/DRIC Bridge, to take traffic measures with respect to
Huron Church Road to divert traffic away from the Ambassador Bridge and toward
the Detroit-Windsor Tunnel and the planned NITC/DRIC Bridge, and to block and
delay the Detroit-Windsor Tunnel and the planned NITC/DRIC Bridge, and to block
and delay the approval and construction of the Ambassador Bridge New Span.
Consistent with NAFTA’s waiver requirements, the only exception from this waiver is
for proceedings for injunctive, declaratory, or other extraordinary relief, not
involving the payment of damages before an administrative tribunal or court under
the law of the disputing Party. For the avoidance of doubt, this waiver does not and

© Exhibit C-141, pp. 112-116.
Exhibit C-171

28/99

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

shall not be construed to extend to or include any of (a) the claims included in the
action entitled Detroit International Bridge Company et al. v. United States Coast
Guard et al in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia (including
all claims contained in the Third Amended Complaint filed on May 29, 2013), which
seeks only declaratory and injunctive relief, or (b) the claims contained in CTC v.
Attorney General of Canada, Court File No. CV-12-446428, pending in the Ontario
Superior Court of Justice (Toronto).”

V. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

Claimant served Canada with Notices of Intent to Submit a Claim to Arbitration under

Section B of Chapter 11 of NAFTA on January 25, 2010 and on March 23, 2010.

On April 29, 2011, Claimant submitted to Canada a Notice of Arbitration (“NOA”) under the
UNCITRAL Rules and the NAFTA. Claimant proposed that the seat of the arbitration be
Washington D.C. and that the proceedings be conducted in the English language.

By e-mail of October 29, 2012, the disputing parties jointly appointed Mr. Yves Derains as
chairman of the Arbitral Tribunal. The disputing parties also informed that Claimant named
The Hon. Michael Chertoff as party-appointed arbitrator, and that Respondent named Mr.
Vaughan Lowe Q.C. as party-appointed arbitrator.

By e-mail of November 2, 2012, Canada stated to the Arbitral Tribunal that DIBC and CTC
had been engaging in long-standing efforts to simultaneously pursue monetary damages
against Canada in domestic courts with respect to the same measures that are alleged to
constitute a violation of NAFTA Chapter 11. Canada stated that in doing so, DIBC and CTC
were in continuing material non-compliance with the conditions precedent to submission of a
claim to arbitration set out in NAFTA Articles 1121(1)(b) and (2)(b), which vitiates Canada’s
consent to arbitrate. Canada agreed to participate in the constitution of the Tribunal without

prejudice so that the Tribunal might promptly deal with this jurisdictional objection.

By e-mail of November 8, 2012, the Tribunal informed the Parties that a telephone conference
would be held with the disputing parties on December 13, 2012 to discuss the organization of

these proceedings.

By e-mail of December 6, 2012, the Tribunal sent to the disputing parties a draft of

Procedural Order No. | to facilitate the discussions during the telephone conference.
29/99

77. By e-mail of December 10, 2012, the disputing parties jointly informed the Tribunal that they
agreed, inter alia: (i) to having these proceedings administered by the Permanent Court of
Arbitration (“PCA”); (ii) that the arbitration shall be divided into three phases, i.e. issues of
jurisdiction, merits and damages shall be heard separately; (iii) that English shall be the
language of this arbitration; and (iv) to having Ms. Ana Paula Montans acting as Assistant to

the Presiding Arbitrator as proposed by the Arbitral Tribunal.

78. On December 13, 2012, the Tribunal and the disputing parties held a telephone conference to
discuss the organization of this arbitration. Claimant informed the Tribunal that it would file

an Amended Notice of Arbitration by January 8, 2013.

79. On December 20, 2012, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, wherein the procedural

timetable was established as follows:

14. The sequence and timing of the proceedings shall be as follows:

 

 

No. | Date Party Description
(a) | January 15, 2013 disputing parties | Simultaneous submission on

the place of the arbitration

 

(b) | By end of January | Arbitral Tribunal | Decision on the place of the
2013 arbitration

 

(c) | By end of January | disputing parties | The disputing parties are to

2013 attempt to reach agreement
on terms and propose a draft
of a confidentiality order to
the Arbitral Tribunal

 

 

 

(d) | February 15,2013 | Respondent Brief statement on jurisdiction
and admissibility

(e) | February 28, 2013 Claimant Brief answer to Respondent’s
statement on jurisdiction and
admissibility

(f) | March 20, 2013 All Meeting in New York City,
NY, for further organization

At 5:00 p.m. of the proceedings

 

 

 

 

 

 

80. By e-mail of January 8, 2013, Claimant informed the Tribunal that Canada consented to a one
week time extension for the filing of the Amended Notice of Arbitration and accordingly

Claimant would file its Amended Notice of Arbitration by January 15, 2013.
30/99

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

On January 15, 2013, the disputing parties filed their respective Submissions on the Place of
the Arbitration. On the same day, Claimant also submitted its Amended Notice of Arbitration

(“Amended NOA”).

By e-mail of January 28, 2013, the Arbitral Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2

determining Washington D.C., in the United States, as the place of arbitration in this matter.

By e-mail of January 31, 2013, the disputing parties requested the Tribunal an extension of
time to submit a joint draft confidentiality order until February 8, 2013, which was granted by

the Tribunal.

By e-mail of February 8, 2013, pursuant to Procedural Order No. 1, the disputing parties
jointly submitted a draft Confidentiality Order and draft Procedural Order No. 3, the latter
reflecting the parties’ agreement with respect to procedural issues not already covered in
Procedural Orders Nos. 1 and 2. The unresolved issues between the disputing parties were
highlighted therein. In the same e-mail, the disputing parties informed the Tribunal of their
agreement that Canada would submit its Statement on Jurisdiction and Admissibility on
February 22, 2013 and that DIBC would submit its answer to that statement on March 8,
2013.

By e-mail of February 21, 2013, co-arbitrator Judge Chertoff sent to the disputing parties a
disclosure statement informing that his law firm’s (i.e. Covington & Burling) was advising Eli
Lilly & Company on a new matter related to Canada’s patentability requirements for
pharmaceutical inventions, in which the Government of Canada is an adverse party. Related
to that representation, Eli Lilly has filed a Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim to Arbitration
under NAFTA Chapter 11 with the Government of Canada, but no arbitration had been

commenced to date.

By e-mail of February 22, 2013, Canada submitted its Brief Statement on Jurisdiction and

Admissibility.

By e-mail of March 6, 2013, Claimant requested the Tribunal to approve an extension of time
until March 15, 2013 to file its response to Canada’s Brief Statement on Jurisdiction and

Admissibility. The request was granted by the Tribunal.

31/99

88.

89.

90.

ol.

92.

By e-mail of March 8, 2013, in reply to Judge Chertoff’s disclosure statement, Canada

informed that

“[...] From your disclosure statement and from Canada’s current understanding of
the Eli Lilly matter, your law firm is not acting adverse to Canada in that NAFTA
Chapter Eleven arbitration (Eli Lilly is represented by a different law firm in respect
of the NOI), nor has arbitration been commenced to date. In light of this, and in light
of your confirmation that you will not participate in Covington & Burling’s
engagement in this Eli Lilly matter, Canada has no objection to your continued role as
arbitrator in this DIBC v. Canada arbitration and is confident that you will remain
impartial and independent notwithstanding these disclosed facts. [...]”

By e-mail of March 15, 2013, Claimant submitted its Response to Canada’s Brief Statement

on Jurisdiction and Admissibility.

By e-mail of March 18, 2013, Canada submitted a corrected page 39 of its Brief Statement on

Jurisdiction and Admissibility making minor amendments at footnotes 138 and 139.

On March 20, 2013, a procedural hearing took place in New York with the Tribunal and the

disputing parties (“Procedural Hearing”).

By e-mail of March 27, 2013, the Tribunal issued Procedural Orders Nos. 3 and 4, as well as
the Confidentiality Order, which had been discussed with the disputing parties at the
Procedural Hearing. In Procedural Order No. 4, the Tribunal established the following

procedural timetable:

“1. The Respondent shall file its Memorial on Jurisdiction and admissibility by June
15, 2013 with all available documents, Witness Statements and Experts Reports
relied upon, if any and, as the case may be, a request for production of documents on
jurisdiction and admissibility;

2. The Claimant shall file its Counter-memorial on Jurisdiction by August 23, 2013
with all available documents, Witness Statements and Experts Reports, if any, relied
upon in rebuttal and, as the case may be, a request for production of documents on
jurisdiction and admissibility;

3. The Arbitral Tribunal shall convene with the disputing parties for a telephone
conference on September 17, 2013 to discuss a schedule for further written
submissions on jurisdiction and admissibility and the possibility of having a round of
document production on jurisdiction and admissibility.

32/99

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

4. The Arbitral Tribunal expects the above time limits to be respected and requests
for extension will be disfavored.

5. When deciding the further schedule after the September 17, 2013 telephone
conference, the Arbitral Tribunal will provide a time frame for Applications for leave
to file amicus curiae briefs and for the presentation of submissions by other NAFTA
parties as contemplated in article 28 and 30 of Procedural Order n°3 issued on
March 27, 2013.”
By e-mail of March 28, 2013, Respondent’s Counsel submitted to the Tribunal the
Confidentiality Order duly signed by the disputing parties in acknowledgement of the
obligation to abide by it.

By e-mail of June 15, 2013, Canada submitted its Memorial on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

(“Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction’), together with its Document Production Request #1.

By e-mail of July 9, 2013, Canada submitted a public version of its Memorial on Jurisdiction

with redactions agreed by Canada and DIBC.

By e-mail of August 23, 2013, Claimant submitted its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility (“DIBC’s Counter-Memorial”), as well as Claimant’s responses to Canada’s

Document Production Request #1 and Claimant’s Document Production Request #1.

On September 17, 2013, a conference call was held with the disputing parties and the Arbitral
Tribunal, pursuant to paragraph 3 of Procedural Order No. 4.

By e-mail of September 20, 2013, the disputing parties requested the Tribunal that the hearing
on jurisdiction and admissibility be held on the week of March 17, 2014. As for the location
of the hearing the disputing parties deferred to the preference of the Tribunal as to whether

Toronto, New York or Washington D.C would be more convenient and cost effective.

By e-mail of September 27, 2013, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 5 wherein it

decided as follows:

“I. After hearing the disputing parties, the Tribunal decides that a document
production phase is not necessary at this point of the proceedings.

2. The following procedural calendar was agreed by the disputing parties and the
Arbitral Tribunal:

33/99

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Date Actions Party/Parties
Reply to DIBC’s Counter-
November 22, “Piy 0 ° . oe
Memorial on Jurisdiction Canada
2013 «copys
and Admissibility
DIBC’s Rejoinder to
Canada’s Reply to
“nary 10, DIBC’s Counter- DIBC
Memorial on Jurisdiction
and Admissibility
NAFTA Art. 1128 submissions
January 24, . .
2014 . and/or amicus curiae submissions
(ifany)
February 14, Reply fo eventual NAFTA Art. 1128
2014 submissions and/or amicus curiae | DIBC / Canada
submissions
March 20 and _ | Hearing on Jurisdiction and All
21,2014 Admissibility

 

3. The Tribunal decides that the Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility will take
place in Washington D.C. The disputing parties will jointly make all necessary
arrangements for the selection and booking of the hearing room and break-out rooms,
as well as court reporting. They will timely, and at the latest 3 months before the
scheduled hearing, inform the Arbitral Tribunal of the arrangements made.”

100. By letter of September 26, 2013, further to his disclosure statement of February 21, 2013, co-

101.

arbitrator Judge Michael Chertoff informed the disputing parties that his law firm, Covington
& Burling LLP, had served Canada with a notice of arbitration under UNCITRAL Rules, on
behalf of Eli Lilly & Company. Judge Michael Chertoff stated that he remained screened out
of any involvement on the Eli Lilly matter and confirmed that he remained impartial and

independent of the disputing parties in respect of this matter.

By letter of October 2, 2013, in reply to Judge Chertoff letter mentioned above, Canada stated
that the situation disclosed was of sufficient gravity that Canada would like to confirm Judge
Chertoff’s willingness to take further steps to ensure that his duties as arbitrator in this matter
were not compromised by the interests of his law firm in simultaneous adverse representation
against Canada. Canada noted Judge Chertoff’s assurance that he would not participate in

Covington & Burling’s engagement in the Eli Lilly arbitration and requested that he takes
34/99

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

additional steps to establish an ethical screen at his law firm by, inter alia, confirming that he
would not discuss the DIBC or Eli Lilly arbitrations with other lawyers and support staff at

his law firm.

By letter of October 8, 2013, arbitrator Judge Michael Chertoff replied to Canada’s e-mail of
October 2, 2013 confirming that the ethical screen requested by Canada has been in place

since the Eli Lilly matter arose.

By letter of October 10, 2013, further to Judge Chertoff’s letter mentioned above, Canada
informed that it had no further questions or concerns and appreciated Judge Chertoff’s

openness in this regard.

By letter of November 18, 2013, the disputing parties jointly requested the Tribunal to

approve a modification to the procedural timetable as set out in Procedural Order No. 5, as

 

 

 

 

 

follows:
|Submission (Current Deadline Proposed Deadline
(Canada’s Reply November 22, 2013 December 6, 2013
IDIBC’s Rejoinder lanuary 10, 2014 lanuary 24, 2014
Art. 1128/amicus briefs Vanuary 24, 2014 [February 7, 2014
Replies to Art. (February 14, 2014 [February 28, 2014
\ 128/amicus briefs

 

 

 

 

 

By e-mail of November 20, 2013, the Tribunal approved the modifications to the procedural

timetable jointly proposed by the disputing parties above.

By e-mail of December 6, 2013, Canada submitted its Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility (“Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction”) with the accompanying witness

statement of Ms. Helena Borges.

By letter of January 23, 2014, the disputing parties jointly requested the Tribunal to approve a
modification to the procedural timetable as set out in Procedural Order No. 5 and modified by

the approval of the Tribunal on November 20, 2013, as follows:

35/99

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.

 

|Submission (Current Deadline Proposed Deadline

 

IDIBC’s Rejoinder lanuary 24, 2014 fanuary 31, 2014

 

Art. 1128/amicus briefs \February 7, 2014 February 14, 2014

 

Replies to Art.
\128/amicus briefs

February 28, 2014 March 3, 2014

 

 

 

 

 

By e-mail of January 24, 2014, the Tribunal approved the modifications to the procedural

timetable jointly proposed by the disputing parties above.

By e-mail of January 31, 2014, Claimant submitted its Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction

and Admissibility (“DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction”).

By e-mail of February 12, 2014, the Tribunal informed the parties that a pre-hearing

conference call would take place on March 12, 2014 at 6pm (Paris time).

By e-mails of February 14, 2014, Mexico and United States made their respective

submissions in accordance with NAFTA Article 1128.

By e-mails of March 3, 2014, Claimant and Canada submitted their respective Replies to the

United States and Mexico Article 1128 Submissions.

By letter of March 6, 2014, the disputing parties jointly submitted a timetable for the hearing
on jurisdiction and admissibility scheduled for March 20-21, 2014. Claimant informed that it

opted not to cross-examine the Respondent’s fact witness Ms. Helena Borges.

By e-mail of March 11, 2014, the Tribunal submitted to the disputing parties an agenda with
topics to be discussed at the pre-hearing conference call scheduled to take place on March 12,

2014.

By e-mail of the same day, the disputing parties informed the Tribunal that they had reviewed
the agenda and believed all major issues had already been organized and resolved. They
stated that if the Tribunal was satisfied that there was no other issues to discuss, the disputing

parties would be agreeable to cancelling the pre-hearing conference call.

By e-mail of March 12, 2014, the Arbitral Tribunal cancelled the pre-hearing conference call.

36/99

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

On March 15, 2014, the Secretariat of the PCA informed the Chairman of the Arbitral
Tribunal that by e-mail of March 14, 2014 the U.S. Department of State had inquired about
the possibility for representatives of the U.S. to attend the Hearing on Jurisdiction on March

20-21, 2014 as a non-disputing NAFTA Party.

By e-mail of March 16, 2014, the Tribunal forwarded the correspondence mentioned above
from the U.S. Department of State to the disputing parties and invited them to submit their

comments thereon by March 17, 2014.

By e-mail of the same day, Canada informed the Tribunal that it had no objections to the

attendance at the Hearing on Jurisdiction by representatives of the United States.

By e-mail of March 17, 2014, DIBC informed the Tribunal that pursuant to paragraph 14 of
the Confidentiality Order, all hearings should be held in camera and therefore it did not

consent to attendance by non-disputing NAFTA Parties at the Hearing on Jurisdiction.

By e-mail of the same day, Canada replied stating, in summary, that the Tribunal should
authorize attendance at the Hearing on Jurisdiction by the non-disputing Parties on the
grounds of NAFTA Articles 1120(2) and 1128. It submitted that even if UNCITRAL Rule
Article 28(3) could form a basis for the exclusion of the non-disputing Parties from a hearing,
that rule was modified by NAFTA Article 1128, which gives the NAFTA Parties the right of
participation on questions of interpretation of the NAFTA. Canada submitted that Claimant
had no legitimate objection to the attendance of the United States and Mexico, especially in

light of the fact that they both had made written submissions in this arbitration.

On March 18, 2014, the Arbitral Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 6, in which it decided

as follows:

“1. The Tribunal first notes that NAFTA Article 1128 mentions that “on written notice
to the disputing parties, a [non-disputing] Party may make submissions to a Tribunal
on a question of interpretation of this Agreement [NAFTA]”. However, such provision
does not mention anything about the physical participation of a non-disputing Party at
hearings.

2. The Tribunal further notes that, pursuant to paragraph 14 of the Confidentiality
Order dated March 27, 2013, “[a]t the request of the Claimant and in accordance
with Article 28(3) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules all hearings shall be held in

37/99

123.

124.

125.

126.

127.

camera”. At the time this decision was taken the Tribunal and the disputing parties
were aware of the NAFTA Chapter Eleven rules.

3. As a consequence, the Confidentiality Order shall be respected and the attendance

at the Hearing on Jurisdiction by non-disputing NAFTA Parties is not permitted.”
By e-mail of March 19, 2014, the U.S. Department of State requested the Tribunal to
reconsider its decision in Procedural Order No. 6 and to allow the non-disputing Parties to
attend oral hearings in this arbitration. In summary, the U.S. Department of State alleged that
that such decision is (i) inconsistent with the NAFTA; (ii) contrary to the unanimous practice
of other NAFTA tribunals; and (iii) prejudicial to the treaty rights of the non-disputing
Parties. According to them, depriving non-disputing Parties of the ability to attend oral
hearings is to deprive them of an important aspect of their right to make submissions under

NAFTA Article 1128.

By e-mail of March 19, 2014, Claimant objected to the U.S. Department of State’s request

that the Tribunal reconsider its decision in Procedural Order No. 6.

By e-mail of March 19, 2014, Mexico informed the Tribunal of its concerns regarding
Procedural Order No. 6 and requested the Tribunal to reconsider its decision. It submitted
that a refusal to allow non-disputing Parties to participate in an oral hearing is a systemic

concern that transcends any effective participation of Mexico in these proceedings.

On March 20-21, 2014, the Hearing on Jurisdiction and Admissibility (“Hearing on
Jurisdiction’) took place with the presence of the disputing parties and the Arbitral Tribunal at
the ISCID offices in Washington D.C., located at 1818 H Street, NW, MSN J2-200.

At the beginning of the Hearing on Jurisdiction on March 20, 2014, the Tribunal heard the
disputing Parties’ submissions concerning the non-disputing Parties’ request for
reconsideration of Procedural Order No. 6. After deliberation, the Tribunal informed the
disputing parties that it had decided to maintain the decision in Procedural Order No. 6 and,
therefore, not to allow participation of non-disputing Parties at the Hearing on
Jurisdiction. The Tribunal summarized the reasons for its decision and informed the disputing
parties that it would send the decision in writing to them following the Hearing on

Jurisdiction.

38/99

128.

129.

130.

131.

132.

On March 25, 2014, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 7, in which it decided as

follows:

“a) Articles 14 and 16 of the Confidentiality Order are enforceable with respect of the
non-disputing NAFTA Parties, as already decided by the Arbitral Tribunal in
Procedural Order No. 6.

b) The non-disputing NAFTA Parties may request to have access to the transcripts
of hearings or part of it in order to be able to make written or oral submissions on
issues of interpretation of the NAFTA.”
By e-mail of March 31, 2014, Claimant notified Canada and the Arbitral Tribunal of its intent
to designate certain information as confidential information in the transcripts of the Hearing

on Jurisdiction, pursuant to paragraph 3 of the Confidentiality Order.

By e-mail of April 8, 2014, Claimant requested an extension of the twenty-day period to
submit redactions of confidential information in the transcripts of the Hearing on Jurisdiction.
According to Claimant, because the Hearing on Jurisdiction was held in camera pursuant to
paragraph 14 of the Confidentiality Order and Procedural Order No. 6, and because paragraph
16 of the Confidentiality Order states that transcripts of the hearings shall be kept
confidential, the entirety of the transcript of that hearing is confidential and no redactions
were necessary. Claimant further indicated that it understood that, pursuant to Procedural
Order No. 7, however, the United States and Mexico could in the future request the Tribunal
to grant access to the transcript. Although Claimant opposed any such motion by United
States or Canada, in the event that the Tribunal would grant such a motion, Claimant
requested an additional twenty (20) days after issuance of such an order to submit appropriate
redactions under the terms of Confidentiality Order and Procedural Order No. 7. Claimant
reserved all its rights notwithstanding this request, including under paragraph 16 of the

Confidentiality Order which states that transcripts of the hearings shall be kept confidential.

By e-mail of April 8, 2014, Canada made reference to Claimant’s e-mail above and stated that
it was in the midst of preparing a letter to the Tribunal on this and other issues and would

present its views in the near future.

By e-mail of April 10, 2014, the Tribunal clarified to the disputing parties that, should the

non-disputing Parties request the Tribunal for access to the transcripts of the Hearing on

39/99

133.

134.

135.

136.

137.

138.

139.

Jurisdiction, the disputing parties would be granted a reasonable period of time to submit their

comments thereon.

By letter dated April 17, 2014, Canada requested the Arbitral Tribunal to amend paragraphs
14 and 16 of the Confidentiality Order and paragraph 31 of Procedural Order No. 3 so as to
allow the attendance of the non-disputing NAFTA Parties to any future hearings and allow
them unrestricted access to the transcripts of the Hearing on Jurisdiction and any future

transcripts generated in these proceedings.

By e-mail of April 18, 2014, the Tribunal invited DIBC to submit its comments on Canada’s

request above by May 2, 2014.

By e-mails of April 29, 2014, Mexico and the United States requested the Tribunal to have
access to the transcripts of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, pursuant to Procedural Order No. 7, in

order to be able to make submissions on issues of interpretation of the NAFTA.

By e-mail of April 30, 2014, the Tribunal acknowledged receipt of Mexico’s and the United

States’ requests above and determined the following:

“(i) Claimant is to submit its comments on Mexico’s and US’ requests by May 12,
2014. Claimant is also requested to submit its proposed redactions to the transcripts
under the terms of the Confidentiality Order within the same deadline, in case the
tribunal decides to give access to the transcripts to the non-disputing Parties.

(ii) Respondent is to submit its comments on Claimant’s submission of May 12, 2014
by May 22, 2014.”
By e-mail of May 2, 2014, DIBC submitted its objections to Canada’s request to amend the
Confidentiality Order and Procedural Order No. 3.

By e-mail of May 5, 2014, the Arbitral Tribunal acknowledged receipt of DIBC’s e-mail of
May 2, 2014 and informed the disputing parties that it would render its decision on this issue

shortly.

On May 12, 2014, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 8, where it decided that:

“[...] Canada’s request to amend paragraphs 14 and 16 of the Confidentiality Order
and paragraph 31 of Procedural Order No. 3 lacks good cause under Article 19 of the
Confidentiality Order and is dismissed.”

40/99

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

By letter of May 12, 2014, Claimant submitted its objections to Mexico’s and the United
States’ requests to have access to the transcripts, and proposed redactions to the transcripts in

the event the Tribunal would nevertheless authorize the requested access.

By letter of May 22, 2014, Canada submitted its comments to Claimant’s submission

mentioned above.

On June 5, 2014, the Arbitral Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 9, where it determined the

following:

“(a) the non-disputing NAFTA Parties shall have access to the transcripts of the
Hearing on Jurisdiction of March 20-21, 2014, in accordance with Procedural Order
No. 7. However, before allowing access to the transcripts to Mexico and the United
States, the Tribunal shall first decide whether they shall have access to the transcripts
in their entirety or only to parts thereof, so as to preserve the confidentiality required
by the Confidentiality Order;

(b) in order to be able to decide which parts of the transcripts shall be redacted, if
any, Claimant is to complete the enclosed table (Annex I to this Order), by no later
than June 12, 2014, justifying its proposed redactions in accordance with the
definition of “confidential information” in the Confidentiality Order;

(c) Canada shall submit its comments to Claimant’s proposed redactions by June 19,
2014;”
By letter of June 12, 2014, Claimant submitted that “in light of the Tribunal’s clarification in
Procedural Order No. 9 about the proper scope of ‘confidential information’ as that term is
defined in the Confidentiality Order of March 27, 2013, Claimant withdraws its previously

proposed redactions and proposes no new redactions.”

By e-mail of June 13, 2014, the Tribunal acknowledged receipt of Claimant’s letter

mentioned above and determined the following:

“[...] the Tribunal grants the United States’ and Mexico’s requests to have access to
the Transcripts of the Hearing on Jurisdiction of March 20-21, 2014 in their entirety
in order to be able to make submissions on issues of interpretation of the
NAFTA...].

 

The non-disputing Parties are invited to make their respective submissions under
NAFTA Art. 1128, if any, by no later than June 27, 2014. The disputing parties shall
submit their comments thereon, if any, by July 18, 2014. Please note that such time

41/99

 

 

145.

VI.

146.

147.

limits are the same as those agreed by the disputing parties under Procedural Order
No. 5 with respect to NAFTA Art. 1128 submissions.”

On June 27, 2014, the United States and Mexico informed the Tribunal that they did not

intend to make any submission under NAFTA Article 1128 at that stage.

SUMMARY OF THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS AND RELIEF SOUGHT

A. RESPONDENT’S POSITION

(1) Preliminary Statement

According to Canada, at its core, this dispute can be described in a single sentence: DIBC, the
owner of the Ambassador Bridge, wants to prevent a new toll bridge from being built in
Windsor-Detroit, while the governments of Canada, Ontario, Michigan and the United States
support its construction. Under the layers of interrelated events and baseless allegations
levelled against Canada in this NAFTA arbitration and in domestic court proceedings lies
DIBC’s singular goal of stopping — or delaying for as long as possible — the cooperative
efforts of Canadian and American public officials and business leaders to promote long-term
economic prosperity and security for the citizens of both countries by building the DRIC

Bridge, customs plazas and highway connections.®

As a means of achieving this goal, DIBC not only initiated this NAFTA arbitration against
Canada but also initiated three different sets of domestic proceedings against Canada with
respect to the same measures before the United States Court for the District of Columbia and
the Ontario Superior Court of Justice, as well as involving the payment of damages. This is
impermissible under NAFTA Article 1121 and renders Canada’s consent to arbitration under
Article 1122(1) without effect. While several of DIBC’s NAFTA claims would fail anyway
because they are untimely (NAFTA Articles 1116 and 1117) or otherwise fall outside of this
Tribunal’s jurisdiction, DIBC’s failure to comply with NAFTA Article 1121 fully deprives
this Tribunal of jurisdiction to determine any of DIBC’s NAFTA claims, as summarized

below.

°5 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 3.
° Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 4.

42/99

(2) International legal principles for establishing the Tribunal’s jurisdiction

(i) Claimant bears the burden of proof to show that it has met the jurisdictional

requirements of the NAFTA.

148. According to Canada, its consent to arbitrate under NAFTA Chapter Eleven is contingent on

149.

150.

151.

certain requirements being met, including that the Claimant and its enterprise waive their right
to pursue and actually refrain from domestic proceedings for damages with respect to the
measure(s) alleged to breach the NAFTA (Article 1121), and that the NAFTA claim must be
timely (Article 1116(2) and 1117(2)). Failure to comply with these requirements means there

is no agreement to arbitrate and, thus, no jurisdiction for the Tribunal.”

Contrary to DIBC’s argument, Canada submits that an investor bringing a claim under
NAFTA Chapter Eleven bears the burden of proving that it has satisfied the conditions
necessary to commence arbitration and that the tribunal has jurisdiction over the dispute. This
position has been constantly upheld by NAFTA tribunals, including in the Apotex v. United

States case, Methanex, Bayview, and Grand River.®

(ii) Jurisdiction is determined on the date that the Notice of Arbitration is filed

According to Canada, under NAFTA Chapter Eleven the jurisdiction of a tribunal is
determined on the date the claim is submitted to arbitration; and in this case the relevant date
is April 29, 2011. Thus, NAFTA Article 1121 stipulates that a claim may be submitted to
arbitration “only if’ an investor and its enterprise filed a valid waiver and comply with that
waiver as of the date the notice of arbitration is submitted. This general rule has been

confirmed by NAFTA and other international courts and tribunals.”

Canada concludes that DIBC cannot create jurisdiction after it has submitted its NAFTA

claim to arbitration without the express consent of Canada, which Canada has not and will not

0

give.” Therefore, the Tribunal cannot have jurisdiction over a claim that was not validly

submitted to arbitration in the first place, even if the claim was subsequently amended. In any

® Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 49.
8 Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 51.
® Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 54-56; See also RLA-4; RLA-6; RLA-40 to RLA-42.
™ Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 57.

43/99

event, an amended claim could only be valid to the extent that it is not “amended or
supplemented in such a manner that the amended or supplemented claim of defense falls

outside the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal”, pursuant to UNCITRAL Rule Article 22.”!

(3) The Tribunal has no jurisdiction because DIBC has failed to comply with
NAFTA Article 1121

(i) Consent to arbitration by a NAFTA Party is conditioned on compliance with the

waiver requirement in Article 1121

152. Canada submits that NAFTA Article 1121, entitled “Conditions Precedent to Submission of a
Claim to Arbitration,” is a prerequisite to the formation of a valid agreement to arbitrate
between the disputing investor and the NAFTA Party involved.” Article 1121(1) and (2)

provides the following:

1. A disputing investor may submit a claim under Article 1116 to arbitration only if:

(a) the investor consents to arbitration in accordance with the procedures set out in
this Agreement; and

(b) the investor and, where the claim is for loss or damage to an interest in an
enterprise of another Party that is a juridical person that the investor owns or
controls directly or indirectly, the enterprise, waive their right to initiate or
continue before any administrative tribunal or court under the law of any Party,
or other dispute settlement procedures, any proceedings with respect to the

 

measure of the disputing Party that is alleged to be a breach referred to in
Article 1116, except for proceedings for injunctive, declaratory or other
extraordinary relief, not involving the payment of damages, before an

administrative tribunal or court under the law of the disputing Party.

2. A disputing investor may submit a claim under Article 1117 to arbitration only if

 

both the investor and the enterpris

(a) consent to arbitration in accordance with the procedures set out in this
Agreement, and

7! Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 58.
” Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 82.

44/99

153.

154.

155.

(b) waive their right to initiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or
court under the law of any Party, or other dispute settlement procedures, any
proceedings with respect to the measure of the disputing Party that is alleged to
be a breach referred to in Article 1117, except for proceedings for injunctive,
declaratory or other extraordinary relief, not involving the payment of damages,
before an administrative tribunal or court under the law of the disputing Party.

NAFTA Article 1121(3) provides that the “consent and waiver required by this Article shall
be in writing, shall be delivered to the disputing Party and shall be included in the submission
of a claim to arbitration.” For cases submitted under the UNCITRAL Rules, NAFTA Article
1137(1)(c) stipulates that a claim is submitted to arbitration when the notice of arbitration is
received by the disputing Party. The tribunal in Waste Management I noted that the waiver
delivered with the notice of arbitration “must be clear, explicit and categorical” and legally

effective.”

The responsibility to comply with a waiver lies with the Claimant, which has an affirmative
obligation to discontinue its domestic proceedings with respect to the measures alleged to
breach the NAFTA. As the tribunal in Commerce Group stated, “logic tells us that it is up to
the Claimants to make the waiver of their legal rights effective, not Respondent’.” Unless
DIBC has actually done what is required by Article 1121, including having terminated
domestic proceedings with respect to measures alleged to breach NAFTA, it is the NAFTA
arbitration that must be terminated for lack of jurisdiction.” Contrary to the submission of
DIBC that the issue of compliance with Article 1121 is a matter for the Respondent to pursue
in domestic courts, Canada submits that it is for the Arbitral Tribunal to determine whether

there is compliance with Article 1121 and whether it has jurisdiction.”

Canada concludes that a claimant’s failure to file a proper waiver with its notice of arbitration,
or its failure to otherwise act consistently with that waiver, means there is no consent to

arbitrate and that the tribunal has no jurisdiction.””

™ Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 83; Exhibit RLA-4.

™ Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 65.

75 Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, 67.

76 Transcripts of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, Day 1, p. 62, Lines 9-13.
™ Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 84.

45/99

156.

157.

158.

oo

159.

(ii) The ordinary meaning of NAFTA Article 1121, read in its context and in light of
the object and purpose of the NAFTA

Article 31(2) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (the “VCLT”) sets out the
general rule of treaty interpretation in international law: “A treaty shall be interpreted in good
faith with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in

light of its object and purpose.”"®

As applied to this NAFTA arbitration, DIBC and CTC were required to file a valid waiver on
April 29, 2011 and, as of that date, discontinue any existing domestic proceedings and refrain
from initiating new proceedings against Canada in Canadian, U.S. or Mexican courts “with
respect to” any of the “measures” alleged to be in violation of NAFTA Chapter Eleven. The
only exception to this is to allow DIBC and CTC to seek injunctive, declaratory or other
extraordinary relief in Canada — not in the U.S. or Mexico — and only if those proceedings are

“not involving the payment of damages”.

Canada points out that the NAFTA tribunal in Waste Management I discussed the term “with

respect to the measure” in the context of Article 1121, stating that:

“[flor the purposes of considering the waiver valid when that waiver is a condition
precedent to arbitration, it is not imperative to know the merits of the question
submitted to arbitration, but to have proof that the actions brought before domestic
courts or tribunals directly affect the arbitration in that their object consists of
measures also alleged in the present arbitral proceedings to be breaches of the

NAFTA”?

Canada concludes that a domestic proceeding “with respect to” a measure that is alleged to
breach the NAFTA is thus one that is “in regards to or with reference to” that measure in a
way that might “directly affect’ the NAFTA arbitration. This could mean, for example, a

domestic proceeding that requires for its disposition the making of determinations of facts or

78 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 86.
” Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 94; Waste Management I, §27, Exhibit RLA-4.

46/99

160.

161.

162.

163.

determinations of legal rights, or that might award compensation “in regards to or with
80

reference to” a measure that is alleged to breach the NAFTA.
The only exception to the rule that domestic proceedings be discontinued with respect to the
measures alleged to breach NAFTA is the right of the claimant to initiate or continue a
domestic proceedings within the respondent NAFTA Party’s territory as long as that
proceeding is for “injunctive, declaratory or other extraordinary relief’ but “not involving the
payment of damages” *'

Canada rejects DIBC’s narrow interpretation of the words proceedings “with respect to”,
which would require a waiver of claims only if the exact measure is specifically challenged
and identified as the specific basis of its claim in the domestic proceedings. Canada counters
that DIBC’s interpretation is incorrect because the ordinary meaning of the words “with
respect to” is “as regards; with reference to”, not “identical” or “same as”. Article 1121 is
focused on the underlying actions of the respondent Party at issue, not the cause of action, and

not on the claims to which such measure may give rise.*?

Moreover, Canada argues that the terms of Article 1121 must be interpreted in their context
and in light of the object and purpose of the NAFTA. Canada points to the Consolidated
Lumber case, where the tribunal stated that “the drafters of the NAFTA sought to avoid
concurrent and parallel proceedings” and pointed specifically to Article 1121 as proof that
overlapping proceedings “are to be avoided”.** Canada submits that other NAFTA tribunals

have taken the same view.**

Canada also rejects DIBC’s argument that Article 1121 would allow it to seek damages in the
domestic courts of the respondent NAFTA Party as long as the damages sought are “in the

alternative” to other equitable relief or as long as the damages are not being sought for the

8° Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 95.
8! Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 96.
® Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 74-75.

® Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 106; Consolidated Lumber Decision on Preliminary Question, June 6, 2006, {{ 237,
242, RLA-12.
“ Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 106; RLA-4 and RLA-S.

47/99

164.

165.

166.

“same” measures alleged to breach NAFTA. According to Canada, DIBC’s interpretation

does not find any support in the plain language of Article 1 121.85

(iii) | DIBC’s waivers contravene Article 1121

Canada submits that a waiver filed pursuant to NAFTA Article 1121 must be consistent with
the requirements set out in that provision. Because jurisdiction is determined on the date
DIBC submitted its claim to arbitration, it is DIBC’s First NAFTA Waiver that is decisive in
this case. Canada argues that even if the Second NAFTA waiver were considered, it also is

inconsistent with the requirements of Article 1121.

Canada argues that DIBC’s First NAFTA Waiver is inconsistent with Article 1121 for two
reasons. First, while NAFTA Article 1121 requires a waiver in respect of “any proceedings”,
DIBC expressly carved-out the Washington Litigation, making the waiver inapplicable to
those domestic proceedings. Second, according to Canada, the measures that DIBC includes
in its First NAFTA Waiver are narrower than the measures alleged to breach the NAFTA in
its First NAFTA NOA; and accordingly the First waiver only waives DIBC’s right to pursue
certain specified measures in domestic proceedings, and thereby purports to preserve the
possibility of DIBC pursuing other claims that may nonetheless be claims “with respect to”

measures at issue in the NAFTA arbitration.**

Canada submits that DIBC’s Second Waiver which accompanied its Amended NAFTA NOA
aggravates the above defects, for the following three reasons: (i) DIBC carved out the
Washington Litigation again, but in addition also carved-out the CTC Litigation; (ii) DIBC’s
Second Waiver failed to include the following phrase from Article 1121(1)(b) and 2(b):
“before an administrative tribunal or court under the law of the Disputing Party”, giving itself
the right to pursue “injunctive, declaratory or other extraordinary relief’ against Canada in the
United States; and (iii) DIBC only made the waiver applicable to certain measures at issue in

the NAFTA arbitration.*”

85 Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 86.
86 Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, $f 99-103.
87 Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, $9] 105-107.

48/99

167.

168.

oo

16

170.

%

Finally, Canada alleges that DIBC’s Third Waiver, introduced at the Hearing on Jurisdiction
as Exhibit C-171, is a clear acknowledgement that the previous waivers were defective,
because the Third Waiver tried to correct the defective aspects of the First and Second
waivers. In any case, Canada argues that such waiver is irrelevant because it was not
submitted at the time of the NOA.*

(iv) | DIBC’s continuation of the Washington Litigation past April 29, 2011 contravenes
NAFTA Article 1121 and deprives the Tribunal of jurisdiction

Canada argues that DIBC’s continuation of the Washington Litigation against Canada after it
commenced NAFTA arbitration contravenes Article 1121 because it was (and continues to
be) both (i) a proceeding with respect to the measures it alleges breach the NAFTA (i.e. DRIC

EA and the Nine Point Plan*’), and (ii) is a proceeding for damages.”

Canada argues that the gravamen of the First NAFTA NOA and DIBC’s Original and
Amended Complaint in the Washington Litigation was the same: Canada’s decision to locate
the DRIC Bridge, corresponding Parkway, and customs plaza in proximity to the Ambassador
Bridge. The measure which approved the location of the DRIC Bridge and the Parkway is the
same: the DRIC EA.”!

DIBC’s First NAFTA NOA was focused primarily on the DRIC EA, alleging that: “Canada’s
focus in developing the Central Corridor crossing infrastructure was to develop a publicly
owned bridge to take traffic from the Ambassador Bridge, drive down the value of the
Ambassador Bridge, and facilitate a future acquisition of the Ambassador Bridge by
Canada.” In DIBC’s Original and First Amended Complaint in the Washington Litigation it
also alleged that Canada “created a new opportunity to attempt to force the transfer of the
Ambassador Bridge to ownership and control by Canada, this time by proposing to build a
new bridge (the “DRIC bridge”) between Detroit and Windsor, designed to take nearly all

the traffic revenue from the Ambassador Bridge.”

88 Transcripts of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, Day 1, p. 90, lines 9-12; p. 94, lines 17-22.
®° Transcripts of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, Day 1, p. 109, lines 1-9.

°° Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 110.

°! DRIC EA Report, Exhibit R-47; CEAA Screening Report, Exhibit C-92.

°? Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 113.

49/99

171.

172.

Canada argues that the timing of DIBC’s NAFTA arbitration and Washington Litigation is
also telling. The DRIC EA was approved by Ontario and Canada in August and December
2009, respectively, after which CTC initiated a judicial review of the DRIC EA in the Federal
Court of Canada on December 31, 2009. DIBC and CTC then launched the Washington
Complaint against Canada on March 22, 2010, and filed a notice of intent under the NAFTA
on March 23, 2010. According to Canada, the DRIC EA was the impetus for all three

lawsuits.

Canada rejects DIBC’s argument that overlapping allegations in the Washington proceedings
should be construed as “context” and would only be there to corroborate Canada’s
discriminatory intent in the Washington Litigation. According to Canada, the Original
Complaint and First Amended Complaint show that the allegations made and the relief
requested by DIBC for Canada’s decision on the location of the DRIC Bridge and Parkway
overlap with the measures alleged to breach the NAFTA. As example, Canada cites the

following:

 

First NAFTA NOA Washington Amended
Complaint
Allegations with respect to the DRIC EA

“The location selected for the DRIC|“[T]o ensure that the DRIC Bridge
Bridge, in the areas known as the Central | succeeds at the expense of the

Complaint/1*

 

 

Corridor, was intentionally chosen to
divert traffic away from the Ambassador
Bridge. The planned DRIC Bridge will
have a direct connection to Highway 401
like the connection Canada promised but
never built for the Ambassador Bridge.
The new connection from Highway 401
to the DRIC Bridge, known as the
Windsor-Essex Parkway, is designed to
divert as much as 75% of the
Ambassador Bridge’s commercial truck
traffic, in order to ensure that the DRIC
Bridge succeeds at the Ambassador
Bridge’s expense.”

 

 

Ambassador Bridge, Canada and FHWA
have manipulated regulatory and other
processes to speed the construction of the
DRIC Bridge, delay or prevent the
construction of the Ambassador Bridge
New Span, and impede the flow of traffic
to the Ambassador Bridge. By the DRIC
Proponent’s own estimate, the objective
of the DRIC Bridge is to divert from up to
75% of the Ambassador Bridge’s truck
traffic and up to 39% of its passenger
traffic."

 

 

53 Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 114.
% First NAFTA NOA, § 38.

5 Washington Complaint, 86, Exhibit R-17; See also Washington First Amended Complaint, 7, Exhibit R-18.

50/99

173.

174.

 

 

Relief Requested

 

“As a result of the measures taken by the
Government of Canada described above,
the Claimant respectfully requests an
award...Directing Canada to pay
damages in an amount to be proved at

Based on_ these allegations”, DIBC
“respectfully request[s] judgment against
[Canada] for the following relief:

(DA declaratory judgment
against...Canada under 28 USC 2201-

the hearing by which the Claimant
presently estimates to be in excess of
US$3.5 billion.””*

2202 that the construction and operation
of the planned DRIC Bridge across the
Detroit River would violate the
obligations of Canada and the United
States to DIBC and CTC:...
(8) An injunction
Canada...prohibiting...[it}from
any steps to construct, prepare for
construction of, or arrange for
construction of the planned DRIC Bridge
or any other bridge across the Detroit
River between Canada and the United
States:

against
taking

(9) Damages against Canada in an amount
to be determined at trial.”°*

 

 

 

 

Moreover, Canada argues that both the First NAFTA NOA and the Washington Litigation
were initiated “with respect to” the Nine Point Plan. The moment DIBC alleged in the
Washington Litigation that Canada unlawfully reneged on the alleged USD 300 million
promise in the Nine Point Plan/LGWEM Strategy, those proceedings became proceedings
“with respect to” the measures alleged by DIBC in its First NAFTA NOA to violate NAFTA.
Canada rejects DIBC’s argument that its allegations against the Nine Point Plan in the
Washington Litigation are merely “facts” that provide “background and context”. Allegations

of discriminatory behavior are not facts or background. °

Canada rejects DIBC’s argument that the NAFTA arbitration is about Canada’s measures in
Canada and the Washington Litigation about Canada’s measures in the United States. The

9 First NAFTA NOA, 52.

9” Washi laint, $7 147, 156, 160, 164, 167, 173, Exhibit R-17; Washington First Amended Complaint, $f] 212,
220, 231, 235, 245, Exhibit R-18.

58 Washington Complaint, § 45-47, Exhibit R-17; Washington First Amended Complaint, 99 67-68, Exhibit R-18.

°° Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, § 117.

51/99

175.

176.

177.

178.

Washington Litigation is clearly about Canada’s measures in Canada, in particular, about
100

Canada’s involvement in the DRIC EA process and the Nine Point Plan.
Canada also rejects DIBC’s allegation that, while this NAFTA arbitration challenges
Canada’s regulatory and legislative actions, the Washington Litigation is addressed solely to
commercial conduct by Canada as a prospective owner, constructor, and operator of the
DRIC. Canada counters that the DRIC EA was a process under Canadian legislation, and is,
therefore, a regulatory and legislative action. It is Canada’s exclusive sovereign prerogative to

decide where and under what conditions a bridge will be constructed on Canadian soil.!!

Finally, Canada rejects DIBC’s argument that the allegations made in the Washington
Litigation are permissible under NAFTA Article 1121 because DIBC is not seeking monetary
damages. Article 1121(1)(b) and (2)(b) contains a limited exception for injunctive and
declaratory proceedings brought against Canada in Canada, as long as those proceedings are
“not involving the payment of damages”. The Washington Litigation is not a proceeding in
Canada but is in front of the DDC in the United States. The limited exception in NAFTA
Article 1121 does not apply, so the issue of whether the Washington Litigation is involving
the payment of damages is immaterial. In any case, the suggestion that DIBC and CTC are
not seeking the payment of damages in the Washington Litigation is false. The Washington
Complaint and First Amended Complaint in the Washington Litigation explicitly sought
damages against Canada.'”

DIBC wrongly assumes that the NAFTA and international law allow it to create jurisdiction at
any time after commencing arbitration and it ignores the consequences of in the failure to
comply with Article 1121 at the outset of the arbitration. Canada considers that this Tribunal
need not look further than the First NAFTA NOA and the Washington Original Complaint

and First Amended Complaint. 103

Canada argues that even if the Tribunal were to look into the Amended NAFTA NOA filed on

January 15, 2013, it would find that the amended claim is itself outside the jurisdiction of the

‘© Transcripts of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, Day 1, p. 109, lines 16-25.
'! Transcripts of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, Day 1, p. 110, lines 10-17.
'©2 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, ff 147-149.
‘8 Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 119.

52/99

179.

180.

181.

Tribunal because DIBC was continuing the Washington Litigation against Canada as of that
date.' The “operative complaint” in the Washington Litigation at the time DIBC amended
the submission of its claim to arbitrate was the Washington Second Amended Complaint.
Canada alleges that DIBC’s allegations in the Second Amended Complaint also renders the
Washington Litigation a proceeding “with respect to” the measures alleged to breach the

NAFTA.'°°

Finally, Canada points out that on May 29, 2013 DIBC amended its claims against Canada in
the Washington Litigation for a third time. DIBC assumes that its Third Amended Complaint
is the “operative complaint” for the purposes of determining whether the Washington
Litigation is a proceeding “with respect to” measures alleged to breach the NAFTA under
Article 1121. The Third Amended Complaint is not the “operative complaint” as DIBC was
required to comply with Article 1121 as of April 29, 2011. Nevertheless, the Third Amended
Complaint does not rectify DIBC’s previous non-compliance with Article 1121 but only
demonstrates DIBC’s continued willingness to flout conditions precedent under that

provision. 106

(v) CTC’s Initiation and Continuation of the CTC v. Canada Litigation Contravenes

NAFTA Article 1121

Canada argues that DIBC contravened Article 1121 when it initiated and continued the CTC
Litigation for the following two reasons: (i) the CTC Litigation is a proceeding with respect to
the measures alleged to breach the NAFTA, as it seeks to impugn the Nine Point Plan, the
DRIC EA, the IBTA and the delay purportedly caused with respect to the New Span EA; and

(ii) it is also a proceeding involving the payment of damages.'””

Canada rejects DIBC’s argument that DIBC is allowed to initiate and continue the CTC
Litigation under Article 1121 because its damages claim in that proceeding is not for the
“same” measures at issue in the NAFTA arbitration. DIBC’s allegation that the actual

' Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 120.
'°5 Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 121.
16 Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 129.

'°7 Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 135.

53/99

182.

183.

184.

construction of the DRIC Bridge is a “measure” separate and distinct from the measures at
issue in the NAFTA arbitration in untenable. For instance, the approved location of the DRIC
Bridge through the DRIC EA is not a measure that is separate and distinct from the actual
construction of the DRIC Bridge for the purposes of Article 1121. Both of DIBC’s allegations
have their roots in the same underlying complaint: that a new international crossing in
proximity to the Ambassador Bridge violates DIBC’s exclusive franchise rights and the
NAFTA. DIBC acknowledges in the CTC Litigation that Canada, through the DRIC EA,
“unlawfully commenced construction of a new, government-owned international crossing to
be built less than two miles from the Ambassador Bridge.”

Moreover, Canada argues that DIBC seeks in excess of US$ 3.5 billion in damages against
Canada in this arbitration and it is difficult to imagine how this quantum would not overlap
with DIBC’s claim for expropriation in the CTC Litigation.”

(vi) DIBC refuses to confirm what Windsor measures are alleged to breach the

NAFTA

According to Canada, in its NAFTA claim DIBC alleges that the City of Windsor took
measures to discriminate against DIBC, violating Claimant’s exclusive franchise rights to
operate a bridge between Detroit and Windsor, and also violating Claimant’s franchise rights
by precluding the construction of the New Span. In the Windsor Litigation, CTC alleges that
the City of Windsor “engaged in unlawful and deliberate conduct for the purpose of delaying,
obstructing, hindering and preventing CTC from engaging in its commercial activities to
effectively operate and improve the Ambassador Bridge crossing.” 10

More specifically, in the Windsor Litigation, the following City of Windsor actions were
alleged to be unlawful and to have caused CTC damages: (i) the Schwartz Report and
Greenlink proposal; (ii) Purchase of property in the DRIC Bridge area; (iii) City Council
Resolutions and submissions in the public consultation process opposing the construction of

the New Span; (iv) planning studies relating to the Olde Sandwich Towne; (v) installation of

'®S Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 138. See CTC Litigation Statement of Claim, 499, Exhibit R-20; CTC
Litigation Amended Statement of Claim, { 105, Exhibit C-119.

' Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 139.
"° Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J] 142-143.

54/99

185.

186.

187.

188.

traffic lights and unlimited driveway connections along Huron Church Road; and (vi) By-laws
il

and City Council resolutions to prevent the demolition of houses in Old Sandwich Towne.
Canada argues that in its Counter-Memorial in this arbitration, DIBC simply refused to
identify which City of Windsor measures “discriminates against DIBC” and “preclude the
construction of the New Span”. However, if any of those measures include those at issue in
the Windsor Litigation, then DIBC has failed to meet the conditions precedent to arbitration

under Article 1121.'7

(4) DIBC’s Highway 401 Road Access Claims and IBTA Claim are Time Barred
under NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2)

(i) Articles 116(2) and 1117(2) set a rigid three-year time limit for submission of a claim
to arbitration

Canada submits that if the Tribunal decides that DIBC has complied with Article 1121, it
nonetheless lacks jurisdiction rationae temporis over DIBC’s Highway 401 and IBTA claims
because of the three-year time limitation set out in Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2).13
Canada alleges that NAFTA Chapter Eleven sets a rigid time limitation within which claims
must be submitted to arbitration. NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) are clear: DIBC had
three years “from the date on which [DIBC and CTC] first acquired, or should have first
acquired” (emphasis added by Canada) knowledge of the alleged breach and knowledge that
DIBC and/or CTC incurred loss or damage to submit its claim to NAFTA arbitration.''*
Canada points to DIBC’s allegation that it suffered damage as a result of Canada’s actions
undertaken prior to filing its NAFTA claim, including diminished toll revenues (including
future losses) and damage to its exclusive franchise rights. In light of this allegation, Canada
argues that the Tribunal has to determine the date on which DIBC/CTC first acquired actual

or constructive knowledge of the alleged breach and damage. Since DIBC’s First NAFTA

"! Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 143.
"2 Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 148.
"3 Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 149.
"4 Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 181.

55/99

189.

190.

191.

192.

NOA was filed on April 29, 2011, if the “first acquired” date show to be before April 29.

2008, then the claims are time barred and outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.''®

Moreover, Canada argues that the NAFTA Parties set a specific time limit of three years in
which to file a claim under Chapter Eleven regardless of whether the impugned conduct is
continuing or not. The countdown starts from the date the investor/enterprise “first acquired,
or should have acquired, knowledge of the alleged breach” and that some cognizable loss has

been incurred. It does not matter if the measure is continuing.''®

NAFTA Tribunals have also consistently noted that concrete knowledge of the actual amount
of loss or damage is not a pre-requisite to the running of the limitation period under 1116(2)
and 1117(2). For instance, the tribunal in Mondev v. United States stated that “[a] claimant
may know that it suffered loss or damage even if the extent of quantification of the loss or
damage is still unclear.”''’ Canada also cites the Grand River Enterprises Six Nations Ltd. v.
United States case, which endorsed the Mondeyv tribunal’s conclusion. us

Canada alleges that all three NAFTA Parties have endorsed the Grand River tribunal’s
interpretation of NAFTA’s limitations provisions. Under Article 31(3)(a) of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties, the consistent position of the United States, Mexico and
Canada on this issue constitutes a “subsequent agreement between the parties regarding the
interpretation of the treaty” which “shall be taken into account’ when interpreting the
NAFTA.'?

Canada argues that the Tribunal should not rely on the UPS v. Canada case in support of
DIBC’s ‘continuing breach’ theory. This is because the UPS tribunal’s interpretation gives the

word “first” no meaning and run afoul of the principle of interpretation of effet utile and is a

"5 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 182
"16 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 185

"'7 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 194; See Mondev International Lid. v. US (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2) Award,
October 11, 2001, { 87, Exhibit RLA-20.

"8 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{][ 96-198; See Grand River Enterprises Six Nations Ltd. v. United States, Jurisdiction
Decision, ${{ 77-78, Exhibit RLA-I5.
"9 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 199.

 

56/99

193.

194.

195.

196.

departure from the approach of the Mondev and Grand River tribunals, as well as the
120

concordant view of the three NAFTA Parties.
Finally, Canada submits that the text of NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) makes no
allowance for the limitations period to be tolled by ongoing litigation with respect to the
impugned measure. As a consequence, none of the ongoing litigation referenced by DIBC

could toll the limitation period.'?!

(ii) DIBC failed to submit timely claims regarding the Highway 401 Measures, as DIBC
first acquired knowledge of the alleged breach and loss before May 1, 2008

As mentioned above, Canada argues that if DIBC first acquired knowledge of the alleged

breaches and damages before April 29, 2008, then DIBC’s claims would be time barred and

outside this Tribunal’ s jurisdiction.'”?
DIBC’s claims regarding road access to Highway 401 encompasses the following:

a. DIBC alleges that Canada reneged on a “promise” in the 2003 Windsor Gateway
Action Plan/Nine Point Plan to spend USD 300 million to construct a direct highway
connection between Highway 401 and the Ambassador Bridge;

b. DIBC alleges that Canada manipulated the Highway 401 connection component of
the DRIC EA (the “Parkway”) to go to the new DRIC Bridge but not to the
Ambassador Bridge; and

c. DIBC alleges that Windsor installed “seventeen unnecessary traffic lights” and
granted “unlimited curb cuts and driveways connection” on Huron Church Road in

order to steer traffic to the Windsor-Detroit Tunnel and the DRIC Bridge.

For the Highway 401 claims, Canada sustains that the relevant dates are March 11, 2004 and

 

November 15, 2005, i.e. dates on which Canada “reneged” on its alleged “promise” to build a
1,23

 

direct highway link between the Ambassador Bridge and Highway 40

- The Windsor Gateway Action Plan/Nine Point Plan was Replaced on March 11, 2004

'20 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 211
"2! Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, 9168-170.
'22 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 182.
"3 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {[ 183.

57/99

197.

198.

199.

First, Canada states that nothing in the Windsor Gateway Action Plan/Nine Point Plan can
possibly be construed as a commitment by Canada to spend $300 million to build a direct

Highway 401-Ambassador Bridge connection. '*4

In any event, Canada argues that the Windsor Gateway Action Plan/Nine Point Plan was
replaced on March 11, 2004. On this date, all three levels of government announced a new
plan under which the $300 million in infrastructure funding would be used. The Let’s Go
Windsor Essex Moving strategy (“LGWEM Strategy”) was explicit: “The Let’s Go Windsor-
Essex Moving strategy replaces the nine-point Windsor Gateway Action Plan.”'?

Canada submits that LGWEM projects funded from the allocated $300 million were well-
publicized, including on the Ontario Ministry of Transportation and Transport Canada
websites, City of Windsor public notices, and in the media.'”° No project under the LGWEM
Strategy ever involved building a direct Highway 401 — Ambassador Bridge connection.!””
DIBC and CTC knew or should have known this, and the evidence indicates they did. In
addition to constructive knowledge of the abandonment of the Nine Point Plan in March
2004, evidence of DIBC and CTC’s actual knowledge can be found, Canada says, in the

following:

- On June 1, 2007: CTC Executive Director of External Affairs Mr. Thomas Skip
McMahon told the Windsor Star newspaper that the $300 million was committed “to

connect the 401 to the [Ambassador] bridge plaza” but was instead spent on other

traffic construction projects in Windsor”;!7*

- On August 24, 2007: CenTra/DIBC/CTC General Counsel Mr. Patrick Moran wrote to

Canada alleging that it had reneged on its promise to use the $300 million to build a

Highway 401-Ambassador Bridge connection;!””

24 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, 219. See Exhibits C-29 - C-33.
"5 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, [ 221. See “A New Solution for the Windsor Gateway Announced By All Three
Levels of Government,” News Release, March 11, 2004, at p. 3, Exhibit R-34.

'° Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 225. See Exhibits R-89 to R-106.

"27 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {[ 225.

"28 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 226. See Exhibit R-109.

"2° Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 226. See Exhibit R-111.

58/99

200.

201.

202.

- On October 3, 2007: Canada wrote to CenTra/DIBC/CTC President Mr. Stamper to
confirm what was already known: (a) the $300 million in the Nine Point Plan was
never intended to be spent on building a Highway 401 connection to the Ambassador
Bridge; (b) the LGWEM Strategy superseded the Nine Point Plan and the $300
million was being spent on short and medium term traffic infrastructure
improvements, and (c) Canada remained committed to the Bi-National Partnership

Process.'*°

Canada argues that the evidence above shows that DIBC and CTC knew, or should have
known, more than three years before it filed its First NAFTA NOA on April 29, 2011, that the
Windsor Gateway Action Plan/Nine Point plan was terminated.'*! For these reasons, DIBC’s
claim with respect to the Windsor Gateway Action Plan/Nine Point plan is time barred under

NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) and thus outside the Tribunal’ jurisdiction.'*?

- Highway 401 Connection to the Ambassador Bridge Through the DRIC EA was
eliminated on November 14, 2005

Canada rejects DIBC’s allegation that Canada would have manipulated the DRIC EA to
eliminate the twinned Ambassador Bridge option X12 in order to ensure the Parkway would
go to the DRIC Bridge but not to the Ambassador Bridge. DIBC’s allegations are without
merit, as has been established in the Federal Court of Canada.!*?

Canada argues that, in any event, the claim is time-barred under NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and
1117(2) because DIBC knew or should have known on November 14, 2005 that there would
not be a direct highway connection between Highway 401 and the Ambassador Bridge,
because option X12 had been dropped from the DRIC EA.'™! Accordingly, DIBC had until
November 14, 2008 to commence arbitration under NAFTA Chapter Eleven with respect to

its Highway 401 claims.'*> Other evidence of DIBC and CTC’s actual knowledge that there

'3° Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 227. See Exhibit C-110.
‘5! Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {[ 128

'32 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 229.

'3 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 230. See Exhibit R-9.
'34 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 230.

'5 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {[ 238

59/99

203.

204.

205.

would not be a direct highway connection between Highway 401 and the Ambassador Bridge

includes the following:

- On November 105, 2005: The day after option X12 was dropped from the DRIC EA,
DIBC/CTC President Mr. Stamper wrote to MTO and MDOT declaring that the DRIC
process had “effected delay and damage” to the Ambassador Bridge. 136

- On November 28, 2006: DIBC/CTC President Mr. Stamper testified before the
Canadian Senate Committee on Transport and Communication that “The plan for the
government-proposed bridge is to finish Highway 401 to the new bridge, not to our
bridge. That is a continued way to take traffic away from the Ambassador Bridge {...].
This is not just pie in the sky. These things have been going on for a long time.”*7

Canada points out that DIBC has itself put forward, in its NAFTA Statement of Claim,
October 3, 2007 as the date on which it first acquired knowledge of Canada’s alleged breach
and knowledge that it incurred loss from this alleged breach. While the evidence above shows
that DIBC actually first acquired knowledge of the alleged breach and damage much earlier
than that date, even if this later date is used to measure the commencement of the three-year
limitation period, DIBC would have had until October 3, 2010 to submit its claim to NAFTA
arbitration (which it failed to do).!°*

Canada also rejects DIBC’s allegations that DIBC could not have known before May 1, 2008,

(the day on which the exact route of the Parkway was publicly announced) that Canada would

not build a direct highway connection between Highway 401 and the Ambassador Bridge. 189

Canada states that every one of the DIRC EA public information open houses in 2006 and
2007 discussed and showed maps of specific routes and options to connect Highway 401 to a
new bridge in one of the three locations in southwest Windsor, and none of those options

included a highway connection to the Ambassador Bridge. 140

'86 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 234. See Exhibits R-35 and R-36.

'S7 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 234. See Proceedings of the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and
Communications, Issue 6 ~ Evidence ~ November 28, 2006, p. 6 of 12, Exhibit R-37.

'S8 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {[ 237
"8° Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 179.
'° Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 181.

60/99

206.

207.

208.

209.

Moreover, Canada rejects DIBC’s suggestion that the elimination of option X12 from the
DRIC EA was merely a preparatory act and that Canada’s alleged unlawful conduct only
occurred much later when the exact route of the Parkway was announced on May 1, 2008.
With respect to the application of its composite act theory, DIBC advances a similar argument
and alleges that “the final act which consummated the composite act” could not have occurred
before the Parkway announcement. Canada counters that, in light of the evidence described
above, DIBC’s “legal” characterizations of Canada’s actions as “preparatory” or “composite”
do not withstand scrutiny. May 1, 2008 is not the date on which DIBC first acquired
knowledge of any alleged NAFTA breach and resulting damage.'*'

(iii) DIBC failed to submit timely claims regarding the International Bridges and Tunnels
Acts (IBTA) as such act was enacted on February 1, 2007

Canada rejects DIBC’s allegation that Canada enacted the IBTA to give Canada the purported
authority to interfere with the Ambassador Bridge’s expansion plans and to coerce DIBC and
CTC to transfer their rights in the Ambassador Bridge to Canada. Canada counters that, even
if these allegations regarding the intent and purpose of the IBTA were believed for the
purposes of jurisdiction, DIBC failed to submit a timely claim within the three-year time
limitation set out in NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) because the IBTA was enacted on
February 1, 2007.'4?

DIBC and CTC cannot plead ignorance of the law, and the evidence shows that they knew or
should have known that the IBTA applied to the Ambassador Bridge on the day it was

enacted.'*

Canada also rejects DIBC’s allegations, raised in its Counter-Memorial, that it did not incur
the loss or damage required by NAFTA Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2) when the IBTA came
into force in February 1, 2007. DIBC appears to suggest that October 18, 2010 is the date it
first acquired knowledge of loss because that was when Canada issued a Ministerial Order to

refrain from further work on the New Span until approval under the IBTA was received.'“

'! Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 190.
'2 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 246.
‘8 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 252.
' Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 198.

61/99

210.

21

212.

However, on January 25, 2010, 10 months before the Ministerial Order was issued, DIBC
filed a notice of intent to arbitrate under NAFTA alleging that the IBTA breached the NAFTA
and caused it damages of “not less than US$1.5 billion”. DIBC chose not to pursue this claim
in its First NAFTA NOA but opted to do so in its Amended NAFTA NOA. Moreover, on
March 22, 2010 DIBC and CTC sued Canada in the United States federal court in Washington
DC for damages caused by the IBTA.'5

Canada argues that the fact that DIBC held the view that the IBTA did not apply to the
Ambassador Bridge does not change the irrefutable fact that the IBTA did apply to the
Ambassador Bridge and that DIBC was clearly told so. DIBC cannot toll the NAFTA’s time

limitations period by unilaterally declaring itself unbound by a lawfully enacted statute.'4°

. Finally, Canada rejects DIBC’s argument that the IBTA, the October 2010 Ministerial Order,

and the BSTA are all components of a composite act that was only consummated with the
passage of the BSTA in 2012. Canada counters that DIBC’s own allegations and pleadings
stress that the passage of the IBTA breached its rights and caused it damage, which started the
NAFTA limitations period. By the time the BSTA was enacted, almost three years had
elapsed since DIBC alleged in its First NAFTA NOI that it had suffered “in excess of US$ 1.5

billion” in damages arising out of the IBTA.'”

(5) Canada’s Request for Relief

In its Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction Canada requested the Tribunal to “dismiss the
Claimant’s claims in their entirety and with prejudice on the grounds of lack of jurisdiction
and/or admissibility and, in accordance with Article 42 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,

order the Claimant to pay all of costs arising from this arbitration, including Canada’s legal

- 9148
costs and disbursements.

"5 Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 201.

'46 Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 205.
7 Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 208.
‘48 Canada’s Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 214.

62/99

213.

214.

215.

216.

B. CLAIMANT’S POSITION

(1) Preliminary Statement

DIBC is an American-owned business that owns and operates the Ambassador Bridge, which
is the single largest trade crossing between the United States and Canada. DIBC alleges that
for many years it has been making plans and seeking approvals to build a twin span to the
Ambassador Bridge (the “New Span’) in order to maintain its bridge crossing, to enhance and
upgrade the infrastructure of the crossing, to increase its capacity to facilitate cross-border
traffic, and to reduce costs and disruptions resulting from maintenance on the existing

bridge.!?

This arbitration, says DIBC, challenges specific acts taken by Canada that reflect its hostility
to the American ownership of the Ambassador Bridge. Canada has recently taken a series of
actions designed to harm the American-owned Ambassador Bridge, and to favor a proposed
Canadian-owned bridge that would be located adjacent to the Ambassador Bridge — i.e. the
NITC/DRIC.'*

Canada has refused to make long-promised improvements to the Canadian approach to the
American-owned Ambassador Bridge or to construct a highway connection from that bridge
to the region’s main thoroughfare, Highway 401. Canada simultaneously has embarked upon
construction of a new highway connection between the unbuilt, not fully approved Canadian-
owned NITC/DRIC and Highway 401. This highway follows a path directly from Highway
401 towards the Ambassador Bridge, but then a mere two miles (ie. 3.2 Km) from the

Ambassador Bridge, veers towards the planned location for the NITC/DRIC instead.'*!

Canada’s decision not to complete the last two miles of this critical connection between the
Ambassador Bridge and Highway 401, while simultaneously redirecting connection towards
the NITC/DRIC, comprised the discrimination known as the “Roads Claim” in this

arbitration.'?

 DIBC’s Rejoinder on Juridiction, | 2
'S° DIBC’s Rejoinder on Juridiction, 3.
'S! DIBC’s Rejoinder on Juridiction, 4,
'S DIBC’s Rejoinder on Juridiction, 5

63/99

217.

218.

219.

220.

221.

According to DIBC, Canada has also created a discriminatory legal regime with respect to the
construction of the American-owned New Span and the Canadian-owned NITC/DRIC.
Specifically, Canada has delayed and obstructed approvals for the American-owned New
Span, while providing automatic approvals via legislative fiat for the Canadian-owned
NITC/DRIC. This regulatory and legislative discrimination is referred to herein as the “New
Span Claim’”.'**

DIBC seeks redress in this arbitration for this and other discrimination by Canada. In response
Canada seeks to avoid jurisdiction based primarily on the affirmative defenses of waiver and
time limitations. As summarized below, Canada has failed to meet its burden of proof on

these affirmative defenses.’
(2) International Legal Principles for Establishing the Tribunal’s Jurisdiction

(i) Canada bears the burden of proof for its own affirmative defences

On the grounds of Article 27(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules’ DIBC argues that the limitations

and waiver defences brought by Canada are affirmative defences, and therefore Canada bears

the burden of proving those defences and any facts relevant to those defences.'*°

In support of its allegation DIBC cites, inter alia, the Pope & Talbot NAFTA tribunal, which
stated that “Canada’s contention that the Harmac claim is time barred is in the nature of an
affirmative defense, and, as such, Canada has the burden of proof of showing factual

predicate to that defense...it is for Canada to demonstrate that the three-year period had

elapsed prior to that date.”'*"

(ii) The Tribunal may consider events subsequent to the notice of arbitration in its
jurisdictional analysis

DIBC rejects Canada’s allegation that no events occurring after the NOA, submitted on April

29, 2011, are relevant for jurisdictional purposes. According to DIBC, although it is true that

'S3 DIBC’s Rejoinder on Juridiction, | 6

'St DIBC’s Rejoinder on Juridiction, { 8.

'S5 Article 27(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules provides that “Each party shall have the burden of proving the facts relied on to
support its claim or defense.”

'5§ DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 15

‘57 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 18. See Also Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Government of Canada, Award in
Relation to Preliminary Motion dated February 24, 2000, Exhibit CLA-14, 11.

64/99

222.

223.

224.

the relevant date for determining jurisdiction is generally said to be the date of filing of a
notice of arbitration, international tribunals have made clear that this rule means only that
subsequent events cannot deprive a tribunal of jurisdiction.'* DIBC, citing as example a
decision from the Philip Morris case, alleges that, conversely, a tribunal may look at post-

filing events to establish or inform jurisdiction.'°

DIBC concludes that it complied with all NAFTA jurisdictional requirements as of April 29,
2011, the date it filed its NOA, and the Tribunal cannot be divested of that jurisdiction by

reference to later events.'©
(3) DIBC Has Complied with NAFTA Waiver Requirement under Article 1121

(i) Canada Misrepresents the Requirements of the NAFTA Waiver Provision

DIBC rejects Canada’s argument that in order to comply with NAFTA Article 1121, a
claimant must engage in additional affirmative conduct beyond submission of a written
consent and waiver. DIBC points to Canada’s allegation that a claimant must both submit the
written document required by Article 1121(3) and refrain from initiating or continuing any
domestic litigation proceeding covered by the waiver. DIBC counters that the plain language
of Article 1121 contains no requirement of affirmative conduct by a claimant beyond delivery
of a written document that the respondent State being sued in arbitration (Canada) can use to

enforce the waiver in domestic courts.'*!

DIBC argues that it is up to Canada to present the waiver to the courts in the domestic
proceedings if and when Canada concludes that the Article 1121 waiver applies. The
respective courts in the domestic proceeding then may determine whether the waiver affects
the claims before them. The NAFTA does not burden its own tribunals with the obligation to

police the actions of litigants in domestic proceedings within the NAFTA States.'°

'S8 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 23. See also Case Concerning the Arrest Warrant of April 11, 2000
(Democratic Republic of Congo v. Belgium), Judgment of February 14, 2002, ICJ Reports 2002, { 26, Exhibit CLA-57.

'° DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 24. See Philip Morris v. Uruguay, ICSIC Case No. ARB/10/7, Decision on
Jurisdiction dated July 2, 2013, {ff 144-45, Exhibit CLA-58

‘© DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 25
'! DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, {ff 46-49.
‘© DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 53.

65/99

225.

226.

227.

228.

Moreover, DIBC rejects Canada’s allegation that the Waste Management I tribunal found it
had no jurisdiction because the claimant failed to terminate domestic proceedings that fell
within Article 1121’s waiver provision. According to DIBC the tribunal found only that the
claimant had failed in the one affirmative requirement of Article 1121(3), ie. to deliver a
legally enforceable waiver of its right to initiate or continue conflicting proceedings. DIBC
concludes that the Waste Management I tribunal did not dismiss the arbitration because the
claimant failed to terminate a conflicting domestic proceeding, as stated by Canada. Rather,
the tribunal dismissed the arbitration because the physical waiver delivered to the respondent
did not in fact contain a legally enforceable repudiation of claimant’s rights in conflicting

litigation. 65

DIBC argues that, the fact that Article 1121 only requires delivery of a legally enforceable
consent and waiver (i.e. without a certification of past dismissals or a statement that the
Tribunal should police all future conduct that the respondent seeks to challenge) is consistent
with the acknowledged purpose of the Article 1121(3) ‘written waiver’ requirement, which is
to provide the respondent State with documentary evidence of the claimant’s waiver to use
before other courts. It does not follow, however, that this Tribunal should determine whether
domestic proceedings comply with the waiver. Rather, Article 1121 provides the respondent
with a tool (i.e. a legally enforceable waiver document) that the respondent may use or not, at

its own discretion.'™

In addition, according to DIBC, the scope of the waiver in Articles 1121(1)(b) and 1121(2)(b)
extends only to “proceedings with respect to the measure” that is alleged to constitute a
breach pursuant to NAFTA Articles 1116 and 1117, respectively. There is no requirement that
claimants waive claims relating to other measures that are not alleged to breach the
NaFTA.'®

DIBC rejects Canada’s allegation that the Commerce Group tribunal determined that claims
addressing merely related measures, rather than the same measure, can violate waiver

provisions like Article 1121. DIBC counters that the Commerce Group tribunal found that

‘© DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, ff 55-56.
‘© DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, {ff 60-61.
‘5 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 63

66/99

229.

230.

the claims at issue in the domestic proceedings and the arbitration “could [not] be teased

apart” and thus comprised “the same measure” in both proceedings.'°°

Moreover, DIBC submits that Article 1121 includes an exception to the scope of its waiver
provision, permitting claimants to maintain parallel “proceedings with respect to the measure”
alleged to breach the NAFTA where those excepted proceedings are for “injunctive,
declaratory or other extraordinary relief, not involving the payment of damages”, and that the
plain meaning of this exception is that claimants can bring claims with respect to the NAFTA
measures in domestic court, as long as they do not seek the payment of damages with respect
to those measures. DIBC rejects Canada’s allegation that this exception would only apply to
proceedings where no damages are sought with respect to any claim (i.e. claims wholly
unrelated to the measure at issue in arbitration). DIBC states that Canada offers no
explanation of how the text of Article 1121 justifies this conclusion. Article 1121 is specific
as to what claims are to be waived and does not generally preclude all causes of action for

damages, regardless of the nature of the claims.'®”

DIBC argues that Article 1121 permits claims for declaratory or injunctive relief, even if they
challenge the same measure as in the NAFTA arbitration, so long as they are brought “under
the law of the disputing Party.” DIBC rejects Canada’s argument that the phrase “under the
law of the disputing Party” requires not only application of the disputing Party’s law, but also
that the proceeding be physically located within the jurisdiction of the respondent State.
Under Canada’s reasoning, an injunction issued by a US (or Mexican) court based on a
violation of Canadian law, and enjoining Canada from violating Canadian statute, would not
result from a proceeding conducted “under the law of the disputing Party”. According to
DIBC this position has no basis in the text of Article 1121, which contains no reference to
choice of forum; nor does Article 1121 demand that the court or tribunal “owe its existence to
or operate” under the law of the disputing Party.'®* DIBC argues that this interpretation is also

in accordance with the preliminary drafts of the NAFTA.!°

166 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 71

‘67 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, ff 75-76.
‘8 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, {ff 79-81.
‘© DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, ff 84-85.

67/99

231.

232.

233.

234.

(ii) DIBC’s Waivers are Consistent with Article 1121

DIBC alleges that all the waivers it provided in this arbitration meet the requirements of
Article 1121. Each waiver was properly and timely delivered, and none facially failed to
waive rights covered by Article 1121. Canada’s letters objecting to DIBC’s waivers do not

change this fact. 70

a. The First NAFTA Waiver is consistent with Article 1121

DIBC rejects Canada’s argument that DIBC First NAFTA Waiver is not consistent with
Article 1121 because DIBC included a statement in the waiver that (correctly) informed
Canada that the Washington Litigation fell outside the scope of Article 1121. DIBC counters
that it does not seek damages from Canada in the Washington Litigation nor does that
litigation challenge the same Canadian measures challenged in this arbitration, and therefore

the Washington Litigation is excepted from the waiver requirement of Article 1121.'7!

DIBC also rejects Canada’s argument that the First NAFTA Waiver is impermissibly
“narrower” than the First NOA because the waiver does not parrot the description contained
in the notice of the measures at issue in the arbitration. DIBC counters that there is no
requirement that the language included in the waiver and notice of arbitration be identical, so

long as the substance of the waiver is of the scope required by Article 1 121.'?

DIBC argues that the measure identified both in the NOA and in the First NAFTA Waiver is
the decision to locate the Parkway so that it both bypasses the Ambassador Bridge and steers
traffic to the NITC/DRIC directly to and from the Canadian highway system. This measure is
wrongful under the NAFTA because it fails to provide “comparable” treatment to the
Ambassador Bridge. DIBC thus did not fail to include in its waiver any measure identified in

the NOA.'7

' DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 86.
‘7! DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, {ff 87-88.
' DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, 90.
"3 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, 92.

68/99

235.

236.

237.

238.

b. The Second and Third NAFTA Waivers are consistent with Article 1121

According to DIBC, Canada incorrectly argues that events occurring after DIBC’s submission
of its NOA are irrelevant to this Tribunal’s jurisdiction. DIBC’s First NAFTA Waiver is
decisive only with respect to measures addressed in the NOA as it existed at that time. As
DIBC amended and expanded its claims in its amended NOA (to which Canada did not
object), the Second NAFTA Waiver is the operative document with respect to new measures

or claims addressed in the Amended NOA.'™

DIBC rejects Canada’s argument that DIBC’s omission of the phrase “before an
administrative tribunal or court under the law of the disputing Party” in the Second Waiver is
incompatible with the requirements of Article 1121 because the omission purportedly gives
DIBC the right to bring claims for injunctive or declaratory relief in the United States. DIBC
argues that the exception to the waiver provision in Article 1121 does not include a choice of

forum clause, and accordingly Canada has not been deprived on any substantive rights.'”>

On March 20, 2014, during the Hearing on Jurisdiction, Claimant submitted the Third
NAFTA Waiver in order to address Canada’s allegations that the Second Waiver was
defective because it did not include the term “not involving the payment of damages”, which
was present in the First NAFTA Waiver. Claimant states that it had no intention for such
omission to be substantive as it interprets the Second Waiver as including such language. The

Third Waiver included this language in order to assure Canada of Claimant’s good faith.!”°

(iii)The Washington Litigation Does Not Fall Within the Scope of the Proceedings
Prohibited by Article 1121

DIBC argues that it did not violate Article 1121 by failing to terminate the Washington
Litigation. First, DIBC had no affirmative obligation to take action with respect to the waiver.

Second, the Washington Litigation does not fall within the scope of Article 1121 because: (a)

"4 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, 95
"5 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, 98
‘6 Transcripts of the Hearing on Jurisdiction, p. 192, lines 8-16.

69/99

239.

240.

241.

242.

it involves measures different from those at issue in this arbitration; and (b) the Washington

Litigation seeks only declaratory relief under Canadian Law.'””

a. The Measures at issue in DIBC’s First NOA are not the same as those addressed in
the Washington First Amended Complaint
DIBC alleges that it is not Canada’s decision to locate the DRIC Bridge in proximity to the
Ambassador Bridge that constitutes the ‘measure’ at issue in this arbitration, but the disparate
treatment of Canadian-owned and US-owned bridges. DIBC’s Road Claim is premised on
Canada’s decision to connect only the NIT/DRIC Bridge to Highway 401 and not the
Ambassador Bridge or New Span. DIBC’s New Span Claim is premised on Canada’s
decisions to block construction of the U.S.-owned New Span while expediting construction of

the Canadian NIT/DRIC.'

The operative complaints in the Washington Litigation challenge particular measures taken by
Canada in the United States or directed towards the United States to construct, promote and
operate the NIT/DRIC Bridge. By contrast, DIBC’s First NOA challenges particular measures
taken by Canada within its own borders to discriminate against the United States owned

Ambassador Bridge and favour the NIT/DRIC within Canada. "79

While this arbitration challenges many of Canada’s regulatory and legislative actions, the
Washington Litigation is addressed solely towards commercial conduct by Canada as a
prospective owner, constructor and operator of the NITC/DRIC. DIBC was forced to seek
relief in both proceedings as a consequence of the fact that Canada’s actions with respect to
the Parkway and the NITC/DRIC and Ambassador Bridge were (i) conducted in and directed
towards two countries; and (ii) taken in both Canada’s governmental and commercial

capacities.'*°

According to DIBC, Canada’s characterization of some of the purported overlap in allegations
is factually incorrect. For instance, the allegations from the Washington Litigation that

Canada characterizes as relating to the DRIC EA do not refer to the Canadian environmental

"7 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 105
"8 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 107
'° DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 108
‘8 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 109

70/99

243.

244.

245.

assessment process with respect to the proposed NIT/DRIC and X12 alternative, but instead
refer to Canada’s improper actions with respect to the United States’ environmental

assessment process relating to the United Sates’ side of the crossing.'*!

DIBC also argues that there is no conflict in the “relief requested” in the First NOA and the

Washington First Amended Complaint. 182

b. The Amended NOA did not add measures to this proceeding that conflicted with the
Washington Litigation
DIBC rejects Canada’s allegation that the Amended NOA would have added claims to this
arbitration that conflicted with the Washington Litigation. DIBC states that when it amended
the NOA, it added claims with respect to the New Span. The New Span Claim, which
challenges disparate treatment by Canada of the New Span in Canada, has never been part of
the Washington Litigation, which challenges only Canada’s wrongful conduct in the United
Sates (and directed solely towards the United States) with respect to the NITC/DRIC and New

Span. 183

Canada nonetheless complains that DIBC’s Washington Second Amended Complaint
includes allegations that Canada: (1) delayed processing DIBC’s Canadian application for
environmental approval of the New Span; (2) enacted the IBTA to interfere with DIBC’s
rights with respect to the New Span; and (3) further enacted the BSTA to interfere with
DIBC’s rights with respect to the New Span by exempting the NITC/DRIC from the
requirements of the IBTA. DIBC counters that these allegations of wrongdoing by Canada
within its own borders are not the basis for any relief requested against Canada in the
Washington Litigation; rather, they are background facts to inform the court in Washington
Litigation of the full extent of Canada’s campaign against DIBC, and they may form a basis
for DIBC’s claim under the Equal Protection Clause of the United States Constitution against
the United States government defendants. They do not form the basis upon which the court is
asked to rule against Canada. DIBC concludes that double recovery and conflicting outcomes

cannot result from domestic proceedings challenging conduct taken by Canada in different

'S! DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 110.
'® DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 111
'8} DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 113.

71/99

246.

247.

248.

249.

countries, even if the wrongdoing in one country is informed by Canada’s conduct in the

 

 

other. '**
c. The Washi Third A led Complaint also is i with the Washi
Litigation

DIBC argues that most of the issues raised by Canada with respect to the Washington Third
Amended Complaint are identical to those addressed with respect to the Washington First and
Second Amended Complaints, and are invalid for the reasons discussed above.!®>

Canada also mistakenly claims, says DIBC, that DIBC challenges measures in the
Washington Litigation other than those specifically identified in paragraph 43 of the
Washington Third Amended Complaint. In support of this assertion, Canada points to a list of
occurrences set forth in paragraph 44 of the Washington Third Amended Complaint. The
allegations in that paragraph, however, are not the measures at issue in the litigation, but a list
of the “direct effects” of Canada’s acts in the United States. A recitation of harms caused by a
measure is not the same as the measure itself. In any event, those harms occurred in the

United States and are not the same as the measures challenged in this arbitration.'*°

d. The Washi Litigation chall iolations of Canadian law and does not seek
damages

 

The Washington Litigation also does not conflict with Article 1121 because it is a proceeding
for declaratory relief, not involving damages, brought under Canadian Law. DIBC rejects
Canada’s argument that the litigation falls outside Article 1121 because it is before a United

States, rather than a Canadian, court.

Second, Canada argues that the Article 1121 exception does not apply because the declaratory
relief sought by DIBC in its Washington Second Amended Complaint (but notably not the
Washington Third Amended Complaint) includes a declaration that Canada’s actions
constitute a taking. DIBC rejects this argument as DIBC has not asked the court in the

Washington Litigation to award any damages against Canada for the taking or for any other

'S DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 114.
'85 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, {| 115; Canada Reply Memorial on Jurisdiction | 130 (regarding the Nine
Point Plan, the DRIC EA, the New Span EA, and the BSTA).

'8§ DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 116

72/99

250.

251.

252.

misconduct.'*” A claim for declaratory relief is not the same as a claim for damages, and the
takings claim plainly seeks only declaratory relief. DIBC also argues that the takings claim is
not being brought against Canada. This declaratory judgment claim originally named Canada
as well as the United States, but it no longer does so (as per Washington Third Amended

Complaint, {{ 332-339, Exhibit C-141).'**

Lastly, DIBC rejects Canada’s argument that because DIBC brings a claim in the Washington
Litigation under the United States Declaratory Judgment Act, the claim is not brought
pursuant to Canadian law. According to DIBC, the U.S. Supreme Court has long held that
“the operation of the Declaratory Judgment Act is procedural only’. Accordingly, DIBC’s
invocation of the Declaratory Judgment Act in no way affects the fact that the substantive law

to be applied in the Washington Litigation is Canadian law.'*°

(iv) The CTC v. Canada Litigation Does Not Violate Article 1121

DIBC argues that the CTC v. Canada Litigation also does not conflict with the written
waiver. To the extent that CTC challenges the same ‘measures’ in that litigation as in this
arbitration, CTC seeks only declaratory relief under Canadian law with respect to those
measures. The only measure for which CTC seeks damages in that case is not a measure at
issue in this arbitration, and thus cannot violate Article 1121.!°°

DIBC rejects Canada’s argument that the measure for “actual construction” of the
NITC/DRIC cannot be separated from the other measures pleaded in the litigation. In this
arbitration, DIBC challenges Canada’s use of its role as a regulator and legislator to treat the
US-owned Ambassador Bridge and New Span differently from the proposed Canadian-owned
NITC/DRIC. In the CTC v. Canada Litigation, the “actual construction” claim is an
alternative claim asserting that if and when Canada ever builds the NITC/DRIC, such
construction would constitute an expropriation under Canadian law. This is a logical
distinction between measures for purposes of Article 1121. Canada’s argument to the contrary
depends solely upon the success of its argument that all actions ever taken by Canada with
respect to either the NITC/DRIC or the Ambassador Bridge constitute a single measure for
'§7 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 118

'88 DIBC’s Counter-Memorial, {{ 205

'8° DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 119
'° DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 120.

73/99

253.

254.

255.

256.

257.

purposes of Article 1121 (i.e., the decision to locate the NITC/DRIC near the Ambassador
Bridge).

DIBC notes that in the Washington Litigation, Canada has taken the position that the
construction and operation of the bridge are separate matters from Canada’s decision

regarding the location of the NITC/DRIC. Canada argues in the Washington Litigation that:

 

“The location of the DRIC, not its construction or operation, is the gravamen of Plainti

claims against the Canadian Defendants.”'!

Canada has previously expressed its views as to what claims CTC should remove from the

CTC v. Canada Litigation, and CTC subsequently withdrew those claims.'”

(v) The Windsor Litigation Does Not Violate Article 1121

According to DIBC, the Windsor Litigation does not violate the NAFTA waiver provision
because it does not challenge the measures at issue in this arbitration. Moreover, CTC has not
taken any steps to pursue the case since DIBC initiated this arbitration and the case is
effectively over. The only affirmative action CTC has taken with respect to the Windsor
Litigation since the First NOA was to abandon an appeal. DIBC is further willing to have
CTC take affirmative steps to dismiss the action if required.!”>

In any event, the February 2010 Statement of Claim in the Windsor Litigation makes clear
that CTC seeks damages only as to certain individual defendants and does not seek monetary

damages from the City of Windsor.'™*

DIBC rejects Canada’s argument that DIBC has refused to identify which Windsor measures
it challenges in this arbitration. In its NAFTA Statement of Claim, DIBC made clear that “this
arbitration arises from measures taken by...the City of Windsor. ..(5) to take traffic measures
with respect to Huron Church Road to divert traffic away from the Ambassador Bridge and

toward the Detroit-Windsor Tunnel and other crossings not owned by a U.S. invertor! This

'°! DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 123.

'®2 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 124; Letter from Mark Luz to Donald F. Donovan and Carl Micarelli dated
March 15, 2012, Exhibit R-23; Canadian Transit Co. v. Attorney General of Canada, No. CV-12446428, Amended
Statement of Claim of February 19, 2013, Exhibit C-119.

'8 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4 125-126.

' DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 127

'5 DIBC Statement of Claim, ¥ 215.

74/99

258.

259.

260.

261.

measure was not challenged in the Windsor Litigation, which challenged only the Windsor
By-laws. The traffic measures taken by Windsor were referenced only once in that litigation
as background and were never identified as the basis for any legal claim or challenge in that

litigation. 196

(vi)If the Tribunal Finds that a Claim Does Impermissibly Overlap, It Should Only
Dismiss that Claim

DIBC concludes that, in light of the fact that none of the domestic proceedings challenged by

Canada here fall within the scope of Article 1121, Canada’s waiver defense should be

dismissed.

In the alternative, if this Tribunal finds that DIBC has violated Article 1121 with respect to a
particular measure, it should dismiss only those portions of DIBC’s claims alleging
wrongdoing with respect to that measure, but retain jurisdiction over the other claims. This
outcome would promote the objective of the NAFTA to “create effective procedures for the

implementation and application of this Agreement”.'?”

(4) DIBC’s Roads Claim and New Span Claim are both Timely
(i) Canada’s Interpretation of NAFTA Articles 1116 and 1117 is Incorrect

According to DIBC, three different types of acts can affect the operation of the limitation
period. The simplest is the one-time act, where the respondent engages in a discrete act at a
particular time and place. Next is the continuing act, where the wrongful conduct takes place
over time and continues to harm the claimant while the conduct continues. The third is a

composite act, where a series of acts taken together comprises the wrongful conduct.!

DIBC rejects Canada’s assertion that the NAFTA does not recognize either the continuing
acts or composite acts doctrines and treats all claims as one-time acts for purposes of the
limitations provisions. Canada thus insists that the limitations periods in this proceeding
began to run on: (1) March 11, 2004 for the Roads Claim (the date on which Canada
incorrectly asserts DIBC first should have known Canada would not connect the Ambassador
'°6 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 129

'7 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 130.
'°8 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, 141

75/99

262.

263.

264.

Bridge to Highway 401) and (2) February 1, 2007 for the IBTA portion of the New Span
Claim (the date on which the IBTA was enacted). According to Canada, claims filed more
than three years after these dates are untimely “regardless of whether a measure is continuing

or not”. These arguments are rejected by DIBC, for the reasons summarized below.'”

a. Canada fails to challenge the NAFTA’s recognition of the “composite acts” doctrine

According to DIBC the doctrine of continuing acts is well established through the
International Law Commission’s Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally
Wrongful Acts (“ILC Articles”), the decisions of other arbitral tribunals, and the decisions of
the only NAFTA tribunal ever to consider the question directly - UPS v. Government of
Canada. DIBC rejects Canada’s argument that the NAFTA chose to depart from customary
international law by including the word “first” in Articles 1116(2) and 1117(2), each of which
provides that a claimant may not make a claim if more than three years have elapsed from the
date on which the investor or enterprise “first acquired, or should have first acquired,
knowledge of the alleged breach and knowledge that the investor [or enterprise] has incurred
loss or damage”. 200

DIBC alleges that Canada’s argument is inconsistent with the fact that numerous other
international treaties contain virtually identical limitations provisions. DIBC cites as example,
among others, the CAFTA (the treaty at issue in the Pac Rim Cayman decision recognizing
the continuing acts doctrine), the Canada-Chile Free Trade Agreement and the Canada-
Panama Free Trade Agreement. DIBC concludes that the phrasing of Articles 1116(2) and
1117(2) is not unique to the NAFTA, but a routine phrasing of time limitations provisions in

international law.

According to DIBC, under the continuing acts doctrine, on-going conduct constitutes a new

violation of NAFTA each day so that, for purposes of the time bar, the three year period

201

begins anew each day.” Thus, one can “first acquire” knowledge of a “breach” arising from

a ae 202
a continuing act multiple times.

'° DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 142
2 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 146.
2°! UPS Award, { 24, Exhibit C-13; DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 149.
2? DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 149.

76/99

265.

266.

267.

268.

Canada also fails to provide any authority that supports its interpretation of Articles 1116 and
1117. It tries to invoke the recent decision of Apotex Inc. v. United States, claiming that
Apotex “concluded that a continuing course of conduct does not toll the NAFTA’s three-year
time limitation period.” DIBC argues that Canada misinterprets Apotex, as the Apotex
Tribunal determined that there was no continuing act at issue in that case, and thus did not
opine on whether NAFTA’s time limitation provisions would apply to such acts had they
existed."

Canada also relies upon the decision of the tribunal in Grand River Enterprises Six Nations
Ltd. v. The United States of America for the proposition that “a continuing course of conduct
does not toll the NAFTA’s three-year limitation period.” This argument is inapposite because
it does not relate to the doctrine of continuing acts. In addition, the Grand River Tribunal
specifically declined to address the question of whether “there is not one limitations period,
but many” arising from the conduct at issue because the claimant failed to plead or brief the
argument, raising it for the first time at hearing. DIBC concludes that Grand River says
nothing one way or the other regarding the doctrine of continuing acts.2™

According to Articles 1116 and 1117, the limitations periods accrue when an investor first
acquires (1) “knowledge of the alleged breach” and (2) “knowledge that the investor has
incurred loss or damage”. Canada wrongly argues that DIBC reads these provisions to require
a claimant to have knowledge of the full “extent” or “amount” of the loss or damage before
the limitations periods begin to run. According to DIBC, the investor must have actually been
harmed and have specific knowledge of that harm for the limitations periods to run. DIBC
asserts that the harm must be concrete, not merely anticipated or potential. DIBC does not
argue that such concrete harm must be fully quantifiable before a claim may accrue under the
NAFTA.”

Canada’s interpretation of Articles 1116 and 1117 is contrary to the object and purpose of the
NAFTA itself. A primary object and purpose of NAFTA Chapter 11 is to protect foreign
investors. But Canada’s interpretation would permit NAFTA States to engage in years of
continuing discrimination towards a foreign investor merely because the investor did not
2°} DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 152.

2% DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 156.
2°5 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4] 172-173

77199

269.

270.

271.

challenge the discrimination when it first began (and even if it first began in a manner that
made it unclear whether it was discrimination and whether nationals were going to be treated

more favorably).7°°

(ii) The Roads Claim is Timely

a. The Roads claim could not accrue until Canada had both disfavoured the American-
Owned Ambassador Bridge (and the New Span) and favored the Canadian-Owned
Bridges (including the NITC/DRIC) with respect to highway access

The Parkway as currently designed travels directly towards the Ambassador Bridge. The last
two miles, however, veer off to the site of the proposed NITC/DRIC and away from the
Ambassador Bridge. This means that a traveler going from Canada to the United States would
travel along a direct highway connection from Highway 401 towards both bridges, but would
then only use the Ambassador Bridge to cross the border if he/she chose to exit this highway
and instead travel along a road with numerous traffic lights and cross-streets. DIBC
challenges this disparate impact on’ travelers crossing the U.S.-Canada border (the Roads

Claim) in this arbitration.”

Canada initially argues that DIBC first acquired knowledge of the breach underlying its
Roads Claim when DIBC knew or should have known that Canada would not improve the
roads to the Ambassador Bridge or New Span. Canada alternatively sets this date at March

11, 200478, November 15, 2005”, and various dates in 20077107"!

As of those proffered dates, however, there is no serious dispute that Canada had not yet
announced that it would build a highway connection to the Canadian-owned NITC/DRIC, a
critical part of the breach alleged by DIBC. DIBC’s knowledge of breach with respect to the

Roads Claim could not have begun to run until May 1, 2008 at the very earliest, when Canada

2° DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 174.

2°7 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 177.

*°8 Canada’s Reply, {[ 178 (the date the Nine Point Plan was replaced by the LGWEN Strategy).

2 Canada’s Reply, [| 180 (the date option X12 (i.e., the New Span) was eliminated from consideration by the DRIC
Partnership).

219 Canada’s Reply, | 183 (May 24, 2007, when the Ontario Ministry of Transportation said it had no plans to provide a direct
connection to the Ambassador Bridge); | 186 (July 4, 2007, when Helena Borges met with DIBC officials and purportedly
said that the community and environmental impacts of building a direct Highway 401-Ambassador Bridge connection were
too serious to consider further).

2!! DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 178.

  

78/99

272.

273.

274.

275.

established the measure at issue by first officially announcing the preferred alternative for the
Parkway, which included a connection to the NITC/DRIC, but not to the Ambassador
Bridge.?!”

DIBC argues that Canada’s disregard of this second portion of DIBC’s claims — i.e., that
Canada treated the Canadian-owned NITC/DRIC more favorably than the American-owned
Ambassador Bridge and New Span with respect to access to Highway 401 — reflects a
misunderstanding of what constitutes a “breach” under the NAFTA and the measures
complained of in DIBC’s Statement of Claim. Canada’s breach of the NAFTA was not
complete (and the limitations period thus could not begin to run) until Canada “completed the
measure of impermissibly favoring the NITC/DRIC over the Ambassador Bridge with respect
to highway access”. 213

Canada’s reliance on DIBC letters from November 2005 complaining of “delay and damage”
arising from the elimination of the New Span (the X12 option) from the DRIC EA process
prove nothing. The fact that DIBC already was being harmed by Canada’s actions does not
mean that Canada’s actions at the time constituted the measure being challenged as a breach

of the NAFTA.?"4

b. It was not established that Canada would build a connection between Highway 401
and the Canadian-owned NITC/DRIC until May 1, 2008 at the earliest

In summary, DIBC argues that none of the evidence proffered by Canada demonstrates that
Canada had taken a ‘measure’ or completed its breach of NAFTA prior to May 1, 2008.
Rather it reinforces the interim status of the Parkway decisions as of that dates

Canada’s argument that DIBC must have known that Canada would build a highway to the
Canadian-owned NITC/DRIC prior to May 1, 2008 also cannot be squared with the position
that Canada takes in its Reply Memorial with respect to the issue of waiver: i.e., that “the
measure which approved the location of the DRIC bridge and the Parkway is one in the same:
the DRIC EA”. The DRIC EA was not even released as a draft for public comment until

2!2 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 179; News Release Communiqué: The Detroit River International Crossing
Study Team Announces Preferred Access Road” (May 1, 2008), Exhibit C-125.

2!3 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 180.
244 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 181
2!5 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 189.

79/99

276.

277.

278.

November 12, 2008, well within the limitations period for this proceedings. It was not finally
approved by Ontario and Canada until “August and December 2009” respectively. If “the
measure which approved the location of the DRIC Bridge and the Parkway” did not occur
until December 2009, then there could not have been a breach arising form that measure prior

to that date.?!°

c. Alternatively, the Roads Claim is a continuing Act

DIBC states that Canada does not directly address DIBC’s characterization of the Roads
Claim as a continuing act. DIBC argues that numerous events in connection with the Parkway
have occurred since May 2008 that demonstrates continuing discrimination against DIBC and
in favor of the NITC/DRIC. These events include environmental approvals in 2008, 2009 and
2010, and the beginning of construction in 2011. Parkway construction has begun from near
Highway 401 towards the border, and its plans could still be revised to allow its final
completion to include the creation of a highway connection to the Ambassador Bridge. This
continuum of events constitutes a continuing breach of Canada’s obligations under the
NAFTA. The Roads Claim thus is based on a continuing act and would be timely even if filed

today?!”

d. Alternatively, the Roads Claim is a composite Act

DIBC argues that the Roads Claim is also a composite act. Because the nature of the breach is
‘comparative’, the claim necessarily is based on multiple acts (i.e., favoring the NITC/DRIC
and disfavoring the Ambassador Bridge and New Span with respect to highway access), each
of which may or may not have been permissible standing alone.?'*

Since May 2008, Canada has announced the Parkway, engaged in multiple environmental
studies and approvals, commenced construction, and maintained construction. Until the
Parkway is completed, Canada will continue to engage in acts that, in the composite, create a

breach of Canada’s obligations under the NAFTA. Thus, the last event in the composite act

2!6 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 190.
2!7 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 192.
2!8 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, | 193.

80/99

279.

280.

281.

282.

that forms DIBC’s Roads Claim “necessarily occurred after May 2008, and may not yet have
95 219

occurred even today”.
(iii) | The IBTA Portion of the New Span Claim is Timely
a. Claimant did not suffer loss or damage pursuant to the IBTA prior to 2009, at the
earliest — Canada fails to show that DIBC had knowledge of breach “and knowledge
of loss or damage” prior to April 20, 2008 with respect to the IBTA part of the New
Span Claim
According to DIBC, Canada does not question the timeliness of the entirety of DIBC’s New
Span Claim, but challenges only that portion of the claim that alleges disparate and wrongful
application of the IBTA to DIBC. Accordingly, all other aspects of the New Span Claim are

timely, including those portions of the claim related to the BSTA2””

DIBC rejects Canada’s argument that the IBTA portion of the New Span accrued when the
IBTA was enacted, because DIBC knew at the time that the IBTA would apply to the
Ambassador Bridge and New Span. Even if true, such knowledge relates only to a “breach” of
the NAFTA, not knowledge of loss or damage, which are also required under Articles 1116

and 1117.7!

DIBC also rejects Canada’s argument that because DIBC publicly opposed to the IBTA prior
to its passage, DIBC must have had “knowledge of general loss” at the time the statute was
actually enacted. According to DIBC, knowledge of a high likelihood of future loss is not the

same as knowledge of actual damage.”

b. The IBTA portion of the New Span Claim is based on a continuing act

DIBC alleges that the paradigm continuing act is “the maintenance in effect of legislative
provisions incompatible with treaty obligations of the enacting state.” The IBTA has been
continuously in effect since its passage, and to the extent DIBC remains subject to its

provisions while the NITC/DRIC is excluded, Canada is maintaining a legislative provision

2!” DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 194.
2° DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 197.
1 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 199.
2 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 200.
3 DIBC Counter-Memorial {{ 297; Exhibit CLA-32.

81/99

283.

284.

285.

incompatible with the NAFTA. The IBTA portion of DIBC’s New Span Claim thus is timely

oe 224
as a continuing act.

c. Alternatively, the IBTA portion of the New Span Claim is one component of a
composite act
Alternatively, DIBC argues that the IBTA portion of the New Span Claim is timely as a part
of a composite act, along with the October 2010 Ministerial Order and the BSTA. DIBC
rejects Canada’s allegation that this argument is “illogical” because DIBC purportedly has
previously asserted that the mere passage of the IBTA breached DIBC’s rights and caused it
damages. DIBC states that it has always asserted that its NAFTA claims arose only after

affirmative application of the law to DIBC through enforcement against CTC and DIBC.>

Even if the enactment of the IBTA were independently actionable, that would not prevent the
IBTA from being considered part of a composite claim that includes later acts. A composite
act is comprised of a series of events. In this case the composite act is the IBTA, the 2010
Ministerial Order, and the BSTA. These three events combine to form their own, composite
measure: Canada’s creation of a legally discriminatory approval regime that discriminates
against the American-owned Ambassador Bridge and its New Span, and in favor of the

Canadian-owned NITC/DRIC.””°

The various actions by Canada that comprise this composite act are inherently interrelated:
the IBTA creates new barriers that, as applied under the 2010 Ministerial Order, impose
unlawful restrictions on the New Span; the BSTA then exempts the NITC/DRIC from those
same barriers (as well as numerous other regulatory requirements), thus creating a
discriminatory legal regime. These actions together form a composite act of discrimination
and inequitable treatment. Because the last action within the composite set of acts (the
passage of the BSTA in 2012) occurred well within the limitations period, the portion of the

claim challenging the IBTA is timely because the IBTA forms a part of this composite act.72”

4 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 202.
5 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 204.
6 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, { 206.
7 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 207.

82/99

286.

287.

288.

289.

d. The correct date for measuring the timeliness of the IBTA portion of the New Span
Claim is the date of DIBC’s Notice of Arbitration

DIBC alleges that the correct time bar date for the IBTA portion of the New Span Claim is the
date of DIBC’s NOA, ie., April 29, 2011. DIBC rejects Canada’s argument that the
timeliness should be measured from the date of DIBC’s Amended NOA on January 15, 2013
because the IBTA portion of the New Span Claim was not included in the original notice.”"*
DIBC argues that even if Canada were correct, measuring three years from January 15, 2013
permits claims that accrued any time after January 15, 2010. Because the IBTA was not
enforced against DIBC until October 2010 at the earliest, the IBTA portion of the New Span
Claim remains timely.”

Canada attempts to distract the Tribunal through reference to letters by which Canada
purportedly informed DIBC prior to 2010 that the IBTA would apply to the Ambassador
Bridge. However, none of these letters sought to actually enforce the IBTA vis-a-vis CTC or

DIBC, or to require DIBC to seek regulatory approval under the IBTA2*°

In any event, the January 15, 2010 date is critical only to the extent that the IBTA portion of
the New Span Claim is considered to be a one-time act claim. To the extent it is a continuing
act or composite act claim, the January 15, 2010 bar date allegedly caused by DIBC’s
amendment of its claims is irrelevant. Treating the IBTA more properly as a paradigm of a
continuing act, the limitations period remains open today. Finally, were one to examine the
claim as a composite act, the earliest the claim could have accrued would be at the time of the

2012 enactment of the BSTA.”*"!
(5) DIBC’s Request for Relief

In its Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, Claimant requested the Tribunal to “dismiss Canada’s

defences with respect to jurisdiction and admissibility and award costs to Claimant and grant

such other relief as is appropriate.”

8 DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 208.

»° DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, {{ 209.

2° DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, J 211

25! DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, 4] 212-213
2% Claimant's Rejoinder on Jurisdiction, { 215.

83/99

VII.

290.

291.

292.

THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION

In summary, Canada argues that the Arbitral Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to hear
DIBC’s claim in this case because DIBC has failed to comply with the waiver requirements
set forth in NAFTA Article 1121 and that, in any event, DIBC’s claims are not admissible
because they are untimely. Accordingly, in order to decide whether it has jurisdiction over
Canada, the Arbitral Tribunal will analyze (A) the conditions set forth in NAFTA Article
1121; and (B) whether DIBC has complied with those conditions. The issue of whether
DIBC's claims are timely will only be addressed if the Tribunal decides that DIBC has
complied with Article 1121.

A. PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS

NAFTA Article 1121, entitled “Conditions Precedent to Submission of a Claim to
Arbitration” stipulates the conditions that a claimant must meet in order to submit a claim
under NAFTA Chapter Eleven. A claimant’s failure to meet these conditions renders the

NAFTA Party’s consent to arbitrate without effect.

By way of reminder NAFTA Article 1121 provides the following:

. A disputing investor may submit a claim under Article 1116 to arbitration only
(a) the investor consents to arbitration in accordance with the procedures set out in
this Agreement; and

(b) the investor and, where the claim is for loss or damage to an interest in an
enterprise of another Party that is a juridical person that the investor owns or
controls directly or indirectly, the enterprise, waive their right to initiate or continue
before any administrative tribunal or court under the law of any Party, or
other dispute settlement procedures, any proceedings with respect to the measure of
the disputing Party that is alleged to be a breach referred to in Article 1116, except
for proceedings for injunctive, declaratory or other extraordinary relief, not
involving the payment of damages, before_an administrative tribunal or court under
the law of the disputing Party.

2. A disputing investor may submit a claim under Article 1117 to arbitration only if
both the investor and the enterprise:

(a) Consent to arbitration in accordance with the procedures set out in this
Agreement; and

(b) waive their right to initiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or
court under the law of any Party, or other dispute settlement procedures, any
proceedings with respect to the measure of the disputing Party that is alleged to be a
breach referred to in Article 1117, except for proceedings for injunctive, declaratory
or other extraordinary relief, not involving the payment of de before an

84/99

 

293.

294.

295.

296.

administrative tribunal or court under the law of the disputing Party.”

3. A consent and waiver required by this Article shall be in writing, shall be

delivered to the disputing Party and shall be included in the submission of a claim to

arbitration. (Emphasis added)
Pursuant to NAFTA Article 1121, the Arbitral Tribunal will only have jurisdiction in this case
if Claimant has duly waived its right to initiate and/or continue proceedings before any
administrative tribunal or court under the law of any Party (i.e. Canada, Mexico or USA) with
respect to Canada’s measures allegedly constituting a breach referred to in NAFTA Articles
1116 or 1117. The only exceptions allowed are those set out in Article 1121, i.e., proceedings
for injunctive, declaratory or other extraordinary relief, not involving the payment of

damages, before an administrative tribunal or court under the law of Canada.

As stated above, it is Canada’s case that the waivers presented by DIBC in this arbitration do
not meet the requirements set forth in NAFTA Article 1121. That submission is contested by
DIBC.

B. DOES CLAIMANT COMPLY WITH NAFTA ARTICLE 1121?

(1) Timing and Relevant Waiver

Pursuant to NAFTA Article 1121, in order to determine whether it has jurisdiction in this case
the Tribunal will analyze the validity of the waiver submitted by Claimant on the date
Claimant submitted its claims to arbitration, i.e. the date of the notice of arbitration. The
Tribunal notes that Claimant submitted its First NAFTA NOA together with its First Waiver
on April 29, 2011 and its Second NAFTA NOA accompanied by the Second Waiver on
January 15, 2013. The Tribunal further notes that the Third Waiver was submitted at the

Hearing on Jurisdiction on March 20, 2014.

In view of Article 1121 and the fact that Canada has objected to the jurisdiction of this
Tribunal as of the submission of the First NAFTA NOA,?* the Tribunal will first analyze
whether it has jurisdiction in this case based on the First NAFTA NOA and the First Waiver.
If the answer is in the negative, the Tribunal will consider whether the Second NAFTA NOA

*53 Canada’s Reply Memorial, {{f[ 99-119. See also paragraph 74 above.

85/99

together with the Second and/or Third Waiver would have been able to cure its initial lack of

jurisdiction.

(2) The Jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal based on the First NAFTA NOA and
the First Waiver

297. By way of reminder, the First Waiver reads as follows:

  

“[...] [DIBC and CTC] waive their right to ini
tribunal or court under the law of any Party, or other dispute settlement procedures, any
proceedings with respect to the measure of the disputing Party that is alleged in the
foregoing Notice of Arbitration to be a breach referred to in Article 1116 or Article 1117,
namely the decisions by Canada, the Province of Ontario, and the City of Windsor to

tiate or continue before any administrative

locate the Windsor-Essex Parkway so as to bypass the Ambassador Bridge and steer
traffic to the planned Detroit River International Crossing (“DRIC”)Bridge, and to take
traffic measures with respect to the Huron Church Road to divert traffic away from the
Ambassador Bridge and toward the Detroit-Windsor Tunnel and the planned DRIC
Bridge, except for proceedings for injunctive, declaratory or other extraordinary relief,
not involving the payment of damages, before an administrative tribunal or court under
the law of the disputing Party. For the avoidance of doubt, this waiver does not and shall

 

 

not be construed to extend to or include any of the claims included in the Complaint filed
on or about March 22, 2010, in the action titled Detroit International Bridge Company et
al. v. The Government of Canada et al., in the United States District Court for the District
of Columbia.” (Emphasis added)

298. On April 29, 2011, when the First NOA and the First Waiver were submitted, Claimant had a

299.

300.

court proceeding ongoing against Canada (i.e., the Washington Litigation), which according
to Canada involved the same measures as those at stake in this arbitration and included a
request for damages. However, the Washington Litigation was expressly carved out from the
First Waiver,” which according to Canada prevents the Tribunal from acquiring jurisdiction

in this arbitration.

On April 29, 2011, Claimant’s claims against Canada in the Washington Litigation were set

forth in the Washington Complaint dated March 22, 2010.

In view of the foregoing, the Tribunal will now analyze whether the ‘measures’ at stake in the

Washington Complaint are the same as those at stake in Claimant’s claims presented in the

2“ The Tribunal notes that DIBC also carved-out the Washington Litigation from the Second and Third Waivers.

86/99

301.

302.

303.

304.

305.

First NAFTA NOA. If the Tribunal concludes that the measures are the same, it will then
proceed to analyze whether they relate only to injunctive, declaratory or extraordinary relief,
not involving the payment of damages, before a court under the law of Canada, pursuant to

the second part of Article 1121.

(i) Are the measures at stake in the Washington Litigation the same as those at stake in
Claimant’s claims in this arbitration?
In order to analyze whether Canada’s measures at stake in the Washington Litigation are the

same as those at stake in this arbitration, it is necessary to first define the term “measure”.

Under NAFTA Chapter Two, titled “General Definitions”, Article 201 defines “measure” as

“any law, regulation, procedure, requirement or practice”.

The Tribunal notes that, “[...] in contrast to the formulations in ‘fork in the road’ clauses, or
in Article 26 of ICSID, the formulation in Article 1121 focuses on the State measure — the
governmental act — which has given rise to the dispute, and not on the claims to which such a
measure may give rise”? For instance, if a discriminatory licensing denial gives rise to
distinct legal claims under NAFTA and under a domestic law, both claims relate to the same

measure, regardless of the legal cause of action under the respective laws.

At the same time, a measure is a discrete act. The fact that multiple discriminatory acts may
be part of a common plan does not make them one measure. If a State discriminates against a
foreign investor by successively denying a license, imposing a special tax, and subsidizing a
domestic competitor, these constitute separate measures, and need not all be pursued in one

forum.

The measures at issue in this arbitration at the time the First NAFTA NOA was submitted are
those identified at paragraph 48 of the First NOA; and the claims arising from them are

summarized in paragraph 49. Paragraphs 48 and 49 read as follows:

“48. This arbitration arises from the decisions by Canada, the Province of Ontario
and the City of Windsor:

?55 Campbell McLachlan, Q.C., Laurence Shore & Matthew Weiniger, Investment Treaty Arbitration: Substantive Principles,

(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007) at 109-110 (RLA-45) commenting on the Waste Management I decision.

87/99

(a) to locate the Windsor-Essex Parkway so as to bypass the Ambassador Bridge
and steer traffic to the planned DRIC Bridge,

(b) to fail to provide comparable improvements in road access to the Ambassador

 

Bridge, because of its ownership by a United States investor; and

(c) to take traffic measures with respect to Huron Church Road to divert traffic away
from_the Ambassador Bridge and toward the Detroit-Windsor Tunnel and the
planned DRIC Bridge.

 

49. The points raised by this arbitration are (a) whether those measures are
inconsistent with Canada’s obligations under Chapter 11 of NAFTA, including
national treatment under Article 1102, most-favored-nation treatment under Article
1102, most-favored-nation treatment under Article 1103 and the minimum standard
of treatment under Article 1105; and (b) if so, what is the appropriate amount of
damages.”?** (Emphasis added)

306. The Tribunal notes that the “measures” indicated above are expressed in a range of laws,

307.

policy statements and decisions. No individual law or policy statement is identified as a

distinct “measure” or as a specific breach of NAFTA.

The Tribunal notes, however, that the measure alleged to be a breach of NAFTA is the
practice of the discriminatory and inequitable diminution of DIBC’s toll revenues that the
Claimant expected to be caused by Canada’s decision to locate the DRIC Bridge so as to
bypass the Ambassador Bridge and steer traffic to the planned DRIC Bridge, and by Canada’s
failure to improve highway connections to the Ambassador Bridge, in order to drive down the

value of DIBC’s investment.?*”

308. In the Washington Complaint,?** DIBC alleged, inter alia, that:

“153. The acts of Canada and FHWA to construct the DRIC Bridge across the
Detroit River within two miles of the Amb lor Bridge, without legitimate need,

for the purpose of destroying the economic value of DIBC’s and CTC’.

 

violation of DIBC’s and CTC’s rights under the U.S. and Canadian legislation
constituting the Special Agreement and the Boundary Waters Treaty.

LJ

 

157. The acts of Canada, the FHWA Defendants and the Coast Guard Defendants in

236 Exhibit C-140, p. 18, if 48-49.
237 First NAFTA NOA, {ff 42 and 47.
8 Exhibit R-17.

88/99

l the U.S. and Canadian regulatory processes to attempt to_ensure,

without lawful justification, that the DRIC Bridge receives rapid approval, and that
any improvements to the Amb lor Bridge are delayed or prevented is a violation
of DIBC’s and CTC’s rights under the U.S. and Canadian legislation constituting the
Special Agreement and the Boundary Waters Treaty.”(Emphasis added)

309. Inthe Washington Complaint, DIBC’s request for relief reads as follows:

“WHEREOF, plaintiffs respectfully request judgment against defendants for the
following relief:

(1) A declaratory judgment against the FHWA Defendants and Canada under 28
U.S.C §§2201-2202 that the construction and operation of the planned DRIC Bridge
across the Detroit River would violate the obligations of Canada and the United
States to DIBC and CTC;

 

 

     

(2) A declaratory judgment against the FHWA Defendants, the Coast Guard
Defendants and Canada under 28 U.S.C. §§2201-2202 that DIBC and CTC have a
right to continue to own and operate the Ambassador Bridge, and a right to build a
second span of the Ambassador Bridge across the Detroit River without interference
by Canada or the United States, subject only to the conditions set forth in the Special
Agreement;

L.-J

(4) A declaratory judgment against Canada under 28 U.S.C. §§2201-2202 that (a)
DIBC and CTC have a right to determine the level of tolls to be charged on the
Ambassador bridge, subject only to the conditions set forth in the Special Agreement,
and (b) DIBC and CTC have a right to transfer their corporate ownership or
ownership of any of their property rights;

L.-J

(8) An injunction cLttst the FHWA Defendants and Canada prohibiting each such

id ki Ste struc

 

 

for construction of the planned DRIC bridge or any other bridge across the Detroit

River between Canada and the United States;

(9) Damages against Canada in an amount to be determined in trial;
LJ

(12) Any other appropriate relief??? (Emphasis added)

310. The Tribunal finds that DIBC’s claims in the Washington Complaint covers the same grounds

that the “measures” put in issue in the First NAFTA NOA.

2° Exhibit R-17, p. 45-47.

89/99

31

312.

313.

314.

315.

316.

. The Tribunal also notes that paragraphs 5, 8 and 157 of the Washington Complaint indicate

that the Washington Litigation is also based upon, inter alia, alleged traffic diversion and

non-improvement of roads.

In view of the foregoing, the Washington Complaint shows that the Washington Litigation
was a proceeding with respect to the measures that are alleged to breach NAFTA in this

arbitration.

(ii) Considering that the measures are the same, do they only relate to injunctive,
declaratory or extraordinary relief, not involving the payment of damages?
Considering that the Washington Litigation and this arbitration both deal with the same
measures, the Tribunal will now analyze whether the Washington Litigation is a proceeding
“for injunctive, declaratory, or other extraordinary relief, not involving the payment of
damages, before an administrative tribunal or court under the law of the disputing Party,”

pursuant to the second part of Article 1121.

The Tribunal notes that at item (9) of DIBC’s prayer for relief in the Washington Complaint
DIBC requests a judgment for “damages against Canada in an amount to be determined at
trial”? Asa consequence, considering that the Washington Complaint did involve a request
for damages and, in view of DIBC’s failure to waive the Washington Litigation at the time the
First NOA was submitted, the Tribunal finds that it is deprived of jurisdiction to arbitrate

DIBC’s claims in this case.

(iii)Was the Washington Litigation before a court under the law of Canada?

In any event, even if the Washington Litigation had not involved a request for damages
against Canada, the Tribunal would still be deprived of jurisdiction in this case because the
Washington Litigation is not a proceeding “before an administrative tribunal or court under
the law of the disputing Party”. The “disputing Party”, plainly, is Canada; but the claim was
brought before the US courts.

By way of reminder, according to DIBC, NAFTA Article 1121 authorizes claims for

declaratory or injunctive relief, even if they challenge the same measure as in the NAFTA

4° Washington Complaint, p. 47.

90/99

317.

318.

319.

arbitration, so long as they are brought “under the law of the disputing Party.” However,
DIBC rejects Canada’s argument that the phrase “under the law of the disputing Party” not
only requires the application of the disputing Party’s law, but also that the proceeding be
physically located within the jurisdiction of the respondent State. DIBC argues that Article
1121 contains no reference to a choice of forum. Nor does it demand that the court or tribunal

“owe[s] its existence to or operate[s]” under the law of the disputing Party.2"!

Contrary to DIBC’s allegations, the Tribunal finds that the last part of Article 1121 (i.e.
“before an administrative tribunal or court under the law of the disputing Party”) is intended
to designate the adjudicative bodies operating under the domestic law of the disputing Party.
Although the preliminary works of the NAFTA do not shed any light on this issue, most of
the provisional/extraordinary measures one could seek in a court or administrative tribunal in
the context of Article 1121 would be based on the /ex fori. The idea of using the applicable
law to determine the competent court is implausible. It appears highly improbable that
NAFTA Parties would accept the initiation of multiple proceedings around the world
discussing the same measures, with the only condition being the application by the court or

administrative tribunal of the law of the disputing Party.

The logic behind Article 1121 is evident. It is to allow the investor quickly to start an action
in the court of the host State to resolve its dispute, without prejudice to the possibility of
subsequent resort to an investment arbitration tribunal should the investor still consider that
the treaty standards have not been met and decide to abandon the action in the host State’s
courts. The only exceptions allowed are actions for injunctive, declaratory, or other
extraordinary relief: these need not be abandoned. Once treaty arbitration has been invoked,
the tribunal will be able to view the host State’s conduct in the round, including the treatment
accorded to the investor in the State’s courts or administrative tribunals. This can be an

important element of an investor’s claim for fair and equitable treatment.”

The Tribunal also finds that the Washington Litigation is a dispute under US law, and not a
dispute under Canadian law as alleged by Claimant. This is because any injunctive or

declaratory relief available in the United States courts would necessarily be given under the

4! DIBC’s Rejoinder Memorial on Jurisdiction, {ff 79-81.
> Exhibit RLA-45, p. 107.

91/99

320.

321.

laws of the United States, not the laws of Canada, as is illustrated by the very wording of the
relief sough in the Washington Complaint which refers expressly to provisions of the
us.c8 Accordingly, any relief granted by a US court, even if based on an alleged
violation of Canadian law, is not relief “under the law of’ Canada as permitted by NAFTA

Article 1121(1)(b) and (2)(b).

(iv) Tribunal’s conclusion

In light of the above, considering that (i) the Washington Litigation involves the same
measures as those at stake in this arbitration; (ii) the Washington Complaint contains a request
for damages against Canada; and (iii) the Washington Litigation is a court procedure initiated
before U.S. Courts (and not before Canadian Courts), the First Waiver does not comply with
Article 1121. Accordingly, the absence of a valid waiver prevents the Tribunal from having

jurisdiction in this case.

(3) Were the Second NAFTA NOA together with the Second and/or Third Waiver

able to cure the initial lack of jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal?

The Tribunal further notes that DIBC subsequently withdrew its request for damages against
Canada in the Washington Second Amended Complaint of November 9, 2012,244 and that
DIBC submitted its Second NAFTA NOA on January 15, 2013, in order to include its “New
Span” claim. However, considering that Canada was already objecting to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction in this arbitration at the time DIBC submitted the Washington Second and Third
Amended Complaints, and that Canada has maintained that objection, the Tribunal does not
consider that the submission of such documents could retroactively validate several months of
proceedings during which the Tribunal wholly lacked jurisdiction but had some kind of
potential existence that might have been realized if it had acquired jurisdiction at some
subsequent date. The lack of a valid waiver precluded the existence of a valid agreement
between the disputing parties to arbitrate; and the lack of such an agreement deprived the

Tribunal of the very basis of its existence.

3 Washington Complaint, pp. 45-47.
4 DIBC’s request for damages also does not appear in the Washington Third Amended Complaint of May 29, 2013.

92/99

322.

323.

As demonstrated below, even if the Tribunal were to focus its analysis on the Second NAFTA
NOA submitted on January 15, 2013, the Tribunal would still reach the conclusion that the

measures at stake in this case are the same as those at stake in the Washington Litigation.

DIBC’s claims in this arbitration, as amended by the Second NAFTA NOA, arise from the
measures identified at paragraph 135 of the Second NOA; and the claims arising from them

are summarized in paragraph 136. Paragraphs 135 and 136 read as follows:”°

“135. This arbitration arises from measures taken by the Government of Canada, the
Province of Ontario and the City of Windsor:

(1) to discriminate against DIBC, violating Claimant’s exclusive franchise rights to
operate a bridge between Detroit and Windsor, and also violating Claimant’s

franchise rights by precluding the construction of the New Span;
(2) to prevent or delay DIBC’s ability to obtain Canadian approval to build the New
Span;

(3) to locate the Windsor-Essex Parkway so as to bypass the Ambassador Bridge and

steer traffic to the planned Canadian-owned NITC/DRIC Bridge, in breach of prior

commitments and agreements to improve the connections to the Ambassador Bridge

 

through the Ambassador Bridge Gateway Project;

(4) to fail to provide comparable improvements in road access to the Ambassador
Bridge as was previously provided to the Blue Water Bridge and is currently being
provided to the non-existent NITC/DRIC Bridge, because the Ambassador Bridge is
owned by a United States investor; and

(5) to take traffic measures with respect to Huron Church Road to divert traffic away
from_the Ambassador Bridge and toward the Detroit-Windsor Tunnel and other

crossings not owned by a U.S. investor.

136. The points raised by this arbitration are (a) whether those measures are
inconsistent with Canada’s obligations under Chapter 11 of NAFTA, including
national treatment under Article 1102, most-favored-nation treatment under Article
1103, and the minimum standard of treatment under Article 1105; and (b) if so, what
is the appropriate amount of damages.”"® (Emphasis added)

45 The same measures are described at paragraphs 215-216 of DIBC’s Statement of Claim of January 31, 2013.
46 Exhibit C-116, I] 135-136.

93/99

324.

325.

326.

327.

The Tribunal notes once again that the “measures” indicated above are expressed in a range of
laws, policy statements and decisions. No individual law, policy statement or decision is
identified as a specific breach of NAFTA: all are instances and evidence of “the
discriminatory and inequitable actions that Canada has undertaken prior to this Demand
(and any during these proceedings) that have diminished Claimant’s past and future toll
revenues due to the failure to improve the highway connections to the Ambassador Bridge
and due to the delay and obstruction of Claimant's ability’s to construct the New Span to the
Ambassador Bridge”™"”.

The Tribunal further notes that the measure alleged to be a breach of NAFTA according to the
Second NOA is the practice of the discriminatory and inequitable diminution of DIBC’s toll
revenues caused by Canada’s failure to improve highway connections to the Ambassador

Bridge, and the obstruction of DIBC’s ability to construct the New Span.

The Tribunal notes that, on January 15, 2013, when the Second NAFTA NOA was submitted,
Claimant’s claims against Canada in the Washington Litigation were set forth in the
Washington Second Amended Complaint dated November 9, 2012.%4* DIBC filed its
Washington Third Amended Complaint on May 29, 2013."

In both the Washington Second and Third Amended Complaints, DIBC alleged, inter alia,
that:

“11. Defendants [which includes Canada] have also violated plaintiffs’ franchise
rights by thwarting plaintiffs’ ability to exercise their right to build the New Span,
and by attempting to accelerate the approvals of the NITC/DRIC to prevent plaintiffs
from exercising their right to build the New Span.

 

13. ....defendants [which includes Canada] have taken a series of steps to
discriminate in favor of the NITC/DRIC and against the New Span.

 

240.2" Another glaring example of Canada’s discrimination against the New Span
and in favor of the NITC/DRIC can be found in Canada’s development of a highway
connection between the location of the proposed NITC/DRIC (which does not exist

and has not even been approved yet), and its refusal _to_build_similar_highway

247 Second NAFTA NOA, {{ 15; DIBC’s NAFTA Statement of Claim, {{ 15.

8 Exhibit R-19.

™° Exhibit C-141

250 In the Washington Third Amended Complaint this statement can be found at { 243.

94/99

connection to the Ambassador Bridge.”

328. In the Washington Second Amended Complaint, DIBC’s request for relief against Canada

reads as follows:

“WHEREOPF, plaintiffs respectfully request judgment against defendants as follows:
LJ

(c) A declaratory judgment against all defendants declaring that plaintiffs own_an
exclusive franchise to own and operate an international bridge between Detroit and
Windsor, or, in the alternative, declaring that no additional bridge may be
authorized between Detroit and Windsor absent a special agreement under the
Boundary Waters Treaty authorizing such an additional bridge, and declaring that
no such special agreement currently exists;

LJ

 

(e) A declaratory judgment against all defendants declaring that plaintiffs own a
statutory and contractual franchise right to build the New Span, and_that_any
conduct by any defendant that seeks to prevent plaintiffs from building the New Span
is_a_ violation of those rights, including in particular any conduct that seeks to
accelerate the regulatory approvals of the NITC/DRIC and/or to delay the
regulatory approvals of the New Span;

LJ

(j) A declaratory jud; that de lants’ actions in supporting the construction of
the NITC/DRIC, and in preventing plaintiffs from exercising their right to build the
New Span, constitute a taking of plaintiffs’ private property rights without payment
of just compensation, in violation of the Taking Clause of the Fifth Amendment and
of international law;

 

  

 

(k) Any and all other injunctive relief necessary to prevent defendants from taking
any action that infringes upon plaintiffs’ exclusive statutory and contractual
franchise rights under their Special Agreement; and

(1) Any such other and further relief as may be just and proper;”**! (Emphasis added)

329. The Tribunal finds that DIBC’s prayer for relief in the Washington Second Amended
Complaint was made in respect of the same “measures” as_ the “measures” put in issue in the
Second NAFTA NOA. Even if the Tribunal excludes sub-paragraph (k), the Washington

Second Amended Complaint plainly covers the “New Span” issues in the Second NOA.

?5! Second Amended Washington Complaint, p. 90.

95/99

330. The Tribunal also notes that paragraphs 239 to 249 of the Washington Second Amended
Complaint indicate that the Washington Litigation is also based upon, inter alia, alleged

traffic diversion and non-improvement of roads.

331. As for the Washington Third Amended Complaint, DIBC’s request for relief with respect to

Canada reads as follows:

“WHEREOPF, plaintiffs respectfully request judgment against defendants as follows:

LJ

(i) A declaratory jud; against Canada that, under Cc lian law,

own
an exclusive franchise to own and operate an international bridge between Detroit
and Windsor; or, in the alternative, declaring that_no_additional_bridge may _be
authorized between Detroit and Windsor absent a special agreement under the
Boundary Waters Treaty authorizing such an additional bridge, and declaring that
no such special agreement currently exists;

LJ

(1) A declaratory judgment against Canada declaring that, under Canadian law,

plaintiffs own a statutory and contractual franchise right to build the New Span, and
that any conduct by Canada that seeks to prevent plaintiffs from building the New

 

Span is a violation of those rights, including in particular any conduct that seeks to
accelerate_the_regulatory approvals of the _NITC/DRIC_and/or_to_delay_the
regulatory approvals of the New Span, or otherwise to discriminate in favor of the
NITC/DRIC and against the New Span;

LJ

ts) Any and all other injunctive relief nec cessary to prevent d

 

s from taking

 

franchise rights under their Special ‘Agreement; and

9252

(t) Any such other and further relief as may be just and proper. (Emphasis added)

332. In view of the above, the Tribunal finds that DIBC’s prayer for relief in the Washington Third
Amended Complaint also relates to the same “measures” as_the “measures” put in issue in the

Second NAFTA NOA.

25? Washington Third Amended Complaint, pp. 112-116.

96/99

333.

334.

335.

336.

As a consequence, even if the Tribunal were to consider the Second NAFTA NOA as the
document containing Claimant’s operative claims in this arbitration, the Washington Second
and Third Amended Complaints also show that the Washington Litigation is a proceeding

with respect to the same measures as those at issue in this arbitration.

The Tribunal notes that since the submission of the Washington Second and Third Amended
Complaints DIBC no longer requests for damages against Canada in the Washington
Litigation. However, even if the Tribunal could take into account DIBC’s subsequent
withdrawal of its request for damages against Canada in the Washington Litigation, the
Tribunal would still be deprived of jurisdiction in this case because the Washington
Litigation, which was carved out from all the three waivers submitted in this arbitration, is not
a proceeding “before an administrative tribunal or court under the law of the disputing Party
[Canada]. The fact that the relief sought in the Washington Second and Third Amended
Complaints does not refer to the U.S.C. (as had been the case in the original Washington

Complaint) is not enough to change that conclusion.

Therefore, even if the Second NAFTA NOA together with the Second and/or Third Waivers
were able to cure the lack of jurisdiction of the Tribunal from a procedural point of view, they

did not do so for substantial reasons, because the conditions set in Article 1121 were not met.

(4) Tribunal’s conclusion

In light of the above, and considering that (i) the Washington Litigation involves the same
measures than those at stake in this arbitration; (ii) the Washington Complaint contains a
request for damages against Canada; and (iii) the Washington Litigation is a court procedure
initiated before U.S. Courts (instead of Canadian Courts), the First Waiver does not comply
with Article 1121. In any event, none of the waivers presented by DIBC complies with
Article 1121, because the Washington Litigation, which was carved out from all three waivers
submitted, is a court proceeding initiated before U.S. courts, not before the Canadian courts.
As a consequence, DIBC’s failure to waive its rights to continue the Washington Litigation

deprives the Tribunal of jurisdiction to arbitrate DIBC’s claims in this case.

97/99

337. Accordingly, the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction in this case, because of DIBC’s
failure to comply with NAFTA Article 1121.

338. In view of the Tribunal’s decision above, there is no need to address the remaining
issues raised by Canada in this jurisdictional and/or admissibility phase. Although
Canada has requested the Tribunal to dismiss Claimant’s claims in their entirety and
with prejudice on the grounds of lack of jurisdiction and/or admissibility, in view of the
Tribunal’s decision that it does not have jurisdiction in this case, the Tribunal does not
have the authority to dismiss Claimant’s claims in this arbitration and can only declare

that it has no jurisdiction to hear them.

339, The allocation of costs arising from this arbitration will be decided in a future award,
after the Tribunal hears the disputing parties on the issue, pursuant to a timetable to be

established in consultation with the disputing parties.

VII. HOLDING

340. In view of the foregoing, the Tribunal decides:
(a) That it does not have jurisdiction to hear Claimant's claims in this case, and

(b) To defer the decision regarding the allocation of the costs of this arbitration to a

future award.

stoke

Ap! a, ten Is

Place of the arbitration: Washington DC, USA.

Date:

ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

    

    

ie Hon-Michael Chertoff Mr. Vaughan Lowe, Q.C
Co-arbitrator Co-arbitrator
e Annex I - Separate Jurisdictional
Opinion)

98/99

Chai

99/99

