International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

 

DUKE ENERGY ELECTROQUIL PARTNERS
&
ELECTROQUIL S.A.
CLAIMANTS

REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
RESPONDENT

ICSID Case No. ARB/04/19

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER No. 1

Decision on Respondent’s Request

 

Rendered by an Arbitral Tribunal composed of:

Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler, President
Mr Enrique Gomez Pinzon, Arbitrator
Prof. Albert Jan van den Berg, Arbitrator

Date of Dispatch to the parties: February 24, 2006

FACTS

This section briefly summarizes the factual background of this arbitration to the extent
required to rule upon Respondent's Request of 6 February 2006 (hereinafter the
“Request’) that Claimants confirm that section II.A of their Reply on the Merits and
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction dated 18 January 2006 (hereinafter “Claimants”
Reply”) contains allegations on the merits as opposed to jurisdiction, and that Claimants
limit their allegations to jurisdiction and not address the merits of the case in their
Rejoinder on jurisdiction due on 27 March 2006.

The following paragraphs are without prejudice to the facts, which the Tribunal will
subsequently deem relevant to determine its jurisdiction and/or the merits of the
dispute.

The first Claimant is Duke Energy Electroquil Partners (hereinafter “DEI”), a partnership
incorporated and registered under the laws of the State of Delaware, USA.

DEI is the sole parent company of Duke Energy International del Ecuador Cia Ltda.
(hereinafter “DE! Ecuador”), an Ecuadorian holding company, which at present owns
72.3% of Electroquil S.A. (hereinafter “Electroquil”), the second Claimant in this
arbitration. Electroquil is a power generation company incorporated and registered
under the laws of the Republic of Ecuador.

DEI and Electroquil will be jointly referred to as “Claimants” or “Duke”.
Respondent in this arbitration is the Republic of Ecuador (hereinafter “Ecuador’).

The current dispute arises from the conclusion of two power purchase agreements
between the Instituto Ecuatoriano de Electrificacién (“INECEL”) and Electroquil
(hereinafter the “Agreements”), namely the Power Purchase Agreement (“PPA 95”)
entered into on 31 October 1995 for the importation, assembly, installation and the
putting into service by Electroquil of two new gas turbine generators (Units 1 and 2) and
the Power Purchase Agreement (“PPA 96”) entered into on 8 August 1996 in
connection with two additional generating units (Units 3 and 4). Both Agreements
provided that Electroquil was to perform its obligations by a specific date, failing which it
would incur contractual penalties.

Shortly after the conclusion on 12 November 1997 of the letter of intent (“LOI”) between
Duke Energy International LLC (“Duke Energy”) and Electroquil providing for the terms
and conditions of Duke Energy’s acquisition of a controlling interest in Electroquil,
INECEL imposed the first in a series of fines that it would proceed to levy against
Electroquil.

Following INECEL’s dissolution in March 1999, the President of Ecuador ordered by
decree dated 28 January 1999 that the Ecuadorian State, through the Ministry of
Energy and Mines (hereinafter the “MEM”), assume the rights and obligations of
INECEL under the Agreements as of 1 April 1999.

Within that framework, INECEL and Electroquil signed on 31 March 1999 an agreement
setting forth the amounts owed by INECEL to Electroquil for capacity and energy
payments under the Agreements (hereinafter the “Interim Liquidation Agreement”).

On 1 June 1999, the State of Ecuador through the MEM entered into two subrogation
agreements with Electroquil (hereinafter the “Subrogation Agreements”), whereby the
Ecuadorian State assumed the rights and obligations of INECEL under the Agreements.

On 30 May 2000, the MEM and Electroquil entered into two identical Arbitration and
Mediation Agreements (hereinafter the “Med-Arb Agreements”) in connection with the
disputes over the fines and over the first contractual year of performance that had
arisen under the Agreements.

On 29 January 2001, Electroquil commenced arbitration against the MEM before the
Arbitration and Mediation Center of the Guayaquil Chamber of Commerce.

In the midst of the local arbitration, a second set of fines was imposed against
Electroquil in connection with PPA 95 on 14 August 2001, as well as in connection with
PPA 96 on 18 December 2001.

On 27 November 2001, the MEM and Electroquil entered into a liquidation agreement in
connection with the termination of PPA 95 (hereinafter the “95 Liquidation Agreement”),
which inter alia identified the disputes pending between the Parties.

On 11 March 2002, the local arbitral tribunal issued an award, in which it determined
that the Med-Arb Agreements were null and void.

20.

On 28 August 2002, the MEM and Electroquil entered into a liquidation agreement in
connection with the termination of PPA 96 (hereinafter the “96 Liquidation Agreement”),
which also sets out the disputes pending between the Parties.

On 30 May 2003, the MEM, Electroquil and Petroecuador (the state-owned oil and gas
monopoly which, in connection with the Agreements, had sold through its subsidiary
Petrocomercial the fuel to operate and maintain the power plant) entered into the so-
called Convenio de Reconocimiento y Extincidn Reciproca de Obligaciones (hereinafter
the “Reciprocal Obligations Agreement”), which provided for the extinction of the
reciprocal fuel-related debts.

On 23 April 2004, an agreement was signed for the offset of the reciprocal interest
accrued on the delayed fuel payments between Electroquil, the Ecuadorian
Government and Petrocomercial (hereinafter the “Undisputed Amounts Interest
Agreement”).

On 26 April 2004, the Parties entered into an arbitration agreement (the “Arbitration
Agreement”), which in its relevant parts reads as follows:

“2. Si las partes no alcanzaran un acuerdo dentro del término maximo de 70 dias previstos [...]
la RDE y las Inversionistas consienten en someter las diferencias descritas en el parrafo 3 de
este instrumento, al Centro Internacional de Arreglo de Diferencias relativas a Inversiones (el
“Centro”) para que sean resueltas de forma completa y detinitiva por medio de arbitraje en
derecho conforme al Convenio de 1965 sobre Arreglo de Diferencias Relativas a Inversiones
entre Estados y Nacionales de Otros Estados (“Convenio CIADI”), y del Tratado entre los
Estados Unidos de América y la Republica de Ecuador sobre Promocidn y Proteccién de
Inversiones, firmado en Agosto 27, 1993 y que se encuentra vigente desde Mayo 11, 1997 (el
“Tratado”).

3. Las siguientes diferencias se definen como ‘diferencias relativas u originadas en una
inversion” para los propositos de este Convenio, del consentimiento de las Partes establecido
en el parrafo 2, el Convenio CIADI y el Tratado: Cualesquiera y todas las reclamaciones,
controversias, demandas y causas originadas en o en conexi6n con (i) las multas y penalidades
impuestas por la RDE en base del Contrato de Compraventa de Potencia y Energia suscrito en
Octubre 31 de 1995 con ELECTROQUIL S.A. (PPA 95), y sus intereses y cualquier otro asunto
y/o acuerdo relacionado con dichos conceptos (ii) las multas y penalidades impuestas por la
RDE en base del Contrato de Compraventa de Potencia y Energia suscrito el 8 de Agosto de
1996 con ELECTROQUIL S.A. (PPA 96), y sus intereses y cualquier otro asunto y/o acuerdo
relacionado con dichos conceptos.

4. Las Part jan a formular y toda impi ion a la jurisdiccién de
cualquier tribunal arbitral constituido en relacidn con este Convenio.”

 

21.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

This section sets forth the chronological sequence of the arbitration proceedings to date
leading to the present Order:

On 25 August 2004, Claimants filed their Request for Arbitration with the International
Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID).

On 18 May 2005, the Arbitral Tribunal was constituted.

On 15 June 2005, the Arbitral Tribunal and the Parties held the First Session at the
offices of the World Bank in Washington, D.C. The Minutes of the First Session
provided for two alternative procedural timetables depending on whether
jurisdictional objections were raised by Respondent and on whether the stages on
jurisdiction and the merits were joined accordingly.

On 2 September 2005, Claimants submitted their Memorial in Chief.

Pursuant to Respondent's letter dated 1 November 2005 advising that its then
forthcoming jurisdictional defence was of such nature that it could be joined to the
merits, the Arbitral Tribunal confirmed on 2 November 2005 the adoption of the
procedural timetable including submissions on jurisdiction as set forth in the
Minutes of the First Session dated 15 June 2005.

On 22 November 2005, Respondent filed its Memorial de Contestacidn a la Demanda,
in which it raised its objections to jurisdiction.

On 9 January 2006, the schedule of pleadings was modified pursuant to the parties’
agreement.

On 18 January 2006, Claimants filed their Reply Memorial and Counter-Memorial on
Jurisdiction.

On 6 February 2006, Respondent filed its present Request.

On 15 February 2006, Claimants submitted its Answer to the Request (hereinafter the
“Answer’).

22.

3.1

23.

24.

25.

For the sake of completeness, the following submissions and events are still anticipated
in this arbitration:'

On 6 March 2006, Respondent shall file its Rejoinder on the Merits and Reply on
Jurisdiction.

On 14 March 2006, the Arbitral Tribunal and the Parties shall hold a pre-hearing
telephone conference.

On 27 March 2006, Claimants shall file their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction.

From 24 April to 28 April 2006, the Arbitral Tribunal and the Parties shall hold a hearing
on jurisdiction and on the merits of the dispute.

THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

Ecuapor’s POSITION

Ecuador alleges that Claimants’ Reply presents a serious defect causing an irreparable
breach of Respondent's procedural rights in this arbitration if not promptly remedied,
given that Respondent will not have an adequate opportunity to comment thereon prior
to the hearing scheduled in April.

Ecuador submits that Claimants have erroneously and improperly made allegations
regarding the merits of the dispute in their arguments on jurisdiction, thereby unilaterally
creating an additional procedural opportunity to address substantive issues raised by
Respondent in its latest submission, namely its Memorial de Contestacién a la
Demanda dated 22 November 2005 (hereinafter “Memorial de Contestaci6n’).

In particular, Ecuador claims that Section II.A (paragraphs 21-44) of Claimants’ Reply,
especially footnote 9 to paragraph 21, makes reference to sections of Respondent's
Memorial de Contestacion in which it sets forth the facts and arguments relating to the
merits of the dispute, namely those related to the liquidation of the Agreements by
mutual consent. Ecuador further alleges that as of paragraph 22 of Claimants’ Reply,
there are numerous references made to such Agreements and the facts upon which
Claimants have based their claims. In sum, Section II.A of Claimants’ Reply addresses

See Letter ICSID of 9 January 2006.

26.

27.

3.2
28.

29.

30.

issues, which are exclusively and undoubtedly substantive with the consequence that
ruling thereupon will entail according to Respondent “un efecto preclusivo de cosa
juzgada sobre las reclamaciones de las Demandantes y no sdlo la inhabilidad del
Tribunal de conocerlas.”

According to Respondent, Claimants cannot circumvent the matter, let alone create a
procedural imbalance, by grossly and falsely alleging that the arguments on the merits
made in Section II.A of their Reply constitute a necessary premise to Ecuador's defence
to the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction. Respondent points out that its jurisdictional
defence is clear and does not depend upon any determination of the merits of the
dispute.

Therefore, Ecuador concludes that:

“La Republica del Ecuador solicita que dichas indicaciones se respeten por las
Demandantes. Que éstas, en consecuencia, confirmen que la seccion II.A de su escrito
de Réplica contiene argumentos de fondo y no acerca de competencia o que, a falta de
dicha confirmacién, asi lo indique el Tribunal con el fin que las Demandantes en su
escrito de Duplica, se limiten a las cuestiones sobre competencia.”

DUKE’s POSITION

After recalling that the jurisdictional and merits phases of this arbitration are being dealt
with together upon Respondent's request, Claimants submit that no action of the
Arbitral Tribunal is required in this particular instance.

According to Claimants, Respondent's plea for the Tribunal to issue instructions based
on its anticipation of how Claimants might present their final written submission on
jurisdiction is nothing more than a shallow attempt to distract attention from the real
issues in this arbitration and a pretext for Respondent to seek leave to file a responsive
pleading to Claimants’ next submission, which is inadmissible.

Claimants submit that Respondent has not and cannot point to any portion of
Claimants’ Reply in which Claimants have addressed issues falling outside of the
substantive and procedural parameters established by the Tribunal and related to the
nature of Claimants’ claims. Respondent appears instead to take issue with the manner
in which Claimants have chosen to address matters before the Arbitral Tribunal.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

Ecuador's preference that Section II.A of Claimants’ Reply appear under a merits
heading rather that one on jurisdiction is not supported by any authority and does in fact
not prevent Claimants from presenting their submission in the way they did.

Claimants further point out that, considering that Respondent has based its
jurisdictional objection partly on the argument according to which certain of Claimants’
claims have been settled or otherwise resolved, Claimants can only fully respond by
showing that no settlement of claims has occurred and that all disputes remain subject
to the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction. In Claimants’ view, these points cannot, as
Ecuador suggests, be isolated from the issue of jurisdiction. Doing so would elevate
form over substance to the point of distortion.

As a result, Claimants conclude that:

“Claimants respectfully request that, to the extent that Respondent has actually
requested any cognizable relief, such relief be denied.”

DISCUSSION

Having examined each party’s submission, the Arbitral Tribunal is not minded to grant
Respondent’s Request on the following grounds.

Upon reading section II.A of Claimants’ Reply in which Claimant discusses in turn the
Interim Liquidation Agreement, the 95 Liquidation Agreement, the 96 Liquidation
Agreement, the Reciprocal Obligations Agreement and the Undisputed Amounts
Interest Agreement for the purpose of rebutting Respondent's allegation that certain
disputes between the Parties have been settled, it appears that such analysis is
conducted in order to substantiate Claimants’ allegation that none of the agreements
referred to above establish settlement, waiver or release of any of the claims submitted
within the present arbitration proceedings. In the Tribunal’s view, such discussion is
legitimate, as it attempts to outline which disputes are allegedly still pending and subject
to this Tribunal’s jurisdiction in light of the Arbitration Agreement.

Further, the manner in which Claimants framed their arguments is left to their own
appreciation when presenting their case. Claimants’ Reply was to address both matters
of jurisdiction and merits according to the agreed procedural timetable. Hence, the
Arbitral Tribunal finds it unduly formalistic under the circumstances that each section

8

37.

38.

39.

should be identified as relating to either jurisdiction or the merits. It is clear from the
Reply which arguments relate to jurisdiction and which refer to the merits.

At any rate, Respondent still has an opportunity to address the issues of jurisdiction and
the merits of the dispute in its forthcoming Rejoinder on the merits and reply on
jurisdiction due on 6 March 2006. As a result, Respondent's procedural rights are not
affected.

As for Claimants’ Rejoinder on jurisdiction due on 27 March 2006, it shall obviously be
limited to the issue of jurisdiction. The Tribunal trusts that Claimants will set forth their
rejoinder arguments on jurisdiction in an appropriate manner, so as to preclude any
other disagreements that might risk rendering the proceedings more cumbersome.

ORDER

On the basis of the foregoing reasons, having reviewed the Parties’ submissions, the
Arbitral Tribunal denies Respondent’s Request.

Made on February 23, 2006

For the Arbitral Tribunal:

Prof. Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler

