ICSID Case No. ARB/03/28

DUKE ENERGY INTERNATIONAL PERU INVESTMENTS NO. 1, LIMITED

and

REPUBLIC OF PERU

(Annulment Proceeding)

DECISION OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE

Members of the ad hoc Committee

Professor Campbell McLachlan QC (President)
Judge Dominique Hascher
Judge Peter Tomka

Secretary to the Committee

Ms Natali Sequeira

Representing the Republic of Peru

Mr Stanimir A Alexandrov
Mr Daniel M Price

Ms Marinn Carlson
Sidley Austin LLP

1501 K Street, NW
Washington, DC 20005

Date of dispatch to the parties: 1 March 2011

Representing Duke Energy International
Peru Investments No. 1 Ltd

Mr Arif Hyder Ali

Mr Baiju S Vasani

Ms. Kassi D Talent

Ms Marguerite C Walter
Ms Emily Alban

Crowell & Moring LLP

1001 Pennsylvania Ave, NW
Washington, DC 20004

Mr Dean M Moesser
Duke Energy International

BWNPR

BWNPR

CONTENTS

Introduction

The Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction and Award
The Application for Annulment
Summary of Annulment Proceedings

The Parties’ Submissions
Submissions on the Decision on Jurisdiction

Jurisdiction ratione materiae
Jurisdiction ratione temporis
Jurisdiction vested in other tribunals

Submissions on the Award on the Merits

Tax stability

Tax amnesty

Good faith/actos propios (estoppel)
Damages

The Ad Hoc Committee’s Analysis
The scope of review under Article 52 ICSID Convention

Decision on Jurisdiction
The Tribunal’s approach
The character of the Decision on Jurisdiction
Jurisdiction ratione materiae
(a) Manifest excess of powers
(i) Application of the applicable law
(ii) Determination of the meaning of the DEI Bermuda LSA
(b) Failure to state reasons
(c) Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure
Jurisdiction ratione temporis
Jurisdiction vested in other tribunals

Award on the Merits

Tax stability

Tax amnesty

Good faith/actos propios (estoppel)
Damages

Costs

Decision

(1)
(2]
(13]
(25]
[28]

(31]
[40]
[46]

(51]

(52]
(71)
(75]
(81]

[84]
[84]

[101]
(101)
(115]
[124]
[124]
[125]
[148]
(161]
[167]
[170]
[183]

[193]
[196]
[224]
[236]
[252]
[259]

[269]

INTRODUCTION

On 15 December 2008, the Republic of Peru (‘Peru’) made a timely application for
annulment of the Decision on Jurisdiction rendered in favour of Duke Energy
Investments Peru No. 1 Limited (‘DEI Bermuda’) in ICSID Case No. ARB/03/28, and in

the alternative partial annulment of the Award in that case.

The Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction and Award

The Decision on Jurisdiction was rendered on 1 February 2006. The Award was
rendered on 18 August 2008. The Tribunal comprised L. Yves Fortier, C.C., Q.C.
(President, a national of Canada), Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil (a national of Argentina)

and Dr. Pedro Nikken (a national of Venezuela).!

The proceedings concerned an investment, made by Duke Energy International
Investments No. 1 Ltd (‘DEI Bermuda’ a company organized under the laws of
Bermuda), which is ultimately owned by Duke Energy International LLC (‘Duke
Energy’ (a company organized under the laws of the United States) through several
acquisitions and reorganisations, of privatised interests in Egenor S.A.A., a Peruvian
electricity corporation, which eventually became Duke Energy International Egenor
S.A.A. (‘DEI Egenor’). In an effort to encourage investment in privatised industries,
the Peruvian Government concluded a number of Legal Stability Agreements (‘LSAs’)
with investors. These included the ‘Egenor LSA’, which applied from 1996 to 2006.
The Peruvian Government had also passed the Merger Revaluation Law (‘MRL’) on
10 January 1994, which guaranteed that corporate reorganisations would not incur
tax liability. In order to benefit from this law, DEI Egenor merged with Power North

S.A. in December 1996.

Following DEI Bermuda’s acquisition of privatised interests in DEI Egenor, DEI
Bermuda entered into the ‘DEI Bermuda LSA’ with Peru on 24 July 2001. The DEI
Bermuda LSA applied for a term of ten years from the date of its execution.

Pursuant to it, DEI Bermuda agreed to make a capital contribution to Duke Energy

1 Dr Tawil and Dr Nikken each lodged a partial dissenting opinion to the Award on different issues. The Decision
on Jurisdiction, Award and partial dissenting opinions are published at 15 ICSID Rep 100.

International Peru Holdings SRL (‘DEI Peru Holdings’) of US$200 million (clause 2)
and Peru in return agreed to guarantee legal stability for DEI Egenor in relation to
various matters, including income tax (clause 3(1)). By clause 9, the parties agreed
that ‘any dispute, controversy or claim between them, relative to the interpretation,

performance or validity of this Agreement, shall be submitted’ to ICSID arbitration.

5. On 26 November 2001, the Peruvian tax authority (Superintendencia Nacional de
Administracion Tribunaria, ‘SUNAT’) assessed a tax liability of approximately US$48
million (including interest and penalities) against DEI Egenor in respect of tax years

1996 — 1999 (‘the Tax Assessment’).?

6. In the Arbitration, DEI Bermuda claimed, inter alia, that this Tax Assessment
constituted a violation of its rights under the DEI Bermuda LSA. Peru objected to the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal and to the admissibility of the claims. The Tribunal

decided to hold a separate hearing on issues of jurisdiction and admissibility.

7. In a reasoned Decision on Jurisdiction dated 1 February 2006, the Tribunal held
that [t]he dispute submitted by DEI Bermuda is within the jurisdiction of the Centre
and the competence of the Tribunal.” \t rejected some of Peru’s objections to

admissibility, and joined others to the merits.

8. By its Award dated 18 August 2008, the Tribunal found that Peru was not liable to
DEI Egenor on one major limb of the latter’s claims.4 However, it concluded, as to
the claim concerning the Merger Revaluation Assessment (‘MRA’), that SUNAT had
violated the guarantee of tax stabilisation for DEI Egenor and in turn for DEI
Bermuda.) In addition, a majority of the Tribunal was of the opinion that the MRA
constituted a breach by Peru of the implied duty of good faith owed to DEI Bermuda
under the DEI Bermuda LSA.° By way of compensation for breach of the DEI
Bermuda LSA, the Tribunal ordered Peru to pay DEI Bermuda US$18,440,746 plus

simple interest.”

2 Decision on Jurisdiction [61].

3 Ibid Dispositif (168(1)].

+ E.g, the Depreciation Assessment claim, Award [307], [323].
5 Ibid [345] - [366].

° Ibid [442].

7 Ibid Dispositif (501)

B. The Application for Annulment

9. By its Application, Peru seeks primarily annulment of the Decision on Jurisdiction in
its entirety, which would have the consequence that the Award as a whole would be
annulled.’ In the alternative, it seeks partial annulment of ‘the portions of the Award
concerning (1) the effect of the Tax Amnesty; (2) the Merger Revaluation Assessment
(specifically, the conclusions regarding tax stabilization and actos propios); and (3)

the calculation of damages.”

10.

°o

Peru’s Application for Annulment of the Decision on Jurisdiction is based primarily
on Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention (manifest excess of powers). Peru
submits that the Tribunal asserted a jurisdiction ratione materiae which exceeded
the scope of the parties’ consent as set out in the instrument of their consent,
namely the DEI Bermuda LSA.'° Further, Peru asserts that, in going beyond the plain
words of the DEI Bermuda LSA, the Tribunal failed to apply the applicable law.!! The
Tribunal also exceeded its jurisdiction ratione personae by asserting its jurisdiction
over claims which were those of DEI Egenor not DEI Bermuda; and exceeded its
jurisdiction ratione temporis by asserting jurisdiction over claims based on events
occurring prior to the execution of the DEI Bermuda LSA.!? Peru seeks in addition
annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention, alleging that the Tribunal
failed to state reasons for its decision not to apply the plain words of the DEI
Bermuda LSA;!3 and under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention on the ground
that failure to abide by the scope of the parties’ consent to arbitration and to apply

the applicable law is a failure to observe a fundamental rule of procedure.!*

11.

B

Peru’s application for partial annulment of the Award relies compendiously on
Articles 52(1)(b), (d), and (e) to challenge the above-noted portions of the Award to

which it objects.!5

8 Transcript, Day 2, 366/2-9 (Peru), 408/17-409/1 (DEI Bermuda).
9 Application [101]

10 (bid (36).

4 (bid (39).

22 (bid (40) - [41]
13 [bid [43] - [44]
4 [bid (45) - [46]
15 (bid (79] - [100]

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

By paragraph 102 of its Annulment Application, Peru requested that the ad hoc

Committee stay enforcement of the Award pending its decision (‘the Stay Request’).

Summary of Annulment Proceedings

On 24 December 2008, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID registered Peru’s
Annulment Application. In accordance with Rule 54(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules,
enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed pending the ad hoc Committee’s

decision.

On 27 February 2009, the Chairman of the Administrative Council appointed Judge
Dominique Hascher (a national of France), Professor Campbell McLachlan QC (a
national of New Zealand) and Judge Peter Tomka (a national of Slovakia) as
members of the ad hoc Committee, which was properly constituted on 4 March
2009. The parties were informed on 16 March 2009 that the members of the ad hoc
Committee had appointed Professor McLachlan as its President. Also on that date,
the Committee invited the parties to agree on a timetable for filing of written
pleadings on Peru’s Stay Request, and proposed that oral argument on the Stay
Request be heard at its First Session. It suggested that the First Session be held on

27 or 28 April 2009 at the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague.

At the First Session, which was held in the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The
Hague on 27 April 2009, the parties confirmed that they had no objections to the
proper constitution of the Committee or to any of its members. The parties reached
agreement with the ad hoc Committee on the establishment of a procedural
timetable and various other procedural directions for the further conduct of the
annulment proceeding. It was provided that the languages of the proceedings would
be English and Spanish. Simultaneous interpretation would be provided at the
hearing. The Committee would render its Decision in English and Spanish, the
Spanish translation being provided by the Secretariat. The hearing was scheduled for

12 and 13 April 2010 at the headquarters of ICSID in Washington, DC.

The parties submitted simultaneous briefs on Peru’s Stay Request on 17 April 2009,
and oral argument was heard on the Stay Request on 27 April 2009. By letter from
its Secretary dated 5 May 2009, the ad hoc Committee confirmed that the
provisional stay of enforcement was to continue until the Committee issued its

Decision.

17. The ad hoc Committee released its Decision on Peru’s Stay Request on 23 June

18.

19.

2

2

2

2

0

©

0.

1.

2.

w

2009. The Committee decided that the stay of enforcement would only continue if,
within 30 calendar days of the notification of the Decision by the ICSID Secretariat,
Peru provided an official written assurance that it would effect full payment of its
liability under the Award within 30 calendar days of the Decision on Annulment, to

the extent that the Award was not annulled.

Peru duly provided a written assurance on 17 July 2009, by letter from the Special
Committee in charge of the representation of the Peruvian State in international

investment disputes.

Peru filed its Memorial on Annulment on 31 July 2009. DEI Bermuda filed its
Counter-Memorial on 20 November 2009. Peru filed its Reply on 22 January 2010,
accompanied by an Opinion on the Question of Annulment, prepared by Professor
W. Michael Reisman, dated 20 January 2010. DEI Bermuda filed its Rejoinder on 19
March 2010, together with an Opinion of Professor Rudolf Dolzer dated 14 March
2010.

A hearing was held in Washington D.C. on 12 and 13 April 2010. The parties agreed,
by joint letter dated 26 March 2010, the schedule for that hearing. It was attended
by counsel for the parties, together with Mr Fernando Quirés and Ms Yesenia
Cabezas of the Embassy of the Republic of Peru in Washington D.C. and Ms Pat
Smith of Duke Energy.

The majority of documents referred to in the parties’ pleadings were lodged in
electronic form with the pleadings. By letter dated 9 April 2010, the President
requested the parties to lodge lists of any documents referred to in the annulment
proceedings and not already filed, and to lodge copies of any documents so listed.

This the parties did at the conclusion of the hearing.

At the conclusion of the hearing, the President closed the oral phase of the
proceedings, and indicated that the ad hoc Committee would notify the parties

through the Secretariat when it had reached its Decision.

The ad hoc Committee then deliberated by various means of communication,
including at meetings in Washington D.C. on 14 April 2010, in Paris on 28 July 2010
and in The Hague on 7 September 2010. On 18 November 2010, pursuant to
Arbitration Rule 28, the Committee invited the parties to submit their respective

statements of costs by 1 December 2010. The parties did so. DEI Bermuda also filed

a written submission as to costs on the same date. Accordingly, the ad hoc
Committee afforded Peru an opportunity to file any written submissions as to costs

in reply by 10 December 2010.

24. On 14 December 2010, the proceeding was declared closed pursuant to Rule 38(1)
of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

M. THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

25. As set out above, Peru makes a wide-ranging challenge to the Tribunal’s Decision
on Jurisdiction and to certain portions of the Award. The arguments on each of
these issues were fully developed by the parties in their written pleadings. At the
hearing, whilst maintaining all of the grounds set out in writing, Peru helpfully

placed particular emphasis on certain of those grounds. These included in particular:

(a) Its objection to the Decision on Jurisdiction based upon manifest excess of

powers, specifically:

(i) the Tribunal’s approach to its jurisdiction ratione materiae (including the

law applicable to determination of that question); and,

(ii) the Tribunal’s assumption of jurisdiction ratione temporis (including
Peru’s allegation that the Tribunal had exceeded its powers by failing to

decide on the objection ratione temporis actually taken by Peru); and

(b) Its objection that the Tribunal had failed to state reasons for that part of its
Award which set out its ‘threshold analysis’, namely ‘the Tribunal’s conclusion that
claims for breach of the Egenor LSA could be raised by DEI Bermuda thanks to its so-

called link found in Article 23(a).’!°

26. This section of the Decision will summarise the parties’ arguments on each of these
issues, followed by the additional arguments in relation to each of the Decision on
Jurisdiction and the Award.

27. Before doing so, however, it is necessary also to mention the parties’ submissions

as to the scope of the annulment standards under Article 52(1). As noted above,
Peru supported its Reply with an Opinion of Professor Reisman, which contained a

discussion of the annulment standards. In response, DEI Bermuda filed an Opinion of

16 Transcript, Day 1, 55/5-8.

Professor Dolzer. The Committee is obliged to both eminent experts for their views.
It will have occasion to refer to certain aspects of the interpretation of Article 52(1)
to the extent relevant and necessary to its analysis in Part Ill below. However,
despite the apparent difference of emphasis on some issues of construction and
approach between the experts, the Committee finds that it is not necessary to deal
with all of these questions in the abstract, in view of the confirmation provided by

Peru in oral submissions that:!”

Article 52, we submit must be read and applied on its terms in order to
maintain the balance struck by the states parties to the ICSID Convention.

And that is what we are asking this ad hoc committee to do....

[T]he question before this committee is not whether the law of annulment is
trending in one direction or another or whether cases embrace or caution

against annulment....

It is an exercise in case specific analysis within the framework of Article 52

itself.

A. Submissions on the Decision on Jurisdiction

28. Peru argues that the Decision on Jurisdiction should be annulled for manifest
excess of powers, departure from a fundamental rule of procedure and failure to
state reasons. This Decision adopts the structure followed by the parties, and is
therefore structured to follow the objections raised by Peru to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction. In effect, in its Application for Annulment, Peru repeats the objections
to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction that it raised before the Tribunal itself, but now does so
on the basis that the Tribunal’s conclusions on those issues warrant annulment

pursuant to Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention.

2

{o

Peru thus argues that:

(a) The Tribunal’s conclusion that it had jurisdiction ratione materiae is to be

annulled under Article 52(1)(b), (d) and (e);

1 [bid 120/17-21, 121/12-16, 122/1-3.

30.

31.

32.

33.

(b) The Tribunal’s conclusion that it had jurisdiction ratione temporis is to be

annulled under Article 52(1)(b), (d) and (e); and

(c) The Tribunal’s improper arrogation to itself of jurisdiction vested in other

fora under other LSAs requires annulment under Article 52(1)(b).

The parties’ submissions on each of these points are summarised in turn.

1. Jurisdiction ratione materiae
(a) Peru’s argument

Clause 3 of the DEI Bermuda LSA guaranteed legal stability ‘in connection with the
investment referred to in CLAUSE TWO’. Under clause 2.1, DEI Bermuda was obliged
to contribute capital of US$200,000,000 to DEI Peru Holdings. The other obligations

imposed on DEI Bermuda under clause 2 were ancillary to that obligation.

Peru argues that DEI Bermuda’s protection under the LSA was constrained to that
investment of $200,000,000 only, and did not protect DEI Bermuda’s investment in
Peru generally, notwithstanding that the capital contribution was a stage in DEI
Bermuda’s acquisition of Egenor.!® In its Reply, it stresses the background to the
LSAs, and the recognition of, among others, DEI Bermuda, that multiple LSAs were
required to protect indirect investments.'? Peru argues that the Tribunal failed to
apply the proper law in interpreting the LSA, and consequently reached an incorrect
interpretation.”° In the face of the DEI Bermuda’s argument to the contrary, it
maintains that Clauses Two and Three are crucial to jurisdiction, because they

circumscribe the matters referred to in Clause Nine.2!

Peru states that it was accepted before the Tribunal that, as a Peruvian legal
instrument, the LSA had to be interpreted according to Peruvian civil law.2? Peru
submits that Peruvian law is also applicable if Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention is

applied, and that the Tribunal identified no gap in Peruvian law, or inconsistency

18 Memorial [116].
” Reply [60]-[61].
20 Memorial [117].
21 Reply [75], [79].
2 Decision on Jurisdiction [31]; Memorial [120]; Reply [73].

10

between its provisions and those of international law, that justified reference to

supervening principles of international law.?>

34. Peru points out that the Tribunal did not refer to any of the applicable provisions of
the Peruvian Civil Code in its Decision on Jurisdiction,” or discuss the appropriate
approach to contractual interpretation.> Nor did it, as DEl Bermuda suggests,
indicate that its approach was based on a ‘good faith’ interpretation as mandated by
Peruvian law.”6 It simply concluded that it was entitled to go beyond the narrow
literal meaning of Clauses Two and Three of the DEI Bermuda LSA to consider four
extrinsic factors.27 Peru contends that the Tribunal’s failure to engage with the
relevant provisions of the applicable law is evidence of its failure to apply the proper

law at alll.5

35. Peru contends that if the Tribunal had applied Peruvian law, it would have found
that it was not entitled to go beyond the ‘plain meaning’ of the LSA. It would have
thus found that only DEI Bermuda’s capital contribution was protected.” It further
argues that the Tribunal so transparently and consciously departed from the

approach advocated by Peru that its error must be manifest.”

36. Peru lastly contends that the Tribunal actually misapplied the four extrinsic factors
it relied upon, and that a proper application of those factors would have lead it to

decline jurisdiction.*!

(b) DEI Bermuda’s argument

37. DEI Bermuda begins by arguing that Peru mischaracterised the terms of the LSA as
the ‘applicable law’, when in fact the only provisions that governed jurisdiction were
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and clause 9 of the DEI Bermuda LSA. The

Tribunal saw its central task as construing clause 9, ‘taking account of the

2 Memorial [122]; Reply [82].

24 Memorial [134]; Reply [80] - [81].
25 Memorial [137].

26 Reply [85], [89].

2 Memorial [140].

28 jbid (135).

2° Memorial [131]; Reply [70].

20 Reply [66].

31 Memorial [143] ff.

22 Counter-Memorial [102].

11

consequences of [the parties’] commitments which the parties must be considered to
have reasonably and legitimately contemplated.’* |t then concluded that the dispute
before it concerned ‘the interpretation, performance or validity’ of the LSA.** DEI
Bermuda submits that clauses 2 and 3 form no part of the applicable law for the
purpose of the jurisdictional determination, and were essentially irrelevant to the

issue of whether the Tribunal had jurisdiction under clause 9.5

38. DEI Bermuda submits that, in order for the Tribunal to have committed a manifest
excess of powers then, having reached that conclusion, it would have to have made
a finding that it would be impossible for the DEI Bermuda to substantiate its claims
at the merits phase.*° The Tribunal made no such finding. Furthermore, DEI
Bermuda argues that Peru’s argument must fail because (a) the Tribunal did in fact
find a breach at the merits phase, and (b) Peru conceded during the merits phase

that its conduct was capable of constituting a breach.*”

3

o

Lastly, DEI Bermuda argues that the Tribunal did not fail to state the reasons on
which its conclusions were based.** DEI Bermuda notes that the Tribunal invoked the
Peruvian requirement that contracts be negotiated, executed and performed in
good faith. It notes that, according to its experts, actual intention must prevail
over ‘literality’ 4° and that, were Peruvian law different on this point, the
international law principle of pacta sunt servanda would intervene.*! In DEI
Bermuda’s view, Peru fails to substantiate its allegation that the Tribunal decided
the dispute ex aequo et bono.” DEI Bermuda argues that the Tribunal did not ignore
clause 2 and 3 of the LSA, but set out its reasons ‘in extenso’ for adopting the
interpretation it did and thus provided reasons for its decision.** DE| Bermuda

maintains that Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and clause 9 of the DEI Bermuda

33 {bid [109], citing Decision on Jurisdiction [77]
3 ibid [111], citing Decision on Jurisdiction [82].
35 tbid [119].
36 tbid [122].
 jbid (124).
38 jbid [132].
29 tbid [133].
40 jbid (135).
+1 ibid (136).
* ibid (140).
8 tbid [144] - [147].

12

LSA sufficed as ‘authority’ for the Tribunal’s interpretation and that it was well

within its mandate to consider contextual factors.“

2. Jurisdiction ratione temporis
(a) Peru’s argument

40. Peru submits that it was accepted before the Tribunal that the DEI Bermuda LSA
was the sole source of DEI Bermuda’s rights claimed in the arbitration. That LSA
applies from 24 July 2001 until 24 July 2011. The SUNAT assessment which the DEI

Bermuda alleged violated the LSA was issued in November 2001.

41. Peru maintains that there are two aspects of jurisdiction ratione temporis, and that
the Tribunal considered only one of them. First, the ‘dispute’ between the parties
must arise during the period specified in the instrument of consent.** Peru never
disagreed that the dispute — which was crystallised by SUNAT’s unfavourable audit
assessment — arose during the period specified in the LSA. Its complaint is that the
Tribunal failed to address the second aspect of jurisdiction ratione temporis: that
‘the substantive provisions of the relevant instrument must temporally cover the

events on which the claim is based.””

42. Peru argues that clause 3(1) of the LSA only guarantees stability for the tax
legislation which is in force on the date the agreement is signed. It thus argues
that ‘[aJny claims based on factual or legal predicates falling outside that 10-year
period are beyond the scope of the LSA’s tax stability provision’.*® |t argues that the
SUNAT assessment enforced tax rules that had applied to Egenor from 1996 to 1999
— rules that were not the subject of the DEI Bermuda LSA. The Tribunal did not
engage with this aspect of temporal jurisdiction, satisfying itself with the conclusion

that the dispute arose during the term of the LSA.* Peru disputes DE] Bermuda’s

+4 ibid (150) - [151].

+5 Decision on Jurisdiction [146]; Memorial [105].

46 Memorial [107].

47 Memorial [107]; Reply [44]. In this respect Peru relies on Salini v Jordan, which held that ‘one must distinguish
carefully between jurisdiction ratione temporis of an ICSID Tribunal (i.e., the existence of a dispute) and
applicability ratione temporis of the substantive obligations contained in a BIT’: Salini Costruttori SpA and
Italstrade SpA v Jordan ICSID Case No. ARB/02/13, 9 November 2004 (Decision on Jurisdiction), [176].

48 Memorial [109].

9 ibid (110).

59 Decision on Jurisdiction [148]; Memorial [112]

13

43.

44,

45.

argument that, in addressing the first aspect of ratione temporis jurisdiction, the
Tribunal implicitly rejected Peru’s actual ratione temporis objection. It argues that

the Tribunal could have addressed Peru’s argument, but failed to do so.*!

Applying Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention, Peru submits that the Tribunal:
(a) manifestly exceeded its powers by exercising jurisdiction that it did not
have, and failing to consider an issue put to it by a party;
(b) departed from a fundamental rule of procedure by failing to consider an
issue put to it by a party; and
(c) failed to provide reasons for its decision, by omitting the reasoning required
to move from Point A (Peru’s actual ratione temporis argument) to Point B
(the Tribunal’s conclusion that it had temporal jurisdiction).
(b) DEI Bermuda’s argument
DEI Bermuda’s central response is that the Tribunal did address Peru’s ratione

temporis argument when it held, in paragraph 148, that the crucial time was when
the dispute arose, ‘not the point in time during which the factual matters on which
the dispute is based took place’.** According to DEI Bermuda, the Tribunal was
entitled to define the ratione temporis issue for itself.54 Having made that decision,
the Tribunal was entitled to consider all the relevant factual background to that
dispute, as it did.® Addressing Peru’s argument that the DEI Bermuda LSA only
stabilised tax laws in effect from 2001, DEI Bermuda argues that the Tribunal held

this question over until the merits phase.

DEI Bermuda maintains that the Tribunal properly explained its decision, rejecting
the first argument and ruling the second irrelevant, citing authority for its approach.
According to DEI Bermuda, the principle of non-retroactivity of treaties has no role

to play here because the act complained of occurred in November 2001.

51 Reply [47] - [54].

52 Memorial [114] ~ [115]

53 Decision on Jurisdiction [148]; cited in Counter-Memorial [87].

3 Counter-Memorial [90]

55 Counter-Memorial [89], citing Decision on Jurisdiction [149] — [150]
56 Ibid [94] - [95]

14

3. Jurisdiction vested in other tribunals

46. By this additional head of challenge to the Decision on Jurisdiction, Peru seeks to
support its two specific objections above with an over-arching point that the
Tribunal exceeded its powers by assuming a jurisdiction properly vested in other

tribunals under other LSAs.°”

(a) Peru’s argument

47. Peru begins with the argument that the Tribunal failed to take account of all the
other LSAs Peru signed, each concluded with a different party, in respect of a
different investment and in force for a different period.* This argument provides
context for Peru’s argument that the entire approach to jurisdiction followed by DEI
Bermuda — and largely adopted by the Tribunal — was designed to circumvent the
shortcomings of individual causes of action available to the Duke Energy group as a
whole. Duke’s particular problem was that only the DEI Bermuda LSA (and not, for
example, the Egenor LSA) contained a reference to ICSID arbitration. But the DEI
Bermuda LSA only applied from 2001, after the tax years in respect of which SUNAT
issued the assessment that Duke claimed violated the LSA. °° In other words, Peru
argues, the Tribunal took jurisdiction over a matter that really arose under a

different LSA, namely the Egenor LSA, and not the DEI Bermuda LSA.

48. In terms of the grounds of annulment under Article 52(1) of the Convention, Peru
maintains that the Tribunal was motivated, in refusing to treat the DEI Bermuda LSA
as an independent instrument with carefully-circumscribed boundaries, by a
‘misguided concern for Duke Energy’s ability to seek relief in a single arbitration for a
full range of claims.’ Peru maintains that this decision was made on the basis of

equity rather than law, and therefore constitutes a manifest excess of powers.

57 Memorial [104].

58 Memorial [92] ff; Reply [93] ff.
59 Memorial [94], [99]; Reply [38]
© Memorial [93], [95].

15

4

5

5

9.

9

p

(b) DEI Bermuda’s argument
DEI Bermuda’s primary response to this argument is that the Tribunal was right to
decide that the particular dispute brought before it under the DEI Bermuda LSA
belonged in no other forum. It argued that the Tribunal properly rejected the Peru’s
admissibility and ratione personae objections because the three criteria for

‘concurrent jurisdiction’ were not met.

In DEI Bermuda’s view, Peru’s argument that the Tribunal should have declined
jurisdiction in favour of a ‘hypothetically available’ forum (under another LSA)
provides no basis for a claim of manifest excess of powers,” especially when there
are no rules for stipulating when ICSID tribunals must decline jurisdiction, but simply
principles derived from general international law. Indeed, DEI Bermuda suggests, the
Vivendi annulment Committee confirmed that an investment arbitral tribunal was

prohibited from declining jurisdiction that it enjoyed in favour of a domestic forum.®

B. Submissions on the Award on the Merits

Peru also seeks partial annulment of the Award. Although the parties organised
their arguments in slightly different ways, their submissions were directed at the
following issues:

(a) The effect of the tax stability guarantee, and in particular (i) the relationship
between the Investment Regulations and the tax stability guarantee;® (ii)
the meaning of legal stability under the LSA;° and (iii) whether the MRA

breached the guarantee of tax stability;"”
(b) The effect of DEI Bermuda’s decision to invoke the amnesty procedure;®

(c) The Tribunal’s finding on the good faith/actos propios issue;“ and

61 Counter-Memorial [66], [68].

® Counter-Memorial [69]

63 (bid [72], citing Compafifa de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Compagnie Générale des Eaux/Vivendi Universal
(‘Vivend/’) v Argentina (First Decision on Annulment) (2002) 6 ICSID Rep 327.

Peru did not seek annulment of the Tribunal’s conclusions in respect of the Depreciation Assessment, a point
on which the DEI Bermuda places some reliance below.

65 Memorial VI.C.1; Counter-Memorial V.B.

6 Memorial VI.C.2; Counter-Memorial V.C.

67 Memorial VI.C.3; Counter-Memorial V.D.

8 Memorial VI.B; Counter-Memorial V.A.

16

52.

53.

(d) The question of damages.”

The parties’ submissions on each of these issues are summarised in turn.

1. Tax stability

Peru makes two arguments under this head: first, that the Tribunal failed to state
reasons for its conclusion that Article 23(a) of the Regulations of the Regime to
Guarantee Private Investment, approved by Supreme Decree No. 162-92-EF
(‘Investment Regulations’) ‘linked’ the DEI Bermuda LSA and the Egenor LSA; and
second that the Tribunal failed to state reasons and exceeded its powers in
concluding that the Peruvian Civil Code overrode Article 23(a)’s limitation on

remedy.

In order to advance these arguments, Peru criticises four steps in the Tribunal’s
reasoning in its Award: (i) its treatment of the linkage between the Egenor LSA and
the DEI Bermuda LSA pursuant to Article 23(a);”* (ii) its decision to supplement the
specific remedy in Article 23(a) with remedies from the Civil Code;7 (iii) its
determination that the guarantee of tax stability in the DEI] Bermuda LSA included
both the tax laws and official interpretations of them;” and (iv) its decision that the
stable interpretation of the MRL allowed companies to obtain tax advantages from a
reorganisation even when conducted solely in order to secure those advantages.”
The arguments of the parties on each of these steps can be conveniently taken in

turn.

 

6 Memorial VI.D; Counter-Memorial V.E.
70 Memorial VI.E; Counter-Memorial V.F.
7 award [201]

7 Ibid (208).

73 tbid [219].

74 Ibid [363].

17

(i) Linking of DEI Bermuda LSA and Egenor LSA
(a) Peru’s argument

54. Peru submits that DEI Bermuda’s position before the Tribunal was that the effect of
Article 23(a) of the Investment Regulations was that the DEI Bermuda LSA preserved
the position in effect in 2001, which included the tax regime stabilised by the Egenor
LSA.” Peru contested this, arguing that neither the LSAs themselves nor the
relevant Peruvian Regulations” allowed the holder of one LSA to take benefits under
another, and that it was inconsistent with the terms of the LSA itself.”” Peru’s
essential complaint is that, having acknowledged the parties’ difference of opinion
on the issue, the Tribunal only addressed the dispute in one sentence and implied
that Peru accepted the DEI Bermuda’s position on the effect of Article 23(a). It
provided no further reasons for its conclusion, and did not address Peru’s argument
that Article 23(a) was a stand-alone regulatory mechanism, not a means of

expanding existing LSAs.

5

u

Peru disagrees with the submission of DEI Bermuda that Peru’s counsel accepted
the linkage effect of Article 23(a).”* Peru also argues that the Tribunal’s conclusion
was inconsistent with its decision to award damages extending to 2011, when the
Egenor LSA — which it determined was incorporated into the DEI Bermuda LSA — only

extended to 2006.

(b) DEI Bermuda’s argument

5

a

DEI Bermuda simply disagrees with Peru’s depiction of the record. It argues that
Peru did, in fact, agree that in some circumstances Article 23(a) of the Investment
Regulations could have the ‘linkage’ effect contended for by the DEI Bermuda.” DEI
Bermuda argues that when counsel for the DEI Bermuda pointed this out, and Peru

had an opportunity to deny it, it did not do so.

5

N

DEI Bermuda also maintains that Peru is deliberately attempting to obfuscate the

issue by introducing unrelated arguments — such as whether DEI Bermuda can claim

75 Memorial [201].

76 Peruvian Law No. 27342 on Regulation of Legal Stability Agreements.
7 Ibid 203] - [204].

78 Reply [123] - [127]

7 Counter-Memorial [191], [194], [198].

18

for a breach of the Egenor LSA itself — when discussing the linkage issue. DEI
Bermuda maintains that the Tribunal’s analysis was simple: (1) DEI] Bermuda can
only claim for a breach of its LSA; (2) DEI Bermuda relies on Article 23(a) to link its
LSA with the Egenor LSA; (3) The parties agree that Article 23(a) can have this effect;
and (4) DEI Bermuda has a claim if the stabilisation granted to Egenor in 1996 was

breached after 24 July 2001.%°

(ii) Supplementing Investment Regulations with Civil Code
(a) Peru’s argument

58. Peru argues that the remedy provided by Article 23(a) of the Investment
Regulations was a reduction in the withholding tax rate charged on dividends paid to
DEI Bermuda. This remedy had no effect, however, because DEI Bermuda already
paid zero withholding tax.*! The Tribunal failed to apply Article 23(a)’s plain
meaning because it did not provide a sufficient basis on which to establish a
limitation of liability and relied upon Article 1322 of the Civil Code, which
guaranteed damages for breach of an obligation.®? Peru argues that this constituted
a failure to apply the proper law, which was Article 23(a). By fashioning its own
remedy, the Tribunal exceeded its powers. This also constituted a failure to state
reasons, because the Tribunal did not expressly identify how it was reconciling the
clash between Article 23(a) and Article 1322 of the Civil Code. Peru finally argues
that the Tribunal’s reasoning was contradictory, because it did not consider the
effect of other Civil Code Articles on its linkage interpretation of Article 23(a). Peru
also argues that the reasoning was contradictory because, having adopted the offset
mechanism in Article 23(a), the Tribunal then decided that the offset mechanism in

that Article was inapplicable to calculating compensation.

80 Counter-Memorial [207], citing Award [184], [194], [201] & [209]
81 Memorial [214].
82 Memorial [216], citing Award [205] — [209].

19

5

6

6

6

9.

0.

p

N

(b) DEI Bermuda’s argument

DEI Bermuda identifies a number of inconsistencies and illogicalities in Peru’s
argument.® Substantively, it argues that the Tribunal simply determined that Article
23(a) of the Investment Regulations did not provide a definitive limitation of liability,
and therefore left open subsidiary bases of compensation. There was no clash
between Article 23(a) and the Civil Code; the Civil Code simply supplied a
supplementary basis of compensation. DEI Bermuda further argues that its Post-
Hearing Brief provided an ‘ample basis in Peruvian law’ for invoking the Civil Code in

this manner.**

(iii) The meaning of tax stability
(a) Peru’s argument

One of the major disputes between the parties before the Tribunal was whether
the tax stability preserved not only the tax laws themselves (Peru’s argument) but
also certain interpretations of them (DEI Bermuda’s argument). Peru maintains that

in adopting DEI Bermuda’s argument, the Tribunal committed annullable errors.

Having referred to provisions in the Investment Regulations that guaranteed the
stability of the /egislation in force,® the Tribunal went on to adopt DE! Bermuda’s
argument. Peru argues that this step was wholly unaccompanied by reasons or
explanation and thus breached Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.* It rejects
DEI Bermuda’s submission that the reasoning is apparent from elsewhere in the
Award and disputes DEI Bermuda’s suggestion that there was more convergence
between the parties than Peru recognised.*’ Peru also rejects DEI Bermuda’s
argument that its decision not to challenge another part of the Award prevents it

challenging this part.

Peru further argues that the absence of any reference to applicable Peruvian law

leads to the conclusion that the Tribunal’s approach to legal stability was developed

83 Counter-Memorial [210] ff.

84 jbid [222].

85 award [212] - [213].

86 Memorial [225] - [226]; Reply [142] - [143].
87 Reply [145] - [153]

20

6

6.

65.

w

&

a

‘from whole cloth’, and not by the application of law.® It finally argues that a failure

to apply the proper law is necessarily violation of a fundamental rule of procedure.

(b) DEI Bermuda’s argument

DEI Bermuda’s response is that if the Tribunal’s reasoning on this point is read in
the context of the Award as a whole, then no annullable error is apparent. After
reciting the parties’ submissions and the evidence of the experts, DEI Bermuda
argues, first, that Peru and its expert agreed that stabilised standards had to be
applied in a manner that was not ‘illegitimate, unreasonable, or manifestly
incorrect.*® Secondly, they accepted that government agencies were required to
apply those standards ‘such as [they had been] applied’. Finally, the parties
differed on whether a new interpretation had to be ‘radically different’ to constitute

a breach.”

According to DEI Bermuda, the Tribunal first determined that there had to be a
stable interpretation when the LSA was signed for DEI Bermuda to rely upon. The
Tribunal’s conclusions, according to DEI Bermuda, were based on the proper law,
Article 10 of the Investment Regulations,°? and were consistent with general
principles of law, in particular the doctrine of good faith. Lastly, the Tribunal
concluded that ‘all interpretation of law must be undertaken subject to basic
principles of reasonability’.°° Thus, DEl Bermuda argues that the Tribunal’s
conclusion was necessitated by the arguments of the parties and the applicable law,

as recited by the Tribunal.

Lastly, DEI Bermuda argues that if the Tribunal’s conclusions on this point should
be annulled for the reasons advanced by Peru, then so too should the Tribunal’s
conclusions as to the Tax Depreciation Assessment (of which Peru does not seek

annulment) that were wholly dependent upon that same determination.

88 Memorial [227].

8° Counter-Memorial [248].

% ibid [249].

91 tbid [250].

®2 Supreme Decree No 162-92-EF (October 9, 1992).
%3 Counter-Memorial [260], referring to Award [226].
9% ibid [263].

21

(iv) Interpretation of the Merger Revaluation Law
(a) Peru’s argument

66. Peru submits that DE] Bermuda presented three propositions, all of which the
Tribunal accepted: (i) that the regime stabilised for Egenor in 1996 included a stable
interpretation of the MRL; (ii) that that interpretation allowed companies to gain tax
advantages from a reorganisation even when the reorganisation was conducted
solely for that purpose; and (iii) that the MRA’s view of the Power North merger was

inconsistent with that stable interpretation.

67. Peru criticises the Tribunal’s adoption of the second proposition. First, it argues
that the Tribunal failed to apply the proper law in determining the criteria for a
stable interpretation. Secondly, its application of these criteria was ambiguous and
contradictory, because it only relied on well-established practice but did not explain
whose practice qualified, and it thus failed to state the reasons for its conclusion.
Thirdly, the Tribunal failed to address Peru’s argument that government input is
required for a stable interpretation to be formed. Fourthly, the Tribunal
contradicted itself in finding, first, that there may not have been a single stable
interpretation of the 1994 MRA in 1996, but second, that it did have a stable

interpretation in 1996.

(b) DEI Bermuda’s argument

68. DEI Bermuda maintains that Peru’s arguments under this head constitute no more
than a request for the Committee to analyse the Tribunal’s assessment of the

evidence, a task that is beyond the Committee’s remit.

69.

o

First, DE] Bermuda argues that there can be no failure to apply the proper law,
because the content of the law — the meaning of stability - had already been
identified. The Tribunal’s task was to apply the law to the factual circumstances;
there was no further standard to be determined. According to DEI Bermuda, there is
no basis to review the assessment the Tribunal reached on the basis of the evidence.

Secondly, DEI Bermuda argues that—-even if the Committee could examine that

°5 Memorial [234]; and see further Reply [164] - [172].

22

70.

71.

72.

issue-the Tribunal’s evaluation of the evidence was not ambiguous or

contradictory.

Thirdly, DEl Bermuda maintains that the Tribunal was not obliged to consider any
particular form of evidence (in this case as to the need for government input in
forming a stable interpretation) and, in any case, did consider the relevance of
government practice.” Finally, DE! Bermuda argues that the reasons given for the
Tribunal’s conclusion that there was a stable interpretation of the MRL in 1996 were

not contradictory.

2. Tax Amnesty
(a) Peru’s argument

Peru submits that it made two arguments to the Tribunal. First, it argued that, by
invoking the amnesty procedure, Egenor accepted that the SUNAT assessment was
substantively valid and that it did not violate any of Egenor’s rights, thus barring any
argument by Egenor to the contrary.” Secondly, it argued that by invoking the
amnesty procedure Egenor waived its rights to challenge the assessment. It disputes
DEI Bermuda’s suggestion that it did not make this distinction before the Tribunal.!°
It argues, finally, that if Egenor was barred from challenging the assessment so too
was DEI Bermuda.

Peru argues that the Tribunal failed to address the first argument, regarding what it
calls the ‘substantive effect of tax amnesty’.!°' This failure, Peru argues, contributed
to the ultimate finding against it and constitutes a failure to state reasons and a

manifest excess of powers, as the Tribunal failed to decide an issue put to it.

9 Counter-Memorial [276] — [285]
7 {bid 286) — [290].

%8 ibid [292] - [294].

% Memorial [188].

100 Reply (107).

201 Memorial [192].

23

73.

74.

75.

(b) DEI Bermuda’s argument

DEI Bermuda’s first argument is that Peru never presented two arguments —
procedural and substantive — to the Tribunal, but simply made one ‘monolithic’
claim that accepting amnesty prevented the tax debt from being challenged, relying
on two bases: the terms of the Sistema Especial de Actualizacién y Pago de Deudas
Tributarias (‘SEAP’) itself and the principle of equitable estoppel.!°? DEI Bermuda

argues that at no point did Peru distinguish the two alleged arguments.

DEI Bermuda’s second argument is that, even if the Tribunal had explicitly
acknowledged the two separate arguments, it would have made no difference to the
outcome. DEI Bermuda suggests that the substantive waiver argument is an attempt
to repackage Peru’s argument that the DEI Bermuda’s claims were ‘in fact tax
claims’! The Tribunal rejected the suggestion that the claims were for breach of
Peruvian tax law in the Decision on Jurisdiction and the Award, and therefore any
estoppel in relation to the substance of the assessments was irrelevant, because the
claims were founded on a breach of the tax stabilisation guarantee in the LSA, not a
breach of Peruvian tax law.!°! DEI Bermuda finally notes that tribunals are not
obliged to consider every argument put to them, nor provide reasons for rejecting

every argument unless it is necessary to their decision.“

3. Good faith/actos propios (estoppel)
(a) Peru’s argument
Peru submits that the Tribunal developed its own test for the application of the
obligation of good faith embodied in the Peruvian actos propios (estoppel)

doctrine.!* It then concluded that the State had effectively represented that Egenor

would be permitted to claim tax benefits under the MRL as a result of the merger

102 Counter-Memorial [168].

103 bid [177].

104 award [179].

105 Counter-Memorial [184], citing MCI Power Group LC v Ecuador (Decision on Annulment) ICSID Case No
‘ARB/03/6 (19 October 2009), [67] ; and Empresas Lucchetti SA (sub nom. Industria Nacional de Alimentos SA) v
Peru (Decision on Annulment) ICSID Case No ARB/03/4 (5 September 2007), [128].

106 award [249] - [250].

24

76.

77.

78.

79.

with Power North, and that the subsequent MRA contradicted that

representation.!07

First, Peru argues that the Tribunal failed to provide reasons for its conclusion that
DEI Bermuda could ‘stand in the shoes’ of, and take the benefit of, representations
made to Egenor and Dominion.' Secondly, the Tribunal did not explain why DEI
Bermuda could, in 2001, take the benefit of representations made in 1996 while
ignoring contrary representations that had been made in the interim (notably

SUNAT’s unfavourable opinion in 1999).

Peru then argues that the Tribunal failed to apply Peruvian law to determine the
content of the actos propios doctrine. Instead it applied international law principles
when it had already explained that no gap or inconsistency justifying the application
of international law existed. Nor did it, in Peru’s submission, explain why it ignored
Peruvian law or, in particular, why it used international law” to adopt the final limb
of its test, which effectively reversed the burden of proof on the question of

reliance.

Peru also argues that the Tribunal failed to state the reasons for which it relied on
the statements and actions of certain agencies and officials other than SUNAT, when
Peru argued at length that only SUNAT’s representations counted.!” Lastly, Peru
argues that the Tribunal never explained how it resolved the contradiction between
its finding that Pedro Sanchez Gamarra, the Chairman of Electroperu, never denied
receiving instructions from the Peruvian Government, and Peru’s claim that he did
deny receiving such instructions. According to Peru, both of these failures provide a

ground for annulment under Article 52(1)(e).

Responding to DEI Bermuda’s argument that Tribunal’s finding on actos propios is
unreviewable because it was obiter, Peru disputes whether the finding was in fact
irrelevant to the decision." It argues that if the Tribunal spent more than 20 pages
on the issue, it must be relevant. Lastly, if the ad hoc Committee annuls the
Tribunal’s primary findings, then the Tribunal’s secondary findings on actos propios

may in fact determine whether Peru is liable.

107 Memorial [244], citing Award [436] - [442].

108 jbid [247].

109 Specifically Article 46 of the Vienna Convention of the Law on Treaties, cited at [248] of the Award.
100 jbid [256] - [258].

11 Reply [181] - [183]

25

(b) DEI Bermuda’s argument

80. DEI Bermuda argues that the Tribunal’s findings on this point were obiter dicta, and
therefore cannot provide a basis for annulment.” The Tribunal made it clear that

its findings on the point were distinct from its finding on liability."

4. Damages
(a) Peru’s argument

81. The parties each presented expert reports that quantified the effect of the
allegedly wrongful MRA: DEI Bermuda a report from Navigant Consulting, and Peru
a report from Macroconsult. The Tribunal noted that it found Navigant’s report
easier to follow, and that Macroconsult’s report lacked supporting data that the

Tribunal required to properly verify its conclusions.!!4

82. Peru argues that the Tribunal did not explain what data were missing from
Macroconsult’s report. This failure to provide explanation amounts, according to
Peru, to a failure to give reasons and thus provides a ground for annulment under
Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention. Furthermore, it never gave Peru an
opportunity to amend the report, and nor did it call Macroconsult’s lead expert as a
witness to be cross-examined. This, Peru claims, denied it a fair opportunity to put
its case in breach of a fundamental rule of procedure, thus providing a ground for

annulment under Article 52(1)(d).!5

(b) DEI Bermuda’s argument

8

w

First, DE] Bermuda maintains that Peru had ample opportunity to present its case,
submitting two expert reports, cross-examining DEI Bermuda’s witness, making
supplemental submissions on damages on 1 June 2007 and devoting seven pages of
its Post-Hearing Submission to the question. DEI Bermuda maintains that the

Tribunal simply assessed the evidence as Peru acknowledged it was entitled to do

12 Counter-Memorial [296], citing Vivendi supra n 63, [65] and [86].
13 bid [297], citing Award [379]

14 award [481] - [483].

45 Memorial [270] - [272]; Reply [185] - [188].

26

84.

8

B

a

and adequately explained why it rejected Peru’s evidence, thus providing reasons.
According to DEI Bermuda, Peru essentially expects the Tribunal to have assisted it
in making out its case. DEI Bermuda suggests that it is a ‘self-evident’ proposition
that a tribunal has no duty to assist a party in determining what evidence is

sufficient to make out its case."*°

THE AD HOC COMMITTEE’S ANALYSIS

A The scope of review under Article 52 ICSID Convention

Peru seeks annulment of the Decision on Jurisdiction and, in the alternative, a
partial annulment of the Award under three heads of Article 52(1) of the ICSID

Convention, namely:!!”

(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;

(d) that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of

procedure; or
(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.

It is not necessary, for the purposes of this Decision, to restate compendiously all
of the principles applicable to the construction of the scope of the powers of an ad
hoc committee to annul an award under Article 52. The ad hoc Committee agrees
with the submission made by Peru that Article 52 is to be ‘read and applied on its
terms in order to maintain the balance struck by the state parties to the ICSID
Convention’ and that this is a ‘case specific analysis within the framework of Article
52 itself.”'8 But that is not to say that Article 52 is to be interpreted in a vacuum. On
the contrary, the customary international law rules of interpretation (which have

consistently been held to be accurately stated and codified in Articles 31 — 32 of the

116 Counter-Memorial [303] — [310]; citing Wena Hotels Ltd v Egypt (Decision on Annulment) (2002) 6 ICSID Rep

129, [72]

47 Supra [10] - [11].
48 Transcript, Day 1, 120/17-20, 122/1-3.

27

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969!!°) are as applicable to Article 52 of

the ICSID Convention as they are to other treaty obligations.

8

a

Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention sets the application of ordinary meaning
within a larger matrix of good faith, context (as more particularly defined in Article

31(2)) and object and purpose, in providing that:

A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the

light of its object and purpose.

87. To this central exercise, Article 31(3) adds other matters to be taken into account.
These include ‘any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations
between the parties ‘(Article 31(3)(c)), a reference which itself denotes all applicable
sources of international law, including general principles of law.!2° Article 31(4)
further permits a special meaning to be ascribed to a term if it is established that the
parties so intended. Article 32 then also permits reference to the travaux
préparatoires of the ICSID Convention in order to confirm a meaning arrived at by
applying Article 31 or to determine the meaning when the application of Article 31

leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure or manifestly absurd or unreasonable.

88. In carrying out this task of interpretation, an ad hoc committee may legitimately
refer to decisions of other annulment committees, not because they are formally
binding on it (which they are not); nor to determine whether, and to what extent,
there may exist some trend of decisions. Rather, the decisions of other committees
may help to illuminate specific aspects of the interpretative process which the
Committee is charged to undertake, just as, in appropriate cases, reference to wider
sources of jurisprudence may help to determine the existence of a general principle
of law applicable to the interpretation of the content of Article 52, or indeed other

relevant provisions of the Convention.

89. The analysis of any particular tribunal decision or award which an annulment
committee is required to carry out under Article 52(1) must perforce be case-
specific, since the committee’s task is to review the conduct of a particular tribunal:
its constitution; its powers; the conduct of its members; its procedure and the

119 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (‘Vienna Convention’) (signed 23 May 1969, entered into force 27
January 1980) 1155 UNTS 331; Territorial Dispute (Libya v Chad) [1994] IC) Rep 6, [41]; Mondev International Ltd

v United States of America (Award) 6 ICSID Rep 192, [43].
120 Article 38(1)(c) Statute of the International Court of Justice.

28

reasons given in its award. But this is not, of course, to say (and Peru does not
contend otherwise) that the Committee may consider the objections taken by a
party to the decision or award of a tribunal in isolation from the grounds specified in
Article 52(1). To do so would amount to an appeal — a remedy which the Contracting
States decided by Article 53(1) should not be available. Thus, where a party objects
to any particular aspect of a tribunal’s process or decision, it must relate that
objection to a specific ground for annulment under Article 52(1), explaining how and

why the objection falls within the specific ground invoked.

90. In the present case, two further general observations are germane: (a) as to the
relationship between the various grounds of annulment under Article 52(1); and (b)

as to the requirement of manifest excess of powers under Article 52(1)(b).

91. Peru bases its Application for Annulment compendiously on Articles 52(1)(b), (d)
and (e). As set out in more detail in Part Il of this Decision, Peru often invokes all
three heads of Article 52(1) in relation to the same subject-matter. This practice is
entirely permissible within the framework of Article 52(1), which permits a party to
request annulment ‘on one or more of the following grounds.’ It has been a frequent
feature of ICSID annulment applications to submit that one and the same aspect of
an award constitutes a manifest excess of powers, a serious departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure and a failure to state reasons.!7!

92. However, Article 52(1) is carefully divided into separate clauses, each dealing with
a separate ground for annulment. Reference to the travaux préparatoires confirms
that the framers of the Convention took particular care to avoid any elision of
different concepts in drafting Article 52, separating, for example, the ground in
clause (e) from clause (d).!” Each of the grounds identified by the Contracting States
in Article 52 as sufficient for the annulment of an award has a different object and
purpose. Thus, an assessment of whether the scope of the powers conferred upon a
tribunal has been exceeded involves quite different considerations to whether, in
the exercise of those powers, it has failed to observe a fundamental rule of
procedure. So, too, an examination of the procedure adopted by the tribunal
involves distinct considerations to an analysis of its statement of reasons for a

decision or award. While, therefore, the possibility that the same aspect of an

21 Schreuer et al The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2ed, 2009) 933.
122 History of the Convention, Documents Concerning the Origin and the Formulation of the Convention (‘History’)
Vol |, 230, 232.

29

award may constitute several grounds for annulment under Article 52 cannot be
excluded, if a party wishes to advance such a case, it must identify separately how
the very different considerations involved in each of these enquiries are

nevertheless provoked by the same aspect of an impugned award.

93.

wo

In its Application for Annulment of the Decision on Jurisdiction, Peru (whilst
referring in addition to Articles 52(1)(d) & (e)) places the primary emphasis of its
complaint on manifest excess of powers under Article 52(1)(b). Peru also relies on
Article 52(1)(b), together with clauses (d) & (e), in its application for Partial

Annulment of the Award.

9.

&

Article 52(1)(b) plays an important role in the control of awards under the
annulment process, since it is directly related to principle of mutual consent which,
as is expressly recognised in the Preamble to the ICSID Convention and in the Report
of the Directors of the World Bank on it, is fundamental to the operation of the

obligations assumed under the Convention and to the jurisdiction of the Centre.!?

95. The question whether an ICSID arbitral tribunal has exceeded its powers is
determined by reference to the agreement of the parties. It is that agreement or
compromis from which the tribunal’s powers flow, and which accordingly
determines the extent of those powers. In the case of a claim under an investment
agreement, the powers of the tribunal are determined by reference to the
arbitration agreement included in or in respect of the investment agreement and
by the ICSID Convention (which the agreement to arbitrate incorporates by
reference). Read together, these two elements constitute the arbitration
agreement and therefore prescribe the parameters of the tribunal’s powers.!*4 As
the International Law Commission put it in formulating its seminal Draft Rules on

Arbitral Procedure from which Article 52 was derived, an excess of powers: ”*

..iS a question which is to be answered by a careful comparison of
the award or other contested action by the tribunal with the relevant

provisions of the compromis. A departure from the terms of

123 Preamble to the ICSID Convention, recitals (6) & (7); Report of the Executive Directors, [23] - [25], which
begins: ‘Consent of the parties is the cornerstone of the jurisdiction of the Centre.’

24 Accord Schreuer supra n 121, 938.

135 International Law Commission, ‘Commentary on the Draft Convention on Arbitral Procedure’ UN Doc
A/CN.4/92, 108.

30

submission or excess of jurisdiction should be clear and substantial

and not doubtful and frivolous.

96. The concept of the ‘powers’ of a tribunal goes further than its jurisdiction, and
refers to the scope of the task which the parties have charged the tribunal to
perform in discharge of its mandate, and the manner in which the parties have
agreed that task is to be performed. That is why, for example, a failure to apply the
law chosen by the parties to the determination of the dispute (but not a
misapplication of it) was accepted by the Contracting States of the ICSID
Convention to be an excess of powers,!”° a point also accepted by other annulment
committees.!?” In considering annulment on this basis, it is necessary to bear in

mind the point made on annulment in Wena that:!28

The Committee is mindful of the views expressed in Kléckner |, Amco | and
MINE to the effect that the failure to apply the proper law may constitute a
manifest excess of power and a ground for annulment. It is also mindful of
the distinction between failure to apply the proper law and the error in
judicando drawn in Klockner |, and the consequential need to avoid the
reopening of the merits in proceedings that would turn annulment into

appeal.

97. Further, a failure to decide a question entrusted to the tribunal and requiring its
decision may also constitute an excess of powers, since the tribunal has also in that
event failed to fulfil the mandate entrusted to it by virtue of the parties’

agreement.!2?

98. An ad hoc committee must also be satisfied that the tribunal’s excess of powers is

manifest.!° As the committee in MCI put it, Article 52(1)(b) ‘suggests a somewhat

126 History Vol Il, Part 1, 518.

27 E.g. Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/7) (Decision on Annulment),
June 5, 2007, (‘Soufraki v UAE’), [85].

228 Wena supra n 116, [22].

29 [bid paragraph 44; Vivendi v Argentina supra n 63, [86].

130 Wena supra n 128, [25]. See also CDC Group PLC v Republic of the Seychelles (Decision on Annulment) (2005),
11 ICSID Rep 237, [41]; Maritime International Nominees Establishment (MINE) v Guinea (Decision on

31

higher degree of proof than a searching analysis of the findings of the Tribunal.”!>!
No distinction is to be drawn in this regard between the standard to be applied to
determining an excess of power based on an alleged excess of jurisdiction and any

other excess of power. In both cases, the excess must be manifest. !>2

99. An ad hoc committee will not therefore annul an award if the tribunal’s disposition
on a question of law is tenable, even if the committee considers that it is incorrect
as a matter of law.”* The existence of a manifest excess of powers can only be
assessed by an ad hoc committee in consideration of the factual and legal elements
upon which the arbitral tribunal founded its decision and/or award based on the
parties' submissions. Without reopening debates on questions of fact, a committee
can take into account the facts of the case as they were in the record before the
tribunal to check whether it could come to its solution, however debatable. Is the
opinion of the tribunal so untenable that it cannot be supported by reasonable
arguments? A debatable solution is not amenable to annulment, since the excess

of powers would not then be ‘manifest.’

100. The Committee will have to return to the standard under Article 52(1)(b) in
more detail when it comes to apply it to the facts of the present case. But it is first
necessary to summarise the essential elements of the Tribunal’s Decision on
Jurisdiction. This, to adopt the language of the International Law Commission, is
the first contested action of the Tribunal, which must then be compared with the
relevant provisions of the compromis and then tested against the requirement of

manifestness.

 

Annulment) (1989) 4 ICSID Rep 79, [4.06]; Mitchell v. The Democratic Republic of Congo, (Decision on Annulment)
ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7 (1 November 2006), [20].

51 Supra n 105, [49].

182 Rumeli Telekom A/S v Kazakhstan (Decision on Annulment) ICSID Case No ARB/OS/16 (25 March 2010), [96].
153 Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH and others v Republic of Cameroon Case No. ARB/81/2, (Decision on
Annulment) (1985) 2 ICSID Rep 95, [52]; and see, to like effect, Case concerning the Arbitral Award of 31 July
1989 (Guinea-Bissau v Senegal) IC) Rep. 1991, 53, [47]-[48]; Government of Sudan v Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/ Army (the ‘Abyei’ arbitration) (PCA, 22 July 2009), [508]-[510], followed in Rumeli ibid.

32

B Decision on Jurisdiction
1. The Tribunal’s Approach
(a) Procedure

101. The Tribunal established the following procedure for dealing with Peru’s objections

to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and admissibility of claims:

(a) At its first session held on July 28, 2004, the Tribunal decided to suspend
proceedings on the merits pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(3) and to bifurcate
the proceedings. It invited each party to plead the questions of jurisdiction and
admissibility, stating that it would decide at a later stage whether to deal with these

objections as a preliminary question or join them to the merits of the dispute.!*+

(b) The parties submitted respectively a Memorial, Counter-Memorial, Reply and

Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and Admissibility.!°>

(c) The Tribunal held a hearing on jurisdiction at the seat of the Centre in
Washington on March 29-30, 2005. At the hearing, the Tribunal heard oral pleading
on behalf of both parties. Further, and following the Tribunal’s request, the Tribunal
heard evidence of one witness nominated by each party on the history of the
negotiations between the parties in connection with the issues relevant to

jurisdiction.!°
(d) Following deliberations, the Tribunal delivered its Decision on Jurisdiction on
February 1, 2006. It unanimously decided that:

The dispute submitted by DEI Bermuda is within the jurisdiction of the Centre

and the competence of the Tribunal.'*”

154 Decision on Jurisdiction, [10].

135 jbid [11] - [12]. Each of these pleadings is exhibited in the record of these annulment proceedings.
136 bid [20] - [21]

157 [bid Dispositif, [168]. Peru's objections to admissibility were joined to the merits.

33

(b) Reasons

102. The Tribunal began its analysis of the issues of jurisdiction by setting out the factual

background, observing in summary that:!38

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

138 (bid Part Il.

189 bid [24] - [27]
140 jbid [28] - [31]
141 [bid [32] - [40]
12 bid [45].

18 [bid [46] - [49]
4 bid [50].

45 bid [54].

LSAs were provided for within the legislative framework adopted by Peru in
the early 1990s, which was designed to attract and promote investment.’
Such LSAs had a distinct juridical character within the Peruvian legal system,
being governed by the Civil Code and not subject to unilateral modification

by the State.!?

Egenor was established by Peru to hold state-owned energy generating
assets which were to be privatised. Initially, a controlling interest in Egenor
was acquired by Dominion Energy Inc (‘Dominion’). However, in 1999, Duke
Energy set about acquiring Egenor through a series of transactions, which
led, by the end of that year, to it owning some 90% of Egenor for which it
had paid US$288 million.!4! On December 18, 2002, Duke Energy, through
DEI Bermuda, made a US$200 million capital contribution to DEI Peru
Holdings, which used the funds to acquire the interests already held by

other Duke companies in Egenor.!4?

Peru had entered into LSAs with each of Egenor, Dominion, and Dominion’s
locally-incorporated wholly-owned subsidiary.'*? The Dominion LSA, but

none of the other LSAs, included an ICSID arbitration agreement.

Duke Energy ‘sought to obtain the same investment protection, through
LSAs, as Dominion had obtained.’!* This could not be done through
assignment of the Dominion LSA. The parties therefore explored alternative
structures to achieve the same result that would have been achieved, if the
Dominion LSA had been assignable.'45 Duke Energy’s proposal, submitted in

February 2000, involved an application for a DEI Bermuda LSA, which

34

application was made on June 20, 2000. Peru provided a draft of this on
April 3, 2001. Duke Energy requested the inclusion of an ICSID arbitration
agreement. The DEI Bermuda LSA was finally executed on July 24, 2001,
effective immediately. It included an ICSID arbitration agreement in exactly

the same terms as the Dominion LSA."6

103. The Tribunal then dealt with each of Peru’s objections to jurisdiction, ratione

materiae, ratione personae, and ratione temporis, in turn.

104. Dealing with jurisdiction ratione materiae, the Tribunal approached the question
on the basis that the arbitration agreement was to be interpreted in good faith,
without adopting an a priori strict or broad construction.'”” The parties had agreed
by clause 9 of the DEI Bermuda LSA to submit to arbitration ‘any dispute,
controversy or claim between them, concerning the interpretation, performance or
validity of this Agreement.’ Accordingly, the Tribunal interpreted its task as being to

determine whether the dispute before it did indeed concern those matters.'48

105. The Tribunal turned to the Claimant’s Request for Arbitration to determine the

scope of the dispute. It enumerated the claims of DEI Bermuda as follows: 4°

1. breach of the guarantee of non-discrimination and equal treatment of DEI
Bermuda's investment in Peru, in violation of Clause Three, Section 5 of the
DEI Bermuda LSA;

2. breach of the guarantee of tax stabilization with respect to DE! Bermuda's
investment in Peru, in violation of Clause Three, Section | of the DE! Bermuda
LSA;

3. breach of the guarantee regarding the free repatriation of DEI Bermuda's
investment in Peru, in violation of Clause Three, Section 3 of the DEI
Bermuda LSA; and

4. breach of the obligation of good faith and fair dealing and the Doctrina de

los actos propios in connection with DEI Bermuda's investment in Peru,

46 [bid [55] - [58]

47 [bid [76] [78], citing Société Ouest Africaine des Bétons Industriels v Senegal (Award) (1988) 2 ICSID Rep 164,
[4.10] and Amco Asia Corp v Indonesia (Decision on Jurisdiction) (1983) 1 ICSID Rep 389, 394, [14].

48 jbid [82].

49 [bid [83], citing Request for Arbitration [42] - [56].

35

obligations that are implied under the Peruvian Civil Code in all contracts,

and here specifically in the DEI Bermuda LSA.

106. The Tribunal then set out the terms of Clauses Two and Three of the DEI Bermuda
LSA. By Clause Three, Peru makes a number of specific guarantees of legal stability
for DEI Bermuda ‘in connection with the investment referred to in CLAUSE TWO.’
Clause Two describes DEI Bermuda’s obligation as being to make capital

contributions to DEI Peru in the amount of US$200 million.!°

107. Observing that it must not prejudge the merits of the claim, the Tribunal held that
it task was ‘simply [to] examine whether the merits dispute, as stated by Claimant, is
within its jurisdiction.”*! Citing prior ICSID jurisprudence, the Tribunal considered
that it was only required to be satisfied that ‘prima facie the claim, as stated by the
Claimants when initiating this arbitration, is within the jurisdictional mandate of

ICSID arbitration, and consequently of this Tribunal.”

108. Holding, contrary to Peru’s submission, that such a prima facie case had been
established, the Tribunal found that the merits of the claims under Clause 3 (and
under Peruvian law) were not to be limited by a literal reading of Clause 2 which
would restrict its application to DEI Bermuda’s US$200 million capital investment in

DEI Peru.!"° This was so for four reasons:'*

1. the capital contribution, without more, would not appear to satisfy the
requirement, under Peruvian law, that an “investment” in relation to which
an LSA is granted contribute to economically productive activity (i.e., that it
be an “active” investment);

2. the capital contribution was not an isolated transaction, but was rather
one of many transactions deliberately concluded as part of the privatization
of Egenor;

3. a narrow focus on the wording of Clause Two of the DEI Bermuda LSA as
an indication of the “investment” elevates form over substance, by ignoring

the purpose of the capital contribution, which was described in the

150 (bid [85].

151 (bid [86].

152 (bid [87], citing Amco Asia supra n 147, 405, [38].
153 Ibid [88] - [92].

154 Ibid [92].

36

application DEI Bermuda submitted for the DEI Bermuda LSA referred to in
Clause One thereof; and

4. in determining their jurisdiction, ICSID tribunals have recognized the unity
of an investment even when that investment involves complex arrangements

expressed in a number of successive and legally distinct agreements.

109. The Tribunal then proceeded to develop each of these four reasons in detail.!°° But
it concluded its analysis by observing that the fact that the Tribunal was entitled to
take into consideration the overall investment did not affect the scope of the claims

which could be permissibly advanced:!5¢

Claimant will need to substantiate its claims, during the merits phase, by
reference solely to the guarantees contained in the DEI Bermuda LSA, and
not those contained in any of the other LSAs. This is a function of the specific
wording of Clause Nine of the DEI Bermuda LSA, and of the legal basis of the
Claimant’s claims as formulated in the Request for Arbitration, namely the
alleged breach of the protections contained in the DEI Bermuda LSA, and not

in any of the other LSAs.

110. Dealing with jurisdiction ratione personae, the Tribunal decided that Peru’s
objections in this regard, i.e. that the claims were those of Egenor or other entities
who had not submitted to ICSID arbitration, were in reality subject-matter
objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. There was no doubt that the Tribunal had
jurisdiction ratione personae in respect of a dispute between DEI Bermuda and Peru

and the objections relating to subject-matter had already been dealt with.!5”

111. Finally, the Tribunal turned to jurisdiction ratione temporis. Peru had contended
that the claims were outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction because they were addressed
to matters arising before the DEI Bermuda LSA entered into force on July 24, 2001,
being concerned in particular with Egenor’s tax liability for the tax years 1996 to
1999.!58 DEl Bermuda argued that the relevant time decisive of the Tribunal’s

jurisdiction was when the parties’ legal dispute arose.

155 jbid [94] - [134]
156 jbid [132].

157 jbid [136] - [138].
158 jbid [146].

37

112. The Tribunal decided that wJhat is decisive of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione
temporis is the point in time at which the instant legal dispute between the parties
arose, not the point in time during which the factual matters on which the dispute is

based took place.’
113. It then explained:!°

Here, the legal dispute arose only after the Respondent imposed the Tax
Assessment on DEI Egenor, on November 22, 2001, several months after the
effective date of the DE! Bermuda LSA. It was in the Tax Assessment, and not
before, that SUNAT decreed a tax liability of approximately US$48 million
against DEI Egenor for what SUNAT determined, at that time, were tax

underpayments in 1996 through 1999.

Naturally, during the merits phase, the Tribunal will have full jurisdiction to
consider all of the factual matters related to the dispute, including those that
preceded the effective date of the DEI Bermuda LSA, for the purposes of
determining whether the Respondent violated the DEI Bermuda LSA through
conduct which took place or reached its “consummation point” after its entry

into force (i.e., the Tax Assessment).

114. Having determined in this Decision that the dispute was within its jurisdiction, the
Tribunal then proceeded to the merits of the claim, and did not revisit the

jurisdictional issues in its Award.

2. The character of the Decision on Jurisdiction

115. Before proceeding to consider seriatim each of Peru’s arguments that, in assuming
jurisdiction, the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers, it is necessary to
consider at the outset the character of the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction, which
the Committee is called upon to annul. This occasioned some discussion at the

annulment hearing in response to a question from the Committee.!* It is important

159 /bid [148], citing Maffezini v Spain (Decision on Jurisdiction) (2000) 5 ICSID Rep 387, [95].
160 jbid [149] - [150], citing Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed SA v Mexico (Award) (2004) 43 ILM 133, [66].
161 Transcript, Day 2, 336-342 (Peru); 453/19-454/14 (DEI Bermuda).

38

to be clear about the matter, since the manner in which the Tribunal exercised its

powers necessarily impacts upon the Committee’s review.

116. As noted above,!” the Tribunal proceeded on the basis that its task was ‘simply [to]
examine whether the merits dispute, as stated by Claimant, is within its
jurisdiction.”® The Tribunal, referring to prior ICSID case-law and to Peru’s Reply,
characterised this as a requirement to establish a ‘prima facie case’.’™ It found

that:

Claimant has made a prima facie case that the dispute falls within its
jurisdiction, in the sense that the claims stated in the Request for Arbitration

are capable of constituting a breach of the DEI Bermuda LSA.

But it nevertheless held in its dispositif that the dispute ‘is within the jurisdiction of

the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal.”

117. It has become common-place in ICSID jurisprudence for tribunals to invoke a so-
called ‘prima facie standard’ as applicable to jurisdictional challenges,!©’ and to
support their analysis by reference to the decisions of other international tribunals,
including the International Court of Justice.!® But this expression is apt to mislead,
since it is in reality a short-hand for two quite distinct aspects of the jurisdictional
enquiry, particularly as it relates to the determination of jurisdiction ratione

materiae, only the first of which imports a prima facie qualification.

118. First, since — as the Tribunal here correctly observed — it ‘must not in any way
prejudge the merits of the case’,!® an arbitral tribunal must, for the purpose of its
jurisdictional determination, presume the facts which found the claim on the merits
as alleged by the claimant to be true (unless they are plainly without any
foundation). In that sense, its determination may be said to be prima facie. But,

second, in the application of those presumed facts to the legal question of

162 Supra [107].

63 Decision on Jurisdiction, [86].

164 [bid [87] - [88]

165 jbid [90].

166 [bid [168].

167 Sheppard “The jurisdictional threshold of a prima-facie case” in Muchlinski et al The Oxford Handbook of
International Investment Law (2009) 932.

268 Notably in Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v United States of America) (Preliminary Objection) [1996] IC)
Rep 803

269 Decision on Jurisdiction, [86].

39

jurisdiction before it, the tribunal must objectively characterise those facts in order
to determine finally whether they fall within or outside the scope of the parties’
consent. In making this determination, the tribunal may not simply adopt the
claimant’s characterisation without examination. In this way, a tribunal whose
jurisdiction is contested strikes the balance between avoiding pre-judging the
merits, on the one hand, and objectively determining the question of jurisdiction on

the other.

119. That an objective and final determination must be made was a central element in
the reasoning of the International Court of Justice in Oi! Platforms when it

observed:!”

[T]he Court cannot limit itself to noting that one of the Parties maintains that
such a dispute exists, and the other denies it. It must ascertain whether the
violations of the Treaty of 1955 pleaded by Iran do or do not fall within the
provisions of the Treaty and whether, as a consequence, the dispute is one
which the Court has jurisdiction ratione materiae to entertain, pursuant to

Article XXI, paragraph 2.

120. The distinction here drawn was well elucidated by Judge Higgins in her Separate

Opinion, when she said:!7!

Where the Court has to decide, on the basis of a treaty whose application
and interpretation is contested, whether it has jurisdiction, that decision
must be definitive....lt does not suffice, in the making of this definitive
decision, for the Court to decide that it has heard claims relating to the
various articles that are “arguable questions” or that are “bona fide

questions of interpretation”...

The only way in which, in the present case, it can be determined whether the
claims of Iran are sufficiently plausibly based upon the 1955 Treaty is to
accept pro tem the facts as alleged by Iran to be true and in that light to
interpret Articles |, IV and X for jurisdictional purposes — that is to say, to see
if on the basis of Iran’s claims of fact there could occur a violation of one or

more of them.

17 Supra n 168, [16].
171 [bid, Higgins Separate Opinion, [31].

40

121. The same distinction was made in the investment arbitration context by the

Tribunal in UPS v Canada when it held:!”2

[The Tribunal] must conduct a prima facie analysis of the NAFTA obligations,
which UPS seeks to invoke, and determine whether the facts as alleged are

capable of constituting a violation of these obligations.

That formulation rightly makes it plain that a claimant party’s mere

assertion that a dispute is within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is not conclusive.

The test is of course provisional in the sense that the facts alleged have still
to be established at the merits stage. But any ruling about the legal meaning
of the jurisdictional provision, for instance about its outer limits, is binding

on the parties.

122. Precisely this distinction was accepted by both parties in their submissions before
this Committee.!? Moreover, irrespective of the short-hand expression used in
paragraph 90 of its Decision on Jurisdiction, the Committee is in no doubt that this is
in fact the basis on which the Tribunal actually proceeded. Without making any final
finding about the merits of the factual claims advanced by DEI Bermuda, the
Tribunal made an objective determination of the question whether those facts, as
alleged, were capable of falling within the parameters of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.
It was neither required to, nor did, revisit those issues at any subsequent stage in

the proceedings.

123. Thus, for the purpose of this Committee’s review on annulment, it is entitled to
and does proceed on the basis that it has before it, in the Decision on Jurisdiction,
the Tribunal’s definitive determination of the legal questions relating to the its
jurisdiction. With that in mind, it is now possible to consider whether in confirming

its jurisdiction in the way that it did, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.

172 United Parcel Service of America Inc v Canada (Award on Jurisdiction) (2002) 7 ICSID Rep 285, 296-7; and see,
to like effect: Continental Casualty Co v Argentina (Decision on Jurisdiction) ICSID Case No ARB/03/9 (2006), [60]
~ [64]; accord Douglas The International Law of Investment Claims (2009) Rules 27 & 28, [502] - [527].

1 Transcript, Day 2, 336-342 (Peru), 453/19 - 454/14 (DEI Bermuda).

41

3. Jurisdiction ratione materiae

(a) Manifest excess of powers

124. Peru contends, in applying for annulment, that the Tribunal did manifestly exceed
its powers in asserting jurisdiction ratione materiae in two principal respects: (i) in
failing to apply the applicable law to the determination of the scope of the parties’
arbitration agreement; and (ii) in taking an approach to the meaning of the DEI
Bermuda LSA which manifestly exceeded its scope.! Peru contends, in short, that
the Tribunal was bound, but failed, to apply solely Peruvian law to the scope of its
jurisdiction ratione materiae and that, had it done so, it would have been bound to
adopt a literal construction of the DEI Bermuda LSA which would have excluded the

Claimant's claims.

(i) Application of the applicable law

125. Peru’s objection based on the Tribunal’s alleged failure to apply the applicable law
to the determination of its jurisdiction ratione materiae arises in a particular
context, which distinguishes this case in at least two respects from many other
challenges based on this ground: (i) as to the issue to which the question of
applicable law applies; and (ii) as to the source of the parties’ consent to ICSID

arbitration.

126. In the first place, the Tribunal was seized of an issue of jurisdiction and not of
substance. When a Tribunal has failed to apply the law chosen by the parties to the
merits of the dispute, it may exceed its powers because it is not determining the
dispute in accordance with the mandate entrusted to it by the parties. The same
may be the case where the parties have not expressly chosen the applicable law,
since, in that event, Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention (which describes one of
the ‘Powers and Functions of the Tribunal’) applies to mandate the approach to be

taken by the tribunal to determination of the applicable law.

4 Supra [31] - [36].

42

127. Some argument in the present case was devoted to the proper construction of
Article 42(1),!” but, as Peru rightly accepted in the course of the annulment hearing,
Article 42 does not apply to a determination of jurisdiction.!” It is concerned with
the Tribunal’s decision on the substantive dispute between the parties. Thus, ad hoc
committees as well as tribunals have confirmed that ‘the jurisdiction of the Centre is

determined not by Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention but by Article 25.”\7”
128. Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention provides, in relevant part:

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising directly
out of an investment, between a Contracting State ... and a national of
another Contracting State, which the parties to the dispute consent in

writing to submit to the Centre.

Thus, the critical question for the extent of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in the present
case was simply whether the dispute was one which the parties had consented in

writing to submit to the Centre.

129. The parties’ consent to the jurisdiction of the Centre in the present case is founded
upon an arbitration agreement between the parties, which is contained in an
investment agreement, namely the DEI Bermuda LSA. It is not founded upon a
state’s unilateral offer of arbitration contained in a bilateral investment treaty,
which is accepted by the investor in writing. Submission to ICSID jurisdiction by
consent contained in treaties has, in recent years, become more common than
submission pursuant to contract. But when the ICSID Convention was formulated,
the Convention’s framers envisaged that the first basis for consent to the jurisdiction

of the Centre would be by contract between the host state and the investor.!”

130. In the present case, the arbitration agreement is contained in Clause Nine of the

DEI Bermuda LSA, which provides:

It being the intention of both parties that problems arising in connection

with the enforcement of this agreement be resolved as expeditiously as

175 Memorial [122]; Reply [82]; Transcript, Day 1, 36.
1% Transcript, Day 2, 461/10 - 462/3.

177 CMS Gas Transmission Co v Argentina (Decision on Annulment) ICSID Case No ARB/01/8 (September 25,
2007), [68] and see also MCI supra n 105, [40]. For the confirmation of this approach at the Tribunal stage see:
Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd v Egypt (‘SPP v Egypt’) (Decision on Jurisdiction No 2) (1988) 3 ICSID
Rep 131, and the further decisions cited in Schreuer supra n 121, 550-2.

178 Report of the Executive Directors, [24], and see Broches (1972) 136 Recueil des Cours 331, 335.

43

possible, the parties agree hereinafter that any dispute, controversy or claim
between them, relative to the interpretation, performance or validity of this
Agreement, shall be submitted to the International Centre for the Settlement
of Investment Disputes to be resolved by de jure international arbitration,
pursuant to the Conciliation and Arbitration Rules set forth in the Convention
on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of
Other States which was approved by Peru pursuant to Legislative Resolution

N. 26210.

The costs incurred in connection with the application of this clause shall be

shared by both parties in equal parts.

131. The separability of an arbitration agreement from the contract of which it forms
part is a general principle of international arbitration law today.!” This principle is
notably enshrined at Article 16(1) of the UNCITRAL Model Law on International

Commercial Arbitration, which provides:

The arbitral tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction, including any
objections with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration
agreement. For that purpose, an arbitration clause which forms part of a
contract shall be treated as an agreement independent of the other terms of
the contract. A decision by the arbitral tribunal that the contract is null and

void shall not entail ipso jure the invalidity of the arbitration clause.

This principle has been recognised in Peruvian arbitration law, as part of its adoption

of the Model Law.'*°

132. One of the consequences of the independence of the arbitration agreement is that
the law governing the arbitration agreement is also independent of the law which

governs the main contract, so that the arbitration agreement may be governed by a

179 Born International Commercial Arbitration (2009) 311-353; Collins et al Dicey, Morris & Collins on the Conflict
of Laws (14" edn, 2006) [16-011]; Gaillard & Savage (eds) Fouchard, Gaillard, Goldman on international
Commercial Arbitration (1999), [388] - [419]; Poudret & Besson Comparative Law of international Arbitration (2°
ed, trans Berti & Ponti, 2007) , [162] - [179]; Plama Consortium Ltd v Bulgaria (Decision on Jurisdiction) (2005) 20
ICSID Rev-FILI 262, [212].

180 article 106 General Law on Arbitration of January 3, 1996 No 26572.

44

different law to that which governs the main contract.!*! Peru accepts in argument

that this is possible in principle. But it submits that it was not the case here.!8?

133. In the present case, both parties accept that the main contract, the DEI Bermuda
LSA, is governed by Peruvian law.'* Clause One of the DEI Bermuda LSA mentions
that the LSA is executed ‘in accordance with the provisions set forth in Legislative
Decree No. 662, in Title II and in the first chapter of Title V of Legislative Decree No
757’. According to Article 39 in Title V of Legislative Decree no 757:

Legal stability agreements are entered into pursuant to Article 1357 of the
Civil Code and have the nature of law-contracts with the force of law, so that
they cannot be unilaterally modified or revoked by the Government. Such
contracts are civil and not administrative in nature, and may only be

modified or revoked by agreement between the parties.
134. The Tribunal found as much, when it held:!84

Under Peruvian law, the Civil Code provisions governing private contracts in
general are also applicable to LSAs and, as such, these agreements are
subject to the principles of Contrato-Ley, as set forth in Article 1357 of the

1984 Civil Code.

As private-law contracts, the negotiation, execution, interpretation and
enforcement of the provisions set forth in LSAs are subject to the general
principles applicable to contracts between private parties under the Peruvian
Civil Code. As such, the fundamental rights granted by Peru pursuant to an
LSA are private contractual rights that are enforceable against the Sate as if

it were a private party.

135. Further, both parties accepted at the annulment hearing that, in interpreting the
scope of the instrument of consent, namely Clause Nine of the DEI Bermuda LSA, the

Tribunal was entitled, as it did, to refer to the substantive clauses of the main

181 Born supra n 179, 354-357; Collins et al ibid, [16-012] ff
182 Transcript, Day 2, 460/17-22.

18 Transcript, Day 1, 29/6-38, 220-222.

18 Decision on Jurisdiction, [28], [31].

45

contract (Clauses Two & Three), which define the scope of the agreement and also

the nature of the investment.!85

136. However, the parties differ in their view of the law applicable to the arbitration
agreement. Peru submits that it is governed by Peruvian law alone, and specifically
Peruvian contract law.!8¢ International law has no role to play in the interpretation of

any part of the DEI Bermuda LSA, including Clause Nine. Peru continues:!®”

International law is relevant, if at all, to the process only of determining
whether Claimant's dispute also meets the additional specific jurisdictional
elements of Article 25 of the ICSID Convention. In other words, does the
investor have the proper nationality? Is there an investment? ... International

law applies to the interpretation of the ICSID Convention, not to the LSA ...

137. On this basis, Peru submits that the Tribunal committed a manifest excess of
powers by failing to apply Peruvian law — specifically Peruvian contract law — to the
determination of the scope of the parties’ arbitration agreement.!*§ Without any
suggestion that Peruvian law was inadequate to interpret the DEI Bermuda LSA,
Peru submits that the Tribunal turned instead to international law and also invoked
ICSID jurisprudence in order to justify its departure from the plain meaning of

Clauses Two and Three.'*”

138. By contrast, DEI Bermuda submits that both Peruvian law and international law are

applicable to the arbitration agreement. More precisely, it states:!°

[T]he Tribunal has to determine its jurisdiction in an ICSID arbitration with
reference to international law for purposes of construing the requirements
under the ICSID Convention. And when it is interpreting the instrument of
consent and specifically that part of the DEI Bermuda LSA which contains

that consent, reference must be made to international law and Peruvian law.

139. In a case where, as here, the parties have not expressly chosen a specific law to
govern their arbitration agreement, but have instead consented to submit disputes

relative to the interpretation of an investment agreement (itself governed by host

185 peru: Reply [72] - [79]; DEI Bermuda: Transcript, Day 1, 226/7 - 227/19
186 Transcript, Day 2, 456/14-459/5.

187 Transcript, Day 2, 313/20-314/10.

188 Reply [72], Transcript, Day 1, 29/6 - 38/1

189 jbid [82] - [90]

19 Transcript, Day 1, 225/21 - 26/6.

46

state law) to international arbitration pursuant to the ICSID Convention (an
instrument of international law), the ad hoc Committee takes the view that it would
be artificial and incorrect to refer solely to the law applicable to the main agreement

to determine the scope of the arbitration agreement.

140. The central question, which is posed by Article 25 of the ICSID Convention itself, is
the extent of the parties’ consent. This question is to be addressed, as the Tribunal
correctly observed,!”! in the light of the general principles enunciated in Amco Asia
Corp v Indonesia (a case where the Centre’s jurisdiction was founded on an
investment application, which had been accepted by the host state). The Tribunal

held: 1?

[A] convention to arbitrate is not to be construed restrictively, nor, as a
matter of fact, broadly or liberally. It is to be construed in a way which leads
to find out and to respect the common will of the parties: such a method of
interpretation is but the application of the fundamental principle pacta sunt
servanda, a principle common indeed to all legal systems of internal law and
to international law. Moreover — and this is again a general principle of law —
any convention, including conventions to arbitrate, should be construed in
good faith, that is to say by taking into account the consequences of the
commitments the parties may be considered as having reasonably and

legitimately envisaged.

141. In addressing this question of consent under Article 25, a tribunal is not bound to
apply host state law, even in a case where the parties’ consent derives from or
relates to an agreement under host state law. Thus, in SPP v Egypt,!% the source of
the state’s consent was a provision in its investment law. Egypt submitted that the
jurisdictional issues were governed by Egyptian law, and that, pursuant to the
Egyptian Civil Code, no effective arbitration agreement had been concluded. This
submission was rejected by a Tribunal presided by Jiménez de Aréchaga. It applied

instead general principles of interpretation and international law to the question of

51 Decision on Jurisdiction, [76] - [78]
12 (Decision on Jurisdiction) (1983) 1 ICSID Rep 394, [14]
1° SPP v Egypt supra n 177, [55] - [61].

47

consent. In CSOB v Slovakia, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction was derived from a contract.

The Tribunal held nevertheless, citing Amco with approval, that:!%

The question of whether the parties have effectively expressed their consent
to ICSID jurisdiction is not to be answered by reference to national law. It is
governed by international law as set out in Article 25(1) of the ICSID

Convention.

142. Thus, an ICSID tribunal determining its jurisdiction is not required to interpret the
instrument of consent according solely to national law, but rather it is to consider
directly whether there is the requisite evidence of consent required by Article 25(1)
of the ICSID Convention, having regard to the common will of the parties on which
arbitration is grounded and the general principle (widely applied in municipal law as

well as in international law) of good faith.

143. Having carefully reviewed the Decision on Jurisdiction in the present case, the ad
hoc Committee is in no doubt that this is exactly what the Tribunal proceeded to do.
In carrying out its task, the Tribunal did not ignore Peruvian law. On the contrary,
the first reason it advanced for its construction of the scope of consent is ‘Peru’s
Requirement that an Investment Contract Contribute to Economically Productive
Activity.’ The Tribunal’s reasoning on this point is supported by specific reference to
Peru’s Foreign Investment Law and to Article 1357 of the Peruvian Civil Code, which
it records expressly provides that an LSA can be established only when ‘supported by
reasons of social, national or public interest.’' Further, its discussion of the
relevance of DEI Bermuda’s Application for an LSA is conducted by reference to the

requirements of the Foreign Investment Law.!%°

144. Peru objects before this Committee that the Tribunal ought to have been
considering other provisions of Peruvian contract law, rather than the Foreign
Investment Law. !%” But it is beyond the scope of the powers of review entrusted to
this Committee under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention to re-evaluate which
particular provisions of Peruvian law might be said to be relevant to the Tribunal’s

determination of its jurisdiction. An ad hoc committee, which is not an appellate

94 Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka AS (‘CSB’) v Slovakia (Decision on Jurisdiction) (1999) 5 ICSID Rep 330, [35].
295 Decision on Jurisdiction, [94].

296 bid, (113).

1°7 Memorial [123] - [125]; Reply [70], (80), [88].

48

body, is not called upon to substitute its own analysis of law and fact to that of the

arbitral tribunal.

145. Peru objects in particular to the Tribunal’s reference to the ‘unity of the
investment’ principle as its fourth reason for reaching the decision which it did on
the scope of the parties’ consent. It claims that this was an improper reference to an
international law principle which was developed to deal with treaty claims and can
have no application in the interpretation of a Peruvian law contract. !°8 Peru made
precisely this submission to the Tribunal itself, which considered and rejected it,

explaining:!%°

The Tribunal is not importing into this proceeding a general definition of
“investment” from BITs together with inapposite BIT jurisprudence. In the
relevant cases, which are discussed below,?” ICSID tribunals have applied the
principle of the “unity of the investment” in situations where consent to ICSID
arbitration is found in individual investment agreements or contracts, not in
an umbrella instrument such as a BIT. The Tribunal is of the view that the
principles derived from those cases are directly applicable to its
determination of the investment in relation to which the parties consented to

ICSID arbitration in Clause Nine of the DEI Bermuda LSA.

146. The Committee accordingly does not find any application of the wrong law to the
determination of the scope of the parties’ consent. On the contrary, this Committee
considers that the Tribunal was proceeding in accordance with the general approach
adopted in the Decision on Jurisdiction in Amco Asia, namely ‘to find out and to
respect the common will of the parties’ and to interpret the arbitration agreement
‘in good faith, that is to say by taking into account the consequences of the
commitments the parties may be considered as having reasonably and legitimately
envisaged.”

147. It remains then to consider in this section whether nevertheless, in proceeding to

interpret the common will of the parties as to the scope of their arbitration

agreement, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.

298 Supra [33] - [34].

99 Decision on Jurisdiction, [121].

200 Holiday Inns v Morocco 1 ICSID Rep 645; CSOB v Slovakia supra n 194, [72], [74] - [75], [80] - [82]; Société
Quest-Africaine des Bétons Industriels (‘SOABI’) v Senegal (Award) (1988) 2 ICSID Rep 164, [4.10]

201 Supra n 192

49

(ii) Determination of the meaning of the DEI Bermuda LSA

148. The Tribunal decided that the investment protected by the DEI Bermuda LSA could
not be restricted solely to DEI Bermuda’s US$200 million capital contribution in DEI
Peru Holdings referred to in Clause Two of the DEI Bermuda LSA. Rather the
investment referred to in the DEI Bermuda LSA, which was approved by Peru, ‘was
part and parcel of the investment being made by Duke Energy in DEI Egenor, an
operating company generating wealth, jobs and providing public services in Peru

(i.e., an active investment).’2>

149. Peru claims that it can only be held to the content of what it signed.2° Peru argues
here that the Tribunal exceeded its powers under the literal meaning of the DEI
Bermuda LSA.” In Peru’s view, the DEI Bermuda LSA did not provide guarantees of
legal stability with respect to Egenor or with anything other than the US$200 million
capital contribution mentioned in Clause Two of the DEI Bermuda LSA. According
to Peru, the Tribunal disregarded the LSA scheme as there were five LSAs in force,

each covering a separate segment of Duke Energy’s investment in Egenor.2°

150. Peru declares that it accommodated the wishes of Duke Energy to own Egenor
through DEI Bermuda within the limits of the LSA system but that this does not make
the DEI Bermuda LSA the all encompassing source of protection for a series of
investment already made by Duke well before the DEI Bermuda LSA.2” The DEI
Bermuda LSA was structured to cover only one slice of Duke’s investment in Peru
because all other parts of its investment were already covered by their own LSAs.
DEI Bermuda knew about this multi-tiered scheme of LSAs in order to protect

sequentially each stage and each channel of the investment.2°

202 Decision on Jurisdiction [99].

203 Memorial [137]; Transcript, Day 1, 55, 56, 59; Day 2, 327.
204 Reply [66].

205 Memorial [127] - [132]

206 Transcript, Day 1, 12-19.

207 Transcript, Day 2, 326-327.

208 Transcript, Day 1, 60; Day 2, 329-332, 467, 468.

50

151. In the view of the ad hoc Committee, the claims of DEI Bermuda, which were
summarised by the Tribunal and are set out above,” related to breaches of the
guarantees provided in the DEI Bermuda LSA in connection with the investment as
well as to breaches of general obligations in the Peruvian law of contract. All claims
were made under Clause Nine of the DEI Bermuda LSA, as acknowledged by the
Tribunal.2!° They were based on alleged violations by Peru of the DEI Bermuda LSA
arising out of the consequences for DEI Bermuda of the tax assessments by Peru
against Egenor.?!! The ad hoc Committee considers that DEI Bermuda is correct in its
submission that it never made claims on behalf of Egenor.?!? The Arbitral Tribunal
remained within its terms of reference. The reasons for the Committee’s conclusion

are as follows.

152. In order to determine the scope of the reference in the arbitration agreement
(Clause Nine of the DEI Bermuda LSA) to ‘any dispute, controversy or claim between
them, relative to the interpretation, performance or validity of this Agreement’ it is
necessary, as the parties both agree, to refer to the operative clauses of the
agreement. At the jurisdiction stage, this is not of course to determine whether such
clauses may in fact successfully be invoked. Rather, it is to determine the scope of

the subject-matter of the main Agreement referred to in the arbitration agreement.

153. The operative clause, Clause Three, makes certain guarantees of legal stability ‘in
connection with the investment referred to in CLAUSE TWO.’ Clause Two of the DEI

Bermuda LSA speaks of an agreement by DEI Bermuda:

To make contribution to the capital stock of the company DUKE ENERGY
INTERNATIONAL PERU HOLDINGS, S.R.L., incorporated in the city of Lima,
registered in Entry n° 11184295 of the Registry of Companies of the Office of
Registration of Lima and Callao, in the amount of US § 200.000.000 (Two
hundred million Dollars of the United States of America) within a term of no

more than two (2) years, from the date of execution of this Agreement.

But the scope of an arbitration agreement is not to be determined on the plain
words in isolation, since the arbitral tribunal is obliged, as the Committee has earlier
observed, ‘to find out and to respect the common will of the parties’ and to interpret
209 Supra [103].
210 Decision on Jurisdiction, [80].

20 Transcript, Day 2, 386-387.
212 Transcript, Day 1, 232/12-16.

51

the arbitration agreement ‘in good faith, that is to say by taking into account the
consequences of the commitments the parties may be considered as having
reasonably and legitimately envisaged.’ As recounted in the Decision on
Jurisdiction,?"* the privatization of Egenor was acknowledged as a complex process.
The DEI Bermuda LSA was concluded as part of Duke Energy's effort to complete the

protection of its investment in Egenor in Peru.

154. DEI Bermuda replaced Dominion and DEI Peru Holdings replaced Inversiones
Dominion Perd S.A. (‘IDP’).745 It is undisputed between the Parties that the Dominion
LSA, also containing an ICSID arbitration clause, could not be assigned for technical
reasons.?!© Duke Energy therefore declared in February 2000 that it wanted the
same protection and stability regime as that accorded to Dominion with respect to
the acquisition of Egenor when Dominion made a capital contribution of US$228
million in IDP whose place was taken by DEI Peru Holdings.?!” DEI Bermuda explained
that different protections including tax stabilization, which are reflected in the
Investment Regulations?'® are accorded to the investor and to the operating

company.?!?

155. On June 20, 2000, DEI Bermuda filed a request for a foreign investor LSA and DEI
Peru Holdings (which was established in May 2000) filed a request for a recipient
company LSA. Looking at the terms of the two applications for LSAs, the Tribunal
found that they reinforced the purpose of the capital contribution to permit

consolidation of Duke Energy's ownership interest in Egenor.2”°

156. Duke Energy made a capital contribution to DEI Peru Holdings through DEI
Bermuda on December 18, 2002. This capital contribution was used to acquire
shares in Egenor from other Duke companies.””! Duke, which already owned 90% of

Egenor at the time the DEI Bermuda LSA was negotiated, did not need to buy Egenor

213 Supra [140], citing Amco Asia.

214 Decision on Jurisdiction, [100].

215 (bid [102], [109].

216 Transcript, Day 1, 145, 148-149.

217 Decision on Jurisdiction (53] - [54]; Transcript, Day 2, 444-445, 447-448.

218 Legislative Decree n° 662, Article 19 (a) to (e) and 25 of Supreme Decree n° 162-92-EF.
219 Transcript, Day 1, 149-150; Day 2, 433-435.

20 Decision on Jurisdiction [117] - [118].

221 (bid (45).

52

twice. The Tribunal declared that it was difficult to see how a contribution of funds
from DEI Bermuda to DEI Peru Holdings could be an active investment within the
meaning of Article 1 of Legislative Decree 662 if considered in isolation of the
context of the transaction.2” Peru itself recognized that the DEI Bermuda LSA did

not require DEI Bermuda to invest in Egenor.2?

157. At the annulment proceeding hearing, DEI Bermuda specified that the contribution
of USS200 million came in and went out the same day. It was a paper or
bookkeeping transaction intended to comply with the requirements of the Foreign
Investment Law in order to provide Duke Energy with protection for its investment
in Egenor.”4 But it also pointed out that this transaction, while necessary to meet
the requirements for the granting of an LSA, was not sufficient, since, on its own, it
provided no contribution to Peru’s economic development, which was a prerequisite
for the granting of an LSA. It was the prior US$263 million purchase of the shares in
Egenor, which represented the reality of that investment and it would have been a

fiction to maintain otherwise.2>

158. Peru, whilst stressing the separate character of each of the LSAs in the structure of
protections accorded to Duke Energy’s investment in Egenor, accepted that there
was no evidence in the record as to why the legal stability regime involved separate

LSAs at each step.

159. The Tribunal considered the provisions of the DEI Bermuda LSA in the broader
context of Duke's investment in Peru. It held that the Peruvian investment laws did
not contemplate a three-tiered structure including a holding-company such as DEI
Bermuda.” It examined the overall circumstances of Duke's investment in Egenor to

give an efficient meaning to the provisions of the DEI Bemuda LSA.

160. When a tribunal engages in interpretation of a written instrument of consent in
light of the surrounding circumstances or in the context of other documents, its final

construction of the meaning of the document in the light of all the evidence and

222 (bid (94).

23 (bid [101]; Memorial [150].

24 Transcript, Day 1, 151, 159-161, 164; Day 2, 447.

25 Transcript, Day 2, 417/4-15. This is the figure provided to the Committee at the hearing. The Award at [54]
states the total cost of Duke Energy's acquisition of a 90% interest in Egenor as of the end of 1999 as USS288
million.

26 Transcript, Day 2, 464/17-20.

27 Decision on Jurisdiction [96].

53

submissions of the parties is unlikely to amount to a manifest excess of powers.
Interpretation, which leaves room for discussion (as the arguments of Peru in the
annulment proceeding amply demonstrate), is not likely to give rise to a manifest
excess of powers. For the reasons set out in this section, the ad hoc Committee
considers that the Tribunal did not exceed its powers in this case in its decision that
the dispute submitted to it by DEI Bermuda fell within the parties’ arbitration

agreement.

(b) Failure to state reasons

161. Peru also claims that the failure to apply the proper law requires annulment under
Article 52(1)(e) because the Tribunal failed to provide reasons for its decision on a
dispositive issue in failing to provide reasons grounded in Peruvian law for its

decision to ignore the express terms of the contract.”

162. Article 52(1)(e) retains an important, and distinct, place in the scheme of the ICSID
Convention. A supplementary decision or correction envisaged by Article 49(2) can
only take place for unintentional omissions to decide any question put to the
Tribunal.2*° The failure to state reasons which is contemplated by Article 52(1)(e) of
the ICSID Convention is not the failure to state correct or convincing reasons as this
would otherwise draw an ad hoc committee into reviewing the substance of the

arbitral tribunal's decision."

163. In the present case, the Arbitral Tribunal provides reasons for its decision on
ratione materiae jurisdiction which are sufficiently set forth in paragraphs 91 —134

of its Decision on Jurisdiction.

164. The Tribunal specifically answered each of Peru's four objections to its
interpretation of the scope of the subject-matter of the DEI Bermuda LSA with the

following conclusions:

28 See e.g., Memorial, (143]-[176].

229 Memorial [178]; Reply, (69]-[70]; Transcript, Day 1, 38.

230 See the decision of the ad hoc Committee in Amco Asia Corp v Indonesia (Amco |) (1986) 1 ICSID Rep 509, [32]-
[34], on the relation between Articles 49(2) and 52.

231 MINE supra n 130 [5.08]; Vivendi v Argentina, supra n 63,[64]-[65].

54

1. “[T]he Tribunal finds that Respondent granted its approval for the DEI
Bermuda LSA because it was part and parcel of the investment made by
Duke Energy in DEI Egenor, an operating company generating wealth, jobs

and providing public services in Peru (i.e., an active investment)”; >>

2. “Because the underlying investment by Dominion (and later by Duke
Energy) in the Peruvian electricity generator — Egenor — underpinned all of
these transactions, including the capital contribution from DEI Bermuda to
DEI Peru Holdings, the Tribunal cannot accept Respondent's argument on
the characterization of the investment as defined in Clause Two of the DEI

Bermuda LSA”;?33

3. “The wording of the application referred to in Clause One of the DEI
Bermuda LSA is another evidentiary element which assists the Tribunal in
concluding that the investment contemplated by the parties when they
entered into the DEI Bermuda LSA included DEI Bermuda's indirect

ownership of DEI Egenor”;+

4. “Finally, by focusing on the guarantees included in the DEI Bermuda LSA,
and excluding the application of the guarantees included in the other LSAs,
the Tribunal is not limiting Claimant strictly to the text of the DE! Bermuda
LSA. First, Claimant is entitled to the guarantees that are implied in the DEI
Bermuda LSA by Peruvian law. Second, Claimant is entitled to the
guarantees provided by such rules of international law as may be held by the
Tribunal to be applicable to the merits of the dispute by virtue of Article

42(1) of the ICSID Convention” .”>

165. Peru may not agree with the Tribunal's reasoning. But the Committee may only
take the Decision on Jurisdiction as it is, not as Peru would have wished the decision
to be. The role of an ad hoc committee is to ensure the stability of the ICSID

arbitration system, not to overthrow awards because of its disagreement with the

232 Decision on Jurisdiction, [99].
233 (bid [1.10] (citation omitted).
234 (bid (1.11 (citation omitted).
235 (bid (134).

55

arbitral tribunal. Otherwise, the annulment mechanism of Article 52 would slide into

an appeal.

166. Finally, as mentioned above, because the Arbitral Tribunal is under no obligation to
cite Peruvian law in reference to all of its findings, there is no contradiction in its
reasoning in applying international law to jurisdiction as Peru claims.
Contradictory reasons which cancel each other out must be carefully distinguished
from dissatisfaction with the reasons expressed in the award. Peru's criticism that
the Tribunal misapplied the above four extrinsic factors?” concerns the correctness

of the Tribunal's reasoning and escapes review under Article 52.

(c) Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure

167. Peru says that the Tribunal's omission to apply Peruvian law chosen by the Parties
requires annulment under Article 52(1)(d) because the obligation to apply the
proper law is a fundamental rule of procedure from which the Tribunal seriously

departed.

168. Definition of a fundamental rule of procedure can be found in the decision of the

ad hoc Committee in Wena: >>

The said provision refers to a set of minimal standards of procedure to be
respected as a matter of international law. It is fundamental, as a matter of
procedure, that each party is given the right to be heard before an
independent and impartial tribunal. This includes the right to state its claim
or its defense and to produce all arguments and evidence in support of it.
This fundamental right has to be ensured at an equal level, in a way that
allows each party to respond adequately to the arguments and evidence
presented by the other.
169. Rather than identifying such a fundamental rule, Peru voices yet another time its
criticism of the outcome of the Tribunal's decision under a different count for

annulment of Article 52(1). As the First ad hoc Committee in Vivendi recognized:

236 Memorial [138].
237 (bid (143).
238 Supra n 116, [57].

56

‘Under article 52(1)(d), the emphasis is clearly on the term “rule of procedure”, that
is, on the manner in which the Tribunal proceeded, not on the content of its

decision. Peru fails to identify such fundamental rule of procedure.

4. Jurisdiction ratione temporis

170. Peru’s principal ground of objection under this head is that the Tribunal failed to
decide a question put to it. This constituted, in Peru’s view, a manifest breach of
Article 52(1)(b), since it was an obvious failure to address the objection to the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction raised by Peru. According to Peru, the objection which it had
raised to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis was not that the dispute arose
after the entry into force of the DEI Bermuda LSA, but rather that ‘there was no
consent in the Bermuda LSA to retroactive application of the substantive promise of
tax stability.” In deciding that ‘[wJhat is decisive of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
ratione materiae is the point in time at which the instant legal dispute between the
parties arose, not the point in time during which the factual matters on which the
dispute is based took place’, 7*! the Tribunal had failed to address the question which
Peru had submitted for its decision. Peru also submits that this failure is a departure
from a fundamental rule of procedure requiring tribunals to consider issues put to
them by the parties and that the Tribunal failed to state the reasons required to
move from its statement of Peru’s actual ratione temporis argument to its

conclusion that it had jurisdiction ratione temporis.2?

171. In the view of the ad hoc Committee, there is indeed a distinction between a
jurisdictional objection ratione temporis based on: (i) the time at which the dispute
between the parties arose; and (ii) the time at which the underlying events giving

rise to the claim arose. Each may provide an independent ground of objection.

172. The second type of objection relates to the temporal application of the substantive

obligations which give rise to the claim. It flows from the general principle (in the

259 Supra n 63, [83].

240 Transcript, Day 1, 80/11-14, citing Transcript of Jurisdiction Hearing, March 29, 2005, 75-76.
241 Decision on Jurisdiction, [148].

242 Supra [41] - [43].

57

absence of express provision by the parties to the contrary) enunciated by Judge

Huber in Island of Palmas that: 2%

[A] juridical fact must be appreciated in the light of the law contemporary
with it, and not of the law in force at the time when a dispute arises or falls

to be settled.

This principle is as applicable to legal obligations arising under contract as by

treaty.244

173. The consequence of this principle in the context of ICSID arbitration is that the
tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis is limited to claims which are founded on
legal obligations in force and binding on the host state at the time of the alleged

breach.”

174. The application of this principle does not preclude a tribunal from taking into
account any earlier facts. Rather, the tribunal is required to identify the facts which
are the source or real cause of the dispute. If these facts arose after the entry into
force of the obligation in question, an objection ratione temporis on this ground is

not well-founded.”

175. This distinction was well explained in the context of determining the jurisdiction of

an investment tribunal in Mondev v United States of America:?*”

Thus events or conduct prior to the entry into force of an obligation for the
respondent State may be relevant in determining whether the State has
subsequently committed a breach of the obligation. But it must still be
possible to point to conduct of the State after that date which is itself a

breach.

 

243 (1928) II RIAA 829, 845

244 In the case of obligations under international law, the principle is codified in Article 13 of the ILC Draft Articles
on State Responsibility and in Article 28 of the VCLT.

245 mpregilo SpA v Pakistan (Decision on Jurisdiction) (2005) 12 ICSID Rep 245, [309] — [314]; Salini v Jordan supra
147 ; Mondev International Ltd v United States of America (Award) (2002) 6 ICSID Rep 181, 206-210; accord
Douglas supra n 172, [616] - [617].

246 This has been the jurisprudence constante of the PICJ and the ICI in interpreting restrictions on its jurisdiction
ratione temporis in relation to facts or situations arising prior to a specified date: Electricity Co of Sofia and
Bulgaria PCI (1939) Ser. A/B, No 77, 82; Right of Passage over Indian Territory [1960] ICJ Rep 6; Certain Property
(Liechtenstein v Germany) (Preliminary Objections) [2005] ICJ Rep 6, [41] - [46]; Jurisdictional Immunities of the
State (Germany v Italy) (Order on Counter-Claim) (July 6, 2010), [23].

247 Supra n 119, [70]

58

The mere fact that earlier conduct has gone unremedied or unredressed
when a treaty enters into force does not justify a tribunal applying the treaty
retrospectively to that conduct. Any other approach would subvert ... the

intertemporal principle...

176. In the present case, the ad hoc Committee is in no doubt that the Tribunal decided
that the fact which was the source or real cause of the dispute between the parties
was the Tax Assessment, levied on DEI Egenor on November 22, 2001 after the entry
into force of the DEI Bermuda LSA, and not the prior tax years in respect of which
that Assessment was levied. That was the state action which DEI Bermuda alleged
constituted in turn a breach of Peru’s obligations to it under the guarantee of legal
stability contained in the DEI Bermuda LSA. “8 This must logically be so, since, prior
to the levying of that Assessment, there was no state conduct by Peru in respect of
the tax liability of Egenor in respect of which DEI Bermuda laid complaint. Its case
depended upon establishing a breach of legal stability predicated upon an alleged
change of legal position at the time of the Tax Assessment from that which had

pertained hitherto.
177. The Tribunal finds as much, when it holds:™4?

It was in the Tax Assessment, and not before, that SUNAT decreed a tax
liability of approximately US$48 million against DEI Egenor for what SUNAT

determined, at that time, were tax underpayments in 1996 through 1999.

178. The Tribunal is thus quite correct, when it continues by drawing the following

distinction:

Naturally, during the merits phase, the Tribunal will have full jurisdiction to
consider all of the factual matters related to the dispute, including those that
preceded the effective date of the DEI Bermuda LSA, for the purposes of
determining whether the Respondent violated the DEI Bermuda LSA through
conduct which took place or reached its “consummation point” after its entry

into force (i.e., the Tax Assessment).
179. It is true that, in reaching its decision on jurisdiction ratione temporis, the Tribunal

couches its reasoning in terms of a rejection of a test based upon ‘the factual

248 See the similar reasoning of the PCUJ in Electricity Co of Sofia and Bulgaria supra n 246.
249 Decision on Jurisdiction, [149]
250 (bid [150].

59

matters on which the dispute is based’ in favour of ‘the point in time at which the
instant legal dispute between the parties arose.”°' It relies for this purpose on a
dictum in Maffezini v Spain.2> This dictum?>> was concerned with the rather different
question which might arise in satisfying jurisdiction ratione temporis of the first type,
namely pin-pointing the time at which a dispute between the parties is to be treated

as having crystallised.

180. However, read in the context of the Tribunal’s decision on jurisdiction ratione
temporis as a whole, the ad hoc Committee finds it to be clear that the Tribunal was
simply finding that a number of matters related to the dispute, which had taken
place prior to the entry into force of the DEI Bermuda LSA, were not in fact the
relevant conduct. These included those enumerated in paragraph 146 of its
Decision, such as that ‘the tax liability at issue in SUNAT’s tax audit was incurred by
DEI Egenor with respect to tax years 1996 to 1999.’ Rather it was the Tax Assessment
itself, which post-dated the entry into force of the DEI Bermuda LSA, which was the
relevant conduct that in turn gave rise to the dispute. After all, the levying of a tax
assessment does not, ipso facto, constitute a legal dispute. Its validity or consistency
with the state’s obligations under a relevant LSA would first have to be the subject
of express objection by the taxpayer or investor as the case may be for there to be a

dispute between the parties.

181. But the ad hoc Committee cannot regard any such infelicity in language or legal
reference in the Decision on Jurisdiction as constituting a manifest excess of the
Tribunal’s powers. On the contrary, it is plain that the Tribunal did decide the
substantive question put to it by Peru in its jurisdictional objection, by finding that
the relevant conduct, namely the Tax Assessment, did take place after the entry into

force of the DEI Bermuda LSA.

182. For the same reason, the Committee finds no failure in the reasoning of the
Tribunal. On the contrary, by rejecting as irrelevant prior facts which did not give rise
to the claim, and finding instead that the relevant conduct did take place within the
relevant time, the Tribunal did explain the rationale for its decision. The fact that
this Committee might have expressed these reasons in a different way, or by

reference to different authority, is nothing to the point. Article 52(1)(e) is not

251 (bid (148).
252 (Decision on Jurisdiction) (2000) 5 ICSID Rep 387, [95].
253 Citing Case concerning East Timor [1995] IC] Rep 90, [22]

60

concerned with the review of wrong reasons, it is concerned with the

comprehensibility of the reasons advanced by the Tribunal itself.

3. Jurisdiction vested in other tribunals

183. Now that the Committee has explained the reasons for its decision not to annul the
Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction in relation to jurisdiction ratione materiae and
jurisdiction ratione temporis, it is possible to deal more briefly with Peru’s objection
that the Tribunal’s assumption of jurisdiction constituted an excess of powers
because it constituted an unwarranted incursion upon the jurisdiction of other

tribunals chosen by the parties to the other LSAs.

184. Peru did not advance this objection in this way before the Tribunal itself. At that
stage, it objected to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione personae on the ground that
the claims advanced by DEI Bermuda were properly the claims of DEI Peru Holdings

or DEI Egenor.2* The Tribunal decided that:

The arguments raised by the Respondent as objections to the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction ratione personae are, in reality, subject-matter objections in
relation to the claims brought before this Tribunal by DEI Bermuda, dressed
up as objections to the Tribunal’s personal jurisdiction over putative claims
by entities (such as DEI Peru Holdings and DEI Egenor) that are not claimants
before this Tribunal.

185. In these Annulment Proceedings, Peru contends differently that the Tribunal
improperly arrogated to itself the jurisdiction vested in other tribunals (notably that
chosen by the parties to the DEI Egenor LSA). This, Peru submits, constitutes a

manifest excess of powers.2>°

186. In the Committee’s view, this ground of objection to the Tribunal’s Decision does
not add materially to those already discussed. Arbitration, as a consensual method
of dispute resolution, operates to confer jurisdiction on the parties’ chosen tribunal
in a manner that necessarily excludes other fora. It is well established in ICSID

jurisprudence that a tribunal's failure to assume a jurisdiction which the parties have

254 Decision on Jurisdiction, [136].
255 (bid (143}.
256 Memorial, [103].

61

conferred upon it may itself constitute a manifest excess of powers.”*’ But it does
not add anything to the enquiry mandated by Article 52(1)(b) into whether the
tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers by exceeding its jurisdiction to contend
that the tribunal has trespassed upon the jurisdiction of other tribunals. The enquiry
which the annulment committee is empowered to make is the same. In the present
case, this has already been undertaken by the ad hoc Committee in considering
Peru’s objections in relation to the Tribunal’s exercise of jurisdiction ratione

materiae and ratione temporis.

187. This was not a case where the Tribunal had to consider staying its proceedings in

light of the same, or substantially the same dispute being actually pending before
another tribunal — a situation of lis pendens.%* Nor was it a case where the same
parties, who were before an investment tribunal pursuant to the general dispute
settlement provisions of a bilateral investment treaty, had already chosen by

contract another tribunal to determine the same dispute.”

188. On the contrary, in the present case, there was only one tribunal competent to

determine a dispute between DEI Bermuda and Peru founded on alleged breaches
of the DEI Bermuda LSA, namely the ICSID Tribunal designated by the parties
pursuant to Clause Nine. By contrast, the arbitration agreement in Clause Eight of
the DEI Egenor LSA (an agreement to submit disputes ‘to national or international
arbitration, which shall be defined by mutual agreement’) related only to disputes
between the parties to that agreement, namely DEI Egenor and Peru, and to
disputes relating to the ‘interpretation or execution of the various clauses of [that]

Agreement.’

189. In consequence, the Tribunal in the present case was simply required to satisfy

itself that the dispute brought before it properly fell within its jurisdiction within the
terms of that clause. This it did by conducting the enquiry into its jurisdiction ratione

materiae and ratione temporis discussed above.

257 Supra [97].
258 As in Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Ltd v Egypt (Decision on Jurisdiction No 1) (1985) 3 ICSID Rep

101, 129,

259 As in SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA v Philippines (Decision on Jurisdiction) (2004) 8 ICSID Rep 515. By
the same token, Peru's reliance (Memorial, [102]) on Southern Bluefin Tuna (Australia and New Zealand v Japan)
(UNCLOS Annex VII Tribunal, Award on Jurisdiction) (2000) 119 ILR 508 is inapposite here. In that case, the
Tribunal’s decision was based upon Article 281 of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
which required priority to be given to a method of dispute settlement chosen by the parties.

62

190. In so doing, it did not ‘deprive[] the arbitral fora specified under [the other] LSAs of.
their rights to exercise the specific jurisdiction granted to them in those contracts.’2
On the contrary, the Tribunal emphasised that its jurisdiction was strictly limited to

claims under the DEI Bermuda LSA, so that:26!

.. Claimant will need to substantiate its claims, during the merits phase, by
reference solely to the guarantees contained in the DEI Bermuda LSA, and
not those contained in any other LSAs. This is a function of the specific
wording of Clause Nine of the DEI Bermuda LSA, and of the legal basis of the
Claimant’s claims as formulated in the Request for Arbitration, namely the
alleged breach of the protections contained in the DEI Bermuda LSA, not in

any of the other LSAs.

As a consequence, the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction could have no effect on the

rights of other claimants under other LSAs.

191. Nor does the Committee accept that, in arriving at its Decision on Jurisdiction, the
Tribunal made a decision ‘driven by equity rather than law”? by assuming an over-
broad jurisdiction ‘acting out of a misguided concern for Duke Energy’s ability to
seek relief in a single arbitration for a full range of claims.” Paragraph 102 of the
Decision on Jurisdiction, on which Peru relies for this allegation, contains the
Tribunal’s reasoning as to the nature of the investment referred to in the DEI
Bermuda LSA. The Committee has already found that the Tribunal was entitled to
interpret that Agreement in consideration of the parties’ real intentions.2“ But, as
the passage from the Decision just cited in the previous paragraph makes clear, that
does not mean that the Tribunal abandoned law for equity. On the contrary, it was
at pains to emphasise that DEI Bermuda would have to make good its claims solely
by reference to the contractual rights which it enjoyed pursuant to the DEI Bermuda

LSA. Indeed, it went on to state that:26

... it will not be in a position to “give effect” to the protections in [the other]

LSAs. In other words, in the peculiar circumstances of this case (successive

260 Memorial, [100].

261 Decision on Jurisdiction, [132].

262 Memorial [95].

263 (dem.

264 Supra [153].

265 Decision on Jurisdiction [133] (citation omitted).

63

agreements for the protection of the investment), the unity of the
investment does not necessarily imply the unity of the protection of the

investment.

192. For these reasons, the Committee holds that this third challenge to the Decision on

Jurisdiction is not well founded and must be dismissed.

C. Award on the Merits

193. In view of the fact that the Committee has dismissed Peru’s Application for
Annulment of the Decision on Jurisdiction, it is necessary now to turn to a
consideration of whether, in the alternative, the Award on the Merits is liable to

partial annulment in one of the four respects of which Peru makes complaint.

194. The particular portions of the Award in respect of which partial annulment is

sought are those dealing with:

(a) Tax stability guarantee;

(b) Tax amnesty;

(c) Good faith/actos propios (estoppel); and,
(d) Damages.

195. The Committee has set out the submissions of the parties on each of these points
above in Part II B. It has also set forth its own general approach to the grounds of
review specified under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention in Part Ill A. With these
observations in mind, it is now possible to deal seriatim with the application of those
general principles to each of the specific substantive issues, explaining first the

Tribunal’s treatment of the point and then the Committee’s reasons for its decision

on that aspect of the Application for Annulment.

1. Tax Stability

196. The question of the meaning and effect of the guarantee of tax stability contained
in Clause Three of the DEI Bermuda LSA lay at the heart of the arbitral proceedings,
since DEI Bermuda’s claim was that the tax assessment levied by SUNAT against DEI

Egenor in turn violated DEI Bermuda’s rights under that Agreement.

64

197. The Tribunal dealt with the construction of Clause Three in paragraphs 186 — 228 of
its Award. Having set out the clause, the Tribunal summarised the parties’
arguments. In order, as the Tribunal put it ‘to link the DE! Bermuda LSA and the
Egenor LSA, but remain within the confines established by the Tribunal in paras. 132
and 133 of the Decision on Jurisdiction (cited earlier), Claimant has relied in

particular on Article 23 of the Investment Regulations.”

198. The Investment Regulations, 7°? enacted in implementation of Peru’s Private
Investment Law,” made detailed provision for the system and contents of LSAs.

Article 23(a) provided, in relevant part, that:2°

The stability regime granted to investors as provided for by section (a) of
Article 10 of Legislative Decree No 662 implies that, in the event the income
tax should be modified during the effective term of the stability agreement in
such a manner that it results in a variation of the tax base or the percentages
imposed on the profit generating company, or in the creation of new taxes
imposed on the company’s income, or for whatever other cause of
equivalent effects the profits or dividends distributable or available to the
investor is reduced in terms of percentage with respect to pre-tax profits in
comparison with the ones distributable or available at the time the
guaranteed tax regime became effective, by virtue of the protection granted
by the agreement the tax rate(s) applicable to the profits or dividends the
investor is entitled to shall be reduced in order to allow the profits or
dividends finally available or subject to allocation are equal to the ones that
were guarantied [sic], up to the possible limit as to the tax imposed on

profits or dividends.

199. The Tribunal, referring to the Memorial, summarised DEI Bermuda’s case on the
effect of that provision as being to afford DEI Bermuda a claim for damages in the

event that the guarantee of tax stability afforded to DEI Egenor was breached by

266 Award, [194].

267 Supreme Decree No 162-92-EF (October 9, 1992).

268 Legislative Decree No 757 (November 8, 1991).

269 The authoritative text of this article is that found in the original text in the Spanish language. The English
translation of this Article is reproduced from that submitted by the parties in the arbitration at Exhibit C-O10. It
differs slightly, but not materially, from the translation reproduced by the Tribunal in the English text of its Award
at [190]. The Committee has used the above translation for clarity of exposition.

65

amendment. Such an amendment, claimed DEI Bermuda, could be effected either by

law or by a change in the interpretation or application of the law.2”

200. The Tribunal next summarised Peru’s position at paragraph 199 as that ‘DEI
Bermuda — can only invoke the guarantees under its own LSA, and therefore
Claimant’s attempt to fuse the DE! Bermuda LSA and the Egenor LSA (by way of
Article 23 of the Investment Regulations or otherwise) is impermissible.”7! Peru
added that the guarantee of tax stability related only to the law and not to its

interpretation or application.2”

201. The Tribunal then undertook its own analysis of the question in paragraphs 201 —

228. It proceeded to its decision in three steps:

(1) It found that ‘t]he parties agree that the linkage between the Egenor LSA
and the DEI Bermuda LSA is provided by Article 23(a) of the Investment
Regulations’ but that they disagreed as to whether Article 23(a) was

merely an offset mechanism or could also support a claim for damages;

(2) The Claimant’s evidence as to Peruvian law was to be preferred — to the
effect that Article 23 would support a claim for damages by DEI Bermuda if

the tax stabilisation afforded to DEI Egenor was violated after 24 July 2001;

(3) The guarantee of tax stabilisation applied not only to laws, but also to stable
interpretations or applications of the law. It may also be invoked to protect
the investor in the absence of a prior stable interpretation to the extent that
‘stabilized laws will not be interpreted or applied in a patently unreasonable

or arbitrary manner.?74

202. Peru’s critique of this approach in these annulment proceedings is brought
principally under Article 52(1)(d) (failure to state reasons) though it advances
additional arguments based on Article 52(1)(b) (manifest excess of powers) in

relation to steps (2) and (3) and adds in addition a claim under Article 52(1)(e)

(procedure) in relation to step (3).?”°

20 award, [195] - [197].
21 (bid (199).

22 (bid (199} - [200].

23 (bid (201).

24 (bid (227).

25 Memorial [197] - [230]

66

203. The general approach which should guide the review of an award for failure to
give reasons under Article 52(1)(e) has been well developed by earlier ad hoc
committees. Thus the decision in Kléckner | explained that the Award must allow
‘the reader to follow the arbitral tribunal’s reasoning, on facts and on law’.”° In

MINE, the ad hoc Committee added that ‘the requirement to state reasons is

satisfied as long as the award enables one to follow how the tribunal proceeded

from Point A. to Point B. and eventually to its conclusion, even if it made an error of

fact or of law.”

204. These general statements must also be read in the light of the observations in

Vivendi that:?”5

... it is well accepted both in the cases and the literature that Article 52(1)(e)
concerns a failure to state any reasons with respect to all or part of an award,
not the failure to state correct or convincing reasons...Provided that the
reasons given by a tribunal can be followed and relate to the issues that
were before the tribunal, their correctness is beside the point in terms of
Article 52(1)(e). Moreover, reasons may be stated succinctly or at length,
and different legal traditions differ in their modes of expressing reasons.
Tribunals must be allowed a degree of discretion as to the way in which they

express their reasoning....

It is frequently said that contradictory reasons cancel each other out, and
indeed, if reasons are genuinely contradictory so they might. However,
tribunals must often struggle to balance conflicting considerations, and an
ad hoc committee should be careful not to discern contradiction when what
is actually expressed in a tribunal’s reasons could more truly be said to be

but a reflection of such conflicting considerations.

205. Moreover, an ad hoc committee is entitled itself to seek to understand the

279

reasons for the award from the record before the tribunal. Indeed, in

appropriate cases, it should do so. As the ad hoc Committee held in Soufraki:°*°

26 Kléckner supra n 133, [119].
27 MINE v Guinea, [5.09]
278 Vivendi v Argentina supra n 63, [64] - [65], followed in Rumeli v Kazakhstan supra n 132, [137] - [138].

67

It is also possible that a tribunal may give reasons for its award without
elaborating the factual or legal bases of such reasons. So long as those
reasons in fact make it possible reasonably to connect the facts or law of the
case to the conclusions reached in the award, annulment may appropriately

be avoided.

(a) Linking of DEI Bermuda LSA and Egenor LSA

206. Peru’s main criticism of the Tribunal’s approach at Step (1) of its analysis is that

there is a fundamental contradiction between the Tribunal’s accurate statement of

Peru’s position at paragraph 199 with its finding two paragraphs later of an

agreement between the parties.”5!

207. In order to understand the basis for the Tribunal’s finding of an agreement

between the parties, the Committee was referred to the transcript of the merits

hearing. In the key passage, which, in view of its importance, the Committee now

quotes in full, Peru submitted:782

There is nothing, however, in Article 23 that suggests that investors can
invoke the tax stability guarantees in LSAs granted to the companies that
receive the investment. There is nothing in Article 23 that suggests that the
Tribunal was wrong in concluding that Claimant cannot invoke any other LSA
but its own. In fact, this morning Mr. Baker [counsel for DE| Bermuda]
conceded that Claimant cannot invoke the Egenor LSA. He stated instead
that Claimant has certain rights under the DEI Bermuda LSA with respect to

the tax stability of Egenor.

This is an important point: Peru does not dispute that the legal
stability guarantee for investors under Article 23(a) of the Private Investment
Regulations may grant the investors certain protections if the income tax on
the profit-generating company is affected in certain circumstances. Thus,

under Article 23(a), certain changes in the income tax of Egenor might affect

 

29 Accord Reisman Systems of Control in International Adjudication and Arbitration: Breakdown and Repair

(1992), 95.

280 Soufraki v UAE supra n 127, [128].
281 Transcript, Day 1, 61-65.
282 Merits Hearing Transcript, Day 1, 249/1 - 250/4; and see, to like effect, ibid, Day 7, 1595/17 - 1596/21.

68

the tax stability granted to DEI Bermuda. If that occurs, DE! Bermuda can
invoke its own, and only its own, LSA with respect to actions affecting
Egenor’s income tax. But this does not mean that DEI Bermuda can invoke
the Egenor LSA. Nothing in Article 23 affects the Tribunal’s conclusion that

Claimant must show a breach of its own LSA, not of Egenor’s LSA.

In the immediately following passage, Peru went on to explain ‘an important
limitation’ — namely that Peru was only obliged to reduce proportionately the
investor’s tax ‘within the limits of the withholding taxes or the taxes from profits

imposed on the investor.?*°

208. Examining the Tribunal’s findings at paragraphs 199 and 201 in the light of that
admirably clear explanation of Peru’s submission as to the effect of Article 23(a), the
Committee finds no fundamental inconsistency amounting to a want of reasons
under Article 52(1)(e). On the contrary, in the Committee’s view, the Tribunal has
accurately captured the nuances of Peru’s position as presented to it in these two
paragraphs. On the one hand, Peru insisted, as the Tribunal recorded at paragraph
199, that Article 23(a) did not have the effect of fusing the two LSAs. DE!| Bermuda
would have to make its claim under the DEI Bermuda LSA and not otherwise. On the
other hand, Peru did agree that Article 23(a) provided a linkage between the two
LSAs to the extent that ‘under Art23(a), certain changes in the income tax of Egenor
might affect the tax stability granted to DEI Bermuda. If that occurs, DE! Bermuda
can invoke its own, and only its own, LSA with respect to actions affecting Egenor’s

income tax. 5+

209. Where the parties did not agree was as to the proper construction and effect of the
rights granted under Article 23(a) — as to whether, as Peru contends, such rights
were limited to the extent of an offset any tax on DEI Bermuda’s own dividends (a
right which in the present case would have no result, since the tax rate on such
dividends was zero), or alternatively whether Article 23(a) could found an
independent claim for damages. But this, too, was accurately summarised by the

Tribunal in the rest of paragraph 201.

(b) Supplementing Investment Regulations with Civil Code

283 Jbid 251/3-5.
284 [bid 249/18-20 — 250/1

69

210. Peru’s critique of the second stage of the Tribunal’s analysis is that it failed to
explain how it could reconcile its application of the remedies provided under the
Civil Code with the clear terms of Article 23(a), which limited the available remedy to
the offset mechanism there specified.?°° Peru adds that this also amounted to an
excess of powers, because it was a failure to apply the applicable law, which it
defines here as ‘the Peruvian lex specialis on foreign investment and stabilization

agreements. 28

211. In the Committee’s view the Tribunal squarely addressed this point at paragraphs
204 — 209. It accepted that ‘t]he wording of Article 23(a), at first blush, appears to
favour Respondent’s line of argument.”*’ But it then turned to consider the expert
evidence on Peruvian law advanced to the contrary by DEI Egenor’s two experts —
Professors Trazegnies and Talledo. Citing from their evidence in detail, the Tribunal
concluded that Peruvian law did allow a claim for damages, notwithstanding the
limitation wording in Article 23(a), as a subsidiary means of compensation where the

primary means provided for was not available.?8*

212. Nor can the Tribunal be criticized for having exceeded its mandate in applying the
Civil Code to the resolution of this issue. On the contrary, the obligation upon a
tribunal under Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention to apply, inter alia, ‘the law of
the Contracting State’ is a reference to the whole of that law, such as the Tribunal
may determine to be relevant and applicable to the issue before it, and not to any

particular portion of it.

213. Peru may well disagree with the view that the Tribunal formed as to the correct
solution of the issue before it under Peruvian law. But an ad hoc committee may not
enter upon an assessment of whether a tribunal made a correct assessment of the
content of the applicable law. It must be ‘mindful of the distinction between failure
to apply the proper law and the error in judicando drawn in Kléckner |, and the
consequential need to avoid the reopening of the merits in proceedings that would

turn annulment into appeal.”*°

285 Memorial [212] - [219]

286 bid (215}, citing Award [194]
287 (bid (204).

288 bid [205] - [209].

289 Wena supra n 116, [22]

70

214. Moreover, in the present case, the Tribunal reached its conclusions on the basis of

a careful assessment of the evidence before it. By ICSID Arbitration Rule 34, ‘t]he

Tribunal shall be the judge of the admissibility of any evidence adduced and of its

probative value.’ It would not be proper for an annulment committee to re-evaluate

that evidence, and nor is it in a position to do so. As it was put in Rumeli v

Kazakhstan, ‘[aJn ad hoc committee is not a court of appeal and cannot therefore

enter, within the bounds of its limited mission, into an analysis of the probative value

of the evidence produced by the parties.’?°°

(c) The meaning of tax stability and interpretation of the MRL

215. As regards step (3) of the Tribunal’s analysis, Peru submits that there is a complete

failure of reasoning in the Award to explain how it was that the Tribunal came to

decide that the guarantee of tax stability applied to changes in interpretations of the

law as well as to changes in the text itself.2!

216. The Tribunal reasoned this issue in the following way:

(a)

(b)

(c)

It opened this part of its analysis by stating that, as the Foreign Investment
Law guarantees to investors the ‘continuity of the existing rules’,*°* the
question for it was to what extent this guarantee included ‘their specific

interpretation and application’ at the time of the investment.2

It accepted that its task was not to sit on appeal from the decisions of
SUNAT or the Tax Court, but only to determine whether their decision
‘represents a change from their respective decisions prior to the entry into
force of the DEI Bermuda LSA.”%*

It stated that what would be required, in the case of a change in
interpretation, would be a ‘stable interpretation at the time the tax stability

guarantee was granted’ and a subsequent decision which modified it.2 This

290 Supra n 132, [96]
251 Memorial [222] - [228]

22 Preamble, Legislative Decree No 662.
283 award [210].
294 (bid (216}.
285 (bid (218}.

71

would have to be established by ‘compelling evidence’ and not mere

implication. 2%

(d) Even where there was no pre-existing stable interpretation, a decision on
the interpretation or application of the law to the investor might infringe

legal stability if it was ‘patently unreasonable or arbitrary.”

217. This set of reasoning steps is both logical and complete. In other words, it very well
explains how the Tribunal got from point A (the question for determination) to point
B (its conclusion on the point). The Committee accepts that the Tribunal does not
cite legal authorities or passages from the expert evidence in support of its reasons.
But, as the Soufraki Committee pointed out, ‘a tribunal may give reasons for its

award without elaborating the factual or legal bases of such reasons.”°8

218. The Committee observes that the Tribunal was, in large measure, engaged in a
process of logical reasoning which did not require citation of authority. The
processes of interpretation and application are, as the Study Group of the
International Law Commission on the Fragmentation of International Law has wisely
observed, integral to law itself, which ‘should be seen not merely as a mechanic
application of apparently random rules’.°° They are the processes by which law

gains its meaning.

219. Reference to the record in the arbitration®™ shows that the Tribunal had before it a
considerable amount of expert evidence as to Peruvian law adduced by both parties
on this question, from which it benefited when formulating its reasons in the way

that it did. Thus, Professor Trazegnies developed in his evidence the point that: 2"

[I]nterpretation is an intrinsic part of the law, and one cannot be understood
without the other. The sense of the law is the interpretation of the law.
Consequently, legal stability can be thwarted if, without making changes to
the text of the law itself, it is interpreted in a way that is radically different

from the way it was understood and applied before.

296 bid (220} - [221].

297 (bid (226) - [227].

288 Soufraki supra n 127, [128]

299 UN DocA/CN.4/L.682 (April 13, 2006), [34] [36].
300 Counter-Memorial, [244] - [250].

301 Trazegnies 2 (February 22, 2005), [54] (a paragraph referred to in the Award at [196]; and see also Trazegnies
4, [22] - [34].

72

220. Professor Bullard, the expert called on behalf of Peru, accepted that ‘every

interpretation must be reasonably based on the stabilized regulations’. °° Whilst,

therefore, in Professor Bullard’s view, stabilization did not prevent SUNAT from

interpreting or applying the Regulations, he added:

221. Thus,

That does not mean that the authorities have complete discretion to
interpret and apply the stabilized regulations and said regulations shall
remain subject to the principles of legality and lawfulness that govern public

administration.

In other words, interpretation cannot be used to “defraud” the stabilization
framework created by the government as a mechanism designed specifically
to protect investment. So SUNAT could not, for example, through an
interpretation, change the income tax rate that applies under a stabilization
agreement. SUNAT could, however, decide whether a specific legal
consequence applies to a specific circumstance, as long as the circumstance

reasonably falls within the scope of the stabilized regulation.

in the Committee’s view, this part of the Award was not only adequately

reasoned, it was also arrived at after consideration of the evidence of Peruvian law.

The Committee, therefore, cannot accept Peru’s request to partially annul the

Award

under Article 52(1)(b) on account of the alleged failure to apply the

applicable law.

222. Further, insofar as Peru seeks to bolster its application under this head by

reference in addition to Article 52(1)(d), the Committee recalls the observations that

it made in paragraph 92 supra. It does not add anything to a challenge based on

failure

to apply the applicable law to characterise such a failure as a ‘serious

departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.’ The requirement to apply the

applicable law goes to the substantive legal framework within which the tribunal is

empowered by the parties to decide the matter, for the reasons discussed in

paragraph 96 supra, and not the procedures which the tribunal must ensure are

observed in the hearing of that case. The Committee repeats the comments which it

made in this regard supra at paragraphs 168 — 169.

302 Bullard 1, [45].
303 pbid, [47].

73

223. For these reasons, Peru’s application for partial annulment under this head must

also be dismissed.

2. Tax Amnesty

224. The next basis for partial annulment of the Award advanced by Peru relates to the
Tribunal’s treatment of the effect of DEI Egenor’s acceptance of the tax amnesty
afforded to it by SUNAT upon DEI! Bermuda’s claim in the arbitration.° Peru submits
that the Tribunal failed to deal with its submission that this amnesty had a
substantive as well as procedural effect and thus both failed to give reasons and

failed to decide an issue submitted to it, committing a manifest excess of powers.

225. Peru’s arguments as to the effect of the tax amnesty had been originally raised by
as an admissibility objection.°° The Tribunal took the view that this was a question
for the merits phase. Accordingly, it was fully re-pleaded on the merits.°” The
Tribunal addressed this issue in its Award at paragraphs 162 — 183. This was one of
the preliminary issues addressed by the Tribunal in Part IV as providing the

necessary framework for its decisions on the merits in Part V.

226. In the jurisdictional phase, the Tribunal stated Peru’s argument in terms of
estoppel.*At the merits phase, the Tribunal summarised Peru’s case on the ‘scope

of renunciation’ as follows:

According to Respondent, a taxpayer’s request to receive the benefits of the
Tax Amnesty Law entails the recognition and acceptance of the tax
obligations specified in the request, since payment made in accordance with
the Tax Amnesty Law constitutes renunciation of any ongoing or future
challenge of the tax obligation in question, whether through administrative

or judicial proceedings.
It added that Peru’s expert had opined that this renunciation applied to proceedings

in any forum including in international arbitration.*"° The Tribunal then outlined DEI

304 Supra [71] - [72].

305 Respondent’s Memorial on Jurisdiction [128] - [134].

306 Decision on Jurisdiction [163] - [164].

307 Memorial on the Merits [271] - [285]; Counter-Memorial on the Merits [120] - [136]; Reply on the Merits
[389] - [407; Rejoinder on the Merits [307] — [330]

308 Decision on Jurisdiction [163], citing Respondent's Memorial on Jurisdiction [133]

309 Award [164].

74

Bermuda’s principal response as being that ‘the only effect of DEI Egenor’s

acceptance of amnesty was the waiver of its right to challenge the amnesty

payments through the procedural mechanisms available under Peruvian tax law."

227. The Tribunal then set out its own reasoning at 179 — 182:3!

179. The Tribunal finds that the LSA rights of both DEI Egenor and of DEI
Bermuda are separate and distinct from the rights to which the SEAP
renunciation applies, quite apart from the fact that DEI Egenor may have
reserved certain rights in its amnesty applications. In order to benefit from
the Tax Amnesty Law, the taxpayer must desist from challenges before
“administrative or judicial authorities.” Under each LSA, it was agreed that
disputes over the scope of protection provided by the LSA would be referred
to arbitration (national or international arbitration, in the case of the Egenor
LSA, and ICSID arbitration, in the case of the DEI Bermuda LSA) and not to

administrative or judicial authorities.

180. The Tribunal therefore concludes that, since neither administrative nor
judicial authorities in Peru had jurisdiction to hear claims or challenges based
on the LSAs, renunciation of all challenges to the tax obligation through
“administrative or judicial authorities”, as provided under the Tax Amnesty
Law, could not have resulted in the waiver of the rights of DEI Egenor or DEI

Bermuda under the respective LSAs.

181. In addition, the DEI Bermuda LSA contains no specific provision
regarding the applicable substantive law. In such circumstances, Article 42(1)
of the ICSID Convention requires the Tribunal to apply “the law of the
Contracting State party to the dispute (including its rules on conflicts of laws)

and such rules of international law as may be applicable.”

182. Consequently, even if payment under the Tax Amnesty Law did, as a
matter of Peruvian law, result in the renunciation of rights under the LSAs
(which in the Tribunal’s opinion it did not do), Peruvian law (“the law of the
Contracting State party to the dispute”), and in particular the Tax Amnesty

Law, would be inconsistent with applicable principles of international law.

 

310 (bid (165}.
31 ypid [166].

312 Footnotes omitted. It added, at [183] a subsidiary point of interpretation under Peruvian law, supported by
experts for both parties, that specialised systems for tax matters were to be interpreted restrictively.

75

One such principle is that waiver of ICSID rights must be explicit (see
Professor Dolzer Second Expert Report at paras. 28-29). As discussed in the
previous Section, Respondent does not dispute that, in the case of such

conflict, it is international law that must prevail over the local law.

228. Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention requires that ‘[t]he award shall deal with
every question submitted to the Tribunal, and shall state the reasons on which it is
based.’ But the framers of the Convention declined to elevate failure to comply with
the first element of this requirement to a ground for annulment,>! preferring
instead to provide the specialised remedy of a request to the tribunal for a
supplemental decision.*"* Thus, a failure to address every question will not ipso facto
constitute a ground for annulment. Rather, it is necessary for an applicant to
demonstrate that such a failure amounts to a failure in the intelligibility of the

reasoning in the award itself (under Article 52(1)(e)).5!>

229. Alternatively the applicant may show that the failure to address a question
submitted to it by the parties amounts to a manifest excess of power, because it
amounts to a failure on the part of the tribunal to undertake the mandate entrusted
to it (under Article 52(1)(b)).3!° In that event, ‘it is only where the failure to exercise a
jurisdiction is clearly capable of making a difference to the result that it can be
considered a manifest excess of power.’ >!” A tribunal does not manifestly exceed its
power if it fails to deal with every argument raised by one party as to a legal
question, so long as, objectively, it has dealt with the legal question itself. As it was

put by the ad hoc committee in CDC v Seychelles:>!8

The specific terminology used by the Republic in its Memorial cannot define
the question the Tribunal was obliged to answer. Rather, the Tribunal was
required to answer a legal question, or to put it another way, come to a

conclusion about the Parties’ rights and liabilities.

313 History, Il, 849.

314 Article 49(2).

315 Accord MINE supra n 130, [5.13]; Wena supra n 116, [100] - [101].
316 supra [97]

317 Vivendi idem, and, to like effect, Kléckner supra n 133 [134], [148]
318 CDC Group PLC v The Seychelles, supra n 130, [57].

76

230. With these considerations in mind, the ad hoc Committee is satisfied that the
Tribunal has both addressed the legal question put to it and done so in a manner

which shows no failure of reasoning.

231. Peru first raised its objection as to the preclusive effect of the tax amnesty as a
plea as to admissibility at the jurisdictional phase. It submitted there that DEI
Bermuda’s claims were inadmissible because the tax disputes that were the
predicates for the claim in the arbitration had all been fully resolved within the
Peruvian tax system.?!? DEI Egenor’s acceptance of the tax amnesty, submitted Peru,
precluded DEI Bermuda’s subsequent arbitration claim and estopped DEI Bermuda
from pursuing it?° DEI Bermuda’s response was that DEI Egenor’s acceptance of the
tax amnesty had no such effect, both as a matter of Peruvian law and because such
a step could not in any event operate preclusively so as to estop DEI Bermuda from

pursuit of its claims in the arbitration.2?!

232. In view of the fact that the Tribunal decided that this question went to the merits
and not to admissibility, the parties resumed legal argument on it in their written
pleadings at the merits stage. DEI Bermuda submitted that ‘by availing of the local
tax amnesty — and thereby capping its exposure, mitigating its damages, and
protecting the value of its investment — Duke Energy only relinquished its rights as a
local taxpayer against SUNAT under Peruvian tax law. It never relinquished its rights
as a foreign investor against the Government of Peru under its LSAs.°” In response,
Peru submitted that ‘Claimant’s [rJecourse to Peru’s [t]ax [aJmnesty [I]aw [bJars its
[c]laims.” According to Peru, this followed whether as a matter of Peruvian law or
in the application of the doctrine of equitable estoppel as applied in international

law.

233. In the Committee’s view, the parties thus submitted to the Tribunal what was in
reality one legal question for decision: the legal effect of the conduct of DEI Egenor
in accepting the tax amnesty on DEI Bermuda’s ability to pursue its claim in the

arbitration. It was that question that could have been dispositive of the outcome —

319 Memorial on Jurisdiction, Section V.

220 (bid [128] - [134].

221 Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, [206] - [212].
222 Memorial on the Merits, [272], footnotes omitted
323 Counter-Memorial on the Merits, Section III B.

77

in the sense that, had Peru succeeded in this defence, it would have been preclusive

of DEI Bermuda’s claim.

234. Each party then proceeded to develop different arguments in relation to that
question, some under Peruvian law and some under international law. But the
Committee finds no inherent bifurcation of the kind now asserted by Peru in these
annulment proceedings, between the substantive and the procedural effect of the
tax amnesty. On the contrary, once the effect of the amnesty had been determined
by the Tribunal to be a matter for the merits phase of the arbitration, it had to be
decided as a substantive matter — i.e. as a defence on the merits. But it is of the
essence of a plea of preclusion or estoppel based upon the disposition of an issue in
prior litigation, that the conduct of the party has a dual character - at once
preclusive of the process and determinative of the substance. These two elements
are not separable. They are inherent parts of the same plea. As a Chamber of the
International Court of Justice put it in the Gulf of Maine Case: ‘preclusion is in fact

the procedural aspect and estoppel the substantive aspect of the same principle.°74

235. In the context of this case, a logically essential element in determining this effect
was to determine the extent to which the conduct of one party (DEI Egenor) in one
legal forum could estop or preclude another party (DEI Bermuda) from pursuit of its
related claim in another forum. The Tribunal, by its reasoning in paragraphs 179 —
182, found that the conduct of DEI Egenor could not preclude DEI Bermuda’s claim,
since the rights of each were separate; the jurisdictions of the Peruvian tax
authorities and the ICSID Tribunal did not overlap; and each claim was governed by a
different applicable law. It thus considered both the substantive and the procedural
consequences of the tax amnesty plea and rejected Peru’s defence. In the result,

then, there has been neither a failure of reasoning nor a manifest excess of power.

3. Good faith/actos propios (estoppel)

236. The Tribunal was divided on DEI Bermuda’s claim that Peru had breached its
implied duty of good faith and the Peruvian doctrine of actos propios or estoppel.

The majority on this point (President Fortier and Arbitrator Tawil) found that there

224 Delimitation of the Maritime Boundary in the Gulf of Maine Area (Canada v United States of America) [1984]
ICJ Rep 246, 305, [130].

78

was such a breach. Arbitrator Nikken delivered a Partial Dissenting Opinion devoted
to this issue.
237. The majority set out its reasoning in four sections of the Award: (i) in its

determination of the applicable law; (ii) in its determination of the scope of

in its application to the depreciation

 

protection implied in the DEI Bermuda LSA; (ii

assessment claim; and (iv) in its application to the merger revaluation claim.

238. In determining the applicable law generally, the Tribunal held, applying Article
42(1) of the ICSID Convention, that, in view of the fact that there was no express
choice of law clause in the DEI Bermuda LSA, it was entitled to apply both Peruvian
law and international law. To the extent of any inconsistency between the two, this
had the effect that it was entitled to accord priority to international law. ** It held
that ‘principles of international law must be given effect in determining the extent to
which the division of the State into separate entities and agencies can insulate the
State from liability for certain actions and representations (i.e. the analysis of good

faith and the doctrine of actos propios)’.22°

239. Then, it set out its approach to the preliminary issue as to the legal content of the
obligation.*”’ It held that estoppel, as an obligation to be implied into the DEI
Bermuda LSA, could not be construed purely by reference to Peruvian law. Rather,
the Tribunal thought it was entitled to apply international law and to ‘take into
account the perspective of a reasonable foreign investor, perceiving, observing and
interacting with the Government of Peru.’?8 The Tribunal, however, rejected the
unity of the state test proposed by DEI Bermuda, derived from the law of state
responsibility. Rather, it considered that vis-a-vis a foreign investor, ‘the State
assumes the risk for the acts of its organs or officials which, by their nature, may
reasonably induce reliance in third parties.”2? What mattered, thought the Tribunal,
was the ‘reasonable appearance that the representation binds the State’, a
determination in which ‘the manifest lack of competence’ of the State organ could

well be decisive.* The Tribunal referred by analogy to the test in Article 46 of the

25 Award [158]
226 bid [160].

227 In Part IVC 2 (c) [241] - [251].
328 jbid [241].

229 award, [246].

330 (bid (247).

79

Vienna Convention*! dealing with provisions of internal law regarding competence
to conclude treaties, which precluded a state from relying on a violation of its
internal law ‘unless that violation was manifest and concerned a rules of its internal
law of fundamental importance.’ Thus, the representation had to be ‘unequivocal’ in
the sense it is ‘the result of an action or conduct that, in accordance with normal
practice and good faith, is perceived by third parties as an expression of the State’s
position, and as being incompatible with the possibility of being contradicted in the

future.”

240. The Tribunal dismissed DEI Bermuda’s claim in relation to the Depreciation
Assessment, finding that it had failed to meet its burden of proof of establishing that

it had received the requisite unequivocal representation.2°

241. It then returned to the estoppel argument in the context of the Merger
Revaluation Assessment. At that stage in its analysis, the Tribunal had already
considered DEI Bermuda’s claim for breach of the contractual undertaking of tax
stability in the DE] Bermuda LSA and had found that there was a breach of that
undertaking. An essential step leading to that finding was that there was a stable
interpretation of the tax law in place at the time the tax stability guarantee was
granted, which interpretation was itself stabilised pursuant to the DEI Bermuda

LSA.3>

242. Therefore, the Tribunal opened the section of its Award dealing with estoppel with
the observation that, having found Peru liable for breach of the tax stability
guarantee, it ‘need not consider Claimant’s alternative grounds for liability, including
breach of the doctrine of actos propios or good faith.”*°* However, it continued, ‘t]he
Tribunal nevertheless feels compelled, having heard a substantial amount of

evidence and argument on this point, to set out its views on the issue.’°”

243. Following its detailed assessment of the evidence on the support of various State

actors for the merger of Egenor with Power North, the Tribunal added that these

331 Supra n 119.

332 award [249].

333 (bid [320] - [323].

334 (bid Part V B 3, [379] - [442].
235 award [352] - [366].

236 award [379].

337 Idem.

80

officials were simply implementing applicable Peruvian policy at the time. It added,

for good measure:38

[T]he Tribunal’s primary finding in respect of the Merger Revaluation
Assessment is that SUNAT breached the Egenor LSA by straying from the
widely-accepted and stable interpretation of the MRL at the time of the
foreign investment into Egenor. The Tribunal’s findings concerning the
conduct of the various individuals that are described under the Tribunal’s
analysis of the actos propios issue are secondary in nature and support its
primary finding on liability.

244. It then proceeded to find that Peru was not entitled to rely on SUNAT’s sole
authority to make representations on tax matters, because, opined the Tribunal, the
law applicable to the question was international law not Peruvian law. ‘In
international law, it is possible for entities and agencies other than the national tax
service to bind the State to a particular position concerning transactions with tax

implications.”

245. Arbitrator Nikken dissented from this portion of the Award. In his view, both
estoppel as a rule of international law and actos propios as a matter of Peruvian law
were ‘beyond any doubt’ applicable.* However, this did not mean that the state
must always act with complete consistency. What mattered was, as the majority had
held, whether the state’s actions reasonably induced reliance. Reliance could not be
reasonable where the representation was made by an organ which manifestly

lacked competence.*!

246. Where Arbitrator Nikken parted company with the majority was not therefore on
the relevant legal test, but rather on its application to the problem at hand. He
opined that an investor could be expected to know the legal order of the State in
which he was investing, at least in respect of a fundamental issue connected with his
economic activity, such as tax. In a tax matter, he was of the view that the investor
could not reasonably conclude that the transaction had been approved in a clear

and consistent way if the tax authority had not pronounced on the matter.*!2 He

388 Ibid [427].

39° Ibid [432].

+40 Nikken Dissenting Opinion, [5].
41 (bid [6] - [7].

32 Ibid [11].

81

pointed out that this was consistent with normal practice in privatizations, since the
seller (a State enterprise) would normally, as in this case, assume liability for hidden
tax liabilities, since it was not the seller but the tax authority which had the power to
determine the application of the tax law. Thus he considered that the conduct of the
other state officials was relevant only to confirm the prevailing interpretation, which
was stabilized under the DEI Bermuda LSA and did not in addition create an

estoppel.3

247. Peru advances a wide-ranging critique of the majority's finding in its Award on this
issue, alleging a manifest excess of powers based upon failure to apply Peruvian law

as the applicable law and a number of failures in the Tribunal’s reasoning.*+

248. DEI Bermuda responds simply that the Tribunal’s observations on this point are
obiter and therefore do not provide a basis for annulment. Peru replies, accepting
that the Award is ‘susceptible to Claimant’s interpretation’ but arguing that it is
‘equally susceptible to the interpretation that the Tribunal has decided after all to
consider and decide Peru’s liability on this alternative ground.’*° It submits further
that this secondary finding would become particularly important were this
Committee to have annulled the Tribunal’s primary finding on liability for tax
stability, since then it could operate as an alternative basis of Peru’s liability.4” Peru
points out that DEI Bermuda had been invited to, and had not, confirmed its
acceptance that the Tribunal’s conclusions on actos propios would not have this

consequence, were the Committee to annul the primary finding in the Award.*8

249. The resolution of the substantive issue presented to the Tribunal is one on which
views might legitimately differ. This is so as regards the balance to be struck
between the twin legal systems specified as the applicable law in the absence of
express choice under Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention,*? a formulation which

undoubtedly ‘confer[s] on to the Tribunal a certain margin and power of

38 jbid [19].

34 Summarised supra at [75] - [79].

345 Reply, [181].

346 [dem.

347 bid (183); Transcript, Day 1, 107/20 - 108/5.

348 Transcript, Day 1, 108/6 — 109/10.

349 Cf. Reisman “The Regime for Lacunae in the ICSID Choice of Law Provision and the Question of its Threshold”
(2000) 15 1CSID Rev-FILJ 362 and Gaillard and Banifatemi “The Meaning of ‘And’ in Article 42(1), Second
Sentence, of the Washington Convention: The Role of International Law in the ICSID Choice of Law Process”
(2003) 18 ICSID Rev-FILJ 375.

82

interpretation.’>© It is also the case that alternative tenable views as to the
application of the law may be entertained even if international law principles of
estoppel are applicable, as all members of the Tribunal thought. Different views
might legitimately be taken, as they were between the arbitrators, as to the balance
to be struck between the effect produced on the respondent and the degree of
authority in fact vested in the relevant official,*! especially in the context of
representations on tax matters, where there may well be grounds for a more

cautious approach.

250. The ad hoc Committee is in no doubt that the views expressed by the majority in
this case cannot be treated as a binding part of its Award, since they do not
constitute a decision on an issue that was essential or fundamental to the Award, a
part of the necessary reasoning of the arbitrators in reaching their decision, as
opposed to being incidental to the arbitral tribunal’s determination.**? Rather, the
majority’s views on this issue are, as appears from the face of the Award, obiter
dicta. The ratio of the Award is the finding of breach of the tax stability guarantee in
the DEI Bermuda LSA by the MRA. The Tribunal’s assessment of damages, leading to
the award of damages in the dispositif, is for ‘breach of the DEI Bermuda LSA’ as a
result of the MRA.*? The Tribunal emphasised the subsidiary nature of its findings
on actos propios in the passages cited supra in paragraphs 242 — 243. Furthermore,
the Tribunal carefully distinguished elsewhere in the Award between its finding of
breach of the tax stabilization guarantee and its conclusions in relation to actos

propios. +

251. The Committee has not, for the reasons set out in section III C 1 of its Decision,
annulled the finding of the Tribunal in relation to the guarantee of tax stability. The
Award and its ratio stand. Therefore the possible scenario adverted to by Peru as
requiring consideration of partial annulment of the section of the Award dealing
with actos propios has not come to pass. Furthermore, DEI Bermuda having taken

the formal position in its pleadings that the Tribunal’s conclusions on estoppel are

350 Wena supra n 116, [39].

351 Accord: Thirlway “The Law and Procedure of the International Court of Justice 1960-1989 Part One” (1989) LX
BYIL 1, 36.

352 ILA Committee on International Commercial Arbitration ‘Final Report on Res Judicata and Arbitration’ (2006)
72 ILA Conf Rep 186, 200, [56]; accord: Associated Electric and Gas Insurance Services Ltd (AEGIS) v European
Reinsurance Co of Zurich [2003] 1 WLR 1041 (PC), [14].

353 Award [454], [474]

354 award [142], [450]

83

obiter dicta is itself bound by that statement. In the light of parties’ positions,
therefore, it is not necessary for the Committee to enter upon an analysis of
whether the grounds for annulment advanced in relation to this section have merit,
since such an analysis could not lead to the outcome sought by Peru, namely the
partial annulment of that portion of the Award dealing with the MRA.*°> Accordingly,

the Committee does not do so.

4. Damages

252. The Tribunal dealt with the quantum of damages in Part VI of its Award
(paragraphs 460 — 488). It had before it reports in chief and reply from experts called
by each of the parties: Mr Kaczmarek of Navigant Consulting for DEI Bermuda and
Mr Bustamante of Macroconsult for Peru, whose calculations are summarised at
paragraphs 460 — 473, together with their respective critiques of each other’s

approach.

253. The Tribunal held that its task was to calculate damages resulting from the MRA
only, limited to the period until the DEI Bermuda LSA expired in 2011. The Tribunal
noted that the difference between the respective experts on these parameters was

between US$19,469,721 (Navigant) and US$9,568,158 (Macroconsult).3>

254. In order to resolve this difference, the Tribunal considered the methodology
adopted by each of the experts and their respective critiques of the other’s
approach. In the end, having scrutinised the data and calculations in each of the
reports, the Tribunal came to the view that it could rely on the calculations of Mr
Kaczmarek. By contrast, it was unable to verify the calculations of Mr Bustamante by
reference to the supporting data. As a result, it adopted the sum as calculated by Mr
Kaczmarek.>°”

255. Peru objects that the Tribunal did not supply reasons to explain why it regarded

Macroconsult’s methodology as inadequate. If it had had such concerns, Peru

contends that the Tribunal had a duty to call Mr Bustamante to give oral evidence at

355 Application for Annulment [101(2)].
356 Award [474] - [475].
357 (bid [481] - [483].

84

the hearing, as DEI Bermuda had not. Its failure to do so violated Peru’s fundamental

procedural right to be heard.>°*

256. The question of the margin of appreciation accorded to a tribunal in calculating
damages was the subject of detailed consideration by an ad hoc committee in

Rumeli Telekom A/S v Kazakhstan.?® That committee observed:

[T]ribunals are generally allowed a considerable measure of discretion in
determining issues of quantum. Thus, in Wena Hotels, the ad hoc

Committee held:*”

With respect to determination of the quantum of damages awarded,
it may be recalled that the notion of “prompt, adequate and
effective compensation” confers to the Tribunal a certain margin of
discretion, within which, by its nature, few reasons more than a
reference to the Tribunal’s estimation can be given, together with
statements on the relevance and the evaluation of the supporting

evidence.

This is not a matter to be resolved simply on the basis of the burden of proof.
To be sure, the tribunal must be satisfied that the claimant has suffered
some damage under the relevant head as a result of the respondent’s

breach.”

’ But once it is satisfied of this, the determination of the precise
amount of this damage is a matter for the tribunal’s informed estimation in
the light of all the evidence available to it. This is widely accepted in

municipal law.*”

257. This analysis is equally applicable here. The Tribunal had determined that DEI
Bermuda had suffered loss as a result of the MRA. It was common ground between
the experts that the MRA had had a material effect on DEI Bermuda. The Tribunal’s
task was thus to determine the extent of that loss as a matter of informed

estimation, taking into account the evidence before it.

358 Memorial [270] - [272]

359 (Decision on Annulment) ICSID Case No ARB/05/16 (25 March 2010), [146] - [147].

360 Supra n 116, [91].

361 Citing Chorzéw Factory Case (Germany v Poland) (Merits) (1928) PCIJ Rep Ser A No 17, 56.

362 Citing Gotanda ‘Recovering Lost Profits in International Disputes’ (2004-5) 36 Georgetown JIL 61, 101 and
Sellars v Adelaide Petroleum NL (1992-4) 179 CLR 332, 368 (HCA)

85

258. This the Tribunal patently did. It is the Tribunal that is ‘the judge of the admissibility

of any evidence adduced and of its probative value’.** It is no part of the mission
entrusted to an ad hoc committee under Article 52 to review those judgments. Nor
were the parties denied an opportunity to be heard on the question of damages.
Both parties adduced two rounds of reports. In view of the sequential nature of
written pleadings in ICSID procedure, this gave Peru and its expert the opportunity
to consider and respond in writing to the approach taken by DEI Bermuda’s expert
and to respond to the latter’s critique of Peru’s approach. A tribunal is not obliged to
hear from all witnesses orally. On the contrary, it is empowered under ICSID
Arbitration Rule 36 to admit evidence given by a witness or expert in a written
deposition. It follows that it may also evaluate the probative value of the evidence
given in such a form. This final ground for partial annulment of the Award is thus

also rejected.

cosTSs

It remains for the ad hoc Committee to consider what order it should make
for, respectively, (i) the ICSID Costs*™; and (ii) the costs and expenses of the parties

in connection with the Annulment Proceeding (‘Party Costs’).

In accordance with the direction of the ad hoc Committee, each party

submitted a statement of its costs on 1 December 2010:

(a) Peru submitted a Statement of its Costs quantified at US$1,365,400.60 (including
Party Costs of US$885,400.60 together with its advances of ICSID Costs, which at
that stage totalled US$480,000.00).

(b) DEI Bermuda submitted a Statement of its Party Costs, which it quantifies, using
an hourly rate, at US$1,373,325.40, whilst conceding that at present it is only
obligated to pay US$662,380.90 as its attorneys’ fees are capped, subject to an

unspecified success fee.

363 ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(1).
+ Comprising, in accordance with Articles 52(4) & 61(2) of the ICSID Convention, the fees and expenses of the
members of the Committee and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre.

86

261. DEI Bermuda’s Statement of Costs was accompanied by legal submissions as
to costs. The ad hoc Committee accorded Peru the opportunity to respond to those

submissions, which it did by letter dated 10 December 2010.

262. DEI Bermuda requests that the ad hoc Committee order Peru to pay DEI
Bermuda’s Party Costs together with all of the ICSID Costs.*®° DEI Bermuda submits
that an award of costs is justified on the basis that Peru’s application was ‘manifestly
unfounded’ and ‘most unlikely to succeea’,** and that Peru ‘artificially and

unnecessarily’ drove up the cost of defending the annulment application.*”

263. Peru responds that it has already paid US$480,000 in advances to the Centre
and has not requested to be reimbursed for any portion of the ICSID costs.* Peru
further argues that it has brought ‘serious, well-substantiated claims for annulment’
and thus submits that an order for it to pay DEI Bermuda’s Party Costs is not justified

and should be dismissed.*°

264. The ad hoc Committee has discretion to determine how, and by whom,
ICSID Costs and Party Costs should be borne (Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention
and ICSID Arbitration Rule 47(1)(j), read in conjunction with Article 52(4) of the ICSID

Convention and Arbitration Rule 53).

265. In view of Peru’s clarification regarding ICSID costs, the ad hoc Committee is

not required to make a determination as to apportionment of those costs, and

accordingly makes an order confirming that Peru has to bear all of those costs.?””

266. In relation to DEI Bermuda’s claim for reimbursement of its Party Costs, the
practice of virtually all ICSID annulment committees has been to order each party to
bear their own Party Costs, even where the Applicant has been wholly unsuccessful

in its annulment application. *”*

36 Counter-Memorial (312(2)].

36° Claimant's Statement of Costs, [13].

3°” ibid [13] - [14].

36 Peru's Response to Claimant’s Submission on Costs, [18].

3°? ibid [8] - [17].

3? The Secretariat will in due course provide the Parties with a financial statement showing the ICSID Costs. The
Centre will reimburse Peru any remaining balance in the case account once all costs and expenses have been
paid.

371 Schreuer supra n 121, 1234. See, e.g.,Wena Hotels supra n 116, [112]; Kléckner supra n 133, 163; Amco Asia
supra n 230, [10.01]; Rumeli supra n 359, [183]; MCI supra n 105, [89]; Azurix Corp v Argentine Republic (Decision
on Annulment) ICSID Case No ARB/01/12 (1 September 2009), [380].

87

267. There have only been two cases in which ad hoc committees have departed
from this approach. In each such case, there were exceptional circumstances.”
Thus, in CDC v Seychelles the ad hoc Committee concluded that the Respondent’s
application was “fundamentally lacking in merit” and “most unlikely to succeed”.*”*

In Repsol v Ecuador, the ad hoc Committee stressed that “the arguments for

274

annulment did not pose novel or complex questions’ and also pointed to the

Applicant’s failure to make timely payment of the advance on costs.

268. In the present case, not all of the grounds raised in Peru’s Application for
Annulment were manifestly unfounded. Peru raised arguments in particular on the
question of manifest excess of power — as it relates both to the Tribunal’s exercise of
jurisdiction ratione materiae and ratione temporis and to the Tribunal’s approach to
the law applicable to actos propios/estoppel — that required the ad hoc Committee’s
extended consideration. Moreover, despite the number of points raised by Peru
during the annulment proceeding, the Committee considers that Peru pursued the
annulment proceeding in a constructive and professional manner. In light of these
factors, the ad hoc Committee is not prepared to order that Peru pay DEI Bermuda’s

Party Costs. The Parties shall each bear their own Party Costs.

3”. CDC v Seychelles supra n 130, [89]; Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A. v Empresa Estatal Petréleos del Ecuador (Decision

on Annulment) ICSID Case No ARB/01/10 (8 January 2007), [86].
33 1p

Ibid [89].
374 ibid [87].

88

Vv.

269.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

DECISION

For the reasons given above, the ad hoc Committee decides that:

Peru’s Application for Annulment is dismissed in its entirety.

Peru shall bear all ICSID Costs incurred in connection with this annulment

proceeding.

Each Party shall bear its own Party Costs incurred in connection with this

annulment proceeding.
Pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule

54(3), the stay of enforcement of the Award ordered by the ad hoc Committee

in its decision of 23 June 2009 is terminated.

89

C.a. MN Yablarr >

Professor Campbell McLachlan QC
President of the Ad Hoc Committee

Date: Z8 Febroary 20}l

AA ~eh Cou

 

Judge Dominique Hascher Judge Peter Tomka
Member of the Ad Hoc Committee Member of the Ad Hoc Committee

Date: Febuary 201) Date: 247 em ool

