 

‘Ié@

EEE Mone ni remakes)
The world business organization

 

Court of © Cour in’ if War

AWARD

icc Court of i i e Cour i ii d i de la CCI
38 Cours Albert ter, 75008 Paris, France

Tel +33 (0)1 49 53 28 28 Faxes +33 (0)1 49 53 29 29/ +33 (0)1 49 53 29 33

E-mail arb@iccwbo.org Website www.iccarbitration.org .

 

 

 

 

ICC INTERNATIONAL COURT OF ARBITRATION

CASE No. 16509/JHN

THE EAST CEMENT FOR INVESTMENT COMPANY
(Jordan)
vs/_
THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND

(Poland)

This document is an original of the Partial Award rendered in conformity with the
Rules of Arbitration of the ICC International Court of Arbitration.

 

 

 

 

 

 

PARTIAL AWARD
Given in Paris, France, on 26 August 2011]

ICC Arbitration 16509/JHN

IN THE ARBITRATION
BETWEEN
THE EAST CEMENT FOR INVESTMENT COMPANY (Jordan)
Claimant
and
THE REPUBLIC OF POLAND
Respondent
BEFORE
Mr. Ulf Franke, Chairman

Prof, Avv. Piero Bernardini, Arbitrator
Prof. Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

For Claimant: For Respondent:

\ Garaas SOETYSINSKI KAWECKI & SZLEZAK
The EAS INT FOR KANCELARIA RADCOW PRAWNY
INVESTMENT COMPANY ADWOKATOW SP.K.

Ms. I 2
ul. Wawelska 15B
02-034 Warsaw
Poland

PROKURATORIA GENERALNA SKARBU
PANSTWA

Ms.

ul. Hoza 76/78

00-682 Warsaw

Poland

 

CONTENTS

L. INTRODUCTION

The Parties

The Arbitral Tribunal

The Arbitration Agreement
The applicable substantive law
The place of arbitration

The language of the arbitration
The issue to be determined

NabdRBDL

2. PROCEDURAL HISTORY
3. RELIEF SOUGHT
3.1 Claimant
Respondent
4, FACTUAL AND LEGAL GROUNDS

INVOKED BY THE CLAIMANT; SUMMARY
OF THE CLAIMANT’S CONTENTIONS

41 Costs incurred by Claimant
4.2 Claimant’s comments on Respondent's claims

5. FACTUAL AND LEGAL GROUNDS
INVOKED BY THE RESPONDENT; SUMMARY
OF THE RESPONDENT’S CONTENTIONS

Sut: Rules and practices

&.1.) ICC case law :

5.1.2 Other international arbitration’s case law
5.2: Application to the case

5.2.1 Claimant has failed to prosecute its case

5.2.2 Therefore, Claimant has to pay for Respondent’s legal and other costs
53 Respondent’s comments on Claimant’s claims
6. THE TRIBUNAL’S CONCLUSIONS

6.1 Introduction

6.2 Allocation of costs

6.3 Reasonable costs

6.4 Interest

1 AWARD

 

 

INTRODUCTION

The Parties

(1) The Claimant:

The Claimant, The East Cement for Investment Company (‘“Claimant” or “The
East Cement” or “ECIC”), is established under the laws of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan. The East Cement is registered as a private shareholding
company under the registration number 42/2004/05/06,

The registered address of The East Cement is:

THE EAST CEMENT FOR INVESTMENT COMPANY
Wasfi Al Tal St.
Maram Center — Appt No 416

~ Amman

Jordan

(2) The Respondent:

The Respondent is the Republic of Poland (“Respondent” or “Poland”).
The address of Poland is:

Minister of Justice

Al, Ujazdowskie 1]

00-950 Warszaw

Poland

The Arbitral Tribunal

 

The Tribunal has been constituted as follows:

Chairman
Mr. Ulf Franke
Chapmansgatan Z

11236 Stockholm
Sweden

jointly nominated by the co-arbitrators and confirmed by the Secretary General
of the ICC on 25 November 2009. The joint nomination of the Chairman was
made pursuant to the Parties’ agreement that the co-arbitrators nominate jointly
a Chairman within 45 days upon notification of their confirmation.

Co-arbitrator
Prof. Avy. Piero Bernardini

STUDIO LEGALE UGHI & NUNZIANTE.
Via Venti Settembre 1

00187. Rome

Italy

nominated by Claimant and confirmed by the ICC Court at its session of 8
October 2009,

Co-arbitrator

Prof. Brigitte Stern

7, rue Pierre Nicole

75005 Paris

France

nominated by Respondent and confirmed by the ICC Court at its session of 8
October 2009.

The Arbitration Agreement

The basis for this arbitration is a Bilateral Investment Treaty (“BIT” or
“Treaty”) between the Republic of Poland and the Hashemite Kingdom of

4

 

Jordan on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments dated 4
October 1997. It provides in Article 7 (Disputes between one Contracting Party
and an investor of the other Contracting Party) as follows:

“(1) Disputes between one of the Parties and an investor of the other Party shall
be notified in writing, including a detailed information, by the investor to the
host Contracting Party of the investment. As far as possible the Parties shall

endeavour to settle these differences by means of a friendly agreement.

(2) If these disputes cannot be settled in this way within six months from the
date of the written notification mentioned in paragraph (1) the dispute shall be

submitted, at choice of the investor to:

- a court of arbitration in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of
the Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerces

- the court of arbitration of the Paris International Chamber of
Commerce;

- the ad-hoc court of arbitration established under the Arbitration
Rules of Procedure of the United Nations Commission for
International Trade Law;

- the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes
(ICSID) set up by the "Convention on Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of other States ", in case
both Contracting Parties have become signatories of this

Convention.
(3) (see under 1.4 below)

(4) The arbitration decisions shal] be final and binding for the Parties to the
disputes. Each Contracting Party undertakes to execute the decisions in

accordance with its national law.

(5) The Contracting Party which is a party to the dispute shall at no time

whatsoever during the procedures involving investments disputes, asserts (sic)

5

 

 

as a defence its immunity or the fact that the investor has received compensation
under an insurance contract covering the whole or part of the incurred damage

or loss,”

The applicable substantive law

Article 7(3) of the BIT provides as follows:
“The arbitration award shall be based on:

- the provisions of this Agreement;

- the national law of the Contracting Party in whose territory the
investment was made, including the rules relative to conflicts of
laws; .

- the rules and the universally accepted principles of international

law.”
The place of arbitration

The place of arbitration is Paris, France, in accordance with an agreement

among of the Parties.
The language of the arbitration

The language of the arbitration is English in accordance with an agreement
among the Parties. It was agreed that if documents are submitted in another
language than English, the relevant passages on which the Party submitting the
documents relies shall be translated into English. It was also agreed that fact and
expert witnesses may testify in another language than English but their

testimony shall be interpreted into English.

The issue to be determined

The issue to be decided by the Tribunal in this Partial Award relates only to the
Parties’ legal and other costs, including the allocation of such, until that stage of
the proceedings.

Z. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

he On 31 July 2009, Claimant filed a Request for Arbitration with enclosures with
the JCC International Court of Arbitration (the “Court”).

a On 16 October 2009, Respondent filed an Answer to the Request for Arbitration

with enclosures with the Court.
ae On 26 November 2009, the Arbitral Tribunal received the file.

4, On 27 January 2010, a hearing was held in Paris. The main issues that were dealt
with at the hearing were the Terms of Reference and the First Procedural Order,
including the Provisional Procedural Timetable. Both Parties were present by
counsel. The Tribunal and the Parties agreed on the documents and by the end of
the hearing the Terms of Reference were signed by the Parties and the
Arbitrators. On the same day, the First Procedural Order and the Provisional
Procedural Timetable, attached to the First Procedural Order, were issued,

5. By letter dated 28 January 2010, the Secretariat informed the Tribunal that in
compliance with Article 24(1) of the ICC Rules of Arbitration in force as from
1998 (the “ICC Rules” or the “Rules”), the time limit of six months within
which the Arbitral Tribunal must render the Final Award started to run on the
date of signature of the Terms of Reference, i.e. on 27 January 2010.

6. By letter dated 19 March 2010, Mr. Qi, and Ms qa
RED informed the Tribunal “that thé lew firm ‘iuupaeieieiees,

has formally resigned from acting as the legal counsel of the East Cement for

Investment Company in the present proceedings.”

 

 

 

Bs

By letter dated 25 March 2010, the Claimant informed the Tribunal “that we
have started immediately the process to search and select new legal firm.”
Noting that it must complete “a comprehensive agreement with the potential law
firm so as not to face the same issues this time”, the Claimant requested the
Tribunal “to shift the time table by a minimum of 90 days.”

By letter dated 1 April 2010, the Respondent, noting that Claimant’s counsel had
resigned “[e]leven days before the agreed deadline for the filing of the First
Submission”, expressed “substantial reservations about the timing and nature of
the extension request.” “To the extent that the Tribunal deems any extension to
be warranted or necessary, Respondent may accept a limited prolongation of no
more than 30 days,”

On 6 April 2010, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2, which dealt with
Claimant's request for extension of time and Respondent*s comments to such
request. The Tribunal noted that the retention of new counsel is a valid reason
for an extension. Having already been aware of the resignation of the law firm
QED, for some time, the Tribunal, however, requested
Claimant to finalize the retention of new counsel as soon as possible. The
Tribunal also requested Claimant to complete its submission scheduled for 5
April 2010 without delay after new counsel has been retained, particularly since
Claimant already has had the opportunity to devote considerable time on such
submission. The Tribunal granted Claimant an extension of time for filing its
First Submission until 4 June 2010, adding that it would adapt the Timetable to
such extension in detail at a later occasion after consultation with the Parties, In

the meantime; the Tribunal extended all time limits in the Timetable for 60 days.

By letter dated 7 May 2010, Mr QQ, informed the Tribunal that the

Claimant had requested QD, to succeed QD
‘QD this arbitration and that ee “accepted such a legal
representation and assistance.” In the letter, Mr. QIN requested an
extension for “an additional 3 months” for Claimant to submit its First

Submission,

 

By letter dated 17 May 2010, Respondent, noting that the extension already
granted for the Claimant's First Submission, i.e. until 4 June 2010, meant that
Claimant would be afforded more than four months from the organizational
hearing for its First Submission, objected “to a further extension of three
months.” The Respondent was “able to accept an extension until no later than
July 15, 2010 provided that the Tribunal deems such an extension to be

warranted.”

On 19 May 2010, the Tribunal issued a revised Provisional Procedural

Timetable, elaborated in consultation with the Parties.

By letter dated 23 July 2010, the Secretariat informed the Tribunal that, at its
session of 1 July 2010, pursuant to Article 24(2) and in view of the timetable
that had been established with the Parties, the Court had extended the time limit
for rendering the Final Award until 31 August 2011,

On 26 July 2010, Claimant filed its First Submission, with enclosures.

On 30 July 2010, Claimant filed a Request for Document Production.

By letter dated 12 August 2010, the Secretariat informed the Parties that, at its
session the same day, the Court had reconsidered the advance on costs and, on
the basis of an amount in dispute partially quantified at US$ 150,537,300,
decided to increase it from US$ 160,000 to US$ 770,000, subject to later
readjustments, The Parties were invited to pay within 30 days from the day
following the date of receipt of the letter US$ 305,000 each.

On 10 September 2010, the Secretariat extended the time for payments of the
advance on costs until 19 November 201 0."

re .
On 20 September 2010, the Respondent filedlPbjections to Claimant’s Request

for Document Production.

On 20 September 2010, Respondent filed a Request for Document Production,

 

20.

2d

22,

On 14 October 2010, the Tribunal ruled on Respondent’s objections to
Claimant’s Request for Document Production. The Tribunal considered that
some of the documents requested by Claimant may be relevant and material to
the outcome of the case. No explanation of any specificity was, however, offered
by Claimant. The Tribunal also expressed the opinion that the production of the
requested documents was overly broad and unduly burdensome insofar as the
Request concerned “all” documents relating to the subject matter of the request
and covered a period of three years. The Tribunal also noted that most, if not all,
documents were publicly available and although the Claimant complained of
problems to retrieve documents from public sources, it had already retrieved a
number of such documents. The Claimant’s Request for Document Production,
as formulated, was dismissed. The Tribunal added that if the Claimant could not
retrieve documents which it considered relevant and material to the outcome of
the case from any public sources it should submit the matter to the Tribunal for

final determination. Such submission, which should be with.the Tribunal on 5 ,

November 2010 at the latest, should be accompanied by a more detailed
explanation of the reasons why the requested document(s) are relevant and
material to the outcome of the case. Further, the Claimant should explain why it
had not been possible to retrieve any of the requested document(s) from public
and other sources and why it assumed that such documents were in the
possession or custody or under control of the Respondent. The Claimant never
submitted any matter to the Tribunal for final determination.

On 14 October 2010, the Claimant filed objections to Respondent’s Request for

Document Production.

On 26 October 2010, the Tribunal ruled on Claimant’s objections to
Respondent’s Request for Document Production. All requests were granted,
Regarding Claimant’s objections to the production of certain documents
requested by the Respondent because they may not exist, the Tribunal added that
while it had no reason to doubt that some of the requested documents may not
exist and therefore cannot be produced, it ordered the Claimant to make a

thorough research for the existence of any documentation falling within the

10

 

23:

24,

25,

26.

27.

28.

2D,

limits of the requests and (a) to confirm that such search has been undertaken

and (b) to produce such documentation to the extent that it is found.

On 2 November 2010, the Secretariat acknowledged receipt of US$ 305,000

from Respondent in payment of its share of the advance on costs.

By letter dated 8 November 2010, Claimant, referring to the Secretariat’s letters
of 12 August 2011, 10 September 2010 and 2 November 2010, requested an
extension of time to pay its share on the advance on costs until mid of January
2011. Claimant pointed out that “the Claimant's shareholders immediately upon
receipt of the letters decided to proceed with a raising of funds and a Claimant’s
share capital increase in order to secure the payment of the Claimant share of the

advance of costs.”
On 10 November 2010, Respondent filed its First Submission with enclosures,

On 10 November 2010, the Secretariat, referring to previous extensions, granted
Claimant a further extension to pay its share of the advance on costs until 10
December 2010.

By letter dated 23 November 2010, Mr. SEED informed the Tribunal

that QED will no longer assist and represent Claimant in this

arbitration, adding that per the provisions of the representation agreement, the

termination will have effect within fifteen (15) days from 23 November 2010.

By letter dated 2 December 2010, Claimant, with reference to the resignation of

Gee. requested a suspension of the proceedings or an extension of

the time limit for two months to enable it to appoint new legal counsel or reach
an agreement vit a> office to continue representing Claimant.

By letter dated 9 December 2010, the Claimant requested a further extension to
pay its share of the advance on costs,

a.

 

30.

SL.

52.

By letter dated 10 December 2010, the Secretariat, referring to previous
extensions granted, advised Claimant that the Secretariat was not in a position to
grant Claimant a further extension to pay its share of the advance on costs (i.e,
US$ 305 000). Should Claimant fail to make this payment within 10 days upon
receipt of the letter, the Secretariat would invite Respondent to substitute for

Claimant in paying the balance of the advance on costs.

By letter 20 December 2010, Respondent objected to any suspension or any
extension of the timetable as unwarranted under the circumstances noting that
Claimant already had obtained an 8-week extension of the time for filing its First
Submission following the withdrawal of Claimant’s previous counsel only
eleven days before the agreed deadline for Claimant’s First Submission. In this
regard, Respondent further noted that Mr @iMiad failed to respond in any
way to the Tribunal’s deadline of November 16, 2010 to submit a power of
attorney, and the last letter in the file from Mr.@jjpbefore that was dated 8
November, 2010, Thus, as of the date of this letter, Claimant has been on notice
of the likely need for new counsel for about five weeks at least. Claimant has
not, however, offered any information about the steps that have been taken to
retain new counsel, or why that process would require more than five weeks, let

alone an indefinite suspension.

On 2} December 2010, the Tribunal decided on Claimant’s request of 2
December 2010 on a suspension of the proceedings or an extension of the time
limit for two months, The Tribunal expressed reluctance to grant any further
extensions of the proceedings or any suspension. The Tribunal noted that the
Request of Arbitration in this case was filed on 31 July 2009 and in order to
‘@palize the case within a reasonable time it was essential that the oral hearing
could be held as scheduled, ic. 23 - 27 May 2011. Therefore, only a short
extension could be;;granted. The Tribunal also noted that the Claimant already
for a considerable time had been aware of that it may have to appoint new legal
counsel. The time for the Claimant to file the submission scheduled for 17
January 2011 was extended unti) 3] January 2011 at the latest. The Claimant
was instructed to appoint new counsel within such time that the time limit could
be kept.

12

 

33.

34,

35.

36.

37.

On 28 January 2011, Claimant should have produced documents to Respondent
in accordance with the Tribunal’s decision of 26 October 2010. Claimant never
delivered any documents, however, nor did it explain why it did not comply with

the Tribunal’s decision,

On 31 January 2011, the Claimant requested a staged and staggered payment of
the advance on costs of at least 4 instalments and/or, as an alternative interim

solution, that the Claimant reduces the amount of the claims to 50 Million US$.

On 3] January 2011, Claimant should have filed its Second Submission but did
not. Nor did Claimant explain why it did not comply with the Procedural
Timetable. te

By letter dated 4 February 2011, the Secretariat ttéted that the Parties had first
been invited to pay the balance of the advance on costs, reconsidered and fixed -
by the Court at US$ 770,000, subject to later readjustment, on 12 August 2010.
Until today, no payment was received from Claimant in payment of the balance
of its share of the reconsidered advance on costs (i.e. US$, 305,000). It was
therefore not possible to grant Claimant a further extension and the Secretariat
was also unable to grant Claimant’s request to pay the balance of its share of the
advance on costs in instalments. However, the Secretariat informed Claimant
that it was free to adjust its claims, The Secretariat noted that the amount in
dispute was currently partially quantified at US$ 150,537,300 (i.e. PLN
447,014,935 for the partially quantified principal claims), If Claimant intended
to reduce its claim; it was invited to inform the Secretariat accordingly within 7

days upon receipt of the letter,

By letter dated 15 February 2011, the Secretariat, referring to its letter dated 4
February 2011, noted that no indication was received from Claimant regarding a
potential adjustment of its claims. Consequently, further to its letter dated 4
January 20]1 and in light of Claimant’s payment failure, the Secretariat invited
Respondent to substitute for Claimant in paying the balance of its share of the
advance on costs (i.e. US$ 305 000) within 10 days from the date of receipt of

13

 

38.

39,

40.

41.

the letter. Unless payment of the amount was received within the time limit
granted, the Secretariat informed the Parties that the Secretary General may,
pursuant to Article 30(4) of the Rules, grant the Parties a further and final time
limit of not less than 15 days to make payment, failing which the claims would
be considered wit without prejudice to their reintroduction at a later date

in another proceeding. *

By letter dated 18 February 2011, Respondent, referring to Claimant’s request
on 31 January 2011, asked the Tribunal to (i) reject this and any further
extension requests from Claimant, and (ii) issue an order finding Claimant in
default for failure to prosecute its case, and cancelling the Procedural Timetable

as no longer valid or necessary.

By letter dated 25 February 2011, Respondent declined the Secretariat’s
invitation of 15 February 2011 to cover the Claimant’s share of the advance on
costs, and requested that the Secretary General and the Tribunal, in view of
Article 30(4) of the ICC Rules, allow Respondent to be heard on a motion for an

award on costs prior to the termination of this arbitration.

By letter dated 4 March 2011, Claimant, acknowledging that it so far had been
unable to comply with the deadlines stated in the Procedural Order, requested “‘a
final extension of 45 days ... to fund and finance this case”, stating that it
presently was in a process of selling a real estate property that would enable it

within 45 days to immediately make the payment of its share of the costs.

By letter dated 10 March 2011, Respondent requested that “(i) the Tribunal issue
an order finding Claimant in default of its obligations under the Procedural
Timetable, and cancelling the same as no longer extant; (ii) the ICC and the
Tribunal confer and confirm that, despite the inevitable deemed withdrawal of
claims, the Tribunal shall adjudicate Respondent’s request for costs; and (iii) the
ICC refund to Respondent the portion of the advance payment that has not been

consumed as promptly as possible.”

14

 

42.

43,

44,

45.

46,

By letter dated 16 March 2011, the Secretariat, acknowledging receipt of
Respondent’s letter dated 25 February 2011, Claimant’s letter dated 4 March
2011 and Respondent’s letter dated 10 March 2011, advised that, after
consultation with the Arbitral Tribunal, the Secretariat will presently refrain
from inviting the Secretary General to apply Article 30(4) of the Rules until the
Arbitral Tribunal has reverted to the Parties regarding the further conduct of the
P dings. Notwithstanding this, the i inded the Parties that the
outstanding balance of the advance on costs, i.e. US$ 305 000, should be paid
without further delay, In this respect, the Secretariat reserved its right to apply
Article 30(4) of the Rules in due course.

By letter dated 17 March 2011, the Tribunal, stating Claimant's failure to
comply with the Procedural Timetable and other orders of the Tribunal,
informed the Parties of its decision to discontinue the current Procedural
Timetable and to invite Claimant to respond, by 31 March 2011 at the latest, to
the Respondent’s requests, included in its letters dated 18 and 25 February and
10 March 2011, that the proceedings be terminated and that costs be awarded in
Respondent's favour.

By letter dated 31 March 2011, Claimant rejected Respondent’s request that the
proceedings be terminated and that costs be awarded in Respondent's favour.

By letter dated 29 April 2011, the Tribunal, again stating Claimant’s failure to
comply with the Procedural Timetable and other orders of the Tribunal, the
result of which was that the case after close to two years was far from ready for
final resolution, as well as Respondent’s request of an award on the costs,
informed the Parties that it had decided to render a Partial Award on the Parties?
costs incurred so far in the proceedings. The Parties were invited to submit, by
13 May 2011 at the latest, cost statements, which may include the costs
requested as well as views on which of the Parties shall bear the costs or in what

proportions they shall be borne by the Parties.

By letters dated 13 May 2011, both Parties submitted submissions on costs. The

contents of the submissions appear below.

 

47.

48.

49;

50,

Si.

3.1

3.2

By letter dated 16 May 2011, the Tribunal invited each Party to comment, by 27
May 2011 at the latest, on the other Party’s submission.

By letter dated 26 May 2011, Claimant requested an extension to comment on
the other Party’s submission until 3 June 2011,

By letter dated 27 May 2011, the Tribunal extended the time limit to comment
on the other Party’s cost submission until 3 June 2011.

By letters dated 3 June 2011, each Party commented on the other Party’s cost

submission.

By letter dated 21 July the Tribunal declared the proceedings closed under
Article 22 (1) of the ICC Rules with respect to the Parties’ costs in relation for
this part of the proceedings.

RELIEF SOUGHT
Claimant

Claimant’s demands full compensation for the costs it “has incurred ,.... in the
preparation, follow up and registration of its claim ....” Such costs amount to
US$ 280,000.00, € 318,494.10 and JOD 65,000.00.

Respondent

Respondent requests that the Tribunal render an award pursuant to Article 31 of
the ICC Rules, ordering that Claimant bear all costs of this arbitration in the
amount of € 668,141.47, plus compound interest at the Polish statutory rate of
13%, or, alternatively, the EURIBOR rates for three months plus 5%,
compounded quarterly, in the case the amount is unpaid after 30 days from the
date of notification, as well as any additional relief that the Tribunal may deem
just and appropriate under the circumstances of this case.

16

 

 

Al.

54,

35.

56.

FACTUAL AND LEGAL GROUNDS INVOKED BY THE CLAIMANT;
SUMMARY OF THE CLAIMANT’S CONTENTIONS

Claimant’s position is that it “has incurred substantial expenses in the
preparation, follow up and registration of its claim and thus demands full

compensation of said costs.”

Claimant “reiterates its previous statements that failure to respond to its request
for extension of Procedural Order was unfounded, unjustified and has disabled
Claimant from submitting further evidences in substantiation of its case.”

“Further, Claimant would like to reiterate the fact that it is the Respondent who
has continuously frustrated the ability of Claimant to make payments, by
depriving the Claimant of funds and payments due to it from the proceeds of its

actions.”

Costs incurred by Claimant:

Expense Amount

65,000.00

 

In addition to the above, the Claimant had incurred indirect costs associated with

the follow up and collection of documents for the case. Those costs are:

Item | Expense Amount Amount in

1

2
3

 

 

 

42,

51

5.1.1

57.

58,

52.

60.

61.

“Claimant rejects to be considered as defaulting party to meet the Procedural
Order and thus to be responsible for losing its actual costs incurred so far. More
importantly, the Claimant rejects to bear any cost claimed by the Respondent as
the later had constantly refused and hindered [Claimant]‘s attempts to extend the
time lines of the Procedural Order. Therefore, Respondent should not benefit
from its actions that had adversely affected Claimant.”

“Respondent should bear in full all costs of arbitration as cessation of

proceedings had been caused by it without lawful justification.”
Claimant’s comments on Respondent’s claims

“On the Respondent's request to recover the costs of this arbitration — without
submission to the accuracy of costs presented by the Respondent, Claimant
tejects this request categorically on the basis that legality negates liability for
damages. Claimant should not bear any share of said costs arising from
Claimant's entitlement to recover its rights from Respondent.”

“ft is the Respondent that should bear in full all costs of arbitration attributed to
it as cessation of proceedings had been requested by it not the Claimant.
Respondent should not benefit from such request.”

FACTUAL AND LEGAL GROUNDS INVOKED BY THE RESPONDENT;
SUMMARY OF THE RESPONDENT’S CONTENTIONS

Respondent is seeking a Tribunal award ordering Claimant to reimburse
Respondent for the entirety of the costs of this arbitration, including
Respondent’s full costs of legal representation, plus compound interest on the

amounts awarded,
Rules and practices

ICC case law

18

 

 

62. Under Articles 31(1) and (3) of the ICC Rules, the Tribunal has broad discretion
to decide in what proportions the costs shall be borne by the Parties, including
the administrative expenses fixed by the ICC Court, and the costs of legal

representation.

63. Applying the general rule that the costs should follow the event, one ICC
tribunal emphasized that

“{slince it is the defendant who is winning this arbitration
because the claim of Claimant was either withdrawn during
the oral hearing or is dismissed by this final award, it is the

ou

Claimant who is to carry its costs.

64. A party’s behaviour in the conduct of the arbitration is also an important factor
in the allocation of costs, For example, another ICC tribunal underscored that,

“falccording to the general principles of international
arbitration law, the arbitral tribunal must take into account
for its decision on costs not only the result of the proceedings but
also the behaviour of the parties during the proceedings ....
According to good faith, the parties to an international
arbitration must in particular facilitate the proceedings and

abstain from all delaying tactics ....”?

65. Specifying the nature of the delaying tactics motivating the ICC tribunal’s costs

award in that case, the tribunal continued,

} Final award in ICC case no. 8547 of 1999 (emphasis added by Respondent).
? Final award in ICC case no. 8486 of 1996 (emphasis added by Respondent).

 

 

66.

5.1.2

67.

“The behaviour of the defendant during the entire proceedings did
not comply with these requirements in any way. The defendant
made none of the advance payments on costs which are
required for the proceedings. . . . Further, it also contributed to
unnecessary delay and confusion in the proceedings by
appointing counsel at the last moment, (...) compounded by
counsel’s renunciation to the mandate only a few days
afterwards, . . . For the above reasons, the defendant shall also
reimburse to the claimant the advance payment on costs, which the

latter paid for these proceedings.”*

In addition to the support found in the ICC Rules and practices, the Respondent
has also referred to decisions by investment treaty tribunals operating under
various arbitration regimes, which have confirmed that the failure to prosecute
its case and a party’s behaviour during the arbitration are crucial factors in
assessing the allocation of costs. Among such references are the following.

Other international arbitration’s case law

The decision on costs of the NAFTA UNCITRAL tribunal in Melvin J. Howard
& others v. Canada is illustrative. There, the tribunal was faced with.a situation
almost identical to that presented by ECIC in the present case. The NAFTA
claimants failed to advance their clairhs, including failing to cover the required
advance on costs. In ordering claimants to reimburse Canada for the costs of the

proceedings, the tribunal observed that

“in light of the Claimants’ failure to meet their basic obligations
and to orderly prosecute their claims, the Tribunal is of the view
that the Claimants are to be perceived as the unsuccessful] Party. . .
[The costs of proceeding] were incurred as a result of the

Claimants’ decision to commence this arbitration and their

3 Ibid. The tribunal in this case awarded costs to the party that failed on much of its claims based on the conduct

of the parties.

20

 

subsequent refusal to pursue their claims in an efficient manner in
accordance with the applicable arbitration rules. It would not be
fair or reasonable, in the Tribunal’s view, if these costs were to be
borne or partially shared by the Respondent, the Government of

Canada.”*

68. Accordingly, the Melvin J. Howard UNCITRAL tribunal awarded Canada the
fees and expenses of the tribunal and the costs of assistance required by the
tribunal.

69. The ICSID tribunal in Quadrant Pacific Growth Fund L.P. and Canasco
‘Holdings Ine. v. Republic of Costa Rica, reached a similar conclusion in the
context of the claimant’s failure to prosecute that case.> There, the tribunal did
not deem it necessary to determine the relative success or failure of either side.
Rather, “the Tribunal may proceed to a decision on the allocation of costs on the
basis of other factors, such as in a case where a party's ‘bad faith, lack of
cooperation, dilatory or otherwise improper conduct justifies that the costs of the
proceedings be assessed against such party.” Citing that “[a]fter almost two
years of adjudication . . . Claimants suddenly decided to abandon their claims,”
and Claimant’s “crisply stated” withdrawal of counsel, the tribunal determined

that

“Claimants cannot expect Respondent to carry the burden of the
costs of defending claims that Claimants decided to abandon.
Accordingly, equity and fairness mandate that Claimants should
bear the expenses and costs incurred by the Respondent in this

arbitration.”

4 Melvin J. Howard, Centurion Health Corp. & Howard Family Trust v. The Government of Canada,
UNCITRAL, PCA Case No. 2009-2] (NAFTA), Order for the Termination of the Proceedings and Award on
Costs, Aug. 2, 2010 (Judge Peter Tomka, Pres; M. Floresta; H, Alvarez), available al
he law.uvic.ca/documents/Howardv,CanadaOrder.
5 Quadrant Pacific Growth Fund L.P. and Canasco Holdings Inc. v. Republic of Costa Rica, 1CSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/O8/I (Canada/Costa Rica BIT), Order of the Tribunal Taking Note of the Discontinuance of the
Proceedings and Allocation of Costs, Oct. 27, 2010 (A. Garro, Pres. A. Lowenfeld; B. Cremades), available at
hup:/fta.law.uyi FundVCostaRicaOrderEng.pdf.

 

     

BA.

 

70.

7.

72.

5.2.1

Similarly, in Piero Foresti, Laura de Carli & Others v. The Republic of South
Africa, the respondent’s request for a default award, not with respect to the
merits, but with respect to fees and costs resulted in the ICSID tribunal’s
determination that it was “fair and reasonable” to order claimants to contribute €
400,000 to respondent’s legal costs and associated expenses.° Respondent
explained that the tribunal could entertain its request to “render a default award
in favour of the Respondent on the ground of Claimants’ failure to prosecute

their claims,” Furthermore,

“Respondent argued that it was entitled to an award of fees and
costs because the Claimants had wasted the time, energy, and
money of ICSID, the Tribunal, and the Republic by bringing a
claim that (i) they never intended to pursue as pleaded, but rather
had brought as a mere tactical device, (ii) could have been
adequately handled under the Respondent’s own laws and

procedures ....”

In line with the respondent’s requests, the tribunal granted a substantial sum for
respondent’s costs given, inter alia, “the fact that the Claimants ultimately
abandoned some of their claims.” In ding so, the tribunal underscored that its
approach “reinforces the view that, [ ] claimants in investment arbitrations . . .
cannot expect to leave respondent States to carry the costs of defending
claims that are abandoned . . . .” (emphasis added by Respondent)

Application to the case

There are several independent reasons supporting Respondent’s request for an

award on costs.

Claimant has failed to prosecute its case

 

6 Piero Forest, Laura de Carli & Others v. The Republic of South Africa, CSD Case No. ARB(AF)/07/01
(italy/South Africa and BLEU/South Affica BIT), Award, Aug. 4, 2010 (V. Lowe, Pres; C.N. Brower; J.M,
Matthews) #9] 132-133 available at http://ita Jaw.uvi PieroForesti_v SouthAfiica Award.pdf.

22

 

 

 

73.

74.

75.

Claimant has effectively abandoned its case, having failed to meet several
deadlines and orders set by the Tribunal, and to cover the required advance on

costs,

Claimant has disregarded the timetable and several extensions exceptionally
granted by the Tribunal. For example, Claimant failed to respond in any way on
28 January 2011 to the Tribunal’s 26 October 2010 order requiring the
production of documents, Claimant also did not submit its Second Submission,
due 31 January 2011, initially failing even to acknowledge the Tribunal’s
deadline. Instead, on the very due date for Claimant’s submission, Claimant sent
the ICC Secretariat a letter, which was not copied to Respondent but
subsequently forwarded to Respondent by the Secretariat, requesting “a staged
and staggered payment for .. . at least 4 instalments” and proposing “an

alternative interim solution that the Claimant reduces the amount of the Claim to

°50 Million USD.” Claimant, however, then failed-to embrace an opening from

the ICC to reduce the amount of the claim, In any case, Claimant has defaulted
in that it failed even to file its Second Submission, and otherwise failed to

prosecute its case.

Furthermore, rather than affirmatively withdrawing its claim to avoid
Respondent’s incurring further costs, Claimant engaged in dilatory tactics,
asserting its intention to proceed, but failing to act. Claimant presented no fewer
than five excuses for its failure to prosecute its claim, including (i) the
resignation of two counsel teams; (ii) the inability to retain new counsel; (iii) a
pending — since at least November 8, 2010 — purported capital increase; (iv) a
planned sale of real estate; and (v) even political turmoil in the Maghreb and
Middle East. None of Claimant’s excuses provided sufficient basis to defer

Claimant’s obligations under the Parties’ procedural agreement.

Claimant has repeatedly presented excuses to protract these proceedings, both

with respect to (i) the time limits for payment of the advance on costs, and (ii)

 

 

5.2.2

77.

78.

79.

the Procedural Timetable, In all, Claimant already has been granted six

extensions by the Secretariat, and three extensions by the Tribunal.

During the course of this arbitration, two counsels for Claimant have resigned.
The first resignation was announced eleven days before the agreed deadline for
the filing of the First Submission, seriously disrupting Respondent’s planning
and schedule for its responsive pleading. The second resignation, in November
2010, was not initially communicated either to the Tribunal, or to Respondent.
After each counsel resignation, Claimant has sought extension of the deadlines.
First, Claimant sought three months, then another three months, and finally two
months. Already after the first resignation, the Tribunal “express[ed] concern on
the duration of the proceedings.” Nonetheless, as recently as March 4, 2011,
Claimant persisted with its request for delay, seeking “[a] final Extension of 45
days.”

Not only has Claimant failed to meet the exceptionally granted deadline, it failed
as well to offer any explanation as to the steps taken, or progress made, long
after the dates when Claimant announced that Mr. Vatier would no longer act for
Claimant in this arbitration, and after the dates when Claimant committed to

have new counsel in place.

Therefore, Claimant has to pay for Respondent's legal and other costs

The costs relevant in this arbitration include two principal categories: (1) the
fees and expenses of the arbitrators and the ICC administrative expenses fixed
by the ICC Court; and (2) the reasonable legal and other costs incurred by
Respondent in the arbitration. In addition, the Respondent has requested that
Claimant shall be ordered to pay (3) compound interest on the amount awarded,

(1) Fees and of the arbitrators and the ICC inistrative

fixed by the ICC Court

24

 

80.

81.

82.

83.

In accordance with the agreed upon procedure and relevant rules, Respondent
has paid its portion of the advance on costs in its entirety. Respondent has in
good faith timely paid the advance on costs fixed by the ICC Court in the
amount of US$ 80,000 on 17 December 2009, and the further adjustment of US$
305,000 on 26 October 2010 for an aggregate advance payment by Respondent
of US$ 385,000 (€ 275,011.53).

Given Respondent’s good faith and unvarying compliance with the rules, the
award on costs should direct that Claimant reimburse Respondent in full for the
advance on costs that has already been paid (alternatively, Claimant should be
ordered to reimburse whatever amount the Court of Arbitration fixes and retains
from Respondent's advance at the close of the arbitration),

(2) The reasonable legal and other costs incurred by R dent in this

arbitration

Legal representation

Costs for legal representation of € 367,638.18, are not only reasonable, they are
substantially conservative. This amount also encompasses additional costs
incurred by counsel, such as attorney travel costs to Paris for the January 2010
hearing, and to the Bankruptcy Court in Cracow, as well as all other costs not

evidenced elsewhere, including, for example, courier costs.

Expert opinion

Respondent retained an expert to provide an opinion regarding Polish
bankruptcy law. The total costs to Respondent for expert services in this case are
€ 5,029.17

 

 

84,

85.

Translations

To produce the written submissions in this case, Respondent contracted with
outside vendors for translation services required. The total outside costs to

Respondent for translation services in this case are € 18,490.90.

Virtually all documents relevant and material in this arbitration are in the Polish
language. Respondent was not only burdened with costs of translating its own
supporting documents, but also was forced to translate documents submitted by
Claimant only in the Polish language, or that Claimant has translated improperly.
Such practices have been employed by Claimant from the outset of these
proceedings, and have continued through Claimant's recent submission dated 4
March 2011. Claimant’s practices, in turn, generate unnecessary, additional costs

to Respondent.

Given the specificity of this case and Claimant’s approach, the above costs are

reasonable and should be granted in full by the Tribunal.

Travel expenses of Respondent's representative

Travel costs of Respondent’s representative, Ma. to the 27

January 2010 hearing in Paris are included under the category of other costs.

These travel expenses were necessary and are eminently reasonable. As in the

case of Profs: Qi > Di. QM ond Mr.
SED Respondent’s representative, Mr. a traveled in

economy class. Similarly, Mr. QP yen at a hotel under a discounted
rate for the minimum period possible (1 night). Accordingly, the amount of these

travel expenses, € 617.17, is reasonable and should be borne by Claimant.

26

 

89.

90.

91,

Other expenses incurred by Counsel for Respondent

The cost of renting the ICC venue for the January 2010 hearing in Paris is also
included under the category of other costs in this arbitration. This cost amounts
to € 1,354.52.

(3) Compound interest

Respondent is entitled to compound interest on any award of its costs of
arbitration and legal representation. International tribunals routinely grant
interest on the principal monetary award for compensation. Indeed, counsel for
Claimant has asserted entitlement fo interest on any awaid in its favor at the
rates applicable under EURIBOR, so surely there can be no objection from

Claimant upon an award of interest to Respondent.

Furthermore, an interest charge on Respondent’s costs is the only assurance that
Respondent will be made whole.

As for the rate of interest that is appropriate in this case, Article 7(3) of the
Treaty applicable here provides as follows:

0% OR

“The arbitration award shall be based on: [i] the provisions of this
Agreement; [ii] the national law of the Contracting Party in
whose territory the investment, was made, including the rules
relative to conflicts of laws; [iii] the rules and the universally
accepted principles of international law.” (emphasis added by

Respondent)

27

 

92. Under Polish law, the rate of statutory interest is 13%. Thus, in view of Article
7(3) of the Treaty, item [ii], it is amply within the Tribunal’s authority to award
the statutory rate of interest required under Polish law of 13% per annum.

93. Given the above, in addition to any pre-award interest, Respondent respectfully
requests that, in case of non-payment of any award on costs in favour of
Respondent after 30 days from the date of its notification, the Tribunal apply the
Polish statutory rate of interest of 13% per annum to the aggregate amount

awarded.

94. In the alternative, Respondent respectfully asks the Tribunal to grant, at a
minimum, the rate of interest akin to that Claimant deemed appropriate for itself,
i.e., the EURIBOR rates for 3 months plus 5% to its award on costs in favour of
Respondent in the case it is unpaid after 30 days from the date of notification.
Although the Polish statutory rate is entirely justified in this case, this alternative
mode of calculation, as proposed by Claimant itself, is consistent with the
practices of other tribunals, both with respect to the level of,’ and the compound

character of interest.*

95. In addition, and regardless of the choice among the alternative rates of interest
proposed above, interest should be compounded quarterly, or at another interval
deemed appropriate by this Tribunal. The relevance of granting compound
interest has been underscored by an ICSID tribunal:

7 See, e.g, PSEG v. Turkey, 4 348 (employing “the 6 month average LIBOR plus 2 per cent per year for each
year during which amounts are owing. The interest shall start running on the date specified below until payment
of the Award. Interest shall be compounded semi-annually.”) (emphasis added by Respondent); Compaiid de
Aguas del Aconguija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic § 9.2.8 (underscoring that “the Tribunal
concludes that a 6% interest rate represents a reasonable proxy for the return Claimants could otherwise have
eared on the amounts invested and lost in the Tucumén concession.”) (emphasis added); /urii Bogdanov,
Agurdino-Invest Ltd. and Agurdino-Chimia JSC v, Republic of Moldova, SCC (Russia/Moldova BIT), Award,
Sept. 22, 2005 (G.C, Moss, sole arbit.) 47.5 (“In case payment is not made or only partially made by that date
the Respondent shall pay default interests at the rate of 23% for payments in lei and 2.5% for payments in Euro,
compounded quarterly.”) (emphasis added by Respondent) available at
hftp://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Bogdanov-Moldova-22September2005.pdf

® See Compatid de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, 49.2.4 (“To the
extent there has been a tendency of international tribunals to award only simpie interest, this is changing, and the
award of compound interest is no longer the exception to the rule.”).

 

28

5.3

98.

99.

 

100.

Cost of renting the ICC venue for the January 2010 hearing € 1,354.52

 

Respondent’s comments on Claimant’s claims ~

As Claimant’s submission itself establishes, Claimant has no genuine legal or
factual basis for its claim for costs. Rather, consistent with ECIC’s practices
from the outset of this arbitration, its costs request further confirms the

groundl of ECIC’s positi as well as Respondent's entit toa full

award of its costs.

A review of each of the components of the overall costs reflects that Claimant
seeks reimbursement of € 552,942.01 for costs of legal representation and other
expenses, while for the same purpose Respondent has shown it incurred €
393,129.94 in costs. The comparison of the Parties’ respective requests confirms

the reasonableness of Respondent’s request for a full award of all its costs.

Respondent requests that the Tribunal rejects in its entirety Claimant’s request
for costs, and renders an award pursuant to Article 31 of the ICC Rules, ordering
that Claimant bear all costs of this arbitration in the amount of € 668,141.47,
plus compound interest at the Polish statutory rate of 13%, or another
appropriate rate.

30

 

THE TRIBUNAL’S REASONING AND CONCLUSIONS

Introduction

The key provisions in this arbitration appear in Article 31 of the ICC Rules,

which reads:

“1, The costs of the arbitration shall include the fees and expenses of
the arbitrators and the ICC administrative expenses fixed by the Court,
in accordance with the scale in force at the time of the commencement
of the arbitral proceedings, as well as the fees and expenses of any
experts appointed by the Arbitral Tribunal and the reasonable legal and
other costs incurred by the parties for the arbitration.

2. The Court may fix the fees of the arbitrators at a figure higher or
lower than that which would result from the application of the relevant
scale should this be deemed necessary due to the exceptional
circumstances of the case. Decisions on costs other than those fixed by
the Court may be taken by the Arbitral Tribunal at any time during the
proceedings.

3. The final Award shall fix the costs of the arbitration and decide
which of the parties shall bear them or in what proportion they shall be
borne by the parties,”

The Tribunal notes that under this Article it can take decisions on costs at any
time during the proceedings, except, however, on the costs fixed by the Court.
The reason for this exception is obvious, The Court does not fix the costs of
arbitration (i.e. fees and expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal and ICC
administrative expenses) until the final award stage, so the costs are not known
to the Tribunal at the time for this Partial Award. From this also follows that the
Tribunal at this stage of the proceedings cannot decide that one Party shall

31

 

6.2

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

reimburse the other Party for the advance on costs since such decision is
dependent on the Court’s fixing of the costs of arbitration at the final award

stage.

Other costs, and how such costs shall be allocated among the Parties, can be
dealt with by the Tribunal in a partial award. In this context, it shall be noted that
neither of the Parties has contested that a decision on costs is made by the

Tribunal.

The Tribunal finds it appropriate that a decision on costs is taken at this stage.
The proceedings have been pending for two years — Claimant filed the Request
for Arbitration on 31 July 2009 — and are presently not progressing.

Considerable costs have been incurred by the Parties and they are entitled to a

decision from the Tribunal,

Having concluded that a partial award of costs is not only in line with the
applicable rules but also appropriate in this case, the Tribunal turns to

considering the reasonableness and allocation of the costs.

Both Parties have submitted cost statements and also commented on each other’s
statements. Extensive summaries of such statements and comments appear
above. The fact that not all arguments and evidence are expressly mentioned in
the Partial Award shall not be construed as if they have not been taken into

account.
The Tribunal starts by considering the allocation of the costs and will then, if the
conclusion is that one party shall reimburse the other, turn to consider whether

the amount claimed is reasonable. Finally, the Tribunal will also deal with

interest.
Allocation of costs

32

 

109.

110.

Il.

112,

113,

114,

115.

As noted earlier, this case was initiated by Claimant on 31 July 2009. On 27
January 2010, the Parties and the Tribunal agreed on a provisional procedural
timetable, It provided for a final hearing on 17-21 January 2011.

On 19 May 2010, the Parties and the Tribunal agreed on a revised timetable. It
provided for a fina] hearing on 23 - 27 May 2011.

On 17 March 2011, the Tribunal, noting Claimant’s failure to comply with the
timetable and other orders of the Tribunal, decided to discontinue the current

timetable. No new timetable has been adopted.

The blame for the delay of the proceedings, and eventually, for all practical
purposes, the effective stay of same, falls entirely upon Claimant. It has failed to
comply with both time limits, laid down in agreed timetables or otherwise, and
other orders of the Tribunal. The Tribunal particularly notes that despite
repeated extensions, Claimant has not filed its second written submission, which,
after extensions, should have been submitted on 31 January 2011 at the latest.
Nor has it complied with the Tribunal’s order to produce documents, due on 28

January 2011.

During the course of the arbitration, two counsels for Claimant have resigned,
the last one on 23 November 2010. Despite extensions of the time to enable

Claimant to appoint new counsel, no such has been retained.

The Tribunal further notes that Claimant has failed to pay its share of the
advance of costs despite repeated requests by the Secretariat.

Although Claimant objects to a termination of the proceedings, it is the
Tribunal’s opinion that Claimant has since long failed to prosecute its case in
such a way that Claimant must be considered to have abandoned the case. By so
behaving, Claimant must also assume responsibility for the costs it has occurred
both for itself and the Respondent by first initiating the case and then, after both
Parties had devoted considerable time and efforts on the case, abandon it.

33

 

116, The Tribunal agrees with Piero Foresti, Laura de Carli & Others v. The
Republic of South Africa, that [ ] “claimants in investment arbitrations . .. cannot
expect to leave respondent States to carry the costs of defending claims that are

abandoned .. . .”!°

117. Other tribunals faced with similar situations have concluded in the same
direction, e.g. Melvin J. Howard & others v. Canada and Quadrant Pacific
Growth Fund LP and Canasco Holdings Inc v Republic of Costa Rica,''

118. Under the ICC Rules, the Tribunal has wide discretion to determine how to
allocate the costs among the Parties. Having already concluded that the Tribunal
cannot take a decision on the allocation of the costs fixed by the Court, it
remains for it to decide on the legal and other costs incurred by the Parties.
According to the conclusion above, the Tribunal finds that the Claimant shall
bear both its own legal and other costs and the reasonable costs claimed by
Respondent in relation to the period of the proceedings up until this Partial
Award,

63 Reasonable costs

119. As to the reasonableness of the legal and other costs claimed by Respondent, the
Tribunal notes that Respondent has provided details of its costs in appendices.
None of the costs appear unnecessary or excessive. The Tribunal also notes that
the costs claimed by Respondent are lower than the corresponding costs claimed
by the Claimant, In the Tribunal’s opinion, the Respondent’s costs, in total €
393,129.94, are reasonable.

°° Piero Foresti, Laura de Carli & Others v. The Republic of South Africa, IcsID Case No, pace eh

Award Aug. 4, 2010, available at http-//it ‘oF oresti_v.

1 Melvin J. Howard. Centurion Health Corp. & Howard Family Trust ¥. The Government - a at,
UNCITRAL, PCA Case No, 2009-21 (NAFTA), Order for the Termination of the Proceedings and Award on
Costs Aug. 2, 2010, available at http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Howardv.CanadaOrder.pdf.

Quadrant Pacific Growth Fund L.P. and Canasco Holdings Inc. v. Republic of Costa Rica, YCSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/08/1, Order of the Tribunal Taking Note of the Discontinuance of the Proceedings and Allocation of
Costs Oct. 27, 2010 available at

hitpy/ita Jaw.uvii

 

Paci Fund VCostaRicaOrderiing.pdf.

34

 

 

64

120.

122.

123.

124,

Interest

Respondent's position is, as noted earlier, that, in case of non-payment of any
award on costs in favour of Respondent after 30 days from the date of its
notification, the Tribunal shall apply the Polish statutory rate of interest of 13%
per annum to the aggregate amount awarded, and has in such connection referred
to the applicable Jaw provision in Article 7(3) of the BIT, which, inter alia,
provides that “the national law of the Contracting Party in whose territory the
investment was made, including the rules relative to conflicts of laws” shall be

applicable by the Tribunal, among other rules.

In the alternative, Respondent has asked the Tribunal to grant, at a minimum,
EURIBOR rate for 3 months plus 5% to its award on costs in favour of
Respondent in the case it is unpaid after 30 days from the date of notification.

In addition, and regardless of the choice among the alternative rates of interest
proposed above, Respondent requests that the interest be compounded quarterly,

or at another interval deemed appropriate by this Tribunal.

Claimant has not requested interest on the amounts claimed as compensation for
its costs, nor has it, although it has denied Respondent’s right to be
compensated, offered any comments regarding Respondent’s interest claims, It
may be noted in this connection, however, that Claimant in its main claims has
requested interest on amounts awarded it “at the rate of EURIBOR 3 months as
at the date of performance of the award by the Respondent.”

The Tribunal’s opinion is that the interest shall serve the purpose of
compensating the aggrieved party for the loss of the use of its money. The
purpose shall not be to over compensate such party or to punish the other party.
In the Tribunal’s view, the Polish statutory rate of interest of 13% may result in
an overcompensation of the Respondent. This is not because it is something

wrong with Polish statutory rate of interest but is a consequence of the fact that

35

 

125.

126.

127.

128.

129.

statutory interest rates usually change infrequently and will therefore not at all
times reflect the economic conditions. In the Tribunal’s opinion a more market

oriented rate should be applied.

The Tribunal recalls that the applicable law provision, apart from referring to
“the national law of the Contracting Party”, also includes a reference to the

“rules and the universally accepted principles of international law.”

The Tribunal! notes that the UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial
Contracts (the “UNIDROIT Principles”) include in Article 7.4.9 (2) a provision
specifically dealing with interest for failure to pay money. It provides that:

“The rate of interest shall be the average bank short term lending rate to
prime borrowers prevailing for the currency of payment at the place for
payment, or where no such rafe exists at that place, then the same rate in the
State of the currency of payment. In the absence of such a rate at either place
the rate of interest shall be the appropriate rate fixed by the law of the State
of the currency of payment.”

This provision appears in the UNIDROIT Principles 2010 as well as in the
preceding versions 1994 and 2004.

The official comment by UNIDROIT to this provision in the 1994 and 2004

versions states, inter alia, that:

“This solution seems to be that best suited to the needs of international trade
and most appropriate to ensure an adequate compensation of the harm
sustained. The rate in question is the rate at which the aggrieved party will
normally borrow the money which it has not received from the

nonperforming party.”

Although the UNIDROIT Principles, under their title, deal with international
commercial contracts, the Tribunal finds that guidance could be sought in these

principles also in the present matter, particularly in finding “an adequate

36

 

compensation of the harm sustained” by Respondent, should the amount

awarded not be provided.

130. As noted above the rate of interest under the UNIDROIT Principles shall, in the
first place, “be the average bank short term lending rate to prime borrowers

prevailing for the currency of payment at the place for payment.”

131. In the present case, however, the Parties, as an alternative to Polish statuary rate,
have adopted a more international approach by referring, albeit in different
connections in these proceedings, to EURIBOR as an acceptable rate of
reference. This is also consistent with the currency of payment. The Tribunal,
therefore, concludes that EURIBOR shall serve as reference rate in the present
case. Both Parties have also indicated that the rate be adjusted every three
months. The Tribunal agrees.

132, Even if the conclusion is that EURIBOR shall be used as a reference rate, further
matters remain to be decided. (1) One is whether the EURIBOR rate should be
increased and, in such case, by which margin. (2) A second is whether the
interest rate should be simple or compounded, and if the latter, in what intervals.
(3) Finally, also the starting point for the application of the interest shall be

determined.

(D) Margin

133. The EURIBOR rate should be increased as such rate only reflects the interest at
which banks lend money to each other, not loans to customers. Respondent has
requested a margin of 5 per cent. The Tribunal finds such margin excessive
taking into account the purpose of the interest outlined above, an approach also
underlying the UNIDROIT Principles. 2% is a more reasonable margin, and this
margin is also frequently applied in international practice. A number of recent
investment awards have applied LIBOR plus a 2 per cent margin, e.g. PSEG
Global, Inc., et al. v. Turkey'? and Lemire y, Ukraine.'? BURIBOR is

'2 PSEG Global, Inc., et al. v. Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5, Award, Jan. 19, 2007, available at
hup://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/PSEGGlobal-Turkey-Award.pdf
37

 

 

comparable to LIBOR and there is no reason why the same margin should not be
used when the reference rate is EURIBOR, and in Cementownia “Nowa Huta”
SA. v. Republic of Turkey'’ a 2 per cent margin was used in connection with
EURIBOR.

(2) Simple or compound interest

134. Respondent has requested that the interest should be compounded quarterly, or
at another interval deemed appropriate by this Tribunal. Claimant has not

expressed any view on this matter.

135. The Tribunal is of the opinion that compound interest better than simple interest
would compensate the Respondent in case of non-payment of the award on costs
in favour of Respondent. This view is supported by recent case law in
investment arbitration. See in particular Compaftid de Aguas del Aconquija S.A.
and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic.'* Respondent has suggested that
the interest should be compounded quarterly. However, also in line with recent
practice, the Tribunal decides that the interest should be compounded semi-
annually, see e.g. Cementownia “Nowa Huta” S.A. v. Republic of T1 urkey'® and
PSEG Global, Inc., et al. v. Turkey'’. :

(3) Dies a quo

136. While Claimant has indicated interest “as at the date of performance of the
award”, Respondent has requested interest “after 30 days from the date of
notification of the award.” Respondent has thus accepted a 30 day grace period.
The Tribunal finds such period appropriate, in view also of the formalities

required for payments.

 

"3 Lemire v, Ukraine, ICSID Case No, ARB/OG/18, Award, Mar. 28, 2011, available at
hutp:/fta.law.uvic.ca/documents/LemireVUkraine Award 28March201 | pdf.

 Cementownia “Nowa ‘ua SA. v. Republic of Turkey, \CSID Case No. ARECAB)nsi2 (BCT), Award Sept.
17, 2009, available at htép://ita.Jaw.uvic.ca/documents/CementowniaA ward pdf.

18 Compaitid de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/V7/3, Award Aug, 20, 2007, available al hitp://ita law.uvic.ca/documents/VivendiAwardEnglish.pdf,

16 See footnote 14.

17 See footnote 12.

     

 

137. Interest shall continue to accrue, until all amounts owed in accordance with this

Award have been finally paid.

7 AWARD
For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal determines as follows:

(1) The Claimant, The East Cement for Investment Company, shall bear its own

legal and other cost in this arbitration up and until this Partial Award.

(2) The Claimant, The East Cement for Investment Company, is ordered to pay
to the Respondent, The Republic of Poland, € 393,129.94, which represents the
legal and other costs incurred by Respondent in this arbitration up and until this .
Partial Award. It should be noted that the legal and other cosis awarded do not
include the costs of arbitration to be fixed by the Court or any advance on costs
payments. |

(3) In the event of non-payment of the amount owing under (2) above within 30
days of notification of the Award, compound interest shall be paid at the
successive EURIBOR 3 months rate plus 2% for each year, or portion thereof,
beginnirig 30 days from the date of receipt of this Partial Award by Claimant.

Interest shall be compounded semi-annually.

(4) All other decisions are reserved for one or more further awards.

Place of arbitration: Paris, France

Date: 26/8/2011

   

Mr. UIf Franke
Chairman

 

Prof. Brigitte Stern
Arbitrator Arbitrator

39

 

