eb kaa aka

aoa

ee a a kas

Appointing Authority
Arbitration Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce
Box 16050, SE — 103 21 Stockholm

Ms. Malin Wallén

malin. wallén@chamber.se
TF: +46 8 555 100 61
FX: +46 8 555 31650

Mr. Robert Volterra
Latham & Watkins

99 Bishopsgate

GB — London EC2M 3XF
TF: +44 207710 1090
FX: +44 20 7374 4460
robert.volterra@|w.com
Arbitrator appointed by
Eastern Sugar

Eastern Sugar B.V. (Nether-
lands)

a company incorporated in the
Kingdom of the Netherlands
Indumastraat 9-13

NL — 5753 RJ Deurne

the parent company of Eastem
Sugar Ceska Republika a.s.

both herein referred to, individu-

March 27, 2007

Partial Award

of the Arbitral Tribunal
composed of

Dr. Pierre A. Karrer
Lavater-Strasse 98

CH — 8002 Zurich

TF: +41 44 287 33 33
FX: +41 44 387 33 34
karrer@pierrekarrer.com

Chairman appointed by the Arbi-
tration Institute of the Stockholm
Chamber of Commerce

in the matter of
UNCITRAL ad hoc arbitration
in Paris
SCC No. 088/2004

ally or collectively as appropriate

in the context, as Eastern Sugar

represented by:

Mr. Peter J. Turner

Mr. Mark Mangan
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer
2-4, nue Paul-Cézanne

FR — 75375 Paris Cédex 08
TF: +33 1 44 56 44 56

Fx: +33 144 56 44 00/01
peter.turner@freshfields.com
mark.mangan@freshfields.com

Agreement on encouragement and reciprocal protection of inves!
lands and the Czech and Slovai

concerning

Prof. Emmanuel Gaillard
Shearman & Sterling

114 Av. des Champs Elysées
FR— 75008 Paris

TF: +33 153 89 7000
FX: +33 153 89 7070
egaillard@shearman.com
Arbitrator appointed by the
Czech Republic

The Czech Republic

Ministry of Finance of the Czech
Republic

Letenska 15

CS~— 118 10 Prague I

att, JUDr. Vaclav Rombald
vaclav.rombald@mfer.cz

herein occasionally referred to as
The Republic

represented by:
Mr. Eric Teynier

Mr. Pierre Pic

Teynier, Pic & Associés
56, rue de Londres

FR — 75008 Paris

TF: +33 153 4597 00
FX: +33 140 1501 08
eric.teynier@teynier.com
Pierre.pic@teynier.com
and

Mr. Daniel Weinhold
Weinhold Legal, v.o.s.

Karlovo nam. 10

CZ~ 120 00 Praha 2

daniel. weinhold@weinholdlegal.com
TF: +420 225 335 336

FX: +420 225335 444

iments between the Kingdom of the Nether-
ik Federal Republic of April 29, 1991 (the BIT)

sie laksa dk kb kkk kkk

tab

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 2/72

 

Index
Abbreviations
A. Introd

B. Prayers for Relief.
(a) Eastern Sugar's Prayers for Relief on the merits
(b) Czech Republic's Prayers for Relief on procedure and the merits.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

c. Confidentiali 10
Dz P di "
(a) Preliminary matters. i
(b) Written submissions and production of d B
(c) Sundry procedural dispute: 14
(d) Main hearing 16
(e) Final phase 18
E, Constitut 20

 

 

F. Jurisdiction and Arbitrability.
(a) Czech Republic’s Plea of Lack of Jurisdiction.
(b) Czech Republic’s Argument on Lack of Arbitrability
(c) Eastern Sugar’s Defence on Jurisdiction.....
(d) Arbitral Tribunal’s Discussion of Jurisdiction
(aa) EC Letter of January 13, 2006.....
(bb) EC Note of November 2006 on the Free Movement of Capital “
(cc) Refer to the ECJ the question of the effect of the EU accession on the BIT?......... 30
(dd) Estoppel?
(ce) Does the Arbitral Tribunal have jurisdiction? .
(ff) Conclusion on Jurisdiction
(e) Arbitral Tribunal’s Di

G. Applicable Law 40

itabl 42

 

 
 
  
 
 

  
 

 

 

Law - Fair and

=

Law - Full security and

 

 

 

J Law - Measures depriving investor of the investment

K. Law - Intertemporal Aspects, Vested Rights, Estoppel...........sscccscsesseesseecseesseesees 45
L. 1989 to 2000: Free Market and EU Sugar Regime

M. First Sugar Decree of February 21, 2000, cancelled on February 14, 2001

(aa) Philosophy of First Sugar Decree

(bb) Political Flexibilization

(cc) Ineffective Impl i

(dd) C: lation by the Czech Constitutional Court
(ee) Overall A

 

 

 

 

bi | be

ae ee |

ia

ahd adh allah) ahd ahh

dak iked

ad

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 3/72

 

  
 

N. Second Sugar Decree of March 7, 2001, cancelled on October 30, 2002.
(aa) Philosopy of Second Sugar Decree... sieseeeeseeeeees
(bb) Further Political Flexibilizati
(cc) Continued Ineffective Impl
(dd) Cancellation by the Czech Constitutional Court .............
(ee) Overall A
0. Third Sugar Decree of March 19, 2003
(aa) Philosophy of Third Sugar Decree ...
(bb) Eastern Sugar targeted?
(cc) Overall A

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

P. From May 2004 to date 65
Q Conclusion on principle 66
R. Quantum: Claim A 66
Ss. Quantum: Claim B - 1 67
T. Quantum: Claim B-2 67
U. Parent Company Claim for Loss by Subsidiary?
V. Summary. 69
W. Interest 69
Xx. Costs 70
(a) Costs Follow the Outcome. 10
(b) Party Rep ion Costs 71
(c) Arbitration Costs 71
Partial Award 72

 

 

a aad

Bop ee aa aaa a a dd

a

ae a

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 4/72
Abbreviations

BIT Bilateral Investment Treaty

CSSR Czechoslovak Socialist Republic

EC European Community

ECJ European Court of Justice

ECT Treaty Establishing the European Community

EU European Union

EUR Euro

IBA International Bar Association

UNCITRAL United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
REIO Regional Economic Integration Organization

SZIF State Agricultural Intervention Fund

 

 

ed add

yk kl

wow a ow ow

re]

Q
be

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 3/72
TOO
A.

Introduction

1.

In late 1989, Czechoslovakia by its Velvet Revolution overthrew the communist regime.
The CSSR was replaced by the Czechoslovak Federal Republic which in 1990 was suc-
ceeded by the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic.

2.

The centralized state economy oriented towards the Soviet Union was replaced by a gener-
ally free market economy open towards the world. Businesses were privatized by the cou-
pon method. Foreign investment was encouraged. Until 2002, Bilateral Investment Trea-
ties were concluded with all countries that are today member states of the European Union
(EU).

3.

On April 29, 1991, an A on ent and p ion of i was
made between the Kingdom of the Netherlands (the Netherlands) and the Czech and Slo-
vak Federal Republic (the BIT).

 

4.
Art. 8 of the BIT reads as follows:
1. All disputes between one Contracting Party and an investor of the other
Contracting Party concerning an investment of the latter shall if possible,
be settled amicably.

N

. Each Contracting Party hereby consents to submit a dispute referred to in
paragraph (1) of this Article, to an arbitral tribunal. If the dispute has not
been settled amicably within a period of six months from the date either
party to the dispute requested amicable settlement.

w

The arbitral tribunal referred to in paragraph (2) of this Article will be
constituted for each individual case in the following way: each party to the
dispute appoints one member of the tribunal and the two members thus ap-
Pointed shall select a national of a third State as Chairman of the tribunal.
Each party to the dispute shall appoint its member of the tribunal within
two months and the Chairman shall be appointed within three months from
the date on which the investor has notified the other Contracting Party of
his decision to submit the dispute to the arbitral tribunal.

4. If the appointments have not been made in the above mentioned Periods, ei-
ther party to the dispute may invite the President of the Arbitration Institute
of the Chamber of Commerce of Stockholm to make the necessary appoint-
ments. If the President is a national of either Contracting Party or if he is
otherwise prevented from discharging the said function, the Vice-President
shall be invited to make the necessary appointments. If the Vice-President
is a national of either Contracting Party or if he too is prevented from dis-

 

 

did dd dd dda al

ad

ddd

bob we de ow oo

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 6/72

 

charging the said function, the most senior member of the Arbitration Insti-
tute who is not a national of either Contracting Party shall be invited to
make the necessary appointments.

The arbitration tribunal shall determine its own procedure applying the ar-
bitration rules of the United Nations Commission for International Trade
Law (UNCITRAL).

The arbitral tribunal shall decide on the basis of the law, taking into ac-

count in particular though not exclusively:

-the law in force of the Contracting Party concerned:

- the provisions of this Agreement, and other relevant Agreements between
the Contracting Parties:

~ the general principles of international law

- the provisions of special agreements relating to the investment.

The tribunal takes its decision by majority of votes: such decision shall be
final and binding upon the parties to the dispute.

wa

a

‘

5.

Effective January 1, 1993, the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic separated into its two
constituent parts which became sovereign states. The Czech Republic succeeded into the
former entity’s international obligations, including those arising from the BIT.

6.

From December 1994 onwards, Eastern Sugar BV which is jointly owned by the large
British and French sugar producers, Tate & Lyle Plc. and St. Louis Sucre, the majority of
which is by now owned by Siidzucker of Germany, acquired interests in Czech sugar pro-
ducing facilities.

7.

On December 31, 1994, with the Europe Agreement, the Czech Republic became a candi-
date for membership in the European Union as it is now called. The Kingdom of the Neth-
erlands was already a member.

8.
The Europe Agreement required the Czech Republic to adapt its legislation to EU stan-
dards.

9.

The European Union always had a protectionist agrarian system, especially to ensure that
its sugar beet growers receive minimum prices. The price of white sugar produced locally
from artificially expensive local sugar beet is far higher than the world market price of
white sugar produced overseas from sugar cane.

10.
The Parties agree that some form of regulatory control is the only way in which a European

 

4

dou i i

Youu oy

Moe a ay

As

aol

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 7/72

ooo

sugar beet industry can survive at all in face of much cheaper imported sugar from sugar
cane.

11.

The present arbitration centers on the various regulatory sugar regimes that the Czech Re-
public put in place from 2000 onwards, particularly the Third Sugar Decree of 2003, and
their effect on Eastern Sugar to this day.

12.

Eastern Sugar claims that it was not properly treated as an investor into sugar factories in
the Czech Republic through Czech subsidiaries that it had acquired (point 6). These sub-
sidiaries are now all merged into Eastern Sugar BV’s almost wholly-owned Czech subsidi-
ary, Eastern Sugar Ceska Republika a.s.

13.
On December 12, 2003, Eastem Sugar initiated the amicable settlement process under Ar-
ticle 8(1) of the BIT.

14.
On May 1, 2004, pursuant to the Accession Treaty of April 16, 2003, the Czech Republic
acceded to the EU.

15.
On June 22, 2004, Eastern Sugar filed its Notice of Arbitration.

16.
It appointed Mr. Robert Volterra as its party-appointed arbitrator.

17.
On August 9, 2004, the Czech Republic appointed Prof. Emmanuel Gaillard as its party-
appointed arbitrator.

18.
On November 10, 2004, the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce as the Appointing Author-
ity appointed Dr. Pierre A. Karrer as Chairman.

19,
The Arbitral Tribunal received the file on December 6, 2004, from the Appointing Author-
ity.

 

 

ood dd od dd

uo

vee de ae a di

ado

4 4

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 8/72

 

B.
Prayers for Relief

(a)
Eastern Sugar's Prayers for Relief on the merits

20.
In its submission of July 1, 2005, Eastern Sugar presented originally the following Prayers

for Relief:

(a) DECLARE that the Czech Republic has breached Article 3(1) of the Treaty
by failing to accord Eastern Sugar's investment fair and equitable treatment;
(b) DECLARE that the Czech Republic has breached Article 3(1) of the Treaty
by impairing, by unreasonable or discriminatory measures, the operation,
management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or disposal of Eastern Sugar's in-
vestment;

(c) DECLARE that the Czech Republic has breached Article 3(2) of the Treaty
by failing to accord Eastern Sugar’s investment ‘full security and protection;

(d) ORDER the Czech Republic to pay Eastern Sugar an amount of EUR
95,858,000;

(e) ORDER the Czech Republic to compensate Eastern Sugar fully for any
other losses suffered as a result of the Czech Republic's breaches of the
Treaty;

() ORDER the Czech Republic to pay interest on the compensation to be
awarded to Eastern Sugar at a rate 100 basis points above the 6-month appli-
cable EURIBOR rate to be compounded bi-annually;

(g) ORDER the Czech Republic to pay all of the costs and expenses of this ar-
bitration, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, the fees and ex-
penses of any experts appointed by the Tribunal and Eastern Sugar, and the
‘fees and expenses of Eastern Sugar ’s legal representation, on a full indemnity
basis; and

(h) AWARD such other relief as the Tribunal considers appropriate.

21.
On March 15, 2006, Eastern Sugar's Request for Relief was the same, with the following

differences:

(d) ORDER the Czech Republic to pay Eastern Sugar an amount of EUR
109,078,000;

() ORDER the Czech Republic to pay interest on the compensation to be
awarded to Eastern Sugar at a rate of 12%, representing Eastern Sugar's in-
ternal cost of capital, failing which, 100 basis points above the six-month ap-
plicable EURIBOR rate, to be compounded bi-annually.

 

4

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 9/72

 

22.
On September 8, 2006, the same parts of Eastern Sugar’s Request for Relief were amended
once again to read as follows:
(d) ORDER the Czech Republic to pay Eastern Sugar an amount of EUR
88,537,000 plus interest;
() ORDER the Czech Republic to pay interest on the compensation to be a-
warded to Eastern Sugar at a rate of 12%, representing Eastern Sugar's weig-
hed average cost of capital, failing which, 100 basis Points above the six-month
applicable EURIBOR rate, to be compounded bi-annually, in either case as
calculated above.

23.

The Arbitral Tribunal takes Eastern Sugar's Prayers for Relief of September 8, 2006, to be
Eastern Sugar’s final Prayers for Relief for the purposes of Art. 20 of the UNCITRAL Ar-
bitration Rules.

(b)

Czech Republic's Prayers for Relief on procedure and the merits

24.
The Czech Republic's Prayers for Relief were originally stated in its Answer of December
31, 2005, as follows:

(a) Declare that it has no jurisdiction to rule over the dispute;

(b) On a subsidiary basis, dismiss Eastern Sugar’s claim pursuant to articles 3
(1) and 3 (2) of the bilateral investment treaty;

(c) In all cases, order Eastern Sugar to pay all the costs and expenses of this
arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, the fees and ex-
penses of all experts appointed by the Czech Republic and the fees and ex-
penses of the Czech Republic's legal representation, on a fully indemnity basis;

(d) Award such other relief as the Tribunal considers appropriate.

25.
In its submission of May 31, 2006, the Prayers for Relief of the Czech Republic read as
follows:

(a) For all the reasons exposed in Part I (Chapters 1 and 2) of the present Re-
Joinder, declare that it has no jurisdiction to rule over the dispute;

(b) On a subsidiary basis, lodge a request for preliminary ruling before the
European Court of Justice pursuant to article 234 ECT and refer the following
questions to the ECJ:

1. At what date did the Bilateral agreement on encouragement and reciprocal
protection of investments signed on 29 April 1991 between the Kingdom of the

 

{eee Pee ee a aa aaa aah

 

oo f a ea

Fy

io lt

Bou ou

bob ib ib Lt

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 10/72

ee

Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak Republic, to the rights and obligations
of which the Czech Republic succeeded on I January 1993, (the “BIT") stop
being applicable (e.g. date of the Accession Treaty signature, ie. 16 April
2003, date of the accession Treaty ratification by the two contracting States to
the BIT, i.e. 14 June 2003 or date of the Accession Treaty entry into force, i.e.
May 2004);

2. Ifany form is necessary to render effective the substitution of the BI T by EC
law and if contracting States have to formally terminate the BIT;

3. If such formal termination, assuming it is necessary, is effective immedi-
ately, with a retroactive effect, or after expiration of the notice period;

And stay the present proceedings until judgement has been rendered by this
court;

(c) Ona very subsidiary basis, dismiss all Eastern Sugar’s claims pursuant to
articles 3 (1) and 3 (2) of the BIT;

(d) In all cases, order Eastern Sugar to pay all the costs and expenses of this
arbitration, including the fees and expenses of the Tribunal, the fees and ex-
penses of all experts appointed by the Czech Republic and the fees and ex-
penses of the Czech Republic’s legal representation, on a full indemnity basis;

(e) Award such other relief as the Tribunal considers appropriate.

26.
On September 8, 2006, the Czech Republic repeated these Prayers for Relief verbatim, ex-
cept for the first line of (a) which now read as follows:

(a) for all the reasons expressed in the Czech Republic's written submissions...

27.
The Arbitral Tribunal takes the Czech Republic's Prayers for Relief of September 8, 2006,

to be the Czech Republic’s final Prayers for Relief.

Cc.
Confidentiality

28.
Unlike many other investment arbitrations, the present arbitration is subject to confiden-

tially undertakings.

 

a

 

“Se ee a ag

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 11/72
D.

Proceedings

(a)

Preliminary matters

29.
On March 24, 2005, Eastern Sugar filed a request for production of documents.

30.
On March 30, 2005, a Preliminary hearing was conducted in Paris. The Parties argued
about the seat of the arbitration. The further proceedings were also discussed.

31.
On May 3, 2005, the Arbitral Tribunal issued a Preliminary Award and Order for Direc-
tions. It ruled as follows:

1. The Arbitral Tribunal shall have its seat in Paris, France, but may meet and
conduct hearings wherever convenient,

2. The costs in connection with this Award shall be assessed and allocated
later,

This award remained unchallenged.

32.
The Directions provided inter alia as follows:

The Arbitral Tribunal shall seek guidance from, but not be bound by, the
(1999) IBA Rules of Evidence.

[J

In the written submissions, the Parties shall present their allegations and deni-
als with reasonable Particularity, offering immediate Specific proof for each al-
legation and denial.

LJ

On production of documents Art. 3 IBA Rules of Evidence applies.

[..]

Party-appointed experts’ reports shall be submitted as prescribed in the IBA
Rules of Evidence (article 5.2).

[J]

At the hearings, any festimony submitted in a language other than English
shall be translated consecutively (or if the Arbitral Tribunal so directs, simul-
taneously). The necessary arrangements shall be made by, and at the expense

es kaka aka

kak

abo kd kaka

eb ok

4a

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 12/72

 

and risk of, the submitting Party.

[J

The hearings will be conducted generally as described in Art. 4 of the IBA
Rules of Evidence.

There will be oral opening statements of no longer than 30 min. each.

If witnesses are heard individually, the following provisions will apply.

Co]

Witnesses will be admonished to tell the truth, and will affirm their testimony.

The Witnesses will be primarily questioned by the Parties. The Arbitral Tribu-
nal will have the right to interject questions at any time.

The Witnesses will not provide any direct testimony (sometimes also called evi-
dence-in-chief) beyond confirming their witness statements.

The Witness may then be cross-questioned forthwith without restriction to the
scope of the witness’ previous testimony (Scope Restriction).

LJ]

A witness after cross-questioning may be re-direct-questioned by the present-
ing Party without Scope Restriction.

The Arbitral Tribunal may allow re-cross-questioning, with or without Scope
Restriction.

[ol
Time management at the hearing, grouping of testimony and availability of
Ih lephone) will be di. d at pre-hearing tele-
phone conferences before each stretch of hearings. It is likely that the Arbitral
Tribunal will apply a chess-clock system as follows: Each Party will have a
pre-determined amount of time for the whole stretch (working out to no more
than two hours in the average per day) available for its examination of all the
witnesses and experts. Time used by a Party to ask questions of any witness or
expert, and the time used by them answering such questions will go against
that Party's time. Interpretation time will also be deducted. When the Arbitral
Tribunal asks questions, these questions and the answers to them will not be
deducted, but questions interjected for better understanding or to speed up,
and answers to such questions, will not stop the clock. If procedural incidents,
including interpretation incidents, arise, the clock will be stopped. Opening
statements and oral summations, if any, will be on an equal time basis, but out-
side the chess-clock system. The Arbitral Tribunal will have no float-time to
distribute.
Oral summation, if any, will be on an equal-time basis. The Parties may pre-
sent their oral summation in French, provided that they arrange and pay for
full simultaneous interpretation into English which will be the only basis for
the transcript.

If additionally to or instead of oral summation post-hearing briefs are re-

oho

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 13/72

 

ee ee ee ee ee |

quested, this will be covered in a separate order.
The Parties will agree on the confidentiality aspects of the present arbitration.

33.
A procedural Time-table was issued.

()

Written submissions and production of documents

34.
In conformity with the procedural Time-table, Eastern Sugar which had given its Notice of
Arbitration on June 22, 2004 (see above, point 15) filed its full memorial on July 1, 2005,
together with witness statements from the following:

Mr. John Walker

Mr. Jeff Hatt

Mr. Anthony Evans

Mr. John Ellison FCA (Expert).
35.

The Czech Republic filed its full answer and a plea of lack of jurisdiction on December 30,
2005, together with witness statements from the following:

Mr. Jaroslav Palas

Mr. Jan Hick

Mr. Philip Haberman MA FCA (Ex-
pert).

36.

The production of documents requested at the outset by Eastern Sugar on March 24, 2005
(see above, point 29), was discussed in correspondence by Eastern Sugar on January 23,
2006, and January 26, 2006, by the Czech Republic, on January 25, 2006, and February 7,
2006, again by Eastern Sugar on February 16, 2006, and finally by the Czech Republic on
February 24, 2006.

37.
On March 15, 2006, Eastern Sugar filed its reply on the merits, and its answer on jurisdic-
tion, together with second witness statements from the following:

Mr. John Walker

Mr. Jeff Hatt

Mr. Anthony Evans

Mr. John Ellison FCA (Expert).

 

 

ao oY Yok oo ow

mp kaka aaa ada aaa aaa

Aa

ae ee |

ated

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 14/72

 

38.
On March 28, 2006, the Arbitral Tribunal issued its decision on the production of docu-
ments, in form of a letter.

39.

On April 18, 2006, the Czech Republic sent a bundle of documents in Czech in answer to
Eastern Sugar's request for production of documents (the April 18, 2006, bundle). The Ar-
bitral Tribunal was copied. On May 22, 2006, Eastern Sugar complained about the alleged
paucity and insufficiency of the documents produced in the April 18, 2006, bundle. Sub-
sequently, some of the documents became part of the record, see below, point 46 et seq.

40.
On May 31, 2006, the Czech Republic filed its rejoinder and its reply on jurisdiction. It
attached a witness statement from

Mr. David Fronek.

Al.
The Czech Republic also filed a second expert's report from

Mr. Philip Haberman MA FCA (Ex-
pert).

©
Sundry procedural disputes

42.

In June, 2006, various procedural disagreements arose between the Parties, many centering
on documents in the April 18, 2006, bundle (see above, point 39). With one exception
(see, for that, point 55 et seq.), they were all resolved in early July 2006.

43.

Most of the pending disagreements were already resolved on July 3, 2006, by a telephone
conference led by the Arbitral Tribunal. The agreements reached at the telephone confer-
ence was reflected in the Arbitral Tribunal's letter to the Parties, dated July 4, 2006, which
also decided a few of the issues that were still open.

44,

With one exception (for the exception, see below, point 55 et seq.), the remainder of the
disagreements were amicably resolved by July 10, 2006, or then decided by the Arbitral
Tribunal's letter of July 10, 2006. The details of these matters are as follows:

45.
On June 9, 2006, the Czech Republic had submitted three new documents, namely an Eng-
lish translation of Art. 17 of the Czech Commercial Code, a decision by the Czech Anti-

 

*

 

ab hk ok a a hid

ohhh abd

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 15/72

 

trust Office of February 6, 2006, and a Summary of price controls (undated, terminus post
quem 2004). These three documents were admitted on July 10, 2006.

46.
On June 28, 2006, the Czech Republic had filed a second witness statement from

Mr. Daniel Fronek.
This was accompanied by new documents R-71 to R-74 to which it referred.

47.
On June 28, 2006, the Arbitral Tribunal was also given new documents R-75 to R-81.

48.

All these new documents (R-71 to R-81) were from the April 18, 2006, bundle. Eastern
Sugar had no objection to these documents "as such", but on June 29, 2006, Eastern Sugar
asked the Arbitral Tribunal to exclude, as belated, Mr. Fronek's second witness statement
and all the new documents R-71 to R-81 from the April 18, 2006, bundle (see above, point
46 and 47).

49.

On July 10, 2006, the Arbitral Tribunal however accepted Mr. Fronek's second witness
statement with its exhibits R-71 to R-74 from the April 18, 2006, bundle (see above, point
46). In its provisional Time-table, the Arbitral Tribunal had foreseen a second round of
witness statements from the Czech Republic for June 28, 2006, but with a question mark.
The Czech Republic should have requested leave to file Mr. Fronek's second witness
statement, but leave would have been granted.

50.

On July 10, 2006, the Arbitral Tribunal also accepted the new documents R-75 to R-81
that also had been provided by the Czech Republic in the April 18, 2006, bundle (see
above, point 47) in view of Eastern Sugar's position concerning further documents in the
April 18, 2006, bundle (see below, point 51).

51.

The Order for Directions (see above, point 32) had said that "new documents may not be
submitted after a deadline set well ahead of the hearing. However, a new document may
be offered as a novum if that document could not have been reasonably presented earlier".
The cutoff date was set at the telephone conference of July 3, 2006, with the exception of
the documents in the April 18, 2006, bundle that Eastern Sugar on July 3, 2006, still re-
served to identify and introduce into the record.

52.
By July 10, 2006, Eastern Sugar identified, as exhibits C-183 to C-188, the further docu-
ments from the April 18, 2006, bundle that it wished to include into the record.

 

ee |

Soa a ada“,

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 16/72

 

53.

Of the other documents in the April 18, 2006, bundle, at the Czech Republic's request,
document n(2) was admitted by the Arbitral Tribunal on July 4, 2006, as exhibit R-76.
This was the minutes of the extraordinary meeting of the Commodity council for sugar
beets and sugar of December 3, 2002, four pages of which the first two were already on
record.

54.

The July 3, 2006, telephone conference also dealt with the matter of the numerous docu-
ments in original language filed without translation and of the numerous translations filed
without original text. This matter was likewise resolved in due course by July 10, 2006.

55.
The one matter that remained unresolved was as follows:

56.

Eastern Sugar had criticized that its request for the production of all inspection reports had
been answered by a mere list of alleged inspections conducted at competitor's plants. The
Czech Republic argued that for reasons of confidentiality it could not provide the inspec-
tion reports themselves.

57.

At the outset of the main hearing of July 17, 2006, the Czech Republic said that it had
brought along the inspection reports. It offered that Eastern Sugar's lawyers (but only the
lawyers) could inspect the reports. The Arbitral Tribunal invited the Parties to discuss the
matter and report about the outcome (See transcript of July 17, 2006, p. 2 et seq.). This
did not happen, however.

58.
On July 27, 2006, after the main hearing, the Czech Republic renewed its offer for an in-

spection either in Paris or Prague.

59.
This one point was briefly discussed at the pleading session of September 27, 2006.

(@d)
Main hearing

60.
On July 17 to 20, 2006, the main hearing was conducted in Paris.

61.

Mr. P. Turner and Mr. M. Mangan of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer, Paris, appeared on
behalf of Eastern Sugar. Mr. E. Teynier and Mr. P. Pic of Teynier, Pic & Associés, Paris,
and Mr. D. Weinhold and Mr. O. Havranec of Weinhold Legal, Prague, appeared on behalf
of the Czech Republic.

 

soe ed daa ea h(a kd aka

acy

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 17/72

 

62.

An arbitration of this magnitude involves of course the work of many who do not speak at
hearings. Some of their names appear in the written submissions, some do not. It is ap-
propriate at this juncture to record the Arbitral Tribunal’s appreciation of the extremely
helpful way the arbitration was conducted on behalf of both Parties.

63.
The Parties presented opening statements of 30 minutes each.

64,
During the whole hearing, a chess-clock system was applied as described in the Order for

Directions (see above, point 32).

65.
The following witnesses were heard :
Mr. John Walker Mr. Daniel Fronek
Mr. Jeff Hatt Mr. Jaroslav Palas
Mr. Anthony Evans Mr. Jan Hock
Mr. John Ellison FCA (Expert) Mr. Philip Haberman MA FCA (Ex-
pert).

66.
The Czech witnesses testified with the help of a Czech-English interpreter.

67.

Eastern Sugar had, during the telephone conference of July 3, 2006, filed a protest against
equal time being applied despite the fact that the Czech Republic's factual witnesses were
going to testify through an interpreter. However, at the close of the hearing, Eastern Sugar
had 60 minutes left of its chess-clock time, and the Czech Republic 256 minutes.

68.
At the close of the hearing, the Arbitral Tribunal gave the Parties an opportunity to voice
any complaint about the way the hearing had been conducted. No complaint was voiced.

69.
The hearing was transcribed by live notes. The transcript is 485 pages long.

70.
On July 31, 2006, the Parties presented agreed errata sheets for the transcript of the July 17
to 20, 2006, main hearing.

 

 

db dh kk ida ak kaa a

Bud

dd

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 18/72

 

 

()
Final phase

71.
On July 24, 2006, the Arbitral Tribunal issued its instructions on Post-hearing submissions.

72.
On September 8, 2006, the Parties presented their Post-hearing briefs. Eastern Sugar at-
tached a new factual document. The Arbitral Tribunal sealed this document unread.

23.
A pleading session was then conducted on September 27, 2006, in Paris.

74,

Mr. P. Tumer and Mr. M. Mangan of Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer, Paris, appeared on
behalf of Eastern Sugar. Mr. E. Teynier and Mr. P. Pic of Teynier, Pic & Associés, Paris,
and Mr. D. Weinhold and Mr. O. Havranec of Weinhold Legal, Prague, appeared on behalf
of the Czech Republic.

75.
Each party presented conclusive pleadings of three hours each (the Czech Republic in

French, see above, point 32).

76.
At the close of the hearing, the Arbitral Tribunal gave the Parties an opportunity to voice
any complaint about the way the hearing had been conducted. No complaint was voiced.

77.
The pleading session was transcribed in English, but as arranged by the Parties, only on the
basis of a tape recording. This was not satisfactory.

78.
On October 20, 2006, Eastern Sugar presented together with its errata sheets a marked-up

version of the Transcript of September 27, 2006.

79.

On December 7, 2006, the Czech Republic presented a full redraft of the entire transcript
of the English translation of its conclusive pleadings that had been presented in French (see
above, point 75). On January 8, 2007, Eastern Sugar claimed that the Czech Republic had
not only improved the transcript but had also given in to the temptation to improve on what
ithad said.

80.
Statements of costs were presented by the Parties on October 13, 2006.

 

 

ab) oo dad

S204 ee

ae ohD

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 19/72
TT ss
81.

By October 27, 2006, the Parties could have commented on the Statements of costs, but did
not do so.

82.

On January 8, 2007, the Parties submitted at the Arbitral Tribunal's request, documents and
comments on two subjects: The first was the European Commission's Note (of November
2006) on the Free Movement of Capital, and the Czech Government's reaction to it. The
second was Eastern Sugar's application to relinquish its quota and its relevance, if any, to
calculation of damages, if any.

83.

The Czech Republic also requested disclosure by Eastern Sugar of further documents on
the second subject. But, on January 12, 2007, the Arbitral Tribunal decided not to issue an
Order for Production of further documents.

84.
On January 11, 2007, the Czech Republic submitted, with comment, two further docu-
ments,

85.

On January 12, 2007, the Arbitral Tribunal decided to unseal the documents submitted by
Eastern Sugar on September 8, 2006 (see above, point 72) since this was related to the
documents requested by the Arbitral Tribunal that had been provided by the Parties on
January 8, 2007 (see above, point 82) and on January 11, 2007, see above point 84.

86.
The Parties were given an opportunity for further comment on the documents newly admit-
ted on January 12, 2007, by January 26, 2007.

87.
Both Parties commented. The Czech Republic sought to introduce a new document, as a
novum. The Arbitral Tribunal sealed this document.

88.
The proceedings were closed on February 5, 2007, on all matters. The file occupies about
five meters of shelf length.

89,

The Arbitral Tribunal deliberated in person on all hearing days and on September 28, 2006,
always in Paris, on January 12, 2007, in Zurich, without changing the place of arbitration
which was and remained Paris, and through numerous e-mails and telephone conferences.

*

 

 

abo bk

ood of oh ot klk

etd

rtd

hed

et

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 20/72

 

90.
The Arbitral Tribunal will first discuss some procedural issues, particularly those raised by
the Czech Republic's prayers for relief (a) and (b).

*

E.
Constitution

91.
This is an ad hoc UNCITRAL arbitration under Art. 8 of the BIT (see above, point 4).

92.
Its seat is in Paris (see above, point 31).

93.
There were no objections to the proper constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal as an arbitral
tribunal under Art. 8 of the BIT.

94.

However, the Czech Republic claimed that by jts accession to the EU, Art. 8 of the BIT
was superseded pursuant to Art. 59 of the Vienna Convention. The alleged implied termi-
nation of the BIT arbitration agreement and its effect on the jurisdiction of the Arbitral
Tribunal and on arbitrability will be discussed forthwith, see below, point 95 et seq.

F.
Jurisdiction and Arbitrability

(a)
Czech Republic’s Plea of Lack of Jurisdiction

95.

The Czech Republic’s Plea of Lack of Jurisdiction was raised timely (Art. 21.3. of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules) in its submission of December 30, 2005, and in its full an-
swer of May 31, 2006.

96.
There is no dispute that Eastern Sugar BV is an investor under the BIT.

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 21/72

 

97.

The Czech Republic did not argue that the BIT had been expressly terminated. However it
argued that the BIT is not applicable beyond the Czech Republic’s EU accession, that is,
beyond May 1, 2004.

98.
The Czech Republic points out that no BITs have ever been concluded between EU mem-
bers states after their accession to the EU.

99.

The Czech Republic also argues that a letter attached to a French-German Convention of
1956 expressed the view that the Convention could not apply to products originating in the
then European Coal and Steel Community. The EU since extended its field and set up a
common agricultural policy and a specific regime for the freedom of investments. The
Czech Republic argues that, as originally for the limited field of coal and steel, no room is
by now left for bilateral treaties in these much wider fields.

100.

The Czech Republic further invokes the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
Under that convention, a treaty shall be deemed terminated if all parties conclude a later
treaty relating to the same subject-matter and (1) it appears that the parties intended that
the subject-matter should be governed by the later treaty or (2) the provisions of the later
treaty are so far incompatible with those of the earlier one that both treaties cannot be si-
multaneously applied (Article 59).

101.

The Czech Republic is of the view that the BIT and the EU rules are competing legal
frameworks addressing the same subject-matter (i.e. the faculty of a party to invest assets
on the territory of another state, and to freely dispose of the revenues).

102.

The Czech Republic argues that it was the Netherlands' and the Czech and Slovak Federal
Republic's subjective intention that Dutch investments be governed by EU law. According
to Article 118 of the Czech Association Agreement, this agreement shall not affect rights
created by earlier agreements “until equivalent rights [...] have been achieved under this
Agreement”.

103.

The Czech Republic also points out that the European Court of Justice ruled in Commis-
sion v Italy that a member state may not exercise rights granted under an earlier agreement
to the extent that such exercise conflicts with obligations under the EEC treaty.

104.
According to the Czech Republic, the intra-EU investment regime, as of the date of the

 

 

 

aid

ab a ata kha

obs

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 22/72

 

Czech Republic’s EU accession, indeed gives equivalent rights to those under the Treaty,
which is therefore superseded by the intra-EU regime.

105.

Moreover, always according to the Czech Republic, if earlier agreements survived, this
might distort the principle of equality of treatment. This principle was confirmed in later
cases (Matteucci). The principle was confirmed with reference to situations in which one
of the parties (i.e. Spain) to a bilateral agreement became part of the EU (Exportur v LOR
SA and Confiserie du Tech SA).

106.

The Czech Republic also argues that it is impossible to simultaneously apply the BIT and
the intra-EU investment regime. The application of the BIT would breach the principle of
non-discrimination/equality of treatment (Article 12 of the European Consolidated Trea-
ties); it would affect the uniformity of the legal regime within the EU.

107.

The application of the BIT would also breach the EU principle of mutual trust. This prin-
ciple would imply that Eastern Sugar brings its claim before a Czech national court. There
would be no room for international arbitration in this area.

108.
It follows, the Czech Republic concludes, that the BIT is not applicable, and that the Arbi-
tral Tribunal does not have jurisdiction.

109.
Subsidiarily, according to the Czech Republic the Arbitral Tribunal should refer the matter
to the ECJ.

110.

The Czech Republic points out that to address the European Commission is not uncom-
mon. In the Mox Plant case, a dispute under an agreement to which the EU member states
as well as the EU itself were parties was stayed by an arbitral tribunal until the European
Commission had rendered a decision on the interpretation of the agreement.

(b)
Czech Republic’s Argument on Lack of Arbitrability

111.

According to the Czech Republic, Eastern Sugar brings two heads of claim. The first re-
lates to the Czech Republic’s alleged failure to enact and enforce a workable sugar regime,
and admittedly does not raise issues of arbitrability.

112.
The second head of claim however is based on /egitimate expectations that allegedly have
been frustrated by the Czech Republic’s adopting rules that differ from the EU sugar re-

 

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 23/72

 

gime. This claim, the Czech Republic argues, cannot be heard by an arbitral tribunal to the
extent that it relates to a time after 1 May 2004, the Czech Republic’s EU accession. From
this time forth, only the European Commission would be competent to deal with such is-
sues,

113.

In an earlier dispute between Eastern Sugar and the Czech Republic, Eastern Sugar had
itself approached the EU Commission for assistance under the Association Agreement.
Ever since the Czech Republic acceded the EU, Eastern Sugar would henceforth be obliged
to bring its claim before the EU Commission.

©
Eastern Sugar’s Defence on Jurisdiction

114.

Eastern Sugar answered the plea of lack of jurisdiction on March 15, 2006, and presented
its rejoinder on jurisdiction on June 28, 2006. Since the Arbitral Tribunal accepts jurisdic-
tion (below, point 181) there is no need to summarize Eastern Sugar's arguments, many of
which the Arbitral Tribunal accepts.

(@d)
Arbitral Tribunal’s Discussion of Jurisdiction

115.
The Czech Republic raised its plea of lack of jurisdiction timely, Art. 21.3. of the UN-
CITRAL Arbitration Rules.

116.
Pursuant Art. 21.1 and 21.2. of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, it is for the Arbitral Tri-
bunal itself to decide on its own jurisdiction on the basis of the arbitration agreement.

117.

The Czech Republic’s plea of lack of jurisdiction and its lack of arbitrability defence are
based on the premise that when the Czech Republic became a member of the EU of which
the Netherlands was already a member, this changed the relationship that it had had with
the Netherlands sufficiently to terminate or limit the application of the BIT implicitly, and
as a result, to put an end to the benefits and protection enjoyed under the BIT by a Dutch
investor such as Eastern Sugar.

118.

Before the Arbitral Tribunal addresses the central issue of the effect of the Czech Repub-
lic’s accession to the EU on the BIT, it will discuss the Czech Republic’s arguments that
because of the supremacy of EU law, the Arbitral Tribunal should defer or refer to the
opinion of EU authorities when deciding about its own jurisdiction (see below, point 119 et

 

 

 

ae ok ab mh ue th tk Sh SR OR Ok leks

Ae

ae

as

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 24/72

 

seq., point 130 et seq.) and that Eastern Sugar is estopped from bringing up certain matters
that it failed to raise earlier (see below, point 140 et seq.).

(aa)
EC Letter of January 13, 2006

119.

Many aspects relevant to the Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction were discussed in the letter
that Mr. Schaub of EC Internal Market and Services wrote on January 13, 2006, to Mr. Ze-
linka, the Czech Deputy Minister of Finance. The letter reads as follows:

Firstly I would like to apologize for the delayed reply to your letter of 13 June
2005 to Mr. O'Sullivan concerning the effect of Bilateral Investment Treaties
(BITs) concluded between Member States. The complexity of the questions
raised has required the input and analysis by various Commission services.

I might, however, recall that the concern of the Commission services on BITs
in general was raised with the Czech Republic in very early contacts with DG
ECFIN, in the Chapter 4 screening process in 1998, at a specific TAIEX semi-
nar on the subject with all candidate countries, including the Czech Republic,
on 17 January 2000, and subsequently in the external relations chapter of the
negotiation process. As you are undoubtedly aware, the Commission services
were primarily concerned with conflicting provisions in pre-accession BITs
with third countries that could prevail over EU measures, concerns that still
remain.

The general question you raised concerns the compatibility of BITs concluded
between Member States, thus, as you point out, almost exclusively (apart from
agreements between Germany and Portugal and Germany and Greece) BITs
concluded by the 10 new Member States. Following from there, you enquire
about (i) the date at which the BITs ceased to apply, and (ii) if any form is nec-
essary to render effective the substitution of BITs by EC law and if contracting
states have to formally terminate BITs as well as, (iii) should such termination
be required, when it would take effect.

Please find below the view of the Commission's services, without prejudice to
any interpretation by judicial instances.

a) EC law prevails in a Community context as of accession

Given that the rights and obligations of membership come into force on acces-
sion rather than on signature or ratification, the applicable date can be con-
sidered as 1 May 2004.

Based on ECJ jurisprudence. Article 307 EC is not applicable once all parties
of an agreement have become Member States. Consequently, such agreements
cannot prevail over Community law.

For facts occurring after accession, the BIT is not applicable to matters falling
under Community competence. Only certain residual matters, such as diplo-
matic representation, expropriation and eventually investment promotion,
would appear to remain in question.

 

 

a ae ae |

Fs

2 oo ot ott lOO

4 Bw BH ww

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 25/72

 

Therefore, where the EC Treaty or secondary legislation are in conflict with
some of these BITs' provisions — or should the EU adopt such rules in the fu-
ture — Community law will automatically prevail over the non-conforming BIT
provisions.

As you mention correctly, the application of intra-EU BITs could lead to a
more favourable treatment of investors and investments between the parties
covered by the BITs and consequently discriminate against other Member
States, a situation which would not be in accordance with the relevant Treaty
provisions.

The commission therefore takes the view that intra-EU BITs should be termi-
nated in so far as the matters under the agreements fall under Community
competence.

b) Effect on existing BITs

However, the effective prevalence of the EU acquis does not entail, at the same
time, the automatic termination of the concerned BITs or, necessarily, the non-
application of all their provisions.

Without prejudice to the primacy of Community law, to terminate these agree-
ments, Member States would have to strictly follow the relevant procedure pro-
vided for this in regard in the agreements themselves. Such termination cannot
have a retroactive effect.

¢) Dispute settlement procedures

As ioned above, Ce ity law, including the jurisdiction of the Court of
Justice, in principle prevails from the date of accession. However, the transi-
tional situation until the BITs are formally terminated may result in complex
questions of interpretation with regard to jurisdiction in particularly with re-
gard to pending arbitration procedures but also in relation to rules such as Ar-
ticle 13 in the BIT between the Czech Republic and the Netherlands, which
provides for an extended application of the agreement in a certain period after
termination.

In so far as conflicts between Member States are concerned, it follows from Ar-
ticle 292 EC that the Member States cannot apply the settlement procedures
provided for in the BITs in so far as the dispute concerns a matter falling under
Community competence.

On the other hand, if the dispute concerns an investor-to-state claim under a
BIT, the legal situation is more complex. Since Community law prevails from
the time of accession, the dispute should be decided on basis of Community law
(which indirectly also follows from Article 8(6) first bullet point in the agree-
ment between the Czech Republic and the Netherlands). However, it may be
argued that the private investor could continue to rely on the settlement proce-
dures provided for in the agreement until formal termination of the BIT if the
dispute concerns facts which occurred before accession. The primacy of
Community law should in such instance be considered by the arbitration in-
stance.

CO a ee ee ee ee ey

oth

ot

_

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 26/72

 

The primacy of EU law and its definite interpretation by the European Court of
Justice would not necessarily preclude a legal instance (arbitration) in another
jurisdiction arriving at a different conclusion, even in an international agree-
ment between two Member States.

In particular, in order to avoid any legal problem with regard to an arbitration
procedure, existing BITs between member States should, as mentioned above,
therefore be terminated. The formal termination can only be done according
to the provisions of the agreement in question. I would note that this principle
would not only apply to the Czech BIT with the Netherlands, which would seem
to have given rise to a significant amount of litigation, but also those of the
Czech Republic with 21 other Member States. Without prejudice to the pri-
macy of Community law, termination of the BIT would take effect according to
the respective provisions of each such BIT.

120.

The Arbitral Tribunal notes that both Parties claim that in the January 13, 2006, letter, the
European Commission agreed with their views. The Arbitral Tribunal however finds the
letter of January 13, 2006, for the most part diplomatic or ambiguous, and in any event, by
its terms, without prejudice to any interpretation by a "judicial authority" which in the Ar-
bitral Tribunal's understanding, includes the present Arbitral Tribunal.

121.

It also notes that the European Commission did not start infringement proceedings against
the Netherlands and the Czech Republic and other members in similar position, for failing
to terminate their BITs as one would expect if it agreed with the Czech Republic’s views.

122.

To the Arbitral Tribunal’s knowledge, neither the Czech Republic nor the Netherlands, nor
anybody else, did file a complaint to the European Commission against the Netherlands
and the Czech Republic and other members in similar position, concerning their failure to
comply with EU Law by leaving their BITs in place.

123.

Even if one had to read the letter in a way favorable to the Czech Republic (in the sense
that the BIT is automatically superseded by EU law), the Arbitral Tribunal is of the view
that as a matter of EU law the European Commission’s opinion on the questions raised by
the Czech Republic’s letter of June 13, 2005, cannot be binding for the Arbitral Tribunal.

124,

As the European Commission correctly points out, the answer to the questions raised must
be given by judicial authorities, which clearly excludes the European Commission, and,
admittedly less clearly, includes an arbitral tribunal such as the Arbitral Tribunal in the
present arbitration.

 

as ues eh eds aaa kaha) ad skal sad

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 27/72

 

125.
It follows that the views of the European Commission in its letter are not binding on this
Arbitral Tribunal but, if clear, which they are not, would at best have persuasive force.

(bb)
EC Note of November 2006 on the Free Movement of Capital

126.

In November 2006 the European Commission, Internal Market and Services DG, sent a
Note to the Economic and Financial Committee. Inter alia it wrote the following (foot-
notes omitted):

There are still around 150 BITs between Member States in force (Annex IV).
There appears to be no need for agreements of this kind in the single market
and their legal character after accession is not entirely clear. It would appear
that most of their content is superseded by Community law upon accession of
the respective Member State. However the risk remains that arbitration in-
stances, possibly located outside the EU, proceed with investor-to-state dispute
settlement procedures without taking into account that most of the provisions
of such BITs have been replaced by provisions of Community law. Investors
could try to practice “forum shopping" by submitting claims to BIT arbitration
instead of - or additionally to - national courts. This could lead to arbitration
taking place without relevant questions of EC law being submitted to the ECJ,
with unequal treatment of investors among Member States as a possible out-
come.

In order to avoid such legal uncertainties and unnecessary risks for Member
States, it is strongly recommended that Member States exchange notes to the
effect that such BITs are no longer applicable, and also formally rescind such
agreements. The Committee is invited to endorse this approach and Member
States are asked to communicate to the Commission by 30 June 2007 which ac-
tions have been taken in that regard and which of their intra-EU investment
agreements still remain to be terminated.

127.
The Czech Ministry of Finance thereupon proposed to the Czech Government to terminate
the validity of the Czech intra-EU BITs by mutual agreement. It wrote, inter alia, the fol-
lowing:
With respect to the delay in the ratification process for the European Constitu-
tion and the fact that a decision on further steps by the EU will not be adopted
until 2008, the Czech Government is again submitting for approval a proposal
for actions by the Czech Republic in terminating the validity of treaties for the
protection and encouragement of investments which the Czech Republic con-
cluded with European Union Member States. In addition to the circumstances
already expounded, an additional reason for submitting this proposal is the
fact that the concurrent existence of these treaties for the protection of invest-
ments and Community law can create a confused legal situation in the inter-

 

a

oc Se tea ea ied aad aa alae

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 28/72

 

pretation and use of these treaties. The termination of the validity of the in-
vestment treaties likewise significantly improves the situation of the Czech Re-
public in the sphere of international arbitration processes, as the majority of
processes being pursued by foreign investors against the Czech Republic were
instigated according to treaties on the protection of investments concluded with
EU Member States.

The termination of the validity of treaties for the protection and encouragement
of investments concluded between the Czech Republic and EU Member States
will not have a negative impact on Czech business making investments in
European Union countries and does not even impact the protection of invest-
ments made in the Czech Republic by businesses based in EU Member States.
As indicated above, the single exception will be that foreign investors will not
be able to instigate international arbitration cases against the Czech Republic.
The potential claims of these investors will have to be asserted, based on their
own choice, either before domestic courts or before the European Court of Jus-
tice.

The documents submitted contain a proposal for the approach by the Czech
Republic in terminating the validity of treaties for the protection and encour-
agement of investments concluded between the Czech Republic and European
Union Member States.

In the interest of ensuring the maximum protection of mutual bilateral rela-
tionships it is recommended that the Czech Republic submit a proposal to the
second contractual state to terminate the validity of a treaty for the protection
of investments by means of an agreement. In this context the Czech Republic
proposes that these agreements eliminate the application of transitional in-
vestment treaty provisions that enable the application of investment treaties for
additional, typically ten-year, periods.

[oJ
A more complicated situation arises in the case of a dispute between an inves-
tor and a host contractual country. In this case, from the date of Czech acces-
sion the EU arbitration tribunal should consider, with respect to the prece-
dence of Community law over a treaty for the protection investments, whether
the submitted dispute falls under its jurisdiction. However, without regard to
the precedence of Community law it is nevertheless impossible to rule out
ahead of time that the arbitral tribunal will decide the matter of jurisdiction
differently and rule that the tribunal is authorized to hear the claims of the in-
vestor. In the interest of ensuring the transparency of the legal environment it
is therefore necessary to guard against a situation which could lead to duplic-
ity of jurisdiction - an arbitration proceeding according to the treaty for the
protection of investments and a case before the courts of the host contractual
country, with the use of the authority of the European court of Justice in ques-
tions falling exclusively under the jurisdiction of the EU. The European
Ce ded that this i dition be resolved
through the termination of the validity of treaties for the protection and en-
of ir luded between the European Union Mem-
ber States

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 29/72

 

With the exception of the possibility to file a complaint against a host country
in an international arbitration proceeding, the protection of investments within
the EU is on a comparative level with the protection that is provided to inves-
tors according to bilateral treaties for the protection of investments.

Cod

There has been significant economic and social development in the Czech Re-
public since the beginning of the 1990's, thanks in large part to the stability of
the legal environment. This progress resulted first in Czech entrance to the
OECD and was followed by the acceptance of the Czech Republic in the Euro-
pean Union. In light of these positive circumstances the treaties for the protec-
tion of investments that were signed with EU Member States cease to fulfil the
original function intended in the 1990's which was based primarily on the pro-
tection of investments by foreign investors against risks arising from the unde-
veloped legal climate in the Czech Republic.

With a single exception the legal code of the Czech Republic incorporates all
the obligations and responsibilities the country undertook in the treaties for the
protection of investments. This concerns, for example, a commitment to non-
discriminatory treatment of foreign investors and their investments, a prohibi-
tion on expropriation, with the exception of eminent domain on the basis of the
law and with compensation. As indicated above, the only difference is in the
method for resolving disputes between investors and the host contractual coun-
try; this method authorizes investors to file claims against the host country in
an international arbitration case in the event that a commitment arising from
this treaty is violated. The existence of bilateral treaties for the protection of
investments signed between EU Member States is therefore superfluous and in
the case of disputes between an investor and a host country these treaties in
J Hi oe sl

fact cause an undesirab ion of p ial jurisdi

[J]

For illustration purposes, we can point out that there are currently fourteen
arbitration processes underway against the Czech Republic, twelve of which
are on the basis of treaties for the protection of investments that the Czech Re-
public signed with EU Member States. The high number of arbitration dis-
putes brought by investors from European Union Member States is caused by
the fact that the majority of investments in the Czech Republic come from EU
Member States and this creates the greatest risk of potential international arbi-
tration cases. The termination of the validity of the treaties mentioned would
substantially reduce this risk.

[J

The majority of these treaties have actually already been extended for an addi-
tional (typically ten-year) period and it is only possible to terminate the valid-
ity of these treaties at the end of this period, usually with a one-year with-
drawal term. Therefore, it wouldn't be possible to withdraw from many of
these treaties until the following decade. Due to the fact that after the termina-
tion of the validity of a treaty there is still a so-called safety period during
which existing investments will continue to be protected by the relevant treaty

t
'

 

cd ic

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 30/72

 

for the protection of investments, it can be stated that in many cases the in-
vestments of foreign investors in the event of a withdrawal from the treaty
would still be protected beyond the year 2020 (according to the terms of indi-
vidual treaties).

128.
The Arbitral Tribunal does not find that the Note of the European Commission supports the
view that the intra~EU BITs are all automatically superseded.

129.
Even if the European Commission's view was clearly in the Czech Republic's favor, it
could only have persuasive force for the Arbitral Tribunal.

(cc)
Refer to the ECJ the question of the effect of the EU accession on the BIT?

130.

Subsidiarily, the Czech Republic requests the Arbitral Tribunal to make a referral to the
European Court of Justice under Art. 234 (formerly Art. 177) of the Rome Convention for
a preliminary ruling on the question of the BIT’s termination.

131.

As it understands the possibility of a referral to the European Court of Justice, this is a
route not open to an arbitral tribunal even if it has its seat in the European Union, see
Nordsee v. Reederei Mond [1982] ECR 1095, 1110; Denuit v. Transorient, ECJ Jan. 27,
2005.

132.

The Czech Republic argues that a dictum in the latter decision reads as follows:
Under the Court's case law, an arbitration tribunal is not a ,,court of a mem-
ber State“ within the meaning of Article 234 EC where the parties are under
no obligation, in law or in fact, to refer their disputes to arbitration...

133.

This, the Czech Republic claims, must be understood to mean that only where the two Par-
ties are under no obligation to refer their dispute to arbitration is an arbitral tribunal not “a
court of a member state”, and by contrast, where the Parties are under the obligation to re-
fer their dispute to arbitration, the arbitral tribunal may file a request for a preliminary rul-
ing by the ECJ. Here, the Czech Republic argues, the BIT requires the Parties to go to ar-
bitration, hence the Arbitral Tribunal may request a preliminary ruling by the ECJ.

134.
The Arbitral Tribunal finds this interpretation even harder to understand than the dictum
itself. There is no such thing as compulsory arbitration even though occasionally some

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 31/72

 

state courts go by the name of arbitral tribunal. Normally, parties are free to agree to arbi-
tration or not. Once they have agreed to arbitration, the are of course bound.

135.
The ECJ’s dictum simply is to the effect that the meaning of “court of a member state” in
Art. 234 EC excludes voluntary arbitration in the normal sense.

136.

The present BIT arbitration is such a voluntary arbitration in the normal sense, binding
only once agreed, and here agreed in the BIT and the Notice of Arbitration respectively,
unless the Czech Republic’s offer in the BIT lapsed with its accession to the EU and there-
fore could no longer be accepted by the Notice of Arbitration (see below, point 142 et

seq.).

137.

Even if the Arbitral Tribunal had discretion to refer (and this is as high as the Czech Re-
public puts its case), the Arbitral Tribunal sees in any event no reason to make a referral in
a case where the answer is not difficult.

138.

Accordingly, the Arbitral Tribunal wil] not refer the matter to the European Court of Jus-
tice. The Czech Republic’s Prayer for Relief (b) to that effect (see above, point 25) is re-
jected.

139.

To the Arbitral Tribunal’s knowledge, nobody else has referred the matter to the ECJ. In
any event, the Arbitral Tribunal wil/ not stay the arbitration. The Czech Republic’s Re-
quest for Relief (b) to that effect is rejected.

(dd)
Estoppel?

140.

On various occasions, the Czech Republic — using the word or not — argues that Eastern
Sugar is estopped from challenging administrative decisions that it failed to attack through
internal Czech remedies. This applies to the following:

(aa) The Czech Republic argues that the unitary beet pricing mechanism — not estab-
lishing different minimum sugar beet buying prices depending on whether the white
sugar produced from the sugar beet purchased would be exported or not — in the vari-
ous sugar decrees had been d for cc ion to i d circles, includi
Eastern Sugar, and had not been criticized, so Eastern Sugar is now estopped from
complaining about this lack of differentiation in the present arbitration.

(bb) The Czech Republic argues that Eastern Sugar’s alleged failure to criticize in
the consultation process that the Czech Republic was not obligated to intervention

setend

a oo kt aaa sicker arc

a]

rt

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 32/72

 

purchases and had discretion on whether to intervene, so Eastern Sugar is now es-
topped from complaining about that discretion in the present arbitration.

(cc) The Czech Republic argues that under the Third Sugar Decree, Eastern Sugar
failed to challenge formally the allegedly wrong application by the SZIF decision of
May 15, 2003, of the criteria to establish Eastern Sugar’s quota. The SZIF had taken
as the basis the daily production in October 2002 rather than the allegedly higher
production that Eastern Sugar claims to have had in November 2001. The failure to
challenge this, Eastern Sugar claims, was due to the Czech Republic’s representa-
tions that led Eastern Sugar to expect a substantial reserve allocation. The Czech
Republic argues that Eastern Sugar itself asked that the October 2002 figures be
used, and that no representations were made by the Czech Republic on the occasion
of a dinner. Now, the Czech Republic argues that Eastern Sugar is estopped from
complaining that it received too small a quota.

141.

Since the BIT does not provide for the exhaustion of local remedies as a pre-condition to a
claim under the BIT, the Arbitral Tribunal does not find it possible to accept the Czech
Republic’s estoppel argument. It follows that the Arbitral Tribunal does not lack jurisdic-
tion over the matters just mentioned on grounds of estoppel.

(ee)
Does the Arbitral Tribunal have jurisdiction?

142.

The Arbitral Tribunal accordingly must now decide by itself whether the Czech Republic’s
accession to the EU excluded its jurisdiction under the BIT by a contrarius actus (even if
not in the same form as the original act) .

143.

Neither the Europe Agreement nor the Accession Treaty provide expressly that the BIT is
terminated. The Arbitral Tribunal would find it odd if a matter as important as investment
protection had been overlooked in the negotiations of the old EU countries with the Czech
Republic and the other new EU countries.

144.
Indeed, the Europe Agreement provides expressly as follows in Art. 74 (1) and (2):

1. Cooperation shall aim to establish a favourable climate Jor private invest-
ment, both domestic and foreign, which is essential to economic and industrial
reconstruction in the Czech Republic.

2. The particular aims of cooperation shall be:
- to improve the institutional framework for investments in the Czech Republic,

- the extension by the Member States and the Czech Republic of agreements for
the promotion and protection of investment,

 

— ak

Ce ee)

oe]

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 33/72

~ to implement suitable arrangements for the transfer of capital,

145.

Art. 118 of the Europe Agreement reads as follows:
This Agreement shall not, until equivalent rights for individuals and economic
perators have been achieved under this Agreement, affect rights assured to

them through existing agreements binding one or more Member States, on the
one hand, and the Czech Republic, on the other.

146,
The Accession Treaty says nothing at all.

147.
Thus one cannot say that the Europe Agreement or Accession Treaty by their terms ex-
Pressly superseded the BIT.

148.
Neither does the BIT itself expressly provide that it might be replaced if both its parties
became members of the same REIO,

149,

Indeed, Art. 3.3 of the BIT reads as follows:
The provisions of this Article shall not be construed so as to oblige either Con-
tracting Party to accord preferences and advantages to investors of the other
Contracting Party similar to those accorded to investors of a third State
Y) by virtue of | membership of the former of any existing or future customs un-
ion or economic union, or similar institutions: or
5) on the basis of an agreement for the avoidance of double taxation, or on the
basis of reciprocity with a third State.

150.

The second paragraph of Mr. Schaub’s letter of January 13, 2006 (see above, point 119)
mentions early contacts about BITs in general. These took place in 1998 and again in
2000. It is not clear what was said in those early contacts,

151.

In 2002, after the award in the CME v. Czech Republic arbitration, there were some later
contacts. The Czech Republic started consultations with the Netherlands specifically un-
der Art. 9 of the Dutch/Czech BIT. However, the subject of the EU accession possibly su-
perseding the BIT was not raised in this consultation nor in any other such consultation,
What was discussed in the 2002 consultations will be discussed in below, point 194 et seq.

152.
Art. 13 of the BIT reads as follows:

 

ee ch og gh thom mmm le

ts

oh tf fh th fh bb

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 34/72

 

1. The present Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the second
month following the date on which the Contracting Parties have notified each
other in writing that the procedures constitutionally required therefore have
been complied with, and shall remain in force for a period of ten years.

2. Unless notice of termination has been given by either Contracting party at
least six months before the date of the expiry of its validity, the present Agree-
ment shall be extended tacitly for periods of ten years, each Contracting Party
reserving the right to terminate the Agreement upon notice of at least six
months before the date of expiry of the current period of validity.

153.
To this day, no notice of termination of the BIT was given by either the Czech Republic or
the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

154.
Thus, neither the BIT nor the Europe Agreement nor the Accession Treaty deal expressly
with the question whether the BIT is still valid today.

15S.

The argument by the Czech Republic that the BIT was implicitly superseded by the acquis
communautaire when the Czech Republic acceded to the European Union of which the
Netherlands was already a member appears novel. Both the Netherlands and the Czech
Republic still list their BIT as one of the international treaties to which they are a Party.
As is well known, the BIT between the Netherlands and the Czech Republic was invoked
in more than one recent arbitration. The argument does not appear to have been made by
the Czech Republic in those other arbitrations. Nor does it appear that the argument was
made in respect to other BITs between countries that, thanks to the EU's enlargement, are
now members of the European Union, and older members. The Arbitral Tribunal does not
know whether it was recently raised in other BIT arbitrations possibly still pending.

156.

The Arbitral Tribunal is of the view that in the absence of more specific legal provisions,
the effect of the Czech Republic’s accession to the European Union, a regional multilateral
treaty, on the BIT must be judged according to the law of Nations, and in particular the Vi-
enna Convention on the Law of Treaties dated 1969, of which the Netherlands and the
Czech Republic are parties. The applicable law according to Art. 8.6 of the BIT (which
will be discussed below, point 191) is not relevant in this connection.

157.
Indeed, as a matter of public international Jaw, a treaty can only end in accordance with its
own terms or the Vienna Convention. Art. 42 of the Vienna Convention reads as follows:

1. The validity of a treaty or of the consent of a State to be bound by a treaty
may be impeached only through the application of the present Convention.

2. The termination of a treaty, its denunciation or the withdrawal of a party,
may take place only as a result of the application of the provisions of the treaty

 

ced eked

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 35/72

 

or of the present Convention. The same rule applies to suspension of the op-
eration of a treaty.

The discussion of the Europe Agreement and of the BIT itself which showed that the BIT
was not terminated in accordance with their own terms (see above, points 143 to 154) pre-
supposed the applicability of Art. 42.2. of the Vienna Convention.

158.

Art. 59 of the Vienna Convention on International Treaties reads as follows:
1. A treaty shall be considered as terminated if all the parties to it conclude a
later treaty relating to the same subject-matter and:
(a) it appears from the later treaty or is otherwise established that the parties
intended that the matter should be governed by that treaty; or
(b) the provisions of the later treaty are so far incompatible with those of the
earlier one that the two treaties are not capable of being applied at the same
time.
2. The earlier treaty shall be considered as only suspended in operation if it
appears from the later treaty or is otherwise established that such was the in-
tention of the parties.

159,

First, the Arbitral Tribunal does not accept the Czech Republic’s argument that the EU
treaty as the later treaty (as between the Czech Republic and the Netherlands) covers the
same subject matter as the BIT, the earlier treaty.

160.

While it is true that European Union law deals with intra~EU crossborder investment, say
between the Netherlands and the Czech Republic, as does the BIT, the two regulations do
not cover the same precise subject-matter.

161.

The European Union guarantees the free movement of capital. Thus, it guarantees to non-
Czech investors from other EU member countries the right to invest in the Czech Republic
on a par with any Czech investor.

162.

The precedents cited by the Czech Republic concern impediments to the free movement of
capital such as cases where one EU Member country - France - retained a "golden share"
which allows the host state to assume, when it suits it, control over the company, thereby
making it unattractive for investors from fellow EU Countries to invest in such companies
in the host state.

163.
Similarly, the European Union guarantees the free movement of capital outwards, thus, the
investor may take out profits and even the investment as such out of the host country.

 

s

well

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 36/72

 

164.

By contrast, the BIT provides for fair and equitable treatment of the investor during the
investor's investment in the host country, prohibits expropriation, and guarantees full pro-
tection and security and the like. The BIT also provides for a special procedural protection
in the form of arbitration between the investor state and the host state and, especially arbi-
tration of a "mixed" or "diagonal" type between the investor and the host state, as in the
present case.

165.

From the point of view of the promotion and protection of investments, the arbitration
clause is in practice the most essential provision of Bilateral Investment Treaties. Whereas
general principles such as fair and equitable treatment or full security and protection of the
investment are found in many international, regional or national legal systems, the inves-
tor’s right arising from the BIT’s dispute settlement clause to address an international arbi-
tral tribunal independent from the host state is the best guarantee that the investment will
be protected against potential undue infringements by the host state. EU law does not pro-
vide such a guarantee.

166.

The importance of dispute settlement provisions was underlined by Arbitral Tribunals in
such cases as ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7, Emilio Agustin Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain,
Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction dated January 25, 2000, point 54; ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/10, Gas Natural SDG, S.A. v. Argentine Republic, Decision of the Tribunal on
Preliminary Questions on Jurisdiction dated June 17, 2005, point 31; ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/17, Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A. and Interagua Servicios
Integrales de Agua S.A. v. Argentine Republic, Decision on Jurisdiction dated May 16,
2006, point 57.

167.
Second, the Czech Republic has not established that the common intention of the Czech
Republic and the Kingdom of the Netherlands was that the EU Treaty should supersede the
BIT.

168.
Third, the Arbitral Tribunal is of the view that the BIT and the EU Treaty are not incom-
patible.

169.
Free movement of capital and protection of the investment are different, but complemen-
tary things.

170.

If the EU Treaty gives more rights than does the BIT, then all EU parties, including the
Netherlands and Dutch investors, may claim those rights. If the BIT gives rights to the
Netherlands and to Dutch investors that it does not give other EU countries and investors,

 

ae] Ee a teeta etd ddd edd hd hd kd eed

co

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 37/72

 

it will be for those other countries and investors to claim their equal rights. But the fact
that these rights are unequal does not make them incompatible.

171.

Nor does the fact that the BIT provides for arbitration violate the principle of mutual trust
between EU Countries. Arbitration is not contrary to mutual trust into State Court systems.
As is well known, the “Brussels Regulation” 2000, which is the successor of the Brussels
Convention, excludes arbitration from its ambit.

172.

The Arbitral Tribunal is of the view that EU law has not automatically superseded the BIT
as a result of the accession of the Czech Republic to the EU. It follows that the BIT, in-
cluding its arbitration clause, is still in force.

173.
Several additional reasons, each of which is sufficient by itself, lead to the result that the
Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction in any event.

174.
Art. 13 (3) of the BIT guarantees an investor’s rights for a further 15 years from the date of
any termination. Art. 13 (3) reads as follows (for Art. 13 (1) and 13 (2) (see above, point
152).
In respect of investments made before the date of termination of the present.
Agreement the foregoing Articles thereof shall continue to be effective for a
JSurther period of fifteen years from that date.

175.

The Arbitral Tribunal can only reject the Czech Republic’s argument that the implied ter-
mination of the BIT through accession also terminated the continuing effect expressly
guaranteed by Art. 13 (3) of the BIT.

176.

In any event, the dispute before the Arbitral Tribunal arose before the Czech Republic’s
accession to the European Union and could not have been affected if the BIT had been
terminated after that.

177.

This is in harmony with Art. 70 Subs. | of the Vienna Convention which reads as follows.
1. Unless the treaty otherwise provides or the parties otherwise agree, the ter-
mination of a treaty under its provisions or in accordance with the present
Convention:

(a) releases the parties from any obligation further to perform the treaty;

(b) does not affect any right, obligation or legal situation of the parties created
through the execution of the treaty prior to its termination.

 

cet octet

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 38/72

 

2. Ifa State denounces or withdraws from a multilateral treaty, paragraph |
applies in the relations between that State and each of the other parties to the
treaty from the date when such denunciation or withdrawal takes effect.

178.

The Arbitral Tribunal moreover does not believe that it can accept the Czech Republic’s
argument that the treaty can end partially and remain in force otherwise. This situation
would be governed by Art. 30 of the Vienna Convention.

179.
Art. 30 of the Vienna Convention applies in cases where the strict conditions of Art. 59 are
not fulfilled. It reads as follows:

1. Subject to Article 103 of the Charter of the United Nations, the rights and
obligations of States parties to successive treaties relating to the same subject-
matter shall be determined in accordance with the following paragraphs.

2. When a treaty specifies that it is subject to, or that it is not to be considered
as incompatible with, an earlier or later treaty, the provisions of that other
treaty prevail.

3. When all the parties to the earlier treaty are parties also to the later treaty
but the earlier treaty is not terminated or suspended in operation under article
59, the earlier treaty applies only to the extent that its provisions are compati-
ble with those of the latter treaty.

4. When the parties to the later treaty do not include all the parties to the ear-
lier one:

(a) as between States parties to both treaties the same rule applies as in para-
graph 3;

(b) as between a State party to both treaties and a State party to only one of
the treaties, the treaty to which both States are parties governs their mutual
rights and obligations.

5. Paragraph 4 is without prejudice to article 41, or to any question of the
termination or suspension of the operation of a treaty under article 60 or to
any question of responsibility which may arise for a State from the conclusion
or application of a treaty the provisions of which are incompatible with its ob-
ligations towards another State under another treaty.

180.

On the merits, the fact that the European Union does not provide for a possibility for an
investor to sue a host state directly, and that in international BIT arbitration this is an es-
sential feature of most bilateral investment treaties, is in itself sufficient to reject the Czech
Republic’s equivalence argument. The Arbitral Tribunal notes that the Netherlands Minis-
try of Foreign Affairs expressly mentioned BIT arbitration at the outset of its report on the
BIT. The Czech Ministry of Finance’s report (see above, point 127) is precisely aimed at
abolishing intra-EU BIT arbitration as quickly as possible by securing the mutual consent
of the States involved.

 

oH oH ott oat yy

ce |

new

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 39/72
—_,o
i)

Conclusion on Jurisdiction

181.
The Arbitral Tribunal accepts jurisdiction. The Czech Republic’s Prayer for Relief (a) to
the contrary (see above, point 25) is rejected.

(e)
Arbitral Tribunal’s Discussion of Arbitrability

182.

The Czech Republic's lack of arbitrability defence concerns damages claimed by Eastern
Sugar in what came to be called Claim B, but only those damages arising from the period
after the Czech Republic’s accession to the EU.

183.
Eastern Sugar bases itself on the BIT, not EU law, also for that portion of Claim B.

184.
The Czech Republic claims that the post-accession damages claimed by Eastern Sugar are
not arbitrable.

185.

The Czech Republic’s is that with ion the BIT was sup d so that
Eastern Sugar could at best have claims under EU law, no longer the BIT. The Arbitral
Tribunal has discussed and rejected this contention (see above, point 172).

186.

The Czech Republic also seems to argue that any claim, possibly even under the BIT, aris-
ing after accession to the EU would no longer be arbitrable, or the Arbitral Tribunal would
lack jurisdiction because, from accession onwards, exclusive jurisdiction allegedly lies
with the ECJ. The Arbitral Tribunal has already discussed and rejected this argument (see
above, point 180).

187.
The post-accession damages claimed under the BIT are arbitrable. The Czech Republic’s
Prayer for Relief (a) to the contrary is rejected.

*
188.

Having rejected the Czech Republic’s procedural prayers for relief (a) and (b), the Arbitral
Tribunal now turns to the merits.

189.
On the merits, Eastern Sugar requests as its prayers for relief (a) to (c) various declarations

 

8 2 tf oa ff i He eh im

wid ded ota aad eed asad od adel ead

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 40/72

a

plus orders for monetary relief as its prayers for relief (d) to (f) (see above, point 22), while
the Czech Republic requests as its prayers for relief (c) that all of Eastern Sugar’s claims
be dismissed “pursuant to articles 3 (1) and 3 (2) of the BIT” (see above, point 25).

190.

Since prayers for declaratory relief often become moot once monetary relief is granted or
rejected, the Arbitral Tribunal will first discuss Eastern Sugar’s requests for monetary re-
lief (d) to (f).

G.
Applicable Law

191.
‘Art. 33 UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules provides as follows:

1. The arbitral tribunal shall apply the law designated by the parties as
applicable to the substance of the dispute. Failing such designation by the par-
ties, the arbitral tribunal shall apply the law determined by the conflict of laws
rules which it considers applicable.

2. The arbitral tribunal shall decide as amiable compositeur or ex aequo
et bono only if the parties have expressly authorized the arbitral tribunal to do
so and if the law applicable to the arbitral procedure permits such arbitration.

3. In all cases, the arbitral tribunal shall decide in accordance with the
terms of the contract and shall take into account the usages of the trade appli-
cable to the transaction.

192.
Art. 8 subs. 6 of the BIT provides as follows:

The arbitral tribunal shall decide on the basis of the law, taking into account in

particular though not exclusively:

— the law in force of the Contracting Party concerned:

~ the provisions of this Agreement, and other relevant Agreements between
the Contracting Parties:

= the provisions of special agreements relating to the investment:

— the general principles of | international law.

193.

Art. 9 of the BIT provides as follows:
Either Contracting party may propose the other Party to consult on any matter
concerning the interpretation or application of the Agreement. The other Party

 

eed

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 41/72

 

shall accord sympathetic consideration to and shall afford adequate opportu-
nity for such consultation.

194.
The meaning of article 8 of the BIT was addressed at the occasion of a meeting held on
April 4 and 5, 2002, between the Czech Republic and the Netherlands,

195.

The agreed minutes read as follows:
The delegations agree that the arbitral tribunal shall decide on the basis of the
law. When making its decision, the arbitral tribunal shall take into account, in
particular, though not exclusively, the four sources of law set out in article 8.6.
The arbitral tribunal must therefore take into account as Sar as they are rele-
vant to the dispute the law in force of the Contracting Party concerned and the
other sources of law set out in article 8.6. To the extent that there is a conflict
between national law and international law, the arbitral tribunal shall apply
international law.

196.

This does not mean that international law applies only when it is in conflict with national
law. On the contrary, it means that international law generally applies. It is not just a gap-
filling law. It is only where international law is silent that the Arbitral Tribunal should
consider before reaching any decision how non conflicting provisions of Czech law might
be relevant, and if so, could be taken into account.

197.

In other words, the agreed minutes explain in a contorted way what Art. 8 subs. 6 of the
BIT means. It means that beyond the wording of the BIT, international law applies, but
that the Arbitral Tribunal should consider, before reaching any decision, how non-
conflicting provisions of Czech law might be relevant and, if so, could be taken into ac-
count.

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 42/72

 

H.
Law - Fair and equitable treatment

198.

Art. 3 (1) of the BIT reads as follows:
Each Contracting Party shall ensure fair and equitable treatment to the in-
vestments of investors of the other contracting Party and shall not impair, by
unreasonable or discriminatory measures, the operation, management, main-
tenance, use, enjoyment or disposal thereof by those investors.

199.

Eastern Sugar claims that the Czech Republic failed to treat it fairly and equitably and in
accordance with its legitimate expectations already with the First and Second Sugar De-
cree, and particularly with the Third Sugar Decree which, Eastern Sugar contends, was
specifically designed to target Eastern Sugar and was intended to be discriminatory, thus
per se an unreasonable or discriminatory measure.

200.

The Czech Republic is of course responsible for all acts and submissions of all its officers,
including the Government and the Constitutional Court. It contests that it breached Art.
3(1) of the BIT.

I.
Law - Full security and protection

201.

Art. 3 (2) of the BIT reads as follows:
More particularly, each Contracting Party shall accord to such investments
full security and protection which in any case shall not be less than that ac-
corded either to ii of its own ii or to i of ii
of any third State, whichever is more favorable to the investor concerned.

202.
Eastern Sugar claims that the Czech Republic violated its obligation to provide Eastern
Sugar with full security and protection of its investments.

203.

As the Arbitral Tribunal understands it, the criterion in Art. 3(2) of the BIT concerns the
obligation of the host state to protect the investor from third parties, in the cases cited by
the Parties, mobs, insurgents, rented thugs and others engaged in physical violence against
the investor in violation of the state monopoly of physical force. Thus, where a host state

 

ee ee ee ee ee ee ee |

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 43/72

 

fails to grant full protection and security, it fails to act to prevent actions by third parties
that it is required to prevent.

204.

In the present case, for the most part, Eastern Sugar complains about acts committed by the
Czech Republic itself, not acts of third parties. Eastern Sugar does not claim that disgrun-
tled sugar beet growers were dumping sugar beet on the entrance stairs of Eastern Sugar,
and policemen were looking on with a grin on their face. Sugar beet was dumped on the
stairs of the Ministry of Agriculture, and the Ministry of Agriculture then allegedly reacted
with the Third Sugar Decree, targeting Eastern Sugar.

205.

The only third parties about whose behaviour Eastern Sugar complains were its Czech
"newcomer" competitors who, once awarded sugar quota to sell, allegedly sold beyond
their quota. The Czech Republic allegedly did not prevent this, and on the contrary re-
warded the Czech newcomers by granting them a still larger quota in the subsequent de-
crees, particularly the Third Sugar Decree.

206.
The Czech Republic contests that it breached Art. 3(2) of the BIT.

207.

The Arbitral Tribunal will concentrate on the actions of the Czech Republic and on the
question whether these actions were within legitimate expectations of an investor or vio-
lated the standard of their equitable treatment under Art. 3(1) of the BIT.

J.
Law - Measures depriving investor of the investment

208.
Art. 5 of the BIT reads as follows:

Neither Contracting Party shall take any measures depriving, directly or indi-

rectly, investors of the other Contracting Party of their investments unless the

following conditions are complied with:

a) the measures are taken in the public interest and under due process of law:

b) the measures are not discriminatory:

c) the measures are accompanied by provision for the payment of just com-
pensation. Such compensation shall represent the genuine value of the in-
vestments affected and shall, in order to be effective for the claimants, be
paid and made transferable, without undue delay, to the country designated

 

a al

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 44/72

 

by the claimants concerned and in any freely convertible currency accepted
by the claimants.

209.
The Czech Republic argues that the Sugar Decrees were a measure taken in the public in-
terest and under due process of law, and that they were not discriminatory.

210.

‘The Arbitral Tribunal is in any event of the view that Art. 5 of the BIT is applicable only if
there was a substantial deprivation of the entire investment or a substantial part of the in-
vestment. This is not what Eastern Sugar is alleging in the instant case.

 

ded hhh hhh skh shad

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 45/72

 

K.
Law - Intertemporal Aspects, Vested Rights, Estoppel

211.
As one will see, the Czech Republic first came close to the European Union model, but
then moved away from it.

212.

The Arbitral Tribunal must decide whether, as the legislation changed almost from year to
year, the Czech Republic punished behavior by Eastern Sugar that it had initially permitted
and even encouraged, and on the contrary later rewarded behavior by others that it had ini-
tially forbidden, and whether, if it did that, the Czech Republic violated the BIT, particu-
larly its Art. 3(1).

213.

The Czech Republic argues against this that each step that it took was pre-discussed with
all interested circles, including Eastern Sugar and the Bohemian-Moravian sugar producers
association of which Eastern Sugar was a member, and Eastern Sugar failed to alert the
Czech Republic to the matters that it is now complaining about.

214.

The Arbitral Tribunal does however not believe that the Czech Republic wishes to say that
Eastern Sugar is estopped from complaining about the sugar regimes that the Czech Re-
public set into place simply because it failed to resist them early on.

215.

Besides, it is factually incorrect that Eastern Sugar failed to complain about the Czech Re-
public's plans. In particular, this is true of the Third Sugar Decree to which the Arbitral
Tribunal will revert.

216.
Similarly, the Czech Republic points out that Eastern Sugar failed to resist some of its
moves internally through the administrative process.

217.

This is in part true. In particular, it appears that Eastern Sugar at one time believed, with
or without good reason, that the adverse effect that the Third Sugar Decree would have on
Eastern Sugar would be mitigated through Eastern Sugar being awarded additional quota
from the reserve.

218.

However, since the BIT does not provide for the exhaustion of the local remedies before an
investor may complain about a violation of the BIT, the point is without relevance to the
Arbitral Tribunal's decision.

 

a a a en |

jd et

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 46/72

 

219.

The Czech Republic also makes much of the regular inspection reports from the European
Union stating that the various sugar decrees were put into place without criticizing them.
In particular, one such report describes the Third Sugar Decree as "adequate" regulation.

220.
On its face, the Czech legislation may have appeared "adequate", if that word is used prop-
erly by the European Commission, which is doubtful.

221.

The Arbitral Tribunal is in any event not persuaded that the European Union analyzed the
Czech legislation in a depth sufficient to identify whether legislation was targeted against a
particular company such as Eastern Sugar to punish it for having closed a factory in a pre-
vious year.

L.
1989 to 2000: Free Market and EU Sugar Regime

222.
Growing sugar cane is cheap, particularly in tropical climates, for instance in the Carib-
bean.

223.
Producing sugar from sugar cane is cheap, particularly in the low wage sugar cane produc-
ing countries.

224.
Sugar transportation costs to Europe are relatively low.

225.
European Sugar beet growers expect to make a far better living than farmers in the Carib-
bean, and producing sugar from beet is comparatively expensive.

226.
The world price of sugar landed in Europe is accordingly low, far lower than the price of
sugar produced in Europe from sugar beet.

227.
For protectionist reasons, at all times, European countries, including the Czech Republic,
put heavy import duties on sugar and related products.

228.
Sugar beet is expensive to transport since the sugar content of beet is low and beet is bulky.

 

etmek oh ek a

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 47/72

 

229.
White sugar is stable, concentrated, and rather easy to transport.

230.

This means that within a country a sugar factory will normally process sugar beet from
nearby growers. Sugar factories need not be close to large users of sugar, such as choco-
late factories.

231.
Sugar and sugar products are distributed to consumers and sold at retail everywhere. The
retail distribution costs of sugar and sugar products are significant.

232.
At the time of the investment, that is 1994 to 2000, what could Eastern Sugar legitimately
expect?

233.

Before the Velvet Revolution, there was no free cross-border movement of agricultural
goods such as sugar beet. In Czechoslovakia various beet sugar factories in Bohemia and
Moravia, many small and old, were producing locally sugar from local sugar beet.
Czechoslovakia exported sugar to other COMECON countries.

234.
But now large-scale export to other countries, soon including Slovakia, was no longer fea-
sible.

235.

A liberal regime was in place in the Czech Republic. On the sugar market, this led to a
drastic reduction of the number of market players. Three major foreign-owned domestic
sugar producers (graced with the term, "strategic") had bought themselves into the Czech
sugar market and were competing with each other. In 2000, before the First Sugar Decree,
Eastern Sugar had a market share of 31.03 percent of the white sugar tonnage produced in
the Czech Republic.

236.

That the market would remain free or would become even more free could not be within
the expectations of an investor such as Eastern Sugar. The wish within the Czech popula-
tion to join the European Union was obvious. So was the wish within the then European
Union to accept Eastern Central European Countries in its midst, after an adaptation period
during which the candidates would adapt their countries to European Union standards, par-
ticularly their legal system. The Europe Agreement 1993 provided for this.

237.

In 2000, an investor such as Eastern Sugar accordingly had to expect that the regulation of
the sugar market would, as accession neared, become roughly the protectionist regime pre-
vailing in European Union countries.

 

oo eat alata ac ae le

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 48/72

 

238.
The future was thus in the past of the European Union.

239.

In what became the European Union, regulation of the sugar market started in 1967. Al-
ready the European Communities Regulation no 1009/67 of the then Council of the Euro-
pean Communities of December 18, 1967, provided for quotas of white sugar to be pro-
duced annually in each member country and sold there. It provided that the basic annual
country quota would be set on the basis of the average production over the five previous
marketing years on the basis of their historical production.

240.

The various member states similarly distributed their quota internally to each factory or
each undertaking. An internal quota system based on historical production was also man-
dated by the European Regulation. It further provided for intervention purchases of sugar
(to sustain a high ex-factory white sugar price), minimum prices for sugar beet, a high
price for beet for sugar for the domestic market and a low price for beet for sugar for ex-
port, and limiting sugar imports (by requiring an import license and imposing high customs
duties).

241.
Council Regulation no. 1705/81 was amended several times. The subsequent Regulations
continued the historical quota system.

242.
Eastern Sugar could therefore expect in 2000 that its historical quota acquired from De-
cember 1994 onwards (see above, point 6) would be maintained.

M.
First Sugar Decree of February 21, 2000, cancelled on February 14, 2001

(aa)
Philosophy of First Sugar Decree

243.

From 1994 to 2000, as the Czech Republic was readying itself to enter the EU, the Czech
political pronouncements were emphatically in favor of a free market economy and in fa-
vor of rationalization to make the Czech Republic fit for competition within the framework
of the European Union.

244,
Eastern Sugar points to various newspaper interviews of government officials and to a
statement by the agriculture ministry before the time of Mr. Palas. These documents, the

 

|

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 49/72

 

Czech Republic objects, are neither attributed nor signed. It seeks to discredit these
sources as mere political pronouncements, but in the Arbitral Tribunal's view, not properly
so. It does happen that the views and the pronouncements of governments are on occasion
distorted. However, governments then invariably set the record straight. The Czech Re-
public did not point to any correction by anybody of political pronouncements, both the
earlier governments and the more recent governments down to those of today’s Czech gov-
emment. Under these circumstances, the Arbitral Tribunal must accept this allegations by
Eastern Sugar as to the position taken by the then government to be correct.

245.

When the Czech Republic issued its First Sugar Decree in 2000, after a first proposal had
been made in 1997, the overall goal was to slowly reduce use of domestic and foreign beet,
and to continue increasing efficiency of sugar manufacturing by closing down facilities and
modernizing the others. Accordingly the Czech Republic

- continued to close borders to foreign white sugar, foreign raw beet or

- imposed prohibitively import duties

- imposed a minimum purchase price for domestic sugar beet to be converted to
domestic sugar

- imposed a maximum domestic sugar sales price

- imposed domestic sugar sales quotas

- imposed, beyond the quotas, an obligation to export excess sugar.

246.

The idea behind the First Sugar Decree was primarily to introduce a sugar regime similar
to those in the EU member states operating under the EU Sugar Regime (see above, point
239 et seq.).

247.

Accordingly, quota was allocated on the basis of production during the previous five years
which were, in the Czech Republic, 1994 to 1999, years characterized by a market econ-
omy. This was as could reasonably be expected.

248.
Eastern Sugar tried to persuade the Arbitral Tribunal that any internal sugar regime must
comply with certain specific requirements.

249.

The Arbitral Tribunal does not follow this entirely. Once the state starts regulating the in-
ternal sugar market, there are indeed elements that are necessary: First and foremost, the
internal market must be ring-fenced against imports of cheap sugar normally produced
overseas from sugar cane, including near-sugar products such as sugar cocoa powder, soft
drinks, syrup and sugar substitutes.

 

ee |

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 50/72

 

250.

How the internal sugar market is regulated in detail depends however on the political goals
pursued. In the First Sugar Decree, the beet growers were guaranteed minimal prices at
which the sugar producers had to purchase beet. The quantity that could be purchased was
left open, and the sugar producer could buy beet wherever in the country they wished. The
sugar producers could not sell more than their quota of white sugar into the Czech sugar
market. They were guaranteed a minimum domestic sugar price which ensured that they
would make a profit despite having bought beet at prices not below the minimum beet
price. They could sell to whoever they chose within the country.

251.

If they produced more sugar than their quota, they could sell the excess sugar only for ex-
port, but the price on the world market was far lower than the internal Czech sugar price.
Since however the beet price to produce sugar for export was the same high minimum
price, in effect, producing more than the domestic quota was discouraged because it would
lead to a loss. Thus the amount of sugar that could be produced was practically fixed.

252.

Under a regime as just described, with the price of raw material (beet) and of end product
(sugar) fixed, and the volume practically fixed as well, a sugar producer was encouraged to
optimize its operations by making better use of its production facilities.

253.
It could be ad to realize ies of scale by inuing to close down small
old-fashioned factories and switch their production to other, larger and more modern facto-
Ties.

254.
In this connection, last minute investors were discouraged from buying up old sugar facto-
ries that already had been closed. In a 1999 memorandum, the then Minister of Agricul-
ture, Mr. Jan Fencl, commented as follows:

.. such efforts will inevitably fail in the long term due to the commitments of

the Czech Republic to the European Union.

255.

A producer could increase its production in a factory by making use of its daily production
capacity for more days, that is by prolonging its production campaign. To this end, instead
of producing sugar directly from sugar beet it could be advantageous to produce thick
sugar juice first, store it temporarily, and use it to produce white sugar later.

256.

Finally, one could wish to use a beet-saving technique, producing more sugar from less
beet, for instance by processing sugar molasses and producing white sugar also from those
rather than only from beet.

 

ae ee ee ee ee ee ee |

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 51/72

 

257.
All these techniques involved some initial investment, but could over time be advanta-
geous.

258.

Eastern Sugar used these techniques perhaps more than its competitors, by closing down
factories, producing thick sugar juice first, and using a technology known as SSMB to pro-
duce sugar from molasses.

(bb)

Political Flexibilization

259.

The First Sugar Decree had however a further feature that was disturbing.

260.
After the February 8, 2000, draft, the First Sugar Decree, of February 21, 2000, "flexibi-
lized" the quota allocation by giving the state a "reserve" quota.

261.

The Czech Republic argues that this reserve quota was an element of the European Union
regulation itself. Not quite. What was different, was that the Czech Government had full
discretion.

262.

The Czech Republic also claims that it was required to open its markets to newcomers.
Mr. Fronek even said that this was required by the WTO. Where the WTO can come in a
purely internal Czech matter is not clear at all.

263.
The reserve quota was said by Mr. Fencl to have been "politically established".

264.
Eastern Sugar claims that this is exactly what it was.

265.

The Arbitral Tribunal agrees. It finds the opening up of the cartel of sugar producers to
newcomers illogical. If indeed the policy is that closure of sugar factories should be en-
couraged, and generally the sugar production should be shrunk rather than expanded, it
makes no sense to reward purchasers of closed factories with quota out of the blue. This is
however exactly what the Czech Republic did. It favored newcomers who had no record
and had no market share to the detriment of those who had bought into or fought for their
market share and had earned their quota.

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 52/72

 

266.
Thus, the First Sugar Decree had an element of internal inconsistency: It was designed to
do one thing, but for political reasons was also doing a bit of the opposite.

(cc)

Ineffective Implementation

267.

Eastern Sugar also faults the Czech Republic with having failed to implement the First
Sugar Decree effectively. Indeed, it let in sugar imports which competed with Czech-
produced beet sugar.

268.
Moreover, it is undisputed that the newcomers oversold their domestic quota instead of ex-
porting the excess sugar produced.

269.

How this happened, and how often and how well the various sugar factories were inspected
by the Czech Republic under the various sugar decrees, has no impact on the Arbitral Tri-
bunal’s decision. Accordingly the issue of the inspection reports (see above, point 55 et
seq.) need not be resolved.

(dd)
Cancellation by the Czech Constitutional Court

270.

The First Sugar Decree was set aside by the Czech Constitutional Court because it lacked
proper legislative basis. The proposed enabling statute had not been passed by the Czech
Parliament in early 2000, but the Government had gone ahead with the First Sugar Decree
anyway in February 2000.

(ee)
Overall Assessment

271.
The Arbitral Tribunal must assess whether the various imperfections of the First Sugar De-
cree just mentioned must be seen as a violation of the BIT.

272.

This raises an interesting aspect: A violation of a BIT does not only occur through blatant
and outrageous interference. However, a BIT may also not be invoked each time the law is
flawed or not fully and properly implemented by a state. Some attempt to balance the in-
terests of the various constituents within a country, some measure of inefficiency, a degree
of trial and error, a modicum of human imperfection must be overstepped before a party
may complain of a violation of a BIT. Otherwise, every aspect of any legislation of a host

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 53/72

 

state or its implementation could be brought before an international arbitral tribunal under
the guise of a violation of the BIT. This is obviously not what BITs are for.

273.
The Arbitral Tribunal does not believe that for historical reasons the Czech Republic
should be held to a less stringent standard than other countries, say the Netherlands.

274.

Even though the First Sugar Decree was rashly introduced on an insufficient legislative
basis (see above, point 270), ineffectively implemented (see above, point 267 et seq.), and
had a disturbing feature, the discretionary reserve quota (see above, point 259 et seq.), the
Arbitral Tribunal does not find this to amount to a violation of the BIT requirement to treat
investors fairly and equitably.

N.
Second Sugar Decree of March 7, 2001, cancelled on October 30, 2002

275.
The Second Sugar Decree was in most respects the same as the First Sugar Decree. It is
sufficient to discuss the differences that it introduced.

(aa)
Philosopy of Second Sugar Decree

276.
The Second Sugar Decree again allocated quota on the historical basis of the previous five
years, now 1995 to 2000.

277.
The Second Sugar Decree corrected the previous mistake (see above, point 270) and was
now based on a proper legislative basis, the SZIF Statute.

(bb)

Further Political Flexibilization

278.
The Second Sugar Decree provided for a reduction of quota if a historical quota went un-
used. This was a new feature contrary to the policy of furthering rationalization.

279.
The reserve was now increased and made expressly available to new entrants only, again
against rationalization.

 

 

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 54/72

 

(cc)
Continued Ineffective Implementation

280.

It is undisputed that the new local entrants continued to produce in excess of their quotas,
and oversold into the domestic market (see above, point 267 et seq.). The SZIF planned to
fine them for this.

(dd)
Cancellation by the Czech Constitutional Court

281.

The Second Sugar Decree was struck down by the Czech Constitutional Court because it
allocated quota on the basis of a historical period that had been affected by the First Sugar
Decree since it included the year 2000 (see above, point 278).

282.

The effect of the cancellation was that no fines were imposed on the new local entrants for
having produced in excess of their quota and oversold on the domestic market (see above,
point 280).

283.

The cancellation also had another effect (see above, point 278). As the Czech Republic

puts it:
Eastern Sugar, the Czech Republic claims due to insufficient production capac-
ity and poor commercial strategy, failed to produce sugar up to the production
quota that it had been allocated by the Czech Republic in 2001/2002. Eastern
Sugar thus risked the sanctions enshrined in the Second Sugar Decree then ap-
plicable, namely a reduction of its sugar quota by an amount exceeding its in-
sufficient production. Only the cancellation of the Second Sugar Decree by the
Constitutional Court permitted, the Czech Republic argues, Eastern Sugar to
evade a substantive reduction of its quota, which finally occurred under the
Third Sugar Decree.

(ee)
Overall Assessment

284.
Overall, the Second Sugar Decree had flaws similar to those of the First Sugar Decree (see
above, point 271 et seq.).

285.
The disturbing feature of a reserve was now increased, and, moreover, made available to

newcomers (see above, point 279).

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 55/72

aaa eee

286.

That Eastern Sugar produced less sugar than permitted by its quota (this was due, as East-
ern Sugar claimed, to excessive production and imports by others) would have under the
Second Sugar Decree led to a reduction of Eastern Sugar's quota by the SZIF which was
administering the Second Sugar Decree (but had not administered the First Sugar Decree).
This might have led the Arbitral Tribunal to a discussion that would have been similar to
what will follow in connection with the Third Sugar Decree. However, the Second Sugar
Decree did not last enough for this to happen.

287.

The Arbitral Tribunal, with more hesitation than for the First Sugar Decree (see above,
point 274), still does not find the Second Sugar Decree to have been in violation of the
BIT.

oO.
Third Sugar Decree of March 19, 2003

(aa)
Philosophy of Third Sugar Decree

288.
In July 2002, thus during the time of the Second Sugar Decree, the Government changed.
This is of course legally irrelevant, but it explains what then happened.

289.
The new Government made no statements about a change in policy.

290.

But as one will see, the policy changed from encouraging rationalization (as generally in
the First and Second Sugar Decree) to protecting and appeasing beet growers at the ex-
pense of foreign-owned producers and to leaving things as much as possible as they were
(the code word for this was "stabilization of the market") or even increase sugar production
in the interest of beet growers and to improve the Czech Republic’s bargaining position
towards the EU.

291.

By 2003, the European Union reduced the country quota allocated to the Czech Republic.
One could have imagined that the quotas of the individual manufacturers might have been
reduced pari passu, but this is not what happened. Earlier Sugar was made to bear the big-
gest reduction by itself since its quota was reduced by more than the entire country quota
reduction.

 

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 56/72

 

292.
This was achieved by abandoning the historical quota basis altogether.

293,
Now the quota was set on the basis of the production achieved on two particular days in
factories still operating.

294.
The effect of this was that a producer which had closed a factory and shifted production to
other factories in the meantime was penalized by a reduction of its quota.

295.
Similarly, a producer which had used modern technology to spread sugar production over
the year and use less beet was also penalized by a reduction of its quota.

296.
Now newcomers were encouraged even more than before. The reserve was again in-
creased.

(bb)
Eastern Sugar targeted?

297.
Eastern Sugar claims that it was now being targeted by the Czech Republic as a revenge

for the closure of the Modrany factory which had occurred in January 2002, thus under the
Second Sugar Decree. The Czech Republic denies this.

298.

The Arbitral Tribunal did receive testimony from the Czech Republic’s witnesses, Mr. Pa-
las, Mr. Hick and Mr. Fronek, about the reasons that led to the enactment of the Third
Sugar Decree, and in particular, to the adoption of the internationally unusual one-day pro-
duction basis to allocate quota.

299,
The only document that the Arbitral Tribunal received was a report by Mr. Fronek to the
Minister of Agriculture. It read as follows:

Annex No. r-77
Reference No. 1105/03-8001 Date: 14 January 2003

Memorandum for the Minister of Agriculture

 

Assigned by: Deputy | Department 8001 Prepared by:
Minister of Agriculture Ing. Daniel Fronek
Ing. Rudolf Jansky

 

 

 

 

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 57/72

 

 

Task: to develop pro- Head of the Sugar
duction quota alloca- Dept.
tion alternatives - pros Ing. Eva DiviSova

and cons, opinions

 

Deadline: immediate Deputy Minister:
Ing. Rudolf Jansky

 

 

 

Re: Sugar production quota allocation system

 

 

Negotiated with the trade unions:

 

 

 

Related reference numbers:

 

Dear Sir,

Below find a draft of the sugar production quota allocation system to be in-
cluded in the planned amendment of Government Decree No. 114/2001 Coll.

Three alternatives of the sugar production quota allocation system have been
drafted after extensive negotiations. These alternatives have been discussed
and reviewed mainly in terms of system functionality, legal viability and the
level of consent of system participants. Based on the assessment of the risks
and pros and cons of the three alternatives we have set up a ranking reflecting
their overall acceptance, i.e. from the most acceptable to the least acceptable
one. All the three alternatives are based on the negotiated national production
quota of 454 862 tonnes of sugar (i.e. on the reduced level from the original
amount of 505,000 tonnes) and apply to the quota year of 2003/2004. The re-
sults for each alternative are as follows:

1) “Production quantities with the choice of a reference period”

Basic principle: A sugar production quota allocation system which is based on ‘
production quantities expressed as an average quantity of sugar pro-
duced in 24 hours; the applicant will be able to choose a reference pe-
riod (either November 2001 or October 2002), depending on whichever
is more favorable to him. &

Pros: a) Relative transparency and fairness of quota allocation; the system re-
flects the current levels of domestic sugar producers.
b) Sugar production figures for each producer are available as sugar
movements are being monitored pursuant to Government Decree No.
114/2001 Coll. (hereinafter "NV 114"). These figures are not influenced
by the sugar producers knowing in advance that the figures will be used
as a basis for quota allocation.
c) Only limited changes in the current NV 114 required - a minor
amendment from a legal point of view - this would be in compliance with
the requirements of the Government Legislative Council.
d) All sugar producers will be allocated the quota at a time; sugar beet
growers will know the quota levels before they start seeding.
e)This alternative provides for a timely application of the NV 114 re-
quirement to prove that sugar beet supplies covering at least 90% of the
allocated quota have been contracted.

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 58/72

 

Cons: The system does not impose the obligation to export sugar produced in
2002/2003.

Opinions: a) Sugar producers from the Eastern Sugar and Agrana groups
(51% of the sugar market) are against this alternative; the position of
the Moravian Sugar Beet Growers Union is reserved; other sugar pro-
ducers support this alternative.

The draft amendment of NV 114 for this alternative has been prepared in co-

operation with the legal department and may be submitted to the Minister's

Council after certain formal adjustments are made.

2) “Combination of production quantities and exports”

Basic principle: A portion of the national production quota (approximately
320,000-360,000 tonnes) would be allocated based on production quan-
tities, the rest of the national quota would be allocated according to each
producer's exports during the 2002/2003 campaign.

LJ]

3) “1995-1999 reference period”

Basic principle: The whole national production quota would be allocated at a
time, based on production quantities of applicants and their average
daily production during the 1995-1999 reference period.

Pros: a) A “clean” reference period free of any regulation interventions.

b) The period not challenged by any decision of the Constitutional Court
of the Czech Republic.

c) Sugar producers will be allocated the whole quota at a time; sugar
beet growers will know the quota levels before they start seeding.

Cons: a) The system does not reflect the current status of the sugar sector- the
capital structure of sugar producers went through significant changes in
those eight years, the sector was restructured and production equipment
upgraded,

Opinions: a) Supported by the Eastern Sugar and Agrana groups; Cukrovary
TTD disagrees.

300.

Mr. Fronek stated in his memorandum that based on an assessment of system functionality,
legal viability, and the level of consent of system participants and of risks and pros and
cons, the system later used in the Third Sugar Decree (alternative 1) ranked first. He did
not explain why this was his opinion, nor could he explain this at the hearing.

301.

Mr. Fronek's immediate superior and other higher officials in the ministry of agriculture
did not testify, but the minister of agriculture at the time and recipient of the memorandum,
Mr. Palas, did.

 

|
|

 

ed

ee ee ee ee ee |

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 59/72

 

302.

Mr. Palas was unable to explain why he had preferred the method used in the Third Sugar
Decree.

303.

His testimony was that the decision had been taken on the basis of Mr. Fronek's memoran-
dum (which had simply stated that using daily production as a basis ranked first), and on
"other information" as well. What that "other information" was and what it said, Mr. Palas
was unable to say.

304.

If the decision was not taken by preferring the first alternative as the best but rather per ex-
clusionem of the others as worse, it is still unclear why the third alternative was ranked
only third.

305.

Mr. Fronek in his memorandum wrote that the 1995 to 1999 historical basis (alternative 3)
was clean of any regulation interventions. Nevertheless the Czech Republic witnesses loo-
sely doubted the constitutionality of using the 1995 to 1999 historical basis.

306.
In his testimony Mr. Fronek claimed that to exclude the new sugar market players would
have been in violation of the constitution. He did not explain why.

307.
He also testified as follows:

A. As far as I remember, this was the result of meetings of public administra-
tion bodies, meaning the ministries, and the result of these meetings was that,
based on the decision of the Constitutional Court, the quota allocation system
was found in preparing -- also the period prior to this decision was influenced
by this unconstitutional decision, meaning that if we continued with the same
method for quota allocation, it could lead to further constitutional complaints
and the quota allocation system would be abolished again.

THE CHAIRMAN: This is advice that you received in the Ministry; correct?
A. This was the opinion of legal authorities of the Ministry, and the opinion

was that continuing the old quota allocation system would lead to additional
constitutional complaints.

308.

The then Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Palas, testified as follows:
Well, the situation was that, if we used this period, there was the possibility
that the Constitutional Court could strike out the decree because it was the

case relating the previous two decrees. So this is why we chose a different
principle.

 

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 60/72

 

[J]

A. As I have already stated -- well, this principle was struck out by the Consti-
tutional Court twice and there was a danger that it would happen in the future,
that this method would be struck out again by the Constitutional Court.

309.

The Arbitral Tribunal does not find the decisions by the Constitutional Court difficult to
understand. It is clear that the only reason why the Second Sugar Decree was struck down
was that it included in the historical basis that it used a period that had been affected by the
struck-down First Sugar Decree. Beyond this aspect, the Constitutional Court said nothing
about the basis that should be used to set the quota. It did not criticize using a historical
basis as such.

310.

In any event, the Arbitral Tribunal has the Czech Republic in front of it, not its government
nor its constitutional court. As far as the Arbitral Tribunal is concerned, these are both
state organs which determine the Czech Republic's actions.

311.
What, then, had been Mr. Fronek’s task? Mr. Palas testified as follows:

A. I gave the instruction to the employees to prepare a draft of a new regula-
tion that could not be challenged by the Constitutional Court.

312.

Mr. Fronek testified as follows:
A, It was my task to find verifiable, measurable, relevant new method for
quota allocation.
THE CHAIRMAN: Did he say "new"?
THE INTERPRETER: Yes.
A. It was my task to find verifiable, measurable, relevant, new quota allocation
key, other than this reference production period, and we were talking about
sugar production, sugar marketing. Everything was about sugar. So we were
trying to find a method that would take this fact into account.
[J

A. Well, this was an assignment given by my managers, my bosses.

313.

The explanations given by the Czech Republic’s witnesses for giving up setting quota on a
historical reference basis are not persuasive. Moving to an entirely new basis just for the
sake of doing something different simply makes no sense to the Arbitral Tribunal.

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 61/72

 

314.
The only rational explanation is that the Government wished to appease the beet growers in
connection with the Modrany closure and the use of SSMB.

315.

It is striking that in the Arbitration, the Czech Republic raised the subject of Modrany time
and again and reverted to it again and again. For example, its first line of questioning in
Mr. Evan's cross-examination concerned the closure of Modrany. See Transcript of July
17, 2006, page 40, line 3.

316.

Mr. Fronek testified that following the closure of Modrany the Czech Republic was under

enormous pressure from the beet growers. He testified as follows:
From the point of view of the Ministry of Agriculture, the reactions to the first
closure of the factory of Eastern Sugar was unprecedented. There was a very
strong opposition from beet growers, not just in the Modrany region but also
from the rep i ionwide. The disapp' | and the opposition was
very strong and the sugar-beet growers started pressing, started pushing, on
the Ministry of Agriculture to make sure that something similar would not be
possible in the future. As a result, there was an agreement between Eastern
Sugar and TTD about the transfer of the quota.
I can tell you that there were numerous calls received from beet growers, also
Srom civil servants, members of the Parliament, so this is the reality that I ex-
perienced, and I can also confirm that, all of this was happening.

317.
Mr. Hick confirmed this.

318.
Mr. Palas’ contrary testimony that there was no strong pressure on the ministry of agricul-
ture is surprising.

319.
Mr. Fronek in a memorandum that he compiled on January 9, 2002, was concerned that the
closure of Modrany would shift the balance of beet cultivation from Bohemia to Moravia.

320.
Beet growers wrote Mr. Palas in September 2002 to ask him to retaliate against Eastern
Sugar for its closure of Modrany.

321.
The Czech Republic wrote the following in its submission of December 31, 2005:

The closure of Modrany was never used as an argument for introducing the
daily production formula, neither was the idea behind to punish Eastern Sugar.
The only concern of the Czech Republic at this time was to settle the upheaval

 

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 62/72

 

among the growers.

322.

The three witnesses of the Czech Republic, Mr. Palas, Mr. Héck and Mr. Fronek, emphati-
cally denied that the Third Sugar Decree had anything to do with the Modrany closure
which they all agreed had been perfectly legitimate, but they still appeared upset about the
closure.

323.
Mr. Fronek testified as follows (Transcript of July 18, 2006, page 52, line 19 et seq.):

I absolutely disagree with this statement. I believe that the primary cause, the
primary source of difficulties, as I see it, was the fact that foreign investors
make certain unusual extraordinary decisions. They let certain sugar factories
go bankrupt, even though these sugar factories were operational, they were
able to function. As a result, there were bankruptcy proceedings in the 1990s.
So it was in the 1990s. These sugar factories were later on purchased by other
entities, as was allowed by our legal system.

As far as I am aware, this development was very specific to the Czech Repub-
lic. It did not happen anywhere else outside of the Czech Republic. Our sugar
factories that were controlled by foreign investors, it was actually 100 per cent
of the production quota, made this decision.

I must emphasise that the Czech Republic, in the scope of its loss, did not have
any opportunity to prevent any new entrants to come to the Czech market and
to start operating these sugar factories. In the year 2000 it was new entrants
in the Czech Republic's sugar market, two new players, the sugar factory in
Prosenice and the sugar factory in Vrdy. At Prosenice there was a former
sugar factory controlled by Eastern Sugar.

So previously the total national quota was occupied by foreign investors, 95 to
100 per cent, but as of January Ist 2000, there were new players on the market
and the Czech Republic could not exclude them from the sugar market. It had
to take the situation into account.

324.
See also the witness statement of Mr. Palas of 15 December 2005:

In his witness statement quoted in paragraph 280 of the Claimant's Memorial,
Mr. Evans directly claims that by setting up a method based on daily produc-
tion I "sought retribution for the damages EAS caused by closing the refinery
in Modrany." I absolutely deny this. The ministry could have reacted to the
closing of Modrany sooner by amendment to the existing decree, but no steps
were taken in this direction, the ministry only (still in the time of my predeces-
sor Mr. Fencl) assisted in drafting a contract between TTD and EAS transfer-
ring part of the quota, which supports my claim that EAS was aware of the un-
fairness of its closure of the refinery in Modrany as well as the fact that by this
act they would markedly reduce their production capacity.

The reduction in the quota by the new [3rd] decree was therefore connected

 

 

ee ee en en ee |

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 63/72

 

with the closing of the Modrany refinery, but for purely technical reasons, as
the quota was derived from the amount of sugar produced for a certain period
of time, and the closure of the refinery is logically reflected in this amount
without respect to what reference period was chosen fort he quota. That it was
not the intention of the Czech government is supported by what really hap-
pened, that the new decree was in reaction to the preceding [2nd] decree being
repealed [on October 3, 2002] by the Constitutional court, which if it hadn't
been repealed, the previous decree would have remained valid and the ministry
would not have planned any interference into the sugar industry motivated by
the unplanned closure of the Modrany refinery and the production quota allo-
cated to EAS would have remained unchanged.

325.
Mr. Hock testified as follows:

A, I do not think that there is a connection between the allocation of the re-
serve and the closure of the Modrany sugar factory, but what was important
was the of one of the ditions that were stipulated in the decree
and the definition or the formulation was very precise. This condition was that
it is necessary to assess to what extent the sugar factories accepted obligations
towards sugar-beet growers in areas where sugar factories were closed.

Q. And that would not, in your view, be an indirect reference to Modrany?

A. No.

326.

Reserve distribution was made in application of the Third Sugar Decree to benefit produc-
ers which contributed to the "stabilization of the sugar sector". "Stabilization of the sugar
market" is of course a code word for keeping things as they are, and the connection with
the Modrany closure is once again obvious.

327.
The Czech Republic asserts the following:

It is a fact, that the two successive closures of Zvolenéves and Modfany, per-
Sormed by Eastern Sugar in 2001 and 2002, caused a brutal and sudden desta-
bilization of the Czech market, in particular in the sugar beet production sec-
tor. The subsidiary of French — not Czech — sugar producer, TTD, which took
over the beets formerly supplied to these two closed factories, was the company
that most contributed to the stabilization of the sugar market.

328.
On May 31, 2006, the Czech Republic wrote the following:

Effectively, the sudden and brutal closure of the Modrany plant in January
2002 led the Czech authorities to allocate TTD with a substantial part of the
reserve in order to maintain the growers’ activities in the area of the Modrany
factory.

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 64/72

 

329.
Eastern Sugar's use of the SSMB beet-saving technique also obviously displeased the
Czech Republic under its new government.

330.

Mr. Fronek's argued that if SSMB had been taken into account in setting Eastern Sugar's
quota, this would have been in favour of one sugar producer - Eastern Sugar - to the det-
riment of other sugar producers in the Czech Republic. This is disingenuous. It is obvious
that favoring one producer over the others disadvantages the others. The question simply
is whether there is good reason to favour the one producer using SSMB, and whether it is
discrimination if such a producer is not favored, or whether the use of SSMB is irrelevant,
in which case the producer using that technology should not be put in a more advantageous
position than others.

33;

Mr. Fronek added the following remark:
Also, I must say that as far as I am aware this sugar production method is not
common in Europe. I just know there is one plant, I believe in Austria, that
uses this method, but it is not just for sugar production; they produce other
partial products. I am not aware of any other countries where this method
would be used, apart from some laboratory experiments or laboratory produc-
tion.

332.

It is obvious to the Arbitral Tribunal that Eastern Sugar's earlier investment into the SSMB
technique was an investment into rationalization, which had heretofore been encouraged by
the then Government but now displeased the present Government.

(cc)

Overall Assessment

333.
From an objective point of view, the Arbitral Tribunal agrees with Eastern Sugar that the
Third Sugar Decree had as its effect that Eastern Sugar lost out at every corner.

334.

Eastern Sugar also complains that the quota that it received under the Third Sugar Decree
on the basis of daily production was on top of everything wrongly calculated. The Arbitral
Tribunal needs not go into this since it considers that the switch to the daily production ba-
sis was as such in violation of Art. 3 (1) of the BIT.

 

ee ee |

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 65/72

 

335.
The Arbitral Tribunal agrees that Eastern Sugar was unfairly and inequitably targeted by
the Third Sugar Decree in violation of Art. 3 (1) of the BIT.

336.
This is the sole rational explanation offered to the Arbitral Tribunal.

337.

In sum, with the Third Sugar Decree the Czech Republic penalized a foreign company that
had done nothing illegal in the previous years, while Czech newcomers who had exceeded
their quota within the previous years were now rewarded for having done so.

338.

Even if the intent was not to punish Eastern Sugar specifically but more generally to favor
newcomers and to preserve the jobs of sugar beet growers, the result is still that a violation
of the BIT occurred. Accordingly, the Arbitral Tribunal is of the view that the effect of the
Third Sugar Decree was a discriminatory and unreasonable measure in the sense of Art. 3
(1) of the BIT.

P.
From May 2004 to date

339.
The Fourth Sugar Decree dated May 26, 2004, replaced the Third Sugar Decree. It essen-
tially continued the Third Sugar Decree.

340.
It was upheld by Constitutional Court on March 8, 2006.

341.
From March 2003, onwards, Eastern Sugar did not fill the reduced quota allocated to it.

342.
In 2006, the European Union was forced by the WTO to liberalize its protectionist sugar
regime.

343.

Briefly after the pleading session of September 27, 2006, Eastern Sugar announced its in-
tention to abandon sugar production in the Czech Republic and two other new EU coun-
tries, and to relinquish its Czech quota.

 

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 66/72

 

Q.

Conclusion on principle

344,
With the introduction of the First Sugar Decree, the Czech Republic did not violate the
BIT.

345.
With the introduction of the Second Sugar Decree, the Czech Republic did not violate the
BIT.

346.
With the introduction of the Third Sugar Decree, the Czech Republic did violate the BIT.

347.

It follows that Eastern Sugar must now be put in the condition in which it would have been
today had the Czech Republic not committed the above violation by issuing the Third
Sugar Decree on March 19, 2003.

R.
Quantum: Claim A

348.
In its post-hearing brief, Eastern Sugar claimed Damages of EUR 40,806,000 for failure to

enact and enforce a workable sugar regime.

349,
This concems the period from the First Sugar Decree to the accession to the EU on May 1,
2004.

350.
The Arbitral Tribunal cannot award any damages accrued before the Third Sugar Decree of
March 19, 2003, which is the one sugar decree that it finds to have violated the BIT.

351.
For the period after that, the complaint is not justified. What the Czech Republic enacted
in the Third Sugar Decree and enforced was workable - it was just unfair and unequitable.

352.
This claim is rejected.

 

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 67/72

 

Ss.
Quantum: Claim B-1

353.

On March 15, 2006 (see above, point 21), Eastern Sugar claimed as per the Second Ellison
Report, lost profits from March 19, 2003, (the Third Sugar Decree) to July 31, 2006, of
EUR 19,501,000.

354.
The Czech Republic claims that from its EU accession on May 1, 2004, onwards, this
claim is not arbitrable. This aspect was discussed in above, point 182 et seq.

355.
It is always difficult to assess lost profits. One cannot simply rely on a business plan.

356.

The lost profits claim under the Third Sugar Decree presupposes that profits would have
been made from March 19, 2003, onwards. The Arbitral Tribunal is not persuaded that this
is so. Had sugar production been sufficiently profitable, Eastern Sugar would have filled
the reduced quota available to it. It produced even less sugar. It is difficult to believe that
it would have produced more sugar, and then made substantial profits, if only it had had a
larger quota. That it now is seeking to abandon production in the Czech Republic alto-
gether (see above, point 343) confirms that the lost profits claimed are overly speculative.

357.
This claim is rejected.

T.
Quantum: Claim B-2

358.

On March 15, 2006 (see above, point 21) as per the Second Ellison Report, Eastern Sugar
claimed unfair and inequitable allocation of quota - Loss of share value from July 31,
2006, onwards, of EUR 28,230,000.

359.

This is based on an average market value of a quota of EUR 730 per ton and the assump-
tion that Eastern Sugar's quota would have remained as in the Second Sugar Decree rather
than reduced by 38,671 tonnes, as it was by the Third Sugar Decree.

360.
The Czech Republic claims that from its EU accession on May 1, 2004, this claim is not
arbitrable. This aspect was discussed in above, point 182 et seq.

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 68/72

 

361.

The Arbitral Tribunal agrees that by being denied a higher quota, Eastern Sugar was de-
nied the value associated with it, a value that it had acquired in earlier years by investing
into the Czech sugar market under the encouragement of the Czech Republic.

362.
The Arbitral Tribunal has some doubts about the ability of Eastern Sugar to sell quota for
EUR 730 per ton to other sugar manufacturers since no such sale occurred.

363.

For the Arbitral Tribunal the no doubt complex negotiations now underway between the
Parties on Eastern Sugar’s possible exit from the Czech Republic sugar market in 2007 are
not relevant to determine the value of the quota that was denied to Eastern Sugar by the
Third Sugar Decree in 2003. The information about the possible exit that was provided to
the Arbitral Tribunal in January 2007 is sufficient (and no further information is required,
see above, point 87) for the Arbitral Tribunal to conclude that in 2003 the quota had a
value equivalent to its potential of being bought back.

364.

It accepts as its yardstick the EUR 730 per ton figure which is the amount for which quota
may be purchased from the European Union from July 1, 2006, onwards under the EU
Council Regulation in force.

365.

If however a manufacturer is compensated for quota that it no longer uses, it is required to
pass on 10% at least of the price, thus EUR 73 per ton, to beet growers and machinery
manufacturers adversely affected by the reduction of the sugar production, see Art. 3(6) of
EU Regulation 320/2006. This 10% must accordingly be deducted from the damages
claimed under this heading.

366.
This leads the Arbitral Tribunal to assess the damages at EUR 25,400,000. In this amount,
the claim is granted.

 

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 69/72

 

U.
Parent Company Claim for Loss by Subsidiary?

367.

The Arbitral Tribunal is aware that the loss of quota was suffered primarily by Eastern
Sugar Ceska Republika a.s. However, this is a practically wholly-owned subsidiary of the
Claimant Easter Sugar B.V, and the value of the subsidiary is in the present circumstances
in practical terms determined by the value of the quota allocated to it. The Arbitral Tribu-
nal deems it correct to award to the Claimant full damages for Eastern Sugar Ceska Repub-
lika a.s.' loss of quota attributable to the Third Sugar Decree.

Vv.
Summary

368.
The Claimant Eastern Sugar is awarded EUR 25,400,000 in principal.

Ww.
Interest

369.
Interest is claimed by Eastern Sugar at the rate of 12% per annum compounded annually,
subsidiarily at EURIBOR plus 1% compounded by-annually (see above, point 23).

370.
There was little discussion between the Parties on the interest question.

371.
Eastern Sugar did not discuss the applied rates nor did it discuss why interest should be
compounded yearly or half-yearly.

372.

On September 8, 2006, the Czech Republic wrote the following:
The Czech Republic contends that the 12% WACC applied for by Eastern
sugar is not an interest rate.

In the absence of Eastern Sugar’s demonstrating how a bi-annual compound of
interests may “adequately compensate”’ it for the damage it adequately suf-

 

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 70/72

 

fered, there is no room for interest being compounded bi-annually.

373.

The Arbitral Tribunal believes that it should apply the statutory interest provided by the
applicable law, which is Czech law, which on this point does not conflict with International
Law (see above, point 197).

374.
This is simple annual interest at 7 percentage points above the repo rate as published from
time to time by the Czech National Bank.

375.

The Arbitral Tribunal is aware that this is statutory interest on the Czech Crown, not on the
Euro, but the difference is not spectacular as the Czech Republic is striving to adopt the
Euro.

376.
Interest runs from July 31, 2006, the reference date under Claim B — 2 granted by the Arbi-
tral Tribunal as described above (see point 359).

*

377.

Now that the Arbitral Tribunal has decided Eastern Sugar’s claims (d) to (f) for monetary
relief, Eastern Sugar has no interest worthy of protection that the Arbitral Tribunal decide
its claims (a) to (c) for various declarations. These are rejected.

378.
The only matter that remains to be decided is costs.

*

X.
Costs

(@)
Costs Follow the Outcome

379,

The Arbitral Tribunal adopts a “broad brush” costs-follow-the-outcome approach, which is
what many arbitral tribunals do, no matter where they sit. This does not mean that the win-
ner on balance takes all. On the contrary, it means that the costs must be borne in propor-
tion to the outcome.

 

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 71/72

 

380.

The Arbitral Tribunal using a broad brush and taking into account that the "high mark" of
Eastern Sugar's claims, principal only, was EUR 109,078,000 (see above, point 21), and
that the Czech Republic fails with its plea of lack of jurisdiction and its lack of its arbitra-
bility defence allocates 30% of the costs to the Czech Republic and 70% to Eastern Sugar.

(i)
Party Representation Costs

381.

The Arbitral Tribunal finds that the party representations costs claimed by the Parties
(Eastern Sugar: EUR 3,366,120.35, plus EUR 1,500 for the Stockholm Institute. The
Czech Republic: EUR 1,242,486.90 plus EUR 1,500 for the Stockholm Institute) to be
generally reasonable.

382.
The Arbitral Tribunal is comforted by the fact that neither Party objected to the Party Rep-
resentation costs claimed by the other.

383.
Accordingly, the Czech Republic shall pay Eastern Sugar 30% of Eastern Sugar's party
representation costs, that is EUR 1,010,786, and shall receive reimbursement of 70% of its
own, that is EUR 870,791. On balance, the Czech Republic shall pay Eastern Sugar
EUR 139,995 towards its party representation costs.

©
Arbitration Costs

384.
The arbitration costs will be fixed and allocated at a later date.

 

SCC No. 088/2004 Partial Award 72/72

 

Based on the foregoing, the Arbitral Tribunal issues the following

Partial Award

. The Arbitral Tribunal accepts jurisdiction.
2. All claims are arbitrable.

3. The Czech Republic shall pay Eastern Sugar BV EUR 25,400,000, plus, from
July 31, 2006, to the date of payment, simple annual interest thereon at 7 per-
centage points above the repo rate as published from time to time by the Czech
National Bank.

4, The Czech Republic shall pay Eastern Sugar EUR 139,995 towards its party
representation costs.

5. The arbitration costs will be fixed and allocated at a later date.

6. All other and furthergoing claims are rejected.

For oe Tribunal:

/

Pierre A. Karrer

Robert Volterra

Seat of arbitration: Paris

Dated, 27. MR2. 2907

    

Emmanuel Gaillard

 

 

COS PARTIAL AWARD 05 12-07 DOC STSAOGTITTS 60 ANT

