IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION CONDUCTED UNDER THE ARBITRATION RULES OF THE
UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (UNCITRAL)

AND

IN THE MATTER OF A CLAIM UNDER THE TREATY BETWEEN THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF
GERMANY AND THE CZECH AND SLOVAK FEDERAL REPUBLIC CONCERNING THE
EENCOURAGEMENT AND RECIPROCAL PROTECTION OF INVESTMENTS

BETWEEN:

(1) ECE PROJEKTMANAGEMENT INTERNATIONAL GBH

(2) KOMMANDITGESELLSCHAFT PANTA ACHTUNDSECHZIGSTE
GRUNDSTUCKSGESELLSCHAFT MBH & Co
Claimants

-and-

THE CZECH REPUBLIC
Respondent

(PCA Case No. 2010-5)

 

AWARD

 

19 September 2013

The Tribunal:
Sir Franklin Berman KCMG QC, Chairman
Professor Andreas Bucher
Mr J. Christopher Thomas QC

Legal Assistant / Secretary to the Tribunal:
Mr Simon Olleson

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

Parr I - INTRODUCTION. 1
A. INTRODUCTION 1
1. The Parties 1
2. Brief Overview of the Dispute 2
B. RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE BIT ..

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 7
1. Constitution of the Tribunal 7
2. Preliminary Procedural Meeting...
3. The Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1
4 The Respondent’s Answer to Statement of Claim and Objections to

Jurisdiction 11
5. The Document Production Phase and the Claimants’ Request for

Extension of the Deadline for Filing of their Memorial on the Merits

and Observations on Jurisdiction and Admissibility .... wll
6. The Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits and Observations on

Jurisdiction and Admissibility 14
7. The Respondent’s Applications dated 26 November 2010........
8. | The Respondent’s Application for Extension of the Deadline for

Filing of its Counter-Memorial on the Merits and Reply on

Jurisdiction and Admissibility 16
9. The Claimants’ Application for Leave to Submit Further Requests to

Produce 16
10. The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits and Reply on

Jurisdiction and Admissibility. ......
11. The Claimants’ Request for Extension of the Deadline for Filing of

their Reply on the Merits and Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and

Admissibili 7
12. The Claimants’ Renewed Request for Leave to Submit Further

qt to Produce 17

13. The Claimants’ Reply on the Merits and Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and

Admissibility. 18
14. The Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits 19
15. The Tribunal’s Ruling on the Respondent’s Request to Exclude the

Second Witness Statement of Mr
16. Joint Chronology. 20

   

 

17. Pre-Hearing Review

 

18. The London Hearing 23
19. Procedural Matters Arising During the London Hearing ...........ssessessesssssseseesesseeneeneeee 24
20. The Tribunal’s List of Issues 27

 

 

21. The Site Visit and Prague Hearing

 

22. Correspondence Subsequent to the Prague Hearing ..............++

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

23. Costs 29
PART II - FACTUAL BACKGROUND 30
A. INTRODUCTION. 30
B. OVERVIEW OF THE PLANNING SYSTEM IN THE-CZECH REPUBLIC......sec00e« eed
1. Planning authorities 32
2. Planning Permits, Building Permits and Occupancy Approval ........sssssessesesesteone 32
3. The System of Appeals in Planning Matters...
C. OVERVIEW OF THE ENVISAGED CONSTRUCTION OF THE GALERIE PROJECT...
1. The Planning Scheme for the Galerie Project.
2. Acquisition of the project lands.
D. ECE’s APPLICATION FOR THE PLANNING PERMIT FOR GALERIE AND THE
PLANNING PERMIT PROCEEDINGS (INCLUDING THE EXTRAORDINARY REVIEW
PROCEEDINGS) 39
1. The Application for a Planning Permit ............essseessees 139
2. The Planning Permit P: dings before MAL 39
3. Appeal Proceedings before RAL. 40
4.  TheE dinary Review P. ing 42
E. THE BUILDING PERMIT PROC! 47
1. Applications for Building Permits in Relation to the Galerie project. :..........ssseee47
2. The Building Permit P: di 48
F. | EXCAVATIONS ON THE SITE OF GALERIE AND THE GROUND WORK REMOVAL
Proc 52
1. The Excavations on the Site. 52
2. Initiation of the Groundworks Removal ProceedingS..........:siessseeseeen 2253
G. THE ABANDONMENT OF THE GALERIE PROJECT AND SUBSEQUENT EVENTS .ssssssscsrsesesseses55

 

1. The Alleged Abandonment of the Project in October 2008 .......

2. The Continuation of the Building Permit ProceedingS ..........:sesssesesseeeseeeereseene DO.

 

3. The Initiation of the Administrative Offence Proceedings and
Subsequent Events in Relation to the Groundworks Removal
Proceedings and Building Proceedi: 56

 

aoconsasencen sccessesssccasceccecees OL

PART III - THE JURISDICTION OF THE TRIBUNAL....sesssssssessersessoseen

 

wee L

 

A. PROVISIONS OF THE BIT RELEVANT TO JURISDICTIO!

B. THE JURISDICTIONAL BASIS ASSERTED BY THE CLAIMANTS IN THE REQUEST
FOR ARBITRATION AND STATEMENT OF CLAIM

 

 

Cc. THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

1. Procedural context 63

 

2. Overview of the Objections to Jurisdiction Raised by the Respondent............

D. THE POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES 65

1. The Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction on the Basis of No
“Investment” Within the Meaning of Article 1(1) of the BIT

2. The Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction Based on Alleged Serious
Violations of Czech Law 71

3. The Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction Ratione Materiae

 

 

 

 

4. The Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis ......

E. THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS ON THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTIONS TO
JURISDICTION. 92
1. The Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction on the Basis of “No
Investment” Within the Meaning of Article 1(1) of the BIT

 

 

 

 

2. The Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction Based on Iegality........ 96
3. The Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction Ratione Materiae and

Ratione Temporis in Respect of Obsolete Expenses 1298
4, C i on Jurisdiction 100

 

 

Part IV - THE MERITS OF THE CLAIMANTS’ CLAIMS OF BREACH OF THE BIT .....:0se00e+0

A. INTRODUCTION 101

 

B. POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES. 102

1. The Claimants’ Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim.........:s:ssss

 

   

 

 

2. The Respondent’s Answer to the Statement of Claim........

3. The Claimants’ Memorial 119
4. The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial 148
5. The Claimants’ Reply 205

 

 

6. TheR dent’s Rejoinder 256

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

  

C. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS 295
lL. Introducti: 295
2. Preliminary Matters: Denial of Justice; Exhaustion of Local
Remedies; and the Relevance of Breaches of Domestic Law. we
3. Alleged Breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard (Article
2(1) BIT) 302
4. Alleged Breach of the Prohibition of Expropriation (Article 4(2) BIT)... 316
5. Alleged Breach of the Prohibition of Impairment of Investments by
Arbitrary or Discriminatory Measures (Article 2(2) BIT)....
6. The Claimants’ Allegations of Corruption .......csssssesssssessssessssssecssssesssesssecsseessvensseess 322
7. Conclusi 345
PART V - CAUSATION 346
A. INTRODUCTION 346
B. CAUSATION BETWEEN THE ALLEGED BREACHES AND THE DECISION TO
ABANDON THE PROJECT.
1. The Date of the Abandonment of the Project
2. The Cause of the Claimants’ Decision to Abandon the Project............
3. The Impact of the Excessive Excavations ....
C. CONCLUSION 366
Parr VI- Costs 367
A. THE COSTS OF THE ARBITRATION (EXCLUDING THE CosTS OF LEGAL
REPRESENTATION AND ASSISTANCE OF THE PARTIES)....04+
B. THE PARTIES’ CLAIMS FoR Costs 368
C. SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES AS TO COSTS...
1. The Claimants’ C 8 May 2013 369
2. The Respondent’s Reply on Costs, 17 May 2013. 370
3. The Claimants’ Rejoinder on Costs, 29 May 2013 373
D. — THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON COSTS ssssscssosssseosssensnseseeseeres eosses
1. Applicable Rules, and Issues for Decision ........:ssssssssseesssecsessessnessessneesneess poeeseeeees 374
2. Recoverability of VAT 375

 

 

3.  Reasonableness of the Costs Claimed by the Respondent.

4. Apportionment of Cost: 379

5. Conclusion 381

PART VII - CONCLUSION AND OPERATIVE PART....esscssssssesesessee aseseenene 3O2

 

 

ParTI
INTRODUCTION

A. INTRODUCTION

The present dispute arises under the Treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and the
Czech and Slovak Federal Republic concerning the Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection
of Investments, signed at Prague on 2 October 1990 (“the BIT” or “the Treaty”).

The Parties

The Claimants

he Claimants are ECE Projektmanagement International GmbH (“ECE International”) and

di Iischaft PANTA Achtundsechzigste Gn tick lichaft mbH & Co
CPANTA: both of which form part of the ECE Group, the ultimate holding company of
which is ECE Projektmanagement GmbH & Co. KG (“ECE or ECE KG”).

 

The first Claimant, ECE International, is a corporation incorporated and organized under the
laws of Germany and a fully-owned subsidiary of ECE KG.

The second Claimant, PANTA, is a limited partnership likewise organized under the laws of
Germany. ECE International is the limited partner in PANTA, and holds all of the limited
participation rights. The general partner in PANTA is PANTA Erste Grundstiicksgesellschaft
mbH, a company also incorporated under the laws of Germany.

The Claimants have been represented throughout the course of the present proceedings by
Dr~ to. As at the date of the institution of proceedings, Dr - wasa
Partner in the Frankiurt office of White & Case LLP. During the course of the hearing, the
Tribunal was notified that Dr had left White & Case and had become a partner in
the Frankfurt office of Norton Rose LLP.

For the oral hearings in the present proceedings, the Claimants were also represented by
Mr Arthur Marriott QC, 12 Gray’s Inn Square, London, and by Ms Mahnaz Malik.

The Respondent
The Respondent is the Czech Republic.

The Respondent is represented by Dr a Partner in the Prague office of Squire
Sanders, v.o.s., advokatni kancelar, and by Mr Stephen P. Anway, a Partner in the New York
office of Squire Sanders LLP.

1.10

1.11

1.12

1.13

1.14

1.15

Brief Overview of the Dispute

The Claimants, and the ECE Group of which they are subsidiaries, are involved in the business
of property development, and in particular the construction, management and sale of shopping
centres.

The present dispute relates to the Claimants’ planned construction of a shopping centre in
a city of some inhabitants situated in the north of the Czech Republic.
is some of Prague, close to ~

The Claimants’ planned shopping centre, which has been referred to throughout the
proceedings as GALERIE (“Galerie” or the “Galerie project”), was to have been
constructed on a sloping hillside site closely adjacent to the bus station in the centre of ~

Although substantial earthworks were conducted in preparation for the construction of Galerie
(a matter in relation to which the Tribunal will have to return later in this Award), the
Claimants’ project ultimately never progressed to the construction phase.

In broad outline, the Claimants complain about the actions of the relevant city, regional and
national Czech administrative authorities having responsibility for planning matters. They say
that the conduct of these authorities in respect of permits required for the construction of
Galerie resulted in delays to the planned construction of Galerie, and that, in the circumstances,
the combined effect of these delays left them no choice but to abandon their investment.

In the Request for Arbitration, the Claimants alleged breaches of “the Claimants’ right to fair
and equitable treatment, protection against arbitrary measures, the right to admission of lawful

od

investments, expropriation and non-discrimination”.

As remedies for these breaches, the Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim sought
damages in the amount of “€70.289 million, plus moral damages”,” which the Claimants
asserted were made up of “obsolete expenditure and lost profits”; these damages were

stipulated to be in respect of:

a. the reduction in the value of the shares in Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha (including a
claim for imputed interest that could have been earned with comparable alternative
investments);

b. the obsolete expenditure of various entities within the ECE Group other than

Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha (again including a claim in respect of imputed interest
that allegedly could have been earned with comparable alternative investments).°

In addition, a further sum of imputed interest was claimed “based on the legal interest rate in
the Czech Republic as of 31 May 2009 that exceeds the alternative investment yield”.*

' Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 17.

? Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 1.

> Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, paras. 19 and 20.
“ Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 21.

2

1.16

1.17

1.18

1.19

1.20

1.21

1,22

 

B. RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE BIT

As noted above, the present dispute arises under the BIT, and the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is
derived solely from the dispute resolution provisions it contains.

The original parties to the BIT were, on the one hand, the Federal Republic of Germany, and
on the other, the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic. Following the separation of the latter the
two successor States (one of which is the Respondent in this Arbitration) regulated between
them succession to bilateral treaties concluded by the predecessor State. On the first day of
the hearing in London on jurisdiction and the merits, in response to a question from the
Tribunal, the representatives of both Parties confirmed that there were no issues resulting from
application of the rules of State succession.” The Tribunal has accordingly treated the BIT in
the same way as if it had been from the outset a treaty concluded between Germany and the
Czech Republic.

Tt is useful to begin by setting out the pertinent provisions of the BIT laying down the
standards on the basis of which the Tribunal is required to decide the dispute.

The Tribunal notes that the BIT was concluded in the German and Czech languages, both
being stipulated to be equally authentic. The BIT was accompanied by a Protocol
(“the Protocol’), likewise concluded in both German and Czech, both texts being equally
authentic. The Protocol contains additional provisions relating to Articles 1-5 of the Treaty
itself, together with a further provision, not relevant to the present case, about the
transportation of goods or persons connected with an investment.

By its introductory provision, the Protocol is expressly made an integral part of the Treaty.
This makes it unnecessary for the Tribunal to consider what status the Protocol might have for
interpretative purposes under Article 31(2)(a) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties, since the plain intention of the Contracting Parties was that the terms of the Protocol
were to be treated as if they had been incorporated into the text of the BIT itself.

It became apparent at an early stage in the proceedings (which by common consent were
conducted entirely in English; see paragraph 1.44 below) that the translations into English of
the BIT relied upon respectively by the Claimants and by the Respondent were not in all
respects identical. The Tribunal directed the Parties in its Procedural Order No. 3 of 3
December 2010 to “consult over the possibility of providing to the Tribunal at some
convenient point an agreed translation into English of the treaty (and, as the case may be, its
Protocol) — or, if that proves not to be possible, a single text in English indicating where and in
what respect differences remain between the Parties over the correct translation”.

The Parties, having proved unable to reach agreement on all points, in due course on 25
January 2011 provided to the Tribunal a joint translation which for the most part was agreed,
but which indicated a certain number of remaining points of disagreement. In setting out the
relevant terms of the BIT and Protocol below, the differences between the Parties as to the
translation of particular words or phrases are indicated in square brackets, with an
indentification of which translation is preferred by which of the Parties.

5 TI, p. 34, IL. 10-17.

 

1.23 The Preamble to the BIT is comparatively brief, recording the Parties’ desire to intensify their
mutual economic cooperation, their intention to create favourable conditions for reciprocal
investments, and their recognition that encouragement and reciprocal protection of investments
are apt to strengthen all forms of economic initiative, in particular in the area of private
entrepreneurial activity.

1.24 Article 1 contains definitions of certain defined terms, and provides as follows:
For the purposes of this Treaty

1) the term "investments" shall include every kind of asset (Claimants: which
has been invested; Respondent: contributed] in conformity with domestic
law, in particular:

a) movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in
rem such as mortgages, liens and pledges;

b) shares of companies and other kinds of interest in companies;

c) receivables and claims to money which has been used to create
an economic value or claims to any performance which has an
economic value and which relates to an investment;

d) intellectual property rights, in particular copyrights, patents,
utility models, industrial designs or models, trademarks, trade
names, technical processes, know-how and goodwill;

e) business concessions under public law, including concessions to
search for, extract and exploit natural resources.

2) the term "Returns" shall mean the amounts yielded by an investment, such
as profit, dividends, interest, royalties or fees.

3) the term "investor" shall mean a natural person with permanent
residence or a juridical person with its seat in the respective area of
application of this Treaty, entitled to engage in investments.

1.25 Paragraph (1) of the Protocol provides, Ad Article 1, as follows;

Receivables and claims to money under Article 1 (c) include receivables and
claims to money arising under loans that are related to the interest in a
company and can be characterized as interest in companies based on their
(Claimants: purpose and extent; Respondent: importance and extent] (loans
similar to interest in companies). Third-party loans e.g. bank loans under
banking conditions are not covered.

1.26 Article 2 provides:

1) Each Contracting Party shall in its territory promote as far as possible
investments by investors of the other Contracting Party and admit such

4

1.27

1.28

1.30

investments in accordance with its legislation. It shall in any case accord
such investments fair and equitable treatment.

2) Neither Contracting Party shall in any way impair by arbitrary or
discriminatory measures the management, maintenance, use or enjoyment of
investments in its territory of investors of the other Contracting Party.

3) Investments and returns of investment as well as (Claimants: in case of
their re-investment the returns thereof; Respondent: reinvestments and
returns thereof] shall enjoy full protection under this Treaty.

Article 4(2) provides

Investments of investors of either Contracting Party shall not be
expropriated, nationalized or subjected to any other measure the effects of
which would be tantamount to expropriation or nationalization in the
territory of the other Contracting Party except for public interest and
against compensation. Such compensation shall be equivalent to the value of
the expropriated investment immediately before the date on which the actual
or threatened expropriation, nationalization or comparable measure
(Claimants: has become publicly known; Respondent: was publicly
announced]. The compensation shall be paid without delay and shall carry
the usual bank interest until the time of payment; it shall be effectively
realizable and freely transferable. Provision shall have been made in an
appropriate manner at or prior to the time of expropriation, nationalization
or comparable measure for the determination and payment of such
compensation. [Claimants: The legality; Respondent: The validity] of any
such expropriation, nationalization or comparable measure and the amount
of compensation shall be subject to review by due process of law.

Paragraph (4) of the Protocol provides, Ad Article 4, that

An investor is also entitled to compensation where a measure set out in
Article 4 (2) harms the investment by affecting an undertaking in which
investor has an interest.

Article 7 provides inter alia that

Each Contracting Party shall observe any other obligation it has assumed
with regard to investments of investors of the other Contracting Party in its
territory.

The dispute resolution provision on which the Claimants found the jurisdiction of the Tribunal
to hear the dispute is contained in Article 10, which provides, insofar as relevant:

1. (Claimants: Differences of opinion regarding; Respondent:
Disputes relating to] investments between either Contracting Party and an
investor of the other Contracting Party should as far as possible be settled
amicably between the parties in dispute.

2. If a (Claimants: difference of opinion; Respondent: dispute] cannot
be settled within six months of the date when it was (Claimants: raised;
Respondent: notified] by one of the parties in dispute, it shall, at the request
of the investor of the other Contracting Party, be submitted to arbitration.
The provisions of paragraphs 3 to 5 of Article 9 shall be applied mutatis
mutandis subject to the proviso that the appointment of the members of the
arbitral tribunal according to Article 9(3) shall be made by the parties to the
dispute, and that, if the periods specified in Article 9(3) are not observed,
either party to the dispute may invite the Chairman of the Arbitration
Institute of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce to make the necessary
appointments. This applies unless no other agreement applies between the
parties to the dispute. The award shall be recognized and enforced under the
Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards
(New York, 10 June 1958).

3. During arbitration proceedings or the enforcement of an award,
the Contracting Party involved in the dispute shall not raise the objection
that the investor of the other Contracting Party has received compensation
under an insurance contract in respect of all or part of the damage.

1.31 In the light of the terms of Article 9(2), paragraphs (3) to (5) of Article 9, governing inter-State
disputes, are also of relevance; they provide:

[J

3. The arbitral tribunal shall be constituted ad hoc as follows: each
Contracting Party shall appoint one member, and these two members shall
agree upon a national of a third State as their chairman, to be confirmed by
the two Contracting Parties. Members of the arbitral tribunal shall be
appointed within two months, and its chairman within three months from the
date on which either Contracting Party has informed the other Contracting
Party that it intends to submit the dispute to an arbitral tribunal.

4, If the periods specified in paragraph 3 above have not been
observed, either Contracting Party may, in the absence of any other
agreement, invite the President of the International Court of Justice to make
the necessary appointments.

5. The arbitral tribunal shall reach its decisions by a majority of
votes. Such decisions shall be binding. Each Contracting Party shall bear
the cost of its own member and of its representatives in the arbitration
proceedings, the cost of the chairman and the remaining costs shall be
borne in equal parts by the Contracting Parties. The arbitral tribunal may
make a different regulation concerning costs. In all other respects, the
arbitral tribunal shall determine its own procedure.

 

1,32

1.33

1.36

1.37

1.38

1.39

Cc. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

By letter dated 7 November 2008 pursuant to Article 10(2) BIT (“the Trigger Letter”),° the
Claimants gave notice to the Respondent of the existence of various claims of breach of the
BIT relating to “the unlawful administrative procedure regarding ECE’s development and
construction of a retail center in Liberec”.

The present proceedings were formally instituted by a combined “Request for Arbitration and
Statement of Claim” dated 31 July 2009, by which the Claimants alleged that the Respondent
had violated Articles 2(1) and 2(2) and 4 of the BIT and sought the payment of compensation
for the damage thereby suffered by the Claimants in the sum of € 70.289 million, as well as
“moral damages to be determined by the Tribunal based on further submissions.”

Constitution of the Tribunal

In the Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, the Claimants noted that they had
nominated Dr Andreas Bucher to serve as member of the Tribunal, and that he had accepted
that appointment.’

Subsequently, the Respondent nominated Mr J. Christopher Thomas QC to serve as member
of the Tribunal. He likewise accepted his appointment.

Following consultations between them, Professor Bucher and Mr Thomas jointly nominated
Sir Franklin Berman KCMG QC, to serve as the third member and Chairman of the Tribunal.
By letter dated 15 December 2009, Sir Franklin Berman noted this nomination and, in light of -
the terms of Article 10(2) read with 9(3) of the BIT, requested the Parties to state their position
as to whether any further steps were required in order to formalize his appointment.

By letter dated 18 December 2009, the Respondent confirmed the appointment of Sir Franklin
Berman KCMG QC as Chairman of the Tribunal for the purposes of Article 9(3) read with
Article 10(2) of the BIT.

Subsequently, as recorded in the approved Minutes of the Preliminary Procedural Meeting held
on 2 February 2010, both Parties confirmed the appointment of Sir Franklin Berman as
Chairman as well as the regularity of the appointment of all of the members of the Tribunal
and the constitution of the Tribunal as a whole.

Preliminary Procedural Meeting

As noted above, a Preliminary Procedural Meeting was convened by the Tribunal on 2
February 2010 at Essex Court Chambers, Lincoln’s Inn Fields, London, at which the
representatives of the Parties attended.

§ Core 8/291 Exhibit C-2).
7 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 285.

7

 

1.40

1.41

1.42

1.43

In advance of the Preliminary Procedural Meeting, the Parties had consulted and sought to
reach agreement on procedural matters; the remaining matters, on which agreement had not
been reached, were the subject of discussion at the Preliminary Procedural Meeting.

Consequent upon the Preliminary Procedural Meeting, a draft Minute was circulated to the
Parties for approval and comment, as was a draft of the Tribunal’s procedural order embodying
the Parties’ agreements on procedural matters, and the Tribunal’s decision on those matters on
which it had not been possible to reach agreement.

The Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1

The Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1, as previously provided to and duly approved by the
Parties, was issued on 19 March 2010. The Minutes of the Preliminary Procedural Meeting
held on 2 February 2010, as likewise approved by the Parties, were annexed.

Procedural Order No. 1, provided, inter alia, that :

a. save as otherwise agreed, and subject to the provisions of Procedural Order No. 1 and
any subsequent Procedural Order of the Tribunal, the 1976 UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules were to govern the proceedings (Article 2);

b. without prejudice to the power of the Tribunal to meet or deliberate in any other
place, the place of the arbitration was to be Paris, and that without prejudice to the
power of the Tribunal, having consulted the Parties, to hold hearing elsewhere, the
hearings would take place in London (Article 3);

c. a quorum for the Tribunal was to be constituted by all three members of the Tribunal;
that, save for agreement to the contrary by the Parties, a quorum was required for all
hearings and meeting of the Tribunal; and without prejudice to the power of the
Tribunal to delegate decisions on purely procedural matters to the Chairman, the
Tribunal was to make any Award or other decision by a majority of its members

(Article 4);
d. the language of the arbitration was to be English (Article 5);
e. Mr Simon Olleson was to be appointed by the Tribunal to act as its Assistant and

Secretary to the Tribunal, and was to undertake such tasks as in relation to the present
proceedings as were directed by the Chairman or the Tribunal, as well as holding and
retaining on behalf of the Tribunal a copy of all pleadings, documents and
correspondence in the arbitration (Article 6);

f the International Bureau of the Permananent Court of Arbitration was to be appointed
to act as registry for the arbitration, its tasks to include, in particular: holding and
administering the deposits made by the Parties by way of advance of the costs of the
proceedings; undertaking the organisation and logistical preparations for all hearings
and any meetings of the Tribunal; providing administrative support and performing
such other tasks as might be required upon the request of the Tribunal; and

ga

maintaining an archive of all filings and correspondence in the proceedings (Article
Ds;

as to document production, the document production phase was to be conducted in
accordance with the 1999 IBA Rules on the Taking of Evidence in International
Commercial Arbitration (“the 1999 IBA Rules”) save insofar as inconsistent with the
remaining provisions of Procedural Order No. 1. The timetable for the document
production phase foreseen was that:

i the Parties were to exchange Requests to Produce by 6 April 2010;

ii. production of any documents pursuant to a Request to Produce which the
requested Party did not object to was to be made by 20 April 2010;

iii. where the requested Party objected to all or part of a Request to Produce, or
to the production of particular documents or categories of documents, or if
the requesting Party was of the view that the other Party had not complied
with a Request to Produce, the Parties were to attempt to settle any
disagreement by 23 April 2010;

iv. in the case any such disagreements could not be settled, the requesting Party
could, by request in writing, submit the matter to the Tribunal for decision
no later than 6pm on 23 April 2010;

v. the requested Party was required to file any submissions in reply by 6pm on
26 April 2010, with any submissions in rebuttal being filed by the requesting
Party by 6pm on 28 April 2010;

vi. thereafter, the Tribunal would provide its ruling, if at all possible, by 3 May
2010, and in doing so would, subject to its residual discretion, apply the
1999 IBA Rules;

vii. any documents as to which the Tribunal ordered production were to be
produced within fourteen days of the Tribunal’s ruling (Article 8);

as to the schedule for written pleadings, the timetable originally envisaged was:

i. the Claimants’ Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim was to stand
as the notice of arbitration for the purposes of Article 3(1) of the
UNCITRAL Rules;

ii. by 15 March 2010 the Respondent was to file and serve an Answer to

Statement of Claim, it being recognized that that document need not be a
full pleading but should, on the basis of the documents then available to the
Respondent, contain an outline of the nature of its substantive defences and
of any objections to jurisdiction or admissibility;

iii. by 13 August 2010 the Claimants were to file and serve i) a “Memorial on
the Merits” and ii) separate “Observations on Jurisdiction and

 

1.44

1.45

Admissibility” dealing with any objections to jurisdiction or admissibility
raised in the Respondent’s Answer to Statement of Claim;

iv. by 12 November 2010, the Respondent was to file and serve a “Counter-
Memorial on the Merits” as well as a “Reply on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility;

v. by 10 December 2010, the Claimants were to file and serve a “Reply on the

Merits” as well as a “Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and Admissibility”;

vi. by 14 January 2011, the Respondent was to file and serve a “Rejoinder on
the Merits” (Article 9);

i. the Parties were to attempt to produce an agreed Chronology, to be provided to the
Tribunal not less than 30 days in advance of the scheduled start of the Hearing
(Article 10);

j the Hearing, which was to be held in London, and the scope of which was to extend

to any objections to jurisdiction or admissibility raised by the Respondent as well as
the merits of the Claimants’ claim, was provisionally scheduled for March 2011, with
a time estimate of one week certain, with a further week held in reserve in case of
need, the precise dates and venue to be fixed by the Tribunal subsequently (Article
11);

k. a pre-hearing review by telephone was to be scheduled on a date to be fixed but in
any case no later than three weeks prior to the scheduled start of the hearing (Article
11.4);

Detailed provision was made as to the form and content of the pleadings and the accompanying
witness, expert and documentary evidence (Article 12), including specific provision that:

a. the written pleadings were to be accompanied by all evidence, including witness
statements and expert reports, on which the submitting Party intended to rely
(Article 12.1), and

b. the Parties’ respective Replies and Rejoinders on jurisdiction and admissibility and
upon the merits were to be limited to responding to points raised in the other Party’s
immediately preceding pleading (Article 12.2);

In addition, detailed provision was made as to matters of evidence, it being specified, inter alia,
that:

a. all evidence upon which a Party intended to rely was to be submitted with the
Memorial or Counter-Memorial on the Merits, and that, save with the permission of
the Tribunal the evidence to be filed with the Reply and Rejoinder was to be limited
to evidence relating to points raised in and arising from the other Party’s preceding
pleading, with the same applying mutatis mutandis to the Parties’ respective
pleadings on jurisdiction and admissibility (Article 13.1 to 13.3);

1.46

1.47

1.48

1.49

b. all witness statements and expert reports relied upon by a party were to be submitted
contemporaneously with the pleading to which they related, and were to stand as the
direct testimony of the witness or expert, save that where a witness or expert was
called to give oral evidence at the hearing, the Party calling them would be able to
conduct a brief direct examination (Article 13.4);

c. witnesses or experts would not be permitted to testify at the hearing unless a written
witness statement or expert report had been provided; that each Party had the right to
cross-examine at the hearing any witness or expert whose statement or report had
been submitted by the other Party and that, save with the leave of the Tribunal, the
evidence of any witness or expert who did not appear for cross-examination at the
hearing was to be disregarded.(Article 13.5);

d. the authenticity of documents was to be assumed unless expressly challenged by the
other Party (Article 13.8);

e. as regards any question in relation to the taking of evidence, subject to the Tribunal’s
residual discretion, the Tribunal could take guidance from the 1999 IBA Rules
(Article 13.12).

The Respondent’s Answer to Statement of Claim and Objections to Jurisdiction

By email sent on 15 March 2010, in accordance with the agreement reached at the Preliminary
Procedural Meeting, as reflected in Article 9.3 of Procedural Order No. 1 (which at that point
had been circulated to the Parties, but was still in draft form) the Respondent filed its Answer
to the Claimants’ Statement of Claim (“the Answer to Statement of Claim”) accompanied by a
separate document containing an outline of its Objections to Jurisdiction (“the Objections to
Jurisdiction”).

The Document Production Phase and the Claimants’ Request for Extension of the
Deadline for Filing of their Memorial on the Merits and Observations on Jurisdiction
and Admissibility

As noted above, Procedural Order No. 1 foresaw that the Parties could submit to the Tribunal
for decision any matters in relation to their respective Requests to Produce on which they had
been unable to reach agreement by 23 April 2010.

By email dated 22 April 2010, subsequently confirmed by Counsel for the Respondent,
Counsel for the Claimants wrote to the Tribunal noting that the Parties were still attempting to
resolve some issues in relation to their respective requests for production, indicated that the
Parties had agreed on a modified schedule for the submission of unresolved issues and the
subsequent timetable of submisions, and requested that the Tribunal confirm those
modifications.

By email dated 23 April 2010, the Tribunal granted the joint request made by the Parties.

 

1.50

1.51

1.52

1.53

1.54

Pursuant to the timetable as amended, the Parties submitted the matters relating to their
respective Requests on which they had been unable to reach agreement on 26 April 2010,
submitted their respective submissions in reply on 27 April 2010, and submitted their rebuttal
submissions on 28 April 2010.

The Tribunal’s Guidance on Requests to Produce

On 17 May 2010, in light of the several disputes which had arisen between the Parties in
relation to their respective Requests to Produce, resulting in the referral of multiple issues for
decision and extensive submissions from both Parties, the Tribunal provided the Parties with
“Guidance on Requests to Produce” (the “Guidance”), in which it noted that the procedure laid
down in Article 8 of Procedural Order No. 1 was not sufficient to deal with the situation which
had presented itself, and invited the Parties:

a. in the light of the observations set out in the Guidance as to the principles governing
the admissibility of Requests to Produce, to resume contact in particular as regards:

i. the relevance and materiality of documents or categories of documents
requested (including the periods during which documents were likely to be
regarded as being relevant or material);

ii. issues of privilege and confidentiality;

iii. the identity of the Parties, including issues as to the persons or entities from
which documents could legitimately be requested;

iv. procedural issues relating to reformulation of certain requests, and
objections taken thereto.

b. to file, by 31 May 2010, a joint report setting out the points on which they had been
able to reach agreement, and those points on which agreement had not been reached,
including a brief statement of the position of each party, as well as a joint Redfern
Schedule.

The Tribunal indicated that it expected both Parties to exercise restraint and discipline in
resolving the continuing disagreement, and that it would provide a ruling on any remaining
areas of dispute as soon as practicable following submission of the joint report.

The Tribunal indicated further that the revised timetable for document production should not
have any impact upon the timetable for pleadings contained in Procedural Order No. 1, and
that the hearing schedule for March 2011 would be maintained. It would however be open to
either Party to make a reasoned application for extension of the pleading deadlines should
delay in the document production phase make that necessary.

By email dated 28 May 2010 from Counsel for the Claimants, subsequently confirmed by
Counsel for the Respondent, the Parties requested an extension to submit the joint report
requested in the Guidance. By communication sent on behalf of the Tribunal on 31 May 2010,
the Tribunal acceded to this request.

 

1.55

1.56

1.57

1.58

1.59

1.60

In accordance with that short extension, the Parties submitted their joint report, accompanied
by a joint Redfern Schedule, on 4 June 2010.

By letter dated 1 July 2010, the Claimants requested an extension of the deadline for
submission of their Memorial on the Merits and Observations on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility from 13 August 2010 to 15 September 2010. Pursuant to a request from the
Tribunal, the Respondent provided its comments on the Claimants’ request on 7 July 2010.
The Claimants submitted additional comments on 8 July 2010, including new matters relevant
to its application for an extension, to which the Respondent responded on 9 July 2010. Counsel
for the Claimants wrote to the Tribunal requesting a decision on its application for extension
on 14 July 2010.

The Tribunal’s Ruling on Document Production

On 15 July 2010, the Tribunal issued its “Ruling on Document Production”, to which was
annexed a consolidated Redfern Schedule, in which it provided its decision on the outstanding
issues in dispute as submitted to it in the joint report filed by the Parties on 4 June 2010. The
Ruling set a deadline of 29 July 2010 for production to the requesting Party of documents
responsive to those Requests to Produce which it had upheld in whole or in part, or of
confirmation that no responsive documents were in the possession, custody or control of that
Party.

The Claimants’ Request for Extension of the Deadline for Filing of their Memorial on the
Merits and Observations on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

As noted above (paragraph 1.56), by their letter dated 1 July 2010, the Claimants requested an
extension of the deadline for the filing of their Memorial on the Merits and Observations on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility, and the Parties then exchanged submissions in that regard. By
email dated 16 July 2010, Counsel for the Claimants wrote to the Tribunal providing further
information relevant to their request, and modified the extension requested to eight weeks. The
Claimants noted that that implied that it would not be possible to maintain the scheduled
hearing date in March 2011.

On 20 July 2010, the Chairman of the Tribunal held a teleconference with the representatives
of the Parties to discuss the procedural timetable.

In consequence of the agreements reached during the teleconference, as subsequently recorded
in Procedural Order No. 2 dated 26 July 2010, the Claimants’ request for an extension was
granted, and the timetable was modified to the effect that

a. the Claimants were to file and serve their Memorial on the Merits and Observations
on Jurisdiction and Admissibility by 15 October 2010;

b. the Respondent was to file and serve its Counter-Memorial on the Merits and Reply
on Jurisdiction and Admissibility by 11 February 2011;

c the Claimants were to file and serve their Reply on the Merits and Rejoinder on
Jurisdiction and Admissibility by 8 April 2011;

d. the Respondent was to file its Rejoinder on the Merits by 3 June 2011; and

13

1.61

1.62

1.63

1,64

e. the hearing period scheduled for March 2011 was vacated, with the hearing to take
place after September 2011, at a date to be subsequently fixed, and consequential
modifications were made to other procedural deadlines relating to preparation for the
hearing.

The Claimants’ Memorial on the Merits and Observations on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility
In accordance with the timetable as modified, the Claimants filed their Memorial on the Merits

(incorporating their Observations on Jurisdiction and Admissibility) on 15 October 2010 (“the
Memorial”).

The Respondent’s Applications dated 26 November 2010

By letters dated 26 November 2010, the Respondent:

a. drew attention to certain alleged deficiencies in the Claimants' document production
and to the exhibits to the Expert Report of Deloitte & Touche filed with the
Memorial;

b. requested leave to submit a new Request to Produce in relation to various categories
of documetns;

c. applied to the Tribunal to reject what it alleged were certain “new and amended

claims”, which it said had been raised for the first time in the Memorial (“the
Respondent’s Appplication to Reject New Claims”).

The Claimants’ response was received on 1 December 2010. The Respondent replied by letter
dated 2 December 2010, and the Claimants responded by email dated 3 December 2010.

By letter from the Chairman dated 3 December 2010 constituting Procedural Order No. 3 (a
corrected version of which was sent to the Parties on 8 December), the Tribunal:

a. as regards the alleged defective document production, directed that the Claimants
were, by 15 December 2010, “to provide to the Respondent the requested documents
or to lodge with the Tribunal the reasons for its inability or, as the case may be, its
tefusal to do so”, and further directed that, from that point, the Respondent's initial
Request for the production of documents “will be considered as closed, and it will be
open to either Party in its subsequent written and oral pleadings to invite the Tribunal
to draw whatever inferences may be considered appropriate from the state of
document production in connection with the Respondent's First Request”;

b. as regards the Respondent’s request for leave to submit an additional Request to
Produce, set a deadline of 8 December 2010 for the Claimants to provide any further
observations as to whether the request should be granted, and indicated that it did not
wish to receive any further submissions on the issue thereafter;

 

1.65

1.66

1.67

1.68

1.69

1.70

Cc. directed that the Claimants should submit, by at latest 15 December 2010, their
submissions on the Respondent’s Application to Reject New Claims.

The Tribunal further indicated that all other procedural time limits were maintained, and that it
expected the Parties to abide by them.

In accordance with Procedural Order No. 3, by letter dated 8 December 2010 the Claimants
submitted observations on the Respondent’s request for leave to submit a further request for
document protection, in which, inter alia, they indicated their own intention to submit a further
request for document production in the near future.

By Procedural Order No. 4, dated 13 December 2010, the Tribunal, recalling the procedure for
document production set out in Procedural Order No. 1 and its Guidance (paragraph 1.51
above), and recalling further that document production could not be used for the purpose of
developing new claims and defences, indicated that it was not prepared to entertain any further
requests from either Party at that stage in the proceedings. It accordingly rejected the
Respondent’s application for leave.

Likewise in accordance with the directions contained in Procedural Order No. 3, by letters
dated 15 December 2010 the Claimants submitted

a. their observations on the Respondent’s Appplication to Reject New Claims; and

b. their observations on the completeness of document production in the first round of
document production. The Claimants proposed that certain missing documents be
produced, or as the case may be, a confirmation that the documents requested did not
exist be given, within a deadline of 30 December 2010.

By email dated 23 December 2010, the Tribunal recalled the terms of Procedural Order No. 3
(paragraph 1.64a., above), noted the proposal made by the Claimants in their observations
dated 15 December 2010, and directed that any further documents produced, and any
confirmations given, by the Claimants by 30 December 2010 would be taken into account,
without prejudice to the right of the Respondent to make whatever submissions it considered
appropriate in that regard.

By Procedural Order No. 5, dated 4 January 2011, the Tribunal rejected the Respondent’s
Appplication to Reject New Claims (see below, paragraph 4.730). The Tribunal indicated in
addition that the time limits remained as fixed in Procedural Order No. 2, but that it would be
willing to entertain a reasoned application by the Respondent for a short extension of the time
for filing of its Counter-Memorial on the Merits and Reply on Jurisdiction and Admissibility,
while making clear that any amendment to the timetable, including consequent amendment of
deadlines for subsequent pleadings, would not affect other time limits, including in particular
the dates for the hearing (which in the meantime had been fixed for 19 to 30 September 2011).

 

1.71

1.72

1.73

1.74

The Respondent’s Application for Extension of the Deadline for Filing of its Counter-
Memorial on the Merits and Reply on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

By letter dated 5 January 2011 the Respondent sought an extension for the filing of its
Counter-Memorial on the Merits and Reply on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, which, pursuant
to Procedural Order No. 2, was foreseen for 11 February 2011. No comment thereon was
received from the Claimants.

By letter from the Chairman dated 12 January 2011, constituting the Tribunal’s Procedural
Order No. 6, the Tribunal

a. granted an extension for the filing by the Respondent of the Counter-Memorial on the
Merits and Reply on Jurisdiction and Admissibility to 25 February 2011;

b. as a consequence modified the deadline for filing of the Claimants’ Reply on the
Merits and Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and Admissibility to 26 April 2011, and the
deadline for the filing of the Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits to 25 June 2011.

c. in the light of the Respondent’s indication in its letter of 5 January 2011 that it
anticipated that it would have difficulty in producing translations into English of
witness statements and expert reports within the deadline, provided for a further
period of two weeks (ie. to 11 March 2011)) for submission of translations of any
statements and reports which were submitted in original in the Czech language
together with the pleading.

The Claimants’ Application for Leave to Submit Further Requests to Produce

By letter dated 26 January 2011, the Claimants sought leave to make a further request for
production of documents.

By letter sent on behalf of the Tribunal dated 27 January 2011, the Tribunal recalled that in
Procedural Order No. 4 (above, paragraph 1.67) it had already indicated that it saw no
justification for deviation from the procedures and timetables previously already laid down,
and that it was not therefore willing to entertain any further requests for document production
at the present stage of the proceedings, and on that basis stated that it would take no further
action on the Claimants request for leave for the time being. It further indicated that, should the
Claimants wish to revert on the matter following the filing of the Respondent’s Counter-
Memorial on the Merits and Reply on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, foreseen for 25 February
2011, it expected that any such application would be made within the shortest time possible
thereafter, and that the Tribunal, to the extent that it decided to permit any further requests,
would lay down a short timetable for production so as to maintain the timelimit for filing of the
Claimants’ Reply on the Merits and Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and Admissibility.

 

10.

1.75

1.76

11.

1.77

1.78

1.79

12.

1.80

1.81

1.82

The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits and Reply on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility.

In accordance with the revised time limit set in Procedural Order No. 6 (above, paragraph
1.72), the Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial on the Merits and Reply on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility (“the Reply”) on 25 February 2011. By letter dated 11 March 2011, the
Respondent drew attention to a number of minor modifications to the Reply which were
required in order to correct erroneous references, and on 17 March 2011 provided a corrected
electronic version of the Reply.

Also pursuant to Procedural Order No. 6, on 11 March 2011 the Respondent filed English
translations of the witness statements and experts report which had originally been submitted
in Czech in support of the Reply.

The Claimants’ Request for Extension of the Deadline for Filing of their Reply on the
Merits and Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

By letter dated 10 March 2013, the Claimants requested an extension of the deadline for the
filing of their Reply on the Merits and Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and Admissibility, scheduled
for 26 April 2011.

By email dated 11 March 2013, the Respondent indicated that it opposed that request (as well
as the application made in the Claimants’ second letter dated 10 March 2013 (as to which, see
below, paragraph 1.80), and that it proposed to file its observations on both matters by
18 March 2013 unless otherwise directed by the Tribunal.

By letter from the Chairman of the Tribunal dated 13 March 2013, constituting Procedural
Order No. 7, the Tribunal

a. granted the Claimants request and extended the deadline for the filing by the
Claimants’ of their Reply on the Merits and Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility to 27 May 2011;

b. as a consequence, extended to 25 July 2011 the deadline for the Respondent to file its

Rejoinder on the Merits.

The Claimants’ Renewed Request for Leave to Submit Further Requests to Produce

By a further letter dated 10 March 2011, the Claimants renewed their request for leave to make
further Requests to Produce.

As noted above (paragraph 1.78), by its letter dated 11 March 2011, the Respondent had
indicated that it opposed the Claimants’ request, and that it intended to file its observations in
that regard by 18 March 2011.

By letter of 13 March 2011, the Tribunal, in order to save time, and without prejudice to the
issue of whether the Claimants had put forward good grounds to justify the grant of leave,

17

1.83

1.84

1.85

13.

1.86

1.87

1.88

invited the Respondent to comment on the individual requests, as well to provide its
observations as to whether leave should be granted by, at latest, 18 March 2011.

In accordance with the direction of the Tribunal, the Respondent provided its observations both
on whether leave should be granted and on the individual requests on 17 March 2011.

By letter dated 22 March 2011, the Claimants submitted (unsolicited) comments on the
Respondent's observations dated 17 March 2011.

Also on 22 March 2011, by Procedural Order No. 8, the Tribunal

a. recalled the agreed parameters for document production contained in Procedural
Order No. 1;
b. tuled that, in light of the fact that the Claimants had formally pleaded a claim of

discrimination in their Memorial, the making of requests for document production in
that regard was in principle admissible;

c. indicated that no production would be ordered upon matters covered by the witness
statements submitted by the opposing Party if supporting documetns had been
submitted with the witness statement;

d. granted, on a limited basis, certain of the requests for document production made by
the Claimants insofar as they related to the administrative proceedings relating to
Multi’s applications for permits, recalling in that regard the position previously taken
by the Respondent that any objection to disclosure based on the confidentiality of
administrative proceedings under Czech law would be overcome to the extent that the
Tribunal ordered production;

e. denied the Claimants’ remaining requests for production;

f. in accordance with the indication contained in its letter of 27 January 2011 (above,
paragraph 1.74), ordered the Respondent to produce relevant documents by 4 April
2011.

The Claimants’ Reply on the Merits and Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and Admissibility

On 27 May 2011, in accordance with Procedural Order No. 7 the Claimants filed their Reply
on the Merits and Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and Admissibility (“the Reply”). In the covering
email, the Claimants requested leave to submit a second witness statement by Mr as
soon as was possible thereafter, as Mr had fallen ill and had therefore not been able to
sign his witness statement prior to the deadline for submission.

By email dated 31 May 2011 the Tribunal granted the Claimants’ request.

On 13 July 2011, the Claimants provided an update in relation to the witness statement of Mr
noting that he had recoved, that his statement had been finalized, and that the

Claimants were awaiting completion of its translation into English. They requested the leave of

the Tribunal to submit the statement, together with a translation into English, by 20 July 2011.

18

1.89

1.90

1.91

1.92

1.93

1.94

14,

1.95

15.

1.96

 

 

 

By email dated 14 July 2011, the Respondent requested that the Claimants immediately submit
the original version of the statement of Mr , together with the original versions of any
supporting documents on which he relied, with the translations to follow as soon as possible
thereafter. Given the delay, it reserved its right to make procedural applications once it had had
the chance to review the statement and to assess how disruptive the delay was for the
preparation of its Rejoinder on the Merits and supporting witness and expert evidence.

By email dated 14 July 2011, the Tribunal indicated that it wished to see Mr ° ‘
statement, together with its translation into English, as soon as possible, and requested the
Claimants to provide the finalized statement, as signed by Mr in its original language
version, to the Respondent at once.

By email] dated 19 July 2011, the Claimants provided to the Tribunal the Czech language
original of the statement of Mr together with annexes, accompanied by English

translations.

By letter dated 20 July 2011, the Respondent objected to the late submission of the statement

of Mr . hoting inter alia that, despite the Tribunal’s request contained in the email
dated 14 July 2011, it was only on 19 July 2011that it had been provided with the original of
the of Mr . Statement and annexes, together with the translations; the statement was

however dated 6 July 2011 and was only six pages long, and at least two of the annexes had
clearly been available to the Claimants prior to 6 July 2011. As the statement and annexes had
been provided to the Respondent only shortly before the deadline for submission of its
Rejoinder on the Merits, due to be filed on 25 July 2011, the Respondent requested that the
statement of Mr and its annexes be declared inadmissible.

On 21 July 2011, the Tribunal requested the Claimants to explain, no later than 25 July 2011,
why the statement of Mr and annexes had not been provided to the Reponsdent
immediately following the Tribunal’s communication dated 14 July 2011, and to make any
other comments they wished on the Respondent’s request.

By letter dated 21 July 2011, the Claimants apologized for the late submission and explained
that the delay in providing the original statement and annexes had been due, amongst other
things, to the absence of Counsel from the office.

The Respondent’s Rejoinder on the Merits

By email dated 25 July 2011, and in accordance with the revised deadline set in Procedural
Order No. 7 (above, paragraph 1.79) the Respondent filed its Rejoinder on the Merits (“the
Rejoinder”).

The Tribunal’s Ruling on the Respondent’s Request to Exclude the Second Witness
Statement of Mr

By letter dated 27 July 2011 the Parties were provided with advance notice of the content of
the Tribunal’s ruling on the Respondent’s request to exclude the second statement of Mr

 

1.97

1.98

16.

1.99

1.100

1.101

1.102

17.

1.103

1.104

That ruling was subsequently embodied in Procedural Order No. 9, also of 27 July
2011, in which the Tribunal:

a. noted the prejudice inevitably caused to the Respondent by the delay in provision of
the statement of Mr

db. observed that the Claimants had provided no satisfactory explanation for non-
compliance with the Tribunal’s direction of 14 July 2011, nor why it had not been
possible to provide the Czech original of the statement of Mr substantially
earlier; but

c. declined to exclude the statement on the basis that the statement and its annexes were

relatively brief, and the issues it dealt with were familiar, but instead granted the
Respondent the opportunity to supplement its Rejoinder by responding to any points
arising from the statement or annexed documents which it felt it had not had the
opportunity to address adequately, such supplemental submission to be filed by 9
September 2011.

In addition, the Tribunal fixed 15 August 2011 as the date for the notification by each Party of
its intention to cross-examine the other Party’s witnesses.

Notices were received from the Respondent on 15 August 2011, and from the Claimants on 17

August 2011.

Joint Chronology

By email dated 19 August 2011, Counsel for the Respondent informed the Tribunal that the
Parties had not been able to agree a joint chronology of events, as requested in Procedural
Order No. 1 (as later modified), and forwarded its own chronology.

By email dated 19 August 2011, the Tribunal reiterated its wish to receive an agreed
chronology, and granted the Parties an extra week for that purpose, whilst making clear that it
was acceptable that the joint chronology could indicate areas of disagreement between the
Parties.

By email dated 22 August 2011, Counsel for the Claimants made certain clarifications in
response to the email from Counsel for the Respondent dated 19 August 2011.

By email dated 26 August 2011, Counsel for the Claimants submitted the Parties’ joint agreed
chronology, indicating areas of disagreement, in both list and table formats.
Pre-Hearing Review

In accordance with Procedural Hearing No. 1, a pre-hearing review was fixed for 30 August
2011,

In advance of the pre-hearing review, by letter dated 29 August 2011, Counsel for the
Claimants:

20

1.105

1.106

1.107

1.108

 

 

a. submitted a revised list of the Respondent’s witnesses whom it wished to cross-

examine;

b. withdrew the testimony of three of their own witnesses, noting that, in lieu, they
would rely on the testimony of other witnesses, and invited the Respondent to
indicate whether it wished to cross-examine those other witnesses;

c made various proposals as to the conduct of the hearing, including as to the order of
witnesses, joint conferencing of experts, etc;

d. noted that their witness Mr ‘had suffered an injury and would be unable
to attend the hearing in London, although he would be available to testify via
videoconference.

By letter dated 29 August 2011, Counsel for the Respondent set out its views on the Claimants’
letter. As regards the withdrawal by the Claimants of certain of their witnesses, the Respondent
stated that it understood that, in accordance with Article 13.5.2 of Procedural Order No. 1
(above, paragraph 1,.45c, the statements of those witnesses were to be disregarded. As to the
Claimants’ statement that they were relying on the evidence of certain other witnesses “in
lieu”, the Respondent requested a short period to consider whether it wished to cross-examine
those witnesses.

The Claimants also proposed that a core bundle should be prepared for use at the hearing, and
that to that end a timetable should be set for the parties to designate the documents they wished
to be included.

On 30 August 2010, the Chairman held a pre-hearing conference with Counsel for the Parties
at which various matters relating to the conduct and organization of the hearing were
discussed, agreement was reached on a variety of matters (including that a core bundle would
be prepared), and certain matters were left over for the subsequent decision of the Tribunal. In
that last regard, in particular, issues arose as to:

a. the Respondent’s representative and witness, Mr , of the Ministry of Finance,

with the Claimants taking the view that he should not be present for the evidence of-

any other witness prior to giving his own evidence;
b. the order in which the expert witnesses were to be heard; and

c. the manner in which the expert witnesses were to be heard, including whether there
was to be witness conferencing, and if so, whether joint examination by the Tribunal
was to precede, or follow, cross-examination of the individual experts by the Parties.

By communication dated 31 August 2011, the Tribunal directed:

a. that Mr evidence was to be taken first, immediately following the conclusion
of opening statements, and prior to the Respondent’s cross-examination of the
Claimants’ witnesses; Mr would be permitted to be present for the opening

statements of the parties, save that he would be required to withdraw if either Party
made submissions addressing his involvement-in the matters in dispute; once he had
given his evidence, Mr «would be free to be present in the hearing;

21

 

1,109

1.110

1.111

1.112

1.113

b. that the Tribunal wished to hear the experts as to excavations before the legal experts
and experts on valuation and tax, but that otherwise the Parties were to attempt to
agree the order in which they and other experts as to factual matters were heard;

c. that the expert witnesses would first give any evidence in chief and then be cross-
examined by the opposing Party, under the control of the Tribunal, following which
there would be witness conferencing.

By email dated 9 September 2011, the Respondent indicated that, in the light of the withdrawal
by the Claimants of the evidence of the three witnesses, it wished to cross-examine one
additional witness.

By further email dated 9 September 2011, pursuant to the provision made in Procedural Order
No. 9 (above, paragraph 1.96), the Respondent submitted an additional witness statement,
accompanied by exhibits, in response to the late filing by the Claimants of the second
statement of Mr and its annexes.

By email dated 12 September 2011, the Claimants took note of the Tribunal’s ruling that Mr

was to give his evidence first, following the opening submissions, submitted that that
option had not been canvassed during the pre-hearing review, and noted that if it had been, the
Claimants would have opposed it. They nevertheless stated that they accepted the ruling,
although they reserved the right to recall Mr for additional questioning as the hearing
progressed.

By letter dated 15 September 2011, the Claimants indicated, inter alia:

a. that they had “been informed by Mr. that he is not in a position to come to
London”, but that he “stands by and confirms” the witness statements submitted with
the Memorial and Reply;

b. that notwithstanding his injury, it appeared that Mr would be able to be
present at the hearing;

c. that they intended to “ask Mr. and Mr. a few questions, independent
of whether Respondent intends to cross examine them”.

By letter dated 16 September 2011, the Respondent:

a. expressed surprise that Mr would not be attending, noting that he was a “very
important witness”, and observed that despite the Claimants’ assertion that Mr
had stated that he stood by and confirmed his witness statements, the Claimants had
not sought the leave of the Tribunal that his witness statements should stand in spite
of the fact that he would not be giving evidence, with the result that, in principle those
statements should be disregarded. It observed, however, that this would be unfair
given that Mr had made important admissions in his witness statements, and
asserted that the Czech Republic had not intended to cross-examine him on those
admissions. It submitted that his non-appearance should not prevent the Respondent
from relying on those admissions, whilst other aspects of his statements, on which the

22

18.

1.114

1.115

 

 

Respondent would not have the opportunity to cross-examine him, should be
disregarded;

submitted that, given that the written statements of witnesses were to stand as their
direct evidence, it was improper for the Claimants to seek to elicit further evidence
from Mr and Mr by direct examination at the hearing; in that regard,
they noted that the Claimants had not submitted a second statement by Mr

with their Reply.

The London Hearing

A hearing on the objections to jurisdiction raised by the Respondent and the merits of the
Claimants’, claims was held at the International Dispute Resolution Centre at Fleet Street,
London between 19 and 30 September 2011 (“the London Hearing”).

On behalf of the Claimants, there attended:

Dr , (Partner, Norton Rose LLP), Counsel
Mr Arthur Marriott, QC, Counsel;
Ms Mahnaz Malik. Counsel

Mr. _ , (Norton Rose LLP), Counsel
Mr (Norton Rose LLP), Counsel

Mr _ _ (Norton Rose LLP), Counsel
Ms (Norton Rose LLP), Counsel
Mr ECE

1.116 On behalf of the Respondent, there attended:

1.117

Mr Partner, Squire Sanders), Counsel

Mr Stephen P, Anway (Partner, Squire Sanders), Counsel

Ms . : (European Partner, Squire Sanders), Counsel
Ms (Associate, Squire Sanders), Counsel

Ms (Associate, Squire Sanders), Counsel

Ms (Associate, Squire Sanders), Counsel

Mr. (Partner, Hartmann Jelinek Fraiia a partnefi), Counsel
Mr (Senior Associate, Hartmann Jelfnek Fratia a partnefi), Counsel
Mr: (Ministry of Finance, Czech Republic)

Ms: (Ministry of Finance, Czech Republic)

Ms :,~ (Ministry of Finance, Czech Republic)

The Tribunal heard the evidence of the following witnesses of fact on behalf of the Claimants,
who were cross-examined by Counsel for the Respondent:

Mr
Mr
Mr

23

1.118 The Tribunal likewise heard the evidence of the following witnesses of fact on behalf of the
Respondent, who were cross-examined by Counsel for the Claimants:

Mr
Mr
Mr
Mr
Mr
Mr
Mr

1.119 In addition, the Tribunal heard the evidence of the following expert witnesses, who were
subject to cross-examination by Counsel for the opposing party, followed by witness-
conference during the course of which questions were put to them by the Tribunal:

a. Dr Stanislav Kade¢ka (the Claimants’ Czech law expert) and Dr Sofia Skulova (the
Respondent’s Czech law expert)

b. Mr Tomas Drtina of Incoma (the Claimants’ Real Estate expert) and Mr Pfemysl
Chaloupka and Mr Nick Powlesland of Knight Frank (the Respondent’s Real Estate
experts)

c Mr Thomas Griihn (Deloittes) (the Claimants’ valuation expert) and Mr Sirshar

Qureshi (PwC) (the Respondent’s valuation expert).

In addition, by agreement of the Parties, the Tribunal conducted a session of witness
conferencing involving Dr Dirk-Oliver Kaul (Deloittes) (the Claimants’ tax expert) and
Mr David Borkovec and Mr Jiirgen Scheidsteger (both of PwC) (the Respondent’s tax experts),
without any prior cross-examination by the Parties.

19. Procedural Matters Arising During the London Hearing

1.120 During the course of the London Hearing, various procedural matters arose, and the Tribunal
rendered a number of procedural rulings.

a. The Claimants’ Request to Conduct Direct Examination of Certain Witnesses

1.121 First, in relation to the Claimants’ indication contained in their letter of 15 September 2011
that they intended to ask Mr and Mr a number of questions by way of direct
examination, and the Respondent’s observations in that regard contained in its letter of
16 September 2011 (see above, paragraphs 1.112 and 1.113), the Tribunal heard the
submissions of the Parties on the first day of the hearing, 19 September 2011.° In order to
assist with its consideration of the Claimants’ proposal, the Tribunal invited the Claimants to
provide as soon as possible a list of the issues which they were intending to cover with the
witnesses.

1.122 By email sent during the evening of 19 September 2011, the Claimants provided a list of the
issues they intended to cover with the witnesses, and explained why.

1.123 Counsel for the Respondent responded to the points made in the Claimants’ email at the
beginning of the hearing on the morning of 20 September 2011, and indicated that the
Respondent continued to resist the Claimants’ proposal.’

 

1.124 The Tribunal provided its ruling orally, indicating that it was prepared to allow some direct
examination of Messrs and , but that any such direct examination was to be
kept to an absolute minimum, and limited to the points which the Claimants had argued had
been newly introduced by the Respondent in the material accompanying its Rejoinder.'°

b. Treatment of the Statements of Mr

1.125 Second, as regards the approach to be taken in relation to the statements of Mr given that
he was not present at the hearing in order to be cross-examined (see above, paragraphs 1.112
and 1.113), the Tribunal likewise heard the arguments of the Parties on the first day of the
hearing, 19 September 2011.!’ By way of elaboration on the position set out in their letter
dated 15 September 2011, Counsel for the Claimants explained that Mr had stated that,
although he confirmed the contents of his statements, the partners in his company had objected
to his appearance, on the basis that if he were to give evidence it would risk damaging the
company’s business.'* The Claimants took the position that the Tribunal should grant leave for
the witness statements of Mr to stand despite the fact that he would not appear. The
Respondent initially took essentially the same position as it had taken in its letter of 16
September 2011, suggesting that admissions made by Mr should be allowed to stand but
that the rest of his statements should be excluded.

1.126 The Tribunal expressed the view that the Claimants’ position in effect involved the making of
an application, and invited the Claimants to make that application in writing.’*

8 T1/8:20 - 14:6.

[2/1319 - 6:2.

10-72/123:8 — 125.

"7 1/14:10 = 21:4,

#1 1/14:19-23; T1/19;12-14.
13-°[1/22:24 - 23:18.

25

1.127

1.128

1.129

1.130

1.131

1.132

1.133

1.134

By email sent during the course of the evening of 19 September 2011, the Claimants made a
formal application for leave that the witness statements of Mr should remain on the
record, and argued that the Respondent’s position that only part of Mr statements should
be permitted to remain on the record should be rejected.

By email sent prior to the start of the hearing on 20 September 2011, the Respondent modified
its position, and argued that, for the sake of simplicity, the statements of Mr’ should be
excluded in their entirety.

The Tribunal had decided that the witness statements by Mr would be disregarded, for
reasons set out by the Chairman orally during the course of the second day of the hearing.’*

Issues Relating to the Evidence of Mr Drtina

On the eighth day of the London hearing, 28 September 2011, during the evidence of the
Claimants’ real estate expert, Mr Drtina, he produced and provided to the Tribunal copies of
certain further materials relating to points raised by the Respondent’s real estate expert, Knight
Frank, in their second report, as filed with the Rejoinder. His evidence at various points also
touched upon the matters dealt with in those materials.

After an initial discussion with the Parties, during which the Claimants indicated that they had
no objection to the new material being introduced into the record, whilst the Respondent
expressed its concern as to the late production of the material, which had not previously been
provided to it, the Tribunal invited the Parties to revisit the issue during the course of the
hearing on the next day.'*

Thereafter, on the ninth day of the London hearing, 29 September 2011, the Respondent orally
made an application that the Tribunal not admit the new documents produced by Mr Drtina,
and in addition that certain passages of his oral evidence, in which he made reference to and/or
explained the contents of those documents, be struck from the transcript. The Claimants
opposed that application. The Tribunal indicated that it would reserve its decision, and that it
would communicate its ruling on the Respondent’s application to the Parties in due course.'®

By email dated 3 October 2011, the Claimants made further (unsolicited) submissions in
relation to certain of the arguments canvassed at the hearing as to whether the new evidence
should be admitted and the transcript redacted. Those submissions in turn provoked
communications in response from the Respondent.

By email dated 10 October 2011, the Tribunal communicated to the Parties its decision on the
Respondent’s application. Recalling the procedures laid down in Procedural Order No. 1 for
the orderly introduction of documentary evidence, the Tribunal indicated that it saw no
exceptional reasons justifying the admission of the new documents provided by Mr Drtina,
with the result that they were not admitted into the record. Conversely, it took the view that
there existed no exceptional reasons requiring the exclusion from the record of evidence which
related directly to the issues resulting from the Parties’ written pleadings, and on that basis

1 72/126:10 ~ 127:25.
*8 78/200:14 — 202:2.
16 [9/163:19 — 174:6.

26

 

 

1.135

20.

1.136

declined to make any order varying the contents of the transcript of the evidence for the eighth
day of the hearing on 28 September 2011.

Site Visit and Additional Hearing in Prague

During the course of the London hearing, it was agreed that a further hearing would be
convened in Prague on 13 October 2013 in order to hear the Parties’ closing submissions, in
combination with which the Tribunal would undertake a site visit to Liberec on 12 October

2013.

The Tribunal’s List of Issues

By email dated 7 October 2011 from the Chairman of the Tribunal, the Tribunal circulated a
list of issues as to which it would appreciate hearing the submissions of the Parties in their
closing arguments. The issues identified were as follows:

“FACTS

A. In the light of the written and oral evidence, to what extent do either the
Claimants or the Respondent maintain an allegation of corruption or similar
wrongdoing, and if so in connection with what individual transactions and
what relationships between specific persons?

B. To the extent that the Claimants’ case depends upon an assertion of the
breach of legitimate expectations protected by the BIT, what actions, by
whom, and in what circumstances, are alleged to have given rise to such
expectations? What actions, by whom, and in what circumstances, are
alleged to have caused the failure of such expectations?

C. To the extent that the Claimants’ case depends upon a claim of unlawful
discrimination, what specifically were the elements in the treatment of the
Forum project, by comparison with the Galerie * project, that are
alleged to constitute such discrimination?

D. Where does the burden of proof lie to establish, or to disprove, the
factual basis for any of the above claims? Is more evidence required, and if
so how much, to establish corruption or other wrongdoing? How should the
Tribunal address allegations of wrongdoing against a private party (in casu
Multi) which is not a party to the arbitration and which therefore has not
been in a position to adduce any evidence in relation to the allegations made
against it?

LAW

E. What is the relationship (in the specific circumstances of the present
case) between breach of treaty and breach of local law by (i) the Respondent
or its agencies or officers; (ii) the Claimant(s)? What is the threshold
standard (i.e. how serious must the breach be)? May the threshold
standard be met by cumulating separate breaches that do not reach this
standard individually? What is the impact of the existence of, or exhaustion

27

 

 

21.

1.137

1.138

1.139

22.

1.140

or non-exhaustion of, local legal or other remedies? To what extent is the
arbitral Tribunal itself a judge of local law? How is the Tribunal to deal
with questions of local law that are unsettled or disputed?

F. How (if at all) do the actions of a private third party (in casu Multi)
engage or affect the international responsibility of the Respondent State?

LIABILITY

G. What is the precise link between each of the above heads of claim and the
Specific protections guaranteed by the bilateral investment treaty?

DAMAGE

H. How are the damages claimed justified in relation to specific breaches of
the specific protections guaranteed by the bilateral investment treaty? What
principles of causation apply to link the specific damages claimed to the
treaty breaches alleged? How in this connection should the Tribunal treat
any delays that may be attributed to the Claimants in the permitting
process?

I. What facts must be proved, by whom, and to what standard, in order to
establish the specific damages claimed under each head?

J. What principles (if any) of mitigation of damage apply to the specific
damages claimed?”

The Site Visit and Prague Hearing

On 12 October 2011, the Tribunal, accompanied by representatives of the Parties, visited the
planned site of the Galerie project, the Multi shopping centre, and various locations in the
immediate environs selected and agreed by the Parties.

On 13 October 2011, the Tribunal heard the Parties’ closing submissions at the offices of
Counsel for the Respondent (“the Prague Hearing”).

During the course of the Prague Hearing, it was agreed that there would be no post-hearing
briefs.

Correspondence Subsequent to the Prague Hearing

Subsequent to the Prague Hearing, the Parties addressed correspondence to the Tribunal on a
number of matters which will be dealt with, so far as required, later on in this Award.

28

23.

1.141

1.142

1.143

1.144

1.145

1.146

1.147

1.148

1.149

Costs Submissions

By letter dated 26 March 2013, the Tribunal requested the Parties to submit by 24 April 2013
schedules setting out the legal costs and disbursements claimed by them in the arbitration, gave
directions as to the form and content of the schedules, and indicated that each Party would be
provided the opportunity to submit comments on the other’s claim within a period of 10 days.

The Parties filed their respective costs schedules on 24 April 2013.

By email dated 1 May 2013, the Claimants requested an extension until 8 May 2013 for the
filing of their comments on the Respondent’s costs schedule. The Tribunal granted the request.

By email dated 3 May 2013, the Respondent indicated that it did not intend to present
comments on the Claimants’ costs schedule, but sought the Tribunal’s leave to file a response
to the Claimants’ comments on its own costs schedule.

By email dated 6 May 2013, the Tribunal indicated that it saw no good reason to vary the
procedure set out in its directions of 26 March 2013, provided that, should the position change,
it would inform the Parties without delay.

On 8 May 2013 the Claimants submitted their comments on the Respondent’s costs claim.

By email dated 10 May 2013, the Tribunal authorized a further exchange of submissions
limited to a number of specific points raised by the Claimants in their comments, with time
limits of 17 May 2013 for the Respondent, and 24 May 2013 for the Claimants.

On 17 May 2013, the Respondent submitted its reply to the Claimants’ comments.

By email dated 21 May 2013, the Claimants requested an extension until 29 May 2013 for the
filing of their rejoinder, which the Tribunal granted by email on 21 May 2013.

By letter of 29 May 2013, the Claimants submitted their rejoinder to the Respondent’s reply.

29

 

 

21

2.2

2.3

PARTI
FACTUAL BACKGROUND

A. INTRODUCTION

The ECE Group, of which the Claimants form part, are in the business inter alia of developing
shopping centres, an area in which they have had notable success. Of relevance for the
purposes of the present dispute, they had previously developed a number of other shopping
centres within the Czech Republic, including Arkady Pankréc (Prague) and Galerie Vaiikovka
(Brno).

Other entities within the ECE Group, in addition to the Claimants and ECE KG, also form a
necessary part of the picture:-

a. Tschechien 7 Immobilienk di ischaft k.s. (““Tschechien 7”) is a limited
partnership incorporated under the laws of the Czech Republic. Tschechien 7 was the
principal vehicle used by the Claimants for the purposes of the Galerie
project.

b. ECE Projektmanagement Praha s.r.o. (“ECE Praha”) is a company incorporated
under the laws of the Czech Republic.

30

The Claimants assert that ECE Praha acts as a service
company for the investments of the ECE Group within the Czech Republic. As such
it was responsible for development, planning, and pre-sales management, and for the
conclusion of pre-lease contracts, for the Galerie Project. The Claimants further
assert that had the Galerie Project come to fruition, and the shopping centre had been
sold to investors, ECE Praha is the company which would have entered into the
management agreement for Galerie

c. EKZ Tschechien 3 Immobiliengesellschaft s.r.o. (“EKZ Tschechien 3”) is a limited
liability company incorporated under the laws of the Czech Republic.

d. EKZ Prag 1 Verwaltungsgesellschaft s.r.o. (“EKZ Prag 1”) is a limited liability
company incorporated under the laws of the Czech Republic.
'

B. OVERVIEW OF THE PLANNING SYSTEM IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC

24 It should be noted at the outset that the applicable planning legislation changed during the
course of the project. The 1976 Building Code (“the Old Building Code”)”! was in force
until 31 December 2006, whilst the new legislation which replaced it (“the New Building
Code”), which for the most part entered into force from 1 January 2007.”

25 Under the transitional clauses in the New Building Code, save for certain exceptions not
relevant for present purposes, the provisions of the Old Building Code continued to apply to

   

2! Old Building Code; Core 1/27 (Exhibit R-5).
» Unnumbered provision, Part Seven, New Building Code, Core 6/197 (Exhibit R-4).

31

 

2.6

2.7

2.8

2.9

2.10

2.11

applications for planning permission that had been filed while the Old Building Code was still
in force. The Old Building Code therefore applied to the application for planning permission
for the Galerie Project filed on 28 December 2006 (see further below). Conversely, the
provisions of the New Building Code applied to the applications for Building Permits in
relation to Galerie filed between January and March 2008, and the resulting proceedings.

Planning authorities

Under the Old Building Code, there were three relevant administrative levels for planning
matters: in ascending order, municipalities, regions and, at the national level, the Ministry for
Regional Development (“the Ministry”).* The position was maintained essentially
unchanged under the New Building Code.

In the present case, the relevant authorities at sub-national level were, at the local level, the

Building Office of the Municipal Authority of (“the Building Office” or “MAL”)
and, at the regional level, the Regional Authority of “RAL”). MAL, although
formally a part of the administration of the municipality of . . is nevertheless regarded

under the scheme of Czech administrative law as being part of the centralized administration,
rather than part of the decentralized areas of self-governance. RAL was the body with principal
appellate competence in relation to decisions of the Building Office in planning matters.

As to the Ministry, although many of its functions may be exercised by officials, certain
powers (in particular the final decision in relation to an appeal against a decision of a Ministry
in an extraordinary review procedure (as to which see further below)) are, under the Code of
Administrative Procedure (“CAP”), reserved to the Minister in person.”

Planning Permits, Building Permits and Occupancy Approval

Under Czech planning and administrative law, the construction of a project such as Galerie
Liberec consists of a number of distinct administrative phases.

First, it may be necessary as an initial step to apply for modification of the municipal zoning
plan, so as to permit land use of the type required. Under the Old Building Code (which was
still applicable at the relevant time for the present dispute), the zoning plan was maintained by
the local municipality.””

A planning permit is an administrative decision by which the competent authority approves the
concept of a construction project, including its location and purpose, and verifies the feasibility
of a project with respect to its access to utilities and roads; the planning permit may impose

% §. 190(3), New Building Code; Core 6/197 (Exhibit R-4).

4 §. 12(1) Old Building Code; Core 1/27 (Exhibit R-5); in addition, although not relevant for the purposes of the
present case, the Ministry of Defence constituted a planning authority for certain narrow, specified purposes in relation
to military land.

5 §_ 5(1), New Building Code, Core 6/197 (Exhibit R-4).

6 §. 152(2) CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

27 Ss 13 and 14, Old Building Code; Core 1/27 (Exhibit R-5).

32

2.12

2.14

2.15

2.16

 

 

conditions as to the connection of the building to transport, energy, water, sewage, and other
infrastructure, and as to the preparation of detailed construction plans required for the
application for a building permit."* In addition, under the Old Building Code, it appears that a
planning permit could authorize an application to carry out certain ground formation works.”

By contrast, under a Building Permit the relevant building office authorizes the construction of
a building, and sets out specific terms and conditions as to the intended construction of the
building and other constructions, for instance, roads, pavements and infrastructure
connections.°° Complex projects may result in the issue of several different building permits
relating to different aspects of the project. Compliance with any conditions contained in the
Building Permit is monitored and enforced by the relevant building authority.

Finally, once a structure is complete, it is necessary to apply for occupancy approval, which
authorizes the intended use of the structure. The process consists of verification by the
competent municipal building authority of compliance with applicable construction and safety
regulations.?!

Planning Permit Proceedings

Under the Old Building Code, once a complete application for planning permission was
received, “planning proceedings” were opened.” Upon the opening of the proceedings, all
participants in those proceedings were to be notified by the relevant authority.>? In the case of
proceedings concerning “an especially extensive structure involving a particularly large
number of parties” the opening of the proceedings was to be announced by a public notice.**

So far as the location of a structure was concerned, participants in the planning proceedings
included, in addition to the applicant and the municipality, “persons whose ownership or other
rights to plots of land or structures located on them may be directly affected by such
permission”, including persons owning neighbouring (adjacent) plots of land and structures on
them.*° Mere lessees of flats or non-residential premises could not be party to planning
permission proceedings.*°

Any individual or entity which was deemed to be a participant in planning permit proceedings
had the right to raise objections to the grant of the planning permission. The relevant
authority was authorized to proceed without holding a hearing where it was possible to deal
with the application on the basis of the documentation, provided that it set a time-limit within
which participants could file such objections.” Once the deadline for any objections had

% Ss, 32 and 39, Old Building Code; Core 1/27 (Exhibit R-5).
® CE. s. 71(1), Old Building Code; Core 1/27 (Exhibit R-5).
3s. 115, New Building Code; Core 6/197 (Exhibit R-4).

3! §, 122, New Building Code; Core 6/197 (Exhibit R-4).

® §. 35(1), Old Building Code; Core 1/27 (Exhibit R-5).

 §, 36(1), Old Building Code; Core 1/27 (Exhibit R-5)..

% §, 36(4), Old Building Code; Core 1/27 (Exhibit R-5)..

3 §. 34(1), Old Building Code; Core 1/27 (Exhibit R-5).

38 §. 34(4), Old Building Code; Core 1/27 (Exhibit R-5).

37 §, 36(3), Old Building Code; Core 1/27 (Exhibit R-5).

33

2.17

2.18

2.19

2.20

passed, the relevant authority proceeded to decide whether or not to issue a Planning Permit.
A decision to grant planning permission was to be notified to the parties.** The standard
procedure for notification to participants of the grant of planning permission was by service by
post. However, in cases of the kind described in paragraph 2.14 above, notification was by way
of display of a public notice for a period of 15 days “in the manner which is usual in the
locality”, with the last day of the period of display being deemed to be the day of service.”

Under the generally applicable rules contained in the CAP, a decision to grant planning
permission would only become legally effective after service on all participants and expiry of
the deadline for any appeals.“?

Building Permit Proceedings

Under the New Building Code, the procedure for Building Permit proceedings was
substantially the same as for Planning proceedings under the Old Building Code, with
proceedings being opened following receipt of a complete application; there was provision for
Participants to submit observations and objections, following which the Building Authority
would proceed to issue its decision.*!

Time Limits

Under the CAP, decisions should, as a general rule, be issued within 30 days of the initiation of
an administrative proceeding, although that period is extended to 60 days for complex
matters.*? In addition, the time period is extended by the time required to prepare any expert
report requested by the administrative authority.“? Issuance of a decision occurs either on the
date of its dispatch to participants, or on the date of its display on the notice board of the
relevant authority, as appropriate.’ The same period applies to the decision of appellate
bodies, although time starts to run from the date on which the file is handed over to the
superior administrative authority, which should occur within 30 days of receipt of an appeal by
the lower authority.“

Of particular relevance for the present dispute is the fact that administrative bodies have the
power to stay proceedings. The effect of a stay is not entirely to suspend the proceedings, but
rather to stop the running of time for the purposes of the time-limit within which the authority
must reach its decision.“* The adoption of a stay also stops time running for the purposes of
calculation of the time period of 15 days within which notification of the opening of
proceedings has to be displayed, as well as the period of 15 days within which participants in
the proceedings are able to submit their comments and objections.

3* §. 42(1), Old Building Code; Core 1/27 (Exhibit R-5).

* S. 42(2) Old Building Code; Core 1/27 (Exhibit R-5).

* Ss, 73and 83 CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

*! Ss. 112 and 114, New Building Code; Core 6/197 (Exhibit R-4).
* § 71(3)(a), CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

* § .71(3)(b), CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

“4 S.71(2), CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

*5 §_ 90(6), read with ss. 88 and 71, CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).
46 Ss, 64 and 65, CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

34

 

2.21

The System of Appeals in Planning Matters

Under Czech law, participants in planning and building proceedings had (and have) a number
of options for bringing a challenge to a decision (or the failure to take a decision). The
principal remedies available in building matters are:

a. appeal to the superior administrative authority;*”

b. the filing of a motion for extraordinary review proceedings with the superior
administrative authority;**

c. the filing of a motion for failure to act under sectionf 80 CAP;

d. judicial review.°°

An appeal to the territorially competent regional authority from a decision of a municipal
authority has to be lodged with the municipal authority which adopted the decision within 15
days of delivery of the decision.*’ The filing of such an appeal will generally have suspensory
effect, such that the decision of the municipal authority would not enter into legal effect.** The
Old Building Code provided specifically that the suspensory effect of an appeal could not be
excluded. Following receipt of the appeal, the municipal authority is required to notify all
other participants and invite comments.** Thereafter, the file is transferred to the relevant
appellate authority; as noted above, transmission of the file should occur within 30 days of the
receipt of the appeal.*°

The options open to the superior authority include upholding the challenged decision or
modifying it; annulling the decision and remanding the case; and cancelling the decision and
stopping the proceedings.°® The decision on an appeal in planning or building proceedings
becomes effective following delivery to the appellant and participants in the underlying
proceedings.”

A further remedy exists against decisions which have become legally effective, in the form of
an application to the superior administrative authority for extraordinary review. Under the
Code of Administrative Procedure, extraordinary review proceedings are designed to correct a
misapplication of the law,** and can be initiated either sua sponte by the competent superior

* Ss, 81-93, CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

48 Ss, 94-99, CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

* §. 80, CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

5 Ss, 65-78, Code of Administrative Justice; Core 2/45 (Exhibit R-7).
5! §, 83, CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

% Ss. 85(1) and 91(1), CAP, Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

3 §. 42(3), Old Building Code; Core 1/27 (Exhibit R-5).
5 §, 85(2) CAP, Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

55'S, 88(1), CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

5° $90 CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

57 §. 91 CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

58 §. 94(1) CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

35

 

2.25

2.26

2.27

2.28

2.29

authority, or pursuant to a motion filed by a participant in the proceedings.’ A decision to
commence extraordinary review proceedings is without any suspensive effect upon the validity
of the underlying decision subject to review. The superior authority may either annul or
modify a decision which it finds to be unlawful.

However, under s. 94(4) CAP, a decision, even if found to be unlawful, cannot be annulled if
the annulment would cause harm to rights acquired in good faith by any of the participants
which would be disproportionate compared with the damage caused to other participants or to
the public interest. If such disproportion is found, the administrative body is required to
discontinue the proceedings.”

Decisions in Extraordinary Review proceedings are subject to appeal; where the decision was
by the Ministry, the appeal lies to the Minister.”

The third available remedy is a motion for failure to act pursuant to section 80 CAP, and may
be filed with the superior administrative authority, which, if it finds the motion to be well-
founded, may either order the subordinate authority to take a decision within a deadline, or
transfer the file to a different subordinate authority, or take the decision itself.

 

Finally, inistrative decisions may be chall 1 before the administrative courts provided
that the claimant has exhausted any administrative di i within the administrative
proceedings." Actions may be brought either challenging an administrative decision,® or
challenging delay. The starting of proceedings challenging an administrative decision before
the administrative courts does not have suspensive effect.°”

 

Cc. OVERVIEW OF THE ENVISAGED CONSTRUCTION OF THE GALERIE PROJECT

The Planning Scheme for the Galerie Project

The various elements which were to be undertaken for the construction of the Galerie project
were divided into a number of “Constructions” for the purposes of making applications for
building permits, some of which in turn comprised a number of discrete sub-elements:

a. Construction I related to the excavation of the site and construction of the main
building; it also comprised:

i. Construction I.a relating to waste water infrastructure;

* Ss, 94(1) and 95(1) CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

© §, 94 and 95(5) CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

5! §, 94(4) CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

® §, 95(6) and 152(3) CAP; Core 1/28 (Exhibit R-6).

§ §. 80, CAP.

& Ss, 5 and 68(a), Code of Administrative Justice; Core 2/45 (Exhibit R-7).
§ Ss, 65-78, Code of Administrative Justice; Core 2/45 (Exhibit R-7).

% Ss, 79-81, Code of Administrative Justice; Core 2/45 Exhibit R-7).

§" §. 73, Code of Administrative Justice; Core 2/45 (Exhibit R-7).

36

2.30

2.31

ii. Construction I.b, relating to internal roads within the Galerie site itself, and
their connection to outside, public roads;

b. Construction II comprised works in relation to _ a public road owned by
the City

c. Construction III consisted of works changing the traffic layout on ” Street,
including works in relation to its intersection with . Street, both

public roads owned by the City

d. Construction IV comprised works in relation to the intersection between a number of
public roads, owned by the City
), located in the area separating the proposed site of Galerie from the site
of the Forum retail centre to be constructed by Multi and adjoining the bus station.
Construction IV was sub-divided into a number of sub-elements:

i. Construction IV.a related to construction of a new intersection and
modification of the road layout between . 5
, and involved the creation of a new intersection and
crossings to replace the existing roundabout;

ii. Construction IV.b related to the construction of a new intersection of

Street.

The Parties were in dispute as to the cause of the decision to split the planning permission into
various constructions, and to sub-divide them. This is again an issue to which the Tribunal will
return,

The traffic intersection which was the subject of Construction IV.b gave rise to a number of
problems, and assumed a particular prominence in the building permit proceedings owing to
the fact that the area which was to be modified overlapped with works in relation to the
intersection to be undertaken as part of Multi’s project.

Acquisition of the project lands.

All of the Jands on which the GALERIE retail centre was to be built (“the project lands”) had
previously been owned by third parties.

The actual transfer of title in the project lands to Tschechien 7 and other subsidiaries of the
Claimants took place after the filing of the application for planning permission with MAL,
although the evidence shows that sale and purchase agreements were in place at substantially
earlier dates. In summary, the process of acquisition of the lands forming the main site on
which the principal structure of the Galerie project was to be built was as follows:

a, |

|

37

2.34

In addition, the application for planning permission and subsequently the applications for
building permits related to a certain number of plots of land which were not owned by
Tschechien 7. In particular, the City’ * owned the public roads which it was foreseen
would be modified in order to integrate vehicle access to Galerie into the public road
system. As discussed further below, the City substantially cooperated with
Tschechien 7 in this regard, including by giving its consent to modification of the public roads.
SIAL architektia inZenyii spol. s r.o. (“SIAL”), the firm of architects which acted on behalf of
Tschechien 7 in the planning and building permit proceedings, in a number of instances also

acted on behalf of the City in filing applications for building permits in relation to
land owned by the City . and in certain instances, filing appeals against decisions of
MAL.

% Core 4/103 (Exhibit SQ-8).

® Core 4/105 (Exhibit R-52).

7 Exhibit SQ-10.

7 Core 4/102 Exhibit SQ-7); Core 4/106 (Exhibit R-87). .

38

D. ECE’s APPLICATION FOR THE PLANNING PERMIT FOR GALERIE AND THE
PLANNING PERMIT PROCEEDINGS (INCLUDING THE EXTRAORDINARY REVIEW
PROCEEDINGS)

 






 

 






 

 

 

 

 




 


 

 




3.1

3.2

3.3

 

A.

As set out above, Article 10 of the BIT, insofar as relevant for present purposes, provides

Part OT
THE JURISDICTION OF THE TRIBUNAL

PROVISIONS OF THE BIT RELEVANT TO JURISDICTION

(taking account of the competing translations into English advanced by the Parties):

i. (Claimants: Differences of opinion regarding; Respondent:
Disputes relating to] investments between either Contracting Party and an
investor of the other Contracting Party should as far as possible be settled
amicably between the parties in dispute.

2. If a (Claimants: difference of opinion; Respondent: dispute] cannot
be settled within six months of the date when it was (Claimants: raised;
Respondent: notified] by one of the parties in dispute, it shall, at the request
of the investor of the other Contracting Party, be submitted to arbitration.

The definition of “investment” is contained in Article 1(1), which provides that it:

shall include every kind of asset (Claimants: which has been invested;
Respondent: contributed] in conformity with domestic law, in particular:

a) movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in
rem such as mortgages, liens and pledges;

b) shares of companies and other kinds of interest in companies;

c) receivables and claims to money which has been used to create an
economic value or claims to any performance which has an economic value
and which relates to an investment;

d) intellectual property rights, in particular copyrights, patents, utility
models, industrial designs or models, trademarks, trade names, technical
processes, know-how and goodwill;

e) business concessions under public law, including concessions to
search for, extract and exploit natural resources.

“Tnvestor” is also a defined term, being stipulated by Article 1(3) of the BIT to mean:

a natural person with permanent residence or a juridical person with its
seat in the respective area of application of this Treaty, entitled to engage in
investments.

61

 

3.4

3.5

3.6

B. THE JURISDICTIONAL BASIS ASSERTED BY THE CLAIMANTS IN THE REQUEST
FOR ARBITRATION AND STATEMENT OF CLAIM

In their Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, the Claimants dealt briefly with the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal, asserting that:

a. both Claimants constituted German investors within the meaning of Article 1(3) of
the BIT “as they have their seat in the Federal Republic of Germany, and are entitled
to carry out investments”;)*”

db. the direct and indirect shareholdings of ECE International and PANTA in the Czech
companies Tschechien7 and ECE Praha qualified as “investments” within the
meaning of Article 1(1) of the BIT insofar as they constituted “shares of companies
and other kinds of interests in companies”; the Claimants asserted that ECE
International indirectly held 100% of the shares in ECE Praha and 99% of the shares
in PANTA, whilst PANTA held 99.999% of the shares in Tschechien 7.'*

In addition, the Claimants also asserted that those investments were made “in accordance with
Czech law”, as required by Article 1(1) of the BIT,'™* and sought, preemptively, to rebut
arguments that had previously been raised by the Respondent in the context of the negotiations
with a view to reaching an amicable settlement pursuant to Article 10 of the BIT which took
place between the Parties in February and March 2009 following the sending of the Claimants”
Trigger Letter of 7 November 2008. The matters raised during the negotiations related to:

a the scope of the groundworks carried out by Tschechien 7 at the project site following
issuance of the Planning Permit;

b. certain issues relating to the involvement of Ms as legal representative on
behalf of the ECE companies in the various proceedings; and

C the acquisition of certain of the project lands through the purchase by Tschechien 7 of
the shares in PerStyn Plus, the owner of the plots, from a company registered in
Cyprus.'®

Although the Respondent did not pursue the second matter as part of its Objections to
Jurisdiction, the closely-connected question of the propriety of the actions of Mr who by
letter dated 13 February 2009 made a complaint to the Czech Bar Association, the relevant
domestic professional body, in respect of the conduct of Ms in the proceedings
before MAL, was the subject of a number of procedural skirmishes between the Parties.
Mr was questioned on behalf of the Claimants on the subject at the hearing.'*

182 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 186.

183 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 189.

184 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 190.

185 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, paras. 191-207 (Section F.IV).
186 72/60:13 — 63:23.

62

 

3.7 The Tribunal is of the view that the questions raised in that regard are of no relevance to the
matters in issue in the present dispute, and no more needs to be said about them here save to
record that the complaint against Ms was rejected as unfounded by the Inspection
Board of the Czech Bar Association on 10 June 2009.'®”

3.8 To the extent that the Respondent has relied upon the first and third matters as part of its
Objections to Jurisdiction, the position taken by the Claimants’ in their Request for Arbitration
and Statement of Claim is summarized in what follows.

Cc. THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTIONS TO JURISDICTION

1. Procedural context

 

3.9 As summarized in the Tribunal’s Procedural Order 1, dated 19 March 2010, at the Preliminary
Procedural Meeting held on 2 February 2010 it was agreed that there would be separate
parallel pleadings on the merits of the Claimants’ claims and on any objections to jurisdiction
raised by the Respondent. It was further agreed, and Procedural Order No. 1 so recorded, that
there would however be no bifurcation of the proceedings, and any objections to jurisdiction
and/or admissibility raised by the Respondent would be heard together with the merits of the
Claimants’ claims.'®*

3.10 In addition, as noted above, it was agreed, and the Tribunal so directed, that by way of initial
response to the Claimants’ Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, the Respondent |
should, in the first instance, file by 15 March 2010 an Answer to Statement of Claim,
incorporating an outline of any objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal or the
admissibility of the Claimants’ claims. Procedural Order No. 1 expressly stipulated that the
Answer to the Statement of Claim:

need not be a full pleading, but must, on the basis of the documents
currently available to the Respondent, contain an outline of both the nature
of its substantive defences and of any objections to jurisdiction or
admissibility.

3.11 As noted above, provision was also made in Procedural Order No. 1 for the filing of further
pleadings relating to any objections to jurisdiction or admissibility raised by the Respondent, it
being stipulated that:

a. the Claimant would, if necessary, file Observations on Jurisdiction and Admissibility
in response to any objections raised by the Respondent together with its Answer to
the Statement of Claim at the same time as its Memorial on the Merits; |

b. thereafter, the Respondent would, if required, file a Reply on Jurisdiction and |
Admissibility at the same time as its Counter-Memorial on the Merits; and

187 See Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 174. |
'88 Procedural Order No. 1, Article 9.1; and Annex C: Minutes of the Preliminary Procedural Meeting, 2 February 2010,
at p. 7-8. |

63 |

3.12

3.13

again, if required, the Claimants would file a Rejoinder on Jurisdiction and
Admissibility at the same time as its Reply on the Merits.

Overview of the Objections to Jurisdiction Raised by the Respondent

In its Objections to Jurisdiction duly filed on 15 March 2010 in accordance with Procedural
Order No. 1 together with its Answer to the Statement of Claim, the Respondent raised four
objections to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal:

a.

first, the Respondent argued that, to the extent that the Claimants made claims in
respect of losses suffered by Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha, those claims did not relate
to an “Investment” under Article 1(1) of the BIT, and were therefore outside the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal (“the Respondent’s objection of no investment within the
meaning of Article 1(1) of the BIT”);

second, the Respondent argued that the underlying facts relating to the Claimants’
claims in relation to the abandonment of the Galerie Project “involved serious
violations of Czech law”. On the one hand it initially alleged suspected violations of
Czech law as regards the manner in which Tschechien 7 acquired a portion of the
lands on which Galerie was to be built (although the objection on that basis was
subsequently abandoned), and on the other hand it pointed to violations by
Tschechien 7 of the terms of the Planning Permit as a result of the extent of the
groundworks carried out (“the Respondent’s objection of illegality of the
investment”);

third, the Respondent argued that the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction ratione
materiae over the Claimants’ claims for damages in respect of losses allegedly
sustained by companies other than Tschechien7 and ECE Praha (“the objection to
jurisdiction ratione materiae’”);

finally, it was argued that the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction ratione temporis over
any claims based on events which pre-dated the date of the making of the Claimants’
respective investments (the objection to jurisdiction ratione temporis).

Although the form of several of the objections underwent substantial modification during the
course of the exchange of pleadings, the Respondent has formally maintained each of those
objections to jurisdiction, and made express reference to them in opening at the hearing held in
London in September 2012.’

'® T1/197:17 to 210:3.

 

3.14

3.15

3.16

3.17

3.18

 

D. THE POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES

The Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction on the Basis of No “Investment” Within
the Meaning of Article 1(1) of the BIT

The Respondent’s first jurisdictional objection is based on the premise that the Claimant’s
claims are outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal because the claims for the alleged losses of
Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha do not relate to an “investment” as protected by the BIT.

The Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction

In their Objections to Jurisdiction, the Respondent pointed to the fact that the definition of
“Gnvestment” in Article 1(1) of the BIT does not define an “investment” as comprising every
kind of asset directly or indirectly owned or controlled by an investor, and on that basis argued
that so-called “derivative” claims brought by the shareholder of a company in respect of loss
caused to that company do not fall within the scope of the BIT.”

Instead, the Claimant asserted that the definition of investment refers to assets “contributed” by
an investor. It placed reliance on the fact that the Czech version of the BIT uses the term
“vloZené’, the correct translation of which it submitted is “contributed”, rather than “invested”,
and noted that the equally authentic German text uses the term “angelegt”, which can be
translated as either “contributed” or “invested”.'*! In support of the assertion that the correct
equivalent in Czech of the English term “invested” is “investované’, it drew attention to two
bilateral investment treaties entered into by the Czech and Slovak Republic roughly
contemporaneously with the BIT at issue in the present case one of the authentic texts of which
was, and which, in each case, render the term “invested” as some form of the verb
“investované”, rather than using the verb “vlozené’, as used in the BIT.!*

In further support of this argument, it argued that the context of Article 1(1) also dictated such
an interpretation, insofar as Article 1(2) of the BIT contains a separate definition of “returns”,
and pursuant to Article 2(3), both investments and returns are protected under the BIT.'%?

On that basis, the Respondent argued that the rights and assets of Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha
(including the project land owned by Tschechien 7, and its rights to due process in the planning
and building proceedings) did not constitute “investments” within the meaning of the BIT. It
further argued that the Claimants’ participatory rights in Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha likewise
did not fall within the definition of protected investments under the BIT.'*

1% Objections to Jurisdiction, paras. 8-10.

'! Objections to Jurisdiction, paras. 10-11.

1% Objections to Jurisdiction, note 2, referring to Article 1(a), Agreement on Encouragement and Reciprocal Protection
of Investments between the Kingdom at the Netherlands and the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic, 29 April 1991
(Exhibit R-25); Article I(a), between the
Government of Canada and the Czech and Slovak Federal Romie 15 November 050 (Exhibit R-26),

193 Objections to Jurisdiction, para. 13.
'©4 Objections to Jurisdiction, paras. 14-15.

65

 

3.19

3.20

3.21

3.22

3.23

The Respondent emphasized that, despite the Claimants’ assertion in the Request for
Arbitration and Statement of Claim,'> that their investments were constituted by their
respective shareholdings in Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha, Tschechien 7 was in fact a limited
partnership, such that PANTA could have no shareholding in it. Rather, the Respondent argued
that PANTA was a general partner in Tschechien 7, PANTA was contractually entitled to
99.999% of Tschechien 7’s profit, and that, as a matter of Czech law, that right was regarded
as contractual, rather than proprietary.1%

It further observed that, under Czech law, PANTA’s participatory rights in Tschechien 7 as
general partner were not contingent upon any contribution of capital. As a consequence, the
Respondent argued that PANTA’s participatory rights as general partner in Tschechien 7 did
not constitute “contributions” for the purposes of the definition of “investment”.!%”

As for ECE International, the Respondent argued that the direct and indirect shareholding of
that entity in ECE Praha had derived from a contribution of capital made by its legal
predecessor, but that, given that the BIT does not contain a “change-of-form” provision, in the
hands of ECE International the “the assets obtained in exchange for assets contributed”
likewise did not constitute an investment within the meaning of Article 1(1) of the BIT.'®

The Respondent in any case observed that the Claimants’ claims on the merits related only to
the rights and assets of Tschechien 7, and emphasized that no allegation was made that the
Respondent had taken any measures directed against the Claimants’ contributions to
Tschechien 7 and/or ECE Praha. The Respondent noted that, instead, the Claimants had
alleged that the actions of the organs of the Respondent had violated the due process rights of
Tschechien 7 in the building and planning proceedings, and that the Claimants’ claim was that
those alleged violations had resulted in a loss of value of the project land owned by
Tschechien 7.'°

The Respondent further noted that, although the Claimants had argued that the alleged
violations of Tschechien 7’s procedural rights also caused actual damage and loss of profits to
both Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha, as well as a number of other companies within the group,
the Claimants did not specify what rights and assets of ECE Praha and those other companies
had allegedly been affected.” The Respondent observed that the Claimants asserted that the
intention was that ECE Praha would become the management company for Galerie once it
became operational, but that, since the project had been aborted prior to commencement of the
construction phase, it appeared that ECE Praha had had no rights or assets in connection with

195 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 188,

196 Objections to Jurisdiction, paras. 15-16.

197 Objections to Jurisdiction, paras. 16-17.

‘98 Objections to Jurisdiction, para. 18.

1° Objections to Jurisdiction, paras. 19-20.

209 Objections to Jurisdiction, para. 21. The Respondent further asserted that the Claimants “make no efforts to properly

identify” the various other companies referred to by the Claimants at Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim,
ara. 249 (EKZ Tschechien 3, EKZ Prag 1, BBP, PerStyn Plus and ECE Projektmanagement), and had not alleged that

P ae

they constituted protected investments within the meaning of Article 1(1) of the BIT (ibid.).

66

 

3.24

3.26

3.27

3.28

    

the project, with the result that the dispute could not relate to the rights and assets of ECE
Praha."!

On that basis, the Respondent argued that the claims brought by the Claimants in relation to
Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha fell outside the scope of its consent to arbitrate under Article 10
of the BIT. Specifically, the Respondent emphasized that, pursuant to Article 10, it had
consented to arbitrate only “disputes relating to an investment”, and that given the narrow
interpretation which it said should be given to the definition of “investment” in Article 1(1) as
being limited to “contributions”, and the fact that the violations alleged by the Claimants
related only to the rights and assets of Tschechien 7, the derivative claims brought by the
Claimants did not constitute a dispute relating to the investment within the meaning of Articles
10 and 1(1) of the BIT. 7”

In particular, the Respondent argued: i) that the claims made by PANTA relating to the
damage allegedly sustained by Tschechien 7 were not claims relating to an investment because
PANTA’s participation in Tschechien 7 did not constitute an “investment” within the scope of
the BIT “because they were not contributed by PANTA”; and ii) that those claims in any event
related to the rights and assets of Tschechien7, which likewise did not constitute an
“investment” as they had not been contributed by PANTA2°?

As regards the claims by ECE International in relation to the damage allegedly sustained by
ECE Praha, the Respondent argued that those claims likewise did not constitute claims
“relating to an investment” on the basis that i) ECE International’s shareholding in ECE Praha
did not constitute an investment because it had not been’ “contributed” by ECE International;
ii) the claims of ECE International did not relate to any existing rights or assets of ECE Praha;
and iii) even if those claims did relate to existing rights or assets of ECE Praha, they would not
constitute an “investment”, as they were not “contributed” by ECE International.?“

The Claimants’ Memorial

In their Memorial (incorporating their Observations on Jurisdiction and Admissibility), the
Claimants asserted that their “direct and indirect shareholdings and other interests in
Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha qualified as investments under Article 1(1)(b) of the BIT”,
disputed that the scope of the BIT was restricted by any requirement of a “contribution” by the
investor; and argued that, to the contrary, the scope of the BIT was “very broad”.?°

As to the first point, the Claimants noted that the Claimants held almost the full participatory
rights in ECE Praha and Tschechien 7, and accordingly had assets in the form of shares within
the meaning of Article 1(1)(b) of the BIT."

20! Objections to Jurisdiction, para. 22.
20? Objections to Jurisdiction, para. 23.
203 Objections to Jurisdiction, para. 24.
20 Objections to Jurisdiction, para. 25.
205 Memorial, paras. 349-350.

206 Memorial, para. 351.

67

 

3.29

3.30

3.31

3.32

As regards the Respondent’s assertion that solely the rights and assets of Tschechien 7 had
been affected, rather than the Claimants’ shareholdings or other interests in their other Czech
subsidiaries, the Claimants noted that investors holding shares were permitted to bring a claim
under investment treaties to recover losses due to the devaluation of the investor’s shares or
participatory interests in the directly owned domestic subsidiary, and that such claims had been
permitted even in the case of indirect shareholdings. The Claimants emphasized that they did
not seek to recover the losses suffered by Tschechien 7, but rather the reduction in value of
their shares and participatory interests in their Czech subsidiaries.”

The Claimants dismissed the Respondent’s reliance on the inclusion of “returns” in Article
1(2) of the BIT and the separate mention of “investments” and “returns” in its Article 2(3) as
“not convincing”.°> They explained that “returns” constituted a “different protected value
separate from the investment definition of Article 1(1)”, and that the notion referred to “the
revenue out of a properly operating investment in the future”. On that basis, they explained
the relevance of Article 2(3) as clarifying that both an investment and the returns to be derived
from it enjoyed protection under the BIT, and argued that the provision should be understood
as expanding the scope of protection available to investors, rather than limiting it.?!°

As regards the Respondent’s suggestion, based on the supposedly different meaning of the
terms used in the authentic Czech and German versions of the BIT, that Article 1(1) required a
“contribution”, the Claimants observed that the Respondent’s argument was unclear both as to
what should be understood to constitute a “contribution”, and as to why the Claimants’
shareholdings and interests in Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha did not in any case fall within that
concept. The Claimants further denied that there was in fact any divergence in meaning
between the two authentic versions of the BIT, and argued that even if there were, that
divergence fell to be resolved by applying the general rules of interpretation.””’

As to the supposed divergence between the Czech and German texts of the BIT, the Claimants
argued that the German version of Article 1(1) could only be understood as meaning “every
asset invested in accordance with domestic law”, and claimed, relying on a German-English
dictionary, that the German word “angelegt” could only be translated as “invested”. In support
of that assertion the Claimants made reference to other investment treaties concluded by the
Federal Republic of Germany for which “official” English translations exist, and in which the
word “angelegt” was likewise translated as “invested”.”!?_ The Claimants asserted that the
German wording and the translation into English they proposed “represent a well known and
frequently used phrase, that the investment is encompassing every asset invested in accordance
with host state law”, observed that no justification had been put forward as to why Article
1(1) of the BIT should be understood as having the “exceptional” meaning of “contributed”;

207 Memorial, para. 353.

208 Memorial, para. 354.

20° Memorial, para. 354.

21° Memorial, para. 354.

21! Memorial, paras. 356-357.

212 Memorial, para. 360, referring to the translations in the United Nations Treaty Series of the bilateral investment
treaties concluded with Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (10 July 1989) 1707 UNTS (Exhibit CLA 41) and the
Republic of Poland (10 November 1989) 1708 UNTS 324 (Exhibit CLA 40).

713 Memorial, para. 361 (emphasis in original).

68

3.33

3.34

3.35

3.36

 

and referred to the rule of interpretation enshrined in Article 31(4) of the Vienna Convention
on the Law of Treaties, observing that a special meaning was to be attributed to a term only if
“the parties’ intention to derogate from the normal meaning is clearly established.”?'*

The Claimants’ further argued that the Czech word “vlozené” could be translated either as
“contributed”, or “invested”, and that there was no reason to focus on the possible meaning
“contributed” when the meaning of “invested” was capable of reflecting both the Czech and
German versions.”"°

The Claimants submitted that such an approach was consistent with the approach proscribed by
Article 33 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties in respect of interpretation of a
treaty authenticated in two or more languages, in particular the rule in Article 33(1) that where
a treaty is authenticated in two or more languages, neither prevails over the other in case of a
difference, and the general presumption contained in Article 33(3) that the terms of treaties
authenticated in different languages have the same meaning in each authentic text.7!

In the alternative, on the hypothesis of a divergence of meaning, the Claimants referred to
Article 33(4) of the Vienna Convention, and argued that “any difference should first be
removed by interpretation in accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention to
give each notion of the BIT the content that better serves its purpose”.”'’ They Claimants
submitted that the meaning “which provides a broad scope of protection to the investor” should

take priority, postulating that, in signing the BIT, “the parties to it intended a very high level of

protection”.”"* To that end, they relied on the “prominent” invocation at the beginning of the .

preamble of the BIT of the role of “foreign direct investment as part of a general strategy to
enhance mutual economic relations”, as well as the title of the BIT itself,”’® as well as making
reference to the historical context in which the BIT was concluded,””°

The Claimants further submitted that it would be contrary to the BIT’s purpose of guaranteeing
“a high standard of protection” “to interpret the scope of jurisdiction restrictively by saying the
investment has to be a contribution to limit the wide definition of covered investments”.
They relied on certain observations of the tribunal in Saluka v Czech Republic in interpreting
the definition of “investment” contained in Article 1 of the Netherlands-Czech Republic BIT
applicable in that case, and in particular the tribunal’s rejection of the suggestion that the term
“investment” should be given “the meaning which that term might bear as an economic
process, in the sense of making a substantial contribution to the local economy or to the well-

99 222

being of a company operating within it”.

‘

214 Memorial, para. 361.

25 Memorial, para. 362.

216 Memorial, para. 363.

2!” Memorial, para, 365.

218 Memorial, para. 366.

219 Memorial, paras. 367-368.

29 Memorial, para, 369.

2! Memorial, para. 370.

22 Memorial, para. 371, citing Saluka Investments B.V. v. The Czech Republic (UNCITRAL), Partial Award: of 17
March 2006, para. 211.

69

3.37

3.38

3.39

3.40

3.41

The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial

In responding to the Claimants’ arguments in the Counter-Memorial (incorporating its Reply
on Jurisdiction and Admissibility), the Respondent reiterated its position that the BIT did not
“enable shareholders’ derivative claims because it defines investments as assets ‘contributed’
rather than simply ‘owned or controlled directly or indirectly’ like most investment treaties,
such as the Energy Charter Treaty”.?”

Having reiterated its position that the English term “invested” should be translated into the
Czech language as “investované”, rather than the term “viozené” used in Article 1(1) of the
BIT, the Respondent apparently conceded that the German term “angelegt” was properly to be
translated as “invested”, and submitted that the first issue was rather “whether those terms are
truly different”.2 It submitted that the Claimants “essentially argue that the English
expression ‘invested’ does not have any real meaning because it does not refer to an economic
process”, and argued that that position is incorrect insofar as tribunals interpreting the term
“investment” in Article 25 ICSID Convention had stressed that the ordinary meaning of the
terms “investment” and “invest” required various elements, including contribution.?* On that
basis, the Respondent submitted that “[t]he real difference, therefore, is not between the
ordinary meaning of ‘invested’ and ‘contributed’ but, rather, whether the word ‘invested’ has
meaning (as the Czech Republic says) or has no meaning (as Claimants say).””*°

The Respondent submitted that the second issue which arose was the reconciliation of the
different meanings according to the rules of the Vienna Convention; in the Respondent’s view,
the meaning which best reconciled the two versions was “contributed”, as only that meaning
was common to both the Czech and German versions of the BIT. The Respondent argued that
having regard to the object and purpose of the BIT was circular and of no assistance given that
the purpose of the BIT was the protection of investments as defined in the BIT.”””

The Respondent argued instead that the submitted divergence in meanings had to be resolved
by reference to the context of Article 1(1), including in particular the fact that Article 1(2)
immediately followed Article 1(1) and contained a separate definition of “returns”. The
Respondent noted that the Claimants recognized that “returns” constituted “a different
protected value”, and argued that that difference was confirmed by the fact that Article 2(3)
expressly provided that both “investments” and “returns” were fully protected by the BIT. As a
consequence, the Respondent argued that the notion of “investment” had to be interpreted as
not including “returns”, since otherwise Article 2(3) would be redundant, and that that
conclusion was consistent with the narrower definition of “investment” as meaning assets
contributed, rather than invested, by an investor.?”*

On that basis, the Respondent maintained its position that the rights and assets of Tschechien 7
and ECE Praha, and the Claimants’ participatory rights in those companies, did not constitute

3 Counter-Memorial, para. 223.

24 Counter-Memorial, para. 223.
5 Counter-Memorial, para, 223.

226 Counter-Memorial, para. 224.
227 Counter-Memorial, paras. 225-226.
28 Counter-Memorial, para. 227.

70

 

3.42

3.43

3.44

3.45

3.46

3.47

 

protected investments. As to the respective participations of the Claimants in Tschechien 7 and
ECE Praha, the Respondent repeated its arguments that they did not constitute investments
because they were not contributions, and noted that the Claimants had not responded to those

arguments in its Memorial.”

The Claimants’ Reply

In their Reply (incorporating their Rejoinder on Jurisdiction), the Claimants maintained their
position that their respective participations in Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha constituted an
investment within the meaning of Article 1(1)(b) of the BIT.

The Claimants observed that the Respondent had put forward no proof, including no citation to
any dictionary definition, in support of its view that the German term “angelegt” could be
translated as “contributed”, and argued that the German “angelegt” “does not mean
contributed”.° They dismissed the Respondent’s allusion to Article 25 of the ICSID
Convention as misleading, given that the ICSID Convention was inapplicable in the present
case.

The Claimants further argued, ex abundanti cautela, that even if there were some requirement
of “contribution”, the participation of the Claimants in Tschechien7 and ECE Praha was
sufficient to meet any such requirement.”"! They pointed to contributions by PANTA to the
capital of Tschechien7 both at the time it became general partner of Tschechien7, and
subsequently.“ As regards ECE International’s shareholding in ECE Praha and the
Respondent’s argument based on the lack of any “change of form” provision in the BIT, the
Claimants observed that “it remains unclear how this transfer of title should affect the
qualification of an asset as an investment”.??

The Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction Based on Alleged Serious Violations of
Czech Law

The Respondent’s second objection was that the Claimants’ claims are barred by the
requirement of Article 1(1) of the BIT that any investment had to be made “in conformity with
domestic law” because Tschechien 7 conducted the Galerie project in violation of
Czech law.

The Claimants’ Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim

As noted above, the Claimants anticipated certain of the Respondent’s objections in the
Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim.

Specifically as regards the legality of the excavation work, the Claimants argued that the
allegedly excessive and illegal scope of the groundworks carried out by Tschechien 7 “does

*® Counter-Memorial, paras. 228-230.

9 Reply, para. 376 (emphasis in original).
23) Reply, para. 377.

23? Reply, para, 378.

233 Reply, para. 379.

71

3.48

3.49

3.50

3.51

not change the fact Claimants have invested assets in accordance with Czech law”.2** They
argued first, that the scope of the groundworks was “entirely irrelevant” because the
investment at issue was the Claimants’ shareholdings in Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha, and not
the operations carried out by them, and the Respondent had not taken the position that the fact
of the shareholdings as such violated Czech law.?*°

Second, the Claimants claimed that although the securing works carried out by Tschechien 7
had involved excavation in excess of the volume permitted under the Planning Permit, they had
nevertheless been in accordance with Czech law as they had been required in order to secure
the site. They submitted that following completion of the authorized volume of groundworks, it
became apparent that the slopes thereby created were not stable, and that there was a risk of
landslides capable of causing severe damage or casualties. They relied on the expert reports by
Jokl Appraisal y.o.s. and 36 and noted that the Claimants had challenged MAL’s
order of 15 August 208.7%”

The Claimants had earlier submitted that the risk of landslides had been aggravated by the
delays in the course of the administrative proceedings, and that Tschechien 7 had therefore
been obliged to resort to securing works “that explain the whole difference between the
volume of groundworks permitted under the Planning Permit and the actual volume of
groundworks”.2*

Third, the Claimants argued that even if safety considerations had not justified the
groundworks in excess of those permitted under the Planning Permit, in light of the object and
purpose of the BIT, which they submitted included fostering and protecting investors and their
investments, the BIT should be interpreted such that not every “formal breach of domestic law
disqualifies an investment from BIT protection that it would otherwise have had”.° Rather,
citing the decision in Desert Line v. Yemen, the Claimants submitted that it was only
“fundamental breaches” of the law of the host State that should have such an effect,”° and
noted that it had not been argued that the development of retail centres was per se unlawful,”*!
nor that the groundworks themselves were per se unlawful.”

The Claimants argued that the volume of groundworks was permissible, and had in fact been
permitted by MAL when it issued the Building Permit for the main construction on 26
November 2008.7 The Claimants had earlier relied on the fact that MAL itself had instructed
Tschechien 7 to perform securing works on 19 September 2008," as well as suggesting that if,

234 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 192.

735 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 193.

286 Exhibits C-22 and C-25.

257 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 195.

258 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 147; Exhibit C-22.

23° Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 196.

249 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 196, citing Desert Line Projects LLC v. Republic of Yemen
(ICSID Case No. ARB/05/17), Award of 6 February 2008, para. 104.

241

Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 197.

2 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 198,
43 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 198.
24 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 148.

72

 

3.52

3.53

3.54

3.55

3.56

3.57

 

following the allegedly improper interference by the Ministry of Finance, MAL had not
improperly stayed the appeal proceedings in relation to the building permit, the main building
permit would have become final and Tschechien 7 would have become entitled to carry out the
groundworks it had in fact performed.°*

On that basis, the Claimants submitted that the most that the Respondent could argue was that
the Galerie project had been “temporarily in a formally unlawful status”. However, the
Claimants submitted that this would nevertheless not exclude their investment from the scope
of protection under the BIT."

As regards the anticipated objection to jurisdiction based on the manner in which Tschechien 7
had acquired certain of the project land previously owned by PerStyn Plus, the Claimants
explained the mechanism by which PerStfYn Plus was first purchased from the Cypriot
company, Helier Trading Limited, and its assets merged into those of Tschechien 7.” The
Claimants argued that that process “obviously does not create any concerns with regard to the
BIT protection of the Claimants’ investment”.

The Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction

In the Objections to Jurisdiction, the Respondent relied on two matters as constituting illegality
by Tschechien 7 which it argued deprive the Tribunal of jurisdiction over the Claimants’

claims.

First, the Respondent set out its position (which, pending disclosure, it at that stage put as no
more than suspicion) that the process by which Tschechien 7 acquired a substantial portion of
the project land on which Galerie was to be built from PerStyn Plus had been in violation of
Czech law. Given however, that this objection was not ultimately pursued,” the Tribunal sees
no reason to set out in detail the Respondent's position in this regard.

Second, the Respondent relied on the fact that Tschechien 7 had violated Czech construction
and planning law, in particular insofar as it proceeded to excavate a quantity of earth and rock
far in excess of the 170,000 m? authorized in the Planning Permit. The Respondent alleged
that, by November 2008, Tschechien 7 had in fact excavated more than 290,000 m?, some 80%
more than was authorized under the Planning Permit.°°

As regards the Claimants’ argument made in the Request for Arbitration that the excess
excavation had subsequently been authorized by the Main Building permit, and that
consequently the project was only “temporarily in a formally unlawful status”,”*' the
Respondent countered that the Main Building permit had not become legally effective because

245 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, paras. 149-152.
246 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 199.

247 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 206.

28 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 207.

4° See below, para. 3.73.

250 Objections to Jurisdiction, para. 31.

5! Above, paras. 3.51 to 3.52.

73

3.58

3.59

3.60

3.61

it was the subject of an appeal,”** and that in any case, the violation in question was far from
being a mere formality, but rather breached the “fundamental principle [of] Czech construction
law that construction work requires prior authorization”.*?

In response to the Claimants’ argument that the requirement that an investment should be made
“in conformity with domestic law” contained in Article 1(1) of the BIT related only to the
acquisition of an investment, and that its investment was constituted by its participation in
Tschechien 7, which it acquired prior to the excavation works, the Respondent responded that,
all of PANTA’s claims were derivative claims for damage to Tschechien 7 allegedly arising in
relation to the construction of Galerie, and that Tschechien 7’s first step in the realization of
the project had been constituted by the excavation works, in violation of the planning permit.
As a result, the Respondent took the position that “[t]he realization of the Galerie

project thus was from the very beginning in severe violation of Czech law”, and argued that
“{t]he integrity of investment arbitration systems requires that the legality requirement in
Article 1(1) be interpreted in a manner that bars claims for projects that violate the law of the
host state regardless of whether the investor’s involvement in the illegality is direct or

indirect” 254

The Claimants’ Memorial

At the outset of their Memorial, the Claimants emphasized that the Respondent had taken
“advantage of Claimants’ good faith settlement negotiations under the BIT to gather data and
evidence to influence the course of this arbitration”,”** and submitted that the Ministry of
Finance had improperly attempted to influence the Groundworks Removal Proceedings in
order to create the impression that the Claimants had acted illegally. The Claimants concluded
that as a result, the Respondent “should be precluded from raising an objection against the
Arbitral Tribunal’s jurisdiction in that regard on the basis of the unclean hands doctrine”.”*°

As a general matter, the Claimants disputed that the alleged illegality of the Claimants’ actions
in respect of Tschechien 7’s acquisition of the project lands and the alleged violation of the
planning permit by reason of the volume of the excavation works affected the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal. Rather, they argued that those issues of legality concerned “whether a Claimant is
entitled to the substantive protections offered by a BIT”, relying in that regard on
observations of the tribunal in Plama v. Bulgaria, and the dissenting opinion in Fraport v.
Philippines.***

In that regard, the Claimants postulated that “[a]t least in a case as this, where the question of
the legality of the excavation works is inextricably interwoven with questions of the merits, the

252 Objections to Jurisdiction, para. 33.

253 Objections to Jurisdiction, para. 34 (emphasis in original).

254 Objections to Jurisdiction, para. 35.

*55 Memorial, para. 10.

25 Memorial, para. 10.

?57 Memorial, paras. 379.

258 Memorial, paras. 379 and 380, citing Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/24), Award of 27 August 2008, para. 112 and the Dissenting Opinion of Bernardo M. Cremades in Fraport AG
Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25), 16 August 2007

74

3.63

3.64

3.65

problem must be dealt with in the merits”, explaining that the question requires “profound
knowledge of Czech administrative law”. In that regard they relied upon observations of the
tribunal in Phoenix Action v. Czech Republic, in which a distinction had been drawn between
“obvious cases of illegality and less obvious cases of illegality, whereby the latter cases should
be dealt with at the merits stage”.?

The Claimants disputed that they had violated Czech law. That position was taken on the basis,
already anticipated in the Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, that until June 2008,
the volume of the excavations had been within the amount permitted by the planning permit,
and that from July 2008 it had become apparent that the geotechnical conditions of the site
were complicated and that securing works had been required in order to protect individuals and
property, such securing works being required under Czech law.

The Claimants further submitted that the Respondent should be barred from relying on any
illegality which might have occurred insofar as the Respondent had taken advantage of the
Claimants’ participation in good faith settlement negotiations in order to obtain data of any
illegal behaviour by the Claimants, and that it had subsequently used that information in order
to advance its claim of illegality.% The Claimants submitted that the conduct of the
Respondent in obtaining the evidence which it relied upon in alleging illegality “violates the
unclean hands doctrine”? and that as a consequence, the Respondent should not be permitted
to rely on the fruits of its bad faith behaviour.*

The Claimants further argued that the objective of the BIT meant that the relevant words of
Article 1(1)?% should in any case be given a restrictive interpretation, such that only
investments “that violate fundamental principles of law and that were made in bad faith”
should be excluded from the scope of protection.76

Although admitting that “the ordinary meaning of the words in the BIT connote that if an
investment is made in violation of Czech law, such an investment is not entitled to
protection”,”™” the Claimants argued that the object and purpose of the BIT of encouraging
foreign investment and promoting economic cooperation had to be taken into consideration.?*
On that basis, the Claimants argued that Article 1(1) was to be read restrictively and that as a
result, only if three criteria were fulfilled should an investment be held to fall outside the scope
of protection of the BIT, namely that:

259 Memorial, para, 381.

2© Memorial, para. 381, citing Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. Czech Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5), Award of 15 April
2009, para. 147.

°61 Memorial, para 384, referring to Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 147.

262

Memorial, para. 385.

263 Memorial, para. 385.

264 Memorial, paras. 385 and 390-391.

°65 Although the Claimants had initially argued that the words “in conformity with domestic law,” should be translated
as “in accordance with host state law”, (Memorial, para. 392) it apparently did not subsequently insist upon that
translation in the agreed English translation of the BIT.

266 Memorial, para. 392.

267 Memorial, para. 393.

268 Memorial, para. 393.

75

 

a. first, on a subjective level, there had to be an element of intent or fraud on the part of
the investor; the Claimants posited that only investments made in good faith could
benefit from protection;?

b. second, from an objective perspective, only violations of fundamental principles of
the law of the host State, if not criminal conduct or a violation of international public
policy, would exclude protection, such that not every minor irregularity would
deprive the investor of protection;?”°

c. third, only violations of the law of the host State concerning the establishment of the
investment were relevant, insofar as the BIT imposed no ongoing obligation to
comply with the law of the host State, a violation of which would result in loss of
protection of the BIT.?”

3.66 The Claimants took the position that none of those three criteria were fulfilled. As regards the
supposed “subjective” element, they argued that contrary to the situation in cases such as
Phoenix Action, Inceysa, Fraport and Plama, in which the tribunals had found either bad faith
or fraud on the part of the investor in reaching the conclusion that their investments were not
protected by the applicable bilateral investment treaties, the Claimants in the present case had
acted with “the best of intentions”, and had not acted fraudulently, but in good faith.?”* In
particular, the Claimants argued that up until July 2008, the Claimants believed that the
volume of excavation works was covered by the Planning Permit, whilst after July 2008, they
acted to secure the site, referring in that connection to section 177 of the Building Act.”

3.67 As regards the supposed “objective” element, the Claimants characterized the provisions which
the Respondent alleged had been violated as a result of the groundworks as constituting
“regular administrative law provisions”, and argued that there had been no violation of any
“fundamental principles” of Czech law, that no crime (whether fraud or corruption) had been

26 Memorial, paras. 395 and 398-402, citing Phoenix Action, Lid. v. Czech Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5),
Award of 15 April 2009, paras. 106 et seq; Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador (CSID Case No.
ARB/03/26), Award of 2 August 2006, para. 242; Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the
Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25), Award of 16 August 2007, para, 396; and Plama Consortium Limited v.
Republic of Bulgaria, (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24), Award of 27 August 2008, para. 143.

270 Memorial, paras. 396 and 406-413, citing Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/26), Award of 2 August 2006, paras. 245 et seq; Desert Line Projects LLC v. Republic of Yemen (ICSID Case
No. ARB/05/17), Award of 6 February 2008, paras. 104 and 106; Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No.
ARB/02/18), Decision on Jurisdiction of 29 April 2004, para. 86; LESI, S.p.A. and Astaldi, S.p.A. v. People's
Democratic Republic of Algeria (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/3), Decision on Jurisdiction of 12 July 2006, para. 83(iii);
World Duty Free Company Limited v. Republic of Kenya (ICSID Case ARB/00/7), Award of 4 October 2006, paras.
136 et seq

27! Memorial, paras. 397 and 417-418, citing Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the
Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25), Award of 16 August 2007, paras. 287 and 345; and Inceysa Vallisoletana
S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/26), Award of 2 August 2006, para. 237.

272 Memorial, para. 403.

273 Memorial, paras. 404-405. In addition, relying on the decision in Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide
v, Republic of the Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25), Award of 16 August 2007, para. 396, the Claimants
further argued that mistakes as to the interpretation of domestic law might be made in good faith, and accordingly, even
if section 177 of the Building Act did not justify the volume of the excavation works, the provision was subject to
different good faith interpretations (Memorial, paras. 401 and 405).

76

3.68

3.69

3.70

3.71

3.72

 

committed by the Claimants, and that there had been no contravention of international public
Ns, 274
policy.

The Claimant further argued that even if the later stages of the groundworks were held to
constitute a violation of the law, they could have been legalized by the issuing of the building
permit itself, that the excavation would have been permitted under any building permit, that
any violation which occurred was a question essentially of timing, and that the comparative
lack of gravity of any violation was demonstrated by the fact that the fine imposed in the New
Administrative Offence Proceedings had amounted only to approximately € 8,000.?”°

As regards the question of the timing of any violation, the Claimants argued that the alleged
illegality in relation to the excavation “did not occur until very late in the project and was not
in the least related with the establishment of the investment”,?”° which, they reiterated, was
constituted by the shares and other participatory interests of the Claimants in the project
companies.?””

Finally, the Claimants argued that the Respondent was estopped from raising an objection
based on alleged illegality in relation to the groundworks as it had waived its right to do so.?”8
First, the Claimants alleged that the Respondent itself had required further excavation works in
order to secure the site, thus creating a legitimate expectation that further excavation works
were legal; they submitted that, by issuing the order to conduct security works, the Respondent
had “induced Claimants to rely on the legality of the excavation works”.?”

Second, it was argued that by issuing the main building permit on 26 November 2008, the
Respondent had legalized the excavation. The Claimants submitted, invoking the principle
nemo auditur propriam turpitudinem allegans, that a State cannot take advantage of its own
wrongful acts to exclude protection of an investment, and took the position that it was
irrelevant that the main building permit was not legally effective, as, under Czech law, the
relevant authorities were bound to issue a building permit without delay.*°

As regards the suspected irregularities raised by the Respondents in relation to the acquisition
of the project lands, the Claimants in the Memorial on the Merits and Observations on

2 Memorial, para. 414.

75 Memorial, para. 414.

276 Memorial, para. 416.

27” Memorial, para. 416.

278 Memorial, para. 419.

*79 Memorial, paras. 420-424, citing, inter alia, Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the
Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25), Award of 16 August 2007, para. 346; ADC Affiliate Limited and ADC &

ADMC Management Limited v. Republic of Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/16), Award of 2 October 2006, para.
474; and Ioannis Kardassopoulos v. Georgia (ICSID Case No. ARB/O5/18), Decision on Jurisdiction of 6 July 2007,
paras. 191 et seq.

289 Memorial, paras. 425-427, citing Joannis Kardassopoulos v. Georgia (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/18), Decision on
Jurisdiction of 6 July 2007, paras. 182 et seq.

77

 

3.73

3.74

3.76

3.77

Jurisdiction and Admissibility limited themselves to the observation that the Respondent had

asserted those suspicions “without any evidence or facts”.”*!

The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial

At the outset, the Respondent made clear that it was no longer pursuing the objection based on
illegality in the acquisition of the project land, and stated that it only maintained the argument
as to lack of jurisdiction based on the “Claimants’ deliberate decision to violate the basic
principle of Czech construction law that excavations require prior authorization.”*

In that latter regard, the Respondent asserted that the evidence showed that the Claimants had
intentionally violated Czech construction law, and that the decision to continue excavations
once the volume authorized by the Planning Permit had been reached had been deliberate;”*? in
particular, the Respondent pointed to the fact that in June 2008, the Board of ECE had more
than doubled the budget for excavation works from €3.2 million to €7.8 million, a sum asserted
to correspond roughly to the price for the entire volume of excavations, and at the same time
had stated that the increased budget would permit Galerie to be opened early, in Spring 2010,
rather than in Autumn 2010.7

The Respondent alleged that the Claimants had been fully aware of the necessity that they be
in possession of a Building Permit authorizing the additional excavations over and above the
volume authorized by the Planning Permit and submitted that the Claimants had “wilfully and
deliberately decided to violate an essential principle of Czech construction law”.7*°

On that basis, the Respondent disputed the veracity of the Claimants’ claims that excavation
conducted after July 2008 was dictated by the need to carry out securing works, as well as the
Claimants’ assertion that up until July 2008, the Claimants had believed that the excavation
was covered by the Planning Permit, and that after July 2008, the Claimants acted with “good
intentions” to secure the site." The Respondent highlighted that the decision to continue
excavations was in fact made on 18 June 2008, that it was apparent from the site diary that the
only securing works carried out in fact took place between 6 and 15 August 2008 in relation to
1,455m’ of rock on a plot next to the main construction pit, whilst excavation continued
unabated in the main pit, and that no legitimate securing works could have required the
excavation of the additional 120,000m’ of rock in excess of the authorized volume.”*”

As to the effect of the alleged breach of Czech law, the Respondent argued that the
requirement of “conformity with domestic law” in Article 1(1) of the BIT constituted a
substantive element of the definition of an investment under the BIT, and that therefore legality

281 Memorial, para. 428. As noted above at paragraph 3.55, the Respondent subsequently did not pursue the objection to
jurisdiction on this basis.

28 Counter-Memorial, para. 231.

283 Counter-Memorial, para, 232.

284 Counter-Memorial, para. 232.

285 Counter-Memorial, para. 233.
28 Counter-Memorial, paras. 234-235.
287 Counter-Memorial, para. 236.

78

 

was a jurisdictional matter.”** In response to the Claimants’ suggestion that legality was a
matter for the merits, the Respondent sought to distinguish the decisions in Plama and Inceysa
relied upon by the Claimants on the basis that the relevant instruments in those cases did not
include the requirement of conformity with domestic law in the definition of investment,”*° and
relied on the assertion of the tribunal in Fraport that, where the requirement of legality is
contained in the definition of “investment”, illegal behaviour on the part of an investor goes to
jurisdiction ratione materiae. As to the Claimants’ reliance on Phoenix Action for the
proposition that, where the issue of illegality is inextricably interwoven with the question of
merits, it should be addressed on the merits, the Respondent submitted that the Claimants’
argument confused two issues, and that what that tribunal in that case had in fact been
discussing was whether, in such a situation, there should be bifurcation.?""

3.78 As regards the Claimants’ reliance on the doctrine of “unclean hands”, the Respondent, in
addition to disputing that the doctrine constituted an established doctrine of public
international law, further submitted in reliance on the decision of the tribunal in the Guyana v.
Suriname arbitration that the doctrine operated solely to prevent a party from claiming a breach
of a party’s obligation if it had itself breached an identical obligation.” By contrast, the
Respondent characterized the objection raised by the Claimants as involving “at best, an issue
of alleged inadmissibility of evidence”.”” It submitted that it was telling that the Claimants had
not identified the information allegedly obtained by the Czech Republic during the settlement
negotiations, and further, that they had never explained what legal rule would prevent the
Czech Republic from using that information.”

3.79 Finally, the Respondent noted that the excessive excavation was an objective fact “that is
readily apparent to the naked eye”; that it was noticed by MAL in July 2008; that it has been
admitted at least in part by Tschechien 7; and that the Claimants’ intention to violate Czech
law and the exact volume of unauthorized excavations were revealed by documents that the
Claimants had been required to produce in the context of disclosure in the present arbitration,
including in particular the site diary, and the Minutes of the Advisory Board of ECE.”

3.80 As to the effect of the alleged breach of Czech law constituted by the excessive excavation, the
Respondent observed that the Claimants’ argument that more than “simple” illegality was
required was supported only by isolated dicta from a few awards under instruments which

88 Counter-Memorial, paras. 237-238.

28 Counter-Memorial, para. 239.

2° Counter-Memorial, para. 240, citing Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the
Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25), Award of 16 August 2007, para. 404. The Respondent also noted that the ad
hoc Committee in Fraport, although granting annulment on other grounds, rejected the claim that the Tribunal had
committed a manifest excess of powers by denying jurisdiction (Counter-Memorial, para, 241, referring to Fraport AG
Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25), Decision on the Application for
Annulment of 23 December 2010).

°! Counter-Memorial, para. 242.

©? Counter-Memorial, para, 243, citing Guyana v. Suriname, Award of 17 September 2007, paras. 417 and 421.

?°3 Counter-Memorial, para. 244,

2° Counter-Memorial, para, 245.

?°5 Counter-Memorial, para. 246.

79

 

3.81

3.82

3.83

3.84

were differently worded, and argued that any such restrictive interpretation was inapplicable in
relation to Article 1(1) of the BIT.”

The Respondent noted that the Claimants accepted that, on the ordinary meaning of the text of
Article 1(1), the words “in conformity with Czech law” were not qualified in any way, and
took issue with the Claimants’ suggestion that the object and purpose of the BIT in some way
required that the BIT should be held to apply to investments that were not in conformity with
Czech law.’ The Respondent submitted that the Parties could “obviously have no interest in
granting Treaty protections to investments that are not in conformity with their laws”, and that
“it cannot be seriously argued that the object and purpose of the [BIT] is to protect illegal
investments”.?* On that basis, the Respondent submitted that “even if considerations of the
object and purpose of the BIT could prevail over the ordinary meaning of the text of Article
1(1), there is no reason why the requirement of legality should be interpreted restrictively”.?”
As to the Claimants’ reliance on a “subjective” limitation, requiring conduct involving an
element of intent and bad faith, the Respondent observed that that proposition was not
supported by any authority, and in particular did not follow from the terms of Article 1(1) or
any of the decisions relied upon by the Claimants.*°° The Respondent disputed the correctness
of the Claimants’ assertion that “only an investment made in bad faith is deprived protection
under a BIT”, and noted that the tribunal in Phoenix Action, in which the investment had been
formally legal under Czech law but had been made in bad faith, had regarded bad faith as an
additional bar to jurisdiction in addition to illegality.’ On that basis, the Respondent argued
that “the clear disjunction between legality and good faith actually shows that the illegality
requirement is an objective one and does not depend on the presence of bad faith or fraud.*”
The Respondent similarly sought to distinguish the decisions in Inceysa, Fraport and Plama as
all involving illegality that involved both intent and bad faith, such that the treatment of the
issue in those cases was not apposite to the question of whether illegal conduct which was
nevertheless committed in good faith might bar jurisdiction.

The Respondent in any case submitted that the issue was moot, in light of the clear evidence
that the Claimants had acted intentionally and in bad faith insofar as the Advisory Board of
ECE had deliberately decided to continue the excavations in full on 18 June 2008.7*

As to the “objective” limit submitted by the Claimants, namely that only a breach of
fundamental principles of law would bar jurisdiction, the Respondent observed that any such
limit found no support in the text of Article 1(1) of the BIT.*°

286 Counter-Memorial, paras. 247-248.

?°7 Counter-Memorial, paras. 249-250.

2°8 Counter-Memorial, para. 250 (emphasis in original),
?°° Counter-Memorial, para. 250.

3° Counter-Memorial, para. 251.

*° Counter-Memorial, para, 252.

32 Counter-Memorial, para. 252.

3° Counter-Memorial, para. 253.

3° Counter-Memorial, para, 254.

3°5 Counter-Memorial, para. 255.

80

3.85

3.86

3.87

3.88

3.89

3.90

3.91

 

The Respondent moreover submitted that the violation of the requirement of prior
authorization of excavations, at least of such a volume, did constitute a breach of a
fundamental principle of Czech construction law, which “protects a vital public interest and
security in planning and construction and represents the raison d’étre of construction
permits”.*06

The Respondent further disputed the Claimants’ suggestion that the requirement of
authorization constituted a mere formality, as well as their suggestion that it did not matter
whether the work was carried out before or after the issuance of the relevant permit, or that the
volume excavated had to be permitted in any case.*”” It observed that, if that were the case,
Czech construction law would be unenforceable and noted that the Claimants had not put
forward any expert witness who supported their theory.*”* The Respondent further noted that
the Claimants’ conduct had been inconsistent with the position they now took, insofar as they
had applied for all permits required.*°

The Respondent also observed that the sanction for the illegality indicated the seriousness of
the violation. It pointed to the order issued by MAL on 4 February 2010, by which the removal
of the unauthorized works had been ordered, albeit also recognizing that the order had
subsequently been quashed “on purely formal grounds”.?!°

As to the time element, the Respondent disputed the Claimants’ suggestion that the
requirement of conformity with domestic law was limited to the establishment of the
investment, again, arguing that the wording of Article 1(1) of the BIT provided no support for
any such limitation.>”"

The Respondent noted that the leading decision cited by the Claimants in support of their
position was the decision in Fraport, but observed that the language of the treaty in issue in
that case was different from Article 1(1) of the BIT, insofar as it referred to investments
“accepted in conformity with” domestic law, and submitted that that fact should be taken as
explaining the focus by the Fraport tribunal on the making of the investment.>””

In light of the different language contained in Article 1(1) of the BIT, the Respondent
submitted that the appropriate conclusion was that an “investment” “must be in conformity
with domestic law throughout its whole duration”.2"3

The Respondent also took issue with the Claimants’ suggestion that any illegality had to relate
to the Claimants’ participatory interests in Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha as their purported

3° Counter-Memorial, para. 256.
3°? Counter-Memorial, para. 257.
48 Counter-Memorial, para. 257.
3” Counter-Memorial, para. 258.
310 Counter-Memorial, para. 259.
3 Counter-Memorial, para. 260.
3! Counter-Memorial, para. 261.
33 Counter-Memorial, para. 262.

81

 

3.92

3.93

3.94

3.95

3.96

investment, relying in particular on the Claimants’ own assertion in the Memorial that the
development of the Project was an “inseparable part” of its investment.°"*

The Respondent also relied upon the rejection by the ad hoc Committee in Fraport of the
investor’s criticism of that tribunal’s decision, insofar as it had refused to accept the argument
that its investment should be regarded as split,’'* as well as the decision of the tribunal in
AES Summit Generation v. Hungary.*© The Respondent submitted that, as a matter of
economic reality, an investment “cannot be artificially separated into the moment of its making
and its subsequent life because additional investments are made when additional funds are
spent”,”!” and submitted that this was precisely what occurred in the present case, including in
particular by reason of the authorization of additional funds by the Advisory Board on 18 June
2008,3!8

On that basis, the Respondent submitted that even if the requirement of legality only applied to
the making of the Claimants’ investment, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal would still be barred
in relation to the period after 18 June 2008.°””

Finally, the Respondent disputed the Claimants’ assertion that it was estopped from raising the
objection of illegality on the grounds that none of the requisites for an estoppel were present.
In particular, it relied on the decision of the tribunal in East Kalimantan v. PT Kaltim in
arguing that in order for an estoppel to arise: i) there had to be a clear and unambiguous
statement of fact; ii) the statement of fact had to have been made voluntarily, unconditionally
and to have been authorized; and iii) there had to be reliance in good faith upon the statement,
involving either detriment to the party relying, or advantage to the party making the statement.
The Respondent further argued that the burden was on the Claimants to demonstrate that all
those elements were present.*”°

The Respondent first disputed that it ever told the Claimants, let alone told them clearly,
unambiguously, voluntarily and unconditionally that the excavation works in excess of those
authorized under the Planning Permit were legal.*”' In particular, it disputed that MAL’s order
or 19 September 2008 to carry out securing works fulfilled that test, and emphasized that the
securing works permitted by MAL’s order were limited to those works up to 359m above sea
level, whilst additional excavation was permitted only in the volume of 2,920m?,>”

Similarly, the Respondent disputed that the issuance of the building permits could result in the
legalization of the excess excavation works which had been carried out by the Claimants, both

+" Counter-Memorial, para. 263, citing Claimants’ Memorial, para. 551.

3!5 Counter-Memorial, para. 264, quoting Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Philippines ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/25), Decision on the Application for Annulment of 23 December 2010), para. 113.

316 Counter-Memorial, para. 265, quoting AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erémit Kft. v. Republic of
Hungary (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/22), Award of 23 September 2010, para. 9.3.16.

37 Counter-Memorial, para. 266.

318 Counter-Memorial, para. 266.
3! Counter-Memorial, para. 267.

3° Counter-Memorial, para. 268, quoting Government of the Province of East Kalimantan v. PT Kaltim Prima Coal and
others (ICSID Case No, ARB/07/3), Award on Jurisdiction of 28 December 2009, paras. 211-213.

321 Counter-Memorial, para. 269.
322 Counter-Memorial, para. 269.

 

on the basis that the building permits had still not acquired legal force, and on the basis that
they were incapable of doing so. In that latter regard, the Respondent explained that as a matter
of Czech law, excavation works could only be regularized in the Groundworks Removal
Proceedings on the basis of an express request by the builder, including a detailed description
of the scope of the unauthorized excavations. The Respondent noted that Tschechien 7 had
neither filed any such request, nor provided detailed information as to the actual scope of the
unauthorized excavations.*”?

3.97 On that basis, the Respondent denied that MAL had ever assured the Claimants that the excess
excavations were in compliance with Czech law, and emphasized that, to the contrary, MAL
had taken enforcement action in the form of the Groundworks Removal Proceedings and
Administrative Offence Proceedings in order to investigate the illegal conduct of the
Claimants. Further, the Respondent argued that the various prior decisions relied upon by the
Claimants (Fraport, ADC Affiliate and Kardassopoulos) were distinguishable as concerning
completely different factual and legal issues, and were therefore of no assistance to the
Claimants.*

3.98 Second, the Respondent argued that even if there had been the necessary clear and
unambiguous representation, the Claimants had not alleged that they had relied in good faith
upon that statement, either to their own detriment or to the advantage of the Respondent.*>

3.99 Finally, the Respondent argued that the Claimants’ invocation of the principle that a State may
not rely on its own domestic law to escape its duties under international law was inapposite
insofar as the Claimants appeared to be saying that the issuance of the building permit and the
illegality of the excavation were two separate issues. The Respondent argued that the
Claimants’ argument presupposed that the Respondent had an obligation under either Czech or
international law to regularize the excessive excavation; the Respondent denied that any such
obligation existed.**°

e The Claimants’ Reply

3.100 In the Reply, the Claimants maintained their position that any illegality related to the
excavation did not affect the jurisdiction of the Tribunal, on the basis that the excess
excavations were but a “negligible breach of the law”, which had resulted in a comparatively
small fine, and which could in any case have been legalized by the issue of the Building
Permit.*” The Claimants noted that, as a precaution, they had in the meantime applied for
legalization of the excavation works.°% They likewise maintained their position that the
Respondent could not rely on the evidence produced in support on the basis that it had been
obtained in bad faith, and that the Respondent was in any case estopped from raising any

*°3 Counter-Memorial, para. 270.
*°4 Counter-Memorial, para. 271.
*°5 Counter-Memorial, para. 272.
326 Counter-Memorial, para. 273.
#7 Reply, para, 382.
*8 Reply, para. 382.

83

 

 

3.101

3.102

3.103

3.104

3.105

objection based on illegality due to the fact that it ordered securing works, and because of the
issue of the Main Building Permit”

The Claimants first asserted that the alleged illegality constituted by the groundworks had no
bearing on the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, and submitted that illegality should be resorted to as a
ground for denying jurisdiction “only restrictively”.*°

They argued that there was a “high threshold to deny jurisdiction” on the basis of breaches of
domestic law by investors.°*) They argued that the requirement that an investment be “in
conformity with domestic law” in Article 1(1) of the BIT “works in a restrictive fashion. It
does not Jead to an exclusion of jurisdiction in cases of good faith violations, minor violations
or violations after the initiation of an investment”? Relying on the observations of the
tribunal in Tokios Tokelés, the Claimants reiterated that that interpretation of Article 1(1) of the
BIT was supported by the purpose of the BIT, in particular insofar as they argued that the BIT
was intended to promote investment. For the Claimants, if the BIT was to be interpreted as
resulting in the risk of loss of protection as a result of a minor breach of domestic law, that
would not be conducive to the required security of investors, and therefore would be contrary
to the purpose of the BIT.?*

In response to the Respondent’s argument that the wording of Article 1(1) did not support their
position, the Claimants observed that tribunals “have regularly found that ‘in conformity with
domestic law’ clauses do not cover all kinds of illegality”.*™

As for the “objective” limitation upon the exclusion of jurisdiction on the basis of illegality,
according to which minor breaches of the domestic law of the host State are irrelevant, the
Claimants essentially reprised their previous arguments. They reiterated that the breach in
question had been “minor” or “insignificant”, again pointing to the fact that the fine imposed in
the New Administrative Offence Proceedings amounted to only €8,000, adding that the
relevant authorities had in fact invited the Claimants to apply for a permit.***

As to the latter matter, the Claimants noted that on 17 January 2011, they had applied for a
permit without admitting liability, and that the proceedings on that application were pending.**°
The Claimants also added that there was no binding order to remove the allegedly excessive
groundworks, insofar as the decision of MAL of 4 February 2010°*” had subsequently been
quashed by RAL on 2 June 2010.°** They further disputed the Respondent's assertion that that
order had been quashed on “purely formal grounds”, and noted that instead the basis for the

3° Reply, para, 383.

30 Reply, para, 384.

*! Reply, section heading prior to para. 385.
352 Reply, para. 385.

333 Reply, paras. 386-387, citing Tokios Tokelés v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/18), Decision on Jurisdiction of
29 April 2004, para. 86.

34 Reply, para. 388.

35 Reply, paras. 391-392.

36 Reply, para, 393,

7 Reply, para, 394.

°8 Core 10/357 (Exhibit ! 24)

84

3.106

3.107

3.108

3.109

quashing of the order had been RAL’s findings that MAL had not assessed, documented and
appropriately justified the feasibility of returning the area to its previous state and had not
addressed the objections made by the Claimants.**°

By way of supplement to the cases previously relied upon as supporting their position that
jurisdiction was not affected in the case of a minor breach of the law, and that it was only
breaches relating to fundamental principles of domestic law or international public policy
which have a bearing on a tribunal's jurisdiction, the Claimants also invoked the decision on
jurisdiction in Metalpar S.A. and Buen Aire S.A. v. Argentina that the failure by the investor in
that case, in breach of the applicable domestic law, to register its investment did not preclude
the jurisdiction of the tribunal.>“° The Claimants noted that the tribunal in that case had held
that it would have been disproportionate to punish the investor for its omission by denying
jurisdiction, and in that connection had taken account of the fact that the applicable domestic
law had provided for other sanctions to address the illegality.*”

The Claimants argued that, similarly, the relevant Czech legislation provided for sanctions of
breaches of the type alleged, and noted that a fine had in fact been imposed, as well as
observing that the Groundworks Removal Proceedings also addressed their allegedly illegal
acts. On that basis they submitted that there was no need to punish them by denying protection
under the BIT.” Finally, the Claimants rejected the suggestion by the Respondent that their
position was that there was no requirement to abide by Czech law, and affirmed that their
position was that the excavation beyond the scope of the permission granted was not a
sufficiently severe breach of Czech law to result in the denial of jurisdiction by the Tribunal.***

The Claimants further relied on a temporal limitation on illegality, repeating their argument
that the Tribunal should exercise jurisdiction on the basis that the alleged illegality occurred
only after initiation of the investment, in particular insofar as the volume of the excavation
exceeded the volume allowed under the Planning Permission only in June 2008, by which time
they had already legally initiated their investment within the meaning of the BIT.*“*

The Claimants referred in this connection to the decision in Saba Fakes v. Turkey, including
the observation of the tribunal in that case, in relation to what the Claimants asserted was a
comparably worded clause in the applicable Netherlands-Turkey BIT, to the effect that the
clause required only “compliance with the host State’s domestic laws governing the admission
of investment in the host State”.**° In addition they invoked that tribunal’s reliance on the
object and purpose of the BIT applicable in that case in support of its finding that “unless
specifically stated” a State was not able to rely on violations of its own domestic law “beyond

> Reply, para. 395.
4 Reply, para. 398, citing Metalpar S.A. and Buen Aire S.A. v. Argentina, Decision on Jurisdiction of 27 April 2006,

para. 84.

Reply, para. 398,

342

Reply, para. 399.

3 Reply, para. 400.
3 Reply, para. 401.
345 Reply, para. 402, citing Saba Fakes v. Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/20), Award of 14 July 2010,

para. 119.

85

 

3.110

3.111

3.112

3.113

the sphere of investment regime” in order to escape the substantive obligations imposed upon
it by the BIT.

The Claimants also placed reliance on the decisions of the tribunals in Fraport and Hamester
in suggesting that a distinction was to be drawn between illegality in the initiation of an
investment, and illegality in its subsequent life or performance, with the latter not affecting
jurisdiction under a BIT, although they admitted that it could well be of relevance in relation to
the substantive merits of a claim.**’

As to the Respondent’s attempt to distinguish the decision in Fraport on the basis that the
relevant treaty provision had been differently worded, the Claimants observed that the
Respondent had not explained why the difference in wording should dictate a different result in
the present case, and in particular why Article 1(1) of the BIT should be interpreted as
requiring that an investment be in conformity with domestic law throughout its whole
duration.** They invoked the observations of the Fraport tribunal, specifically endorsed by
the tribunal in Hamester, to the effect that “the effective operation of the BIT regime would
appear to require that jurisdictional compliance be limited to the initiation of the
investment”?

As to the Respondent’s arguments based on the continuous character of investments, the
Claimants disputed that that implied that investments had continuously to comply with
domestic law in order for a tribunal to have jurisdiction, on the basis that any other approach
would mean that investors could not act safe in the knowledge that their investment was
protected, and that this would inhibit investment. Whilst not as such disputing the continuous
character of investments, the Claimants noted that no tribunal had ever relied upon that factor
in order to hold that an investor had to comply with domestic law at all times in order for there
to be jurisdiction, and emphasized that the tribunal in Fraport, in which a number of separate
acquisitions over time had been held to constitute a single investment, nevertheless had held
that it was sufficient that the overall investment had been in conformity with domestic law at
its initiation.

As for the Respondent’s reliance on AES Summit Generation v. Hungary as authority for the
continuous character of investments, the Claimants noted that the tribunal in that case had in
fact relied upon a theory of discontinuity, and treated the investor’s related business activities
as two separate investments, and that it had done so in the context of consideration of the
investor’s asserted legitimate expectations, rather than as regards any issue of illegality. The
Claimants further noted that if the Tribunal were to adopt an approach based on discontinuity
of investments, that would not change matters insofar as all other parts of the Claimants’

*4 Reply, para, 402.

**7 Reply, paras. 404-405, referring to Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines
(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25), Award of 16 August 2007, para. 345 and Gustav F W Hamester GmbH & Co KG v.
Republic of Ghana (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/24), Award of 18 June 2010, paras. 127-128.

*8 Reply, paras. 406-407.

*° Reply, para. 408, citing Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines (ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/25), Award of 16 August 2007, para. 345 and Gustav F W Hamester GmbH & Co KG v. Republic of
Ghana (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/24), Award of 18 June 2010, para. 128.

350 Reply, para. 409, citing Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines (ICSID
Case No. ARB/03/25), Award of 16 August 2007, para. 262.

86

3.114

3.115

3.116

3.117

3.118

   

investment activities not connected with the excavation would constitute separate investments
which would be within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal."

On the basis of the decisions in Fraport and Hamester, the Claimants took the position that, at
most, any illegality after the initiation of an investment could only be relevant as a substantive
defence to the merits of a claim, and made the new point that the Respondent could not justify
any of the alleged violations of the substantive standards of protection contained in the BIT
asserted by reliance on the allegedly illegal acts of the Claimants. The Claimants argued that
none of the matters in relation to which they made complaint had anything to do with the
groundworks, in particular, asserting that none of the decisions adopted by the relevant
authorities after June 2008, including in particular the various decisions to stay the Building
Permit Proceedings, made any mention of the excavations; on that basis, argued that any
excessive excavation could not serve as a defence to the merits of their claims.*°

 

The Claimants maintained their position that the Respondent was precluded from relying on
the evidence in order to substantiate the illegality of the groundworks due to the fact that it had
been obtained in bad faith during the course of the settlement discussions.***

By way of supplement to the arguments previously raised in reliance on the principle of nemo
auditur propriam turpitudinem allegans, which they asserted had been accepted by investment
arbitration tribunals to constitute a general principle of international law,** the Claimants
asserted that the Respondent was precluded from relying upon the evidence obtained in the
wake of the report by YBN Consult, as the Respondent would profit from its own bad faith if it
were allowed to introduce it.>**

As a separate matter, the Claimants also maintained their argument based on the proposition
that the “unclean hands” doctrine constituted a general principle of international law, arguing
that the principle was not only applicable to substantive obligations, as had been submitted by
the Respondent, but that it was also relevant to questions of procedure, including the
admissibility of evidence.>**

The Claimants likewise maintained their argument that the Respondent was estopped from
relying on the alleged illegality relating to the groundworks on the basis of the fact that MAL
had ordered securing works, and the issue of the Main Building Permit, and asserted that they
had relied in good faith upon the legality of the excavation works, such that the Respondent
could no longer assert their illegality.>*” In addition, as regards the Main Building Permit, they
asserted that it had authorized the construction as planned, including the full extent of

35! Reply, para. 410.

38 Reply, paras, 411-412,

359 Reply, para. 413,

35 Reply, para. 414, referring to Inceysa Vallisoletana S.L. v. Republic of El Salvador (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/26),
Award of 2 August 2006, paras. 225 et seq; 229, 240 et seq and Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria
(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24), Award of 27 August 2008, paras. 14] and 143.

355 Reply, para. 414,

356 Reply, para. 415-416.

357 Reply, paras. 417-419

87

 

 

 

3.119

3.120

3.

3.121

a.

3.122

3.123

3.124

necessary excavations envisaged, and that “[cJonsequentially, the Building Permit also
incidentally contained the determination that the complete excavation works are legal”.***

The Claimants disputed that the fact that Building Permit had not become legally effective was
of any , and submi that the Respondent in its Counter-Memorial had not
addressed the Claimants’ arguments that the relevant authorities were legally obliged to issue
the Building Permit, and that the Respondent could not rely on its own breaches of its own
domestic law?”

Finally, the Claimants argued that the Respondent’s understanding of the doctrine of estoppel,
based on the decision in East Kalimantan v. PT Kaltim, was unduly narrow and was restricted
to the situation where the estoppel arose on the basis of a prior statement of fact. The
Claimants noted that in the Memorial they had relied on authorities, including in particular the
observations of the tribunal in Fraport, which had espoused a more general understanding of
estoppel and waiver, and that the Respondent had not sought to address those authorities.°°°

The Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction Ratione Materiae

The Respondent’s third objection to jurisdiction was that the Tribunal does not have
jurisdiction insofar as the Claimants make claims in relation to damages allegedly sustained by
companies other than Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha.

The Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction

In its Objections to Jurisdiction, the Respondent noted that the Claimants, in the Request for
Arbitration and Statement of Claim, had made clear that their claim for damages included sums
in respect of damages allegedly suffered by various companies within the ECE Group other
than Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha, (namely EKZ Tschechien 3, EKZ Prag 1, EBP, PerStyn
Plus a.s. and ECE Projektmanagement), and observed that the Claimants “make no efforts and
do not even allege that they constitute protected investments under Article 1(1) of the
Treaty”.°5!

The Respondent further observed that the Claimants had not explained what rights or assets of
those companies had allegedly been affected by the measures adopted by the Respondent, and
argued that, as a consequence, the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction ratione materiae over the
Claimants’ claims in respect of those companies.

The Claimants’ Memorial

In response, the Claimants argued that whether or not they were to be compensated for the
damages in the form of obsolete expenses was not a matter of jurisdiction, but a matter of the

358 Reply, para. 419.

35° Reply, para. 420.

36 Reply. para. 421, referring to Memorial, paras. 422 et seq, and quoting Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services
Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25), Award of 16 August 2007, para. 346.

36! Objections to Jurisdiction, para. 37.

88

3.125

3.126

3.127

3.128

362

merits. They explained that they had not claimed damages as an investor in EKZ Prag 1,
EKZ Tschechien 3, PerStyn Plus and EBP, but rather as investors only in Tschechien 7 and
ECE Praha, and that the costs and expenses incurred by other companies in the ECE Group
“merely contribute to the loss which Claimants suffered as a consequence of their investment
in Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha” as set out in the later section of the pleading on damages.*
The Claimants argued that “it is not necessary that the damage must itself constitute an
investment” and that it was sufficient that “the injured party made an investment in the host
state and that it had suffered loss by a breach of the BIT.**

The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial

In its Counter-Memorial, the Respondent maintained in part its argument that the Tribunal
does not have jurisdiction over the Claimants’ claims for obsolete expenses incurred by
companies other than Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha, dealing with that argument in conjunction
with its objection that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction ratione temporis in relation to
claims based on events that pre-dated the Claimants’ respective investments.

As reformulated, the Respondent’s objection was that “the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction
over Claimants’ claims for Obsolete Expenses incurred prior to Claimants’ respective
investments in the Subsidiaries that incurred those expenses”.°**
The Respondent submitted that, “[w]Jhen applied to the Claimants’ claims for damages, both
objections relate to the same issue ~ Claimants disregard the limitations due to their relatively
late and sequenced acquisition of the subsidiaries whose expenses they now claim”.3®

In that connection, the Respondent relied on the decision in Saluka v. Czech Republic, in
relation to what it asserted was a similar issue, explaining that “the Tribunal only has
jurisdiction to hear and decide the Claimants’ claims for damages regarding expenses (or loss
of value) that were incurred by Claimants’ subsidiaries - and not ECE International’s parent
ECE KG ~ after their acquisition by Claimants”.* The Respondent took the position that the
Tribunal only had jurisdiction with respect to claims relating to:

a. expenses (or loss of value) incurred by EKZ Tschechien 3 and EKZ Prag 1, after 10
July 2008;

b. expenses (or loss of value) incurred by Tschechien 7 and PerStYn Plus, after 1 July
2007; and

c expenses (or loss of value) incurred by ECE Praha, after 11 January 2007;

Memorial, para. 374.

363 Memorial, para. 375

3 Memorial, para. 376

365 See the title of Counter-Memorial, Section HILC. (p. 70).

366 Counter-Memorial, para, 274.

367 Counter-Memorial, paras. 275-276, citing Saluka Investments B.V. v. The Czech Republic UNCITRAL), Partial
Award of 17 March 2006, para. 244.

89

 

 

3.129

3.130

3.131

3.132

those being the relevant dates on which the Claimants had acquired their interests in those

companies.>*

The Claimants’ Reply

In response, the Claimants in their Reply maintained their position that the issue was not one
which went to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. They dismissed the Respondent’s reliance on
Saluka v. Czech Republic as being of no relevance insofar as it had not concern the issue of
whether damage suffered by an affiliate company were within the jurisdiction of the
tribunal.2 In accordance with that position, the Claimants’ claims in respect of obsolete
expenses incurred by companies other than Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha were dealt with later
on in the Claimants’ Reply in the section relating to damages.

The Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction Ratione Temporis

The Respondent’s fourth objection to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal was an objection that the
Tribunal has no jurisdiction over the Claimants’ claims to the extent that they are based on
events pre-dating the date of their respective investments.

The Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction

In its Objections to Jurisdiction, the Respondent asserted that it was clear from the Czech
Company Register that PANTA had become the general partner in Tschechien7 on | July
2007, and submitted that the Claimants had asserted that the conduct of the Respondent prior
to that date resulted in a violation of the BIT.°” It argued that an investor could only raise
claims based on events occurring after the making of its investment, and that any dispute
relating to events prior to that date would not constitute a dispute relating to an investment
within the meaning of Article 10 of the BIT. On that basis, the Respondent took the position
that, even if the Tribunal were to conclude that PANTA’s participation in Tschechien 7
qualified as a protected investment, any claim by PANTA based on conduct of the Respondent
in relation to Tschechien 7 prior to PANTA’s acquisition of Tschechien7 on 1 July 2007
would be outside the Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis>”

The Respondent further observed that PANTA made claims for the alleged loss of value of the
project land owned by Tschechien 7 as constituting an asset of Tschechien 7, rather than in
respect of PANTA’s participation in Tschechien 7. On that basis, it likewise argued that, even
if the Tribunal were to find that the land acquired by Tschechien7 constituted a protected
investment of PANTA, given that Tschechien 7 acquired the land between August 2007 and
March 2008, its claims for alleged loss of value insofar as they were based on events pre-

36 Counter-Memorial, para. 276.

3 Reply, paras. 380-381.

37 Objections to Jurisdiction, para. 38.

371 Objections to Jurisdiction, paras. 39-40.

90

3.133

3.134

3.135

3.136

3.137

3.138

dating the acquisition of the land by Tschechien 7 would also be outside the scope of the
‘Tribunal’s jurisdiction ratione temporis.*”

The Claimants’ Memorial

The Claimants observed that the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction on the basis that, in
order to be protected, an investment must have been made before the breach of the BIT “states
the obvious”, but submitted that “it remains unclear how this finding should relate to the
present case”.*”?

In the Claimants’ submission, although the Respondent had submitted that the Claimants had
no standing in relation to breaches committed prior to 1 July 2007 (the date on which the
Claimants’ investment in Tschechien 7 was made), they had not alleged any breach before that
date and “the first in the series of wrongs committed by Respondent in the administrative
proceedings occurred on 6 July 2007, when the planning permit should have been issued
[73%

As for the Respondent’s argument that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear claims with
respect to land acquired after the alleged chain of violations of the BIT had commenced, the
Claimants countered that the argument was flawed, insofar as it presupposed that the relevant
investment for the purposes of Article 1(1) of the BIT was the purchase of the land itself. The
Claimants reiterated that their investment was constituted by the participation of the Claimants
in Tschechien 7 “and the other subsidiaries set up” for the purpose of the Galerie project.?”>

The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial

As noted above, in its Counter-Memorial the Respondent dealt with its objection to the
jurisdiction ratione temporis of the Tribunal in the context of its discussion of its objection to
jurisdiction in relation to claims in respect of damage alleged suffered by companies other than
Tschechien 7 or ECE Praha prior to the Claimants’ investments.?”°

In addition, in the light of the position taken by the Claimants in their Memorial, the
Respondent noted that there was agreement between the Parties that the Claimants “cannot
claim based on events pre-dating their respective investments,” and noted the Claimants’
affirmation that the first violation of the BIT alleged had taken place on 6 July 2007, and
acknowledged that this addressed its objection to jurisdiction ratione temporis as regards
conduct affecting Tschechien 7.77”

The Claimants’ Reply

The Claimants made no separate mention of the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction ratione
temporis in their Reply.

3 Objections to Jurisdiction, para. 41.
*3 Memorial, para. 429.

374 Memorial, para. 430.

*°5 Memorial, para, 431.

36 Counter-Memorial, paras. 274-276; see above, paras, 3.125-3.128.
377 Counter-Memorial, para. 277.

91

 

 

3.139

3.140

3.141

E. THE TRIBUNAL’S FINDINGS ON THE RESPONDENT’S OBJECTIONS TO
JURISDICTION

By way of introduction to the Tribunal’s consideration of the issues relating to its jurisdiction
to hear the current dispute, the Tribunal notes that Article 10 of the BIT confers jurisdiction
upon it in relation to “differences of opinion regarding investments” (Claimants’ translation) or
“disputes relating to investments” (Respondent’s translation) “between either Contracting
Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party”. As noted above at paragraph 1.17, it is
not in dispute that the Respondent succeeded to the rights and obligations under the BIT as
originally entered into by the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic and that ECE International
and PANTA each constitutes a juridical person with its seat in the area of application of the
BIT as those terms are used in Article 1(3) of the BIT.

The Respondent’ s objections to jurisdiction differ in their character. Whilst the first and second
objections based, respectively, on no investment within the meaning of the BIT, and on
illegality under Czech law, are presented as going to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to hear the
dispute as a whole, the third and fourth objections (i.e. the objections ratione materiae and
ratione temporis) do not have such a far-reaching effect. Rather, in the case of the objection
ratione materiae, its effect if established, would be to exclude certain of the claims for
damages made by the Claimants on behalf of subsidiaries of the ECE Group. Similarly, the
objection ratione temporis has as its aim solely to exclude claims based on events prior to the
date of the making of the Claimants’ respective investments.

The Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction on the Basis of “No Investment” Within
the Meaning of Article 1(1) of the BIT

As regards the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction based on the asserted lack of any
“investment” on the part of the Claimants, within the meaning of that term as defined in Article
1(1) of the BIT, it is useful to set out again the terms of that provision. Article 1(1) of the BIT
provides:

the term "investments" shall include every kind of asset (Claimants: which
has been invested; Respondent: contributed] in conformity with domestic
law, in particular:

a) movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in
rem such as mortgages, liens and pledges;

b) shares of companies and other kinds of interest in companies;

c) receivables and claims to money which has been used to create an
economic value or claims to any performance which has an
economic value and which relates to an investment;

a) intellectual property rights, in particular copyrights, patents, utility
models, industrial designs or models, trademarks, trade names,
technical processes, know-how and goodwill;

92

3.142

3.143

3.144

3.145

3.146

3.147

3.148

3.149

e) business concessions under public law, including concessions to
search for, extract and exploit natural resources.

The Claimants allege that the relevant investment is comprised of their shareholding or other
form of participation in companies incorporated under Czech law: Tschechien 7 (in the case of
PANTA) and ECE Praha (in the case of ECE International). Although also making claims in
respect of the obsolete expenses incurred by other companies within the wider ECE Group,
they put forward their claims for damages primarily on the basis of the reduction of value of
their shareholdings or other participation in those companies,

Article 1(1) defines “investments” as including “every kind of asset” invested/contributed in
conformity with domestic law, and provides a non-exhaustive list of the types of assets which
are to be regarded as constituting “investments”.

The Tribunal is of the view that, other things being equal, and leaving to one side for one
moment the question of the correct translation of the word rendered by the Parties as
“contributed” and “invested”, respectively, on the ordinary meaning of the terms of Article
1(1) the shareholding or participation of the Claimants in Tschechien7 and ECE Praha,
respectively, qualify in material terms as ‘investments’ inasmuch as they clearly fall within the
literal meaning of “every kind of asset ... in particular ... shares of companies and other kinds
of interest in companies”.

The dispute between the Parties as to whether the Claimants can be held to have an investment
thus turns exclusively on the correct interpretation of Article 1(1) of the BIT, and in particular
of the words “vlozené” and “angelegt” used respectively in the Czech- and German-language
versions of Article 1(1) of the BIT.

The question which arises is whether the concept those two words are intended to represent is
to be understood as limiting the scope of application of the BIT solely to assets “contributed”
by an investor, as is submitted by the Respondent.

As became clear during the exchange of written pleadings between the Parties, that question in
fact breaks down into two questions, namely, first: whether the concept denoted by the words
vlogené/angelegt in the Czech and German languages is properly to be translated into English
as having the meaning “contributed”, rather than “invested”; and second, whether, as a result,
the relevant term is to be understood as imposing any requirement that assets otherwise falling
within the terms of the definition must have in fact have been “contributed” by the investor in
order to qualify as an investment.

As to the first question, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent initially asserted in its
Objections to Jurisdiction that the Czech word “viogené” in the Czech version of the BIT was
to be translated as “contributed”, and that the German word “angelegt” could be translated as
either “contributed or invested”.

The Tribunal regards it as significant that the Respondent did not dispute the Claimants’
assertion in its Observations on Jurisdiction that “viozené” is capable of being translated either
as “contributed” or as “invested”. Further, the sole basis put forward by the Respondent for its
assertion that the Czech-language word “viozené” is. to be translated as “contributed” in

93

3.150

3.151

3.152

response in its Reply on Jurisdiction remained the argument that in other treaties concluded
contemporaneously by the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic, and which had an authentic
English text, the Czech-language counterpart for the word “invested” was the different term
“investované”.

The Tribunal is of the view that little assistance as to the meaning of the word “investované”
can be derived from the bilateral investment treaties entered into by the Czech and Slovak
Federal Republic with the Netherlands and Canada roughly contemporaneously with the BIT at
issue in the present case. The fact that the English word “invested” in the authentic English
version of those treaties is rendered as “investované” in the equally authentic Czech-language
version sheds little light upon the correct interpretation of the different term “vlozené” used in
the authentic Czech version of the BIT at issue, which has no authentic English language
version. It is often the case that a number of synonyms, whether or not having subtle
differences or shades of meaning, may be used to translate a single word from one language
into another. The fact that in these treaties “investované”, rather than “viloZené” is used as the
counterpart of the English word “invested” is not determinative of the question of whether the
term “viozené’ is properly translated as “invested” or “contributed”.

The Tribunal also regards it as significant that in its Reply on Jurisdiction the Respondent did
not seek to counter the assertion made by the Claimants in their Observations on Jurisdiction,
in reliance on a German-English dictionary, that the German word “angelegt” was properly
translated as “invested”, and indeed appeared to accept that the Claimants’ position was correct
insofar as they stated that the term could not be translated as “contributed”. Rather than
maintaining its position that the proper translation of the word “angelegr’” could be either
“contributed” or “invested”, the Respondent instead queried whether the meaning of the two

terms “are truly different”,>”* and submitted that the real question was whether “the word

‘invested’ has meaning”.*”

Again, an issue arises as to the reliance by the Claimants on the bilateral investment treaties
entered into by the Federal German Republic with the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Republic of Poland. However, the issue is a slightly different one than that
just discussed in relation to the Respondent’s invocation of bilateral investment treaties
concluded by it with third States: although the term “angelegr” is translated as “invested” in
what the Claimants referred to as the “official” English versions of the treaties invoked by
them, in the case of neither of the treaties does the translation relied upon constitute an
authentic version of the relevant treaty. Rather, the authentic texts of the treaties were in
German and Serbo-Croat in the case of the treaty with the SFRY, and German and Polish in
the case of the treaty with Poland. The supposedly “official” English translations relied upon
by the Claimants are those published in the United Nations Treaty Series. However, in the
absence of it being established that the Parties to those treaties agreed that those English
translations were to be regarded as authentic,**° the Tribunal is of the view that those texts can
be of only marginal relevance in interpreting the provisions of the BIT at issue in the present
case, and in identifying the meaning of its terms.

378 Counter-Memorial, para. 223.

379 Counter-Memorial, para. 224.
38° Cf, Article 33(2), VCLT.

3.153

3.154

3.155

3.156

The BIT stipulates in its final clause that it was authenticated in both the Czech and German
languages. The Tribunal is thus faced with two versions of the same term in the two authentic
language versions of the BIT which, on the positions adopted by the Parties, are capable of
meaning both “invested” and “contributed” in the case of the Czech-language word “vlozené”,
and solely “invested” in the case of the German word “angelegt”.

Article 33 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties makes specific provision as to the
basis on which the interpretation of treaties authenticated in two or more languages is to be
approached; it provides:

Article 33
Interpretation of treaties authenticated in two or more k

1. When a treaty has been authenticated in two or more languages,
the text is equally authoritative in each language, unless the treaty provides
or the parties agree that, in case of divergence, a particular text shall
prevail.

2. A version of the treaty in a language other than one of those in
which the text was authenticated shall be considered an authentic text only if
the treaty so provides or the parties so agree.

3. The terms of the treaty are presumed to have the same meaning in
each authentic text.

4. Except where a particular text prevails in accordance with
paragraph 1, when a comparison of the authentic texts discloses a difference
of meaning which the application of articles 31 and 32 does not remove, the
meaning which best reconciles the texts, having regard to the object and
purpose of the treaty, shall be adopted.

In accordance with Article 33(1), the two authentic texts are thus to be regarded as equally
authoritative. Further, in accordance with the rule of interpretation embodied in Article 33(3),
the terms of the treaty are to be presumed to have the same meaning in both authentic texts.
Finally, under Article 33(4), when comparison of the authentic texts reveals a difference in
meaning that cannot be resolved through application of the normal methods of interpretation
contained in Articles 31 and 32 the solution is to be found in the meaning which, in the light of
the object and purpose of the treaty, best reconciles the texts.

Approaching the question on that basis, the two terms are to be presumed to have the same
meaning. In light of the fact that, in the end, the Respondent did not dispute that the German
word “angelegt” can only properly be translated as “invested”, whilst the Parties appear to be
in agreement that the Czech-language term “viozené” can bear the meaning either of “invested”
or “contributed”, in application of the presumption contained in Article 33(3) VCLT, and in
the context of the surrounding provisions of Article 1(1), the Tribunal concludes that the
appropriate translation into English is that, in order to constitute an “investment”, an asset must
have been “invested” in the ordinary sense of that term.:

95

3.157

3.158

3.159

3.160

3.161

3.162

3.163

3.164

As to the second question, the Respondent appeared to suggest in its Reply on Jurisdiction that,
even if the word “vlozZené/angelegt” was properly to be understood as having the meaning in
English of “invested”, rather than “contributed”, nevertheless there was still a requirement that
the relevant assets had been “invested” in some meaningful sense by an investor, and that this
was not the case in the present case insofar as neither of the Claimants could be taken to have
“invested” in their shareholding or participatory rights in Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha.

The Tribunal does not believe that the Respondent’s reliance on the fact that the BIT makes
separate provision as regards “returns” as forming part of the context for the interpretation for
Article 1(1) is of any assistance in determining the scope and meaning of the term
“investment” in the BIT. Whether or not separate provision is made in relation to “returns”
and particular protections are provided in that regard does not govern the scope of the meaning
of “investment”.

Conversely, the Tribunal does not consider that the Claimants’ invocation of the Preamble to
the BIT, as containing an indication that the BIT’s object and purpose was to promote foreign
investment, takes matters much further. It agrees with the Respondent that this argument begs
the question of whether or not a particular asset constitutes a protected investment.

Rather, the question is whether, in light of the Tribunal’s conclusion that Article 1(1) of the
BIT is to be properly translated as encompassing every kind of asset which has been
“invested”, the Claimants’ shareholding or other participatory interests in Tschechien 7 and
ECE Praha are properly to be regarded as falling within that definition.

The Tribunal has no doubt that this is indeed the case, and that, on the ordinary meaning of the
terms of Article 1(1), in particular given its express reference to “shares of companies and
other kinds of interest in companies” in Article 1(1)(b), the Claimants’ shareholdings or other
participatory interests in Tschechien7 and ECE Praha do indeed constitute “assets”, and
therefore “investments” within the scope of that provision, and sees no basis for imposing a
requirement that those assets should in some additional way have been “contributed”.

Further, the Tribunal sees no basis for excluding “derivative claims” by shareholders or other
participants in companies which constitute investments, not least for the reason that the
Protocol states Ad Article 4 that “An investor is also entitled to compensation where a measure
set out in Article 4(2) harms the investment by affecting an undertaking in which the investor
has an interest”

On that basis, the Tribunal rejects the Respondent’s objection that the Claimants do not have
an “investment” within the meaning of Article 1(1) of the BIT.

The Respondent’s Objection to Jurisdiction Based on legality

As to the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction based on the illegality of the Claimants’
conduct, the Tribunal notes that although originally put forward on the basis of both the
suspected illegality in the acquisition of the plots of project land and the illegality of the
groundworks conducted by the Claimants, in its Counter-Memorial the Respondent disclaimed
any reliance on the former, and the objection was based solely upon the alleged illegality of the

96

 

3.165

3.166

3.167

3.168

3.169

3.170

groundworks (above, paragraph 3.73). The Tribunal need not therefore address any further the
circumstances of the acquisition of the project land, and whether it involved any illegality.

The Tribunal notes that the definition of “investment” in Article 1(1) of the BIT expressly
requires that the assets constituting the investment should have been invested “in conformity
with domestic law”. As such, the Tribunal is of the view that under the BIT applicable in the
present case compliance with domestic law constitutes an express requirement of an
investment.

However, on the ordinary meaning of the terms, whatever the position may be under other,
differently worded BITs, the Tribunal agrees with the Claimants that that requirement cannot
be interpreted as conditioning the existence of an investment within the meaning of Article
1(1) upon compliance by the investor with all applicable rules of domestic law throughout the
life of the investment. This should not however be taken as denying the obligation of an
investor to comply with domestic law during the lifetime of an investment, or as implying that
a failure to do so may have consequences for the merits of that investor’s claim.

Further, the Tribunal does not accept the Respondent’s argument that the making of the
investment in this case was an ongoing process, and that, given the illegality of the excavations
after 18 June 2008, the Tribunal’s jurisdiction is in any event excluded after that date. The
Tribunal notes in this regard that the “investment” relied upon by the Claimants is their
shareholding or other participatory interests in Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha.

The Tribunal is therefore of the view that the assessment of whether the Claimants’ investment
was made “in conformity with domestic law” for the purposes of Article 1(1) of the BIT falls
to be made at the inception of the investment, i.e. at the point at which the Claimants acquired
their relevant rights in the project companies, and is limited to whether the way in which the
Claimants acquired their investment was in conformity with Czech law. The Respondent raised
no criticism that the acquisition by the Claimants of their investment was not in all material
respects in conformity with Czech law, and as noted above, in the event further disclaimed any
reliance on the suggestion that the manner in which the project lands had been acquired by
Tschechien 7 involved any illegality.

The Parties debated at some length the extent to which illegality connected with an investment
might affect the jurisdiction of a Tribunal to rule upon a claim more generally, even in the
absence of express language in the relevant bilateral investment treaty requiring compliance
with domestic law. However, the cases in which tribunals have found that they are without
jurisdiction on the basis of illegality, on analysis, have all concerned illegality of a particularly
serious nature connected with the initial making of the investment, such as corruption, or fraud.

In the present case, the relevant illegality relied upon by the Respondent consists of a violation
of Czech administrative law relating to excavations in excess of the amounts permitted by the
planning permit obtained in relation to the Galerie project. Although the Tribunal does not
doubt that the rules of Czech law relating to planning and pre-authorization of construction
work are of central significance in the overall scheme of Czech planning law, those rules
cannot be characterized as being of the same order of gravity as the rules outlawing corruption
or fraud.

97

3.171

3.172

3.173

3.174

3.175

3.176

3.177

In these circumstances, the Tribunal is of the view that breach of those provisions, even if
established, and even if committed deliberately by an investor (a question to which the
Tribunal will return later in the context of its discussion of the merits of the claims), is
incapable of affecting its jurisdiction. At most, the breach by the Claimants of the relevant
tules of Czech law is relevant to the merits of the Claimants’ claims.

On that basis, the Tribunal is of the view that whatever illegality may have occurred in the
context of the excavation works connected with the Galerie project does not affect the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal to rule on the Claimants’ claims, and on that basis rejects the
Respondent’s objection.

In these circumstance it is not necessary for the Tribunal to address, for the purposes of
establishing its own jurisdiction, either the argument that the Respondent is precluded from
relying on the alleged illegality in consequence of what is alleged to be its improper conduct in
gathering evidence in relation to the alleged illegality of the groundworks following the
sending of the Trigger Letter by the Claimants, or in the alternative that the Respondent is
estopped from relying on the illegality of the excessive groundworks.

The Respondent’s Objections to Jurisdiction Ratione Materiae and Ratione Temporis
in Respect of Obsolete Expenses

Given the manner in which the Respondent reformulated its objections to jurisdiction ratione
materiae and ratione temporis in relation to obsolete expenses in its Counter-Memorial, it is
convenient to deal with the two objections together.

The Tribunal notes that, as originally formulated, the objection ratione temporis consisted of a
general objection that the Claimants were not entitled to raise a complaint under the BIT in
respect of any action of the Respondent occurring prior to the Claimants’ acquisition of their
respective investments consisting of their shareholding or other participation in Tschechien 7
and ECE Praha.

Had the Claimants sought to rely on any conduct prior to acquisition of their respective
investments as constituting a breach of the BIT, the objection would in principle have been
well-founded; however, in light of the Claimants’ confirmation that they did not in fact rely on
any conduct of the Respondent prior to their acquisition of their investments in Tschechien 7
and ECE Praha as constituting a breach of the BIT, the objection to jurisdiction becomes moot.
It retains its life only to the extent that the Tribunal will, in its treatment of the merits, pay
particular attention to assuring itself that the claims for adjudication do relate exclusively to
conduct falling properly with the scope of the BIT ratione temporis.

As reformulated, the objection to jurisdiction ratione temporis seems to the Tribunal to be
closely connected to the objection to jurisdiction ratione materiae. Both objections are of
limited scope, and go to the question of the extent to which the Tribunal has jurisdiction over
the claims made by the Claimants in respect of losses allegedly suffered as the result of
obsolete expenses incurred by subsidiaries of the Claimants within the ECE Group other than
ECE Praha and Tschechien 7.

98

3.178

3.179

3.180

As explained by the Respondent, the point arises due to the “relatively late and sequenced
acquisition” by the Claimants of the subsidiaries whose obsolete expenses it claims.**’ In its
ratione materiae form, the objection is that the Claimants cannot claim for damages in respect
of obsolete expenses incurred by subsidiaries except to the extent that those subsidiaries were
owned by the Claimants, and therefore constituted their investments within the meaning of
Article 1(1) of the BIT. In its ratione temporis version, the objection is that the Tribunal has
no jurisdiction over Claimants’ claims for damages for obsolete expenses incurred by their
subsidiaries save insofar as the latter actually represented investments of the Claimants at the
time those expenses were said to have been incurred.

In the opinion of the Tribunal the argument underlying these objections is in principle valid.
That does not however automatically mean that it is an argument of a preliminary character
going to jurisdiction itself, in the strict sense. Under Article 10(2) of the BIT, read in
conjunction with Article 10(1), the Respondent has given its consent to the submission to
arbitration by this Tribunal of [disputes relating to}**? investments between either Contracting
Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party. Taken literally and in isolation, this
phrase could be read as encompassing any dispute between the parties so identified, so long as
the dispute had some relationship with an ‘investment’, and without regard, that is, to whether
the subject of the dispute was an allegation by that particular investor that the host State had
breached the investor’s specific rights, as guaranteed under the BIT, in respect of that specific
investment. To read Article 10 in this way would not however make good sense, and would
not, in the Tribunal’s view, be in accordance with the regime for interpretation laid down in the
Vienna Convention, which lays down as the fundamental rule that the search for the proper
interpretation of treaty language must always view the natural meaning of the words in their
context, and in the light of the treaty’s object and purpose. Many bilateral investment treaties
are drawn in terms rather more specific than those used in Article 10. The Tribunal is
nevertheless in no doubt that, if one looks at the text of the BIT as a whole in the light of its
overall purpose, the less precise text of Article 10 was intended to achieve the same result.
The universe of possible disputes that would fall within the ‘jurisdiction’ of an arbitral tribunal,
in the formal sense of its competence to adjudicate on them, is thus coextensive with the
universe of possible claims in respect of which an investor could properly seek a substantive
remedy from an arbitral tribunal for the breach of its rights under the treaty as a result of the
host State’s treatment of its investment.

That conclusion having once been reached, it becomes immaterial whether the point raised by
the Respondent in the present case is understood as a strictly ‘jurisdictional’ objection in the
narrow sense, or as a broader plea of inadmissibility which the Tribunal ought to dispose of as
a preliminary matter, or as a matter going to the merits, since in either of the first two cases the
objection would be so closely tied up with the substantive, content of the Claimants’ claims that
a tribunal would properly join it to the merits. It had however, been established from the outset
in the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1 that preliminary objections and substantive merits
should be argued in parallel with one another.

38 Counter-Memorial, para. 274; above, paragraph 3.127.
382 The Respondent’s wording for the translation of the paragraph, but the point here discussed is independent of the
disagreement between the Parties over the translation.

99

 

3.181

3.182

3.183

Although, as noted above, the Claimants specified that they make no claim of breach of the
BIT in respect of the conduct of the Respondent prior to 6 July 2007, and implicitly accept that
PANTA had no investment in Tschechien 7 prior to 1 July 2007 and that ECE International
had no investment in ECE Praha prior to 11 January 2007, this does not touch the Tribunal’s
competence to have regard to relevant events prior to the earliest of these dates insofar as those
events constitute part of the background against which it must rule upon the allegations over
which it does have jurisdiction.

Conclusions on Jurisdiction

In the light of the above, the Tribunal:

a. holds that the Claimants’ respective shareholdings and other participatory interests in
Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha constitute investments within the meaning of Article
1(1) of the BIT and rejects the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction based on the
Claimants’ lack of an investment;

b. rejects the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction on the basis of illegality;

c. joins to the merits the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction ratione materiae and
ratione temporis as reformulated in the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial.

The Tribunal will therefore proceed to consider the arguments of the Parties on the merits of
the dispute.

100

41

42

43

44

45

ParRTIV
THE MERITS OF THE CLAIMANTS’
CLAIMS OF BREACH OF THE BIT

A. INTRODUCTION

The core of the Claimants’ claims in the present arbitration is that improper delays in the
administrative proceedings relating to the necessary Planning and Building Permits for the
construction of the Galerie project resulted in their being forced to abandon the project.

More specifically, the Claimants’ case is:

a. that the various decisions of the Respondent’s authorities resulted in delays which
violated the standards laid down in the BIT;

db. that the consequence of those delays was that the opening date for the Galerie project
had to be pushed back;

c that as a result, anchor tenants were lost; and

d. that in turn the loss of key tenants, combined with the continued uncertainty over the

opening date had so severe an effect on the profitability of the project that the
Claimants had no alternative but to abandon it.

The Claimants’ claims are thus premised not only upon showing a breach of one or more of the
relevant standards of protection contained in the BIT, but also in showing that the breach or
breaches caused the abandonment of the project and the consequential loss.

An essential element in this context, without which the allegedly key importance of the
opening date for the Claimants’ Galerie project cannot be understood, is the existence of the
rival shopping centre project being constructed by Multi, in very close proximity to the Galerie
project. The Multi project, Forum, would not only have been in direct competition with the
Claimants’ Galerie project for customers in the event that both opened, but was also, during the
period of permitting and construction relevant to the dispute, in fierce competition with the
Claimants to secure tenants in advance of their respective anticipated openings.

The Respondent's essential position is that the administrative proceedings were conducted in
an entirely proper manner and that none of the decisions adopted by the relevant authorities
resulted in a breach of the BIT. The Respondent argues further that the great majority of the
delays were caused by the Claimants’ failure to file complete and timely applications with the
relevant authorities. The Respondent also takes issue with the Claimants’ assertion that they
were forced to terminate the project because of the delays in the permitting proceedings, the
loss of anchor tenants, and the alleged uncertainty, and suggest that the real reason why the
Claimants aborted the project was due to “their own bad business judgment, poor local

101

 

4.6

47

48

49

management and the effect of the worldwide crisis in the real estate market in Central and
p> 383

Eastern Europe”.
There is thus a substantial dispute between the Parties not only as to whether anything done by
the relevant authorities of the Respondent breached the BIT, but also as to whether there is any
causal link between any such breach of the BIT (if established) and the decision of the
Claimants’ to abandon the project (and, indeed, when that decision was actually taken), and
thus as to whether any loss suffered by the Claimants resulted from the breaches alleged.

In the present Part, the Tribunal examines the merits of the Claimants’ claims of breach of the
BIT, without examining in detail the added layer of complication resulting from the dispute
between the Parties as to what was in fact the cause of the abandonment of the project, and as
to when the decision to abandon was taken. Nevertheless, given that they are fundamentally
intertwined, the positions of the Parties on the merits of the Claimants’ claims and as to the
reasons for abandonment and causation are set out together in the following section. The
Tribunal’s decision as to the date and cause of the abandonment and the issues of causation is
then addressed separately in Part V below.

B. POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES.

The Claimants’ Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim

Alleged Breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard (Article 2(1) BIT)

In the Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, the Claimants put forward their case of
breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard on two fronts. First, they recalled that the
Tribunal in Tecmed had held that the fair and equitable treatment standard required States to
provide to investments treatment that does not affect the basic expectations that were taken
into account by the foreign investor in making its investment. Second, relying on the decisions
in Metalclad, Occidental, and Waste Management, they argued that the concept of due process
“concretizes the principle of fair and equitable treatment with regard to administrative
proceedings and requires that the host state acts transparently and predictably vis-a-vis foreign
investors and, therefore, permits them to plan and organize their investments.*** The
Claimants’ position was that in general terms the breach by a State of its own laws both
violated the requirement of predictability under the fair and equitable treatment standard, and
was per se unfair.

As to the facts of the present case, the substance of the Claimants’ allegation of breach of the
BIT under the heading of the fair and equitable treatment standard was that the relevant
authorities had repeatedly failed to comply with the applicable rules of Czech administrative

38 See e.g, Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 3.

38 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 213, citing Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1), Award of 30 August 2000, para. 99; Occidental Exploration and Production
Company v. Republic of Ecuador (LCIA Case No. UN3467), Final Award of 1 July 2004, para. 183; and Waste
Management Inc. v. United Mexican States (No. 2) (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3), Final Award of 30 April 2004,

para. 98.

102

4.10

4.11

4.12

law, and had thereby created “a significant delay that prevented Claimants from enjoying the
benefits of their investment”.**° In support of this, multiple allegations of violation of
applicable Czech administrative law were made in relation to both the Planning Permission
Proceedings (with particular emphasis being placed upon the delays in the extraordinary
review proceedings), the Building Proceedings (including in particular as regards the Third
Stay adopted by MAL), and the conduct of the Groundworks Removal Proceedings.

The Claimants argued that “the complete lack of transparency and the lack of adherence to
Respondent’s own laws, which led to the temporary revocation of a lawfully rendered Planning
Permit and to an unlawful stay of the building permit proceedings for several months,
manifestly offends judicial propriety”,** and that “the Respondent’s conduct during the
Planning and the Building Permit Proceedings, which was undisputedly unlawful under
Respondent’s own laws, violated Claimants’ fair expectations to receive from Respondent fair
and equitable treatment” and that therefore there had been a violation of the fair and equitable

treatment standard contained in Article 2(1) of the BIT.3®”

Alleged Breach of the Prohibition of Impairment of Investments by Arbitrary or
Discriminatory Measures (Article 2(2) BIT)

Second, the Claimants asserted, relying on Article 2(2) of the BIT, that the “erratic and
unexplainable conduct” of the administrative authorities “violated Claimants’ legitimate
expectation to be protected against arbitrary measures”.°**

The Claimants asserted that the Respondent “impaired Claimants’ enjoyment of its investment
in Tschechien 7 through the arbitrary measures of its authorities i.e. MAL, the Ministry and the
Minster”, invoking in particular:

a. the fact that, despite the underlying facts not having changed, the Ministry in the First
Ministry Decision decided to remand the case back to RAL, but thereafter in the
Second Ministry Decision decided to revoke the planning permit entirely with the
consequence that the proceedings in relation to Tschechien7’s application for
planning permission would have had to be recommenced from the beginning;**

b. the fact that the Minister, despite the underlying facts and parties being identical,
decided the same case in different ways in the First and Second Minister Decisions.”
The Claimants referred also to the fact that the Minster acted in contradiction of the
opinion of the Advisory Committee;**!

c. MAL/’s various decisions to stay the building permit proceedings; in particular as
regards the Third Stay, the Claimants invoked the fact that the decision to stay was so

385 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para, 214
38 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 215.
387 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para, 216.
388 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 217-218.
38° Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 220.
3° Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 220.
5°! Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 220.

103

4.13

4.14

4.15

4.16

obviously unlawful that RAL “felt it necessary to explicitly stress in writing on
several occasions that it was impossible to legally defend the position MAL had
taken”,2%

On that basis, it was asserted that the Claimants’ investment had been “frustrated” by a
“multitude of violations of administrative legal provisions on the adherence to which
Claimants had relied when making their investments”. The conduct of the Ministry and
Minister for Regional Development in the extraordinary review proceedings was qualified as
“erratic”, and that conduct was said to have been “completed” by MAL’s conduct in adopting
the Third Stay.°°?

Finally, the Claimants pointed to the fact that the Ministry for Regional Development
“{ntervened” in the Groundworks Removal Proceedings and Administrative Offence
Proceedings as confirming “Respondent’s preparedness to act arbitrarily when it serves its
purposes”.°* They emphasized that the Ministry had had no competence under Czech law to
interfere in the administrative proceedings, and submitted that it did so in an attempt to create
an “obstacle” for the present proceedings, and had also sought to place pressure on officials
within MAL.°°°

Alleged Breach of the Obligation to Admit Investments (Article 2(1) BIT)

The Claimants in addition claimed that the conduct by the agencies of the Respondent of the
Planning Permit and Building Permit Proceedings violated not only the Respondent’s own
domestic law, but also the obligation under Article 2(1) of the BIT to admit the Claimants’
investments “in accordance with its legislation”.°°°

The Claimants asserted that the Second Minister decision confirmed that both the First and
Second Ministry Decisions had been unlawful, and that, regardless of any flaws in RAL’s
decision to dismiss appeals against the Planning Permit, under the applicable legislation, the
rights acquired by the Claimants under the Planning Permit and its reliance thereon were such
as to override any concerns as to the lawfulness of the Planning Permit. The Claimants asserted
that the First Minister decision “should have come to that conclusion, rendering also the First
Minister Decision unlawful.”

In addition, the Claimants asserted that, as confirmed by the decisions of RAL in relation to the
appeals against the Third Stay adopted by MAL, the Third Stay of the Building Permit
Proceedings was unlawful as the fact that the Extraordinary Review Proceedings were pending
did not affect the final and binding status of the Planning Permit.>*

+? Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 221.

393

Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 222.

3° Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 223.
35 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 223.
36 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para, 225.
7 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para, 228.

398

Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 229.

104

 

4.18

4.19

4.20

4.21

Alleged Breach of the Prohibition of Expropriation (Article 4 BIT)

Fourth, the Claimants asserted that the conduct of the Respondent’s agencies in the Planning
Permit and Building Permit Proceedings amounted to “a measure tantamount to expropriation”
for the purposes of the prohibition of expropriation, nationalization and measures having
effects tantamount thereto contained in Article 4(2) of the BIT.

Relying on the observations of the Metalclad tribunal that the prohibition of expropriation
(under Article 1110 NAFTA) extendsed to “incidental interference with the use of property
which has the effect of depriving the owner, in whole or in significant part, of the use or
reasonably-to-be expected economic benefit of property”,°” the Claimants noted that the
intended use of the property as a retail centre was legitimate and that the Planning Permit was
lawful and binding; alleged that the Respondent prevented the Claimants “from their intended
use” because the Planning Permit was revoked during the Extraordinary Review Proceedings ;
and argued that the delays caused by the administrative proceedings “created a situation in
which Claimants could no longer pursue their intention to develop, sell and manage the retail
centre”, such that the Claimants could “no longer reap the intended economic benefits from
their property”.4°°

The Claimants argued that the interference by the Respondent with the Claimants’ rights was
of sufficient “intensity” to qualify as indirect expropriation; they stated that the

classic case of a sufficiently severe violation of an investor’s rights is where
the host state violates an investor’s legitimate expectations through lawful,
but modified conduct. The current situation is significantly worse:
Claimants’ legitimate expectations, and their decision to set up Tschechien 7
as a project company for the Galerie Project, were based on
adherence of Respondent's organs to their domestic laws. But Respondent
undisputedly violated its domestic laws on several occasions, but during the
Planning Permit and the Building Permit Proceedings. In terms of
restricting an already acquired legal position, the most severe violation of
Claimants’ legitimate expectations was the Second Ministry Decision, which
de facto took away from Claimants the planning security already acquired
through a binding planning permit. In such a situation, Claimants could no
longer implement their business plan — and cannot do so in the future.“

Finally, whilst acknowledging that they remained in possession of the land constituting the
project site on which the Galerie project was to be developed, and had the requisite permits and
approvals, the Claimants asserted that the land plots were worthless to Claimants because
“their concept for development of a retail centre can no longer be pursued. The business
opportunity related to Galerie is forever gone, which is tantamount to a taking of the
rights arising from Claimants’ investment.“

3° Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 235, quoting Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1), Award of 30 August 2000, para. 103.

4 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 236.

4} Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 237.

4 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 238.

105

 

 

4.22

2.

4.23

4.24

4.25

4.26

4.27

“Non-Discrimination”

In addition, although not formally alleging a breach in this regard, the Claimants stated in
general terms that they had “reason to believe that Respondent has also breached its duty of
non-discrimination under the BIT”, and reserved their rights to “submit further facts, evidence
and legal conclusions, including through requests for document production.”4

The Respondent’s Answer to the Statement of Claim

Overview and Factual Matters

At the outset of its Answer to the Statement of Claim, the Respondent asserted that the
Claimants’ claim constituted a “thinly-veiled attempt by Claimants to use the [BIT] as an
insurance policy against their bad business judgment and poor local management”.*™

The Respondent charged that the Claimants had misrepresented the conduct of the relevant
administrative proceedings; omitted to inform the Tribunal of their contribution to the delay of
the proceedings; asserted with no supporting evidence that the alleged delays caused the
abandonment of the project; and “asserted a damage claim seemingly from thin air.“

As regards the third matter, the issue of causation of the abandonment of the project, the
Respondent emphasized that the burden lay with the Claimants to establish that actions of the
Respondent had in fact caused them to abandon their project.*

The Respondent explained that 10 of the 22 months between December 2006, when the
application for a Planning Permit was made, and October 2008, the point in time at which the
Claimants asserted that they abandoned the project, was attributable to delays caused by the
actions of Tschechien 7.” The Respondent further argued that it had been impossible for the
Galerie Liberec project to open in the Autumn of 2009 as the Claimants assert they had
originally expected, and that, as a result of the delays, the earliest the Claimants could have
expected the opening of the Galeriec Liberec centre was February 2011.4

As to the cause of the supposed delays, the Respondent pointed first to the filing of the
incomplete application for planning permission in late December 2006, which was only
remedied in May 2007, resulting in a delay of five months before the Planning Permit
Proceedings effectively began.“ The Respondent further highlighted that the Planning Permit
was thereafter issued on 16 July 2007, and having been confirmed on appeal by RAL, became
effective on 21 December 2007."° In that connection, the Respondent emphasized that the

43 Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, para. 239.
494 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 3.

“5 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 11.

40° Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 14.

407 Answer to Statement of Claim, paras. 15-18.

408 Answer to Statement of Claim, paras. 19-20,

49 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 16.

410 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 17.

106

4.28

4,29

effectiveness of the Planning Permit was not affected by the Extraordinary Review
Proceedings before the Ministry for Regional Development, and that the Claimants were able,
and in fact did, proceed with their applications for the Building Permits."”!

Second, the Respondent highlighted that the Claimants did not in fact complete the application
for the Building Permit until the end of May 2008, a further five months after the Planning
Permit had become effective."!”

As to the effect of the delays, the Respondent argued that in light of the relevant statutory rules
applicable to the conduct of administrative proceedings and Tschechien 7’s own estimates as to
the time necessary for construction, at least 40 months were required between the submission
of a complete application for a planning permit and the opening of the centre.*!> That position
was taken on the basis that:

a. taking account of the relevant statutory time-limits and requirements as to the display
of notices, and assuming that there would be appeals against the decision of MAL, at
least six and a half months (195 days) was required from the filing of a complete
application for planning permission, and the entry into legal effect of the Planning
Permit;*!*

b. a period of at least two months was normally required between the issue of an
effective building permit and the submission of a complete application for building
permits, given the complexity of the detailed construction plans and documents
required, and the need to comply with any specific terms contained in the Planning
Permit;*?°

c. again taking account of relevant statutory time-limits and requirements as to the
display of notices, and again assuming that there were appeals against the decision of
the municipal authority, at least a further six and a half months (195 days) was
required from the filing of a complete application for a Building Permit, and the
coming into legal effect of a Building Permit;

d. the Claimants themselves had estimated that the actual construction phase of the
416

project would take 23 months;

e. the issuing of Occupancy Approvals would take at least 45 days, even assuming that
no major issues were identified which required rectification. On that basis, the
Respondent estimated that two months was a reasonable provision for the final
issuance of Occupancy Approvals.*!”

“1 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 17.

“12 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 18.

“3 Answer to Statement of Claim, paras. 19 and 70.

*!4 Answer to Statement of Claim, paras. 58.

“15 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 66.

416 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 68. ‘
“17 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 69.

107

 

 

4.30

4.31

4.32

4.33

As such, the Respondent submitted that an opening in Autumn 2009 would only have been
possible if Tschechien 7 had filed a complete application for planning permission towards the
beginning of the Summer of 2006, rather than in May 2007.*"8 Given that the complete
planning permit application had in fact been filed in May 2007, the Respondent asserted that
the earliest possible opening, assuming the speedy filing of an application for a building permit
would have been early Autumn 2010; however, given the fact that a period of five months
elapsed before a complete application for the main Building Permit was filed, the Respondent
asserted that the earliest possible opening date became February 2011.41

On that basis, the Respondent asserted that the Claimants’ claims that the project had to be
abandoned in October 2008 as a result of the anchor tenants withdrawing because a Spring
2010 opening was not possible were false.“”°

By way of summary of its case on the merits, the Respondent asserted that, even assuming
Claimants’ factual allegations were true, the claim would nevertheless fail on the law, given
that all of the Claimants’ claims related to allegations that the Czech administrative bodies
issued incorrect decisions and caused unjustifiable delays in administrative proceedings, and
were therefore, in reality, disguised claims for denial of justice.*7!_The Respondent noted that
the Claimants had not discussed issues of exhaustion of local remedies, and asserted that this
was because all of the decisions of which complaint was made were either successfully
appealed, appeals were lodged, but out of time, or no appeal was filed at all. The Respondent
argued that although the Claimants had put forward claims as to breaches of a number of
provisions of the BIT, analysis of the real nature of the claims disclosed that they were in
reality claims for denial of justice, and that the applicable standard for denial of justice under
international law required dismissal of the Claimants’ claims.*”

The Respondent further argued that the Claimants’ claims in any case failed on the merits, on
the basis that:

a. insofar as the Claimants alleged violation of their legitimate expectations, the
Respondent never made any representations, and the Claimants’ alleged estimates as
to timing were unrealistic;

b. a mere violation of procedural rules did not ipso facto result in a violation of the fair

and equitable treatment standard;

c. relying on the decision of the International Court of Justice in ELSI, a first instance
decision which has been quashed cannot be held to be ipso facto arbitrary;

d, insofar as the Claimants made complaint as to the admission of their investments,
there was no dispute that the Claimants acquired their interests in Tschechien 7 and
ECE Praha without any interference; and

418 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 19.
*!° Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 20.
“9 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 21.
“21 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 22.
“2 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 22-23

108

4.34

4.35

4.36

4.37

e. there was no indirect expropriation, insofar as the Claimants retained full ownership
and control over both Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha, and over the project land owned
by Tschechien 7.‘

The Respondent also criticized the Claimants’ conduct subsequent to the supposed decision to
abandon the project, which they noted the Claimants claimed was reached in October 2008. In
particular, the Respondent noted that the Claimants had at no point informed the building
authorities that it was no longer interested in completing the project, nor had it withdrawn the
applications for building permits.‘ The Respondent further criticized the conduct of
Tschechien 7 in filing an appeal against the Building Permit for the Main Construction, as well
in not appealing the decision by RAL to stay the appellate proceedings in relation to the
Building Permits.“ The Respondent submitted that the Claimants’ “dilatory conduct” had
been intended to cause further delay in the hope of creating support for their investment
claims.*”6

In the context of its discussion of events subsequent to the date on which the Claimants
allegedly abandoned the project, the Respondent also laid down a general marker that, on the
basis of the Claimants’ claims, events subsequent to the alleged date of abandonment in
October 2008 could not have been causative of the supposed forced abandonment, and were
therefore of no relevance for assessment of the Claimants’ claims of breach of the BIT.*””

In addition, the Respondent criticized Tschechien 7’s conduct in the Planning and Building
Proceedings as being inconsistent with the Claimants’ asserted expectation that the opening
date of Galerie would be in Spring 2010,” making reference in particular to:

a. the delay between December 2006 and May 2007 in providing the complete
documentation supporting the application for a Planning Permit, with the result the
Respondent asserted, that, already at that stage, the opening date could have been no
earlier than September 2010;*”

b. the delay in submitting complete applications for the various Building Permits, the
complete documentation only having been submitted on May 2008, with the result
that, so the Respondent asserted, the opening date would have had to have been
pushed back to, at earliest February 2011 30

The Respondent argued in summary that the various proceedings were, overall, conducted in a
manner which was favourable to the Claimants, and were throughout conducted in a timely,
fair and transparent manner, with Tschechien 7 having the opportunity to seek redress for any

#3 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 24.

424 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 100

45 Answer to Statement of Claim, paras. 101-102
426 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 103

7 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 103.

48 Answer to Statement of Claim, paras. 114.

#9 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 114.

40 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 115.

109

 

 

4,38

4.39

4.40

correct decisions or delay.“*! By way of amplification, the Respondent noted that, although the
Galerie project resulted in vigorous opposition from a variety of quarters, the appeals by
individual residents (supported by Cisté Mésta), as well as by Multi, ultimately were all
rejected.‘*” Further, the Respondent submitted that the authorities on a number of occasions
acted of their own motion to Tschechien 7’s benefit; in particular, referring to MAL’s decision
of 29 October 2008 to recommence the Building Proceedings, it noted that despite the fact that
the appeals-by Tschechien7 had been filed late, and were dismissed by RAL on that basis,
MAL in effect gave relief of the form sought by Tschechien 7 in its appeals.**?

Merits of the Claimants’ claims

As to the merits of the Claimants’ claims of breach of the BIT, the Respondent characterized
all of the various claims as essentially relating to the allegation that the Czech authorities
issued incorrect decisions and caused delays in the administrative proceedings, and submitted
that all of those claims were in reality disguised claims for denial of justice.*** On that basis it
submitted that the Claimants’ claims did not rise to the elevated standard required for a finding
of breach on that basis.‘** In the alternative, even if the standards of denial of justice were held
not to apply, the Respondent’s position was that the Claimants’ claims in any case failed on the
merits.“

i.__ Denial of Justice

As to the assertion that the Claimants’ claims were in reality disguised denial of justice claims,
the Respondent, relying on the decision in Amco Asia, argued that the standards of denial of
justice applied equally to administrative proceedings as they do to proceedings before judicial
or quasi-judicial bodies.*®’ On that basis, it argued that the Claimants’ claims failed because
the Claimants did not complain of any measure which went unredressed by the mechanisms
available under Czech administrative law, and, in any case, the conduct of the relevant Czech
authorities had not risen to the level required in order to find a denial of justice.“**

By way of amplification of the first issue, the Respondent pointed to the normal requirement
under international Jaw in relation to a claim for denial of justice that available local remedies
must be exhausted, and argued that the finality of the decision challenged constitutes a
substantive element of the standard.*” The Respondent argued that Czech Republic could not
be held to have caused a denial of justice unless it had been given the “opportunity to remedy

the alleged wrongdoing by the operation of its domestic system of remedies”, and referring

“" Answer to Statement of Claim, paras. 117 and 118.

432

Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 117.

433 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 118.

434 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 119.

435 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 121.

436 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 121.

437 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 123, citing Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID
Case ARB/81/1), Award in Resubmitted Proceeding of 5 June 1990, para. 59.

438 Answer to Statement of Claim, para 125.

43° Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 126.

440 Answer to Statement of Claim,, para. 126

110

441

4.42

4.43

to the decision in Jan de Nul, argued that it was only if the system as a whole had been tested
and the initial wrongful decision had remained uncorrected (or there were no effective remedy
available, or any remedy would have had no reasonable prospect of success), that the State
could be held liable.“*! Relying upon the observations of the tribunal in Jan de Nul, the
Respondent further argued that a single unfair first instance decision cannot per se constitute a
breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard.“

As to the merits of the claims, assessed against the denial of justice standard, the Respondent
took the position that every single decision of which the Claimants complained was either
successfully appealed, the appeal was lodged after the relevant statutory time limit had expired,
or no efforts were made to lodge an appeal.“ In this regard, it emphasized that:

a. the First and Second Ministry Decisions had ultimately been overturned by the
Minister in the Second Minister Decision;

b. Tschechien 7 had not appealed MAL’s decisions constituting the Third Stay within
the applicable time limit; and

c. Tschechien 7 had not appealed RAL’s decision to stay the appellate proceedings in
relation to the main building permit (Construction 1).““

In addition, the Respondent pointed to the fact that Tschechien 7 at no point made use of the
remedies available as regards a failure to act under section 80 CAP.““°

On that basis, the Respondent asserted that “none of the alleged bases for the claimed denial of
justice satisfies the requirement of finality and exhaustion of local remedies. That alone is fatal
to all of Claimants’ claims”.“6

As to the second issue in relation to denial of justice, the Respondent posited that the
applicable standard for a denial of justice was a high one.“*” It referred to the decision in
Loewen for the proposition that a finding of denial of justice requires a conclusion that there
has been “manifest injustice in the sense of a lack of due process leading to an outcome which
offends a sense of judicial propriety”,“* as well as invoking Paulsson’s suggestion that the
standard requires that “the factual circumstances must be egregious if state responsibility is to
arise on the grounds of denial of justice”. It further noted, relying on Jan de Nul and on
Pantechniki, that “mere unlawfulness or error in the interpretation of domestic law cannot

“41 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 127, citing Jan de Nul N.V. and Dredging International N.V. v. Arab Republic
of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/13), Award of 6 November 2008, paras. 258-259.

#2 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 128.

“4 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 129.

“4 Answer to Statement of Claim, paras, 129-131.

5 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 132.

“© Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 133.

“7 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 134,

448 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 134, citing The Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United States of
America (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3), Award of 26 June 2003, para. 132.

“4 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 134, citing J. Paulsson, Denial of Justice in International Law (CUP, 2005), p.

60.

Md

 

4.44

4.45

4.46

4.47

4.48

amount to a breach of due process or a denial of justice if there was no breach of the investor’s
fundamental rights to participate and defend itself in the proceedings.”**°

As regards the facts, the Respondent argued that, even assuming the Claimants’ claims to be
true, the alleged irregularities in the planning and building proceedings fell well below the
requisite level.°' The Respondent noted that Claimants had made no allegation of
fundamental breach of procedural rights, of any lack of transparency, that Tschechien 7 did not
have access to all relevant files, or that Tschechien7 was in any way deprived of its
opportunity to be heard.***

The Respondent further argued that the overall length of the Planning and Building
Proceedings did not rise to the level of a denial of justice, noting that both MAL and RAL had
delivered their decisions within the relevant statutory time periods.‘ It further argued that
minor delays, such as that resulting from the early removal of the notification of opening of the
Planning Proceedings, and the short delay in the transmission of the file from MAL to RAL
following the appeals against the Planning Permit, could not be said to rise to the level of a
denial of justice. More generally, it observed that the Planning Permission and Building
Proceedings related to a complex matter, involving major excavation works and connection to

existing roads.“

ii. Merits of the Claimants’ Claims of Breach of the BIT

Quite apart from its arguments as to denial of justice, the Respondent also disputed that the
Claimants’ claims as pleaded amounted to a violation of the substantive standards of treatment
contained in the BIT.*°°

Alleged breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard (Article 2(1) BIT)

As to the Claimants’ claims of breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard, the
Respondent noted that the Claimants had asserted a violation of the general requirement of fair
and equitable treatment, as well as arguing that the conduct of the authorities in relation to the
Planning Permission and Building Proceedings frustrated their legitimate expectations of due
process due to violations of Czech law, thus resulting in a lack of predictability and
transparency.**”

In response, the Respondent emphasized that breaches of domestic law did not ipso facto give
rise to a violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard.‘** In support of that position, the

450 Answer to Statement of Claim, paras. 135-136, citing Jan de Nul N.V. and Dredging International N.V. v. Arab
Republic of Egypt (CSID Case No. ARB/04/13), Award of 6 November 2008, para. 206 and Pantechniki S.A.
Contractors & Engineers v. Republic of Albania (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/21), Award of 30 July 2009, para, 94,

“51 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 137.
“52 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 137.
453 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 139.
“54 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 139.
“55 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 141
456 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 143.
457 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 143.
“8 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 144.

112

4.49

4.50

4.51

Respondent relied on a number of authorities, including in particular the observations of the
tribunal in Continental Casualty and the decision of the Chamber of the International Court of
Justice in ELSI.” Referring to the decision of the NAFTA tribunal in ADF Group, the
Respondent took the position that something more than alleged unlawfulness under domestic
law was required in order to give rise to violation of the fair and equitable treatment
standard,‘©°

As to the Claimants’ claim based on legitimate expectations, the Respondent emphasized that
the expectations protected under international law were those that the investor took into
account in making its investment;**! argued, relying on the decision in Duke Energy
Electroquil v. Ecaudor, that the reasonableness of expections had to be assessed in the light of
“all circumstances, including not only the facts surrounding the investment, but also the
political, socioeconomic, cultural and historical conditions prevailing in the host State”;* and
that legitimate expectations could only be based on specific assurances given to the investor by
the host State, rather than upon domestic legislation.*

The Respondent highlighted that the Claimants had not asserted that they had received any
specific commitment from the Respondent at the time of making their investment, and
submitted that the Claimants could not have reasonably assumed that the period for the
permitting and construction phases of Galerie would take anything less than 40 months from
submission of a complete application for planning permission, or 31.5 months from the making
of a full application for the requisite building permits.“ The Respondent noted that the ECE
Group had previous experience of development of retail centres in the Czech Republic,
including its development of Arkady Pankrdc in Prague, which had taken close to seven years
to open.**

On that basis, and given that the application for Planning Permission had been completed only
in May 2007, the Respondent concluded that the Claimants could not reasonably have
expected that there was any possibility that Galerie would open at any time prior to September
2010.“ It further noted that whatever estimates the Claimants may have made were irrelevant,
insofar as the Respondent had made no specific assurances and those expectations were not
therefore protected under the BIT.*”

45° Answer to Statement of Claim, paras. 14-146, citing, inter alia, Continental Casualty Company v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9), Award of 5 September 2008, para. 281 and Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI), ICI Reports
1989, p. 15, at p. 74 (para. 124).

460 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 148, citing ADF Group Inc. v. United States of America (ICSID Case

No. ARB(AF)/00/1), Award of 9 January 2003, para. 190.

46! Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 151, referring to Duke Energy Electroquil Parmers and Electroquil S.A. v.
Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/19), Award of 18 August 2008, para. 340; and EDF (Services) Limited
y, Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/13), Award of 8 October 2009, para. 219.

462 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 151, quoting Duke Energy Electroquil Partners and Electroquil S.A. v.
Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/19), Award of 18 August 2008, para. 340.

463 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 152.

464 answer to Statement of Claim, para. 154.

465 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 155.

466 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 156,

487 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 157.

113

4.52

4.53

4.54

Alleged breach of the prohibition of impairment of investments by arbitrary or discriminatory
measures (Article 2(2) BIT)

As to the Claimants’ claims of violation of the prohibition of impairment by arbitrary
measures, the Respondent’s principal defence, relying on the decision in ELSI, was that the
claim failed insofar as it rested on the premise that the measures in question were arbitrary
because they were unlawful under Czech law.‘ The Respondent submitted that the relevant
test of arbitrariness was that proposed by the Chamber in ELSI:

Arbitrariness is not so much something opposed to a rule of law, but

something opposed to the rule of law. [...] It is a willful disregard of due

process of law, an act which shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of judicial
69

propriety."

Approaching the Claimants’ claims on that basis, the Respondent argued that the two Ministry
Decisions adopted in the extraordinary review proceedings could not be considered to be
arbitrary as they had been overturned by the two Minister Decisions.‘” It further observed that
the Minister, although agreeing with the Ministry that the Planning Permit had been issued in
violation of Czech law, only disagreed with the conclusions of the Ministry in the Second
Ministry Decision on the question of whether the quashing of the Planning Permit would
constitute a disproportionate interference with Tschechien 7’s rights acquired in good faith
compared with the public interest considerations. The Respondent submitted that the
application of the proportionality test was “one on which minds can reasonably differ” but that
the Ministry’s conclusion was not one which satisfied the test enunciated by the ICJ in ELSI of
constituting a “willful disregard of due process of law”, or which could be said to shock or
surprise a sense of judicial propriety.*”’

As for the claim that the First Minister Decision was arbitrary because the Minister had chosen
to quash the First Ministry Decision and remand the case to the Ministry, and the connected
suggestion that the remand was unlawful, the Respondent first disputed that the Minister’s
decision to remand was unlawful.” In its submission, the Minister’s decision to remand was
entirely proper given that he deemed it appropriate that further factual investigation be
conducted, in particular as regards the scope and extent of any rights acquired in good faith by
Tschechien 7 as a result of the Planning Permission.*” In addition, the Respondent asserted
that, in any case, any unlawfulness affecting the First Minister Decision under Czech law
arising from the decision to remand to the Ministry, rather than terminate the extraordinary

468 Answer to Statement of Claim, paras, 158-159, citing Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI), ICJ Reports 1989, p. 15, at p.
74 (para. 124)

469 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 160, citing Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI), ICJ Reports 1989, p. 15, at p. 76
(para. 128).

47 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 163.

“" Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 164.

“ Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 166.

“73 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 166.

114

4.55

4.56,

4.57

4.58

review procedure, would not necessarily mean that the decision should be treated as
arbitrary.**

In relation to the claim that the Third Stay of the Building Proceedings imposed by MAL in
July 2008 was arbitrary because unlawful under Czech law, the Respondent likewise disputed
that this was sufficient to justify a conclusion that the decision was arbitrary, and submitted
that the decision fell below the relevant threshold.‘ The Respondent emphasized that
although MAL realized its mistake, it was prevented from rectifying it by reason of the fact
that Tschechien 7 had in the meantime appealed the Third Stay to RAL, with the result that the
file had to be transferred, and that MAL acted sua sponte to resume the proceedings as soon as
RAL had dismissed the appeal.*”*

Finally, the Respondent rejected the Claimants’ claim that the Ministry of Finance acted
arbitrarily in “intervening” in the Groundworks Removal Proceedings, on the basis that the
“{ntervention” was “a mere exchange of information with MAL” consequent upon receipt by
the Ministry of the Claimants’ Trigger Letter.*”” The Respondent argued that such an exchange
of information was entirely appropriate in circumstances in which a claim was raised in
connection with ongoing administrative proceedings, and observed that the Claimants did not
attempt to specify how the “intervention” was arbitrary.’”* In a footnote, the Respondent also
recalled that the “intervention” took place in 2009, and therefore could not have had any effect
upon the Claimants’ decision to abandon the project in 2008.4

Alleged breach of the obligation to admit investments (Article 2(1) BIT)

As regards the Claimants’ claim that the Respondent breached its obligation under Article 2(1)
of the BIT to admit the Claimants’ investment in accordance with its legislation because of the
failure to issue the Planning and Building Permits in accordance with the relevant statutory
deadlines under Czech law, the Respondent took the position that the obligation was only
relevant to the initiation of an investment, which the Claimants claimed was their participation
in Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha.“*°

The Respondent observed in this connection that there had been no interference in the
acquisition by the Claimants of those participatory rights, and that admission of the Claimants
was entirely unconnected with the administrative proceedings for the Galerie project.**!

Alleged breach of the prohibition of expropriation (Article 4(2) BIT)

The Respondent, at the outset of its discussion of the Claimants’ claims of indirect
expropriation observed that the Claimants’ “articulation of this claim is difficult to follow”,

“* Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 166.
“5 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 167.
“6 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 167.
“7” Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 168.
478 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 168.
4° Answer to Statement of Claim, note 171.
48 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 171,
“8! Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 171.

115

 

4.60

4.61

4.62

4.63

4.64

4.65

482,

and noted that the Claimants “seem to argue that the Czech Republic indirectly expropriated
their investment based on the alleged delay in the administrative proceedings” .**

The Respondent took the position that expropriation required: i) action by the State
constituting a taking of property rights; ii) having a substantially severe impact on an
investor’s investment as a whole, and which iii) did not fall into any of the categories of
permissible and non-compensable expropriation (such as bona fide regulatory action). It
submitted that the Claimants had failed to establish any of those elements.**?

As to the required “taking”, the Respondent noted that the only measure specifically identified
as expropriatory by the Claimants was the supposed revocation of the Planning Permit by the
Second Ministry Decision. It observed that, given that the Second Ministry Decision never
became legally effective (ie. due to the filing of Tschechien 7’s appeal and the subsequent
quashing of the Second Ministry Decision by the Second Minister Decision), the Claimants
were wrong insofar as they suggest that the Planning Permit had been revoked. ***

In the alternative, the Respondent argued that, even if the Planning Permit had been revoked,
that would have constituted a valid exercise of regulatory powers and thus could not constitute
a compensable taking, and again emphasized that the conclusion of the Extraordinary Review
proceedings was that the Planning Permit had been issued unlawfully, although the Second
Minister Decision had declined to quash it.*°

Foreshadowing its arguments on causation, the Respondent briefly noted that, on the
Claimants’ case, the decision to abandon the project was taken in October 2008, approximately
two months after the Second Minister Decision, at a point at which the global financial and real
estate crisis had been at its peak.***

The Respondent further noted that the Claimants had not specified what property right was
allegedly expropriated.**’ It noted that even as regards the supposed revocation of the
Planning Permit, the only right which was said by the Claimants to have been taken away was
the “planning security” resulting from the Planning Permit, to which the Respondent’s answer
was that the mere issue of a Planning Permit provided no guarantee of “planning security”
since it provided no guarantee that the Building Permits would subsequently be issued, or any
assurance that they would be issued within any given time frame. It added that “planning
security” did not constitute a legal right, and could not be expropriated.***

As to the Claimants’ assertion that the project land had become worthless and that the business
opportunity was “forever gone”, the Respondent noted that this allegation was unsupported by
evidence, but that in any case, on the basis of voluminous authority, there could be no
expropriation in circumstances in which the investor retained full ownership and control over

Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 173.

“83 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 174.
484 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 175.
“85 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 175.

486 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 177.
“87 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 178.
488 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 178.

116

4.67

4.69

the investment and its day-to-day operations.“®° The Respondent noted that the Claimants
maintained full ownership and control over their investments (Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha),
and further that Tschechien 7 retained full ownership and control over the project land.
Although acknowledging that use of the land to build a retail centre was contingent upon
obtaining the necessary legally effective building permits, the Respondent observed that that
had always been the case since Tschechien 7’s acquisition of the lands, and that Tschechien 7
otherwise was able to use, enjoy or dispose of the project lands.*”

iii, Causation

Finally, the Respondent argued that even if it had been found to have violated the BIT, the
Claimants’ claims still failed on the basis that “their causation theory is legally flawed and
unsupported by any evidence”.“*’ In particular, the Respondent asserted that the Claimants had
failed to show that the alleged delays in the administrative proceedings caused the failure of
the Galerie Liberec project, and submitted that the decision to abandon the project in October
2008 was Claimants’ own decision and the claim that they were forced to take that decision
was unfounded.‘

The Respondent emphasized that Tschechien 7 had acquired the majority of the project land
between November 2007 and March 2008, and that the Planning Permit had become legally
effective on 21 December 2007. The Respondent drew the inference that the Claimants must
have been generally satisfied with the planning proceedings and their outcome, since otherwise
Tschechien 7 would not have continued to purchase the parcels of land.***

The Respondent further pointed to the fact that it was not until May 2008 that all information
required in order to start the building permit proceedings had been filed, and that Tschechien 7
must have been aware at that point that, in light of the applicable deadlines, as a result it was
likely that the building permits would not be issued earlier than the end of 2008.4"

The Respondent disputed the Claimants’ assertion that the abandonment of the project in
October 2008 was caused by the loss of anchor tenants once it became apparent that it was
unable to guarantee an opening in Spring 2010; it observed that, in light of the time needed for
permitting and the estimated period for the construction works, a Spring 2010 opening could
never have been a realistic option.**> Given that the completion of the application for the
Planning Permit occurred in May 2007, and that a complete application for the building
permits was completed only in May 2008, the Respondent asserted that it should have been
evident at the time of the completion of the applications for the Building permits that an

“® Answer to Statement of Claim, paras. 179-181.
Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 182.
“5! Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 183.
“ Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 184.
“3 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 185.
454 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 186.
“5 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 187.

117

 

 

4.70

4.71

4.72

4.73

4.74

opening prior to February 2011 was not feasible, and that a Spring 2010 opening would not
have been possible should have been evident by the Summer of 2007.4

The Respondent also attacked the Claimants’ case on causation on the basis that it was
unsupported by any evidence, including as to the existence of secured anchor tenants for
substantial periods, that if they existed, the anchor tenants were entitled to withdraw, or were
otherwise released in the event of delays, or that the anchor tenants did in fact withdraw
because of the alleged delays. The Respondents further added that no evidence had been
provided to substantiate the assertion that if the retail centre had been completed, ECE Praha
would have been able to manage it for 25 years and thus earn the management fees.”

The Respondent further criticized as incredible what they characterized as the Claimants’ “fall
back” case in relation to causation, namely that, but for the alleged violations of the BIT, the
Claimants would have been able to achieve an opening in Autumn 2009, on the basis that this
would have required the making of a complete application for a planning permit at some point
during Summer 2006.“

The Respondent further noted that the Claimants’ claim for damages appeared “to be based on
the allegation that the [Respondent]’s purported violations of the Treaty prevented Claimants
from selling the project to a final investor on 15 December 2007”, and observed that the
Claimants had provided no evidence either that an investor had been secured, or that any
investor withdrew as a consequence of the alleged delays in the proceedings.*”? The
Respondent in addition submitted that the Claimants’ position was in tension with their
acceptance that the Planning Permit Proceedings had been “almost regular” and with the
duration of the planning permit proceedings of some seven months once the complete
application had been filed.”

The Respondent submitted that the “obvious flaws” in the Claimants’ case on causation
indicated that the real reason for the decision of the Claimants to abandon the project had been
different, and had in fact been the crisis in the Czech real estate market, which was well under
way by October 2008, and which had an impact on expected rentals, and sales prices, , as a
result of a tightening in the availability of credit, and heightened interest rates.°

The Respondent added that the Claimants’ project was ill-conceived from the beginning, in
circumstances in which nad experienced a swift growth in the number of retail centres,
and, as at the initial planned opening date of Autumn 2009, already had a near-saturated retail
market. On that basis, it submitted that a contributing cause of the Claimants’ decision to
abandon the project was its original bad decision to embark upon the development of the retail
centre, which had then been exacerbated by the general real estate crisis.°?

“6 Answer to Statement of Claim, paras. 188-189.
“” Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 190.
“8 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 191.
*° Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 192
5° Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 193.
5°) Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 194.
502 Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 196.

118









 





4.121

4.122

4.123

Merits of the Claimants’ Claims of Breach of the BIT

By way of general introduction of its discussion of their claims on the merits under the various
standards of protection contained in the BIT, the Claimants emphasized, having quoted the
decision in Azurix v. Argentina, that the specific standards of protection contained in the BIT
must not be confused with the “considerably lower standard of protection in customary
international law”, and that there existed “autonomous concepts of the substantive standards
within the treaty framework that need to be assessed by interpretation of the treaty
provisions”.°"! They further submitted, relying on the Preamble to the BIT, that the Parties to
the BIT had “intended a very high level of protection”, and that the standard of protection it

enshrined went “far beyond what Respondent argues it to be”.

i, Denial of Justice

The Claimants rejected the Respondent’s suggestion that their claims necessarily involved an.
allegation of denial of justice. In that regard, they argued that

the obstruction of the administrative proceedings constitutes a violation of
the BIT in several respects. Claimants’ claims relate to a whole variety of
unlawful acts of Respondent’s administration, which violate various
standards of the BIT. Whether the requirements of denial of justice are
fulfilled has no bearing on whether there have been violations of other BIT
standard.

5” Memorial, para. 282.

5°8 Memorial, paras. 283-284.

*°° Memorial, para. 285.

600 Memorial, para. 286.

1 Memorial, paras. 433-435, quoting Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12), Award of 14
July 2006, para. 372.

6° Memorial, para. 436.

63 Memorial, para. 440.

132

 

4,124

4.125

4,126

4.127

In support of that argument, they argued that the Respondent’s approach was flawed, in that it
implied that a given set of facts could only fall into one box or standard.°* The Claimants
however pointed to the fact that “in arbitral practice, a given set of facts may well constitute a
violation of several treaty standards”,®° and submitted that the same principle was applicable
to the relationship between the standard of denial of justice and other treaty obligations.

The Claimants also sought to distinguish the authority relied upon by the Respondent in
support of its position as to denial of justice.” They argued that in Jan de Nul v. Egypt, the
tribunal had explicitly contemplated that the denial of justice standard was not exclusive with
respect to other treaty standards, insofar as it had applied the fair and equitable treatment
standard to the relevant conduct alleged to constitute a breach other than judicial acts.°* They
similarly argued that the decision in Amco v. Indonesia was not authority for the proposition
that the denial of justice standard was exclusive in relation to administrative proceedings,
emphasizing that the tribunal in Amco had merely decided whether the denial of justice was
applicable to such proceedings.”

In further support of their position that their claims did not fall to be assessed against the
standard of denial of justice, the Claimants submitted that the approach advocated by the
Respondent involving exclusivity of the denial of justice standard would have “alarming
consequences”, insofar as every other standard of protection would be rendered “almost
completely meaningless”.5"? The Claimants observed that States typically act through their
administrative bodies, and that if the Respondent were correct, given that “any act of State
follows from some kind of ‘proceeding’”, “almost every investment dispute would have to be
exclusively treated as a claim for denial of justice”.®!! They further submitted that the
exclusivity of the denial of justice standard would allow States a mechanism by which to
circumvent the standards of protection contained in investment protection treaties merely by
taking action through flawed proceedings.°”

The Claimants submitted that rather the denial of justice standard was confined to situations in
which an investor has “chosen to resort to the host state’s courts before initiating arbitral
proceedings under the BIT”,“" and that, in such cases, the denial of justice standard was
exclusive due to the need to respect the host state’s judiciary; they submitted that such restraint
had “never been applied to situations where the administrative acts have not been judged by
the domestic courts”.°'* They relied on the observations of the tribunals in Mondev v. USA and

© Memorial, paras. 442-444,

65 Memorial, para. 442; and see para. 443.

696 Memorial, paras. 442 and 444.

©” Memorial, paras. 445-446.

8 Memorial, paras. 447-449, quoting Jan de Nul N.V. and Dredging International N.V. vy, Arab Republic of Egypt
(ICSID Case No. ARB/04/13), Award of 6 November 2008, paras. 190-191.

6° Memorial, para. 450, referring to Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case
ARB/81/1), Award in Resubmitted Proceeding of 5 June 1990, para. 44 et seq.

610 Memorial, para. 452.

611 Memorial, para. 452.

612

Memorial, para. 453.

&"3 Memorial, para. 454,
614 Memorial, para. 455.

133

4.128

4.129

4.130

Azinian v. Mexico, and submitted that the quotations from authorities relied upon by the
Respondent in support of its position as to the priority of the denial of justice standard were all
taken from cases in which the tribunals had reviewed court decisions.‘°

Although rejecting the position of the Respondent as to the exclusivity or priority of the denial
of justice standard, the Claimants argued that the “overall conduct in the administrative
proceedings” in any case amounted to a denial of justice.*!© They relied on the decision in
Amco for the proposition that a denial of justice may result from “a combination of improper
acts”,617

The Claimants asserted that the conduct of the Respondent satisfied the test for a denial of
justice, insofar as it “‘shocks a sense of impropriety’ [sic] and is adequately described by the
term ‘egregious’”. They added that it even “goes beyond a combination of improper acts, but
adds up to a tainted scheme”.°'®

By way of example, the Claimants relied upon the fact that the authorities had “initiated
ancillary proceedings which were used to interrupt the building permit proceedings”, and
referred to:

a. the allegedly unlawful reliance by MAL upon the Extraordinary Review Proceedings
to stay the building permit proceedings in the Second and Third Stays in April and
July 2008;5”

b. the way in which the Groundworks Removal Proceedings had allegedly been used to
block the appeal proceedings in relation to the main Building Permit in March
2009;

c. the conduct of the Administrative Offence Proceedings in relation to the excessive
groundworks, and in particular the splitting of those proceedings into two,
purportedly solely to keep the proceedings alive and avoid any decision constituting
res judicata being adopted; the Claimants emphasized that the proceedings were split
despite the fact the underlying question was the same one of whether Tschechien 7
had excavated too much earth;

615 Memorial, paras, 456-458, quoting Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/99/2), Award of 11 October 2002, para. 126 and Robert Azinian, Kenneth Davitian & Ellen Baca v. United
Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2), Award of 1 November 1999, para. 99.

616 Memorial, para. 459.

©” Memorial, para. 461, citing Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case ARB/81/1),
Award in Resubmitted Proceeding of 5 June 1990, para. 58.

618 Memorial, para. 462.

©! Memorial, para. 463.

°° Memorial, para. 463.

°1 Memorial, para. 464.

134

4.131

4.132

4.133

4.134

4.135

on

d. the conduct of the Extraordinary Review Proceedings, insofar as the Minister had
“deviated from well-founded administrative practice without a justification, only to
keep the proceedings alive and to obstruct the Claimants project”.©

The Claimants further submitted that, together with those specific examples, account was to be

taken of the other irregularities in the proceedings, including the fact that “the relevant

authorities exceeded the maximum statutory deadline in almost every case”, that they had

“lured Tschechien 7 into ... separate filing of permits by the promise of a prompt decision on

the main building permit”, and had “asked for splittings and new filings of permits without any

comprehensible reason”.°

The Claimants argued that these various matters “go way beyond the breach of a rule of law”

and constituted rather a “breach of the rule of law and hence a denial of justice”.°*

ii_ Exhaustion of Local Remedies

As to the Respondent’s arguments that the Claimants had not exhausted all available local
remedies, such that their claims (if subject to the denial of justice standard) were barred, the
Claimants at the outset emphasized that they had filed fifteen appeals, as well as various
motions, objections and statements, and recalled that they had made complaints to a number of
Ministries, the Prime Minister, and the German Ambassador. In addition, they drew attention
to the fact that the Respondent had submitted that the appeal filed against the Third Stay had in
fact delayed the progress of the proceedings.

As to the substance of the Respondent’s argument, the Claimants argued that:
a. an investor was not in any event required by the BIT to exhaust all local remedies;

b. that this was particularly the case in circumstances in which the wrong complained of
was delay in judicial and quasi-judicial proceedings;

c that there was no requirement to resort to remedies which were ineffective; and
d. that the Claimants had in any case resorted to all remedies which were reasonable and
effective.*

As to the first point, the Claimants emphasized, relying on the decisions in Mondev and Waste
Management (No. 2), that the rule of customary international law requiring exhaustion of local
remedies was not incorporated into the BIT, whether as a procedural prerequisite to arbitration,
nor as a substantive requirement of a claim of denial of justice.”

Memorial, para. 465.

63 Memorial, para. 466.

8 Memorial, para. 467.

5 Memorial, paras. 469-470.

6 Memorial, para. 471.

°7 Memorial, paras. 472-475, referring to Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/99/2), Award of 11 October 2002, para. 96 and Waste Management Inc. v. United Mexican States (No. 2)

135

4.136

4.137

4.138

As regards the second proposition, the Claimants invoked the observation of the Tribunal in
Jan de Nul, that “the requirements of exhaustion of local remedies would not have been a bar
to a claim of denial of justice on the basis of excessive delays in the judicial proceedings had
such delays been deemed a treaty breach”.°*

In relation to the third point, the Claimants relied upon the decision of the International Court
of Justice in ELSI and its judgment on preliminary objections in Diallo, emphasizing that those
decisions made clear that the relevant question was whether any supposedly available local
remedy was reasonable and effective, as well as submitting that the burden of proof to show
the existence of such remedies was upon the State which argued that there had existed effective
remedies in its legal system that had not in fact been exhausted.”

The Claimants argued that none of the remedies referred to by the Respondent had in fact been
effective:

a. as regards the possibility of appealing against the Third Stay of the Building Permit
proceedings adopted by MAL, it was emphasized that even the Respondent did not
consider such a remedy to be effective insofar as it had argued that the filing of an
appeal had prevented MAL from resuming the proceedings sua sponte. The
Claimants further argued that the possibility of appealing against a decision to impose
a stay could not be considered a remedy for the purposes of the exhaustion rule,
insofar as a stay did not constitute a final decision;“°

b. in relation to the possibility of appealing against RAL’s decision of 12 March 2009 to
stay the appeal proceedings in relation to the Main Building Permit, the Claimants
argued that such an appeal would have been ineffective insofar as the project had by
that stage already been abandoned;

c. as to the suggestion that resort should have been had to a motion for failure to act
under section 80 CAP, the Claimants emphasized that the delays had not resulted only
from inactivity, but predominantly from the allegedly unlawful decisions to stay the
proceedings and unreasonable remands, such that an action to compel the taking of a
decision was not an available remedy.*? In relation to those instances where the
authorities had been inactive, such that the remedy had in principle been available,
the Claimants emphasized that the remedy would have not been effective insofar as,
under the relevant legislation, the options open to the supervising authority were
restricted to making an order requiring the subordinate to adopt a decision within a
particular period, itself taking a decision, authorizing another body to conduct the

 

(ICSID Case No, ARB(AF)/00/3), Decision on Mexico's Preliminary Objection concerning the Previous Proceedings of
26 June 2002, para, 30.

628 Memorial, para. 476, citing Jan de Nul N.V. and Dredging International N.V. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case
No. ARB/04/13), Award of 6 November 2008, para. 256.

©° Memorial, para. 479, referring to Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI), ICJ Reports 1989, p. 15, at pp. 46-48 (paras. 61-
63) and Ahmadou Sadio Diallo (Republic of Guinea v. Democratic Republic of the Congo), Preliminary Objections, ICI
Reports 2007, p. 582, at p. 600 (para. 44).

63° Memorial, para. 480.

3! Memorial, para. 481.

°° Memorial, para. 482.

136

 

 

4.139

4.140

4.141

4.142

proceedings, or extending the statutory time-limits for the adoption of the decision.
Further, the Claimants emphasized that, in any case, the harm had already been done
insofar as the proceedings had already been delayed, and resort toa motion for failure
to act would have resulted in further delay insofar as it would have been necessary for
the supervising authority to familiarize itself with the case, and then to adopt a
decision.“

Finally, the Claimants argued that they had done everything in their power to prevent
abandonment of the project through pursuing numerous remedies, They submitted that it was
unsurprising that, given the number of proceedings, they might have missed or miscalculated
some of the deadlines for taking particular procedural steps.°°

iii Alleged Breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard cle 2(1) BIT

The Claimants’ claim under the fair and equitable treatment standard was put forward on a
variety of bases, namely:

a. violation of the right to due process;

b. failure to provide a transparent, predicatable and stable legal framework, in violation
of the Claimants’ legitimate expectations; and

c violation of specific legitimate expectations created during the initial phase of the
project.

By way of preface to its discussion of its claims, the Claimants accepted that a violation of
domestic law did not ipso facto result in a violation of international law, and that breach of the
fair and equitable treatment standard had to be ascertained in accordance with international
law.®” However, the Claimants stressed that they did not rely solely upon the domestic
illegality of the actions of the Respondent’s actions, but rather upon the Respondent's overall
behaviour, consisting of the alleged obstruction of the Claimants’ project whilst favouring the
competing Forum project, which had forced them to abandon their project.

The Claimants relied in that respect on the decision in ADF for the proposition that where there

as “something more than simple illegality or lack of authority under the domestic law of a
State”, this could give rise to a violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard. They
further submitted that the decisions in ELSI and Continental Casualty invoked by the
Respondent, as well as the decision in Meralclad indicated that, although domestic illegality

3 Memorial, para. 483.

4 Memorial, para. 484.

65 Memorial, para. 485-486.

6 Memorial, para. 488.

7 Memorial, para. 489.

8 Memorial, para. 490.

°° Memorial, para. 491, citing ADF Group Inc. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/1), Award
of 9 January 2003, para. 190.

137

did not automatically translate to international unlawfulness, a violation of domestic law might
be relevant in ascertaining whether there had been a breach of international law.“

Due Process and Procedural Propriety

4.143 The first way in which the Claimants put their claim of breach of the fair and equitable
treatment standard was under the heading “Due Process and Procedural Propriety”; they
asserted that the Respondent had “continuously obstructed the administrative proceedings
concerning Galerie’ in numerous individual irregular decisions”, and that, compared to
the “preferential treatment” accorded to the Forum project, “the background of these
obstructions was to hinder Claimants from entering the market in n 641

4.144 As to the applicable standard in relation to due process and procedural propriety, the Claimants
invoked the decision in Waste Management to the effect that

The minimum standard of fair and equitable treatment is infringed by
conduct attributable to the State and harmful to the claimant if the conduct
[...] involves a lack of due process leading to an outcome which offends
judicial propriety - as might be the case with a manifest failure of natural
justice in judicial proceedings or a complete lack of transparency and
candour in an administrative process.

4.145 They argued that that “threshold is significantly lower than Respondent claims it to be”, and
invoked the discussion by the tribunal in Mondev v. USA of the dicta of the International Court
in ELSI as demonstrating that “the ICJ’s findings in ELS/ are only a starting point for
examining what is fair and equitable, but that the threshold in modern times is a lot lower”.
To that end, they invoked the formulation of the standard put forward by the tribunal in
Mondev that

In the end the question is whether, at an international level and having
regard to generally accepted standards of the administration of justice, a
tribunal can conclude in the light of all the available facts that the impugned
decision was clearly improper and discreditable, with the result that the
investment has been subjected to unfair and inequitable treatment.“

© Memorial, paras. 492-494; citing Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI), ICJ Reports 1989, p. 15, at p. 74 (para. 124);
Continental Casualty Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9), Award of 5 September 2008, para.
281; and Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1), Award of 30 August
2000, para. 97. As regards the decision in Continental Casualry, the Claimants highlighted that the observations of the
tribunal relied upon by the Respondent had been made in the context of a claim of indirect expropriation, and not of
breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard (Memorial, para. 493).

©! Memorial, para. 496.

© Memorial, para. 497, quoting Waste Management Inc. v. United Mexican States (No. 2) (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/3), Final Award of 30 April 2004), para. 98 (text as quoted by the Claimants),

3 Memorial, para. 498,

& Memorial, para. 498, quoting Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/99/2), Award of 11 October 2002, para. 116.

138

4.146

4.147

4.148

4.149

They further highlighted that the Mondey tribunal had emphasized that “in modern times, what
is unfair and inequitable need not equate with the outrageous or the egregious”.
Applying that standard to the facts of the case, the Claimants asserted that “in numerous illegal
concerted irregularities of the administrative authorities, the intention of Respondent was to
obstruct Claimants’ project in favour of the competing project”.
More particularly, they submitted that the Respondent, “being aware that time was a critical
factor for Claimants, remained “frequently inactive without any justifiable reason or
unnecessarily delayed the necessary decisions”. In support of that assertion, reference was
made to both the Building Permit proceedings and the Extraordinary Review Proceedings.

a, as regards the Extraordinary Review Proceedings, attention was drawn in particular to
the fact that:

i, the Minister had delayed his decisions;

ii. the First Minister Decision had been rendered late, and had resulted in a
remand which had meant the process had had to start again; and

iii, whilst the First Minister Decision had resulted in a remand, the Second
Minister Decision had resulted in termination, despite the fact that the
neither the law nor the facts had changed.°*

b. As regards the Building Permit proceedings, reliance was placed in particular on the
frequent stays of those proceedings by MAL, on the basis of what were alleged to be
pretexts.©

The Claimants alleged a further violation of due process due to the alleged attempt to deprive
them of their right to be heard due to the decision of the Ministry that Tschechien 7 was not a
party to the proceedings preceding the First Ministry Decision.°°

The Claimants also invoked further alleged irregularities following their abandonment of the
project, pointing in particular to:

a. the alleged efforts to gather data and evidence under the pretext of settlement
negotiations;

b. the complaint made against Counsel who had acted for the Claimants domestically;

c. the alleged efforts by the Ministry of Finance to unduly influence the continuing

proceedings before the relevant administrative authorities; and

“48 Memorial, para. 499, referring to Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/99/2), Award of 11 October 2002, para. 116.

€ Memorial, para. 500.

67 Memorial, para. 500.

8 Memorial, paras, 501-502.

9 Memorial, para, 501.

65° Memorial, para. 503.

139

 

4.150

4.151

4.152

4.153

4.154

d. the Administrative Offence Proceedings, which were alleged to have been
> 651

“artificially kept alive to overstate Claimants’ alleged illegality”.'
The Claimants submitted that an overall assessment of these various matters led to the
conclusion that in sum they “amount to a violation of due process”, and are “improper and
discreditable having regard to generally accepted standards of the administration of justice”.°?

Transparency and Predictability

The Claimants further argued that the alleged “violations of due process and rules of
procedural propriety equally conflict with the obligation to provide a transparent and
predictable business environment in which an investor can plan its business activities”®*?

As to the applicable standard in that connection, the Claimants invoked the observations of the
tribunal in Tecmed that

The foreign investor expects the host State to act in a consistent manner,
free from ambiguity and totally transparently in its relations with the foreign
investor, so that it may know beforehand any and all rules and regulations
that will govern its investments, as well as the goals of the relevant policies
and administrative practices or directives, to be able to plan its investment
and comply with such regulations. Any and all State actions conforming to
such criteria should relate not only to the guidelines, directives or
requirements issued, or the resolutions approved thereunder, but also to the
goals underlying such regulations. The foreign investor also expects the host
State to act consistently, i.e. without arbitrarily revoking any preexisting
decisions or permits issued by the State that were relied upon by the investor
to assume its commitments as well as to plan and launch its commercial and
business activities,°*

The Claimants submitted that the present case was “a prime example where the investor could
not rely on a predictable and transparent business environment”.® They submitted that they
had carefully planned the project on the basis of “reasonable time schedules, relying on the
statutory time-limits in R dent’s d ic legal order, ing that R dent would
act within these time limits and in accordance with its own law”,®°* and further emphasized
that “time was of the essence”, as it dictated the feasibility of the project from a business

perspective. °°”

The core of the Claimants’ complaint was that the Respondent had “repeatedly disregarded its
own codified timeframes and acted in an unpredictable manner in repeated violation of the

$5! Memorial, para. 504.

$52 Memorial, para. 505

653 Memorial, para. 506.

°54 Memorial, para. 507, quoting Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/2), Award of 29 May 2003, para, 154.

°55 Memorial, para. 508.

656 Memorial, para. 508.

°57 Memorial, para. 508.

140

4,155

4.156

4.157

4.158

4.159

law”; that was argued to have undermined the Claimants’ “careful planning”, with the result
that they had had to abandon their original time schedule, and, due to the delays and the effect
that they had had on the planned opening of the shopping centre, ultimately had had to
abandon the project.®?

Quite apart from the alleged lack of predictability and transparency of the Respondent's overall
behaviour, the Claimants alleged that the same was true of numerous individual actions, giving
as examples the fact that the Minster for Regional Development had departed from the usual
practice by refusing to follow the opinion of the Advisory Committee, and the fact that MAL
had allegedly departed from its normal practice of requesting additional documents informally
by instead imposing stays accompanying formal requests for the provision of the documents.°°

In conclusion, the Claimants argued that the Respondent’s “disregard of its statutory
timeframes, legal provisions and established administrati[vJe practice, the arbitral [sic] change
of policy and the discrimination towards competitors constitute a breach of Respondent’s duty

to provide a predictable business climate”.©

Legitimate expectations

Third, the Claimants asserted that “[w]ith regard to the favourable behaviour of the City of
. in the initial phase of Galerie :, Respondent’s subsequent behaviour also
violated the concept of protection of legitimate expectations,”6

The Claimants accepted that “the concept of legitimate expectations created by statements of
the host state requires two elements to establish a claim: (i) the existence of government
representations and assurances and (ii) the reliance of the investor on such assurances to make
its investment”.°

As to the existence of representations or assurances on the part of the Respondent, the
Claimants argued, relying on the decisions in Azurix v. Argentina and Saluka v. Czech
Republic, that such assurances need not be made explicitly, but could also be made
implicitly.“ They pointed to the assurances allegedly provided by the conduct of the City of

through changing its zoning plan, which they alleged “created the impression that the
City of! and thereby Respondent [was] supportive of the project”,°* and further
submitted that that impression was reinforced when the City agreed with Claimants
to apply for the permits for the external roads and water, allegedly “in the joint hope that Multi

58 Memorial, para. 508.

65° Memorial, para. 509.

6 Memorial, para. 510.

°! Memorial, para. 511.

6 Memorial, para. 512.

63 Memorial, para. 512.

4 Memorial, para. 513, citing Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12), Award of 14 July
2006, para. 318; and Saluka Investments B.V. v. The Czech Republic (UNCITRAL), Partial Award of 17 March 2006,
paras, 351 et seq.

65 Memorial, para, 514.

141

4.160

4.161

4.162

4.163

would not appeal a permit applied for by the City of itself’. Finally, and more
generally, they argued that the City had promised to provide equal treatment to both
Forum and Galerie, and submitted that that was “sufficient to qualify at least as an implicit
assurance”.°”

They submitted that they “could rely on these assurances to the extent that their investment
would be supported and be treated on an equal footing with the competing developers”.5°

The Claimants accepted that an investor could only rely on assurances or representations “if
the expectations are reasonable”, and further accepted the Respondent’s position, based on the
decision in Duke Energy Electroqu il v. Ecuador that “in order to have a reasonable
expectation an investor has to take into account all circumstances, including not only the facts
surrounding the investment, but also the political, socioeconomic, cultural and historical
conditions prevailing in the host State”.

However, they disputed the conclusion drawn in that respect by the Respondent. They asserted
that the Claimants had been entitled to pay attention to the level of development of the
Respondent, and that in light thereof, “an investor generally should not have to expect serious
shortcomings in the [Respondent’s] legal system”.°” In particular the Claimants argued that
the Respondent had been a member of the European Union since 2004, “thereby claiming that
its administration will in any respect comply with the standards of good governance”,S” and
that, as a result, the Claimants “did not have to expect any risky investment and did not have to
be prepared for a discriminatory, contradictory and obstructive behavior”.©” More generally,
the Claimants submitted that, although investors investing in States with a low stage of
development should expect and may have to accept certain risks, “if an investor invests in a

member state of the European Union, he should not have to expect serious shortcomings”.6”

iv. Alleged Breach of the Prohibition of Impairment of Investments by Arbitrary or
Discriminatory Measures (Article 2(2) BIT)

Impairment by arbitrary measures

As to their claim of breach of the prohibition of impairment by arbitrary measures by reason of
the adoption by the authorities of the Respondent of arbitrary measures, the Claimants argued
that the Respondent had denied having breached the standard “by seeking to raise the bar for a

© Memorial, para. 514.

66” Memorial, para. 514.

668 Memorial, para. 515.

°° Memorial., para. 516, quoting Duke Energy Electroquil Partners and Electroquil S.A. v. Republic of Ecuador
(ICSID Case No, ARB/04/19), Award of 18 August 2008, para. 340; cf. Answer to Statement of Claim, para. 151,
6° Memorial, para. 517.

©" Memorial, para. 517.

6 Memorial, para. 517.

3 Memorial, para. 518.

142

4.164

4.165

4.166

violation of the standard to a level high enough so that the misconduct of its authorities would

remain unremedied”.°”*

The Claimants took issue with the Respondent’s approach on three levels, arguing that

a. the substantive threshold for arbitrariness submitted by the Respondent, relying on the
ELSI case, was “in no way consistent with the BIT at hand”;

b. that when the correct threshold was applied, the Respondent’s acts were arbitrary;

c. that even if the supposedly higher threshold from the ELSI case relied upon by the
Respondent were to be applied, “it would need to discharge itself from the
presumption of arbitrariness”.°%

As to the first point, the Claimants rejected the Respondent’s reliance on the decision in ELSI
to the effect that the standard requires conduct which may be classified as “a willful disregard
of the due process of law”, or which “shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of judicial
propriety”.°"® They submitted that that standard was “inappropriate” insofar as it had been
elaborated in the context of the 1948 US-Italy FCN Treaty, signed at a time “when the
expectations as to investment protection were significantly lower than they are today”.{””
Rather, the Claimants preferred the understanding of “arbitrary” elaborated by the tribunal in
Lauder v Czech Republic, and relied upon in subsequent decisions, as meaning “depending on
individual discretion [...] founded on prejudice or preference rather than on reason or fact”.”*

As to the second point, the Claimants submitted that the conduct of the Respondent met that
standard, insofar as it had not been “based on reason or fact, but on prejudice and preference”

and:

a. pointed to the differences in the permitting process applicable to Forum and
Galerie;*”
b. submitted that “in numerous concerted irregularities of the administrative authorities,

the intention of the Respondent was to obstruct the Claimants’ project in favour of the
competing project”, and in particular that the relevant authorities, despite having
been “aware that time was a critical factor for Claimants, remained frequently
inactive without any justifiable reason or unnecessarily delayed the necessary
decisions”! in both the Building Permit proceedings and the Extraordinary Review

Proceedings;

64 Memorial, para. 519.

5 Memorial, para. 520.

66 Memorial, para. 521.

7 Memorial, para. 522.

8 Memorial, para. 523-524, quoting Ronald S. Lauder v. Czech Republic (UNCITRAL), Final Award of 3 September
2001, para. 221.

9 Memorial, para. 526.

6° Memorial, para. 527.

1 Memorial, para. 528.

143

4.167

4.168

4.169

4.170

c. recalled its earlier submissions that the First and Second Minister decisions in the
Extraordinary Review Proceedings had been contradictory, and submitted that that

only confirmed “the Minister’s intentions to delay the proceedings”; *

d. asserted that “a further violation of due process was Respondent's attempt to deprive
Claimants’ from the right to be heard” in the process leading to the First Ministry
Decision;®?

e. relied on the alleged interference by the Ministry of Finance in the administrative

proceedings following the sending of the Trigger Letter, suggesting that “incompetent
authorities unduly influenced the competent authorities to arrive at conclusions
favourable for the state”.°**
In summary, the Claimants asserted that the relevant behaviour could not be regarded as
having been “based on reason or fact. Quite to the contrary, prima facie there seems to have
been a preference for the competing project.”

In relation to the third point, whilst acknowledging that the International Court in ELS/ had
observed that “without more, unlawfulness cannot be said to amount to arbitrariness”, the
Claimants placed particular reliance on the Court’s further statement that “a finding of the
local courts that an act was unlawful may well be relevant to an argument that it was also
arbitrary”.

Relying on academic commentary, they submitted that it was “not for Claimants to prove that
there has been ‘something more’ than plain unlawfulness”, and that rather, once the Claimants
had established “a prima facie case of arbitrariness with serious consequences”, it was for the
Respondent to provide “evidence which mitigates or explains the conduct which resulteqd in
such arbitrariness”. They argued that such an analysis was consistent with the decision in
ELSI, insofar as the Court had “denied arbitrariness despite proven unlawfulness of one of its
Officials, but only because Italy could prove that the official acted innocently and had
reasonable and comprehensible motives”.

On that basis, the Claimants asserted that despite the unlawful acts of the Respondent being
prima facie arbitrary “yet Respondent has never explained why its authorities acted contrary to
the law persistently”, and that “[u]nless Respondent provides a comprehensible explanation in

this regard, these acts must therefore be considered as arbitrary”.

°? Memorial, para. 529.

63 Memorial, para. 530.

°® Memorial, para. 531 (emphasis in original).

685 Memorial, para. 532.

686 Memorial, para. 533, referring to Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI), ICI Reports 1989, p. 15, at p. 74 (para. 124).
887 Memorial, para, 534, citing Grierson-Weiler and Laird in Muchlinski et al (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of
International Investment Law (OUP, 2008), p. 287.

68 Memorial, para. 535.

9 Memorial, para. 536.

4.171

4.172

4.173

4.174

4.175

4.176

Impairment by discriminatory measures

Relying on the decision in Saluka v. Czech Republic, the Claimants further asserted that the
prohibition of impairment had been breached by the Respondent in that “Respondent
undertook not to discriminate against the investments of German investors”, yet the Forum
project had been treated in a much more favourable way than the Galerie project “without any
reasonable justification and although both projects are in every way comparable”.°°

By way of elaboration, the Claimants explained that the two projects had been alike in every
aspect relevant for the administrative proceedings, and in particular that they had been of
similar size and located in neighbouring locations, separated by only a single road, had been
aimed at the same clients, and were to be developed over much the same period.°

As to the difference in treatment, the Claimants made reference in particular to the difference
in length of the respective administrative proceedings, and submitted that this resulted
primarily from the fact that Multi had been required to apply for only one building permit,
whilst the Claimants had been required to apply for four. Reliance was also placed on the
difference in treatment in respect of the overlapping planning permits, as well as the
Respondent’s “responsiveness” in relation to motions for extraordinary review, insofar as the
Claimants’ application for extraordinary review of Multi’s building permit was “ignored”,

The Claimants asserted that there had existed no reasonable or justifiable grounds for the
alleged difference in treatment, and relying on the decision in Nykomb v. Latvia, submitted that
the burden of proving the existence of any such justification, and that no discrimination has
taken place, fell on the Respondent.°?

y. Alleged Breach of the Obligation to Admit Investments (Article 2(1) BIT

The Claimants maintained their claim of breach of the obligation to admit lawful investments,
although apparently in the light of their response to the Respondent's objections to jurisdiction,
they accepted that the investment was the shares and other participatory rights in Tschechien 7
and ECE Praha and that the Galerie project had been “abandoned leaving the ownership of the
shares untouched”.

As to the scope of the relevant obligation, the Claimants argued that the concept of admission
in the present case was “not limited to the initial acquisition of participatory rights” in the two
companies.°** They noted that Tschechien 7 had been merely a special purpose vehicle for the
development of Galerie, and that Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha had been “an inseparable part
of the Galerie ' project, which was denied admission”.

© Memorial, para. 537-538.

©! Memorial, para, 539-540,

6° Memorial, para. 542-546,

3 Memorial, para. 547-548, citing Nykomb Synergetics Technology Holding AB v. Republic of Latvia (SCC), Award of
16 December 2003, para. 128.

4 Memorial, para. 549.

5 Memorial, para. 550.

6 Memorial, paras. 550-551.

145

 

4.177

4.178

4.179

4.180

4.181

4.182

The Claimants further explained that “the establishment of Tschechien7 and its value is
connected to the ability to realize Galerie ** submitted that it would be “artificial” to
separate the investment into, on the one hand, the creation of Tschechien 7, and on the other,
the project as such; and posited that in the case of a “complex investment” such as the Galerie

project “which necessarily consist of several interconnected parts”, “an investment can
be seen as admitted only if the investor was able to realize his business goal”.®”

The Claimants submitted that the passage from Fraport relied upon by the Respondent in its
Answer to the Statement of Claim was not to the point, as it related “only to the implications of
illegal investor behavior and the relevant timeframe in which illegality had to exist”.°*

As to the substance of the claim, the Claimants took the position that the allegedly illegal
withholding of the necessary permits amounted “de facto to a denial of admission of the
investment”, on the basis that the building permit, if granted, would “be useless, because due to
the saturation of the market and the opening of Forum, no shopping center as originally
planned can open. The realization of Galerie was only possible in this short time frame
until 2010 or not at all”.°?

yi. Alleged Breach of the ibition of Expropriation (Article 4(2). B.

The Claimants also maintained their claim that the conduct of the Respondent constituted “a
measure tantamount to expropriation” within the meaning of Article 4(2) of the BIT,
suggesting that the overall conduct in the administrative proceedings amounted to “a taking of
sufficient intensity”, and that it did not fall within the exception for regulatory takings and
police powers.’

As to the alleged taking, the Claimants submitted that “[aJll illegal acts of the Czech authorities
delaying and disrupting the administrative proceedings and thereby impeding the realization of
Galerie together constitute the taking, in particular the withholding of the building
permits”,”"' asserted that the cumulative effect of the various measures had the same effect as a

single act and argued that it was well accepted that a “creeping” expropriation can take place
through a series of acts.”

In support, the Claimants invoked previous decisions, including the decisions in Metalclad v.
Mexico, Goetz v. Burundi and Middle East Cement Shipping v. Egypt, which it submitted were
all cases in which “necessary permits such as construction permits were withheld,
incapacitating the investor to pursue its business”, and in which tribunals had found an indirect
expropriation as a result.”

©” Memorial, para. 551.
8 Memorial, para. 552.
69° Memorial, para. 553.
70 Memorial, para. 554.
7°! Memorial, para. 555.
72 Memorial, para. 555.
7°3 Memorial, para. 556-559.

146

 

4.183

4.184

4.185

4.186

4.187

4.188

 

The Claimants accepted that the required intensity of any taking had to be substantial insofar as
it must “deprive the foreign investor of fundamental rights of ownership or interfere with the
investment for a substantial period of time”.”“ They argued that the required intensity was
present, insofar as there had been a “severe impact on the investment as a whole, as Claimants
were deprived to make economic benefits of their investment.’

They explained that the conduct of the Respondent had had a “severe economic impact”
insofar as the Claimants had been forced to abandon the project, leaving them with
participatory interests in a company “the only asset of which is the economically worthless
formal ownership of the property. The use, enjoyment and management of the business has
thereby been rendered useless for Claimants”.”

As to the possibility that the building permit might still be issued at some point in the future,
the Claimants emphasized that that would be of little value, as, due to the opening of Forum,
the retail market has been saturated, “thereby invalidating any chances of interesting an
investor and realising a shopping center as originally envisaged”.””” As a result, the Claimants
submitted that they were no longer able “to pursue their business”, and asserted that, in the
circumstances of the present case, a late building permit “is equivalent to no building permit at
all”

The Claimants also stressed that, whilst they were still in possession of the land plots on which
Galerie was to be built, those plots, even if accompanied by the necessary permits, would be
“worthless for Claimants, because their concept for a retail center can no longer be pursued”.”°°
They made clear that a building permit was only now necessary to enable a sale of the plots,
insofar as, if a building permit were in place for a shopping centre, it made it more likely that a
purchaser would be able to build a different project on the land.’!°

The Claimants submitted that the authoritics made clear that the fact that they retained the
formal ownership and control over the land was irrelevant, as what was important was the
deprivation of economic benefit.’”"’ They distinguished the decisions in Pope & Talbot v.
Canada, Feldman v. Mexico, and other authorities relied upon by the Respondent on the basis
that they all concerned situations in which, on the facts, the investor had not been deprived of
the economic benefit of its investment, but had only suffered a diminution in the amount of
profits it was able to earn.”

They invoked Middle East Cement Shipping v. Egypt, as an example of a case in which a
tribunal had accepted the possibility of expropriation of particular rights forming part of a

7 Memorial, para. 560.
75 Memorial, para, 560.
°° Memorial, para. 561.
°” Memorial, para. 562.
78 Memorial, para. 562.
7 Memorial, para. 563.
7 Memorial, para. 563.
™! Memorial, para. 564.

2

* Memorial, paras. 565-568.

147

4.189

4.190

4.191

wider business operation, without examining the question of whether the investor retained
control over the entire investment.”!

Finally, although accepting that the exercise of general regulatory powers in the public interest
“do not constitute an expropriation”,’"* the Claimants disputed that the Respondent’s actions
constituted “general non-discriminatory measures” of the type required.’'> Rather, the
Claimants asserted, the relevant conduct had been “directed individually against Claimants in a

discriminatory manner”,”!

The Respondent’s Counter-Memorial

Overview and Preliminary Points
At the outset of its Counter-Memorial, the Respondent placed emphasis upon:

a. the unrealistic nature of Claimants’ alleged expectations as to the time it would take
to secure the Planning and Building Permits;

db. the procedural mistakes of Tschechien 7, including its repeated failure properly to
appeal the decisions now complained of by the Claimants; they argued that the failure
to exhaust local remedies barred the claims that those decisions breached the treaty;

c. the illegal nature of the excessive excavations; the excessive excavations directly
resulted in the Groundworks Removal Proceedings, which in turn resulted in the
suspension of the appellate proceedings in relation to the Building Permit.”””

The Respondent further underlined that the failure to appeal the relevant decisions precluded
any international claim, and argued that, although the procedural requirement to exhaust local
remedies was not applicable, in the case of a denial of justice claim the requirement was
substantive.”"® They reiterated their argument that the Claimants’ claims were all disguised
claims for denial of justice insofar as they sought to challenge the relevant administrative
decisions, and asserted that the Claimants “either failed to appeal or successfully appealed
almost all of the decisions” now challenged, the only exception being the First Minister
decision, against which no remedies had been available, which they submitted fell far short of
the threshold for denial of justice.”

713 Memorial, para. 569, referring to Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co. S.A. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
(ICSID Case No. ARB/99/6), Award of 12 April 2002, paras. 101, 105, 107 and 127.

™* Memorial, para. 571.

78 Memorial, para. 571.

16 Memorial, para. 571.

™7 Counter-Memorial, paras. 2-6.
7'8 Counter-Memorial, paras. 7-8.
7! Counter-Memorial, paras. 9-10.

148


















4.251

4,252

4,253

4.254

4.255

4.256

Merits of the Claimants’ Claims of Breach of the BIT

As regards the merits of the Claimants’ claims, the Respondent noted as a preliminary point
that there existed a time-limitation, insofar as the Claimants had claimed that they abandoned
their project in mid-October 2008, and claimed the damages allegedly sustained as a result of
that abandonment. Relying on “basic principles of causation”, the Respondent argued that any
breach had to precede the occurrence of damage, with the result that the Respondent could
only be liable for the damages claimed if the Claimants were able to establish a breach of the
BIT prior to mid-October 2008.°”

On that basis, the Respondent rejected as irrelevant any reliance by the Claimants on events
after mid-October 2008, including the Claimants’ reliance on the fact that the Building Permit
for the main building had still not been issued; in addition, it noted that the Claimants’ claim
that the Respondent had violated the BIT by the entirety of its conduct, rather than by
individual measures, was similarly temporally limited.°**

i, Denial of Justice

The Respondent repeated the argument made in its Answer to the Statement of Claim that the
essence of the Claimants’ claims was that the Czech authorities had issued incorrect decisions
and caused delays, and that those claims were in essence disguised claims for denial of
justice.°*°

It emphasized that the Claimants had complained only of alleged procedural mistakes and had
not alleged that any final decision was substantively incorrect, and asserted that “the only
effect of these procedural decisions was that Tschechien 7 did not obtain a final and binding
building permit for the main building at a time when Tschechien 7 (erroneously) expected its
issuance”.54°

Further, it reiterated its argument that denial of justice claims could only be brought where
there had been exhaustion of local remedies, and observed that, although the Claimants had
complained of first-instance decisions, those decisions had either been corrected on appeal, or
not validly appealed (either because no appeal was lodged, or any appeal was filed out of
time).8*!

On that basis, the Respondent repeated its argument that, although the Claimants’ claims had
been formulated as breach of substantive treaty standards, they were to be assessed against the

®56 Counter-Memorial, para. 217.
*57 Counter-Memorial, para. 283.
58 Coutner-Memorial, para. 284-285.
®39 Counter-Memorial, para. 278.
*0 Counter-Memorial, para. 279.
*1 Counter-Memorial, para. 280.

4.257

4,258

4.259

4.260

 

principles underlying the standard of denial of justice, and measured against that standard, they
were without merit and were to be rejected.°*

By way of expansion of those points, it first argued that the principles embodied in the
standard of denial of justice specifically addressed the interplay between the responsibility of
States under international law and their decision-making in multi-level administrative or
judicial proceedings. It submitted that denial of justice could thus be seen as lex specialis
governing state liability in such matters, despite the existence of other, more general standards
of protection. *

Relying on the decision in Loewen, the Respondent submitted that, “a low-level administrative
or judicial decision can constitute an international delict only if no effective remedy is
available or if the aggrieved party’s applications for remedy do not lead to redress”,®“ and
reiterated its position that a State should only be judged by the final product of its decision-
making processes, and “will only be held liable if the overall process of its decision-making is
erroneous”. *4

It submitted that those specific principles were “embodied in the standard of denial of justice”,
and that the Claimants’ claims should be assessed against that standard; it relied in that respect
on the decisions in Amco v. Indonesia and Jan de Nul v. Egypt, as examples of cases in which
tribunals had applied the denial of justice standard to court and administrative proceedings.*"*

In relation to the Claimants’ argument that the tribunal in Jan de Nul had applied both the
denial of justice and fair and equitable treatment standards, the Respondent responded that the
Claimants had overlooked the fact that the tribunal had applied those standards to different
facts, noting in particular that the conduct of Egypt in multi-level decision-making proceedings
had been assessed against the denial of justice standard, whilst only conduct outside those
proceedings had been assessed against the fair and equitable treatment standard.*”

The Respondent further argued that, in any case, even where similar claims had been assessed
against the substantive standards of protection relied upon by the Claimants, tribunals had
nevertheless “applied the principles underlying the standard of denial of justice”; it relied upon
the observations of the ad hoc Committee on annulment in Helnan v. Egypt, which it submitted
were “consistent with the traditional principles that a lower-level decision can constitute an
international delict only if it was not redressed upon appeal or if such appeal would have been
fatile”.***

® Counter-Memorial, para. 282.

®8 Counter-Memorial, para. 287.

8 Counter-Memorial, para. 289, citing The Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United States of America
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3), Award of 26 June 2003, para. 154,

5 Counter-Memorial, para. 289.

4 Counter-Memorial, para. 290.

7 Counter-Memorial, para. 291, referring to Jan de Nul N.V. and Dredging International N.V. v. Arab Republic of
Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/13), Award of 6 November 2008, para. 191.

*8 Counter-Memorial, paras. 292-294, citing Helnan International Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of Egypt ICSID Case
No, ARB/05/19), Decision of the ad hoc Committee of 14 June 2010, paras. 48-50.

167

4.262

4.263

4.264

It also invoked the observations of the ICJ in ELS/ that a measure which has been quashed by a
higher court or authority cannot be said to be arbitrary in the sense of international law as
reflecting the “traditional principle of the standard of denial of justice that an incorrect decision
does not constitute an international delict if it was remedied by a superior authority”.°”

In the alternative, the Respondent argued that the Claimants had failed to respond to the
substance of its argument based on denial of justice; it submitted that the Claimants had
attempted to sidestep that argument, and had not explained why first-instance decisions of the
Czech administrative authorities had breached the BIT. Rather, the Respondent submitted, the
Claimants had concentrated on “a mostly academic discussion” of whether the BIT granted a
high level of protection, and had attempted to “dress up” their denial of justice claims as
alleged breaches of provisions of the BIT.*°

The Respondent disputed the Claimants’ assertion that the BIT provides for a high level of
protection, and that the standards under the BIT are higher than those under customary
international law and NAFTA:**!

a. first, it took the position, relying on a passage from Mondev, that investment treaties
should be interpreted neither expansively or restrictively;®?

b. second, it argued that the treaty “is an instrument of public international law and must
be interpreted in accordance with such principles, including customary law”,®? and
that the standards of protection in the BIT, even if autonomous, must be interpreted
against the relevant background, including the fact that many of the standards were
first introduced by Treaties on Commerce and Navigation. The Respondent
emphasized that the use of the term “arbitrary” must be understood as having its
ordinary meaning under international law.**

c. third, the Respondent complained that it was disingenuous of the Claimants to argue
that the Respondent was attempting artificially to lower the standard of protection
under the BIT by reference to NAFTA and the customary international law standard,
since on its terms that criticism was only even arguably applicable to the fair and
equitable treatment standard; it asserted that the Claimants’ argument was in any
case incorrect;®*

d. fourth, the Respondent characterized the Claimants’ argument, based on the historical
context, that the Parties intended a high level of protection, as “pure speculation”,

* Counter-Memorial, para. 295, citing Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI), ICI Reports 1989, p. 15, at p. 74 (para. 124).
®5° Counter-Memorial, para. 298.

®51 Counter-Memorial, para. 299.

552 Counter-Memorial, para. 301, citing Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/99/2), Award of 11 October 2002, para. 43.

®53 Counter-Memorial, para. 302.

® Counter-Memorial, para. 302.

®55 Counter-Memorial, para. 303.

168

4.265

4.266

which was not supported by the travaux préparatoires or other contemporaneous
documentary evidence;®*

e. fifth, the Respondent denied that the supposed high level of protection under the BIT
allegedly intended by the Parties could be derived from its object and purpose, or the
preamble; it pointed out that Germany had more or less contemporaneously
concluded a bilateral investment treaty with Poland having the same object and
purpose and an almost identical preamble, yet the protection offered was considerably
lower insofar as the offer of arbitration extended only to disputes relating to
expropriation or free transfer.**”

As regards the Claimants’ suggestion that the denial of justice standard was non-exclusive, and

its argument that, if the Respondent’s argument were to be accepted, almost every investment

dispute would have to be treated as a claim for denial of justice, the Respondent responded that
its argument was far narrower; its position was merely that “liability for alleged procedural
mistakes in the conduct of administrative proceedings that were remediable by ordinary
appeals must be assessed against the standard of denial of justice”.*** The Respondent in any
case took issue with the premise underlying the Claimants’ argument, emphasizing that
breaches of an investment treaty could arise from acts of a State which did not involve any

“proceeding”, most notably the passage of legislation and the acts of the highest executive

bodies, and submitted that “only a small minority” of investment cases concerned decisions in

administrative proceedings.*” .

The Respondent further attacked as misconceived the Claimants’ argument that the denial of
justice standard was limited to cases in which the investor sought redress before the domestic
courts, It argued that the reliance by the Claimants on the decision in Mondev was misplaced,
insofar as the relevant passage did not relate to the standard for denial of justice, but rather
reiterated the principle that investment tribunals are not courts of appeal, and that their role is
not to review the decisions of domestic courts on questions of domestic law.*° The
Respondent further observed that the Mondev tribunal had been careful to stress that its
willingness to review administrative decisions was limited to “unremedied acts”, on that basis
submitted that the decision in Mondev did not support the Claimants’ position, and asserted
that the same was true of the decision in Azinian.*' Finally, the Respondent submitted that
investment tribunals should “exercise restraint when reviewing highly complex and technical
matters of domestic law”, and invoked the observations of the tribunal in Generation Ukraine,
which had observed, inter alia, that in that case,

the only possibility [...] for the series of complaints relating to highly
technical matters of Ukrainian planning law to be transformed into a BIT
violation would have been for the Claimant to be denied justice before the

856 Counter-Memorial, para. 304.

557 Counter-Memorial, para. 305.

858 Counter-Memorial, para. 308.

85° Counter-Memorial, para. 309.

860 Counter-Memorial, paras 310-311, referring to Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America (ICSID Case
No. ARB(AF)/99/2), Award of 11 October 2002, para. 126.

86! Counter-Memorial, para. 312.

169

 

Ukrainian courts in a bona fide attempt to resolve these technical
matters,°*

4.267 The Respondent further observed that the Claimants had introduced a new claim for denial of
justice in their Memorial, and observed that the Claimants appeared to be arguing that “the
Czech Republic’s overall conduct constituted denial of justice, even though its individual
decisions did not”.°® It noted that the Claimants had disregarded the temporal limitation on
their claims resulting from the fact that the damage claimed was alleged to have occurred in
mid-October 2008.°*

4.268 The Respondent further attacked the Claimants’ denial of justice claim on the basis that that
standard could only be violated by a final and binding measure which was not or could not
have been remedied upon appeal, which it referred to as a “substantive” requirement of
exhaustion of local remedies; it submitted that that approach had been generally applied by
international tribunals both under the denial of justice standard, and other substantive
standards.*® It distinguished the substantive requirement of exhaustion from the procedural
requirement of exhaustion under customary international law (and which it noted was
applicable as a condition of admissibility before some international bodies, including the
European Court of Human Rights), which it recognized was not provided for in the BIT, and
emphasized that it had not argued that any procedural requirement was applicable. It submitted
that the Claimants confused these two concepts.°

4.269 The Respondent argued:

a. that the substantive requirement of exhaustion in relation to claims of denial of justice
was necessary in order to preserve the integrity of its multi-level administrative
system;®°”

b. that nothing in the BIT submitted that the Parties had intended to allow investors to

bypass the domestic system of remedies, and seek international justice in order to
challenge first-instance administrative decisions;*®

c. relying on the decisions in Jan de Nul and Chevron v Ecuador, as well as upon the
writings of Paulsson, that the substantive requirement of exhaustion in the context of
denial of justice was well-accepted;*® the Respondent emphasized that the Claimants

862 Counter-Memorial, para. 313, quoting Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9), Award of
16 September 2003, para. 20.33.

863 Counter-Memorial, paras. 314-315.

®4 Counter-Memorial, para. 316.

865 Counter-Memorial, para. 319.

866 Counter-Memorial, paras. 320-321.

°67 Counter-Memorial, para. 322.

868 Counter-Memorial, para. 323,

56° Counter-Memorial, para. 324, referring to Jan de Nul N.V. and Dredging International N.V. v. Arab Republic of
Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/13), Award of 6 November 2008, para. 191; Chevron Corporation and Texaco
Petroleum Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador (UNCITRAL/PCA), Partial Award on the Merits of 30 March 2010,
para. 321; and J. Paulsson, Denial of Justice in International Law (CUP, 2005), pp. 100 et seq.

170

4.270

4.271

4.272

 

had provided no authority in support of their position that the substantive requirement
did not apply, save from an isolated academic commentator;°””

d. that the reliance by the Claimants on the decision in Mondev was misplaced, insofar
as in the relevant passage quoted by them the tribunal was merely explaining that the
claimants in that case had not been required to bring proceedings before the domestic
court (i.e. that there was no procedural requirement of exhaustion under NAFTA), but
that once they had done so, they could only bring a claim for denial of justice;*”’

e. that the reliance by the Claimants on the decision on jurisdiction in Waste
Management likewise demonstrated their confusion of the substantive and procedural
requirements of exhaustion, insofar as the tribunal in that case had not dealt with
denial of justice at all, but had rather simply stated that there was no procedural
requirement of exhaustion under NAFTA.°?

The Respondent further disputed the suggestion by the Claimants that the requirement of
exhaustion of local remedies did not apply in cases of delay, and argued that it clearly did
apply where an effective remedy against delay existed. It asserted that such a remedy had
existed in the present case. In support of its argument on the point of principle, it again referred
to the decisions in Jan de Nul and Chevron v. Ecuador®” Referring to the latter decision, it
also emphasized that any failure to exhaust available local remedies was in any case relevant
insofar as it constituted a contributing cause of any delay.*

In addition, the Respondent noted that the situations at issue in both Jan de Nul and Chevron
related to “delays resulting from inactivity rather than formal procedural decisions”,®”> and
that, in contrast, the Claimants complained of specific decisions to suspend the proceedings
relating to the Building Permits which were subject to appeal, and would not have become
binding unless upheld upon a timely appeal. On that basis, the Respondent asserted that the
Claimants had failed to exhaust remedies which had been significantly better than those
available to the claimants in those two cases.°”

In relation to the Claimants’ position that exhaustion was not required in relation to procedural
decisions to stay proceedings, even if they were subject to appeal, the Respondent noted that
such an argument was “patently incorrect”.®”” The Respondent submitted that if an investor
sought to hold a State liable for incorrect procedural decisions, then the State had to be given

*7° Counter-Memorial, para. 324.
®"" Counter-Memorial, para. 325.

872

Counter-Memorial, para. 326.

573 Counter-Memorial, paras, 327-330, quoting Jan de Nul N.V. and Dredging International N.V. v. Arab Republic of
Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/13), Award of 6 November 2008, para. 256, and Chevron Corporation and Texaco
Petroleum Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador (UNCITRAL/PCA), Partial Award on the Merits of 30 March 2010,

para, 326.

874 Counter-Memorial, para. 331, quoting Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v. Republic of
Ecuador (UNCITRAL/PCA), Partial Award on the Merits of 30 March 2010, para. 327.

875 Counter-Memorial, para, 332.

*76 Counter-Memorial, para. 332.

®77 Counter-Memorial, para. 334

171

4,273

4.274

4.275

4.276

4.277

the opportunity to “speak the last word on those procedural issues”;®”* it submitted that the
Claimants could not, on the one hand, complain that procedural decisions were sufficiently
serious to constitute a denial of justice, whilst on the other, suggesting that they were not
serious enough to require exhaustion of local remedies.*” It relied on the observation of the
tribunal in Chevron v. Ecuador that resort to remedies for delay was required “in the same
manner as in other contexts”.*8°

In support of its position that the requirement of exhaustion of local remedies was applicable,
the Respondent submitted that the Claimants’ subsidiaries had had a reasonable and effective
remedy (in the form of an administrative appeal) against every decision as to which complaint
was made, with the exception of the First Minister Decision.**!

Although accepting that the burden of proof was upon the Respondent to show that remedies
existed, relying on the decision in Chevron v, Ecuador, it submitted that it was for the
Claimants to show that any such remedies were either ineffective, futile, or unsuccessful."

The Respondent reiterated that, under the relevant provisions of the Code of Administrative
Procedure, the subsidiaries of the Claimants had had:

a. a right to appeal each first-instance administrative decision, including the two
Ministry Decisions, as well as the procedural decisions of RAL in the appellate
proceedings. It pointed out that the effect of an appeal was that the decision
challenged would not become legally binding unless and until it was upheld by the
superior body;*** and

b. the right to file a motion for failure to act so as to request the superior authority to
take action against delay once the statutory time-limit had been exceeded.**

In addition, the Respondent noted that final and binding administrative decisions which had
been appealed within administrative proceedings could in any case be challenged before the
Czech administrative courts, and that in such proceedings, the courts could order that an
administrative decision be issued within a fixed time-limit.®*

The Respondent observed that the Claimants had not disputed the existence of those remedies,
although they had disputed their effectiveness. As to the Claimants’ arguments as to the
effectiveness of the available remedies:

®8 Counter-Memorial, para. 333.

§7° Counter-Memorial, para. 335.

*8 Counter-Memorial, para. 336, citing Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v. Republic of
Ecuador (UNCITRAL/PCA), Partial Award on the Merits of 30 March 2010, para. 326.

881 Counter-Memorail, para. 337.

®® Counter-Memorial, para. 337, citing Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v. Republic of
Ecuador (UNCITRAL/PCA), Partial Award on the Merits of 30 March 2010, para. 329.

*83 Counter-Memorial, para, 338.

®* Counter-Memorial, para. 339; in addition, it noted the availability in certain circumstances of various types of
extraordinary review proceedings, although making clear that it did not rely on the non-exhaustion of those remedies:
ibid., para. 340.

*85 Counter-Memorial, para. 341.

172

a. first, the Respondent asserted that the Claimants had grossly mischaracterized its
position insofar as they had submitted that the Respondent itself did not regard the
appeal to RAL against the Third Stay as effective since it prevented MAL from
resuming the proceedings sua sponte. The Respondent emphasized that the relevant
appeals against the Third Stay had been filed out of time, and had therefore obviously
been ineffective, but submitted that a timely appeal would have been effective. In
support, it pointed to the Claimants’ success on their appeal against the Third Stay
insofar as it concerned the water-management proceedings.*** In addition, it argued
that the failure to appeal against the Third Stay in a timely manner as regards the
other proceedings prevented the Claimants from arguing that the Third Stay had
breached the BIT.*””

b. second, the Respondent rejected Claimants’ argument that an appeal against RAL’s
decision of 12 March 2009 to stay the proceedings in relation to the appeal against the
Building Permit in respect of the main construction “would not have changed
anything”, pointing out that an appeal could have been filed against that decision with
the Ministry, which, if upheld, would have meant that the stay would not have
become final and RAL would have had to continue the appellate proceedings, and
that remedy would therefore have been effective.*** The Respondent accepted that
such an appeal would not have changed matters, given that the project had already
been abandoned, but submitted that this did not go to the effectiveness of the appeal,
but rather indicated that events after mid-October 2008 could provide no basis for the
Claimants’ claims.®*

c. as for the Claimants’ suggestion that a motion for failure to act was not applicable to
a decision to stay proceedings, the Respondent accepted that this was the case, but
asserted that it had never submitted otherwise, and that its position was rather that a
decision to stay could have been appealed;*”°

d. finally, as regards the Claimants’ challenge to the effectiveness of a motion for failure
to act on the basis that the superior body required time in order to review the matter,
and that it could in any case merely set a further deadline within which the decision
was to be taken, the Respondent submitted that this highlighted the Claimants’
misunderstanding of Czech administrative law, and the role of international law. In
particular, it explained that Czech law did not make compliance with statutory
deadlines a condition of the legality of the decision, and argued that, similarly, delays
in the issuing of a decision raised no issues under international law. It submitted that,
on the Claimants’ case, any incorrect first-instance decision would violate
international law, insofar as it had to be appealed and thereby created delay, which by
definition would be unremediable; it argued that, on the Claimants’ case, the BIT
would become a guarantee that the relevant authorities would issue substantively

*86 Counter-Memorial, paras. 342-344.
®®7 Counter-Memorial, para. 345.
888 Counter-Memorial, para. 346.
5° Counter-Memorial, para. 347.
§° Counter-Memorial, para, 348,

173

 

 

4,278

4.279

4,280

correct decisions within the relevant time limits, failing which they would breach the
BIT." It further argued that the approach advocated by the Claimants would negate
the requirement of exhaustion, since the delay inherent in pursuit of any remedy
would per se violate the BIT.*”

Finally, the Respondent rejected the Claimants’ suggestion that they had done “everything in
their power”, and:

a. emphasized that the relevant question was not the total number of appeals filed, but
whether appeals had been filed against the decisions of which complaint was made,
and pointed out that no appeal had been filed against the First Stay; that the appeal
against the Second Stay had been withdrawn following the lifting of the stay, and that
the appeal against the Third Stay had been filed late (although it noted that the stay
was in any case lifted by MAL in the light of RAL’s indication that it was
improper);*°? and

b. rejected any reliance on the complaints made to the Prime Minister and the Minister
or the approach made to the German Ambassador as being in any way relevant to the
question of exhaustion.**

As to the standard for denial of justice, the Respondent adopted the formulation put forward by
the Loewen tribunal of “manifest injustice in the sense of a lack of due process leading to an
outcome which offends a sense of judicial propriety”;®® it also relied upon the observations of
the Chevron v. Ecuador tribunal that the threshold for denial of justice is high, and that while
the standard was objective and did not require a showing of bad faith “‘it nevertheless requires
the demonstration of ‘a particularly serious shortcoming’ and egregious conduct that ‘shocks,
or at least surprises, a sense of judicial propriety’””.°%°

Further, relying on Paulsson, the Respondent also argued that the factual situation had to be
“egregious”,**” and that a mere violation of domestic law did not in and of itself constitute a
denial of justice, a proposition for which it also relied on Jan de Nul,®** It further invoked the
comments of the Tribunal in Pantechniki v. Albania to the effect that, although the general rule
was that a mere error in the interpretation of domestic law would not as such involve

responsibility, a wrongful application of the law could nevertheless provide “elements of proof

®! Counter-Memorial, paras. 350-352.
5®2 Counter-Memorial, para. 353.

®3 Counter-Memorial, para. 355.
§°4 Counter-Memorial, para, 356.

®°5 Counter-Memorial, para. 359, quoting The Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United States of America

(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3), Award of 26 June 2003, para. 132.

®°6 Counter-Memorial, para. 359, quoting Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v. Republic of
Ecuador (UNCITRAL/PCA), Partial Award on the Merits of 30 March 2010, para. 244,
7 Counter-Memorial, para. 360-361, quoting J. Paulsson, Denial of Justice in International Law (CUP, 2005), pp. 60,

73 and 76.

®°8 Counter-Memorial, para. 361, citing Jan de Nul N.V. and Dredging International N.V. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
(ICSID Case No. ARB/04/13), Award of 6 November 2008, para. 206

174

 

4.281

4,282

 

of a denial justice”, but that the test in that regard was stringent insofar as it requires that “the
error must be of a kind which no ‘competent judge could reasonably have made””.°%?

As to the merits of the Claimants’ claims of denial of justice, the Respondent asserted that “no
measure complained of by the Claimants, or any combination of measures, comes even
remotely close to egregious conduct or a particularly serious shortcoming”*” constituting a
denial of justice, and submitted that all that the Claimants had complained of were alleged
procedural errors in the application of Czech administrative law.°”' It submitted that in the
majority of cases, there had in fact been no error, and that where errors had occurred, they had
been remedied on appeal.’

As to the Extraordinary Review Proceedings, the Respondent:

a. asserted that the initiation of the review proceedings by the Ministry was appropriate
because the Ministry had reasonably determined that the Planning Permit had
“serious deficiencies”, and noted that the Claimants had offered no evidence
supporting the assertion that the Extraordinary Review Proceedings had been initiated
in order to interrupt the Building Permit proceedings;>”

b. recalled that in the Answer to the Statement of Claim, it had stated its position that
the First Ministry Decision and the Second Ministry Decision could not constitute a
denial of justice insofar as they had been successfully appealed by Tschechien 7, and
accordingly had never became legally effective. The Respondent noted that the
Claimants appeared to have accepted that that was the case insofar as they had not
asserted in the Memorial that either decision constituted a denial of justice;°*

c asserted that the First Minister Decision had not constituted a denial of justice; the
Respondent denied, as “unsupported as a matter of both fact and law”, the Claimants’
assertions both that the Minister had deviated from normal administrative practice
without justification by not following the advice of the advisory committee and
remanding the case, and that the motivation for doing so was to keep the proceedings
alive and obstruct the Claimants’ project.° It asserted that there existed no
administrative practice according to which a Minister must always follow the advice
of an Advisory Committee, and noted that, as a matter of law, a Minister was not
bound to do so. It further asserted that the First Minister Decision had not been
improperly motivated, and noted that no evidence had been put forward showing that
the Minister had intended to obstruct the project; it observed that if the Minister had
in fact desired to obstruct the project, he would have upheld the First Ministry

5° Counter-Memorial, para. 362, citing Pantechniki S.A. Contractors & Engineers v. Republic of Albania (ICSID Case
No. ARB/07/21), Award of 30 July 2009, para. 94.

°° Counter-Memorial, para. 363.

°°) Counter-Memorial, para. 363.

5°? Counter-Memorial, para. 363,

5°3 Counter-Memorial, para. 364,

5° Counter-Memorial, para. 365.

°°5 Counter-Memorial, para. 366.

°°6 Counter-Memorial, para. 366.

175

 

Decision rather than quashing it and remanding the matter. Relying on expert
evidence, it further took the position that the decision to remand was correct as a
matter of law. Finally, it argued that even if the decision to remand had been
incorrect, the difference between remand and reversal and termination of the
proceedings was a “subtle point of Czech administrative procedure that prima facie

cannot meet the high threshold for denial of justice”;°°”

 

d. finally, noted that the basis for Tschechien7’s application to discontinue the
proceedings before the Municipal Court in Prague for review of the First Minister
Decision was its acknowledgement that the First Minister Decision had been
remedied by the Second Minister Decision.**
4,283 As to the Building Permit pr di the Respondent likewise itted that there had been

 

no denial of justice. In particular, as regards the Third Stay:

a

although admitting that MAL’s decision had been incorrect, the Respondent recalled
that, in its Answer to the Statement of Claim, it had argued that Tschechien 7 had
failed to appeal the relevant decisions in a timely manner and that that fact barred the
Claimants’ claim of denial of justice, but that the Claimants in their Memorial had
merely repeated their claim without joining issue in that regard;°?

the Respondent noted that the evidence of Mr > as that he had been motivated
to adopt the Third Stay by the fear that if the Building Permits had been issued but the
Planning Permit had subsequently been cancelled in the Extraordinary Review
Proceedings, the Building Permits would then likewise have had to be cancelled;?"”

the Respondent asserted that, although not in accordance with the principle of the
correctness of administrative acts under Czech law, Mr ~ decision had been
reasonable, and that, even if the Claimants’ claim in that regard was not barred by
reason of failure to exhaust domestic remedies, that decision fell far short of the high
threshold for denial of justice.*"! It further recalled that following RAL’s rejection of
Tschechien 7’s appeal as out of time, MAL had nevertheless resumed the proceedings
although not obliged to do so, with the result that the Third Stay was ultimately
reversed on 29 October 2008.°”

4,284 —Inrelation to the Second Stay:

a.

the Respondent recalled that Tschechien7 had filed an appeal, which it had
subsequently withdrawn following resumption of the proceedings by MAL, and
submitted that that fact barred any claim of denial of justice in that regard;?" it further

°°” Counter-Memorial, para. 367.

98 Counter-Memorial, para, 368, referring to Core 9/333 (Exhibit R-27).
°° Counter-Memorial, para. 369.

9! Counter-Memorial, paras. 370.

°"' Counter-Memorial, paras. 370-371.

° Couneter-Memorial, paras. 371-372.

*® Counter-Memorial, para. 373.

176

argued that the Second Stay had been fully justified as a matter of Czech law insofar |
as it was based on grounds in addition to the pendency of the Extraordinary Review
Proceedings, in particular, Tschechien7’s application for partial withdrawal of the |

Planning Permit;?"* \
b. in the alternative, the Respondent argued that, again, the question was a “subtle” i
question of Czech administrative procedure and thus not capable of constituting a |
denial of. justice;?!*
c. the Respondent characterized the Claimants’ suggestion that the Czech authorities

had improperly requested splitting of the Building Permit proceedings as “baseless”,
on the ground that no such request had ever been made; it argued that any such
request would have had to have been made in writing, and that the Claimants had
provided no evidence in support of their allegation.°'® It submitted that the evidence
was rather that the splitting of the permits had been agreed between the Claimants and
the City in its capacity as owner of the parcels on which the relevant
streets and crossings were built; it submitted that the Claimants had agreed to that
approach in the hope that this would prevent Multi from becoming party to the
building proceedings in relation to the main building (Construction I), since Multi
owned no plots of land neighbouring the plots on which Galerie was to be built,
whilst the City had agreed based on the Claimants’ belief that Multi would
not attempt to disrupt permit proceedings where the applicant was the City
*” The Respondent further noted that the Claimants had put forward no '
evidence in support of their allegation that the relevant authorities had promised that
the building permits would be delivered more quickly if the applications were split.”!®

4.285 On that basis, the Respondent argued that there had been no denial of justice prior to the
Claimants’ decision to abandon the project. It noted that, to the extent any statutory deadline
was exceeded, it was by a matter of days, and that the proceedings related to a complex
construction project. It noted that the tribunal in Jan de Nul had considered that even a delay |
of 10 years did not meet the threshold for denial of justice where the matters were complex,
highly technical and involved extensive expert reports.°!°

 

4.286 The Respondent noted that the Claimants had complained of only one incorrect decision (the
Third Stay), and observed that decision had not been appealed in a timely fashion, but it had in
any case been remedied sua sponte. It took the position that the delay of 3.5 months for the
position to be remedied could not constitute a denial of justice.*”°

°' Counter-Memorial, para. 374.
°!8 Counter-Memorial, para. 375.
°}6 Counter-Memorial, para. 376. |
°!7 Counter-Memorial, para. 377. |
°!8 Counter-Memorial, para. 378. i
°!9 Counter-Memorial, para. 379, referring to Jan de Nul N.V. and Dredging International N.V. v. Arab Republic of |
Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/13), Award of 6 November 2008, para. 204. j
°° Counter-Memorial, para. 380.

177 |

 

4.287

4.288

4.289

4.290

4.291

It further took the position that the First and Second Ministry Decisions in the review
proceedings did not constitute a denial of justice as they had been quashed by the First and
Second Minister decisions, respectively.>”!

Quite apart from this, the Respondent noted that the Extraordinary Review Proceedings had
had no impact on the Claimants’ rights, and submitted that their only relevance was that their
existence had “indirectly” caused MAL to issue the Third Stay. It noted that the Ministry had
immediately confirmed that the review proceedings did not justify the Third Stay, and
submitted that that was evidence that the Ministry did not intend the review proceedings to
obstruct the Building Permit proceedings, and that MAL’s decision had been an “isolated
mistake”.°22

Finally, the Respondent took the position that the conduct post-dating the Claimants’ decision
to abandon the Galerie project did not constitute a denial of justice. It emphasized that any
events after the abandonment could not justify the Claimants’ claim for damages, but stated
that it would nevertheless respond to the Claimants’ allegations as regards the period post-2008
“for the sake of completeness”.°”

As regards MAL’s decision in March 2009 to stay the appellate proceedings in relation to the
Building Permit for the main building (Construction I) whilst the Groundworks Removal
Proceedings were pending, the Respondent:

a. noted that the Claimants had had the right to appeal the decision, but had failed to do
so; the Respondent submitted that that fact in and of itself precluded any claim for
denial of justice;?*

b. argued that, in any event, as a matter of Czech law the stay was entirely legal insofar
as the state of the site did not correspond to the situation envisaged in the Building
Permit, which assumed that only the excavations foreseen in the Planning Permit had
been carried out;°

c. submitted that the issue was in any case a red herring, insofar as if the Claimants’
position was that its business opportunity to construct the shopping centre had already
been lost, it made no sense for them to continue with the Building Permit
proceedings.™°

As regards the Administrative Offence Proceedings, and the Claimants’ suggestion that the
relevant authorities had intentionally sought to avoid a situation in which a decision having the

°21 Counter-Memorial, para. 381.
° Counter-Memorial, para. 382.
* Counter-Memorial, para, 383.
54 Counter-Memorial, para. 384.
°25 Counter-Memorial, para. 385.
%6 Counter-Memorial, para. 386.

178

   

force of res judicata arose, the Respondent likewise denied that any denial of justice had
occurred.” It noted that:

the the use of MAL of the terms “misdemeanour” (a term used for offences
committed by natural persons) and “administrative offence” (the term used for
offences committed by legal entities) was an entirely formalistic matter, which had
had no effect in substance;°”* and

the Claimants’ argument that RAL’s decision to close the proceedings based on
MAL’s mislabelling had res judicata effect was baseless as a matter of Czech
administrative law.”

In addition, the Respondent observed that in their Memorial, the Claimants had put forward a
“brand new theory that the Czech authorities somehow conspired to set up a tainted scheme to
obstruct Claimants’ project”.°°° The Respondent rejected that theory as lacking credibility and:

a.

noted that the Claimants had put forward no evidence at all to support their
931

accusations;
submitted that the evidence showed that the authorities had harboured no ill-will
against the Claimants’ project, relying in particular on:

i the actions of the City in agreeing to allow construction to be
carried out in relation to the external roads.” The Respondent emphasized
that the City had gone further than necessary by agreeing that the
applications could be made in its name on the basis that the Claimants hoped
that that would discourage appeals by Multi;°?

ii. the actions of MAL in

(1) holding on 19 June and 7 July 2008 that and one of the
Multi companies were not parties to the Building Permit
proceedings in relation to the main building (Construction I), a
decision which was subsequently overturned by RAL on 18 August
2008;°%

(2) resuming the Building Permit proceedings sua sponte on
29 October 2008;

7 Counter-Memorial, para. 387.
°°8 Counter-Memorial, para. 387.
5° Counter-Memorial, para. 388.
°° Counter-Memorial, para. 389.
53! Counter-Memorial, para. 390.
52 Counter-Memorial, para. 391.
°3 Counter-Memorial, para. 392,
5 Counter-Memorial, para. 393,

179

 

4.293

4,294

4,295

iii. the actions of RAL, which, although it rejected Tschechien7’s appeal
against the Third Stay as untimely by its decision of 8 October 2008, made
clear its view that the Third Stay was improper;°*>

iv. the action of the Ministry in confirming, in its letter of 28 July 2008, that the
Third Stay was not justified on the basis of the pendency of the
Extraordinary Review Proceedings °%*

v. the action of the Minister in not confirming the First and Second Ministry
Decisions; the Respondent observed that the decisions depended on an
assessment of whether Tschechien 7 had acquired rights in good faith, and
whether revocation of those rights would be proportionate,

and submitted that those were issues that could easily have been decided against
Tschechien 7.99”

ii, Alleged Breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard (Art. 2(1) BIT)

As regards the claims of breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard, the Respondent
submitted that the Claimants’ claims failed:

a. first, because the conduct of the proceedings had been, on balance, fair and equitable
in the circumstances, and

b. second, because, as with the standard of denial of justice, the fair and equitable
treatment standard was concerned with the overall process of decision-making, with
the result that first-instance decisions could only violate the standard if remedies were
either futile or unsuccessful.°**

Relation of the Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard to the Customary International
Minimum Standard

The Respondent first submitted that violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard
required a high threshold, on the basis that the standard in the BIT was substantially identical
to the current minimum standard under customary international law.°?

As to the interpretation of the “fair and equitable” standard contained in the BIT, having noted
that the ordinary meaning of the words “fair and equitable” was of little assistance,””° the
Respondent took issue with the Claimants’ argument that, in light of the fact that the purpose
of the BIT was the encouragement and reciprocal protection of investments, this militated in

°35 Counter-Memorial, para. 394.

536 Counter-Memorial, para. 395.

°7 Counter-Memorial, para. 396.

°38 Counter-Memorial, para. 398, referring to Helnan International Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case
No. ARB/05/19), Decision of the ad hoc Committee of 14 June 2010, para. 148.

°° Counter-Memorial, para. 400.

°° Counter-Memorial, para. 401, referring to Saluka Investments B.V. v. The Czech Republic (UNCITRAL), Partial
Award of 17 March 2006, para. 297.

180

 

 

favour of a high standard of protection. The Respondent noted that the purpose of all
investment protection treaties was the same, and, relying on the decision in Saluka, submitted
that that purpose did not imply that the encouragement of investments would be best served by
an “exaggerated” standard of protection.”

4.296 The Respondent also submitted that, on the basis of Article 31(3)(c) of the Vienna Convention
on the Law of Treaties, account should be taken of the current international minimum standard,
and in that connection made reference to the decision of the tribunal in Bayindir v. Pakistan”
It further submitted that a number of tribunals had held that the treaty standard of fair and
equitable treatment is “materially identical” to the customary international minimum of
treatment.

4.297 As to the Claimants’ suggestion, relying on the decision in Azurix v. Argentina, that there was
a “fundamental distinction” between the customary international law standard, and an
autonomous treaty standard, the Respondent submitted that the tribunal in Azurix had in fact
held exactly the opposite.°“ It further observed that whether or not the Treaty standard was
“autonomous” was irrelevant insofar as it was not interpreted as stricter than the customary
international minimum standard.°* It noted that the tribunal in Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania had
adopted this approach and concluded that the fair and equitable treatment standard imposed a
high threshold.°“

The Claimants’ Claims of Breach

4.298 As to whether there had been a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard, the
Respondent first reiterated its position that mere breaches of domestic law did not ipso facto
result in a violation of the fair and equitable standard. It noted that the Claimants had accepted
that this was so in their Memorial, and had modified their case so as to suggest that the
allegedly unlawful decisions of the authorities had been adopted in order to discriminate
against the Claimants, to the benefit of Multi.“” However, it took the position that those
allegations were entirely unsupported by any evidence.**

54! Counter-Memorial, para. 402-403, citing Saluka Investments B.V. v. The Czech Republic (CUNCITRAL), Partial
Award of 17 March 2006, para. 300.

° Counter-Memorial, paras. 404-405, citing Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of
Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/29), Award of 27 August 2009, para. 176.

53 Counter-Memorial, para. 406, citing Duke Energy Electroquil Partners and Electroquil S.A. v. Republic of Ecuador
(ICSID Case No. ARB/04/19), Award of 18 August 2008, paras. 332-337; Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID
Case No. ARB/01/12), Award of 14 July 2006, para. 361; CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8), Award of 12 May 2005, para. 284; and Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Limited v. United
Republic of Tanzania (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22), Award of 24 July 2008, paras. 591-592.

4 Counter-Memorial, para. 407, citing Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12), Award of 14
July 2006, para. 361.

°45 Counter-Memorial, para. 408.

%6 Counter-Memorial, para. 409, citing Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Limited v. United Republic of Tanzania (ICSID Case
No. ARB/05/22), Award of 24 July 2008, para. 597.

°7 Counter-Memorial, paras. 410- 411.

°8 Counter-Memorial, para. 412.

181

 

4,299

4.300

4.301

4.302

4.303

© Legitimate Expectations

The Respondent denied that the conduct of the various proceedings had frustrated the
Claimants’ legitimate expectations. It emphasized that the Claimants’ alleged expectations as
to the duration of the proceedings had not been reasonable, and that they had not been based on
any assurances by the Respondent. On that basis, it submitted that the alleged expectations did
not qualify for protection under the fair and equitable treatment standard.”

As to the reasonableness of the alleged expectations, the Respondent emphasized that the
Claimants had not specified on what assurance the alleged expectations were based. It noted
that the only specific expectation alleged was the promise allegedly made by the City of

of equal treatment of the Galerie and Forum projects, and submitted that that specific
promise had been fulfilled.°°

As to the alleged legitimate expectation as to the duration of the administrative proceedings,
the Respondent argued that the Claimants unjustifiably relied upon a hope that no remedies
would be pursued by third parties. It pointed to various internal documents from ECE which
had made clear that the time projections given were reasonable estimates only on the
assumption that no appeals would be filed, and submitted that the Claimants had been fully
aware that any appeals would affect their expectations as to the duration of the proceedings,
which were, in effect, a best-case scenario. On that basis it claimed that the asserted
expectation had not been reasonable, and could not therefore have been a ‘legitimate
expectation’.°?

The Respondent further argued that the Claimants’ time expectations could not in any case be
regarded as reasonable in the light of their previous experience with other developments in the
Czech Republic. In particular, it pointed to the fact that at least one other development
previously undertaken by the Claimants, the Arkady Pankrac centre in Prague, had been
subject to severe delays in the permitting process as the result of objections and appeals filed
by NGOs and neighbours, which had meant that in excess of five years had been required from
the date of application for a planning permit in December 2001 to the Building Permit finally
becoming legally effective in June 2007.

The Respondent submitted that that episode meant that the Claimants must have been aware
that third party appeals were not uncommon, and could affect the duration of the proceedings,
and that incorrect first instance decisions could result in issues being remanded. It observed
that the time estimates for the Galerie project had nevertheless not in any way reflected the
possibility of appeals or remands, but rather had proceeded on the basis that all permits would
be issued within three months. Accordingly, it argued, those expectations had been unrealistic,
and inconsistent with the Claimants’ prior experience, and could thus not be regarded as
legitimate.°*

°° Counter-Memorial, para. 413.

°5° Counter-Memorial, paras. 414-415.
°5! Counter-Memorial, paras. 416-417.
°°? Counter-Memorial, paras. 418-422.
°53 Counter-Memorial, paras. 423-424.

182

4.304

4.305

4.306

4.307

4.308

As to the existence of assurances provided by the Czech Republic, the Respondent noted that
the Claimants had accepted that only expectations based on a State’s assurances upon which
the investor had relied when making its investment benefited from protection, and reiterated its
position that legitimate expectations “can only be based on specific — rather than implicit —
assurances given to the investor by the host state”.°™

The Respondent emphasized that the Claimants had not (and did not claim to have) received
any assurances, whether implicit or explicit, as to the duration of the administrative
proceedings, but rather claimed to have received implicit assurances from the conduct of the
City in: i) changing the zoning plan in February 2007; ii) entering into the
Cooperation Agreement dated 30 April 2008; and iii) the general promise to provide equal
treatment to the Galerie and Forum projects.”

The Respondent attacked each of those asserted sources of implicit assurance as not giving rise
to any legitimate expectation attracting protection under the fair and equitable treatment
standard:

a. in relation to the change of zoning plan, the Respondent noted that that conduct could
give rise to no protected legitimate expectation, insofar as it only affected the
permitted use of the land plots, and contained no assurance as to the conduct, duration
and/or success of the proceedings. The Respondent further emphasized that the City

as a body of “local self-government”, was in any case not in a position to
provide any assurances in that regard since those matters were not within its
competence, but rather within the sphere of competence of the central government;°**

b. the Respondent likewise noted that the Cooperation Agreement was of no relevance
to the duration or success of the proceedings, and that the City : had in any
case been acting in its capacity of owner of the relevant plots of land on which the
relevant roads and traffic intersections were situated;°%”

c as to the promise of equal treatment, the Respondent reiterated that the City
had in fact provided equal treatment.?*

In conclusion, the Respondent asserted that the Claimants had received no assurances on which
they could base a claim for frustration of legitimate expectations.”

° Due Process and Procedural Propriety

As regards the Claimants’ claims of-denial of due process, the Respondent noted that although
the requirements of due process and procedural propriety were included in the standard of
denial of justice, the Claimants had discussed some of those allegations separately.°°°

°54 Counter-Memorial, para. 425.
°55 Counter-Memorial, paras. 426-427.
956 Counter-Memorial, para. 428.
°57 Counter-Memorial, para. 429.
°58 Counter-Memorial, para. 430.
°59 Counter-Memorial, para. 431.

183

 

4.309

4.310

4.311

The Respondent submitted that, given the inclusion of notions of due process and procedural
propriety in the denial of justice standard, its observations relating to denial of justice were
equally applicable to the Claimants’ claims of violation of the fair and equitable standard on
that basis. It submitted that the applicable threshold was demanding, and that the duty to
provide due process and ensure procedural propriety could only be violated “by procedural
conduct that was confirmed upon timely recourse to local remedies or where no local remedies
were available”.°"

The Respondent submitted that, in an attempt to downplay the demanding nature of the
standard, the Claimants had mischaracterized the relevant case law:

a, first, it submitted that the tribunal in Waste Management had not, as submitted by the
Claimants, taken the position that an investor can rely on any statutory administrative
provisions and proceedings, or that the threshold for a violation of due process and
procedural propriety was low.° It emphasized that the relevant passage from the
decision in Waste Management referred to “grossly unfair conduct, manifest failure
of natural justice in judicial proceedings, or a complete lack of transparency and
candor in an administrative process”,°® and argued that it was thus clear that the
tribunal was of the view that the threshold for a finding of breach of the fair and
equitable treatment standard was demanding;*™

b. second, the Respondent took issue with the Claimants’ suggestion that the tribunal in
Mondev had stated that the findings of the International Court in ELS/ constituted “a
starting point for what is fair and equitable but that the threshold in modern times is a
lot lower”; it argued that the Mondev tribunal rather had “expressly agreed with the
conclusion in ELS/ and applied it in the context of a claim for denial of justice, i.e.
also to claims for a violation of the duty of due process and procedural propriety”;?®
c. on that basis, the Respondent submitted that there was “widespread agreement on the
demanding threshold for a violation of the duty to guarantee due process and
procedural propriety”.°°
As to the merits of the Claimants’ claims of violation of due process, the Respondent asserted
that the Claimants’ main argument was that the administrative authorities had committed
numerous procedural irregularities with the intent to obstruct the Galerie project and favour
Forum, and rejected that argument as baseless.’ It asserted that “the Czech Republic never
had an intention to obstruct the Claimants’ project. Similarly, its administrative bodies never

 

°° Counter-Memorial, para. 432.

°6! Counter-Memorial, para. 433.

°® Counter-Memorial, para. 434,

°83 Counter-Memorial, para, 435 (emphasis in original), with reference to Waste Management Inc. v. United Mexican
States (No. 2) (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3), Final Award of 30 April 2004, para. 98.

9 Counter-Memorial, para. 435.

°65 Counter-Memorial, para, 435, referring to Memorial, para. 498 and Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of
America (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2), Award of 11 October 2002, para. 127.

°86 Counter-Memorial, para. 436.

°67 Counter-Memorial, para. 437.

 

4.312

4.313

engaged in any improper conduct,” and again emphasized that the Claimants had put forward

no evidence in support of their accusations.

968

It noted that the Claimants had relied upon a handful of incorrect first-instance decisions that
had been remedied upon appeal or sua sponte, and observed that that was not sufficient to
justify a claim for lack of due process or procedural propriety.°® In particular, it asserted:

a.

although the Claimants had submitted that the Building Permit proceedings had been
“frequently delayed”, in fact the proceedings in relation to Construction Ib, II and II
and IVa had been stayed only twice, once due to the incompleteness of the
applications, and once (incorrectly) by reference to the ongoing Extraordinary
Review proceedings (i.e. the First and Third Stays);°”

the proceedings in relation to the Building Permit for the main building Permit
(Construction I) had been stayed three times:

i as to the First and Second Stays, the Respondent repeated its position that
they had been justified due to the incompleteness of the application, and the
application by Tschechien 7 for modification of the Planning Permit;

ii. whilst admitting that the Third Stay was incorrect, the Respondent
emphasized that the MAL had rectified that decision sua sponte, despite
Tschechien 7’s belated appeal,*”’ and submitted that the circumstances were
insufficient to constitute a violation of due process.*”

The Respondent also denied any violation of due process in the context of the Extraordinary

Review Proceedings:

a.

whilst observing that the Claimants had not been a party to the proceedings resulting
in the First Ministry Decision, it noted that such a course was expressly permitted in
expedited Extraordinary Review proceedings using the summary procedure;°”?

in any case, it noted that a decision in expedited Extraordinary Review proceedings
only became legally effective if it was not appealed within the relevant period, and
that this provided adequate protection to an affected party. It emphasized that
Tschechien 7 had appealed the First Ministry Decision which had been quashed by
the First Minister Decision and had thus never became legally effective."

the Respondent submitted that the First Minister Decision had been perfectly
appropriate in the circumstances, and that there was nothing unusual about remand if
a matter was complex and required additional fact-finding, as, it submitted, was

°68 Counter-Memorial, para. 438.
° Counter-Memorial, para. 439.
°7° Counter-Memorial, para. 440.
°7! Counter-Memorial, para. 441.
972 Counter-Memorial, para. 442.
9” Counter-Memorial, para, 443.
°™ Counter-Memorial, para. 444.

185

 

necessary in relation to the issue of whether Tschechien 7 had acquired rights in good
faith under the Planning Permit;

d. the Respondent denied that there had been any contradiction between the First and
Second Minister Decisions. In that connection, it submitted that there would have
been contradiction only if the Second Minister Decision had confirmed the
cancellation of the Planning Permit. By contrast, it noted that the only difference
between the First and Second Minister Decisions was that the First Minister Decision
had quashed the First Ministry Decision whilst remanding the matter, whilst the
Second Minister Decision had quashed the Second Ministry Decision and terminated
the proceedings.°”* It further explained that:

i. the reason for the difference between the First and Second Minister
Decisions was that the Minister had been satisfied on the second occasion
that the Ministry’s fact-finding “did not reveal any evidence that
Tschechien 7 had acquired the rights under the Planning Permit in bad faith.
Therefore, its good faith had to be presumed”.°””

ii. upon considering the balance between Tschechien 7’s good faith as “against
the public interest in cancelling the illegal Planning Permit”, he had
considered that cancellation would not be proportionate.*”*

iii, the Claimants had agreed that the Second Minister Decision was correct.°”

e. Finally, the Respondent again reiterated that the Extraordinary Review Proceedings
had caused no harm to the Respondent insofar as the outcome had been that the
Planning Permit was not cancelled, and the Claimants had never lost, even
temporarily, the rights granted by the Planning Permit. It repeated its position that the
existence of the proceedings had affected the Claimants “only indirectly” insofar as
MAL had incorrectly stayed the Building Permit proceedings on the basis of their
pendency; however, it noted that that error related only to MAL’s decision imposing
the Third Stay, rather than the Extraordinary Review Proceedings.” Referring to the
decision in Waste Management, the Respondent argued that the fair and equitable
treatment standard could only be violated by conduct that actually harmed the
investor, and submitted that the “alleged delays and purported irregularities” in the
Extraordinary Review Proceedings had had no harmful effects on the Claimants, and
therefore could not have violated due process even if they had been improper.°*!

°° Counter-Memorial, para. 445,

976 Counter-Memorial, para. 446.

°” Counter-Memorial, para. 447.

°”8 Counter-Memorial, para. 447.

°° Counter-Memorial, para. 447.

°®° Counter-Memorial, para. 448.

581 Counter-Memorial, para. 449, referring to Waste Management Inc. v. United Mexican States (No. 2) ICSID Case
No. ARB(AF)/00/3), Final Award of 30 April 2004, para. 98.

186

4.314

4.315

4.316

4.317

4.318

        

In relation to events subsequent to the alleged abandonment of the project, and in particular the
Claimants’ allegations relating to the conduct of the Ministry of Finance during the settlement
negotiations, the Respondent submitted that the allegations were untrue and in any case
unrelated to the due process claim. It denied that the Ministry of Finance had collected
evidence improperly, arguing that the Claimants themselves had decided to allow the site
inspection in early February 2009, without even proposing a non-disclosure agreement, such
that the Ministry of Finance was accordingly not constrained in the use of the evidence
obtained during the inspection or during the negotiations.”

The Respondent further denied that the Ministry of Finance had influenced the commencement
of the administrative offence proceedings, which it submitted had been commenced in
December 2008, well before the Ministry of Finance had started to investigate the excessive
excavations.**? The Respondent noted that, in any case, the Claimants had failed to specify
what procedural rights had been violated by the conduct of the Ministry of Finance.°**

¢ Transparent and predictable business environment

As regards the Claimants’ claim of breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard as the
result of failing to provide a transparent and predictable business environment for their
investment, the Respondent argued that what was required was “a transparent, predictable and
stable regulatory framework”, covering both generally applicable regulations and specific
permits required for the operation of the investment. The Respondent took the position that that
requirement did not target potential irregularities in specific administrative proceeding, which
were better dealt with in the context of denial of justice or lack of due process.”

As to the merits of the claim, the Respondent argued that the relevant applicable regulatory
framework had been entirely transparent, and the Claimants had known of all the rules that
would govern their investment, which had not materially changed since the time at which the
investment had been made. In particular, the Respondent emphasized that the Claimants had
been aware that the Galerie project had required planning and building permits, as well as
various ancillary permits and authorizations, and noted that the Claimants had not disputed that
they had been aware of the permitting process, and had not complained of any regulatory
changes.°®”

The Respondent further noted that no permits had ever been revoked, repeating that, although
the Ministry had considered that it was necessary to revoke the Planning Permit, the Minister
had on appeal chosen not to confirm its decision, such that the Planning Permit had remained
effective at all times.”

82 Counter-Memorial, para. 450.
°83 Counter-Memorial, para. 452.
°* Counter-Memorial, para. 453.
°85 Counter-Memorial, para. 454 (emphasis in original).
986 Counter-Memorial, para. 454.
°§7 Counter-Memorial, para. 455.
°88 Counter-Memorial, para. 456.

187

4.319

4.320

4,321

The Respondent characterized the Claimants’ claim as being that the permitting process had
been unpredictable because it had taken longer than expected. It rejected that complaint as
baseless, insofar as the fair and equitable treatment standard was concerned with the
predictability of the business and regulatory framework, rather than the ability of the Claimants
to predict the length of specific administrative proceedings. It reiterated that the Claimants’
estimates had been overly optimistic insofar as the Claimants had not budgeted for appeals.°®

As for the Claimants’ allegations of violation of long-standing administrative policies relating
to i) the failure of the Minister to follow the recommendation of the Advisory Committee; and
ii) MAL’s decision to stay proceedings on the basis of missing documentation, rather than
requesting the necessary materials informally, the Respondent replied that both the Minister
and MAL had acted in strict compliance with Czech administrative law,” and disputed that
either of the supposed “administrative practices” existed.’

Finally, the Respondent disputed the Claimants’ claim that there had been a violation of the
fair and equitable standard on the basis of the overall conduct of the parties:

a. first, it rejected the Claimants’ suggestion of a concerted effort to obstruct the Galerie
project in favour of Forum as having no basis in the evidence;?”

b. second, it again emphasized that the Extraordinary Review Proceedings had had no
effect upon the legal effectiveness of the Planning Permit as a result of the quashing
of the First and Second Ministry Decisions;?”

c. third, although accepting that the adoption of the Third Stay by MAL had been
“erroneous”, the Respondent submitted that this was the only irregularity, and an
isolated error, as evidenced by the willingness of the Ministry to provide its opinion
that the stay was not justified, RAL’s denunciation of the error, and MAL’s
subsequent decision to revoke the stay sua sponte;°™*

d. fourth, the Respondent sustained that the splitting of the building proceedings had not
come about as the result of pressure by MAL, but had been mutually agreed upon by
the Claimants and the City

e. fifth, whilst noting that the Claimants in their Memorial appeared not to have pursued
their complaints as to delays set out in the Request for Arbitration and Statement of
Claim, the Respondent noted that in any case the periods by which the statutory time-

°° Counter-Memorial, para. 457.
% Counter-Memorial, para. 458.
*' Counter-Memorial, para. 459.
°°2 Counter-Memorial, para. 461.
°°3 Counter-Memorial, para, 462.
°°4 Counter-Memorial, para. 463.
°°5 Counter-Memorial, para. 464.

188

4,322

4,323

4.324

limits had been exceeded were measured in days, and could not have contributed to
the failure of the project;

f. sixth, the Respondent argued that the only reason why the Claimants had not yet
obtained a legally effective Building Permit for the main building was due to the
Claimants’ wilful decision to engage in the illegal excavations, which had triggered
the Groundworks Removal Proceedings, which in turn had resulted in the stay of the
appellate proceedings before RAL in relation to the Building Permit for the main
construction. The Respondent noted in this connection that RAL had confirmed all
the other Building Permits, which were not affected by the excessive excavations.°””
The Respondent further noted that the Claimants had chosen not to apply for
regularization of the excessive excavations, and submitted that the motivation in that
regard had been an attempt to bolster their position in the present arbitration.°*

iii, Alleged Breach of the Prohibition of Impairment of Investments by Arbitrary and
Discriminatory Measures (Article 2(2) BIT

The Respondent noted that, in response to its refutation of the Claimants’ claims of breach of
the prohibition of impairment by arbitrary measures contained in its Answer, the Claimants in
their Memorial had criticized the applicability of the observations of the International Court of
Justice in ELSI and repeated their previous accusations, whilst adding an allegation that the
authorities had intended to obstruct the Galerie project and favour Forum.”

Impairment by arbitrary measures

In relation to the Claimants’ claim of breach of the prohibition by arbitrary measures, as
regards the applicable test for arbitrariness, the Respondent

a. maintained its position that the decision in ELSI constituted the leading authority as to
the standard for arbitrariness, and submitted that this was particularly so as regards
judicial or administrative decisions;

b. took the position that arbitrariness could not be assumed; and

c. denied that, on the evidence, the relevant conduct had arbitrarily impaired the
Claimants’ investment,’°°

As to the first point, ie. the applicable standard of arbitrariness under international law, the
Respondent submitted that ELS/ remained the leading authority, and that the observations of
the International Court of Justice in that case were particularly apposite for the present case as

°°6 Counter-Memorial, para. 465.
7 Counter-Memorial, para. 466.
°8 Counter-Memorial, para. 467.
°° Counter-Memorial, para, 468.
1090 Counter-Memorial, para. 469.

189

 

4.325

4.326

4.327

4.328

the decision specifically concerned “administrative process and the consequences of the
> 1001

quashing of an incorrect first-instance decision by a superior authority”.
The Respondent disputed the Claimants’ suggestion that the “modern” test for arbitrariness
was to be found in the observations of the tribunal in Lauder, noting that the tribunal had
merely made reference to a dictionary definition of the term “arbitrary”, and argued that the
ELSI decision remained a “significantly better authority for the interpretation of the same
term” contained in the BIT which had been concluded subsequent to the decision of the
Court. The Respondent further drew attention to decisions in which tribunals had referred to
and applied the decision in ELSI, which it submitted confirmed that that decision remained the
undisputed leading authority for the legal test of arbitrariness."

In relation to the second point, in response to the Claimants’ suggestion that the burden of
proof should be shifted and that the Tribunal should assume the arbitrariness of the relevant
conduct based on the fact that it was unlawful under Czech law, the Respondent disputed that
the relevant conduct was unlawful, and noted that in any case such a shifting of the burden of
proof would be “unprecedented”,'°™

The Respondent further disputed the accusation by the Claimants that it had provided no
explanation “why its authorities acted contrary to the law persistently’, noting that it had
provided a detailed explanation of the relevant conduct of the administrative conduct in its
Answer to the Statement of Claim.'* It submitted that, by contrast, the Claimants had
provided only “conclusory and generalized statements of fact and law”.!

Third, the Respondent rejected the Claimants’ various accusations of breach of the prohibition
of impairment by arbitrary measures, namely that it had:

a. withheld or withdrew permits for the Galerie project;

b. frequently remained inactive or delayed decisions in the Building Permit proceedings
and the Extraordinary Review Proceedings ;

c. issued contradictory decisions in the Extraordinary Review Proceedings;

d. denied Claimants the right to be heard in the proceedings prior to the First Ministry
Decision; and

1001 Counter-Memorial, para. 470.

1002 Counter-Memorial, paras. 472-474.

1003 Counter-Memorial, paras. 475-477, referring to Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/11),
para. 176; LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International Inc. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case
No. ARB/02/1), Decision on Liability of 3 October 2006, paras. 156-157 and 162; and Siemens A.G. v. Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8), Award of 6 February 2007, para. 318.

109 Counter-Memorial, para. 478.

1005 Counter-Memorial, para. 479, quoting Memorial, para. 536.

1096 Counter-Memorial, para. 479.

190

4.329

4.330

    

e. had influenced the competent authorities, in particular as a result of the supposed
attempts by Mr to influence RAL to stay the appellate proceedings in relation
to the Building Permit for the main building,!°”

The Respondent submitted that it was significant that those accusations were copied verbatim
from the Claimants’ discussion of their claims of breach of other standards of protection, and
argued that the claims were flawed insofar as the Claimants had not attempted to explain how
each of those measures had impaired its investment.'°* Relying on the decision of the tribunal
in CMS v. Argentina, it argued that the BIT did not prohibit arbitrariness as such, but only
arbitrary measures that actually impaired the management, maintenance, use or enjoyment of
the Claimants’ investment.’°?

It submitted that most of the measures complained of did not (and could not) impair the
Claimants’ investment in any way;!°"° specifically, it asserted that:

a. no permits had ever been withdrawn, the cancellation of the Planning Permit by the
Second Ministry Decision never having become legally effective due to the appeal
filed by Tschechien7 and the quashing of that decision by the Second Minister
Decision;!™

b. no permits had been withheld; as regards the main Building Permit, which was the
only permit which the Claimants had applied for and not yet received, the Respondent
again underlined that the proceedings in that regard had been stayed as a result of the
illegal excavations deliberately undertaken by the Claimants. It reiterated its position
that the stay was appropriate, and recalled that it had not been appealed;’”!”

c the Extraordinary Review Proceedings had never caused any impairment of the
Claimants’ investment, insofar as the Planning Permit had never been cancelled nor
its legal effectiveness at any point even temporarily suspended, and the Claimants’
subsidiaries had not been denied due process. Further, the Respondent took the
position that even if it were to be assumed that the procedural rights of the Claimants’
subsidiaries had been denied, there had been no impairment of the Claimants’
investment insofar as Tschechien 7’s rights under the Planning Permit had never been
cancelled and there had been no adverse effect upon Tschechien 7’s assets;'°>

d. as regards the Third Stay, the Respondent argued that MAL’s error had in fact been
remedied sua sponte, and would have been remedied by RAL if an appeal had been
filed in time. Invoking the observations of the International Court of Justice in ELSI,
the Respondent submitted that it would be “absurd if this remedied incorrect first-

17 Counter-Memorial, para. 480.

108 Counter-Memorial, para. 480-481,

10° Counter-Memorial, para. 481-482, referring to CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID
Case No. ARB/O1/8), Award of 12 May 2005, para. 292.

19! Counter-Memorial, para. 483.

1011 Counter-Memorial, para. 484.

1012 Counter-Memorial, para. 485.
'°'3 Counter-Memorial, para. 486.

191

 

 

4.331

4.332

instance decision qualified as arbitrary under international law”.!°* It further
observed that, in any case, MAL’s decision had been adopted on the basis of a
reasoned decision “albeit a mistaken one due to an erroneous interpretation of the
law”;!'5 It reiterated that MAL had had a reasonable concern that, if the Planning
Permit were to be cancelled in the Extraordinary Review Proceedings, it would have
had to re-open the proceedings and cancel any Building Permits it had granted in the
meantime, albeit recognizing that such a concern had been misplaced given the
presumption under Czech administrative of the regularity of administrative acts,!016

e. the Respondent denied the allegation of an attempt by Mr of the Ministry of
Finance to influence the administrative authorities to the detriment of the Claimants,
noting that no binding orders had been issued, and that the Ministry of Finance had
not in any case been in a position to do so. It further observed that, in any case, the
alleged conduct had occurred after the decision by the Claimants to abandon the
project, and thus could not have impaired the management, maintenance, use or
enjoyment of the Claimants’ investment, and could not have constituted, or
contributed to the alleged violation of the prohibition of non-impairment.'”

Impairment by discriminatory measures

The Respondent noted that in their Memorial the Claimants had introduced an entirely new
claim, found nowhere in their Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, to the effect that
the Respondent had treated the Claimants’ investment less favourably than the Forum project.
It further noted that the Claimants had gone so far as to suggest that the Respondent had
intentionally obstructed the project as part of a scheme to favour Forum, although it observed
that there was no evidence to support that allegation.’""* The Respondent submitted that the
late introduction of that claim “speaks volumes about its lack of support. Indeed the credibility
of this last-minute addition is readily apparent from Claimants’ failure to support it with any
documentary evidence”.!"°

The Respondent noted that the Claimants’ claims of discrimination were put forward on four
bases, namely that:

a. the permitting process for the Forum project had been far shorter than that for
Galerie;

b. Multi had only been required to apply for a single building permit, whilst the Galerie
project had required four;

1014 Counter-Memorial, para. 487, referring to Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI), ICJ Reports 1989, p. 15, at p. 76 (para.
128).

15 Counter-Memorial, para. 487.
116 Counter-Memorial, para. 487.
‘7 Counter-Memorial, para. 488.
1018 Counter-Memorial, para. 490.
*°° Counter-Memorial, para. 491.

192

4.333

4.334

4.335

4.336

4.337

 

c. only the Claimants had been adversely affected as a result of the overlap between the
Planning Permits for the two projects; and

d. Multi’s motion for extraordinary review of the Planning Permit in relation to Galerie
had been granted, whilst the Claimants’ application for extraordinary review of the
grant of the Building Permit in relation to the Forum project had not.”

The Respondent rejected each of those claims as baseless,!!

As an initial point, in relation to the applicable standard, it argued that the prohibition of
impairment by discriminatory measures would only be violated where:

a Galerie and Forum had been treated differently;

b. that different treatment had occurred in like circumstances;

c. the difference in treatment had not been justified; and

d. the different treatment had impaired the management, maintenance, use or enjoyment

of the Claimants’ investment.'°

The Respondent submitted that although the Claimants had submitted four instances of
differential treatment, which were submitted to have occurred in “like circumstances”, and
without justification, they had not attempted to explain how the alleged differential treatment
had impaired their investment, and submitted that the claim should fail on that basis alone.'°>

Second, the Respondent disputed that the administrative proceedings for Galerie and Forum
had been comparable from a legal perspective. It referred to the decision in Bayindir v.
Pakistan, and the rejection by the tribunal in that case of an argument that the domestic
competitors of the claimant in that case had been in a similar situation simply because they had
performed works for an identical project in the same sector. In particular, the Respondent
relied on the tribunal’s explanation that the requirement of comparability related to the
contractual relationship with Pakistan, rather than the mere fact that the companies had
operated in the same sector.'”* On that basis, the Respondent took the position that the
Claimants’ reliance on the similar size, neighbouring locations, same target clients and
duration of the developments were not sufficient to establish comparability. '°°

Third, the Respondent argued that a finding of discrimination presupposed that any difference
in treatment could not be justified by objective reasons. The Respondent invoked in that

120 Counter-Memorial, para. 492.

121 Counter-Memorial, para. 493,

1022 Counter-Memorial, para. 494,

*3 Counter-Memorial, para. 495

1° Counter-Memorial, para, 496-497, referring to Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of
Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/29), Award of 27 August 2009, para, 402.

1°25 Counter-Memorial, para. 498.

193

 

4.338

4.339

connection the decision of the tribunal in Consortium R.F.C.C v. Morocco,!** and observed

that the Claimants had failed to analyse whether any of the differences in treatment of which
complaint was made could be justified.1”

As to the Claimants’ specific claims of discrimination, it submitted that in fact the differences
in the proceedings had been justified as a result of “basic objective parameters of the
administrative proceedings regarding the two competing projects”,!°*

In particular, as to the length of the proceedings, although admitting that the proceedings in
relation to Forum had been shorter than those in relation to Galerie, the Respondent submitted
that the projects had had a number of basic parameters which were radically different:

a. the different technical parameters to be assessed by MAL, including that:

i. the Galerie project was to be constructed on a steep slope, and would
involve extensive excavations, whilst the Forum project was to be
constructed on a relatively flat site; and

ii. the Galerie project would involve extensive reconstruction of two streets and
a major crossing in order to make it accessible by car, whilst Forum was

situated next to a major road and only needed the construction of short
1029

connecting roads;
b. the different procedural context, in particular:
i the fact that Forum had not been opposed by neighbours and NGOs, whilst

Galerie had actively opposed by third parties, including Multi, which had
filed a number of appeals on procedural and substantive matters, including
the motion for Extraordinary Review; the Respondent noted that the result
was that those objections had had to be addressed by MAL at first instance,
and subsequently by RAL on appeal, both of which had taken time;!°°

ii. the large number of participants in the proceedings relating to Galerie,
which meant that the decision had had to be delivered by display on the
notice board, which again took longer. By contrast, the proceedings in
relation to Forum had had a smaller number of participants with the result
that decisions could be notified to them by post;!°!

1026 Counter-Memorial, para. 499, citing Consortium R.F.C.C. v. Kingdom of Morocco (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/6),
Award of 22 December 2003, p. 51.

127 Counter-Memorial, para. 500.

1028 Counter-Memorial, para. 501.

49 Counter-Memorial, para. 503,

1939 Counter-Memorial, paras. 504-505.

1°31 Counter-Memorial, para. 506.

194

4.340

4.341

4.342

4.343

4.344

iii. the Third Stay, which had occurred in a procedural context which had not
existed in the proceedings relating to Forum;'”

iv. the issues resulting from the fact that the Claimants had violated the law by
deliberately undertaking unauthorized excavations. The Respondent
submitted that, as a result, the stay of the appellate proceedings in relation to
the Building Permit for the main construction likewise occurred in a context
which had not existed in the proceedings relating to Forum.'*

The Respondent further submitted that, where the proceedings had in fact been comparable,
they had been treated in a similar fashion; in particular, it pointed to the fact that the
timeframes for the respective first-instance proceedings in relation to the applications for
Planning Permits had been similar, with the Planning Permit for Galerie being issued in
approximately six weeks, whilst that for Forum had taken one month. It explained the small
difference by reason of the fact that the proceedings in relation to Galerie had been more
complex, with MAL having to rule on three objections. °*

In relation to the claim that four Building Permits had been required for Galerie, whilst only
one had been required for Forum, the Respondent first disputed the factual premise of the
Claimants’ claim, repeating that MAL had not required division of the building proceedings,
but that rather the splitting of the applications had been decided by the Claimants’ subsidiaries
and the City in an attempt to minimize the likelihood appeals by Multi.'°°°

Second, the Respondent noted that the Claimants themselves had admitted that the splitting of
the permits had not impaired their investment.’ It further noted that the supporting
documentation which would have had to be submitted would have been identical even if an
application for a single Building Permit had been made, and that MAL in any case had in fact
treated the various applications as a single proceeding. As a consequence, it submitted that no
harmful effect had been caused by the splitting of the proceedings,“37

Third, it noted that the fact that Forum had been issued with a single Building Permit covering
both the main construction and the connecting roads had been fully in compliance with Czech
Jaw. It noted that the Building Office within MAL dealt with both general and local road
construction, and denied as erroneous the Claimants’ suggestion that local road constructions
were handled by the traffic department. '°**

As regards the Claimants’ claim of discrimination in relation to the overlap of the planning
permits, and in particular that the relevant authorities “only took action to the detriment of
Claimants”,'”° the Respondent explained that the overlap issue related to Construction IVb of

12 Counter-Memorial, para. 506.
1°53 Counter-Memorial, para. 507.
1° Counter-Memorial, para. 508.
135 Counter-Memorial, para. 510.
1036 Counter-Memorial, para. 511, quoting Memorial, para. 261.
137 Counter-Memorila, para. 511.
1038 Counter-Memorial, para. 512.
103° Counter-Memorial, para. 514, quoting Memorial, para. 545,

195

4.345

4.346

4.347

4.348

4.349

Galerie, which involved the reconstruction of a major intersection, changing it from a
roundabout to a normal intersection with traffic lights, and that the overlap related to the fact
that both Planning Permits covered a land plot adjacent to the crossing, with Forum’s Planning
Permit envisaging the preservation of the status quo, whilst the Galerie Planning Permit
foresaw the creation of a new turning lane so as to permit vehicles turning right to avoid the
intersection. It noted that the issue had been resolved by the decision not to apply for the
Building Permit in relation to Construction IVb.!%°

The Respondent admitted that the overlap issue had been one of the reasons underlying the
Second Stay, although it submitted that this was so “only very indirectly”. It explained that the
Second Stay had been adopted, inter alia, on the basis of Tschechien 7’s motion for partial
withdrawal, which had been treated as an application for a modification of the Planning
Permit, which required a stay until the motion was resolved. It noted that the motion had
subsequently been withdrawn by Tschechien7, at which point the proceedings had
resumed,!™

On that basis, the Respondent submitted that MAL had taken no action detrimental to the
Claimants, but rather had only stayed the Building Permit proceedings as a consequence of the
Claimants’ request for modification of the Planning Permit, and that the resumption of the
proceedings, despite the fact that the overlap issue remained, demonstrated that the existence
of the overlap had not hindered the Building Permit proceedings.”

It further observed that the Claimants had not submitted what action MAL should have taken
in relation to Forum; it observed that the overlap issue had arisen due to the grant of the
Planning Permit for Galerie, and submitted that it would have been unfair to resolve the issue
to the detriment of Forum, noting that the principle of acquisition of rights in good faith
applied equally to Multi’s rights under the Forum Planning Permit.’ It noted that MAL had
in fact of its own motion initiated review proceedings in relation to the planning permit for
Forum in December 2007, but that those proceedings had been terminated in June 2008 after
the overlap issue had been resolved as a result of the decision by Tschechien 7 not to apply for
the Building Permit in relation to Construction IVb.'**

Finally, the Respondent noted that the Claimants had not sought to establish how their
investment had been impaired by the overlap,’

In response to the Claimants’ claim of discrimination in relation to the non-initiation of
Extraordinary Review proceedings in relation to the Forum Building Permit, as compared to
Multi’s motion for Extraordinary Review of the Galerie Planning Permit, which was granted,
the Respondent noted that Multi’s motion had been filed in a timely fashion and raised serious
issues regarding the lawfulness of the Galerie Planning Permit. By contrast, it emphasized that

14 Counter-Memorial, para. 515.
#041 Counter-Memorial, para. 516.
1942 Counter-Memorial, para. 517.
143 Counter-Memorial, para. 518.
10% Counter-Memorial, para. 519.
1945 Counter-Memorial, para. 520.

196

4.350

4,351

 

 

the Claimants’ motion had been filed out of time, and in any case, had not been justified on the
merits." The Respondent

a. noted that MAL was competent to act both as a general and special building authority
the building permit for Forum, and had therefore been able to decide on the
application for both the main construction and the connecting roads in a single
proceeding; it argued that the only technical defect in the building permit for Forum
was that MAL had failed to state explicitly that it was acting as both a general and
special building authority;!°”

b. noted that even if Extraordinary Review Proceedings had been opened, the rights
acquired by Multi in good faith would have had to have been protected, and it was
thus unlikely that the building permit for Forum would have been cancelled;°"*

c. emphasized that the Galerie Planning Permit had had serious deficiencies, including
that Multi had been denied the status of party to the proceedings, and that it had
improperly authorized excavations;!°?

d. further highlighted that whilst Multi’s motion for review had been filed immediately
after RAL’s appellate decision in relation to the Galerie Planning Permit, the
Claimants’ letters alleging irregularity in Multi’s Building Permit had been submitted
after the lapse of the one-year deadline for review proceedings.’

Finally, the Respondent likewise argued that the Claimants had failed to explain how the
failure to initiate review proceedings in relation to the Forum Building Permit had impaired
their investment, and noted that even if extraordinary review proceedings had been initiated,
the Building Permit would have remained legally effective until such time as it was quashed,
an outcome it submitted was unlikely.'°?

iv. Alleged Breach of the Obligation to Admit Investments (Article 2(1) BIT

As regards the Claimants’ claim that the Respondent had failed to admit the Claimants’
investment in accordance with its legislation due to the fact that it had allegedly withheld the
necessary permits for the Galerie project, and their argument in that context that “an
investment can be seen as admitted only if the investor was able to realize its business goal”,
the Respondent responded that BIT was not “a guarantee against business risk” and that it was

under “no positive duty to guarantee that investors will be able to realize their business
9» 1052

 

goals

1046 Counter-Memorial, paras. 522-523.
10 Counter-Memorial, para. 524.
108 Counter-Memorial, para. 525.
1° Counter-Memorial, para, 526.
1950 Counter-Memorial, para. 527.
151 Counter-Memorial, para, 528.
1°52 Counter-Memorial, para. 529.

197

 

4.352

4.353

4,354

4.355

In the alternative, the Respondent in any case denied that it had withheld any necessary
permits, noting that the authorities had issued the Planning Permit, that all but one of the
Building Permits required for construction of the Galerie project had been issued and become
legally effective, and that the sole reason for the fact that the the Building Permit for the main
construction was still not legally effective had been the Claimants’ illegal behaviour. It
submitted that, but for the excessive excavation, RAL would not have stayed the appeallate
proceedings in relation to the Building Permit for the main construction, and the Building
Permit would, in all probability, have become effective in early 2009, 1°53

Finally, the Respondent again pointed out that the Claimants could only claim damages for
alleged violations occurring prior to the decision to abandon the project, such that there could
be no claim of violation of the obligation to admit investments on the basis that the Building
Permit for the main construction had still not become legally effective.!°*

y. Alleged Breach of the Prohibition of Expropriation (Article 4(2) B

As an initial point in response to the Claimants’ claim of indirect expropriation, the
Respondent asserted that the claim must fail on the basis that there had been no taking. Relying
on observations of the tribunals in Bayindir v. Pakistan and Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine,
the Respondent submitted that the starting point for analysis of any claim of expropriation was
to identify what had been taken, and observed that the Claimants at no point identified what
had allegedly been taken from them.’°*°

The Respondent noted that the Claimants had not in fact identified the property rights which
they said been expropriated, but had rather attempted to sidestep the issue by suggesting that
“where necessary permits such as construction permits were withheld [...] arbitral tribunals
allowed the investor to rely on indirect expropriation”.'%° It further disputed that the
authorities relied upon by the Claimants as support for that position were apposite; it observed
that the decision in Goetz v. Burundi had concerned the revocation of the status of a free export
company, and argued that it was this revocation of previously granted rights which was held to
constitute an indirect expropriation because it forced the company to stop any activity.’°”
Similarly, it submitted that the decision in Middle East Cement Shipping v. Egypt concerned a
prohibition of the exercise of existing rights granted to the investor under a licence.’®* As
such, it distinguished those cases from the present case on the basis that the Claimants and
their subsidiaries had not had any previously granted rights revoked or cancelled.'°°

'°5 Counter-Memorial, para. 530.

1954 Counter-Memorial, para, 531.

1955 Counter-Memorial, paras. 532-534, quoting Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of
Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/29), Award of 27 August 2009, para. 442 and Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine
(ICSD Case No. ARB/00/9), Award of 16 September 2003, para. 6.2.

4956 Counter-Memorial, para. 535, quoting Memorial, para. 556.

1°57 Counter-Memorial, para. 536, referring to Antoine Goetz and others v. Republic of Burundi (ICSID Case No.
ARB/95/3), Award of 10 February 1999 (First Part; Decision of 2 September 1998), para. 124.

3958 Counter-Memiorial, para. 537, referring to Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co: S.A. v. Arab Republic of
Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/6), Award of 12 April 2002, para. 107.

1059 Counter-Memorial, para. 538.

198

4.356

4.357

4.358

The Respondent further submitted that the Claimants had mischaracterized the decision in
Metalclad v. Mexico, emphasizing that the claimant in that case had obtained the federal
permits necessary for construction and operation of a landfill site, and had been assured by
federal officials that a municipal permit was not necessary. It argued that it was the denial by
the municipality, which the tribunal found had acted outside its competence, of the municipal
construction permit which had resulted in the claimant losing the rights it had been granted
under the federal permits, and that it was this which had been found to be a taking.' The
Respondent emphasized that, by contrast, in the present case, the Claimants had always known
which permits were needed, that the issuance of the Planning Permit was not a guarantee of the
grant of the Building Permits, and that the permits granted had never been revoked. '°°!

The Respondent asserted that the crux of the dispute was that the “applications for Building
Permits were not issued quickly enough in accordance with Claimants’ overly optimistic time
estimates”, and that it was on that basis that the Claimants had decided to abandon the
project.!° However, it observed that pendency of an application, let alone pendency for less
than nine months (including delays caused by the incompleteness of the Claimants’
application), could not constitute a taking.'° In support of that position, it relied on the
rejection of what it asserted was a similar expropriation claim by the tribunal in Walter Bau v.
Thailand, noting that the tribunal in Walter Bau, in turn relying on the decision in
PSEG Global v. Turkey, had held that there had been no deprivation to a sufficient degree of
the investor’s control of its investment.’ On that basis, it submitted that the Claimants could
not seriously argue that they had had any rights that had been taken.’°%

The Respondent further argued that there had been no taking of a sufficient intensity. It
observed that the Claimants’ case was that because the Building Permits had not been issued in
line with their expectations, their project had become economically unsustainable and their
ownership of the project land “became formal and economically worthless”.'%° The
Respondent noted that the legal status of the land as at the time of the abandonment had been
no different than when it had been acquired by the Claimants, insofar as at neither point in time
was there a valid Building Permit, so that “nothing has changed”; they observed that, at most,
the Claimants had lost “their hope to realize the project with a profit”, but that “that hope never
materialized into a legal right or asset.”’°’ On the basis that the Claimants had not lost any
previously granted rights, the Respondent took the position that the non-realization of the
project could not qualify as a taking, but submitted that even if it could, it would not have
reached the required intensity for a finding of expropriation.'° It referred to the observations
of the tribunal in Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine to the effect that the fact that an investment

1060 Counter-Memorial, para. 539.
1051 Counter-Memorial, para, 540.
1062 Counter-Memorial, para. 541.

1063 Thid.

19% Counter-Memorial, para. 542, quoting Walter Bau v. Thailand (UNCITRAL), Award of 1 July 2009, paras. 10.16-
10.18, in turn quoting, inter alia, PSEG Global Inc. and Konya Ilgin Elektrik Uretim ve Ticaret Limited Sirketi v.
Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5), Award of 19 January 2007, para. 278.

1055 Counter-Memorial, para. 543.

16 Counter-Memorial, para. 544, referring to Memorial, paras. 561-563.

1957 Counter-Memorial, para. 545,

1068 Counter-Memorial, para. 545.

199

 

had become worthless did not without more mean that there was an expropriation; that it was
not sufficient for an investor merely to point to “some governmental initiative or inaction,
which might have contributed to his ill fortune”; and that it was not enough for an investor to
rely upon an act of maladministration, abandon the investment without efforts to remedy the
administrative default, and then claim an “uncompensated virtual expropriation”.'°°

4.359 Relying on a variety of authority, including most prominently the decision in Walter Bau v.
Thailand, the Respondent further asserted that there could be no expropriation where the
Claimant retained full ownership and control over its investment and its day-to-day
operations.'°”° The Respondent further noted that the Claimants had not denied that they were
in fact able to fully control, use, enjoy, or dispose of the affected property, in particular insofar
as the Claimants continued to fully own and control the rights relating to the participatory
interests in Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha, and that those entities in turn fully owned and
controlled their asserts, including the project land,'07!

4.360 The Respondent further invoked the decision of the tribunal in Pope & Talbot v. Canada as
illustrating the point that there could be no expropriation in such circumstances;'°” it
submitted that the Claimants had missed the point insofar as they had argued that the decision
was irrelevant insofar as the claimant in that case had been able to pursue other business
opportunities. It noted that ECE Praha had been in operation since 1996 and provided services
to companies within the ECE Group within the Czech Republic, and that there was no reason it
could not continue to do so in the future. Similarly, it observed that Tschechien 7 continued to
own the project land and could attempt to use it for a different kind of development.’°”?

4.361 The Respondent submitted that the decision in Pope & Talbot also illustrated a further point,
noting that the tribunal in that decision had held that an interference resulting in the “loss of
already established profits did not constitute an expropriatory taking” and that, by contrast, the
Claimants’ claim for expropriation was based on lost profits even though the planned business
activity had not even started.'°” It also referred in that connection to the observation of the
Tribunal in Waste Management that it was not the function of the international law of
expropriation “to eliminate the normal commercial risks of a foreign investor”, or to require
States to provide compensation for the failure of an investor’s flawed business plan.'””* It thus
concluded that even if the non-realization could constitute a taking (which it denied), the claim

of expropriation would in any event fail, 1076

196° Counter-Memorial, Para, 545, quoting Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9), Award of
16 September 2003, para. 2(

1070 Counter-Memorial, paras. 6. 547, quoting, inter alia, Walter Bau v. Thailand (UNCITRAL), Award of 1 July
2009, para. 10.13.

1071 Counter-Memorial, paras. 546; 548.

107 Counter-Memorial, para. 549, referring to Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Canada (UNCITRAL), Interim Award of 26 June
2000, para. 102.

173 Counter-Memorial, para. 549.

1074 Counter-Memorial, para. 550, referring to Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Canada (UNCITRAL), Interim Award of 26 June
2000.

175 Counter-Memorial, para. 550, quoting Waste Management Inc:-v.United-Mexican States (No-2)-(CSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/3), Final Award of 30 April 2004, para. 177.

1°76 Counter-Memorial, para. 551.

200

4.362

4.363

4.364

4.365

Finally, the Respondent submitted that, insofar as the Planning Permit had been issued
unlawfully, a potential revocation within the Extraordinary Review Proceedings would have
constituted a valid exercise of its regulatory powers and thus would not have constitute a
compensable taking. It submitted that the same was true in relation to the conduct of the
relevant authorities in instituting the Groundworks Removal Proceedings, and the decision of
RAL to stay the appellate proceedings as to the main Building Permit on the basis of the
pendency of the Groundworks Removal Proceedings.'°””

The Respondent submitted that the Claimants had misstated the scope of the police powers
exception insofar as they asserted that it extended only to general non-discriminatory measures
aimed at regulating general welfare, such as taxation.'"”* Although accepting that in order to
fall within the police powers exception, any measures had to be non-discriminatory, it asserted
that the measure in question could be individual, provided that it was adopted pursuant to a
generally applicable statute; in support of that position, it noted that in Saluka v. Czech
Republic, the forced administration of a bank had been held to come within the police powers
exception. '°”

In support of its position that the relevant conduct had been within the police powers
exception, the Respondent observed that the prior authorization of work constituted a
fundamental principle of Czech construction law, and that unauthorized works had to be
removed unless the owner of the land applied for and obtained regularization. It submitted that
any requirement to remove unauthorized works, although potentially constituting a taking,
nevertheless was not compensable insofar as it fell within the police powers exception.'°°° It
further reiterated that the pendency of the Groundworks Removal Proceedings had necessitated
a stay of the main Building Permit proceedings insofar as the subject matter of those
proceedings would necessarily be affected by a future decision requiring removal of
unauthorized works, or regularizing the situation.”

The Respondent further noted that under Czech administrative law, pursuant to the principle of
substantive correctness of administrative decisions, in certain circumstances and subject to
certain procedural safeguards, an administrative permit could be cancelled even after it had
become legally effective, and that the proceedings leading to such a cancellation could be
opened by an administrative body acting swa sponte. As such, it argued that any potential
cancellation of the Planning Permit in the Extraordinary Review Proceedings would have come
within the police powers exception, and therefore would not have constituted a compensable
taking.

1°77 Counter-Memorial, para. 552.

18 Counter-Memorial, para. 553.

19 Counter-Memorial, para. 553, referring to Saluka Investments B.V. v. The Czech Republic (UNCITRAL), Partial
Award of 17 March 2006, paras. 262 et seq.

1°89 Counter-Memorial, para. 554.

1°81 Counter-Memorial, para, 555.

1982 Counter-Memorial, para. 556.

201

 

4.366

4.367

4.368

4.738

4.369

Causation

Quite apart from its case as to the merits of the Claimants’ claims of breach of the BIT, the
Respondent took the position that the Claimants’ case failed as a matter of causation.

i. Incidence of the Burden of Proof as Regards Matters of Causation

Relying inter alia on the decisions in Azuriz v. Argentina and Biwater Gauff and Tanzania, the
Respondent submitted that the burden was upon the Claimants to show that there existed a
causal link between each of the breaches of the BIT alleged and the losses claimed.’ It
argued that that the relevant causal link could not be remote or indirect, and that the relevant
standard for causation was a “but for” test.'°*

ii. Alleged Failure by the Claimants to Establish Their Case on Causation

As to the facts, the Respondent asserted that in order to establish their case on caustion the
Claimants would have to discharge the burden of proof upon them in relation to the following
elements:

(a) The Czech Republic delayed and obstructed administrative proceedings for
Galerie and thus breached the Treaty;

(b) The delays caused the issuance of the building permit to become
unpredictable;

(c) The delays also required that the opening date of Galerie be
postponed to fall 2010;

(d) The postponement of the opening date allegedly caused the loss of key
tenants necessary for the success of the project;

(e) The loss of key tenants prevented Galerie from prevailing on the
market and being sold to an investor with a profit for Claimants.'°*

It argued that that the Claimants had established none of those matters.’°*°

The Respondent first argued that the Claimants were unable to establish that any alleged
breach of the BIT had caused the postponement of the opening date to the Autumn of 2010.17
It took the position that

108 Counter-Memorial, para. 558-559, citing Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/1/12), Award
of 14 July 2006, para, 297; and Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Limited v. United Republic of Tanzania ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/22), Award of 24 July 2008, para. 779 and 782.

108 Counter-Memorial, para. 559-560, citing, inter alia, Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Limited v. United Republic of
Tanzania (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22), Award of 24 July 2008, paras. 785-786; and Chevron Corporation and Texaco
Petroleum Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador (UNCITRAL/PCA), Partial Award on the Merits of 30 March 2010,

para. 374.

185 Counter-Memorial, para. 561.
1086 Counter-Memorial, para. 562.

202

4.370

it was not credible that a delay of approximately two weeks in the issuing by RAL of
its decision on Multi’s appeal against the Planning Permit resulted in the
postponement of the opening of the Galerie centre from Autumn 2009 to Spring
2010;1°8

the Claimants had not established that the Third Stay of the Building Permit
proceedings had rendered the Building Permit proceedings unpredictable, and
referred to its earlier arguments that any uncertainty was self-inflicted and resulted
from Tschechien 7’s failure to file a timely appeal, the fact that Tschechien 7 had
improperly requested (and been granted) permission for excavations in the Planning
Permit, and from the excavations in excess of those authorized in the Planning
Permit;!°°

the Claimants had not established that the shift of the opening from Spring to Autumn
2010 had been caused by the Third Stay, pointing to the Claimants’ own internal
documents, which showed that, during April and May 2008, the Claimants had
envisaged opening in Autumn 2010; it submitted that the shift back to a projected
Spring 2010 opening occurred only after the Claimants had improperly decided to
exceed the authorized volume of excavations;!°°°

the overall delay was mainly of the Claimants’ own making; the Respondent referred
in particular to the delay of five months in submitting the documentation necessary
for the Planning Permit, the delay of two months in applying for the Building Permits,
and the further delay of approximately three months in completing those applications;
it noted that in total 10 months of delay was attributable to the Cliamants, and that
that far exceeded any delays attributable to the Respondent.’

Second, the Respondent argued that the Claimants had failed to substantiate the allegation that
the shift from a Spring to an Autumn 2010 opening had in fact been fatal to the project,'*
drawing attention to the fact that the Claimants had themselves envisaged an Autumn 2010
opening from April 2008 onwards, but had not at that stage abandoned the project.’”? Second,
it submitted that the evidence showed that the departure of certain key tenants had in fact been
due to the better location of Forum.'* It further noted that the Claimants had failed to disclose
documents relating to the lease negotiations with certain prospective tenants, and invited the
Tribunal to draw the inference that the reason why those tenants had not in the end signed up
with Galerie had nothing to do with the projected opening date of Galerie.!°%* It submitted that

 

'°87 Counter-Memorial, para, 563.
1088 Counter-Memorial, para. 564.
408° Counter-Memorial, para. 565.
10° Counter-Memorial, para. 566.
10! Counter-Memorial, para. 567.
10% Counter-Memorial, para. 568.
13 Counter-Memorial, para. 569.
1° Counter-Memorial, paras. 570-572.
1095 Counter-Memorial, para. 573.

203

4.371

4.372

4.373

4.374

4.375

the loss of key tenants, and failure to secure others, resulted from Galerie’s inferior location,
which was part of the Claimants’ business risk,!°°

Third, the Respondent attacked the Claimants’ assertion that they would have prevailed on the
market but for the alleged breaches of the BIT; it submitted that the Claimants had failed to
provide any evidence that this was in fact the case, and noted that the evidence of their real
estate experts was that the high level of saturation of the market in meant that all
competitors would have suffered from high vacancy rates and fierce competition, resulting in
lower profitability.”

Fourth, in relation to the Claimants’ claim for lost profits, which was based on a valuation
assuming a sale on 15 December 2007, the Respondent submitted that the Claimants had not
shown any actions of the Czech Republic prior to 15 December 2007 “which even remotely
appear as a possible violation of the Treaty”, and recalled that the Claimants had themselves
accepted that the proceedings relating to the Planning Permit had been “almost regular”.!* It
further noted that the Claimants had only prepared an Investment Exposé in November 2007,
which it was intended would be distributed only once a valid Building Permit was obtained,
and on that basis submitted that the Claimants had never intended to sell the project in
December 2007.'%° The Respondent submitted that the lack of causation and “implausible”
valuation date undermined the entire claim for lost profits, and underlined that the Claimants in
the Memorial had not responded to the Respondent’s arguments in that regard contained in the
Answer to the Statement of Claim.'"°°

 

e Cause of Ab: nment of the Galerie Project

In addition, the Respondent put forward a positive case that, rather than resulting from any
difficulties in the administrative proceedings, as asserted by the Claimants, the real reasons for
the abandonment had in fact been the real estate crisis, which had an impact on the availability
of financing and depressed sale prices, and submitted that a further important factor had been
the over-saturation of the retail market in nol

Although accepting that it had no documentary evidence that the real cause of the
abandonment had been the financial pressure resulting from the combined effect of the retail
crisis and over-saturation of the market, it submitted that that was because the Claimants had
not disclosed “the financial calculations and liquidity reports underlying their decision”, and
other relevant documents, and invited the Tribunal to draw negative inferences in that
regard,'!0?

The Respondent further submitted that the Claimants had “ultimately realized that their time
estimates had been unreasonable”, and submitted that, despite their assertions to the contrary, it

4096 Counter-Memorial, para. 574.

1097

Counter-Memorial, paras. 575-576.

198 Counter-Memorial, paras. 577-578.
108° Counter-Memorial, para. 579.
110° Counter-Memorial, para. 580.
01 Counter-Memorial, paras. 581-582.
0? Counter-Memorial, para. 583.

204

4.376

4.377

4.378

4.379

4,380

4.381

was unlikely that they would have been able to complete the centre within just 19 months; it
noted that the Claimants had produced no documents supporting their assertions in that
regard,"

By way of conclusion of its arguments as to the cause of abandonment, the Respondent
submitted that the Claimants “finally recognized the inherent risks of the project,

exacerbated by the real estate crisis, and decided to abandon it”, 1104

iv. Relevance of the Excavations to Causation

Further, the Respondent argued that, even if the Claimants were able to establish their case
as to causation, any chain of casuation had in any case been broken by the excavations in
excess of those authorized by the Planning Permit; it argued that the violation of Czech
law had as a consequence that the relevant authorities were required to address the
unauthorized excavations through the Groundworks Removal Proceedings, and that the
Building Permit proceedings could only recommence once the Groundworks Removal
Proceedings had been resolved, '!°5

The Respondent emphasized that the Claimants had chosen not to apply for regularization
of the excess volume of excavations, or provide details as to their scope, which had
prevented any consideration by the authorities of whether or not to regularize them, !!°6

As such, the Respondent submitted that what it referred to as the “alternative timeline”
required by the Claimants’ case on causation (i.e. the situation “but for” the alleged
breaches of the BIT), did not support their claims. It argued that even if there had been a
breach of the BIT, the Claimants would still have found themselves in a situation in which
the proceedings in relation to the Building Permit for the main construction remained
blocked due to the unauthorized excavations with the result that Galerie would not have
been able to open in Autumn 2010 in any event.!!7

The Respondent concluded that the excessive excavations in any event broke the chain of

causation, such that the Claimants’ entire claim for damages in any event failed.'!°°

The Claimants’ Reply

Overview and General Points

At the outset of their Reply, the Claimants asserted that their claim related to acts of the Czech
authorities

113 Counter-Memorial, para. 584.
"8 Counter-Memorial, para. 585.
195 Counter-Memorial, paras. 586-588.
6 Counter-Memorial, para. 589.
197 Counter-Memorial, para. 590,
108 Counter-Memorial, para. 591.

205

 

 

4.382

4.383

4.384

“which led to the destruction of the Claimants’ investment in the Czech
Republic. Because of such illegal acts, Claimants were disrupted in their
investment activity and had to abandon an initially promising shopping
centre project. Significant circumstantial evidence points to a corruptive
scheme”,"1

The Claimants went on to suggest that they had created a “reasonable time schedule” for the
development of the Galerie project,'!° and that, despite the parallel development, in close
proximity, of Multi’s competing Forum project, on the basis of that schedule they had been
entitled to “assume that it would be them and not Multi who would succeed in attracting the
relevant tenants and opening first”.'"'' They submitted that the “obstructions and delays” in the
permit proceedings had been unexpected, and that they had not foreseen the “privileged
treatment” which they alleged had been granted to Multi, as they had not been aware of the
“corruption scheme created within Respondent’s authorities and related in particular to
Multi.”!"”? They further asserted that the circumstances were “highly suspicious”, in particular
in so far as the “numerous irregularities in the permit proceedings and the preferences granted
to Multi” could not be explained as mere “unfortunate circumstances”, and further that the
number of “illegal decisions rendered in or non-standard pr dings” should be
taken to exclude the possibility that they had occurred through pure coincidence. Rather, they
suggest that “individuals in the authorities purposefully obstructed” the Claimants. They also
pointed to other “conspicuous circumstances” which were alleged to show that a scheme of
corruption existed.''!"*

 

Having summarised their complaints as to the conduct of the Extraordinary Review
Proceedings and the Building Permit proceedings, and their case that the delays in the
proceedings forced them to abandon the project,!"" the Claimants reiterated that they claimed

breach of: '

a. the fair and equitable treatment standard (Article 2(1) of the BIT);

b. the prohibition of impairment by arbitrary and discriminatory measures (Article 2(2)
of the BIT); and

c the prohibition of expropriation and measures tantamount to compensation without
compensation (Article 4 of the BIT).'"’

The Claimants affirmed that their case was not that it was the Respondent’s
“various different acts that constitute, each in and of itself, a breach of the

treaty. [...] Rather Claimants submit that Respondent breached the treaty
through its overall obstructive conduct in the Extraordinary Review and

1109 Reply, para. 1.
1110 Reply, para. 3.

"" Reply, para. 4.

1122 Reply, para. 5.

1153 Reply, para. 5.
114 Reply, paras. 6-13.
"5 Reply, para. 14.

206

Main Building Proceedings and through the favourable treatment of
Multi?!"

4.385 They further argued that that was the case “irrespective of whether the numerous irregularities
were part of a corruption scheme to obstruct Claimants or result of mere coincidence”,
although they submitted that there were serious indices sufficient to prove corruption.!!"”

4.386 The Claimants also made a number of observations in relation to the allegedly irregular
conduct of the Respondent following the abandonment. In particular:

a. they reiterated the suggestion that the Ministry of Finance, in the person of
had improperly used the settlement negotiations in order to “lure” the Claimants into
agreeing to permit an on-site inspection and provide additional information in relation
to the excavation works on the project site, and that in doing so, the Ministry had
improperly taken advantage of the Claimants’ good faith attempts to reach a
settlement, in circumstances in which it had in fact had no real intention of seeking a
settlement, but was merely seeking material in order to raise a defence;!"!®

b. the Claimants stressed that the excavations had never been relied on by the relevant
authorities as a reason for the stays of which the Claimants complained, and
submitted that any attempt by the Respondent to draw a connection between the stays
and the excavation should be dismissed;!"”*

c. the Claimants also raised a number of additional complaints as to the conduct of the
Respondent once the present proceedings had started:

i they repeated that the Respondent had made a formal complaint to the
relevant Bar association against one of the Claimants’ main
witnesses,"

ii. they complained that the Respondent had asked employees of the Ministry

of Regional Development to submit any witness statements first to its
Counsel, thereby effectively preventing the Claimants from obtaining
evidence; '!!

iii. they observed that the Respondent had withheld from the Claimants
information as to the workings of the Advisory Committee within the
Ministry of Regional Development, despite the fact that under Czech law it

16 Reply, para. 14,
"17 Reply, para, 15.
"118 Reply, paras. 16-17.
1° Reply, para. 18.
1120 Reply, para. 20.
21 Reply, para. 21,

207

 

was obliged to disclose it, and in normal circumstances would have done
so;!!”? and

iv. noted that the Respondent had deliberately selected as its expert witness on
Czech law a colleague within the same department as the Claimants’ own
expert witness; the Claimants expressed concern that the Respondent was
thereby seeking to exert influence on the Claimants’ legal expert.'!”°

4.387 Finally, the Claimants sought to identify what it asserted were irrelevant issues, the relevant
issues, issues on which there was agreement between the Parties, and those issues which the

Claimants deemed to be most important.

1124

4.388 The Claimants submitted that the category of irrelevant issues included

a.

the imposition of the stays in the ancillary Building Permit proceedings (i.e. those
relating to water, and to internal and external roads), which, although illegal, had not
contributed to the delay which had forced the Claimants to abandon their project;

the conduct of the Respondent’s authorities following the abandonment, insofar as the
Claimants were not claiming damages in respect of any conduct after 13 October
2008, the asserted date of the abandonment. Nevertheless, the Claimants submitted
that those actions might indirectly be of relevance, in particular insofar as the conduct
of the Ministry of Finance barred the Respondent from relying on particular evidence
obtained by it."

4.389 As regards uncontested issues, the Claimants submitted that the Parties were in agreement that:

e.

the Third Stay had been illegal under Czech law;

MAL had not noticed that the appeal brought by Tschechien 7 against the Third Stay
had been out of time, and the issue had first been identified by RAL;

an opinion adopted by an Advisory Committee within a Ministry was not legally
binding;

the First Stay had been legal (although the Claimants maintained their position that it
had been unusual, and unnecessary); and

“Claimants’ excavations were legal at Jeast until June of 2008”.!16

4.390 As to the “relevant issues” to be decided, the Claimants submitted that these were:

1? Reply, para. 21

123 Reply, para. 22.
24 Reply, para. 23.
1125 Reply, para. 24.
"6 Reply, para. 25.

208

4,391

4.392

a whether there was a “corruption scheme involving Multi and individuals within the
authorities”; they asserted that “Multi and its construction company Syner unduly
influenced representatives of the City : and of MAL as well as the Minister
of Regional Development”;

b. whether, as part of the scheme, individuals within those authorities had illegally
obstructed the Claimants; it submitted that the Claimants had been subjected to
numerous non-standard and unjustified delays in the Extraordinary Review
Proceedings and in the Main Building proceedings;

c whether, as part of the scheme, those individuals had “illegally favoured Multi”;

d. whether, because of the “exceptionally high number of pre-lease agreements”
concluded by the Claimants with premium tenants, there was a guarantee that the
Claimants’ project would have succeeded;

e. whether the “numerous obstructions”, as well as the favourable treatment accorded to
Multi, had forced the Claimants to abandon the project;

f. whether the Claimants had done “everything in their power to remedy the situation”;
the Claimants submitted that the fact that the appeal against the Third Stay had been
belated “does not play a role”; and

whether the excavations had anything to do with the duration of the administrative
proceedings, and the decision to abandon the project; the Claimants submitted that
this was not the case, and that “the excavations do not play a role for Respondent’s
liability”.1?7

0a

Factual Matters

i,__ The Claimants’ Claim of Corruption

As to the facts, the Claimants first set out the basis for their claim that the “significant and
numerous circumstantial evidence points to a corruption scheme whereby Respondent
intentionally obstructed GALERIE to enable the competition Multi to succeed with its
project FORUM”.'8 They submitted that the irregularities in the administrative proceedings
had not been “a mere pearl chain of coincidences”, but rather “the expression of a deliberate

attempt to favour Multi over Claimants”.''°

In essence, the Claimants’ case in this regard was that:

a. Multi had had a vital interest in ensuring that Forum would open first, and that
Galerie would open later, or not at all;'!°

"27 Reply, para. 26.
"28 Reply, para. 27.
"9 Reply, para. 27.
1130 Reply, para. 29,

209

b. accordingly, it had influenced of MAL to obstruct the permit proceedings
for the Claimants, and to simplify the permitting process for Multi;!"9!

c that the vehicle for the alleged improper influence was Multi’s construction firm,
which, it was alleged, had a close relationship with the Mayor of
the City: 1132

d. following RAL’s rejection of Multi’s appeal against the Planning Permit, Multi had
sought to obstruct the Claimants by filing Extraordinary Review proceedings, and in
that connection, that it had recruited Minister who was prepared to remand the
matter to the Ministry, rather than terminate it;!"°3 and

e. Mr had improperly used the existence of the pending Extraordinary Review
proceedings as a pretext in order to adopt the Third Stay in the Building Permit
proceedings.!!*

4.393 The Claimants emphasized that they did not allege that all officials within the relevant
authorities were part of the scheme; in particular they submitted that
a. RAL was “incorruptible and independent”;!!7>
b. the Deputy Mayor « , Mr had “stayed neutral”;!3° and
Cc it was not all officials within the Ministry who were involved, but only those involved

in the Extraordinary Review Proceedings.'9’

4.394 The Claimants further admitted that it had “no direct proof of Multi paying the officials”, but
submitted that this was not necessary insofar as there were “numerous serious indices that
leave no other option but to conclude that a corruption scheme exists”,!"*

4.395 The Tribunal will not attempt to summarize here the various detailed matters relied upon by
the Claimants in order to substantiate their claim of the existence of a scheme of corruption,
but rather will discuss those arguments in its substantive discussion of the Claimants’ claim of
corruption later in the present award. For present purposes, it is sufficient to note that the
matters relied upon included:

a. information, including from NGOs, relating to the level of corruption within the
Czech Republic generally, as well as to particular alleged instances of corruption,
none of which were connected to the facts of the present case; 1139

113! Reply, para. 30.

32 Reply, para. 30.

"33 Reply, para. 33.

134 Reply, para. 34.

135 Reply, para. 35.
1136 Reply, para. 36.
37 Reply, para. 37.
1138 Reply, para. 40.

210

information, including from NGOs, relating to the level of corruption within
itself, including specific alleged instances of corruption, again none of which were

connected to the specific facts of the present case;''4°

allegations as to suspected corruption by —_—-_— within . None of which
specifically related to the facts of the present case, as well as allegations as to the
close connections between the owner of 3 . and Mr , the
Mayor of} ma

allegations that the cause of a supposed “freezing” of relations between the City
and the Claimants was due to the fact that. ~ was not awarded the
contract to build the Galerie project, and eventually ended up building Forum;!!”
detailed allegations, largely based on witness evidence, to the effect that the reasons
underlying particular occurrences within the Building Permit proceedings, including
the adoption of the stays, was either due to obstruction by Mr . or particular
instructions given to officials within MAL to find ways to obstruct the progress of the
proceedings.'? The Claimants emphasized that MAL had been fully aware of the
risk of abandonment by the Claimants in the event of delays as the result of a letter
sent to MAL on 23 May 2008 submitting the documents requested pursuant to the
Second Stay;''*
detailed allegations, again largely based on witness evidence, as regards specific
alleged irregularities within the Extraordinary Review Proceedings, as well as various
other irregularities, which, it was alleged, could only be explained by corruption and
an intention on the part of the relevant officials, including Minister to favour
Multi.''* The Claimants relied upon:

i the fact of initiation of the Extraordinary Review Proceedings, which they
submitted was in itself unusual;!™“

ii, the First Ministry Decision, an allegation that the employee of the Ministry
who had prepared the draft of the decision had expressed the opinion that it
was wrong, and the assertion that Tschechien 7 should have been heard and

treated as a participant in the proceedings;!!*”

 

1139 Reply, paras. 41-43,

1140 Reply, paras. 44-46.

14! Reply, paras. 47-50.

"'® Reply, paras. 51-53.

14 Reply, paras. 54-63 and 66.

14 Reply, paras. 64-65, referring to Core 6/193(Exhibit
1145 Reply, paras. 82-108.

14 Reply, para. 84,

147 Reply, para. 85.

33).

211

iii.

vi.

vii.

viii.

1148 Reply, para. 86.
149 Reply, paras. 87-92.
1150 Reply, paras, 93-97.
1151 Reply, para. 98.

152 Reply, paras. 99-100.
1153 Reply, paras. 101-102.

the denial of Tschechien7’s status as a participant in the proceedings
leading to the First Ministry Decision;’'®

the fact that Minister had deviated from the opinion of the Advisory
Committee in the First Minister Decision insofar as he had decided to
remand the matter, rather than terminate the proceedings; although
accepting that the opinion of the Advisory Committee was not legally
binding, the Claimants submitted that the Minister had never before deviated
from a recommendation of the Advisory Committee;!!”

the fact that Minister had not followed the draft prepared by the
Legal Department of the Ministry; the Claimants noted that, although a
draft had been prepared by the Legal Department based on the
recommendation of the Advisory Committee, the Minister had requested the
full file, following which the First Minister Decision had been issued in a
form different from the draft;!"°°

the timing of the First Minister Decision on 27 June 2008; the Claimants
submitted that the decision was significantly delayed, the recommendation
of the Advisory Committee having been issued on 22 April 2008, and
submitted that the decision was only issued as a result of the approach made
by the Claimants to the Prime Minister in their letter dated 16 June 2008;1!"

an allegation that Multi had inspected the First Minister Decision before it
was dispatched; the Claimants alleged that the legal representative of Multi
had inspected the file at the Ministry, and had “checked the wording as if it
had been Multi’s own draft” prior to its dispatch; on that basis they alleged
that Multi had communicated with the Minister and had requested that the
proceedings should improperly be remanded to the Ministry;!!?
the fact that subsequent to the First Minister Decision, the composition of
the Advisory Committee had changed, with the Minister replacing two of its
members with effect from 19 September 2008; the Claimants submitted that
the Minister had disapproved of the recommendation of the Advisory
Committee, and had appointed partisan members so as to be able to
influence the recommendation of the Advisory Committee in relation to the
Second Minister Decision;'!*?
the transfer of an official within the Legal Department at the Ministry, Ms
to another position; the Claimants emphasized that Ms was
the official who had previously stated to a representative of the Claimants

212

 

4.396

4.397

 

that the Minister had not previously deviated from a recommendation of the
1154

Advisory Committee;

x. the fact that the Second Minister Decision had reached a different decision
based on what the Claimants alleged were the same facts as those underlying
the First Minister Decision;!"*°

xi. specific allegations in relation to a corruption charge against Minister 5
in an unconnected matter, which the Claimants characterized as a “further
interesting coincidence” which cast doubt on his integrity;'!* and

xii. the alleged illegality of a number of the administrative decisions, in

particular all of the decisions in the Extraordinary Review Proceedings and
the Second and Third Stays;! 'S7 the Claimants argued that it was clear, even
without regard to the evidence of the legal experts, that the decisions were
“far from being standard”, and submitted that the decisions “cannot
plausibly be explained without assuming that they were part of a scheme to
obstruct Claimants”.!8
Although contained in the section setting out the Claimants’ case on corruption, it is necessary
to examine in more detail certain of the Claimants’ arguments in relation to the Third Stay,
which are also relevant to the Claimants’ claims more generally. The Claimants noted that the
Respondent had accepted that the decision was illegal, but drew specific attention to RAL’s
tuling of 8 October 2008 on the Claimants’ appeal against the Third Stay, and in particular
RAL’s observation that MAL had “artificially fabricated” a non-existent preliminary issue in
order to justify the Third Stay.'° They submitted that the justification put forward by the
Respondent for the Third Stay, based on the possibility that the Planning Permit might be
revoked, was cynical, insofar as MAL had been fully aware of the risk of abandonment, which
would have rendered revocation of the Planning Permit irrelevant.'! They further argued that
if the Planning Permit had been revoked, this would not necessarily have resulted in
cancellation of the Building Permit and a need to demolish any construction which had already
been carried out, and in any case, that they could have applied for a new Planning Permit.'!*!

The Claimants submitted that MAL had been aware of the illegality of the Third Stay after the
Claimants had on 31 July 2008 provided it with a copy of the opinion from the Ministry of
Regional Development dated 28 July 2008. They asserted that MAL should accordingly have

1154 Reply, para. 103.

1155 Reply, paras. 104-108.

1156 Reply, paras, 109-114.

457 Reply, paras. 115-116.

1158 Reply, para. 115.

1159 Reply, para. 67, quoting Core 8/279 (Exhibit R-59).
© Reply, paras. 68-69.

6! Reply, paras, 70-71.

213

 

4.398

4.399

4.400

4.401

4,402

4.403

sought to resume the proceedings sua sponte, and could have done so prior to the filing of
Tschechien 7’s (belated) appeal on 7 August 2008,!!

They further argued that MAL in any case had not been prevented from resuming the
proceedings sua sponte even after the Claimants had filed their belated appeal, and submitted
that it was crucial that MAL had not noted that the appeal was belated, and thus would not
have ded itself as p d from the dings.’ They also made the point
that if MAL had been concerned as to the Claimants’ good fortunes, it could have informed the
Claimants that the appeal would be an obstacle to it resuming the proceedings sua sponte, and
the appeal could have been withdrawn.’ Instead, they noted that MAL had failed to respect
what they alleged was the ten day time limit for transferring the case file to RAL, and had only
supplied it after 30 days."

Finally, the Claimants noted that following the delivery of RAL’s decision on the appeal on 8
October 2008, MAL had only resumed the proceedings on 29 October 2008, some three weeks
later, and after the Claimants had abandoned the project.’ The Claimants noted that the
Respondent had submitted that the file was returned from RAL only on 30 October 2008, and
argued that MAL must accordingly have been aware of RAL’s decision prior to that date, and
the delay in receiving the file could not therefore have been the cause of the delay.!!%”

ii___The Claimants’ Claims of Discrimination
The Claimants also devoted a substantial part of their discussion of the facts underlying their
claims of discrimination as between the Forum and Galerie projects; they linked those

arguments to their claim of corruption, asserting that favourable treatment of one competitior
over another is “the most obvious indicator that corruption is involved”.!16°

The first complaint in this regard was the disparity between the length of the various permit
proceedings for Forum, which the Claimants submitted were speedy, and the far longer
proceedings for Galerie, which it was submitted, had been “severely disrupted by MAL”."!°

Having noted that the Respondent had asserted that Forum had not met any opposition, the
Claimants asserted that the reason why the Forum proceedings had been quicker was that the
relevant authorities had miscalculated the number of neighbours, and therefore the number of
participants in the proceedings, which had simplified the permit proceedings for Multi.!!”°

They submitted that, although officially there were fewer than 30 participants in the Forum
proceedings, “it is hardly conceivable that a retail centre like Forum, in a similar location of

"© Reply, para. 72-74,
1163 Reply, paras, 75-76
"64 Reply, para. 77.

4165 Reply, para. 78.

166 Reply, paras. 79-80.
167 Reply, para. 81.

165 Reply, para. 117.
416° Reply, para. 118.
117 Reply, para. 119.

214

4.404

4.405

4.406

4.407

' like Claimants’ project and even adjoining the pedestrian zone should have fewer than
30 participants”.!””. The Claimants submitted that, on the basis of the number of neighbouring
plots of land, the proceedings should have involved well in excess of 30 participants,
especially taking account of the number of plots of land abutting Street,
which was reconstructed by Multi as part of the Forum development.'’” They further
submitted that the reason for the low number of official participants was that MAL had failed
to check the number of land plots involved, and that Multi had not mentioned the land plot
corresponding to street, and a number of other land plots, in the
supporting documentation for either the Planning Permit or Main Building Permit.'!*

The Claimants further submitted that, irrespective of the number of participants, the re-
development of street had constituted a “line-type structure” and that
accordingly, under the relevant legislation a public notice should in any case have been used to
communicate the Planning Permit for Forum."!*

The Claimants contrasted that situation with that of Galerie, which had more than 30
participants, such that publication by public notice was required. The Claimants submitted that
as a result, rather than being served individually by post, as had been the case with the
proceedings in relation to Multi, all decisions had had to be published on the notice board for
15 days, with the result that the Galerie proceedings had taken longer.''”® They further noted
that, due to the publication on the notice board, the general public had been informed of the
progress of the proceedings, and interested parties were able to raise objections and appeals,
whilst in the case of the proceedings relating to Forum, only those participants who had been
individually served could raise objections and file appeals, whilst other neighbours that would
normally have constituted participants were not informed of the progress of the proceedings
and thus could not raise objections.!!"°

Second, the Claimants relied upon the differing number of Building Permits required for the
two projects, asserting that both should have been required to submit only two applications for
Building Permits, the first for the construction of the main building, to be issued by the general
building authority, and the second for the construction of roads, to be issued by the special
building authority. By contrast, the Claimants noted that it had been requested that the Galerie
project submit four applications, whilst Forum had only submitted a single application.!!””

The Claimants alleged that the requirement to split the Building Permits had come from
Mr of MAL, who had requested the separation of the Building Permits for the main
building (Construction I), the internal roads (Construction Ib), and for the external roads
(Constructions II, III and IVa). They further alleged that he had threatened that, if that course
of action were not followed, he would reject the application if an application was made for
only two Building Permits, and promised that he would issue the Building Permits if the

"7 Reply, para. 120.
4 Reply, paras, 121-122.
173 Reply, para. 123.
" Reply, para. 124.
175 Reply, para. 125-126.
1376 Reply, para. 127.
"77 Reply, para. 128.

215

 

 

4.408

4.409

4.410

4.411

4.412

4.413

Claimants were to proceed as requested.!!”® The Claimants further alleged that the cooperation

agreement with the City of . was concluded only because the Claimants had decided to
accedetoMr.. ._ s request,!!7°
The Claimants asserted that Mr ‘s alleged request to split the proceedings had clearly

been illegal,''®° and that it put the Claimants at a disadvantage insofar as they had had to
separate the documentation for the various sets of proceedings, resulting in further delay.'!®’
They further submitted that MAL subsequently took advantage of the multiple proceedings in
order to find a justification for the Second and Third Stays, arguing that the proceedings in
relation to the Building Permit for the main building could not be continued whilst the
proceedings for the Building Permit in relation to the external roads were pending. ''*

The Claimants noted that, by contrast, Multi had applied for a single Building Permit, and had
made no separate application for Building Permit for the external roads; they alleged that
Forum’s Building Permit had not even mentioned the external roads.''®?

The Claimants submitted that Multi’s Building Permit was illegal, and noted that, by a motion
for extraordinary review, they had requested RAL to declare the permit null and void. They
emphasized that RAL, in a “decision” dated 1 April 2008, although it did not find that Multi’s
Building Permit was null, had held that the construction of the external roads had not been duly
authorized.''™ The Claimants further asserted that although RAL had thereafter on 2 April
2008 sent a letter to MAL instructing it to remedy the illegality, MAL had refused and had
chosen to ignore the legal opinion issued by RAL, and ignored a further request from RAL to
take relevant steps in that regard,’"8>

Finally, the Claimants drew attention to the fact that, although RAL had initially regarded itself
as competent to decide those questions, following submission of the Claimants’ Trigger Letter,
RAL had expressed the view that the competent body was rather the Ministry of Transport.
The Claimants submitted that that change of position was caused by the pendency of the
present proceedings and the undue influence of the Ministry of Finance, |!

Third, the Claimants alleged that the relevant authorities had ignored unauthorized
construction by Multi on land belonging to the City « and the damage caused to that
property, including the removal of pavements, and damage to greenery.'!®”

They also pointed to the fact that in the course of the supposedly unauthorized works, on 13
July 2008 Multi had damaged the municipal water main, resulting in flooding of

1178 Reply, paras. 129-130.

117 Reply, para. 131.

118 Reply, para, 132.

1181 Reply, para. 133.

"8 Reply, para. 134.

1183 Reply, para. 135.

118 Reply, para, 137, referring to Core 5/165 (Exhibit C-129).
185 Reply, paras, 138-139.

118 Reply, para. 140,

187 Reply, para. 141.

216

4414

4.415

4.416

street, a landslide in a neighbouring park, flooding of garages belonging to RAL and of
neighbouring properties and damage to vehicles parked in RAL’s garages. They submitted that
the incident would not have occurred if there had been due authorization of the works.'’®* The
Claimants noted that, although they had asked RAL to intervene, no action had been taken; that
similarly no action had been taken upon a criminal complaint filed against Multi by the
Claimants on 14 July 2008, which alleged that Multi was not authorized to construct on the
relevant plots of land and that it had endangered public safety and unlawfully enjoyed a thing
of another; and that no action had been taken following complaints to the City and
Mayor 1189

Fourth, the Claimants complained of a difference of treatment in relation to the overlap issue.
The Claimants asserted that only they had suffered from the overlap, despite the fact that it
arose as a result of the failure of MAL to coordinate the two projects. They pointed to the fact
that the overlap was the basis on which Multi had challenged Galerie’s Planning Permit, and
subsequently initiated the Extraordinary Review Proceedings, which in turn had been the
pretext for the Second and Third Stays adopted by MAL.!"° The Claimants further submitted
that not only had Multi made use of the overlap issue, but that MAL had done so as well; the
overlap could have been solved by an “insignificant change” to the Forum Planning Permit,
but, following the filing of a motion by the Claimants dated 22 November 2007 (i.e. during the
pendency of Multi’s appeal against the Planning Permit) for the Forum Planning Permit to be
modified, MAL had remained inactive.'"! The Claimants submitted that it was against this
background that Tschechien7 had filed its motion dated 14 April 2008 to withdraw their
intention to build the relevant part of the construction, but that MAL had subsequently used
that application in order to adopt the Second Stay.'!9?

The Claimants submitted that the Respondent had failed to provide any reason why Galerie
and Forum should have been regarded as materially different, noting that they were located
close to each other, separated only by a road; that they were of a similar size and complexity;
were both already in the course of development and had commenced leasing activities; and that
they were directed to a similar group of consumers.'!*

They further denied that there existed any justification for the difference in treatment,
suggesting that “most of Respondent’s justifications indeed are based on Respondent’s own
discriminatory behaviour”, and thus supported a finding of liability, rather than of justification
for the relevant behaviour:'!**

a. the Claimants argued that the Respondent could not rely on the opposition to Galerie,
noting that most of it was found to be “inadmissible” in any case. The Claimants
recalled their argument that MAL had ignored a number of relevant land plots for the

1188 Reply, para. 142.
1189 Reply, paras. 143-146,
119 Reply, paras. 147-150.
19) Reply, paras. 151-152.
118 Reply, paras. 153-154.
1183 Reply, para. 156.
1 Reply, para. 157.

217

 

 

4.417

4.418

purposes of the proceedings for Forum, thereby effectively reducing the possibility of
opposition to Forum;!"%

b. the Claimants denied that the road constructions for Galerie were in fact more
complex, and in any case, argued that the Respondent could not rely on that matter
insofar as MAL had not granted the required authorization and Forum had built the
roads illegally;!!°°

c. the Claimants further argued that the Respondent could not rely on the excavations;
although admitting that such excavations were unusual, they submitted that the
excavations had been authorized in the Planning Permit and in any case had not
delayed the Planning Permit proceedings.''”’ They further submitted that even if the
excavations had been illegal, this would not have caused any delay in the Building
Permit proceedings; had not been relied upon by RAL as grounds for a stay at any
point prior to the abandonment of the project, and that MAL had discriminated
insofar as, although it took action against the excavations, it had ignored the illegal
construction by Multi.!!*

iii,_Prospects of Success of Galerie

The Claimants thereafter devoted a substantial section of its Reply to charting the
transformation of the prospects of the project, from a situation in which they characterized the
project as having “outstanding chances of success” to the situation in which the Claimants
alleged they had been forced to abandon. The Claimants submitted that the cause was the
“obstructive and discriminatory treatment” of the Galerie project by the relevant authorities. '!%°

The Claimants emphasized the “vast experience” of the project team,'”°° and, denying that the

failure of the project was due to a bad business decision, argued that between 2005 and 2007,
the Galerie project had had better chances of success than its competitors. The Claimants:

a. relying on the high number of inhabitants in the catchment area, asserted that the
retail market at that point in time was not yet saturated, and relied upon the number of
developers contemplating projects as evidencing that the business opportunity was a
good one; !?!

b. submitted that the Galerie project had secured an unusually high number of pre-lease
agreements, including a “representative and outstanding tenant mix” which was better
than that secured at the time by Forum, and which they assert would have stayed with

195 Reply, para. 158.
4196 Reply, para. 159.
197 Reply, para. 160.
"5 Reply, para. 161.
119° Reply, para. 162.
20 Reply, para. 163.
1201 Reply, paras. 164-165,

218

4.419

4.420

4.421

Galerie, rather than shifting to Forum but for the uncertainty caused as to permits and
the Claimants’ opening date;'°*

c. attributed the high number of tenants to Galerie’s better layout and design; its
location, which was asserted to be better for customers arriving by car; and the
reputation of ECE, as evidenced by the number of pre-lease agreements concluded.
The Claimants denied that the location of Forum on the site of the former shopping
centre was a factor which had been taken into account by retailers,

The Claimants on that basis asserted that they would have succeeded in dominating the market
in They denied the Respondent’s suggestion that high market saturation following the
opening of all the planned retail centres would have resulted in lower tenancy rates in all
centres; submitted that the strongest retail centre would have won; and claimed that they would
not have had high vacancy rates since they had secured key anchor tenants and a high pre-lease
rate at an early stage, amounting to 65% by December 2007, with the majority of tenants
signed up for terms of 10 years.’

iv. Cause of Abandonment of the Project

As to the abandonment of the project, the Claimants emphasized that the determinative factor
had been the uncertain opening date of Galerie, dismissed the Respondent’s suggestion that the
opening date was of lesser importance on the basis that the importance of the opening date was
clear from the position taken by potential tenants, and submitted that the key factor was not
whether customers would become accustomed to a shopping centre, but rather the views of key
tenants, 7°

The Claimants noted that the pre-lease agreements which had been concluded became invalid
if the stipulated expected opening date was not met. They further noted that the duration of a
project depended to a large extent upon the amount of money that the developer was prepared
to spend, and submitted that this explained the various projected opening dates apparent in the
minutes of the Board Meetings, which varied according to the stage of the permitting process
and the possibilities for accelerating the process by spending extra money.'°° They noted that
in an extreme case it would have been possible to commence construction works on the date of
issue of the Planning Permit, with the general construction contractor having been identified
and the documentation for the Building Permit having been prepared whilst the Planning
Permit was being considered and submitted immediately thereafter such that the Building
Permit could be issued soon after. They noted that such measures would have shortened the
projected duration of the development, and denied the Respondent’s suggestion of
corruption.” They further observed that different parts of the construction could have been
undertaken in parallel, and resort could have been had to additional acceleration measures,
including the use of night shifts, but that this was in the end a question of how much money

1202 Reply, paras. 166-169.

203 Reply, para. 170.

1204 Reply, paras. 171-174.

205 Reply, para. 175-176.

1206 Reply, paras. 177-178; 181.
1207 Reply, para. 179,

219

 

4.422

4.423

4.424

4.425

was spent early in the project, which would have thus increased the Claimants’ exposure.'?

Finally, the Claimants emphasized that, contrary to the Respondent’s position, it was indeed
possible that a delay of two or three weeks could result in the shifting of the opening by half a
year, as shopping centres generally open only in the Spring or Autumn.!?”

As to the facts, the Claimants emphasized that immediately before abandonment of the project
it had become apparent that a shift of the opening date to Autumn 2010 had become necessary,
submitted that “even this opening date could not be guaranteed because there was no fair
play”,'?!° and noted that this would have had “severe implications on the tenant structure” of
Galerie, insofar as it would have resulted in the loss of 15% of the pre-lease agreements, and
renegotiation would thus have become necessary.'”"' They emphasized that the Respondent
itself had recognized that many tenants had been disappointed by the shift, asserted that Multi
had been offering discounted rates, and gave illustrative examples of the reaction of a number
of individual tenants to the situation, !!

Against that background, the Claimants asserted that the cause for the abandonment had been
the “unpredictability of the permit situation”, and submitted that the Claimants had had to
make a prognosis in October 2008 as to whether a Building Permit would be issued in the near
future and whether the Planning Permit would be upheld by the Minister. They asserted that
the uncertainty was entirely due to the conduct of the Czech authorities and was not self-
inflicted,!?!3

By way of explanation, the Claimants first asserted that there was no link between the
excavation and the Building Permit, and submitted that the issue of the Building Permit was
not dependent upon the termination of the Groundwork Removal proceedings.’!* They
submitted that, whatever the formal position as a matter of Czech law, the question was not
relevant “because this issue could not have inflicted any uncertainty on Claimants and
therefore could not have influenced their decision to abandon the project” and submitted that
the issue had only became relevant after the sending of the Claimants’ Trigger Letter.'7"°

They explained that the Third Stay had not been based on the Groundwork Removal
proceedings, which had only been commenced on 15 August 2008, following the site visit of
13 August 2008, and therefore after the adoption of the Third Stay on 9 July 2008, but rather
had been justified by MAL on the basis of the pending Extraordinary Review proceedings. '7!°
They further noted that the Groundworks Removal Proceedings had not initially been actively
pursued, and that between their commencement and the abandonment of the project, there had
been no discussion of whether a stay of the proceedings relating to the Main Building Permit

1208 Reply, para. 180.
1209 Reply, para. 182.
1210 Reply, para. 183.
21! Reply, para. 183.
1212 Reply, para. 184-192.
1213 Reply, para. 193.
24 Reply, paras. 194-195.
1215 Reply, para. 196
1216 Reply, para. 197.

220

4.426

4,427

4.428

4.429

was required.’”!” In addition they pointed to the fact that, despite the pendency of the
Groundwork Removal proceedings, MAL had resumed the Building Permit proceedings on
29 October 2008 and thereafter had issued the Building Permit for the main construction on
26 November 2008.'!*

Although acknowledging that the Main Building Permit never became legally effective, they
submitted that this was because it contained an illegal condition as to its duration, and that this
was the reason why it had been appealed by Tschechien 7.’*!° They argued that it was only
after the Ministry of Finance had given instructions to MAL and RAL following the start of the
settlement negotiations that the question of a stay of the Building Permit proceedings became
live. They pointed to the fact that the Groundworks Removal Proceedings had not been
pursued, and noted that it was only following the instruction given by the Ministry of Finance
that RAL, on 25 February 2009, had in turn instructed MAL to take action in that regard, that
the question of a stay of the Main Building Permit proceedings had been raised, and that RAL
had stayed the proceedings on 12 March 2009.'”°

Second, the Claimants submitted that no blame could be attributed to them for the fact that the
Planning Permit had authorized excavation works; they submitted that the question had only
been raised by the Respondent in the present proceedings, noting that Multi in challenging the
Planning Permit had only raised the question of the overlap, and that that issue had remained
the “single decisive issue” throughout the appellate proceedings and the subsequent
Extraordinary Review process.!”’ Although acknowledging that the Second Ministry
Decision had raised the illegality of the Planning Permit on the basis of its authorization of
excavation works, they submitted that that was a “side-note”, and simply the result of a search
by the Ministry for additional reasons for finding the Planning Permit illegal. They further
observed that although the Ministry had held that Tschechien 7 could not have been in good
faith as to the legality of the Planning Permit, that finding had been based on the overlap issue,
and the lack of coordination between the two projects.’*” They further submitted that the
authorization of the excavation works had not played a role in the Second Ministry Decision,
and that the excavation was rather relied upon as evidencing that the Claimants had relied in
good faith on the Planning Permit,!2°3

Finally on that point, the Claimants argued that, in any event, whether the Planning Permit
could authorize excavation works was irrelevant insofar as MAL had granted the application
and authorized the work, such that any illegality and the consequential risk that the Planning
Permit might be quashed was to be attributed to the Respondent, and not to the Claimants. 17

Third, the Claimants argued that no uncertainty had been caused by the lateness of the appeal
against the Third Stay, suggesting that, at the point at which the decision to abandon the

1217 Reply, para, 198.

218 Reply, para, 199,

219 Reply, para. 200.

1229 Reply, para. 201-202.
121 Reply, paras. 203-204.
1222 Reply, para. 205.

123 Reply, para. 206.

'24 Reply, para. 207.

221

 

4.430

4.431

4.432

4.433

project had been taken, there was no further uncertainty caused by that appeal, as RAL had
already requested MAL to resume the proceedings sua sponte, and the Claimants thus were
entitled to expect that the proceedings would recommence in the near future. The Claimants
added that, in light of their previous experience, they had had no certainty that MAL would not
find a further pretext to delay the proceedings, and that it was that uncertainty that caused the
Claimants finally to abandon the project.!?%

As to the Respondent’s arguments that the financial and real estate crisis or insufficient
liquidity were behind the decision to abandon the project, the Claimants denied that those
factors had played any role, asserting that the Claimants were largely funded by cash by the
owners of the ECE Group and was not dependent upon external funding, and that ECE had not
been dependent upon an investor purchasing the project, but could have held and managed the
project until a suitable opportunity arose.'°° They made reference to other retail centres they
had successfully developed during the crisis, and denied that the failure of ECE’s operations in
Ukraine was in any way probative, observing that the cause had been the conduct of its joint

vy. Date of Abandonment

As to the date of abandonment, the Claimants denied the Respondent’s suggestion that the
decision was linked to the financial crisis and had only been taken on 8 December 2008,
following the Second Minister Decision and the issue of the Building Permit for the main
construction; it asserted that the decision was taken on 13 October 2008.'?”* In support of that
position, it relied principally on the evidence of a number of witnesses who had participated in
the meeting of the “Kleiner Kreis” (small circle) of the Management Board, and explained that
minutes of such meetings, in which sensitive decisions were discussed, were not kept. As to
the circumstances of the abandonment, its position was that after Mr had given a
presentation setting out the risks of the project, “the panel decided ad hoc to abandon the
project”, and that it was for this reason that there were no written documents evidencing the
decision.'”°

The Claimants also submitted that “it followed from” the Trigger Letter dated 7 November
2008 that the abandonment had already taken place at that time, in particular insofar as the
Claimants would not have claimed losses of up to €56 million if the project had not already
been given up.'°

As to the sequence of events relating to the communication of the abandonment to tenants, the
Claimants asserted that although there had been some delay, that did not put into question the
date of the abandonment insofar as they had decided to wait until after the opening of its
Arkady Pankrac shopping centre in Prague on 13 November 2008. They explained that they
had wanted to avoid the abandonment of the Galerie project overshadowing the opening of

25 Reply, paras. 208-210.
1226 Reply, paras. 211-216.
1227 Reply, paras. 217-218.
1228 Reply, para. 219,
1229 Reply, para. 220.
230 Reply, para. 221.

222

4.434

4.435

4,436

Arkady Pankrac; that, in any event, the period immediately preceding the opening was “very
work-intensive”; and that following the opening of Arkady Pankrac the Claimants started to
inform the prospective tenants of Galerie in the second-half of November 2008, with important
tenants being informed in advance by individual conversation in an attempt to limit the
Claimants’ loss of credibility, whilst the other tenants were officially informed by letter on or
around 8 December 2008.'**! The Claimants submitted that, in that context, their actions in
signing a pre-lease agreement with a prospective tenant on 6 November 2008 were
understandable, 7°

In relation to the Respondent’s allegation as to the continuation of excavation works after the
date of abandonment, the Claimants asserted that the only works carried out after October 2008
were “excavations for securing works” in November 2008, and “securing works without
further excavations” in December 2008.'”? They explained that excavation was necessary in
order to prevent steep slopes from sliding, in particular either to reduce the angle of the slope,
or to prepare the slope for the building of pile walls or nailed walls, and that excavations had
been necessary in order to build approach ramps required for the heavy machinery necessary
for securing works.'** They pointed to the low volumes of earth excavated, and submitted that
only a few workers had been present on site from 13 October to the end of November 2008,
pointed to the fact that an expert was engaged in mid-November in order to assess the stability
of the construction pit and to determine the securing works necessary, and emphasized that no
excavation, but only securing work, had taken place in December 2008.!**°

In addition, the Claimants disputed the Respondent’s argument that the permit situation as at
the alleged aband date of 8 D ber 2008 itted by the Resp had in fact
improved as a result of the issue in the interim of the Second Minister Decision and the Main
Building Permit; the Claimants asserted that the argument was flawed insofar as they had only
subsequently become aware of the Second Minister Decision, and it had only been served on
them on 16 December 2008.'7°°

vi. Reasonableness of Time Estimates

The Claimants asserted that the time schedule elaborated by them had been “sound and
reasonable”, arguing that it was entitled to rely on its experience with Galerie Varikova in Brno
where the permitting process had been “speedy and efficient”, whilst the delays it had faced in
relation to Arkédy Pankrac were to be ignored because of the “unique situation in Prague”.!?°”
They further submitted that they had been entitled not to take into account appeals, both as a
matter of principle, and on the basis that they were not to be expected in relation to the Galerie
project.'738

1231 Reply, paras. 222-226.
1232 Reply, para. 227.
1233 Reply, para. 228.
14 Reply, para. 228.
1235 Reply, paras. 229-230.
256 Reply, paras. 231-232.
1237 Reply, para. 233.
1238 Reply, para. 233.

223

 

 

4.437

4.438

4.439

As to the Galerie Vaiikova project, the Claimants submitted that it had been broadly
comparable with Galerie , both in terms of size and technical complexity.’ By
contrast, it submitted that Arkédy Pankrac was not comparable, given the complexity of the
project, including the fact that it formed part of a much larger development, which led to a
number of requests for extension of time,’**° and the strong resistance from civic associations
in Prague, which, it was submitted, routinely opposed any major development.'**" It submitted
that no similar opposition should have been expected outside Prague.'*? The Claimants added
that the Planning Permit proceedings in relation to Arkady Pankrac were delayed because ECE
had submitted a pro forma application without supporting documentation in order to ensure
application of the then-applicable version of the Building Act, in advance of the point it would
normally have made its application, and that the complete documentation had only been
supplied some 14 months later.!%4?

As to the issue of whether the statutory time-limits were binding, the Claimants first submitted
that the question was not strictly relevant, and:

a. characterized the Respondent’s attempt to justify the non-binding nature of the
statutory time-limits on the basis of the principle of substantive correctness of
administrative decision under Czech administrative law as “cynical”, and submitted
that even if it were true that time-limits could be disregarded in order to ensure
correct decisions were made, that argument could have no application to illegal
decisions (as to which it pointed to the stays in the Building Permit proceedings, and
the two Ministry Decisions and First Minister Decision in the Extraordinary Review
Proceedings );

b. argued that the principle of substantive correctness could not justify the alleged
intention on the part of the authorities to delay the proceedings to the detriment of the
Claimants; and

c. noted that the Respondent had not argued that the delays were necessary to reach
correct decisions, and observed that such an argument could not be made as the
decisions were not of a complexity such as to justify the delays.'**

The Claimants nevertheless maintained their position that the statutory time-limits were strictly
binding, and argued that the Respondent’s position to the contrary contradicted itself, insofar
as:

a. extensions of the statutory time limit had been sought and granted in relation to the
Arkddy Pankrac project; the Claimants submitted that that would not have been
necessary if the time-limits were not in any case binding;

125 Reply, para. 234-235.
149 Reply, paras, 238-244.
1241 Reply, paras. 245-251.
12 Reply, para. 252.

1243 Reply, para, 253-255.
124 Reply, para, 257.

224

4.440

4.44]

4.442

 

b. in its Answer to the Statement of Claim, the Respondent had relied upon detailed
calculations of time, based on the statutory time-limits; and

c RAL in its decision of 8 October 2008, rejecting Tschechien7’s belated appeal
against the Third Stay, had criticized MAL’s handling of the Building Permit
proceedings on a number of bases, including for failing to respect the time-limit for
transmission of the the case-file to RAL!

The Claimants asserted that they were entitled not to expect that appeals would be filed,
insofar as it was a wide-spread practice in the area of property development, and that in any
case, there was no indication that appeals from either Multi, neighbours or civil associations
were likely.'“° They further submitted that even taking account of appeals, an opening in
Spring 2010 would still have been feasible.'”’ They characterized the Respondent’s suggestion
as to the necessary time which should have been budgeted as a “worst case scenario”, and
submitted that the Claimants should not have had to expect that the Planning Permit would be
quashed.'4* They further argued that what the Respondent submitted was the maximum time
period was not in any event applicable to the Building Permit proceedings, and that a Building
Permit could have been expected promptly insofar as, under the Old Building Code, objections
that could have been raised in the Planning Permit proceedings or in relation to the change in
zoning plan could not then be raised in the Building Permit proceedings.'“°

The Claimants further asserted that appeals by Multi should not have been expected, insofar as
Multi did not qualify as a participant and was therefore not entitled to file an appeal, and in any
case, Multi’s appeal would not have been possible had it not been for the fact that the Planning
Permit had been taken down from the notice board early by MAL. They argued that the need
for repetition of the publication furnished Multi with the possibility of filing an appeal, insofar
as its appeal was filed on the last day of the statutory period for appeals following the second
publication, and submitted that, but for the error, which effectively extended the time-limit,
Multi would not have filed any appeal.'?*° In addition, they submitted that there had initially
been a “mutual understanding between Multi and ECE” that each would not appeal the other’s
permits and that it would be left to the market to decide which project would succeed, and that,
on that basis, they had been entitled to expect that Multi would not attempt to obstruct the
permitting process in relation to Galerie in elaborating their timetable.'”*

The Claimants also disputed the Respondent’s suggestion that appeals by neighbours were to
have been expected insofar as there had been “no indicators that would have led to the
expectation that there would be more resistance by neighbours than usual”.! They argued
that that expectation had in fact been confirmed insofar as the appeals filed by neighbours had
not caused any delays, and it had only been the actions of Multi which had been of any

124 Reply, para. 258.
1246 Reply, para. 259.
29 Reply, para. 260.
1248 Reply, para. 261.
124° Reply, para. 262.
1250 Reply, paras. 263-268.
1251 Reply, para. 269.
1232 Reply, para. 270.

225

 

 

4,443

4,444

4,445

4.446

relevance.!*? They submitted that the site for Galerie was in the city centre, with only a few
residential neighbours, and that in any case, it was normally possible for a developer to
negotiate a solution with neighbours, such that the existence of residential neighbours could
not be understood inevitably to result in opposition.’ They further emphasized that ECE
generally developed sites in city centres, similar to , and its normal practice was not to
budget for appeals.!?5°

The Claimants further denied the Respondent’s suggestion that opposition was to be expected
from civic associations, suggesting that the authorities in had not previously faced
appeals, and civic associations in had not previously opposed major construction
projects. They pointed to the lack of opposition to Forum as supporting its position.'°”
They further submitted that although had not objected to Forum, this was because
it was “the extended arm and the vehicle used by Multi to oppose Galerie » 1258 ‘They
pointed to the close similarity of the formulation of the appeals and objections filed by Multi
and in relation to the Main Building Permit, and alleged that Multi’s architect had
held a power of attorney for , and had approached neighbours of the Galerie project
in an attempt to convince them to object to the permits for Galerie,"

The Claimants submitted that they had been realistic in budgeting for the time necessary for
construction, again pointing to the experience of Galerie Vaiikova in Brno, which was slightly
larger, and for which excavations had commenced only after obtaining a Building Permit. They
submitted that it would have been possible to accelerate construction by having the
groundworks and construction of the main building overlap, which they asserted had been
planned from the outset, and which they submitted was a common practice. They further
argued that the fact that the contract with Integra had made no reference to measures which
would have permitted such acceleration was irrelevant, insofar as Integra had not at the time
been selected as general contractor for the construction of the main building.!7°

 

Cause of Delays

The Claimants further submitted that all delays in the project had been caused by actions of the
relevant administrative authorities of the Respondent, in particular the First Minister Decision,
the two Ministry Decisions, the stays in the Building Permit proceedings in relation to the main
building, and the request to split the Building Permits, 2°"

Conversely, they denied that any delays had been caused by them. They:

1259 Reply, para. 270.

1254 Reply, paras, 271-272.
55 Reply, paras. 273.

1256 Reply, para. 274.

257 Reply, para. 275.

1258 Reply, para. 276.

259 Reply, paras, 277-279.
1260 Reply, paras. 280-281.
261 Reply, para. 282.

226

4.447

4.448

4.449

4.450

a. denied that any delay had been caused by the fact that the complete application for
the Building Permits was submitted only on 17 May 2007, after the application had
been filed on 28 December 2006, suggesting that that had always been the Claimants’
plan, and emphasized that the filing in December 2006 was so as to ensure that the
Old Building Law was applicable;!*

b. submitted that it had been sensible to wait two months from having obtained the
Planning Permit to apply for the Building Permits, insofar as time was necessary in
order to prepare the application, and noted that they had originally foreseen a longer
period in that regard;!?6

c. argued that the fact that the application for a Building Permit when filed was
incomplete, and that further documentation was required, was irrelevant, and that the
delays rather resulted from the First and Second Stays, which were “nonstandard”,
insofar as proceedings were not normally stayed when documentation was
missing. 17+

The Claimants further denied that any delay had been caused by local opposition, suggesting
that the “few objections and appeals” filed during the course of the permit proceedings had had
no effects. They drew a distinction in this connection between the objections and appeals of
Multi and (which it was submitted was shown by the evidence merely to be an
“extended arm of Multi”), and the objections filed by other third parties. As to the latter, the
Claimants noted that most of the appeals and objections had been ruled inadmissible, and had
had no effect on the proceedings. They submitted that there was “not a single objection or
appeal that can not either be traced back to Multi or that was inadmissible”. °°

The Claimants went on to note that in the Planning Permit proceedings, the majority of the
objections and appeals had been rejected as inadmissible on the ground either that they were
belated, or because the person raising the objection did not have standing as a participant in the
proceedings, and as a consequence did not have to be considered on the merits, and had
therefore caused no delay, or were subsequently withdrawn. They emphasized that the only
relevant opposition had been raised by Multi. '°°

As regards the Extraordinary Review Proceedings, they emphasized that only the motion by
Multi was of any relevance, with the motions of other persons and entities being irelevant.'”

In relation to the Building Permit Proceedings for the main building, the Claimants submitted
resistance by neighbours and civic associations had equally played no role. They noted that
the objections raised by had been held to be inadmissible as \ had been
held not to be a participant, and that objections raised by various neighbours, as well as by
Multi, had been rejected on substantive grounds in the Building Permit. The Claimants further

202 Reply, para, 283.

53 Reply, para. 284.

264 Reply, para. 285.

265 Reply, para. 286 (emphasis in original; footnote omitted).
1266 Reply, paras. 287-290.

1267 Reply, paras, 291-293.

227

 

4.451

4.452

4.453

dismissed the relevance of the appeals filed by neighbours against the Building Permit on
22 December 2008, as they had only been filed after the abandonment,” In addition, the
Claimants argued that the objections made by neighbours and civic associations in the
proceedings relating to the Building Permits for the internal and external roads and water were
irrelevant, insofar as it was the Building Permit for the main building which had been crucial
for the progress of the project. '2

viii. Actions n Agaii lays

The Claimants submitted that they had taken “every possible and effective measure against the
delays”, and rejected the Respondent’s argument that the delays occurred because they had
failed to appeal every illegal decision rendered by the Czech authorities. The Claimants
submitted that they had appealed against “each and every decision where an appeal was
possible”, and in addition had taken “further political steps”.!2”° Although admitting that they
had failed to file a timely appeal against the Third Stay, the Claimants submitted that this was
irrelevant insofar as MAL had been obliged to resume the Building Permit proceedings sua
sponte, and submitted that, in any case, even a timely appeal would not have resulted in any
different outcome in light of the Respondent’s alleged intention to obstruct the proceedings, !2”!

By way of explanation, the Claimants asserted that they had appealed against each decision
which was to their detriment in the Planning Permit proceedings, and emphasized that those
proceedings were nearly regular and that they complained in particular of the Extraordinary
Review Proceedings.’ They noted that the Respondent admitted that the Claimants had
successfully appealed against the relevant decisions insofar as possible, including appealing
against the First and Second Ministry Decisions, and that they had commenced court
proceedings before the Municipal Court in Prague in respect of the First Minister Decision,
although that action was subsequently discontinued as moot due to the issuance of the Second
Minister Decision?” They observed that no appeal was brought against the Second Minister
Decision because it was in their favour, and because it was rendered after the abandonment.!2"4

As regards the Building Permit Proceedings for the main construction, the Claimants asserted
that they had “successfully proceeded against” the First and Second Stays.!?" As regards the
First Stay, they noted that Tschechien 7 had produced the documents requested shortly after it
was issued, with the result that it was lifted, and no appeal was necessary.” In relation to the
Second Stay, they observed that although an appeal had been filed on 27 May 2008, MAL

1268 Reply, paras. 294-297.
126 Reply, paras. 298-299.
127 Reply, para. 300.
27) Reply, para. 301.
2? Reply, para. 302.
273 Reply, para. 303.
1274 Reply, para. 304.
275 Reply, para. 306.
1276 Reply, para. 307.

228

4.454

4.455

4.456

thereafter initiated the proceedings on 2 June 2008, with the result that there was no reason to
1277

pursue the appeal, and it was withdrawn.
In relation to the Third Stay, the Claimants explained that the admittedly belated filing of the
appeal had been due to “an unlucky accident”, in particular the fact that the Claimants had
relied on the time period based on service of the Third Stay by public notice, without being
aware that MAL had served the Third Stay personally on Mr (who had failed to inform
Ms of that fact), with the result that the deadline for filing the appeal by
Tschechien 7 and EKZ Prag 1 was in fact some 11 days earlier.'*”* They noted that MAL itself
had failed to realize that Tschechien 7’s appeal was belated, and that it was only upon RAL’s
consideration of the appeal that the issue had been identified, '?””

The Claimants submitted that the belatedness of the appeal against the Third Stay was
nevertheless not relevant. First, referring to RAL’s decision of 8 October 2008, they argued
that the Third Stay had been “manifestly and evidently illegal”,'**° and that MAL could and
should have resumed the proceedings sua sponte. They submitted that the proceedings should
have been resumed by MAL even prior to the filing of the appeal by Tschechien 7 on 7 August
2008, insofar as it had been provided with the opinion obtained from the Ministry for Regional
Development dated 31 July 2008 which stated that a stay in such circumstances was illegal.’
They further submitted that even after the filing of the appeals, MAL had been “legally entitled
and obliged” to resume the proceedings, and reiterated their argument that it was irrelevant that
MAL could not auto-remedy the appealed decision because of the belated nature of the appeal
due to the fact that MAL was not even aware that the appeal had been filed out of time.*
Finally, they argued that following RAL’s decision of 8 October 2008, which “unequivocably
ordered to resume the proceedings sua sponte”, MAL should not have waited until 29 October
2008 to resume the proceedings, by which time they had abandoned the project. 8

Second, they argued that even if the appeal by Tschechien 7 had been filed in time, this would
have made no difference, insofar as MAL rejected the appeal, without noticing that it was
belated.'”* They further submitted that, in light of the preceding events, MAL would in any
case “have found a way to delay the Building Proceedings even further, even if RAL had
quashed the third stay”.!78° They pointed to the delay of several weeks between RAL
requesting MAL to resume the proceedings, and MAL in fact doing so, and submitted that
even if RAL had in fact quashed the Third Stay, MAL would in any case have delayed for
several more weeks to issue the Building Permit, such that it would in any case have been
issued after the abandonment by the Claimants.'7°°

277 Reply, para, 308.

1278 Reply, paras. 310-311.

1279 Reply, para. 312.

1280 Reply, para. 314.

1281 Reply, paras, 313-315.

1282 Reply, paras. 316-317; see above, paragraph 4.398.
1283 Reply, para. 318.

284 Reply, para, 319.

1285 Reply, para. 320.

1286 Reply, para, 320,

229

   

 

 

 

4.457

4.458

4.459

4.460

4.461

4.462

The Claimants affirmed that the appeals in relation to the “ancillary” Building Permits
concerning permits for the internal and external roads and water, were irrelevant as they had
had no effect on their decision to abandon the project; again, they submitted that it was the
Main Building Permit which was crucial, explaining that the ancillary works could have been
undertaken after the start of construction of the main building.'?°”

Finally, the Claimants submitted that any appeals filed after the abandonment of the project on
13 October 2008 were of no relevance; they explained that those appeals had been undertaken
only in the hope that they would be able to sell the land plots.'288

The Claimants in addition made reference to the “political remedies” to which they had
resorted, including writing to the Prime Minister in June 2008 to “inform him of the
irregularities in the Extraordinary Review Proceedings and to ask him to intervene”.!”*? The
Claimants explained that that letter had been written in circumstances in which the Advisory
Committee had in April 2008 issued its recommendation to terminate the proceedings, but
Minister ' had taken no action in that regard. They stressed that there had been “nothing
improper in turning to political decision-makers and to diplomatic measures to point out the ill-
treatment of an investor and to point out an investment arbitration as a legal and rightful
alternative for the investor”,!?° and submitted that, in a case of corruption, and not “mere
administrative mistake”, “political measures are more appropriate than administrative

measures”,!9!

ix. Legality of the Claimants’ Conduct, Including Excavations

The Claimants further denied that they themselves had engaged in any illegal behaviour. They
submitted that the Respondent had sought to “distract from its own corruption scheme” by
invoking the excessive excavations and alleging corruption by the Claimants, noting that the
Respondent “seems to insinuate without further factual support that Claimants raised the
budget to ‘interfere’ with the administrative proceedings and that it sent fabricated invoices to

Integra not in return for services, but to conceal these payments”. !?*

The Claimants denied that there had been any corruption on their part, and characterized the
+» 1293,

Respondent’s allegations in that regard as “outrageous”.
They denied that the increase in the budget had been intended to conceal bribes, and affirmed
that their aim had rather been to accelerate the project by use of regular measures, in particular
by funding architectural services, including the preparation of the detailed work drawings to be

87 Reply, para. 321.
1288 Reply, para. 322.
289 Reply, para. 323.
129 Reply, para. 324,
91 Reply, para, 325.
2 Reply, para. 326,
293 Reply, para. 327.

230

4.463

4.464

4.465

4.466

used by the general contractor for construction of the main building, and preparation of the
tender documents necessary for the award of the contract to the general contractor.'2*

They further submitted that the Respondent was not fully aware of the background to the
issuing of the relevant invoices, and that the supposed “irregularities” identified by the
Respondent were due to a change in the pricing scheme for the excavation due to difficulties
encountered due to the price applicable for different classes of earth which resulted in
amendment of the price per cubic metre; disagreement with Integra as to the cost of the
securing works, and difficulties linked to changes in the exchange rate between the Czech
Crown and the Euro. The Claimants provided a detailed explanation and reconciliation of the
course of events, and of the invoices issued by Integra and the sums paid.!2°5 The Claimants
explained that finalisation of the negotiations with Integra on the various issues had taken
some time, and that it was for that reason that the amendment to the Integra contract had been
finally concluded only on 25 June 2009, !29

As regards the excessive excavations, the Claimants observed that whilst “the amount of
excavation taken place and the necessity of securing works” was “largely undisputed”, there
was disagreement as to whether all the excavations in excess of the amount permitted in the
Planning Permit were justifiable as securing works.'?°”

As to the legality of the excavations, the Claimants invoked the fact that the Planning Permit
authorized excavation of “approximately” 170,000 m°, and submitted that the imprecise nature
of the figure was necessary because of the fact that the works covered a large area, and were
based on assumptions as to the soil structure; they accordingly submitted that “the actual
amount therefore has to be adapted to the conditions found”!** They further submitted that the
authorized amount was not exceeded “during the ordinary groundworks”, but that rather they
had been forced to continue the excavation works in order “to secure the construction pit”.!2%
They further emphasized that there had been “no decision by the Czech authorities that has
become effective and binding that finds against the legality of the excavations”,!*° noting that
the decision in the New Administrative Offence proceedings had not become legally effective
and binding, but those proceedings were still pending before MAL, and that the Groundworks
Removal Proceedings were equally pending insofar as RAL on 2 June 2010 had quashed the
order of MAL dated 4 February 2010 by which MAL had ordered removal of the excessive
groundworks, and remanded the matter to MAL?

The Claimants maintained their argument that the groundworks had subsequently been
legalized by the issue of the Main Building Permit, suggesting that “[nJot only were the
excavations therefore originally legal, they were also legalized by the Building Permit”.°

1294 Reply, paras. 327; 328-332,
1295 Reply, paras. 327; 333-357.
1296 Reply, para. 339.

1257 Reply, para. 358, 359-360.
1298 Reply, para. 361.

125 Reply, para. 362.

150 Reply, para. 363.

130 Reply, para. 363.

1302 Reply, para, 364.

231

4.467

4,468

4.469

4.470

They submitted that the fact that the Building Permit had not yet become effective was not the
Claimants’ fault, as the Claimants had had to appeal the Building Permit due to the inclusion of
the requirement that the building had to be completed within two years of it becoming legally
binding, which they submitted was illegal.'°

They further noted that they had submitted an application for an additional separate permit on
17 January 2011 without any admission of liability, and submitted that “even assuming that the
Building Permit does not allow for such legalization and such legalization is necessary, such
legalization can be expected within the course of this arbitration, provided that MAL does not
find further pretexts to delay these proceedings”.'9%*

The Claimants submitted that the Respondent had “overvalued” the issue of the excavations,
insofar as it had reproached the Claimants “for having excavated more soil than had been
permitted in the Planning Permit, and a large part of which was justified by securing
works”, 1305 and submitted that it stood in “stark contrast” with the scheme of corruption
alleged by the Claimants.

As to the seriousness of the issue, the Claimants submitted that the violation was of a
“negligible nature”, pointing to the fact that the fine imposed was only €8,000, and that, as the
Respondent had emphasized, the works could be legalized in a subsequent permit.!°°°

They further argued that the Respondent had tried to “overestimate the importance of the
excavations”, since the institution of the proceedings, and submitted that events subsequent to
the abandonment were “primarily important to illustrate Respondent’s attempt not only to gain
information on these excavations under a pretext, but also to keep the related offence and
Ground Work Removal Proceedings alive to underline the importance of such a negligible
offence, if it was one at all”."°’ They alleged that the Ministry had issued “undue
instructions”, as a result of which:

a. the Ministry of Finance had intervened in the administrative proceedings by
commissioning an expert report in relation to the excavations;

b. the Groundworks Removal Proceedings had been resumed by MAL, having
previously lain dormant;

c. the appellate proceedings in relation to the Building Permit for the main construction
had been stayed by RAL on the basis of the pendency of the Groundworks Removal
Proceedings;!38

1308 Reply, para. 365.
1504 Reply, para. 366.
1305 Reply, para, 367.
1396 Reply, para. 368.
1307 Reply, para. 369.
1308 Reply, para. 370.

232

the Old Administrative Offence Proceedings had been commenced on 16 December
2008, shortly after the Claimants had sent their Trigger Letter giving notice of their
claims; and

the New Administrative Offence Proceedings had been instituted in order to keep the

claims against the Claimants alive.'*°?

4.471 The Claimants submitted that the Ministry of Finance had had no authority to influence the
further administrative proceedings, nor to instruct MAL and RAL as to their conduct in those

proceedings.

1310

4.472 Finally, the Claimants submitted that the excavations were irrelevant to the arbitration on the
basis that “{nJone of the numerous links that Respondent seeks to establish” existed.’?!?
Referring back to the treatment in their Memorial, the Claimants argued that:

a.

130° Reply, para. 370.
310 Reply, para. 372.
1311 Reply, para. 374,
1312 Reply, para, 374,

the excavations had played no role in the delays in issuing the Building Permit for the
main building, insofar as the stays had been based on the pendency of the
Extraordinary Review Proceedings, and that it was only after abandonment, and the
involvement of the Ministry of Finance that the issue of priority between the
Groundworks Removal Proceedings and the proceedings relating to the Building
Permit for the main building arose;

the question of whether it was possible as a matter of Czech law to authorize the
excavations in the Planning Permit was irrelevant, as the crucial issue in the appellate
proceedings in relation to the Planning Permit and the Extraordinary Review
Proceedings had been the overlap between the Claimants’ and Multi’s Planning
Permits;

the excavations could not serve as a justification for the different treatment accorded
to Multi and the Claimants, and indeed the fact that the authorities had ignored
Multi’s “illegal activities” constituted a further ground of discrimination;

there had been no irregularities in the invoices issued by Integra “that could provide
the smallest hint to corrupt activities by Claimants”;

the question of whether the excavations could have been legalized in the Building
Permit for the main building or whether a subsequent permit was required was
irrelevant, insofar as the Claimants had in the interim applied for such a permit, albeit
without acknowledging liability;

the excavations did not render construction or the permit proceedings any more
complex, and the alleged complexity in any case did not justify any longer duration of
the permit proceedings. 19”

233

a

4,473

4.474

4.475

4.476

4.477

Merits of the Claimants’ Claims of Breach of the BIT

By way of preamble to their response on the merits of their claims of breach of the BIT, the
Claimants reiterated their position that the BIT “provides for a high level of protection”; they
referred back to the discussion in their Memorial of the preamble of the BIT and its historic
context as supporting the conclusion that “the parties to the BIT intended for effective and far-
reaching investor protection”.'*"? The Claimants asserted that, by contrast, the Respondent had
frequently “understated” the standards of protection contained in the BIT.'?!*

The Claimants further emphasized that their claims were not based on the actions of “one or
more individuals”, but upon the Respondent’s “overall conduct”, and asserted that the
Respondent had attempted to focus analysis on acts of individuals.’*"* They argued that,
“{wJhile it may be true that not every single act of Respondent amounts of itself to an
international wrong, there can be no doubt that Respondent’s overall conduct does”,'?!° and
submitted that the purpose of the BIT was “precisely [...] that investors should not be

repeatedly obstructed in their investment activity by host states”.'9!7

i,__Alleged Breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard (Art. 2(1) BIT)

In summary, the Claimants alleged that the Respondent had breached the fair and equitable
treatment standard by acting in bad faith; violating the principle of due process; failing to
provide a transparent and predictable business environment; and by frustrating the Claimants’
legitimate expections.

Applicable standard under the BIT

Prior to addressing the substance of their claims, the Claimants recalled their argument that the
fair and equitable treatment standard as contained in Article 2(1) of the BIT was intended to
provide a “high level of protection”, and submitted that the Respondent’s arguments that
Article 2(1) provided no greater protection than the minimum standard of treatment under
customary international law should be rejected. '3!*

They asserted that the level of protection under Article 2(1) of the BIT “clearly exceeds the
level of protection under customary international law and grants broad protection against host
state actions”, and submitted that the authorities invoked by the Respondent were either “not
comparable” or did not in fact “argue for a narrow level of protection under the fair and
equitable treatment standard of the BIT,”"*" In addition, the Claimants rejected as baseless the
suggestion by the Respondent that they had misstated the case law in the Memorial.

313 Reply, para. 423.
314 Reply, para. 424,
1515 Reply, para. 426,
1316 Reply, para. 426,
1317 Reply, para. 426,
3318 Reply, para. 428.
31° Reply, para, 429,

234

4.478

4.479

4.480

4.481

As regards the question of whether the level of protection under the BIT exceeded that under
customary international law, the Claimant submitted that by inclusion of the fair and equitable
treatment standard in the BIT, the Parties “granted investors a level of protection that exceeds
the level of protection under customary international law”, and referring back to their
Memorial, further asserted that the States parties intended a “high level of protection of
investors”.'3?° They submitted that it would “contravene this clear intention of the parties” if
the level of protection under the BIT were assimilated to that under customary international
Jaw, 1321

‘They further argued that that conclusion was supported by the interpretation of Article 2(1) of
the BIT in accordance with its ordinary meaning under Article 31 VCLT, and invoked
Schreuer in support of their argument that there was no reason to think that the ordinary
meaning of the term “fair and equitable treatment” was to be taken to mean “in accordance
with customary international law”.'?” The Claimants distinguished provisions such as Article
1105(1) NAFTA, which explicitly make reference to international law, and noted that Article
2(1) of the BIT “uses the autonomous term of fair and equitable treatment and must therefore
be understood as an autonomous standard, independent from customary international law”.'323

The Claimants rejected the attempt by the Respondent to rely on Article 31(3)(c) VCLT to
argue that, in interpreting the BIT, account should be taken on relevant rules of international
law applicable in the relations between the parties, and that this should be taken to include the
minimum standard of treatment under customary international law; they argued that the
minimum standard of treatment formed part of the customary law of diplomatic protection and
was not as such relevant to the present dispute, and that by conclusion of the BIT, the parties
established an autonomous set of rules for protection of investments, which provided for
“material ind dent from the y law of diplomatic protection”.’4 The
Claimants disputed the Respondent’s suggestion that Bayindir v. Pakistan was authority for
any other proposition, noting that although the tribunal in that case had observed that
“customary international law and decisions of other tribunals may assist in interpretation” of
the provision containing the fair and equitable treatment standard, in its subsequent analysis,
the tribunal had made no reference to the minimum standard of protection.'*”°

As regards. the other cases relied upon by the Respondent in support of its argument that the
standard of protection under the BIT was to be equated with the customary minimum standard
of treatment, the Claimants first noted that a number of the authorities were decided under
NAFTA, and argued that, given the express reference to “international law” in Article 1105
NAFTA in its enunciation of the fair and equitable treatment standard, they were inapplicable
to the interpretation of the BIT which contained no such reference. As regards the
remaining decisions relied upon by the Respondent (including Duke Energy Electroquil v.

132 Reply, para. 430.
1321 Reply, para. 430.
1322 Reply, para. 431.
123 Reply, para. 432.
1324 Reply, para. 433.
1325 Reply, para, 435.
1326 Reply, pata. 437.

235

 

4.482

4.483

4.484

4.485

Ecuador, Azurix v. Argentina, CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentina and Biwater
Gauff v. Tanzania, the Claimants submitted that they were irrelevant for the Respondent’s
argument that the standard of protection under Article 2(1) of the BIT was low, as the tribunals
in each of those cases rather had held that the minimum standard of protection had evolved to a
level equivalent to that in the individual BITs, and thus did not conclude that the standard
thereunder offered a low standard of protection.!*”

In support of their contention that Article 2(1) of the BIT offered broad protection against host
State actions, the Claimants first submitted that this followed naturally from the wording of the
clause and the use of the terms “fair” and “equitable”, which meant that that standard provided
protection against “all kinds of host state actions that unjustly harm the investor”,’*** In
addition, the Claimants submitted that that conclusion was supported by the object and purpose
of the BIT, which they submitted “show that the standard is meant to be applied broadly and in
a pro-active way”.!”° In support of that assertion, having referred to what they asserted were
relevant passages of the preamble to the BIT, they invoked the observations of the tribunal in
MTD Equity & MTD Chile v. Chile, in respect of what was said to be a similar preamble in the
BIT at issue in that case. ‘°° In addition, they referred to the observation of the Azurix tribunal
to the effect that the standards of conduct contained in BITs presuppose “a favourable
disposition towards foreign investments”, and a “pro-active behaviour of the State to
encourage and protect it”,'°3!

Relying on the decision in Bayindir v. Pakistan, the Claimants argued that Article 2(1) of the
BIT was to be understood “to offer broad protection, comprising the obligation to act
transparently and grant due process, to refrain from taking arbitrary or discriminatory
measures, from exercising coercion or from frustrating the investor’s reasonable expectations
with respect to the legal framework affecting the investment”.!°*

The Claimants noted that the tribunal in Biwater Gauff, invoked by the Respondent, had
identified such a broad scope of protection, in particular referring to the protection of
legitimate expectations, and the obligations of the host state to act in good faith and to deal
with investors consistently, transparently and in a non-discriminatory manner. 39?

The Claimants denied the suggestion by the Respondent that in the Memorial they had
mischaracterized the holdings of the tribunals in Waste Management and Mondev so as to
“downplay the level of wrongdoing necessary” for a finding of violation of the fair and
equitable treatment standard.'*** They emphasized that in relying on the decision in Mondev

1327 Reply, para. 438.

328 Reply, para. 439.

'32° Reply, para. 440,

1330 Reply, para. 440, citing M7D Equity Sein Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No.
ARB/01/7), Award of 25 May 2004, para. 1

331 Reply, para. 441, citing Azurix Corp. v. srsentne Republic (ICSD Case No. ARB/01/12), Award of 14 July 2006,

para, 372.

322 Reply, para. 442, citing Bayindir Insaat Turizm Ticaret Ve Sanayi A.S. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case
No. ARB/03/29), Award of 27 August 2009, para, 178.

393 Reply, para. 443, citing Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Limited v. United Republic of Tanzania (ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/22), Award of 24 July 2008, para, 602.

38 Reply, para. 444,

236

they had only relied on the decision as showing that the observations of the ICJ in ELSI
constituted “only a starting point for examining what is fair and equitable, but that the
threshold in modern times is a lot lower”, noting that the tribunal in Mondev, having referred to
the observations in ELSI, had thereafter established what was asserted to be a lower threshold
for violation, namely whether “a tribunal can conclude in the light of all the available facts that
the impugned decision was clearly improper and discreditable”.'°*°

4.486 As for their reliance on Waste Management, they emphasized that they had interpreted the
decision as showing that the fair and equitable treatment standard “comprises the right of due
process so that the investor can rely on any statutory administrative provisions and proceedings
to plan its investment and make sustainable business decisions”.'™° They submitted that the
passages from the decision invoked by the Respondent supported that conclusion, and further
noted that they alluded to transparency and candour in administrative processes, which they
submitted demonstrated that an investor could rely upon statutory provisions and proceedings

in planning their investment.'*”

Merits of the claim of breach of fair and equitable treatment
© Bad faith

4.487 As to the merits of their claim of breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard, the
Claimants first submitted that the Respondent had acted in bad faith “by purposefully
obstructing Claimants’ project”, and that the events in the Extraordinary Review Proceedings
and the Building Permit proceedings “add up to a scheme to obstruct Claimants”. 15°

4.488 They invoked the comment of the Waste Management tribunal that it was a basic obligation of
the State under the fair and equitable treatment standard “to act in good faith and form, and not
deliberately to set out to destroy or frustrate the investment by improper means”,'>** and noted
that other tribunals had identified a requirement under the fair and equitable treatment standaxd
that the host state should act in good faith.'4°

4.489 The Claimants emphasized that while sufficient, it was not a necessary condition for breach
that the Respondent should have intentionally harmed the Claimants.!*! They further argued
that even if the Tribunal were to conclude that the Respondent had not acted in bad faith, it
should nevertheless find a violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard on other

835 Reply, para. 445, citing Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2),
Award of 11 October 2002, para. 127.

336 Reply, para. 446.

337 Thid., referring to Waste Management Inc. v. United Mexican States (No. 2) (CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/3), Final
Award of 30 April 2004, para. 98.

1898 Reply, para. 447.

1339 Reply, para. 448, quoting Waste Management Inc. v. United Mexican States (No. 2) (ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/3), Final Award of 30 April 2004, para. 138.

1340 Reply, para. 448, referring to Saluka Investments B.V. v. The Czech Republic (UNCITRAL), Partial Award of 17
March 2006, para. 303; MID Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7),
Award of 25 May 2004, para. 109.

34! Reply, para. 449, quoting CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8),
Award of 12 May 2005, para. 280; Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12), Award of 14 July
2006, para. 372.

237

grounds, including violation of due process, failure to provide a transparent and predictable
business environment, and frustration of the Claimants’ legitimate expectations,“

4.490 In addition, they emphasized the problems posed in proving corrupt behaviour between State
authorities and a third party, in particular the difficulty of obtaining anything more than
circumstantial evidence of corruption.'? Relying on the decision in AAPL v. Sri Lanka, they
submitted that in such circumstances, the burden of proof should be lowered or even
reversed;'** that, given the difficulties of proof of corruption, the Tribunal could be satisfied
with only “serious indices” 1345 and, relying on an ICC decision, submitted that where some
“relevant evidence” for its allegations had been produced by a party, the Tribunal might
exceptionally require the other party to provide “counterevidence, if such task is possible and
not too burdensome.”!3#

© Due process

4.491 Second, the Claimants argued that the Respondent had breached the fair and equitable
treatment standard by a failure to provide due process. They noted that the standard protected
investors against State conduct which “leads to an outcome that offends judicial propriety”,
and to that end tribunals had analysed whether there was a “lack of candour and transparency
in the proceedings”.'**”7 They submitted that that would be the case where there were
unjustified delays, or where a decision had been rendered in the absence of an investor such
that the investor was denied the right to be heard.'5“*

4.492 On that basis, they reiterated that the Respondent had repeatedly delayed the proceedings, and
that on one occasion, the Claimants had been denied the right to be heard before the issue of a
decision. As to the claims of delay, they emphasized in particular that MAL had delayed the
Main Building Permit proceedings without justification by resort to the First, Second and Third
Stays, and highlighted that the Respondent accepted that the Third Stay was unlawful, and that
MAL had not rectified the situation upon receipt of the opinion of the Ministry." They
further pointed to the delays caused by the Ministry and Minister in the Extraordinary Review
Proceedings, and the resulting prolonged uncertainty as to the validity of the Planning Permit;
they emphasized that the Second Minister Decision had not been based on any new facts found
by the Ministry, and submitted that this made clear that in the First Minister Decision, the
Minister should not have remanded the matter to the Ministry.!°°° Although accepting that the

3 Reply, para. 450.

4 Reply, para. 451.

4 Reply, para. 452, citing Asian Agricultural Products Ltd v. Republic of Sri Lanka (ICSID Case No. ARB/87/3),
Final Award of 27 June 1990, para. 56.

1345 Reply, para. 453, citing IOC Case No. 8891; 127 JDI 1076 (2000), at 1079.

1346 Reply, para. 454, citing ICC Case No. 6497 (Final Award); Yearbook of Commercial Arbitration 1999, Volume
XXIVa, pp. 71-79, para. 4.

7 Reply, para. 456, referring to Waste Management Inc. v. United Mexican States (No. 2) ICSID Case No.
ARB(AF)/00/3), Final Award of 30 April 2004, para. 98.

'348 Reply, para. 456, referring to Mohammad Ammar Al-Bahloul y. Republic of Tajikistan (SCC Case No. V064/2008),
Partial Award on Jurisdiction and Liability of 2 September 2009, para. 221; Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican
States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1), Award of 30 August 2000, para. 91.

134 Reply, para, 457.

1350 Reply, paras. 457-458.

238

4.493

4.494

4.495

4.496

Planning Permit remained effective, they submitted that the delays in the Extraordinary
Review Proceedings were crucial insofar as MAL relied upon the pendency of those
proceedings to justify the Third Stay, and noted that if the Minister had not wrongfully
remanded the matter by the First Minister Decision, this would not have been possible.'**!

In relation to the claim of violation of the right to be heard, the Claimants reiterated their
complaint that the Claimants were not treated as party to the proceedings resulting in the First
Ministry Decision, and were thus not heard.'°? As regards the suggestion by the Respondent
that the exclusion of the Claimants had been lawful under domestic law, the Claimants,
invoking, inter alia, Article 3 of the ILC’s Articles on State Responsibility countered that this
was irrelevant, as domestic legality was irrelevant to whether conduct constitutes an
internationally wrongful act;'**? in any case, they denied that the Ministry’s conduct was in
fact lawful under Czech law. 3°

¢ Failure to provide a transparent and predictable business environment

Third, the Claimants alleged that the fair and equitable treatment standard was breached by
reason of the fact that the Respondent had failed to provide a transparent and predictable
business environment, insofar as it “repeatedly broke its own laws, thus frustrating Claimants’
trust in Respondent’s legal system, and derogated from established administrative
practices”,135°

The Claimants first asserted that the Respondent had misstated the Claimants’ position insofar
as they characterized the Claimants as essentially complaining that the permitting process had
taken longer than the Claimants had predicted, had argued that a specific expectation as to the
duration of proceedings did not form part of a transparent and predictable business
requirement, and had submitted that the Claimants’ estimates had been overly optimistic and
had disregarded the possibility of appeals.'*° The Claimants responded that the claim was not
premised “on a specific expectation as to the duration of proceedings. Rather, Claimants are
complaining of Respondent’s specific behaviour in the present case”,'*” and emphasized that
under the fair and equitable treatment standard, it was the acts of the host State which were
scrutinized, and that the Claimants were complaining of specific wrongful acts of the
Respondent. '**

In support of their claim that the Respondent had systematically violated its own laws, the
Claimants first contended that the Respondent’s argument that the Claimants had been aware
of the relevant rules, and that those rules had undergone no material changes, although true,
was irrelevant; they emphasized that they were not complaining of a change in the law, but
rather of the fact that the Respondent had repeatedly violated the law. They submitted that the

1351 Reply, para. 459.

1352

Reply, para, 460.

1353 Reply, paras. 461-463.
1354 Reply, para. 464,
55 Reply, para. 465.
356 Reply, para. 466.
157 Reply, para. 467.
1258 Reply, para. 468,

239

 

4.497

4.498

4.499

Respondent had thereby denied the Claimants a transparent and predictable business
environment,'*?

The Claimants noted that the Parties were in agreement that a violation of domestic law did not
ipso facto equate to a violation of international law, but submitted that it was “equally
undisputed” that a violation of international law could arise from an action which was contrary
to domestic law. In support, they invoked the decision in PSEG Global v. Turkey, and in
particular the finding of the tribunal in that case that the host state had breached its own laws
and its conclusion that there had been a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard,'*®
They argued that the fair and equitable treatment standard was infringed if violations of
domestic law were systematic and therefore affected the stability and transparency of the legal
framework, 3!

As to the facts of the case, the Claimants first submitted that the Respondent had “violated its
own laws repeatedly and systematically”, and that “in doing so, Respondent undermined the
business environment for Claimants’ investment and subjected Claimants to intransparent and
unpredictable business conditions”."° They pointed in particular to the First Ministry
Decision, which they asserted had purported to quash the Planning Permit, and the First
Minster Decision by which the Minister had allegedly wrongfully decided to remand the case
back to the Ministry. They observed that the remand had enabled Mr to invoke the
pending Extraordinary Review proceedings as a “pretext” to stay the proceedings in relation to
the permit for the Main Construction.’ They further argued that the Respondent had violated
the applicable “binding time-limits” contained in the Code of Administrative Procedure.'9*

Second, the Claimants submitted that the Respondent’s authorities “arbitrarily broke with
established administrative procedures”, in particular insofar as Minister had deviated
from the opinion of the Advisory Committee and the draft decision prepared by the legal
department. They submitted that there was an established administrative practice that the
Minister would follow the recommendation of the Advisory Committee, emphasizing that in
20 cases decided since 2008, the Minister had never previously departed from the

dation of the Ci i they further ‘ited that the Minister normally followed
the recommendation of the legal department of the Ministry. Although accepting that the
Minister was not bound by the decision of the Advisory Committee, they submitted that this
was irrelevant insofar as a stable and predictable business environment encompassed also the
practices of the authorities.!°©

1359 Reply, para. 469.

1369 Reply, para. 470, referring to PSEG Global Inc. and Konya Ilgin Elektrik Uretim ve Ticaret Limited Sirketi v.
Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No, ARB/02/5), Award of 19 January 2007, para. 249.

136! Reply, para. 470,

136 Reply, para. 471.

1363 Reply, para. 472,

1364 Reply, para. 473.

1365 Reply, para. 474-476.

240

4.500

4.501

4.502

4.503

4,504

4.505

¢ Frustration of legitimate expectations

Fourth, the Claimants submitted that the Respondent had violated their legitimate expectations,
arguing that the Respondent had repeatedly provided assurances to the Claimants which had
led to reasonable expectations and that those expectations had then been frustrated by the
Respondent’s actions in the permit proceedings. "7°

The Claimants argued that the Respondent had mischaracterized their position as being that
they had had legitimate expectations as to the exact duration of the administrative proceedings;
this was not their argument, but rather that, given that the purpose of the fair and equitable
treatment standard was to scrutinize the behavior of the host state, they only complained of the
specific wrongful actions taken by the Respondent during the various proceedings, and
clarified that they did not complain of the actions of third parties, including appeals by NGOs
or neighbours, which they accepted were of no relevance in that regard.'°°”

As to the specific legitimate expectations claimed, the Claimants asserted that “[t]hrough
explicit and implicit representations and assurances, Respondent created and reinforced in the
Claimants the expectation that the permit proceedings would be conducted swiftly and in a
non-discriminatory fashion”.'**

They relied first upon the actions of the City « | . in changing the zoning plan and
agreeing to allow the applications for some of the Building Permits to be made in its name,
which they submitted constituted “an implied assurance that Respondent would be supportive
of the project”.7°

The Claimants disputed the Respondent's assertion that legitimate expectations could only be
derived from specific rather than implicit assurances, and noted that none of the decisions
invoked by the Respondent made any distinction between “implicit”, “explicit” or “specific
assurances”, but rather referred to the fact that there had to be a “promise of the
administration” or “conditions that the state offered the investor”.!°”°

Relying on Article 4(1) and 7 of the ILC’s Articles on State Responsibility and in particular the
proposition that the conduct of any State organ is to be considered to be an act of the State,
irrespective of the organ’s character as an organ of the central government or of a territorial
unit, and even if it exceeds its authority, they further argued that whether the permit
proceedings fell within the competence of the City :, and whether it was competent to
provide such assurances was irrelevant.'?”!

136 Reply, para. 477.

137 Reply, para. 478-479.

1368 Reply, para. 480.

130 Reply, para. 481

137 Reply, para. 482, quoting PSEG Global Inc. and Konya Ilgin Elektrik Uretim ve Ticaret Limited Sirketi v. Republic
of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5), Award of 19 January 2007, para. 241 and Duke Energy Electroquil Partners
and Electroquil S.A. v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/19), Award of 18 August 2008, para. 340,
respectively.

37! Reply, para. 483.

241

 

4.506

4,507

4.508

4,509

4.510

Second, they submitted that a specific assurance as regards the Extraordinary Review
Proceedings had been provided insofar as Mrs had represented to the Claimants in an
email that the Minister had never previously deviated from a recommendation of the Advisory
Committee; they submitted that Mrs had thereby assured the Claimants that the
E dinary Review P dings could be expected to be uded quickly, as the
recommendation of the Advisory Committee had been to terminate the proceedings.”
Third, the Claimants invoked (albeit without any further explanation or elaboration), the
assurance allegedly provided by Mr of MAL that the Building Permits would be granted
if the applications for Building Permits were split."°"°

Finally, the Claimants invoked the guarantee allegedly provided by Mr ' Mayor of the
City , that “there would be no discrimination between the competing projects of
Claimants and Multi”,!°"

The Claimants argued that the expectations following from the assurances they claimed had
been made by the Respondent were reasonable, and referring to the decision in Duke Energy
Electroquil v. Ecuador, argued that, “[t]aking into account all the circumstances, including the
facts surrounding the investment and the political, socioeconomic, cultural and historical
conditions prevailing in the host State, Claimants could reasonable rely on Respondent acting
in accordance with its assurance”.'*”5 In particular they referred to their prior experience with
the Galerie Vaiikova project in Brno, in which they submitted that the permitting proceedings
had been conducted in a “swift and efficient fashion and only took nine months from
application to legal enforceability”, and submitted that, on that basis, they were could have
reasonably expected that the Respondent would act swiftly, and in accordance with the
assurances given.'”° Referring back to their earlier discussion in that regard, the Claimants
sought to distinguish the proceedings in relation to the Arkady Pankréc project in Prague,
relied upon by the Respondent, again arguing that the length of those proceedings was due to
the “unique situation in Prague”.'?””

In relation to the frustration of their alleged legitimate expectations, the Claimants asserted,
referring back to the factual section, that the Respondent “did not conduct the permit
proceedings in a swift fashion but implemented numerous stays and issued wrongful decisions,
thus prolonging the proceedings intolerably. Moreover Respondent also discriminated against
Claimants by treating Multi much more favourably.”13”

137 Reply, para. 484.
373 Reply, para. 485.
1374 Reply, para. 486.
375 Reply, para. 487.
1376 Reply, para. 488.
377 Reply, para. 489.
1378 Reply, para. 490.

242

ii.__Alleged Breach of the Prohibition of Impairment of Investments by Arbitrary and
Discriminatory Measures (Article 2(2) BIT)

Impairment by arbitrary measures

4.511 The Claimants maintained their claim of breach of Article 2(2) of the BIT on the basis that the
Respondent had impaired the use and enjoyment of their investment through arbitrary
measures.'*” They submitted that the relevant conduct of the Respondent “meets any test of
arbitrariness”!*® asserting in particular that the Respondent had acted arbitrarily throughout
the whole of the Extraordinary Review and Main Building proceedings “even under the

inapplicable high standard submitted by the Respondent”. '**!

4.512 As to the appropriate threshold, the Claimants reiterated their position that the appropriate test
was that set out in Lauder v. Czech Republic, and argued that the Respondent’s position based
on the decision in ELSJ was to be rejected. Relying on the definition enunciated by the tribunal
in Lauder that conduct is arbitrary if it is “founded on prejudice or preference rather than on
reason or fact”,'**? the Claimants submitted that the decisive factor was the rationality of the
conduct, and that the Tribunal should not analyse whether it would have acted in the same
manner if it had been in the same position, but rather whether the conduct was based on
“tenable reasoning”.'*

4.513 As to the Respondent’s invocation of ELSI, the Claimants argued that the Respondent’s had
attempted “incorrectly to inflate the threshold for a finding of arbitrariness as requiring a
violation of due process or the rule of law”, and submitted that it was telling that the
Respondent had not responded to its arguments that the decision in ELSJ was based on the
1948 US-Italian Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation, when international
investment protection was much less developed.'*** They submitted that the “interpretation of
a treaty from the Middle Ages of investment protection cannot be the basis for understanding
the modern times Czech-German BIT, concluded in 1990.”"3*5 In response to the Respondent’s
argument that recent decisions had applied the standard enunciated in ELSI, rather than that in
Lauder, the Claimants submitted that the authorities indicated that the Lauder rule in fact
prevailed." They referred to the decision in LG&E v. Argentina, and the emphasis they
submitted was placed by that tribunal upon the importance of rationality and “reasoned
judgment”.’**” Similarly, they invoked the decision in Siemens v. Argentina; although
recognizing that the Siemens tribunal had referred to the decision in ELS/ as an authoritative

1379 Reply, para. 491.

1380 Reply, para. 491

38! Reply, para, 492,

382 Reply, para. 493, quoting Ronald S. Lauder v. Czech Republic (UNCITRAL), Final Award of 3 September 2001,
para. 221.

3383 Reply, para. 494.

88 Reply, para. 495.

1385 Reply, para. 495.

1386 Reply, para. 496.

387 Reply, paras, 497-498, referring to LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International Inc. v.
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1), Decision on Liability of 3' October 2006, para. 158.

243

 

4.514

4.515

4.516

interpretation of international law, they submitted that the tribunal had supported its finding
that Argentina had acted arbitrarily not by reference to criteria deriving from ELSI, but solely
on the basis of a conclusion that Argentina’s conduct had not been “based on reason”, 3%

On the basis that the applicable test was that submitted by the tribunal in Lauder, the Claimants
argued that the conduct of the Respondent had not been based on reason or fact, but on
prejudice and preference.'**? They reiterated their argument that the relevant actions “formed
part of a scheme to obstruct Claimants”, and submitted in the alternative that even assuming no
such overall scheme, the only conclusion was that “various of the Respondent’s decisions were
not based on reason and thus arbitrary”.’*°° Reference was made in particular to:

a. the First and Second Ministry Decisions, which the Claimants asserted “arbitrarily
decided to revoke the Planning Permit”, thus delaying the proceedings;

b. the First Minister Decision, by which the Minister “arbitrarily remanded the case
back to the Ministry”; the Claimants reiterated their observation that in the Second
Ministry Decision, the Minister had decided differently based on the same facts;

c the fact that MAL “arbitrarily stayed the Main Building Permit proceedings two
times”,139!

The Claimants submitted that each of those decisions was not only unlawful under Czech law,
but “not based on a ible jud ”, and itted that the Respondent had “failed to
provide a satisfactory explanation of the conduct of its administrative bodies”. 19?

In the further alternative, the Claimants argued that even applying the ELSJ standard, the
Tribunal should hold that the Respondent had acted arbitrarily. Referring to the prior
discussion under the fair and equitable treatment standard, they argued that the Respondent had
violated the rule of law as it had “breached its own laws in a systemic fashion in the course of
the Extraordinary Review and Building Permit Proceedings with the intention to obstruct one
party in favour of another one”.!*°3 Again, they submitted that the Respondent had offered no
“sufficient explanation” for those breaches; noting the Respondent’s denial that the burden of
proof shifted even in case of prima facie arbitrariness, they argued that the Respondent
“effectively argues that it does not have to offer explanations for its unlawful conduct”.!3%
They argued that if “even an unexplained breach of law did not constitute an arbitrary measure,
the standard of protection against arbitrary measures would hardly ever be breached and would
be of no relevance whatsoever”.!°5

1388 Reply, para. 499, referring to Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8), Award of 6
February 2007, paras. 318 and 319.

188 Reply, para. 500.

1390 Reply, para. 500.

°°! Reply, para. 500.

13% Reply, para. 501.

13 Reply, para. 503 (emphasis in original; footnote references omitted).

1394 Reply, para. 504,

1395 Reply, para. 504,

4.517

4.518

4,519

4.520

4.521

In addition, again referring back to the previous discussion in relation to the fair and equitable
treatment standard, they claimed that the Respondent had violated due process of law insofar
as the Claimants had not been heard in the Extraordinary Review Proceedings, and because its
authorities had caused multiple delays in the various proceedings.'°° They noted that the
Respondent had alluded to the possibility of local remedies being available “in order to evade
the conclusion of arbitrariness”, and cross-referred to their later discussion of that topic
elsewhere in the Reply.’**”

In addition, the Claimants disputed the Respondent’s argument that the relevant acts had not in
any case impaired their investment; they argued that the ordinary meaning of the term
“impair” did not imply that the relevant object had to be completely destroyed, and submitted
that it was sufficient if the object had been “damaged or made worse”, and more broadly, if
there had been “a detrimental effect”, which they asserted clearly was the case on the facts.'3*

They submitted that the Respondent had engaged in “cherry-picking” of specific administrative
decisions which it asserted had not impaired the Claimants’ investment, but argued that this
was to no avail as it was the “overall dilatory conduct and its effect on Claimants’ investment
that counts”.!° They argued that the overall dilatory conduct had resulted in the abandonment
of the project “and thus clearly impaired the investment”, and argued that, in any case, even the
specific decisions referred to by the Respondent constituted an impairment.'*”

In response to the Respondent’s argument that the investment was not impaired by the
Extraordinary Review Proceedings insofar as the Planning Permit remained in force at all
times, the Claimants emphasized that they had never complained of the loss of the Planning
Permit, but rather relied upon the “increased unpredictability” resulting from those
proceedings; they further noted that the Extraordinary Review Proceedings had constituted the
basis for the Second and Third Stays adopted by MAL, such that those decisions could not
have been adopted but for the delays in the Extraordinary Review Proceedings.'*!

The Claimants characterized the Respondent’s argument that it had not withheld the Main
Building Permit as “absurd”, noting that the Main Building Permit proceedings had been
stayed twice “under a pretext until Claimants abandoned the project”.'“? Finally, the
Claimants also dismissed the Respondent’s reference to the stay of the appellate proceedings in
relation to the Main Building Permit, and the Respondent’s suggestion that it was lawful given
the pendency of the Groundworks Removal Proceedings, as being without any relevance
insofar as it had been adopted well after the abandonment. '*

1396 Reply, para. 505.
397 Reply, para, 506.
1398 Reply, para. 507-508.
39 Reply, para. 509
40 Reply, para. 509.
1401 Reply, para. 510.

1402

Reply, para. 511.

1403 Reply, para. 512.

245

4,522

4.523

4.524

4.525

Impairment by discriminatory measures

In relation to their claim of breach of Article 2(2) of the BIT on the basis of discrimination
between the Galerie and Forum projects, the Claimants noted that there was agreement
between the Parties as to the prerequisites for such a claim, and asserted that those conditions
were met, insofar as:

a. Galerie and Forum had been treated differently;

b. the difference in treatment had occurred in like circumstances;
c. the difference in treatment had been without justification; and
d. it had impaired the Claimants’ investment.!4*

As regards the first and fourth requirements, the Claimants cross-referred to their submissions
on those points elsewhere in the Reply, as well as to their submissions in the Counter-
Memorial. '4°5

As to the existence of a justification for the alleged difference in treatment, the Claimants
argued that the Respondent had unjustifiably argued that the burden was upon the Claimants to
identify any justification for the different treatment, and asserted that, in that regard the burden
undoubtedly fell on the Respondent to bring forward and prove any possible justification.
Referring to their submissions earlier in the Reply, they submitted that the Respondent had
failed to do so as there had been no justification for the difference in treatment.'4°° In relation
to the comparability of the circumstances of the two projects, the Claimants likewise referred
back to the earlier treatment of that topic in the Reply,'’ and noted that the only legal
argument raised by the Respondent in that connection was that the Claimants’ treatment of the
comparison of the factors of comparability had been insufficient. Their response was that there
was nothing further to compare, and noted that the Respondent had refrained from specifying
what additional factors might be relevant.'4°8

Further, the Claimants argued that the Respondent’s reliance on the decision in Bayindir v.
Pakistan was misplaced. They distinguished that decision on its facts on the basis that in
circumstances in which the allegation of discrimination in that case had been that a State entity
had wrongfully terminated a contract for works, and then entered into a contract for the same
works with a local company, allegedly on more favourable conditions, the comparison was
necessarily between the terms of the two contracts; they argued that, by contrast, in the present
case there were no contracts to compare. 4?

404 Reply, paras. 513-514.

4405 Reply, para. 514.

1405 Reply, para. 516, cross-referring to Reply, paras. 156 et seq (above, paras. 4.415 to 4.416).
1407 Reply, para. 517, cross-referring to Reply, paras. 117 et seq (above, paras. 4.400 to 4.416).
1408 Reply, para. 517.

40° Reply, para. 518.

4.526

4.527

4.528

4.529

4,530

4.531

iii, Alleged Breach of the Prohibition of Expropriation (Article 4(2) BIT

The Claimants’ repeated their claim of indirect expropriation in breach of Article 4(2) of the
BIT, on the basis that the Respondent had “deprived Claimants’ shares in ECE Praha and
Tschechien 7 of their use and benefit for Claimants without acting within the framework of
their police powers”.’*"°

The Claimants first denied that it was of any relevance that they had not lost any previously
granted rights, on the basis that “no formal act of taking of the investment is necessary”; they
emphasized that Article 4(2) of the BIT contains a prohibition of measures “the effect of which
would be tantamount to expropriation”, and submitted that consequently, there could be a
taking under that provision even where the investor retained nominal ownership of the
investment.'“"! They argued that it was sufficient that measures were taken “the effect of which
is to deprive the investor of the use and benefit of his investment”. "41?

They submitted that “[t]hrough the various wrongful decisions and delays in the extraordinary
review and Main Building Permit proceedings, Respondent deprived Claimants’ shares in
Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha of any use and benefit”, and submitted that, from an ecomomic
point of view, the actions of the Respondent “had the same effect as an overt taking”. “1?

In support of that claim, the Claimants first argued that expropriation may result from a series
of State actions, each of which alone would not be sufficient to constitute an expropriation, and
noted that the Respondent had not denied that a “creeping expropriation” on that basis was
possible. They asserted that “the whole of Respondent’s conduct amounts to expropriation”.'4"*
By way of elaboration of the assertion that they had lost the use and benefit of their shares in
Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha, the Claimants explained that they could “no longer use these
companies for implementing a shopping centre project in , as originally intended”.'*!5

They recalled that Tschechien 7 was a special purpose vehicle created for the development of
the Galerie project, observed that the Claimants had “spent a considerable amount of money
and put it into the development of GALERIE through Tschechien 7, in the hope of one
day being able to collect the benefits”, and asserted that, following the abandonment,
Tschechien 7 had “lost all use for Claimants and Claimants lost the money they had put into
Tschechien 7”.!*"© As for ECE Praha, the Claimants recalled that it had provided services to
Tschechien 7 in relation to the development of the Galerie project, and that it had been
intended that it would provide management services to the future purchaser of the project; they

1410 Reply, para. 519.

1411 Reply, para. 520.

'4!2 Reply, para. 521, citing Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co. S.A. v. Arab Republic of Egypt (CSID
Case No. ARB/99/6), Award of 12 April 2002, para. 108.

1413 Reply, para. 522.

' Reply, para. 523.

'$15 Reply, para. 524.

1416 Reply, para, 525.

 

 

 

4.532

4.533

4.534

4.535

asserted that, as a consequence of the abandonment, their participation in ECE Praha had
29 1417

become “partially useless”.
In response to the Respondent’s argument that the legal status of the land plots on which the
project was to be built had not been affected by the abandonment, the Claimants submitted
that, in the circumstances, that was irrelevant, and that it was the status of the shares which was
decisive. They noted that the value of the shares had been “considerably diminished” due to
the fact that the project was unfinished and abandoned; on that basis, they rejected the
suggestion by the Respondent that “nothing” had changed insofar as the situation was still that
they had not received a legally effective Building Permit.'*”*

In response to the Respondent’s argument that the Claimants could still use their shares in
Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha for some other purpose, the Claimants asserted, relying on the
decision in Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania that only “reasonable ways of using the nominally
remaining rights” were relevant, and that the Respondent had failed to demonstrate that there
existed any such reasonable alternative use for the shares. '"° They submitted that it was not
possible for Tschechien7 to use the plots for a different type of development, noting that
specialisation in a particular field of development was required in order to be able to compete,
and that the ECE Group was not in a position simply to develop an office building or
residential properties. On that basis it was asserted that “[flor ECE, the land plots owned by
Tschechien 7, and thus Tschechien 7 itself, have become worthless”.!420

In relation to ECE Praha, the Claimants submitted that the fact that ECE Praha had provided
services to other ECE shopping centres within the Czech Republic was beside the point insofar
as a “partial deprivation of the use and benefits” could amount to an expropriation. They
referred to Middle East Cement v. Egypt as an illustrative example, noting that the tribunal in
that case had not limited itself to an assessment of whether there had been a loss of the
investment as a whole, but had “also analysed whether particular assets had been lost”.!4?!
They argued that, on that basis, the Tribunal should take account of the fact that ECE Praha’s
business related to the Galerie project formed a “structural unit” that had been lost due to the
Respondent’s actions; that the Respondent had “completely deprived Claimants of the use and
benefit of its shares in ECE Praha as regards the project GALERIE. ’; and that this
amounted to “an indirect partial expropriation”. In support of that argument, they observed
that absurd results would be caused if there was no protection against the particular
expropriation of separate business units within a single company insofar as investors would be
better protected if they established numerous companies each of which dealt with specific
business areas; that if there was no protection against partial direct expropriation, it would
always be open to a host state to argue that some use for the company remained; and that the

‘17 Reply, para. 526.

“18 Reply, para. 527.

1419 Reply, para. 528, citing Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Limited v. United Republic of Tanzania (ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/22), Award of 24 July 2008, para. 463.

1 Reply, para. 529.

#21 Reply, para, 530, referring to Middle East Cement Shipping and Handling Co. S.A. v. Arab Republic of Egypt
(ICSID Case No. ARB/99/6), Award of 12 April 2002, paras. 97 et seq and 131 et seq.

1422 Reply, para, 531 (emphasis in original).

248

4.536

4.537

4.538

4,539

4.540

manner in which an investor’s business had been organized could not be decisive for an
1423

expropriation claim.
The Claimants further asserted that the Respondent’s argument that they still had day-to-day
control over the business of Tschechien7 and ECE Praha was “absurd”, noting that such
control could only be relevant where there remained some day-to-day business in existence.'4*
They submitted that due to the abandonment, Tschechien 7 had no day-to-day business, but
existed solely for the purposes of liquidating the project, and that denying the existence of an
expropriation on that basis would be “to ignore economic realities”.'*"° As for ECE Praha, they
asserted that it had no day-to-day business “with regard to GALERIE , and submitted
that that was sufficient for a partial indirect expropriation of the shares in ECE Praha.'4”°

The Claimants did not dispute the Respondent’s observation that the purpose of the prohibition
of expropriation in the BIT was not to remunerate investors for bad business decisions, but in
response asserted that the project “would have had success, had it not been for Respondent’s
interference”.'*””

As regards the Respondent’s reliance on the police powers exception, the Claimants denied
that the “delaying actions” of the Respondent had constituted a valid exercise of the
Respondent’s regulatory powers, with the result that they did not fall within the exception.!”8
They noted that the police powers exception presupposed the pursuit of some “purpose of
social and general welfare”; noted that the Respondent had only alluded to the alleged
illegality of the Planning Permit and of the excavations, apparently on the basis that its actions
were in pursuit of the enforcement of domestic law; and submitted that that argument was
without merit.“

First, they denied that the Respondent had in fact pursued the enforcement of domestic law,
arguing that various of the decisions in the Extraordinary Review and Main Building Permit
proceedings had been unlawful and that the Respondent’ s actions had been part of a scheme of
obstruction; on that basis, they submitted that the actions had not been in pursuit of any welfare
purpose, but rather had been aimed “to hinder a private business”.!4°°

Second, the Claimants in any case denied that the enforcement of domestic law could
constitute a valid welfare purpose, invoking the decision in Tecmed as an example of a case in
which an act an authority was bound to execute under domestic law had nevertheless been
found to constitute a breach of international law resulting in an obligation to pay

1423 Reply, para, 532.
1424 Reply, para, 533.
1425 Reply, para. 534,
1026 Reply, para. 535.
1427 Reply, para, 536.
1428 Reply, para. 537.
1429 Reply, para. 538,
1439 Reoly, para. 539.

249

 

4.541

4.542

4.543

compensation. They observed that if that were not the case, a State could simply enact a law in
order to justify its actions.'“7!

Third, they argued that even if enforcement of domestic law could be held to constitute a valid
welfare purpose, the justification based on the excessive excavations put forward by the
Respondent was insufficient insofar as the First to Third Stays in the Main Building Permit
proceedings had made no reference to the excessive excavations. They reiterated their earlier
observation that the stay of the appellate proceedings was irrelevant, as it had been adopted
after the abandonment of the project. '437

Fourth, the Claimants postulated that, in any case, any application of the police powers
exception was only valid to the extent it was non-discriminatory, and that that was not so on
the facts of the present case; they submitted that “Respondent’s overall conduct [...] favoured
Multi to the detriment of Claimants”, pointing in particular to the disparate number of Building
Permits required, and the delays in the Claimants’ proceedings compared to those for Multi.'*??
As regards what they characterized as the Respondent’s attempt “to justify its discriminatory
action by arguing that the exempted measure may be individual, i.e. imposed specifically with
respect to the investor, if it is taken in application of a general applicable statute”, the
Claimants accepted that the proposition was true as a general matter, but denied that it assisted
the Respondent in the present case, suggesting that “the measures in question were not taken in
application of the law but in misapplication thereof. At all times MAL acted illegally in

treating Claimants and Multi differently”. !**

iv. Exhaustion of Local Remedies

As regards the Respondent’s reliance on the denial of justice standard and their arguments
based on what they labelled “a purported requirement to pursue local remedies”,'° the
Claimants first noted that the Respondent sought to deprive them of protection under the BIT
by relying principally on the fact that the Claimants had missed the deadline for filing an
appeal against the Third Stay, and that despite the fact that that event had not been relevant for
the abandonment of the project. They argued that the Respondent’s arguments based on the
local remedies rule under customary international law should be rejected on the basis that:

a. the denial of justice standard did not apply exclusively;

b. they had been required only to pursue “reasonable efforts for domestic redress”, had
not been required to comply with the customary local remedies rule, and in any case,
that what had been required of them was limited due to the fact that the actions of the
Resopndent constituted a pattern of State conduct aimed at obstructing them; and

431 Reply, para. 540.
1432 Reply, para. 541.
1433 Reply, para. 543.
+434 Reply, para. 544 (emphasis in original).
"5 Reply, para. 545.

4.544

4.545

4.546

4.547

c. they had in any case pursued all efforts required by law.'#*6

As regards the asserted non-exclusivity of the denial of justice standard, the Claimants first
noted that, although the Respondent had originally argued that the denial of justice standard
was the exclusive standard for the determination of liability under the BIT in relation to any
administrative proceedings, and had thereby attempted to introduce a substantive requirement
of exhaustion of local remedies in relation to all claims, in its Counter-Memorial, the
Respondent had limited itself to arguing that the standard applied to “multi-level decision-
making proceedings”. The Claimants submitted that the distinction between “multi-level” and
other decision-making proceedings was an invention of the Respondent, and that local
remedies did not have to be exhausted even in “multi-level decision-making proceedings”.'*37

Second, the Claimants argued that the denial of justice standard did not exclude the application
of other BIT guarantees; in addition to referring to the views of academic commentators, they
relied principally upon the decision of the tribunal in Saipem v Bangladesh for the
Proposositions that, although expropriation by judicial act presupposed some illegal
intervention by the court, it did not necessarily presuppose a denial of justice, and that the
exhaustion of local remedies was not a substantive requirement for a finding of expropriation
by acourt.'8

Third, the Claimants asserted that the BIT constituted lex specialis in relation to the customary
law standard for denial of justice, and submitted that the Respondent was trying to invert the
normal relationship by attempting “to make the customary law standard of denial of justice
prevail over specific treaty standards”.'%° Relying on the historical development of the denial
of justice standard as part of customary international law relating to diplomatic protection, in
which regard it was asserted that diplomatic protection embodied only an “absolute minimum
standard that does not ensure an effective protection of investors”, the Claimant submitted that
States concluded BITs precisely to remedy that inadequacy, and that as a result, the customary
standard can “therefore not exclude the explicit standards of the BIT”.'“° They invoked the
writings of Paulsson in support.'“#!

They emphasized that that conclusion was not subject to any modification to the extent that it
was recognized that certain elements of the denial of justice standard were implicitly
incorporated into the fair and equitable treatment standard. They argued that “[dJenial of
justice does not form part of the BIT guarantees so that the level of protection is lowered to the
level of protection under customary international law. Rather, denial of justice only forms part
of the BIT guarantees so that it is ensured that the level of protection under the BIT never
undercuts the level of protection under customary law.’"“?

"436 Reply, para. 546.

'437 Reply, para. 547

'458 Reply, para. 549, citing Saipem S.p.A. v. People's Republic of Bangladesh (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/7), Award of
30 June 2009, para. 181.

"4° Reply, para. 551.

1440 Reply, para. 552.

i441 Reply, para, 553, quoting J. Paulsson, Denial of Justice in International Law (CUP, 2005), p. 111

'@ Reply, para. 554,

251

     

4.548

4.549

4.550

4.551

4552

Fourth, they submitted that the exclusivity of denial of justice had only ever been applied to
acts of the judiciary, and was not applicable to administrative proceedings, and submitted that
it was irrelevant in that regard whether the proceedings were “single-level” or “multi-
level”,

As regards the Respondent’s reliance on Amco and Jan del Nul, the Claimants noted that the
decision in Amco was not concerned with the exclusivity of denial of justice compared with
other BIT standards, in particular because it was decided under customary international law.'*
As for Jan de Nul, the Claimants noted first, that the case had not concerned “multi-level”
administrative proceedings, but rather court proceedings and “single-level” administrative
proceedings; and second, that the tribunal had applied the denial of justice standard to the court
proceedings, whilst applying the fair and equitable treatment standard to the administrative
proceedings,!#°

The Claimants further submitted, referring to the decision in RosInvestCo v. Russian
Federation, that the denial of justice standard did not apply exclusively to administrative
proceedings insofar as it had developed to deal with the specific issue of wrongful acts
committed by the judiciary."“*°

Finally, the Claimants argued that the denial of justice standard was not the exclusive
applicable standard where there were multiple, interlocking acts of the State which
cumulatively harmed the investor, and that such claims should be analysed under the
individual explicit standards under the BIT, which were more appropriate insofar as they
allowed the assessment of the cumulative effects of the various actions as a whole.'“” The
Claimants again invoked the decision in RosInvestCo, noting that the tribunal in that case had
considered the actions of the host state’s courts under the denial of justice standard, but had not
held that it could not exclude those decisions from its analysis of the claims under other treaty
standards.'“* The Claimants noted that their investment activities had not been impeded by a
single decision, but rather by the “cumulative effect of multiple state actions on different
administrative levels”, pointing in particular to the Extraordinary Review and Main Building
Permit proceedings.“

As regards the argument that they had had only to pursue “reasonable efforts” for domestic
redress in order to rely on the investment protection guarantees under the BIT, the Claimants
asserted first that there was no requirement that they should have complied with the rule
requiring exhaustion of local remedies under customary international law, as no such

‘8 Reply, para. 555.

14 Reply, para. 556.

145 Reply, para. 557.

™46 Reply, paras, 558-559, citing RosInvestCo UK Ltd. v. Russian Federation (SCC Case No. V079/2005), Final Award
of 12 September 2010, para. 274.

147 Reply, para. 560.

18 Reply, para. 561, citing RosInvestCo UK Ltd. v. Russian Federation (SCC Case No. V079/2005), Final Award of 12
September 2010, para. 280.

149 Reply, para. 562.

252

requirement was contained in the BIT; they relied on certain observations of the tribunal in
1450

Chevron and Texaco v. Ecuador.

4.553 Second, they submitted that even under the denial of justice standard, if it were held to be
applicable and exclusive, there was no obligation to exhaust local remedies, but only to pursue
reasonable efforts to do so, and that the same standard applied under the treaty guarantees.’**!
The Claimants emphasized that the BIT contained no substantive requirement to exhaust local
remedies, and that the Respondent’s argument that the Claimants should have appealed every
decision was thus without foundation.'*? They noted that any strict requirement of exhaustion
would contradict the purpose of investment protection, and submitted that the jurisprudence
showed that an investor only had to undertake reasonable efforts to obtain redress locally
before commencing arbitration.’4>>

4.554 Although accepting that “not any wrongful decision on the lowest administrative level can
amount to a breach of international law”, the Claimants denied that this meant that the
exhaustion of local remedies rule established under customary international law applied with
“full rigour”.!“* They submitted that any such conclusion, and the imposition of a substantive
requirement of exhaustion of local remedies, would be inconsistent with the purpose of
investment arbitration.'*° They invoked various decisions as showing that only “reasonable
efforts” to obtain redress had to be pursued, including the decisions in Generation Ukraine v.
Ukraine and Lemire v. Ukraine.'**6

4.555 Third, the Claimants argued that they were in any case under no obligation to seek anything
other than limited domestic redress by reason of what they submitted was a “pattern of state
conduct, aimed at delaying Claimants’ investment activities”.'*’ As support for that argument,
they referred to the comments of the ad hoc Committee in Helnan Hotels.'***

4.556 The Claimants submitted that the Respondent had utilized the Claimants’ attempts to obtain
redress to prolong the proceedings, and had thus compounded the breach; they made reference
inter alia to the delay which had occurred following the appeal of the First Ministry Decision,
including in particular the delay between the recommendation of the Advisory Committee and
the adoption of the First Minister Decision; the remand to the Ministry; and the Claimants’
appeal of the Third Stay, including MAL’s delay in forwarding the case file to RAL.'4°°

1450 Reply, paras. 563; 565-567, referring to Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v. Republic of
Ecuador (UNCITRAL/PCA), Partial Award on the Merits of 30 March 2010, para. 321.

1451 Reply, para. 564,

1452 Reply, para. 568.

1453 Reply, para. 569.

'854 Reply, para. 570.

55 Reply, para. 371-572.

1456 Reply, paras. 573-574, quoting Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9), Award of 16
September 2003, para. 20.30; Joseph C. Lemire v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/18), Decision on Jurisdiction and
Liability of 14 January 2010, para. 282.

1457 Reply, para. 575.

1458 Reply, paras. 576-577, quoting Helnan International Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/19), Decision of the ad hoc Committee of 14 June 2010, para. 50

1459 Reply paras. 578-580.

253

 

4.557

4,558

4.559

4.560

4.561

Further, they reiterated their position that the various decisions had been the result of a pattern
of State conduct, constituting a “scheme to obstruct Claimants”.'°° They noted that the
authorities had adopted a number of obviously incorrect decisions, and submitted that the
number of gross errors was such that it could not be regarded as mere coincidence, They
further invoked what they asserted was the allegedly more favourable treatment given to Multi.
As a consequence, they submitted, they had had no prospect of obtaining a domestic solution
through further appeals, and could not be required to have pursued any further domestic
efforts."4°

The Claimants further claimed that they had in any case pursued every form of redress
required, albeit without success, cross-referring in that regard to the development of the point
earlier in the Reply; by way of summary, they emphasized that they had only had to seek
redress in the Main Building and Planning Permit proceedings, and only as regards actions
prior to the abandonment.'“ They submitted that, on that basis, they had done everything
required by law, noting that they had appealed every decision possible in the Extraordinary
Review Proceedings save the Second Minister Decision, and had taken action where necessary
against the various stays in the Building Permit proceedings.!**

The Claimants denied that they should have had recourse to the Czech administrative courts,
suggesting that because they had been continuously rebuffed, they could not have been
expected to seek relief before the courts, and that, in any case, it was evident that any such
recourse would have been ineffective as it would have only come far too late.'“°

Finally, although stressing that it was not necessary for their claims, the Claimants asserted
that, as a result of the conduct of the Respondent they had been denied justice, “because of
procedural irregularities, and because of manifestly unlawful decisions”. They claimed that
they had pursued all necessary local remedies.“ They reiterated their position that
exhaustion was not strictly required and that “reasonable efforts for domestic redress” was
sufficient, and again referred to Chevron v. Ecuador.'*8"

As to the effectiveness of the remedies available, the Claimants repeated their argument, based
on the decision of the International Court of Justice in Diallo, that the burden to establish that
effective remedies existed was upon the Respondent.'“* The Claimants submitted that none of
the various remedies theoretically available under Czech law were effective. They noted in
particular that, as recognized by the Respondent, the motion against failure to act was not
available against stays; that it was likewise not available in relation to the Minister, as he had
no superior authority; and that in any case, it would have been likely to have prolonged the

1460 Reply, para. 581.

1461 Reply, paras. 581-582.

1462 Reply, para. 583.

1463 Reply, paras. 584-585

1464 Reply, para. 586.

1465 Reply, para. 587.

1466 Reply, para. 588.

1467 Reply, para. 589-591.

1468 Reply, para. 592, referring to Ahmadou Sadio Diallo (Republic of Guinea v. Democratic Republic of the Congo),
Preliminary Objections, IC] Reports 2007, p. 582, at p. 600 (para. 44).

254

4,562

4.563

4.564

4.565

4.566

proceedings.'“® They argued that recourse to the administrative courts would likewise not
have been effective insofar as administrative means of recourse first had to be exhausted, and
in any case it would not have resulted in a decision prior to the abandonment.'4”°

Specifically as regards the Third Stay, the Claimants submitted that no effective remedies had
been available, and rejected the Respondent’s argument that they were precluded from relying
on that decision because of their untimely appeal; they argued that even an appeal filed in time
would not have made any difference, referring again to the fact that MAL had in any case
ignored the opinion of the Ministry that the stay was improper. 47!

As to the substance of the alleged denial of justice, they argued that consideration could not be
limited to manifestly unlawful decisions (although they argued that decisions of that nature had
been adopted), and submitted that a denial of justice had also occurred as a result of the
unwarranted delay in the Main Building Permit proceedings as the result of the unlawful stay
decisions, and the “grossly deficient” manner in which the Respondent had administered
justice as a result of failing to hear the Claimants in the Extraordinary Review Proceedings.“

As to the duration of the proceedings, the Claimants rejected the Respondent’s invocation of
the decision in Jan de Nul to the effect that even a 10 year delay in complex proceedings might
not constitute a denial of justice as inapposite, noting that they did not rely on the overall
duration of the proceedings but on specific delays; they further argued that the proceedings
were not of a complexity such as to justify the delays which had occurred, and submitted that
the delays were rather due to the alleged scheme of corruption. "47°

By way of expansion of their claim of manifest unlawfulness, the Claimants focused on the
Third Stay and the First Minister Decision, and disputed the Respondent’s attempt to suggest
that those decisions were justified by reasonable motives. On the one hand, they asserted that
the intention of both Mr and the Minister had been to obstruct the Claimants,'*”* and on
the other noted that the subjective intention of the decision-maker was not relevant for a denial
of justice, emphasizing that no finding of bad faith was necessary. “”°

They argued that on an objective approach, no justification for the Third Stay was possible,
and that in light of the relevant Czech law, it had been “manifestly unjust”; they asserted that
the same was true of the Second Stay insofar as it had relied on the pendency of the
Extraordinary Review Proceedings.'*”° As for the First Minister Decision, the Claimants took
issue with the Respondent’s attempt to portray the difference between remand and immediate
termination as a subtle point of administrative procedure, and argued that the manifest

1469 Reply, para. 594,

147 Reply, para. 595.

"47! Reply, para. 596.

14? Reply, paras, 597-599.

1973 Reply, paras, 600-602.

97 Reply, para, 604.

1475 Reply, para. 605, citing Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador
(UNCITRAL/PCA), Partial Award on the Merits of 30 March 2010, para. 244.

1476 Reply, para. 606.

255

 

4.567

4.568

4.569

unlawfulness of the First Minister Decision resulted clearly from the fact that the Minister had
reached a different conclusion on precisely the same facts in the Second Minister Decision. '*””

vy. Causation

On causation, the Claimants cross-referred to their submissions on the facts, repeating their
assertion that the project would have prevailed but for the alleged interference by the
Respondent, and that it had been the Respondent’s “obstruction” that had forced the
postponement of the opening date to the Autumn of 2010 and made it impossible for the
Claimants to guarantee even that date, as a result of which it was alleged that key tenants had
been lost, and the Claimants had had “no other option but to abandon their project”.!4”

In addition, the Claimants disputed the Respondent’s suggestion, which they submitted
entailed the idea of a “hypothetical timeline”, according to which even if the Second and Third
Stays had not been adopted, the Main Building Permit proceedings would in any case have
been stayed due to the Groundworks Removal Proceedings. The Claimants argued that the
Respondent had provided no authority that consideration of such “hypothetical chains of
causation” had to be considered, noting in particular that the decision in Factory at Chorzéw
provided no support in that regard.'4” They continued by arguing that if such hypothetical
situations had to be considered, investors would be disadvantaged as respondent States could
invoke reasons for decisions that had not been relied upon initially; they noted that the
excessive excavations had not been relied upon by the Respondent as a reason for the Third
Stay,!4®

On that basis, they submitted that the question for the Tribunal was whether the Claimants
would have had to abandon their project without the decisions in the Extraordinary Review
Proceedings, the illegal stays and the illegal splitting of the Building Permits, and that the
answer to that question was that the project would have continued uninterrupted. They further
assertedthat, in the absence of those decisions, “[t]here would not have been any excavations
beyond the limit in the Planning Permit in the first place because the Building Permit would
have been issued even before the limit in the Planning Permit had been reached”, with the
result that there would have been no Groundworks Removal Proceedings which could have
had an effect on the Main Building Permit proceedings.'*!

The Respondent’s Rejoinder

Overview and Preliminary Points

By way of introduction in their Rejoinder, the Respondent submitted that “[tJacitly
acknowledging their failure to state a viable claim in either their Statement of Claim or their

1477 Reply, para. 607.
+478 Reply, para. 608.
47° Reply, para. 609.
1480 Reply, para. 610.
1481 Reply, para. 611.

256

4.571

4.572

4.573

Memorial” the Claimants had “completely revamped their case yet again” in the Reply.'**?

They noted that whilst, in the Statement of Claim, the claims had been put forward on the basis
of the issuing of incorrect decisions and the causing of delays by the Czech authorities, the
focus in the Memorial had shifted to allegations of discrimination in respect of the manner in
which the Claimants’ investment had been treated by comparison to that of Multi, and that in
the Rejoinder the focus had shifted again to allegations of bribery by Multi of Czech officials
in order to procure incorrect decisions and cause delays.'**

The Respondent highlighted the Claimants’ acknowledgment that it had no direct evidence to
support the allegations of bribery,'“** and set out in a table the principal allegations made by
the Claimants and what it referred to as the “stunning lack of support” for the allegations of
corruption, as well as its own evidence in response.'“*> It submitted that in respect of all but
one of the allegations, no evidence was put forward by the Claimants, and that as regards the
remaining allegation (that employees of MAL were instructed to obstruct the permit
proceedings in respect of Galerie), the only evidence was the witness statement of
Ms 148

The Respondent rejected the claims of corruption as unfounded.'*’ It submitted that they were
“a creative afterthought to a failed case”, noting that the Statement of Claim had made no
mention at all of corruption; it argued that the claims constituted a “flagrant violation” of the
Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1, Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Rules, and “basic notions of
due process”, in particular insofar as the Claimants had failed to provide any explanation for
the delay in raising the new claim, 48

They further took particular objection to the fact that in support of their claim, the Claimants
had resorted to relying upon an unsigned witness statement attributed to Mr __ of the
Ministry of Regional Development, and drew attention to the fact that the reason why that
statement was unsigned was because Mr _ had been asked to sign it and had refused to
do so.'“® Relying on the observations of the Tribunal in Azinian v. Mexico, the Respondent
strongly objected to this procedural impropriety, in particular insofar as it was alleged that Mr

jand another employee of the Ministry had not been informed that they were being
approached as potential witnesses, and that they had a right to legal representation.'°° It
further submitted that the Claimants had attempted to obtain information from the Ministry
under false pretences, including in particular by recruiting a law student to request information

"482 Rejoinder, para. 1.

1483 Rejoinder, paras. 2-4.

1484 Rejoinder, para. 4, quoting Reply, para. 40,

1485 Rejoinder, para. 4,

486 Rejoinder, para. 4.

487 Rejoinder, para. 5.

1488 Rejoinder-paras. 6 and 7.

148° Rejoinder, para. 8 and 9,

1490 Rejoinder, paras. 10 and 11, citing Robert Azinian, Kenneth Davitian & Ellen Baca v, United Mexican States
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/2), Award of 1 November 1999, para. 56,

 

257

 

   

4.574

4,575

4.576

4.577

as to the frequency with which the Minister did not follow recommendations of the Advisory
Committee under the guise that it was required for “school research”, 4°!

As an overview of its response to the Claimants’ case as set out in the Reply, the Respondent
submitted that the essential flaw in the Claimants’ case was that they had believed that it was
not necessary for them to calculate risk, that they could start development of their own project
more than a year after Multi had started work, in a worse location, and “at the tipping point of
a saturated market”, and that the cause of the abandonment was that situation, coupled with the
10 month delay caused by the Claimants themselves in the permitting process, and the onset of
the global economic crisis in late 2008.'*°?

It further submitted that, in response to the reply to their claims contained in the Respondent’s
Answer and Counter-Memorial, the Claimants’ Reply had offered “little more by way of
rebuttal than a string of mischaracterizations and a wild-growth of new and unsupported
assertions”,'#°?

As to the new claim of corruption, the Respondent argued that it was “taken from thin air”;
noting that if the Claimants had been serious about the claim, it would have been raised
previously, but that no criminal complaint for corruption had been filed in 2007 or 2008 whilst
the project was ongoing, nor after the arbitration had been initiated. It repeated that the claim
of corruption was entirely unsupported, and noted that, although the Claimants accused
virtually all of the public officials involved, with the exception of the officials of RAL, of very
serious crimes, the only actual evidence relied upon was “newspaper clippings and general
studies regarding so-called ‘corruption scandals’” which were unconnected to the present
case.'** They noted that the Claimants were in effect asking the Tribunal to infer a specific
conclusion of corruption by Multi from “exceedingly general” conclusion that corruption was
present in the Czech Republic. '*°*

The Respondent noted that the principal officials against whom allegations were made
» Mr and Mr ) categorically denied the accusations made against
them.'° Further:

a. as regards Mr it drew attention to the fact that he had issued numerous
procedural and substantive decisions that were entirely favourable to the Claimants,
including in particular the Planning Permit, the Main Building Permit and the
building permit for the roads, as well as other minor procedural decisions,'*”” as well
as the fact that he had “resumed all of the incorrectly-stayed building permit
proceedings promptly” following the decisions on the appeals by Tschechien 7.'*
They further highlighted that a number of mistakes made by Mr were

491 Rejoinder, paras. 12 and 13.
49 Rejoinder, para. 16.

"43 Rejoinder, para. 17.

+44 Reioinder paras. 18-20.

45 Rejoinder, para. 21.

16 Reioinder, para. 22.

17 Rejoinder, para. 23.

148 Rejoinder, para. 24.

258

4.578

4.579

4.580

favourable to the Claimants, in particular the authorization of the excavations in the
Planning Permit, which it was submitted, had been contrary to Czech law, and that he
had issued the Main Building Permit even though it was alleged that he should have
required updating of the documentation to take account of the unauthorized
excavations;!*°?

as regards Mr they recalled that the City of . aad changed its zoning
plan in a manner which assisted the Claimants, that the City had applied
for certain of the main building permits in its own name, and that on 30 April 2008 it
had entered into the coordination agreement with the Claimants to reconstruct the
roads owned by it that were necessary to make the Galerie shopping centre accessible
by road; 1500

as regards Minister the Respondent asserted that his decisions had been in
accordance with Czech law, and had always been in the Claimants’ favour. It notes
that the only act of which criticism was made by the Claimants was his choice in the
First Minister Decision to remand, rather than reverse the First Ministry Decision, and
submitted that that was the correct decision, pointing to the fact that that was the
course of action which Tschechien 7 itself had originally requested in its appeal. It
noted that if the Minister had wished to obstruct the Claimants’ project, he could
easily have ruled against Tschechien 7 by confirming the First or Second Ministry
Decisions, thereby cancelling the Planning Permit, but that he had not done so.!5°!

In addition to its response on the merits of the corruption claims, the Respondent also raised a
procedural objection to the allegations of corruption, arguing that they were inadmissible
insofar as Article 12.2 of the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 1 had provided that the Reply
was to be limited to responding to points raised in the Counter-Memorial.'°

As regards the Claimants’ other claims, the Respondent submitted that the Claimants’
allegations centred around three key dates, namely:

a.

b.

1 July 2007, the date on which the Claimants made their investment in Tschechien 7;

15 December 2007, the Claimants’ “valuation date” for the purposes of its assessment
of the lost profits claimed as damages; and

13 October 2008, the last date on which the Claimants had alleged any violation of
the BIT. 5°

As regards the first key date of 1 July 2007, the Respondent noted, recalling its position on the
jurisdiction ratione temporis of the Tribunal, that the Claimants had admitted that there could

be no violation of the BIT prior to the date when their investment was made.

1504

149 Rejoinder, para 25.

1500 Rejoinder, para. 26.

‘50! Rejoinder, para. 27.

'5 Reioinder, paras. 28-29.
1503 Rejoinder , para. 30.

259

 

 

4.581

4.582

4.583

4.584

As regards the second key date of 15 December 2007, the Respondent argued that, as a matter
of public international law, the valuation date must immediately precede the breach to which it
relates, and that accordingly the Claimants’ selection of 15 December 2007 was an indication
of when the Claimants believed that the breach of the BIT occurred.’°°> On that basis, the
Respondent submitted that the relevant period for analysis of breach of the BIT was between 1
July 2007 and the end of 2007.'% Although acknowledging that acts after late 2007 could in
theory breach the BIT, the Respondent argued that the Tribunal could not award any damages
for lost-profit on that basis insofar as the Claimants had not presented any evidence of
valuation of their investment after 2007.'°””

Finally, as regards the third date of 13 October 2008, the Respondent argued that, although in
theory the Claimants could recover damages for the “obsolete expenses” flowing from a breach
after the end of 2007, the Claimants had expressly stated that they made no claim in respect of
events after the alleged abandonment on 13 October 2007, and that accordingly, on the
Claimants’ own case, the Respondent could only be liable in that regard in respect of events
between 1 July 2007 and 13 October 2008.'°° It added that it could only be liable in respect of
expenses incurred by the Claimants’ subsidiaries whilst they were in fact owned by the
Claimants, and that those expenses would have to be valued as at the date of the breach. It
argued that the Claimants’ claim for “obsolete expenses was “unsubstantiated” insofar as they
had not shown either that the amounts claimed in that regard had been incurred whilst the
relevant subsidiaries were owned by them, nor that the valuation had been undertaken as at the
date of the relevant alleged breach. 6”

On the basis of that analysis, the Respondent submitted that two periods were relevant for
assessment of whether there had been a breach of the BIT:

a. first, in respect of the Claimants’ claims in respect of lost profits, the relevant period
was between | July 2007 and the end of 2007;

b. second, in respect of the Claimants’ claims in respect of “obsolete expenses”, the
relevant period was between 1 July 2007 and 13 October 2008.'°!°

However, the Respondent emphasized that the Claimants had admitted in the Reply that none
of the events prior to 13 October 2008 were in fact decisive for the abandonment of the project,
and that the decision to abandon the project had been taken on the basis that they could “no
longer be certain that MAL would not soon find another pretext to delay the proceedings”.!5!!
They further highlighted the fact that the Claimants’ own assessment as at the time of the
alleged abandonment was that the shopping centre in Spring/Summer 2010 was at least 50%,
and repeated their argument that, on the basis of the position taken by the Claimants, the cause

 

150% Rejoinder, para. 32.
1595 Rejoinder, para. 33.
1506 Rejoinder, para. 34
1507 Rejoinder, para. 34.
1508 Rejoinder, para. 35.
150? Rejoinder, para. 36.
1510 Rejonder, para. 37.
151! Rejoinder, para. 38, quoting Reply, para. 210.

260

 

of the abandonment was thus a fear of a future violation of Czech law. 15! They further
submitted that, in any case, the fear of a future breach had not been the real cause of the
abandonment, but that rather the project had been abandoned due to a belated appreciation of
the riskiness of the project, Tschechien 7’s own delays in the permitting process, and the fact
that, as a result of the financial crisis in the early Autumn of 2008, liquidity problems had
arisen; the Respondent made reference to the PowerPoint presentation given to the board in
October 2008 and submitted that that was conclusive proof that the actions of the Respondent
had not been the real cause of the abandonment.'*!?

b. Factual Allegations

4.585

4.586

4.587

 

1512 Reioinder paras. 38-39.
1513 Rejoinder, paras. 40-41.
1516 Rejoinder, para. 42.
1515 Rejoinder, para. 45.
4516 Rejoinder, para. 45.
1517 Rejoinder, para. 47
1518 Rejoinder, paras. 48-50.

261

 


 

 








 

 

 


4.629

4.630

4.631

4.632

Merits of the Claimants’ Claims

As to the merits of the Claimants’ claims, the Respondent submitted that, despite the changes
in the Claimants’ case, the common thread had been complaints as to delays in the permit
proceedings; it produced a table summarising the dates of the filing and completion of each
application, as well of each first instance decision and-any decisions on appeal in relation to the
various proceedings. It asserted that the Claimants complained of proceedings which had all
ended in their favour, with the sole exception being the proceedings in relation to Main
Building Permit, as to which the appellate proceedings had been stayed on 12 March 2009, and
again submitted that the Claimants “had only themselves to blame” insofar as the stay was
caused by the excessive excavations, and in any case noted that the Claimants asserted no

breaches after October 2008.16

On the basis that the Claimants had been successful in all of the relevant proceedings, the
Respondent submitted that their only complaint could be that the successful outcomes had not
come quickly enough, and noted that that had never been held to be a sufficient basis for

concluding that a State had violated international law.'°°”

i,___Denial of Justice and Exhaustion of Local Remedies

To that end, the Respondent reiterated its position that the Claimants’ claims had to be
assessed against the principles of denial of justice.
As to the applicability of the denial of justice standard and its content, the Respondent noted

that the Claimants in the Reply had taken the position that they only complained as to the
conduct of the Extraordinary Review Proceedings and the Main Building Permit proceedings,

159 Rejoinder, para. 147.
15% Rejoinder, paras. 148-149.
1594 Rejoinder, para. 150.

1595 Rejoinder, para. 151.

596 Reioinder, paras. 152-153.
1597 Rejoinder, para. 154.

273

4.633

4.634

4.635

and emphasized that their complaint was not as to delays due to inactivity in the periods
between the various decisions in those proceedings. It submitted that any such claim would
have been hopeless insofar as the relevant authorities had “always decided the matters before
them within a reasonable time”.!** Rather, the Respondent submitted, the Claimants’
complaint was that “too many first-instance decisions were incorrect, and it caused delay by
having to remedy them on appeal”, and argued that, whether assessed against the principles of
denial of justice or against other standards of protection, tribunals had consistently concluded
that “incorrect decisions subsequently quashed by a superior authority (or which could have
been quashed had the investor used available local remedies) do not give rise to an
international delict”.°°°

By way of expansion of that argument, the Respondent explained that incorrect first-instance
decisions were subject to “a substantive requirement of exhaustion of local remedies because
States must be given an opportunity to quash incorrect first instance decisions in the usual
appellate process”. Relying on the decisions of the tribunal and ad hoc Committee in
Helnan Hotels, of the tribunal in EDF y. Romania, and of the tribunal in Amco Asia y.
Indonesia, it submitted that that conclusion had been reached “either by analysing similar
claims under the standard of denial of justice or by expressly or implicitly imposing the
requirement under other standards”.’! The Respondent submitted that the underlying
justification for that approach was that it would be “unrealistic to interpret investment treaties
as requiring that first instance administrative decisions always be procedurally and
substantively correct”, and submitted that that was particularly the case where errors could be
remedied upon appeal, or by another domestic remedy.’ It further argued that domestic
bodies were far better placed to deal with appeals against incorrect first instance administrative
decisions, and invoked the observation of the tribunal in Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine that it
was for domestic bodies, and not international tribunals, to “ensure that municipal agencies
perform their tasks diligently, conscientiously or efficiently”.'*

It noted that despite the fact that it had consistently reiterated those principles, the Claimants
had failed to address them. '6*

Second, in response to the Claimants’ argument that the denial of justice standard was not
exclusive, the Respondent submitted that that argument missed the point, which was rather that

1598 Rejoinder, para. 155.

159° Rejoinder, para. 156.

1600 Rejoinder, para. 157.

1601 Rejoinder, para. 157, quoting Helnan International Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No.
ARB/05/19), Award of 3 July 2008, para. 148; Helnan International Hotels A/S v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case
No. ARB/05/19), Decision of the ad hoc Committee of 14 June 2010, paras. 48 and 50; EDF (Services) Limited v.
Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/13), Award of 8 October 2009, para. 313; and Amco Asia Corporation and others v.
Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case ARB/81/1), Award in Resubmitted Proceeding of 5 June 1990.

1602 Rejoinder, para. 158.

1603 Rejoinder, para. 158, quoting Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9), Award of 16
September 2003, para. 20.33.

1604 Rejoinder, para. 159.

274

 

4.636

4.637

4.638

4.639

no standard of protection under the BIT could be violated by “an incorrect first-instance
decision that was remedied upon appeal, or not appealed at all”.’®°

The Respondent submitted that the Claimants had failed to provide any “meaningful response
to that well-established principle”; insofar as the Claimants had invoked the decision in Saipem
v. Bangladesh for the proposition that a first-instance decision could constitute an
expropriation, even if not appealed, the Respondent submitted that they had overstated its
holding insofar as, although the tribunal in that case had expressed the view that exhaustion
was not a substantive requirement of a finding of expropriation, it had held that it was not in
any case required to make a determination on that issue.’ The Respondent in any case
criticized the “apparent readiness” of the tribunal in Saipem to hold that exhaustion was not a
substantive requirement for expropriation by a judicial act as “not in line with prevailing
interpretation”, and referring to, inter alia, the decisions in Loewen v. USA, Pantechniki v.
Albania, and EDF v. Romania submitted that other tribunals were “adamant” that exhaustion
of local remedies was required.’©”

The Respondent also disputed the relevance of the reliance by the Claimants on the decision in
RosInvestCo y. Russia, arguing that the tribunal in that case had held that the criteria for denial
of justice had been developed in light of the different functions of administrative organs and
judicial organs and “the resulting differences in their discretion when applying the law and in
the appeals available against their decisions”, and that that did not contradict its position.’®*

The Respondent emphasized that all of the administrative decisions of which the Claimants
complained (with the exception of the First Minister Decision) had been first instance
decisions rendered in multi-level administrative proceedings, and thus were subject to appeal
and could have been quashed as efficiently as if they had been first instance court decisions.
On that basis it submitted that there was no difference between Czech administrative and
judicial proceedings in that respect, and that accordingly the requirement of exhaustion of local
remedies applicable to first-instance judicial decisions applied equally to first-instance
administrative decisions."

Third, the Respondent asserted that denial of justice constituted the applicable lex specialis
governing claims based on the conduct of administrative proceedings. It disputed the
Claimants’ assertion that, because the denial of justice standard allegedly provided for a low
level of protection, it could not constitute lex specialis as against the supposedly higher
standard of protection contained in the BIT; it submitted that the opposite was in fact true
when claims related to the conduct, rather than the outcome, of administrative proceedings.
Further, it argued that the Claimants’ position appeared to be based on a misunderstanding of a

165 Rejoinder, para. 160

166 Rejoinder, para. 161, quoting Saipem S.p.A. v. People's Republic of Bangladesh (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/7),
Award of 30 June 2009, paras. 181-182.

1607 Rejoinder, para. 162, referring to The Loewen Group, Inc, and Raymond L, Loewen v. United States of America
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3), Award of 26 June 2003, para. 154; Pantechniki S.A. Contractors & Engineers v.
Republic of Albania (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/21), Award of 30 July 2009, paras. 96-102; and EDF (Services) Limited
y. Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/13), Award of 8 October 2009, para. 313.

18 Rejoinder, para. 163, quoting Ros/nvestCo UK Ltd. v. Russian Federation (SCC Case No. V079/2005), Final Award
of 12 September 2010, para. 274 (emphasis in original).

1609 Rejoinder, para. 164.

275

 

or

4.640

4.64]

4.642

4.643

footnote contained in an academic treatise on denial of justice, and submitted that, where
claims related to matters which were covered by the customary law of denial of justice, that
standard “should either prevail as lex specialis or at least inform the interpretation of any other
Treaty standard." It submitted that this was the case was confirmed by a number of
decisions in which the author of the treatise in question had acted as arbitrator, in particular the
decisions in Generation Ukraine v. Ukraine, and Pantechniki v. Albania."

Fourth, the Respondent disputed the Claimants’ argument that the requirement of exhaustion of
local remedies did not apply where an investment suffered from the “cumulative effects” of
“several interlocking acts”, suggesting that that argument was an attempt to avoid the
consequence of the fact that the Claimants were unable to defend their position that the
requirement of exhaustion did not apply to administrative proceedings, and that it was without
support in the case law.'61?

The Respondent noted that the Claimants had relied solely on the decision in RosInvestCo v.
Russia, but submitted that the case was inapposite because it was based “‘on very different
facts”.!©!3 In any case, it argued that there had in fact been no “cumulative” delay, insofar as
the delay of which complaint was made had originated in the Building Permit proceedings and
had been fully remedied within those proceedings. It reiterated its position that, of the three
stays, only the Third Stay had been incorrect as a matter of Czech law, and argued that, insofar
as the First and Second Stays had been entirely proper, the delay resulting from them could not
be “added” to that resulting from the Third Stay.'®'* It further emphasized that although the
pendency of the Extraordinary Review Proceedings had been the motivation underlying the
adoption of the Third Stay, they had not in any way added to the delay, and noted that the Main
Building Permit proceedings had resumed in October 2008 in spite of the continued pendency
of the Extraordinary Review Proceedings. '°!

In conclusion, it submitted that the only delay of which complaint could be made was that

resulting from the Third Stay, and noted that the Third Stay had been remedied by MAL sua
1616

sponte.

Finally, the Respondent submitted that the Claimants had misunderstood the standard for
exhaustion of local remedies, and had attempted to change the standard altogether insofar as
they had argued that they only had to pursue “reasonable efforts for domestic redress”, and that
“no strict requirement for the exhaustion of local remedies exists”.'"” The Respondent
submitted that the Claimants’ argument was based on a “gross misrepresentation” of the
decision in Chevron v, Ecuador, which related to a specific treaty provision which imposed a

1610 Rejoinder, para. 165.

1611 Rejoinder, para. 166, referring to Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9), Award of 16
September 2003, para. 20,33 and Pantechniki S.A. Contractors & Engineers v. Republic of Albania (ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/21), Award of 30 July 2009, paras, 96-102.

16!2 Rejoinder, para. 167.

1613 Rejoinder, para. 168.
614 Rejoinder, para. 169.
1615 Rejoinder, para. 169.
1616 Rejoinder, para. 170.
1617 Rejoinder, para. 171, quoting Reply, para, 563.

276

 

4,644

4.645

4.646

4.647

4.648

less demanding lex specialis standard compared to the customary law prohibition of denial of
justice, and which had no equivalent in the BIT.’

As to the applicability of the denial of justice standard and the requirement of exhaustion of
local remedies to the facts of the case, the Respondent asserted that the Claimants had “often
failed to make even reasonable efforts to use effective domestic remedies”.'*"

It argued that Czech law had provided effective remedies against delays in administrative
proceedings. It submitted that insofar as the Claimants had complained of alleged violations of
the statutory time limits for the issuing of decisions, an appropriate remedy had been provided
by the possibility of bringing a motion for failure to act, whilst to the extent that they
complained of allegedly incorrect decisions to stay the Building Permit proceedings, a remedy
had existed in the form of a regular administrative appeal.'°°

It submitted that the Claimants’ argument appeared to be that those remedies were not
effective solely on the basis that the process of applying for those remedies in itself took time,
and countered that that argument would “inexorably” lead to the conclusion that no remedies
against incorrect decisions would ever even theoretically be possible insofar as any remedial
process unavoidably required some time which, on the Claimants’ argument would have
constituted “unwarranted delay”.’©

In relation to the Third Stay, the Respondent submitted that an ordinary appeal, if filed in a
timely fashion, would have been an effective remedy; it submitted that if the Claimants had in
fact filed their appeals on time, then RAL would have quashed the Third Stay and the
proceedings would have automatically resumed. However, given that that had not been the
case, RAL had had no option but to reject Tschechien 7’s appeals, and MAL had been under
no obligation to resume the proceedings. It invoked the outcome of Tschechien 7’s timely
appeal against the stay of the water management proceedings, as a result of which RAL had
quashed MAL’s decision, as demonstrating that a timely appeal would have been effective. ©?

The Respondent disputed the Claimants’ suggestion that a timely appeal would have been no
quicker than the actual course of events, in which MAL had resumed the proceedings sua
sponte following RAL’s rejection of the appeal as inadmissible on 8 October 2008; it argued
that if Tschechien 7 had filed an appeal against the Third Stay immediately after being notified
of it, RAL could have issued a decision quashing the stay as early as 15 September 2008. It
further noted that, in any case, if the Third Stay had been quashed, MAL would have been
under an obligation to resume the proceedings, which had not been the case following the
rejection of Tschechien 7’s belated appeal.’

1618 Rejoinder, para. 172.
1619 Rejoinder, para. 172.

160 Reioinder, para. 174,

181 Reioinder, para. 175,

1622 Reioinder, para. 176.
13 Rejoinder, para. 177.
464 Rejoinder, paras. 178-179.

277

 

 

 

4.649

4.650

4.651

4.652

4.653

4.654

Finally, the Respondent argued that there had been a further effective remedy available, of
which the Claimants had not availed themselves, in the form of recourse to the administrative
courts. It repeated its argument that the Claimants could not discard that remedy merely on the
basis that it would have taken time. It noted that recourse to the courts required exhaustion
within the administrative proceedings, and that where there had not been such exhaustion, any
attempt to seize the courts would have been declared inadmissible, but submitted that it could
not be blamed for the non-exhaustion by the Claimants of administrative remedies.'°*>

Second, the Respondent in the alternative argued that the Claimants had not in fact exhausted
all reasonable remedies. Having noted that the Claimants had admitted that the First and
Second Ministry Decisions had in fact been remedied by the First and Second Minister
Decisions pursuant to Tschechien 7’s appeals, the Respondent submitted that as a result, those
decisions could not give rise to an international delict. Similarly, it noted that the Claimants
had acknowledged that the Second Stay had been remedied when MAL resumed the
proceedings, and submitted that as a result it also could not give rise to any violation of
international law.1°

As regards the Third Stay, the Respondent noted that the Claimants had failed to make proper
use of the “reasonable and effective remedy” consisting of an appeal to RAL, and submitted
that that fact alone prevented the Claimants from arguing that the Third Stay violated the BIT.
The Respondent disputed the Claimants’ suggestion that the belated nature of their appeal was
irrelevant insofar as MAL was under an obligation to remedy its error sua sponte at all times; it
argued that under Czech law, an administrative body had the power, but was under no
obligation to rectify incorrect suspensions of proceedings sua sponte, and that the only binding
remedy was the quashing of the incorrect stay in appellate proceedings.!”

Finally, the Respondent disputed the Claimants’ argument that they were only under a limited
obligation to exhaust local remedies because, in light of the alleged pattern of conduct by the
Respondent against them and adverse to their investment, such remedies would have been
futile and would used against them. The Respondent asserted that there was no such pattern of
conduct, and that all of the appeals initiated by the Claimants had in fact been favourable to
them, and on that basis, denied the Claimants’ suggestion that they had been “rebuffed in their
efforts to gain redress”.'*

Next, the Respondnent denied that, even if the requirement of exhaustion of local remedies
were ignored, the Claimants had in fact been denied justice.

First, it rejected the Claimants’ suggestion that they had suffered a denial of justice as a
consequence of unlawful decisions, arguing that “most of the decisions complained of were
perfectly lawful and none were egregious or manifestly unlawful”.'®”? It argued that:

15 Rejoinder, para. 180.
1626 Rejoinder, para. 181.
1©7 Rejoinder, para. 182.
1©8 Rejoinder, paras. 183-184.
1©9 Rejoinder, para. 186.

278

1630 Rejoinder, para.
‘631 Rejoinder, para.
1632 Rejoinder, para.

although the First Ministry Decision had been incorrect (insofar as it had failed to
enquire as to whether Tschechien 7 had acquired rights under the Planning Permit in
good faith), it had not been egregious or manifestly unlawful, and in any case could
not constitute a denial of justice insofar as it had been remedied upon appeal;'6*°

the First Minister Decision had been entirely correct, including insofar as it had
remanded the case.’! The Respondent noted that the Claimants had not sought to
explain how the First Minister Decision had been wrong, but rather had focused on
the fact that the Second Minister Decision had resulted in a reversal rather than a
remand, allegedly “based on the exact same facts”.’®* The Respondent denied that
that had in fact been the case, pointing to the fact that new evidence had been on the
record at the time of the issuing of the Second Ministry Decision, including inter alia,
correspondence from Tschechien7 and RAL, as well as Tschechien7’s appeal
against the Second Ministry Decision, the amendment thereto, and further
submissions made by Tschechien 7. The Respondent noted that the correspondence
had raised several new factual issues, including the repeated statements by
Tschechien7 that the overlap issue had been resolved in the building permit
proceedings, ¢ ‘

; it submitted that that
material had been highly relevant to the issue of the proportionality of any
cancellation of the Planning Permit.’ Quite apart from that, the Respondent drew
attention to the fact that the Claimants had accepted that a remand, as opposed to
immediate termination, could not give rise to manifest unlawfulness, and noted that
Tschechien 7, in its appeal against the First Minister Decision had itself requested a
remand, and that it was only later that it had changed its position so as to request
termination.’©* Finally, the Respondent argued that even if the First Minister
Decision had not been lawful, it would be “wholly unprecedented” that a breach of
treaty were to be found based on a decision which was essentially favourable to the
investor solely because it had remanded the matter for futher fact-finding; the
Respondent invoked the decision in Mondev, and the observations of the tribunal in
that case that questions of fact-finding upon appeal were “quintessentially matters of
local procedural practice”, and the doubts expressed as to how the application of local

procedural rules as to matters such as remand could result in a violation;*®*

although the Second Ministry Decision had been incorrect insofar it had “erred in
improperly assessing whether Tschechien7 was in good faith regarding the
correctness of the Planning Permit”, it had likewise not been egregious or manifestly
unlawful; again, the Respondent submitted that the Second Ministry Decision could

187.
188.
189.

1 Rejoinder, paras. 189-190.

1634 Rejoinder, para.
1635 Rejoinder, para.

191, referring to Reply, para. 607.
192, citing Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No,

ARB(AF)/99/2), Award of 11 October 2002, para. 136.

279

 

4.655

4.656

4.657

not constitute a denial of justice as it had been remedied upon Tschechien 7’s
appeal;!°

d. the Second Stay adopted by MAL could not be qualified as manifestly unlawful,
insofar as two of the three alternative bases put forward as justifying it had been
lawful; the Respondent noted that although the Claimants’ Czech law expert had
disputed the validity of the second reason, he had not called into question the first
reason (i.e. Tschechien 7’s Motion for Partial Invalidation), and submitted that, even
if the second reason had been incorrect (which it denied), this was in itself sufficient
to have justified the adoption of the Second Stay;!®”

e. the Third Stay had been incorrect, but could not be characterized as egregious or
manifestly unlawful; the Respondent again submitted that the Third Stay had been
motivated by a “precautionary approach favourable to the Claimants”, which,
although incorrect as a matter of Czech law, had been logical. On that basis, it
submitted that it had not been irrational for MAL to adopt the Third Stay, even if the
principle of administrative correctness under Czech law dictated a different result.1**
The Respondent added that even if the Third Stay could be considered to have been
manifestly unlawful (which it denied), it was disputed that it could give rise to a
denial of justice insofar as Tschechien 7 had failed to exhaust available remedies; it
invoked the decision in Pantechniki v. Albania as an example of a case in which even
an extreme misapplication of the law had been held not to constitute a denial of
justice where the investor had not pursued available remedies.’“?

Second, the Respondent denied that the Claimants had suffered any denial of justice due to
departure from what the Claimants had submitted were “well-established administrative
practices” that i) permit proceedings were not stayed where an application was incomplete; and
ii) that a Minister always followed the recommendation of his or her Advisory Committee. '*°

The primary ground for that position was that the asserted “administrative practices” did not
exist. In relation to the imposition of stays of proceedings based on the incompleteness of
applications, the Respondent pointed to the fact that stays had been imposed on that basis in
the Claimants’ Planning and Building Permit proceedings in relation to Galerie, in Multi’s
planning proceedings, and in the planning and building proceedings in relation to Arkady
Pankrac, 1!

As regards the extent to which there was an administrative practice that Ministers followed the
recommendation of their Advisory Committees, the Respondent pointed to the evidence of a
number of witnesses who denied that this was the case, both in the Ministry for Regional

1656 Rejoinder, para. 193.

1657 Rejoinder, paras. 194-195.

1638 Rejoinder, paras. 196-198.

163 Rejoinder, para. 199, citing Pantechniki S.A. Contractors & Engineers v. Republic of Albania (ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/21), Award of 30 July 2009, para. 96.

164 Rejoinder, para. 200.
1641 Rejoinder, para. 201.

280

4.658

4.659

4.660

Development, and in other Ministries.’ It further noted that, if the Claimants’ suggestion
were correct, it would have been reflected in legal commentaries or court decisions, but that, to
the contrary, the leading commentary merely confirmed that recommendations of Advisory
Committees were not binding, and a decision of the Supreme Administrative Court confirmed
that this was not the case,’

The Respondent submitted that the Claimants’ theory rested solely upon the email from
Ms stating that, from her personal experience, the Minister had, up to that point,
always followed the opinion of the Advisory Committee, and reiterated its early observation
that that email had in fact clearly warned that there was a risk that the Minister might not sign
the proposed decision if he did not agree with it.'°*

Third, the Respondent denied that there had been a denial of justice by reason of delays:

a. as regards the allegations of delay resulting from the First to Third Stays, it reiterated
its position that the First and Second Stays had been lawful and justified, and noted
that the Third Stay, although unlawful, had been remedied after three and a half
months, a portion of which was attributable to the fact that Tschechien 7’s appeal was
belated, and that MAL had resumed the proceedings shortly after RAL’s appellate
decision had become legally effective. It submitted that in such circumstances “a
voluntarily remedied delay of three-and-a-half months cannot qualify as denial of
justice”;!

b. in relation to the allegation of delay in the Extraordinary Review Proceedings, the
Respondent noted that the First and Second Ministry Decisions had both been
quashed upon the Claimants’ appeals, and that the two appellate processes had each
taken approximately three months, delays which it submitted were inherent in any
remedial process.’ It argued that insofar as the First Minister Decision had correctly
remanded the matter, it had not caused any undue delay.’®*?

Fourth, the Respondent denied that there had been a denial of justice because the Ministry had
not allowed Tschechien 7 to be heard in the proceedings preceding the First Ministry Decision.
It noted that the relevant legislation did not require the Ministry to allow Tschechien 7 to be a
party to the proceedings,'* and further submitted that Tschechien 7’s non-party status had had
no adverse impact upon it, insofar as it had in fact submitted substantive comments; even if the
First Ministry Decision had not been served upon it by the Ministry it had been informed of it
by both MAL and RAL; and insofar as the First Minister decision had been successfully
appealed, that meant that it never produced any legal effects.’

16 Rejoinder, para. 202.
1643 Rejoinder, para. 203.
1644 Rejoinder, para. 204.
1645 Rejoinder, para. 205.
1646 Rejoinder, para. 206.
1647 Rejoinder, para. 207.
1648 Rejoinder, para. 208.
‘64 Rejoinder, para. 209.

281

 

 

———__—

4.661

4.662

4.663

4.664

Fifth, the Respondent submitted that the Claimants’ allegation that they had suffered a denial
of justice as a result of the “overall conduct” of the Czech authorities was unsupported by
authority. It argued that none of the individual acts of the Czech authorities amounted to a
denial of justice individually, and the same was true if they were taken together. On that basis,
it argued that it was thus unnecessary to determine whether the “overall conduct” could
amount to a breach of the BIT where none of the individual actions “even remotely reach that
threshold”.’*° The Respondent argued that the Claimants’ reliance on the decision in
RosInvestCo v. Russia was inapposite insofar as, first, the individual acts at issue in that case
“prima facie reached the threshold for a breach of the applicable treaty”, and it thus did not
address the question whether a breach could result from “the alleged cumulative effect of a
number of non-violative individual actions”; and second, that, in any case, the decision in
RosInvestCo was readily distinguishable on the facts given the “devastating measures” which
were at issue.'®!

ii. Alleged Breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard (Art. 2(1) BIT

In relation to the Claimants’ claims of breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard, the
Respondent first recalled its earlier submissions that the Claimants’ “fabrication of a
corruption scheme is unsupported by any evidence, easily defeated on the facts, and
inadmissible at this stage of the proceeding”, and that “the alleged violations of domestic law
[...] were certainly not systemic”.!°?

In relation to the allegation of failure to provide a transparent and predictable business
environment, the Respondent asserted that the standard guaranteed “a transparent, predictable,
and stable legal framework for the investment; it does not guarantee against alleged procedural
irregularities in specific proceedings”,'“° and referred back to its arguments in the Counter-
Memorial, which it submitted supported the conclusion that it had not violated that
standard.’ By way of supplement, the Respondent added that the Claimants’ claims would
fail “even if this standard covered Claimants’ allegations that the Czech Republic ‘repeatedly
broke its own laws, thus frustrating Claimants’ trust in Respondent’s legal system, and
derogated from established administrative practices’”, on the basis that the errors of Czech law
were not systemic, and in any event were remedied; it submitted that “[rJemedied errors of law
ipso facto are not systemic”.'* It relied upon the decision in PSEG Global v. Turkey, in
which it submitted the tribunal found a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard (but
not of the duty to provide a predictable and transparent business environment) as a result of the
unremedied failure of the Government to abide by a decision of the Constitutional Court.!°°

The Respondent argued that the Claimants’ claim of breach of legitimate expectations likewise
failed. It emphasized that the Claimants accepted that whether expectations were legitimate

165 Rejoinder, para. 210.

1651 Rejoinder, para. 211.

1652 Rejoinder, para. 213.

1653 Rejoinder, para. 214 (emphasis in original).

1654 Rejoinder, para. 214, referring to Counter-Memorial, paras. 454-457.

655 Rejoinder, para. 215, quoting Reply, para. 465.

1656 Rejoinder, para. 216, referring to PSEG Global Inc. and Konya Ilgin Elektrik Uretim ve Ticaret Limited Sirketi v.
Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/5), Award of 19 January 2007, para. 249.

282

4.665

4.666

4.667

 

and protected had to be assessed taking into account “all circumstances, including the facts
surrounding the investment and the political, socioeconomic, cultural and historical conditions
prevailing in the host State”,'®’ and submitted that the Claimants should have been aware from
their prior experience with Arkédy Pankréc that “decision making in administrative
proceedings for a retail center may be complex — and thus time-consuming — because of, inter
alia, appeals of third parties or incorrect first-instance decisions”. '®*

Further, invoking the decision in Walter Bau v. Thailand, it reiterated its argument that only
expectations based on specific assurances were protected, and relied upon the decision in
Total v. Argentina in relation to the required degree of specificity and clarity of the alleged
assurance.'® Jt argued that the Claimants’ expectations in relation to the duration of the
administrative proceedings had not been reasonable, and thus were not protected, and that in
recognition of that fact, the Claimants had modified their case so as to rely on four alleged
specific assurances. '°

As regards those four alleged assurances, first the Respondent characterized the Claimants’
argument that the change in the zoning plan by the City of | and the subsequent
agreement by the City to apply for certain of the building permits for roads constituted “an
implied assurance that Respondent would be supportive of the project”,'® as “absurd”,
observing that the conduct of the City of did not relate to the conduct, duration or
success of the proceedings handled by MAL. It added that even if the City of “. © had
made clear promises in that regard (which it denied), those acts could not have given rise to
any protected legitimate expectation insofar as the Claimants must have been fully aware that
such matters were outside the City of ’s competence. Further, it argued that whether or
not the conduct of the City of was attributable to the Czech Republic was irrelevant,
insofar as the issue was not one of attribution but of the scope of the alleged assurance the
reasonableness of the purported reliance by the Claimants.'°*

Second, the Respondent dismissed the factual basis for the supposed assurance provided by Ms
. , that a speedy resolution of the Extraordinary Review Proceedings was to be expected
insofar as, in the proceedings in relation to the Claimants’ appeal against the First Ministry
Decision, the Advisory Committee had recommended termination of the proceedings. Again,
the Respondent emphasized that the email from Ms had highlighted the risk that the
Minister might not follow the recommendation of the Advisory Committee, and submitted that
there was nothing in the email which would be interpreted as “an expression of an intention to

bind the Minister or the Ministry for the future”.'°*

1657 Rejoinder, para, 217, quoting Duke Energy Electroquil Partners and Electroquil S.A. v. Republic of Ecuador
(ICSID Case No. ARB/04/19), Award of 18 August 2008, para. 340.

1658 Rejoinder, para. 218.

1659 Rejoinder, paras. 219 and 220, quoting Walter Bau v. Thailand (UNCITRAL), Award of | July 2009, para. 11.11,
and Total S.A. v, Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/01), Decision on Liability of 27 December 2010, para.

121

1660 Rejoinder, para. 221.
1651 Rejoinder, para, 222, quoting Counter-Memorial, para. 481
1682 Rejoinder, para, 222
1663 Rejoinder, para. 223,

283

 

4.668

4.669

4.670

4.671

4.672

Third, the Respondent likewise dismissed the factual basis for the alleged assurance given by
Mr that the building permits would be granted if the applications for the building
permits were split, arguing that he had done no such thing, and that in fact the splitting was
agreed between the Claimants and the City of 1664

Fourth, insofar as the Claimants claimed that there had been a “general promise of the City of
to provide equal treatment to Forum and Galerie °, the Respondent argued that,
if any such promise had been made, it had been more than fulfilled. '°*

iii, Alleged Breach of the Prohibition of Impairment of Investments by Arbitrary and

iscriminatory Meas: ticle 2(2) BI

Impairment by Arbitrary Measures

In response to the Claimants’ claims of breach of the prohibition of impairment by arbitrary
measures, the Respondent first reiterated its position that the decision of the ICJ in ELS/ was of
particular relevance, both, for its definition of “arbitrariness” as “‘something opposed to the
tule of law’ rather than ‘something opposed to a rule of law,’ ‘a willful disregard of due
process of law, an act which shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of judicial propriety’”,'°% and
second insofar as the ICJ had held that “quashed first instance decisions could not be qualified
as arbitrary just because they were quashed”.'®” It submitted that the decision in ELSI was
particularly apposite, both because it emanated from the ICJ, and because it addressed “the
issue of arbitrariness in an administrative process based on the quashing of an incorrect first-
instance decision by a superior authority”!

The Respondent emphasized that ELS/ had been widely followed by tribunals in relation to the
question of arbitrariness.’ It contested the Claimants’ criticism of the decision on the basis
that the underlying FCN treaty at issue had been concluded in 1948, noting that the Claimants
had provided no support for their suggestion that the notion of arbitrariness had evolved over
time, and adding that, in any case, the decision in ELSI had been delivered in 1989, only
shortly before conclusion of the BIT, such that it was safe to assume that the Parties to the BIT
had been aware of it.'°”

The Respondent further argued that, in reality, there was less disparity between the definition
in ELSI and that given by the tribunal in Lauder, relied upon by the Claimants, than the

1664 Rejoinder, para. 224.

1665 Reioinder, para. 225.

'666 Rejoinder, para. 226, citing Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI), ICJ Reports 1989, p. 15, at pp. 74 (para. 124) and 76
(para. 128).

667 Rejoinder, para. 226.

1668 Tid.

1669 Rejoinder, para. 227, quoting Siemens A.G. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8), Award of 6
February 2007, para. 318 and Duke Energy Electroquil Partners and Electroquil S.A. v. Republic of Ecuador (ICSID
Case No. ARB/04/19), Award of 18 August 2008, para. 378.

167 Rejoinder, para. 228.

284

4.673

4.674

4.675

4.676

4.677

 

Claimants had argued; it noted that the tribunal in Lauder, although putting forward its own
definition, had not questioned the holding in ELSI that first-instance decisions cannot be
characterized as arbitrary merely on the basis that they were quashed as unlawful. It submitted
that that alone was fatal to the Claimants’ case.’

As to the merits of the Claimants’ claims of breach of the prohibition by impairment, the
Respondent maintained its position that the various decisions had not been arbitrary, and by
reference to its previous arguments in its Answer to the Statement of Claim and Counter-
Memorial rejected the Claimants’ accusation that it had failed to explain those decisions as
“simply not credible”.'°?

As to the specific decisions of which complaint was made, the Respondent referred back to its
arguments that the Second Stay and the First Minister Decision had been correct, and
submitted that, accordingly, they were not arbitrary. In relation to the First and Second
Ministry Decisions and the Third Stay, it recalled its position that those decisions had not been
either egregious or manifestly illegal, and on that basis submitted that they likewise did not
reach the threshold of arbitrariness. It also noted that, in any event, the decisions were either
quashed on appeal, or, in the case of the Third Stay, the proceedings were subsequently
resumed by MAL sua sponte following Tschechien 7’s belated appeal.'°?

It further reiterated its position that, even if any of the decisions were held to..have been
arbitrary, they nevertheless had not impaired the Claimants’ investment, and took issue with
the Claimants’ arguments in response. First, as regards the Claimants’ suggestion that it had
been the “overall dilatory conduct” which led to the abandonment, and thus impaired their
investment, the Respondent noted that this put “the cart before the horse”, that the Claimants
rather had to show that they had abandoned the project because it had been impaired by the
Respondent’s arbitrary measures, and that the Claimants could not “derive the impairment
from the abandonment”.'°*

Second, insofar as the Claimants argued that the pendency of the Extraordinary Review
Proceedings had resulted in “increased unpredictability”, the Respondent commented that the
argument was “difficult to follow” and in any case “disproved by Claimants’ own factual
statements in their Reply”, in particular the Claimants’ acceptance that there was no
uncertainty because of the illegality of the Planning Permit, and the position they took that the
decision to abandon the project was in fact motivated by the future uncertainty as to whether
MAL would find another pretext to delay the proceedings. 1”

Third, insofar as the Claimants had argued that the Second and Third Stays had been adopted
“under a pretext until Claimants abandoned the project”, the Respondent noted that this
assumed that their investment had in fact been impaired by the stays, but repeated its argument
that the Second Stay had been lawful, and that the Third Stay had not been arbitrary. In
addition, the Respondent noted that the Claimants themselves had stated that, at the time of the

167! Rejoinder, para. 229.
36 Rejoinder, para. 230.
1673 Rejoinder, para, 231.
16 Rejoinder, paras, 232-233.
165 Rejoinder, para. 234.

285

 

4.678

4.679

4.680

abandonment, they had expected that the proceedings would have been resumed in the near
future.'°”® Finally, the Respondent reiterated its suggestion that the abandonment did not in fact
actually occur until December 2008, by which time the Main Building Permit proceedings had
recommenced, and further noted that even if the Claimants’ case that the abandonment had
occurred on 13 October 2008 were to be accepted, its corollary was that the fact of the
abandonment was kept secret until December 2008, such that MAL’s resumption of the
proceedings could not have been influenced by it.16””

Impairment by Discriminatory Measures

As regards the Claimants’ claim of breach of the prohibition of impairment by discriminatory
measures, the Respondent noted that the claim was stated shortly, and did no more than refer to
the Claimants’ factual submissions. It referred generally to its previous pleadings, particularly
as regards the applicable standard and the differences between Forum and Galerie, and added
specific remarks in relation to what it characterized as “new or amended discrimination
claims”,!"8

First, the Respondent recalled that in the Counter-Memorial, it had submitted that the smaller
number of participants and lack of opposition in the Forum proceedings had been an objective
reason for their shorter duration, and that in response, the Claimants had argued that the
smaller number of participants in the Forum proceedings itself resulted from discrimination,
and that MAL had intentionally reduced the number of participants so that decisions could be
delivered without requiring publication on the official notice board.'6” The Respondent
dismissed those allegations as “manifestly baseless”, reiterating its arguments that MAL had
correctly identified the participants in the Forum proceedings, and noting that, in any case, any
individual who thought that they had been improperly omitted could have applied to be joined,
or appealed or filed a motion for review with RAL.’ In any case, it noted that the claim was
flawed insofar as the Claimants had acquired their rights in Tschechien 7 on 1 July 2007, but
the planning and building permits for Forum had been issued on 19 June 2006 and 31 January
2007, respectively, such that no claim of breach of the BIT could be made by the Claimants in
that regard.'®*! Finally, it argued that the Claimants had failed to show that a requirement to
publish decisions on the notice board would have made any significant difference to the Forum
project, and dismissed as “pure speculation” the suggestion that Forum would have faced local
opposition if notices had been so displayed.

Second, the Respondent disputed the Claimants’ assertion that the differing number of permits
required for the Forum and Gallery projects had impaired the Claimants’ investment, noting
that the single building permit covering both the main building and modifications to the roads
for Forum had been lawful that MAL had been competent to grant it, and that a single permit
could have been granted for the Galerie project, but that it was as a result of the Claimants’

1676 Rejoinder, para. 235.
1877 Rejoinder, para. 236.
1678 Rejoinder, para. 237.
1679 Rejoinder, paras. 238-239.
1680 Rejoinder, para. 240.
1681 Rejoinder, para. 241.
168 Rejoinder, para. 242.

286

4.681

4.682

4,683

4.684

   

agreement with the City of that the proceedings were split. The Respondent further
noted that the Claimants had not explained how and on what basis an application for a single
permit could have been rejected by MAL. 6%

In addition, the Respondent submitted that a further, fundamental defect in the claim was that
the splitting of the building permits had in no way impaired the investment, and that the
Claimants had admitted as much insofar as, in the Memorial, they had accepted that the
splitting of the proceedings had not endangered an opening before Forum.’ Although noting
that, in their Reply, the Claimants had sought to change their position, suggesting that they had
been put at a disadvantage, and that the splitting had caused delays, the Respondent noted that
the Claimants had not explained how they had in fact disadvantaged, what delays had been
incurred, and how their conflicting positions were to be reconciled.'**

Third, insofar as the Claimants alleged impairment by reason of the fact that the relevant
authorities had not acted on the Claimants’ motion by which they sought review of Multi’s
building permit, the Respondent recalled that in their Counter-Memorial, they had explained
that the motion had been filed after the relevant deadline, and thus the circumstances had been
materially different from those in which Multi had sought review of the Claimants’ Planning
Permit; they further noted that the Claimants had modified their position such that they focused
on exchanges between the director of RAL and the secretary of MAL as to whether the
building permit for Forum had also authorized work on the roads.’ It noted that MAL had
taken the view that the construction on the roads had been properly authorized, and that
therefore no action was necessary.’

The Respondent criticized the Claimants as having misrepresented the correspondence as
involving decisions, when in fact it was a simple exchange of letters, and emphasized that RAL
had not issued any binding decision to MAL. It added that neither the director of RAL nor the
secretary of MAL had any authority in relation to building proceedings, being instead
responsible for administrative and organizational matters.!°* The Respondent added that MAL
had assured RAL that everything was in order, and RAL had then not pursued the matter, nor

had the Claimants.’

As to the merits of the Claimants’ allegation, it repeated that even if a failure to take regulatory
action against a competitor could be considered to constitute impairment, there was in any case
“practically no chance” that Forum’s building permit would have been quashed, even if the
Claimants’ motion could have led to the commencement of an extraordinary review

proceeding (which it denied). It noted that the Claimants had put forward no response to that

in their Reply.'©

1685 Rejoinder, para. 244.

468 Rejoinder, para. 245, quoting Memorial, para. 165.
1685 Rejoinder, para. 245, quoting Reply, para. 133.
1686 Rejoinder, para. 246-247.

1687 Rejoinder, para. 247.

1686 Rejoinder, para. 248.

+689 Rejoinder, para. 249.

3690 Rejoinder, para. 250.

287

4.685

4.686

4.687

4.688

4.689

Likewise, it argued that even if the road construction had not been properly authorized, at most
any action by MAL would have resulted in a temporary halt, the could have continued once
MAL had legalized the constructions, and would have had no impact on the construction of the
Main Building, which would still have been fully completed by the Autumn of 2010. It
submitted that it likewise did not assist the Claimants.!!

Fourth, the Respondent argued that what it characterized as the Claimants’ “new allegations
regarding the alleged unresponsiveness of the Czech Republic to the Claimants’ further
complaints against Multi”, in particular in relation to damage to a water pipe, were groundless,
insofar as construction on the land plots owned by the City of had been “fully
authorized”, and the works carried out by Multi had not constituted criminal behaviour.'°
Although admitting that there had been some flooding of adjacent streets, the Respondent
submitted that it was “far less dramatic” than had been submitted by the Claimants, and noted
that the City of had not seen fit to take any action, and that Multi had in any case
repaired all damage caused,'®?

In addition, the Respondent noted that the authorities had never received any criminal
complaints in relation to the Claimants’ works, and there was thus no basis on which to allege
discriminatory treatment,, They submitted that the Claimants had not explained how their
project had been impaired by reason of the facts that Multi had not been fined, and that the
City of : had not endorsed the Claimants’ criminal complaint.'*

Fifth, the Respondent rejected as baseless the Claimants’ claim that MAL had taken action
only to the detriment of the Claimants in respect of the overlap issue, again noting that the
Claimants had provided no meaningful response to the Respondent’s arguments in that regard
in the Counter-Memorial."> It further rejected the Claimants’ new argument that Multi’s
appeal and the motion for extraordinary review of the Planning Permit had only been possible
because of the overlap; it argued that Multi had qualified as a participant in the Planning
Permit proceedings on two other grounds such that the overlap issue was “irrelevant”, and that
Multi had appealed the Planning Permit primarily on the basis of the alleged insufficiency of
the traffic solutions. It further noted that there were a number of other reasons why Multi’s
motion for review had been granted, including that RAL had incorrectly held that Multi was
not a participant in the proceedings, and had on that basis rejected Multi’s appeal as
inadmissible.'°*

The Respondent added that, in any case, the overlap had not hindered the proceedings in
relation to the Building Permit, and that the overlap had been resolved in the context of those
proceedings. On that basis, it argued that the overlap had not impaired the Claimants’
investment.'®”

1991 Rejoinder, para. 251.
18? Rejoinder, para 252.
163 Rejoinder, para. 253.
1694 Rejoinder, para. 254.
1695 Rejoinder, para. 255.
16% Rejoinder, para. 256.
1697 Rejoinder, para. 257.

288

4.690

4.691

4.692

4.693

4.694

iv. Alleged Breach of the Obligation to Admit Investments (Article 2(1) B

As regards the Claimants’ claim based on the alleged failure to admit the Claimants’
investment in accordance with its legislation, the Respondent noted that the Claimants had not
responded to its arguments in that regard in the Counter-Memorial, which thus stood
unchallenged.'®®

y. Alleged Breach of the Prohibition of Expropriation (Article 4(2) BIT)

As to the claim of breach of the prohibition of expropriation, the Respondent submitted that the
Claimants’ various arguments in the Reply were irrelevant, insofar as they had not articulated
“what assets or legal rights had been taken or made useless prior to their decision to abandon
the Project,” and noted that in all of the cases relied upon by the Claimants, there had been “a
taking of previously granted rights or assets.”!°° It submitted that the failure by the Claimants
to identify lost assets or rights was because there were none, and that that was the case was
made clear by the fact that the Claimants had decided to abandon the project at a time when
they themselves estimated that their chances of opening Galerie “were still at least 50%”, and

that at that time, the Claimants “were still in full control of their investment”.'””

In support of that submission, it pointed to the assertions by the Claimants that, following the
abandonment, Tschechien 7 had “lost all use for Claimants”, that they had “lost they money
they had put into Tschechien7”, and that “Tschechien7 fhad] no day-to-day business
anymore.'”! Although disputing that those statements were correct, the Respondent submitted
that they made clear that any loss of use occurred after the abandonment, and argued that there
could only have been an indirect expropriation if the loss had occurred prior to the
abandonment.’

Further, the Respondent reiterated the argument put forward in its Counter-Memorial that,
even if the Planning Permit had been revoked in the Extraordinary Review Proceedings, the
mere possibility of revocation would have been insufficient to constitute an expropriation
insofar as it would have constituted a valid exercise of the Czech Republic’s police powers. It
asserted that the same was true of the decisions relating to the unauthorized excavations,
including RAL’s stay of the appellate proceedings in relation to the Main Building Permit, and
any future decision requiring removal of the unauthorized excavation (i.e. by requiring them to
be filled in).!”

Causation

The Respondent further submitted that the Claimants’ claims failed “as the alleged wrongful
conduct did not cause their alleged damages”; it submitted that there was no “causal nexus”
for five independent reasons, namely:

1698 Rejoinder, para. 258.

1699 Rejoinder, paras. 259-260.

170° Rejoinder, para. 261.

1 Rejoinder, para. 262, quoting Reply, para. 534,
5702 Rejoinder, para. 262.

13 Rejoinder, para. 263.

289

4.695

4.696

4.697

a, that the Claimants had admitted that the project had been abandoned because of an

anticipated breach;

b. the Claimants had admitted that, “but for” the alleged wrongful conduct, the Project
still had a 50% chance of opening when projected;

c the decision to abandon the project had not been caused by the administrative
proceedings;

d. the decision to abandon the project had been due to reasons unrelated to the conduct

of the administrative proceedings; and
e. the excessive excavations broke any causal chain.’

As to the first point, the Respondent reiterated that the Claimants had asserted in the Reply that
the cause of the abandonment was the uncertainty that “MAL would not soon find another
pretext to delay the proceedings”,!° that this was an admission that the cause of the
abandonment was an anticipated breach, and that such an anticipated breach was insufficient to
give rise to liability under the BIT.!” It further emphasized that the anticipated breach had not
in fact occurred, insofar as MAL had issued the various Building Permits, including issuing the
Main Building Permit on 26 November 2008.17”

 

As to the second point, the Respond bmitted that that lusion was “‘t ” by the
Claimants’ own internal documents, which indicated that, at the time of the abandonment, the
view was that the project had at least a 50% chance of opening in Spring/Summer 2010; it
submitted that if the project could nevertheless have succeeded “despite the Czech Republic’s
alleged acts, then there can be no causation between the alleged acts and Claimants’
damages”,!7

The Respondent submitted that, although the Claimants appeared to dispute the need for “but
for” causation, such a causal link was required. Relying on, inter alia, the decisions in Chevron
v, Ecuador, Azurix v, Argentina and Biwater Gauff v. Tanzania, it argued that “Claimants must
positively establish a ‘but for’ causal link between breaches of the Treaty and Claimants’ loss”,
that the link “can be neither remote nor indirect”, and that causation had to be established
“with respect to each alleged breach”.’”° It rejected the Claimants’ approach based on the
“hypothetical time-line”, which it submitted was one which did not involve consideration of

17 Rejoinder para. 264.

1795 Rejoinder, para. 265, quoting Reply, para. 210.
1706 Rejoinder, paras. 266-267.

197 Rejoinder, para. 268.

108 Rejoinder, para. 269.

1799 Rejoinder, para. 270, citing Chevron Corporation and Texaco Petroleum Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador
ICITRAL/PCA), Partial Award on the Merits of 30 March 2010, para. 374, Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12), Award of 14 July 2006, para. 297; Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Limited v. United Republic

of Tanzania (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22), Award of 24 July 2008, paras. 779; 785-786; and 782.

290

4.698

4.699

   

“what would have happened in the absence of the alleged breaches”, and thus of “but for”

causation.!7”°

In relation to the third point, the Respondent asserted that the Claimants had failed to

“positively establish causation” insofar as the evidence supposedly underlying the Claimants’

factual allegations rather showed that the actions of the Czech Republic had not caused the

postponement of the opening date to the Autumn of 2010. It submitted that there were four

flaws in the Claimants’ theory of causation:'7!!

a. first it argued that the Claimants’ internal documents in evidence indicated that the
Claimants’ had expected the project to open in Autumn 2010 as early as 28 April
2008, such that nothing after that date could have been the cause of the
postponement; it noted that this included the Second and Third Stays of the Building
Permit proceedings, as well as the First Minister Decision and subsequent events in
the Extraordinary Review Proceedings.'’!? It noted that, although it had made that
point in the Counter-Memorial, the Claimants in their Reply had put forward no
answer;!7!3

b. second, it argued that the Claimants had failed to show that the postponement of the
opening date had in fact caused the loss of anchor tenants, and submitted that rather
major tenants had left, at least in part, due to the fact that Forum had a better location,
and in part because Forum by that stage had already had a building permit since

February 2007 (as to which it emphasized that that latter fact was not its fault);!7"*

c third, it asserted that the Claimants had failed to show that Galerie would have
prevailed on the retail market in but for each of the alleged breaches; it
pointed to the expert evidence on both sides as to high saturation of the retail market
in which, it submitted, “would have led to high vacancies, fierce competition
and thus lower profitability”;!”'°

d. fourth, it submitted that the alleged breaches had not in fact prevented a sale of the
project by the “valuation date” of 15 December 2007, which was the fundamental
premise for the Claimants’ claim in respect of lost profits; it highlighted that the
Claimants had admitted that the Planning Permit proceedings had been “almost
regular”, and noted that the Claimants had made no efforts to sell the project by that
date.!716

As to the third and fourth points alleged to preclude causation, the Respondent repeated its
assertion that the real reasons for the abandonment had been unrelated to the administrative
proceedings. It highlighted that it had req dd ion relating to the abandonment of

17! Rejoinder, para. 271.
1) Rejoinder, para. 273.
12 Rejoinder, paras. 274-275.
1713 Rejoinder, para. 276.
1714 Rejoinder, paras. 277-281.
15 Rejoinder, para. 282.
16 Reioinder, para. 283.

291

 

 

 

4,700

4.701

4.702

4.703

4.704

the project, asserted that the Claimants had “refused to produce many of them”, but submitted
that even the few documents which had been produced confirmed its theory.!7!”

The Respondent observed that the presentation to the Supervisory Board made in advance of
the alleged decision to abandon the project had:

a. stated that there were two alternatives, namely carrying on “with all consequences”,
or to halt the project and “through sale of the lands and a successful arbitration, to get
compensation for the invested capital and damages that may exceed it”,

b. submitted that the chances of opening in Spring/Summer 2010 were still at least 50%;
c. stated that the factor militating against continuance was “the requirement for liquid
funds”,!7!8

In that last regard, the Respondent again recalled that the presentation had made reference to
various annexes, including calculations as to “liquidity needs” and “theoretical loss at
postponement of the opening of the Centre”, which had not been disclosed by the Claimants on
the ground that they had not been able to locate them.’”” It further noted that the Claimants
had likewise failed to disclose documents relating to the profit/loss of similar projects in the
Czech Republic or any other country in Central or Eastern Europe in the last five years, and
any other similar project developed and then operated or sold by third parties, justifying the
failure on the basis that no such documents existed, as the Claimants’ internal documents used
eamings rather than profitability calculations; it criticized the Claimants’ position in that
regard as “semantic gamesmanship”.'”°

The Respondent noted that, even in the absence of those documents, it was apparent from the
evidence on the record that in April 2008, the Claimants had increased the budget by 22.9%
(from €100.18m to €123.15m), whilst its internal financing costs increased by approximately
82.5% from €4.80m to €8.79m; the Respondent drew the conclusion that the “internal
financing funds became scarcer and thus more costly”.!”!

On that basis, it argued that the evidence showed that the project had been under intense
financial pressure as the result of the “combined effect of the real estate crisis and the
saturation of the retail market in ”, and that the Claimants understood that the project
was no longer financially viable; relying on its own expert valuation experts, it submitted that
the gross value of the project as at 15 October 2008 was €80.41m, whilst total costs amounted
to up to €107.56m, resulting in a negative net valuation of some €27.15m.!”"

On that basis, the Respondent submitted that the truth was that the Claimants had realized that
they would save money by abandoning the project, and that that was what they had done.

1” Rejoinder, para. 285.

1718 Rejoinder, para. 286, quoting Core 8/288 (Exhibit R-58).
'7!° Rejoinder, para. 287, quoting Reply, para. 664.

1° Rejoinder, para. 288.

121 Rejoinder, para. 289.

17 Reioinder, paras. 290-291.

292

4.705

4.706

4.707

4.708

4.709

Whilst suggesting that that decision may have been “entirely. reasonable”, the Respondent
denied that its conduct had been the proximate cause.'”*?

As to the fifth point, based on the assertion that the excessive excavations had broken any
causal chain, the Respondent explained that the excavations had vastly exceeded the
170,000m? authorized in the Planning Permit, excavating approximately an additional
120,000m?; denied that the excess excavations could be justified as emergency securing works;
emphasized that the evidence showed that, the authorized amount of excavations having been
reached around mid-June 2008, the Claimants had deliberately decided to exceed the
authorized volume when the Board of ECE International had, on 18 June 2008 approved a
proposal to increase the budget for excavation works; and reiterated that excavation had
thereafter continued “at full speed” until late August 2008.'7*

Although noting that it was not disputed that Tschechien 7 had notified MAL of the alleged
need to carry out emergency securing works on 1! August 2008, it observed that when MAL
had ordered securing works on 19 September 2008, the volume of works authorized was
approximately 1.7% of the amount authorized in the Planning Permit, and argued that MAL’s
order had not addressed, still less legalized, any other excavations. '7*°

It submitted that it was irrelevant that, due to what it characterized as the Claimants’
obstruction, there had been no effective decision holding the excessive excavations to be
illegal. It noted that MAL’s decision of 4 February 2010 had been quashed on formal grounds,
and that the substantive conclusion was unlikely to be affected in any subsequent decision.'”°

It submitted that the effect of the excessive excavations was to put the Project in a “perilous
situation”, due: to the fact that the immediate consequence was that MAL had opened the
Groundworks Removal Proceedings with a view to ensuring removal.'”” Although
acknowledging that Claimants could have applied for regularization of the excavations, and
could then have submitted updated documentation for the Main Building Permit to reflect the
changed situation, it emphasized that the Main Building Permit should only have been issued
after that process had been followed. It argued that the fact that MAL had nevertheless
incorrectly issued the Main Building Permit was not relevant, insofar as the Main Building
Permit had been appealed and had never become legally effective, and RAL had spotted
MAL’s error, and had therefore stayed the appellate proceedings until a decision had been
reached in the Groundworks Removal Proceedings.'”"*

The Respondent emphasized that the only means for legalization was by using the special
procedure availablefor that purpose, and that it had not been possible for the excessive
excavations to be legalized by the Building Permit. It emphasized that the Claimants’ argument
to the contrary had been expressly rejected by a 2008 decision of the Czech Supreme

13 Rejoinder, para, 292.
14 Rejoinder, paras. 294-297.
15 Rejoinder, para. 298.
176 Reioinder, para. 299.
127 Rejoinder, para. 300.
1728 Rejoinder, paras. 300-302.

293

4.710

4.711

4.712

4.713

4.714

Administrative Court in unrelated litigation, which had been confirmed on appeal by the Czech
Constitutional Court.'””

The Respondent further disputed the Claimants assertion that it could be expected that
legalization could be expected as a result of an application filed by the Claimants on
17 January 2011, noting that that application was not one for regularization, and rather
appeared to have been aimed at luring MAL into providing confirmation that the excessive
excavations had been emergency securing works. It noted that MAL had subsequently
discontinued the proceedings on the application.'”°

The Respondent further denied that the excessive excavations had been in any way provoked
by the conduct of its authorities, and rejected the Claimants’ argument to the contrary, which it
submitted presumably were based on the fact that Tschechien 7 had not had a Building Permit
by the time it reached the volume permitted under the Planning Permit.'*' It argued first that,
even if there had been a breach of the BIT prior to mid-June 2008, as a matter of principle that
could in no way excuse the Claimants’ violation of Czech law. Second, it in any case disputed
that there had been any violation prior to the relevant time, noting that the First and Second
Stays had been fully justified, and that the existence of the Extraordinary Review Proceedings
had played no role until the Third Stay, adopted on 9 July 2008, after the Claimants had
exceeded the authorized volume.'”?

The Respondent further submitted that, in fact, the Claimants had been fully aware from the
outset of the proceedings relating to the Main Building Permit that they would have reached
the volume of authorized excavation before the permit was issued, given that the initial
application filed on 20 February 2008 had been incomplete, the omissions only being rectified
at the beginning of April 2008, and the fact that building permit proceedings normally take
approximately six and a half months.'73

On that basis, the Respondent argued that even accepting for the sake of argument that the
Third Stay had resulted in a violation of the BIT, this would have had no impact upon the
effect of the excessive excavations on the Main Building Permit proceedings. In particular, it
noted that even in the absence of the Third Stay, this would not have affected the fact that Cista
Mésta had complained of the excessive excavations in July 2008, such that MAL would in any
case have had to open the Groundworks Removal Proceedings. It argued that, even assuming
that MAL had mistakenly issued the Main Building Permit, in spite of the excessive
excavations, this would have occurred at earliest in early August 2008, and that it was likely
that Cisté Mésta and Multi would thereafter have appealed, and that RAL would have spotted
MAL/’s error, and stayed the appellate proceedings.'"™*

In the alternative, it submitted that even if no appeals had been filed, the Main Building Permit
would have been “vitiated by error of law”, RAL would have opened review proceedings once

19 Rejoinder, paras. 303-304.
1730 Rejoinder, para. 305.
1731 Rejoinder, para. 306.
182 Rejoinder, paras. 307-308.
"33 Rejoinder, para. 309.
1" Rejoinder, paras. 311-312.

294

4.715

4.716

4.717

4.718

4.719

4.720

 

it had become aware of the issue, and this could have resulted in the cancellation of the
Building Permit; the Respondent again submitted that it was safe to assume that Cisté Mésta
and Multi would have brought the issue to the attention of RAL.'7°

The Respondent submitted that events thereafter would have been dependent upon the attitude
of the Claimants, and in particular whether they had been willing to admit their violation of the
Planning Permit and apply for subsequent legalization; however, it submitted that even if such
an application had been made, the consequent delay, and the need to submit updated
documentation for the Main Building Permit “would have postponed the opening of Galerie
until the fall of 2010, if not later”, such that the situation would have been no better.!73

On that basis, the Respondent submitted that even without the Third Stay, the proceedings
would in any case-have been stayed on the basis of the excessive excavations, such that the
alleged chain of causation was broken by the Claimants’ own illegal conduct.'””

Cc. THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

Introduction

As noted above, and as results from the preceding summary of the pleadings, the Claimants’
claims underwent a profound modification during the course of the proceedings, both as
regards the emergence of the allegation of corruption, and as regards the specific breaches of
the BIT alleged. ,

The Claimants’ Claim of Corruption

To begin with the issue of corruption, in their Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim
the Claimants’ principal allegations were of breach of the standard of fair and equitable
treatment, and in addition of the prohibition of impairment by arbitrary measures and the
prohibition of expropriation. As noted above, as regards the “prohibition of discrimination”
(by which the Tribunal understands to have been intended the second limb of the prohibition of
impairment standard), the Claimants did no more than reserve their rights.

In the Memorial, the reliance on an allegation of preferential treatment accorded to the rival
project of Multi became more pronounced, accompanied by innuendoes of corruption as the
motivating factor underlying the irregularities and delays that were said to have occurred in the
administrative proceedings. Those suggestions then became explicit in the Reply. By the
time of the hearing, the Claimants’ case rested squarely on an allegation of an overarching
scheme of corruption which infected and was the cause of all actions adverse to the Claimants.

The Tribunal will deal with the allegations of corruption below.

35 Rejoinder, para. 313,
1736 Rejoinder, paras. 314-315.
1737 Rejoirider, para. 316.

295

 

4,721

4.722

4.723

The Claimants’ New Claims

In addition, the development of the arbitral process also brought new claims into the light of
day, even at a late stage. In the Claimants’ opening statement on the first day of the oral
hearing, Counsel invoked for the first time Article 7 of the BIT (the “umbrella” clause), as well
as the Most Favoured Nation clause contained in Article 3, and the full protection standard
contained in Articles 2(3) and 4(1).!® Likewise at the resumed hearing in Prague, Counsel
for the Claimants argued that the conduct of the Respondent had violated “virtually all of the
treaty's substantive obligations”,'”° and subsequently made reference to the full protection and
security standard; the requirement of most-favoured nation treatment and the umbrella
clause,'74°

Subsequent to the Prague Hearing, the Claimants sent a letter to the Tribunal on 4 November
2011 in which, inter alia, it provided a response on certain points raised at the hearing, and
submitted formal corrections to the transcript of the Prague Hearing.

Part 6 of that letter put forward what were called “Factual Clarifications” of certain
submissions made by Counsel for the Respondent at the Prague Hearing, whilst Section 7
contained a new “Prayer for Relief’, in which the Claimants, “with reference to all of their
written submissions and their oral submissions in London and Prague”, requested the Tribunal
to find that the Respondent had breached:

1.) the Guarantee of Fair and Equitable Treatment (Article 2(1) BIT)

2.) the Guarantee not to Impair in any Way the Investment by Arbitrary or
Discriminatory Measures (Article 2(2) BIT)

3.) the Guarantees of Full Protection (Article 2(3) BIT) and of Full
Protection and Security (Article 4(1) BIT)

4.) the Guarantee of Most Favoured Nation Treatment (Article 3 BIT)

5.) the Guarantee not to Expropriate without a Prompt, Adequate and
Effective Compensation (Article 4(2) BIT)

6.) the Guarantee to Observe all Obligations under Domestic and
International Law (the so-called “Umbrella Clause”) (Article 7 BIT).

In addition, the Prayer for Relief contained a reformulation of the remedies sought by the
Claimants.

1738 P1/34:22 — 39:16 (umbrella clause); 39:17-18 (full protection and security and Most Favoured Nation) (“if you don't
agree with me on applying 7(1) and 7(2) as I suggest, we rely on the substantive protection standards of the treaty, 2,
3.1, 4.1”); see also 39:21-25 (full protection and security) 102:4-16 (full protection and security) and 103:18-23 (full
protection and security) (Mr Marriott).

¥89 [1 0/122:25 — 123:1 (Ms Malik).

1740 P10/125:13 — 127:23 (Most Favoured Nation and full protection and security); 128:8 -130:12 (umbrella clause) (Ms

falik).

296

 

4.724

4.725

4.726

4.727

4.728

4.729

4.730

       

Invited by the Tribunal to provide its observations, by letter dated 9 November 2011 the
Respondent objected to the “Factual Clarifications”, as constituting “a short post-hearing brief
in letter form” which had not been authorized by the Tribunal, and requested the Tribunal to
strike that part of the letter from the record. .

By email dated 11 November 2011, the Tribunal indicated that it was not, as then advised,
minded to admit Sections 6 and 7 of the Claimants’ letter (with one exception), but indicated
that, should the position in that regard change, the Respondent.would at that point be afforded
an opportunity to respond to the material in question.

By letter of 15 November 2011, the Claimants submitted that there was no reason to strike
Section 6 of its letter dated 4 November 2011 from the record, although it left the matter to the
Tribunal’s discretion. As regards the Prayer for Relief contained in Section 7 of that letter, the
Claimants insisted that it should remain on the record, noting that the Respondent had not
requested that it be struck, and arguing that it did not contain new submissions “but merely
summarises [...] a consolidated version of Claimants’ pleadings for the relief sought after the
written and oral submissions.”

By response also dated 15 November 2011, the Respondent expressed the view that the
Tribunal in its email of 11 November 2011 had clearly rejected the admissibility of Sections 6
and 7 of the Claimants’ letter of 4 November, and objected to what it characterized as the
Claimants’ unsolicited request to the Tribunal to reverse its ruling.

By letter dated 25 November 2011, the Claimants stated their understanding that the Tribunal’s
communication of 11 November 2011 did not constitute a formal decision to strike the ‘Factual
Clarifications’, but made no further reference to the Prayer for Relief.

The Tribunal’s communication of 11 November 2011 referred to above contained the
Tribunal’s provisional view as to the appropriateness of admitting Sections 6 and 7 of the
Claimants’ letter of 4 November 2011. The Tribunal now formally confirms that decision. It
was procedurally improper for the Claimants to seek to introduce a new prayer for relief in its
letter of 4 November 2011; no provision had been made in that regard in the procedural
timetable nor had it been contemplated in the discussion with the Parties at the close of the
Prague Hearing, in which it was agreed that there would be no need for Post-Hearing Briefs.
The procedural irregularity is not however limited to the formality of the submission of a new
Prayer for Relief at that stage, but extends to the fact that the Claimants sought to introduce by
this means new claims which had not previously been the subject of any discussion in the
written pleadings. These new claims — under the umbrella clause, the guarantee of full
protection and security, and the Most Favoured Nation clause — were introduced in only the
most general terms at the September hearing. The Claimants’ closing submissions at the
Prague Hearing on those matters were likewise pitched at a high level of generality, with no
specification of which particular facts were relied upon as constituting a breach of those
provisions of the BIT.

The Tribunal notes that it had been faced with a not dissimilar situation before. In its
Procedural Order No 5, dated 4 January 2011, in ruling upon the Respondent’s Appplication to
Reject New Claims (see above, paragraph 1.70), the Tribunal:

297

4.731

4,732

4.733

a. made clear that it drew “a distinction between the claims formulated by a Party in its
submissions to the Tribunal and the facts asserted by that Party in support of those
claims” (paragraph 1);

b. expressed the view that the dispute submitted to the Tribunal was “a dispute over
whether the Respondent's administrative procedures in relation to the Claimants’
GALERIE project, and the effects thereof, constituted a breach of the [BIT]”
(paragraph 2);

Cc tuled that, “[s]o long as their submissions remain within the boundaries of that

dispute, the Parties are at liberty to formulate their claims and defences as they
choose, subject only to the exercise by the Tribunal of the discretionary power vested
in it under Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Rules” (paragraph 3); and

d. declined to strike out any part of the Memorial on the basis that it saw no good reason
to exercise the power contained in Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Rules (paragraph 4).

Article 20 of UNCITRAL Rules envisages that a Party may amend or supplement its claim or
defence during the course of the proceedings, unless the tribunal considers it inappropriate to
allow the amendment, “having regard to the delay in making it or prejudice to the other party
or any other circumstances”. Article 20 does not expressly require the making of a formal
application for amendment, but adopts a permissive approach, in principle allowing
amendments unless they are disallowed on one or more of the grounds specified.

That said, the Tribunal is of the view that if the Claimants wished to put forward claims of
breach of provisions of the BIT other than those relied upon in the pleadings, it would have
been proper for them either to make a formal application to the Tribunal for permission to do
so, or at the least, to state clearly at the outset of the September hearing that they were seeking
to amend their case. To have done so would have contributed to the orderly conduct of the
proceedings. That was not however done, Rather, the various new claims were introduced
during the course of submissions, in the case of the Most-Favoured Nation clause indirectly
through the invocation of Article 3 of the BIT. In the result, the Respondent was never faced
with a pleaded case setting out the Claimants’ case in this regard. Nor has the Tribunal had
the benefit of any written specification of the matters on which the Claimants relied as
constituting the breaches which underlie their new claims.

Although, as indicated above, Procedural Order No 5 did not accept the Respondent’s
application to strike those portions of the Memorial which were alleged to contain new claims,
the Tribunal takes the view that the introduction of new claims at and after the hearing is of a
fundamentally different nature. Whereas the new claims in the Claimants’ Memorial were
introduced in writing, thus allowing the Respondent a proper opportunity to respond, by
contrast the late introduction of new claims, without adequate particulars, did not of itself
allow the Respondent a proper opportunity to prepare its response within the framework of the
agreed procedure. And even though the Respondent raised no formal objection at the hearing
(and in its own opening, responded to the umbrella clause claim on the merits), the Tribunal
does not feel that it would be appropriate to exercise its discretion under Article 20 of the
UNCITRAL Rules to allow this amendment and supplementation of the Claimants’ claims
“having regard to the delay in making it or prejudice to the other party or any other

298

 

4.734

4.735

4.736

4.737

4.738

 

circumstances”. The Claimants had more than ample opportunity to raise these claims during
a phase of written procedure lasting roughly two years and, not having taken that opportunity,
must be regarded as having lost it by the time the oral hearing began. The Tribunal will
therefore assess the Claimants’ allegations on the merits against the standard of Articles 2(1),
2(2), and 4(1) of the BIT, in the light of the allegations of corruption referred to above, but not
against the standard of Articles 2(3), 3, or 7.

The Tribunal notes, in addition, that the Claimants had originally pleaded a claim of breach of
the obligation to admit investments contained in Article 2(1) of the BIT, and maintained that
claim in the Memorial. Although the Prayer for Relief in the Claimants’ Reply still made
formal reference to Article 2(1), the body of the Reply contained no further submissions in
relation to that claim, and there was no reference to it in the oral argument of either Party at the
hearing.'! The Tribunal therefore regards it as having been abandoned.

The Tribunal’s Approach to the Claimants’ Claims

In light of the exclusion of the Claimants’ claims other than those included in the written
pleadings, the only claims remaining before the Tribunal are those of breach of:

a. the obligation to provide fair and equitable treatment (Article 2(1) BIT);

b. the prohibition of impairment by arbitrary or discriminatory measures Article 2(2)
BIT); and

c. the prohibition of expropriation (Article 4(1) BIT).

The Tribunal notes that the primary focus of the Claimants’ claims is on breach of the standard
of fair and equitable treatment. The facts relied upon as giving rise to a breach of the
prohibitions of impairment by arbitrary measures and of expropriation are in essence identical
to those relied upon in relation to fair and equitable treatment.

The Tribunal notes further that, although the Claimants invite the Tribunal to find that the
actions of the Respondent were the result of a scheme of corruption, they also rely on breach of
various standards contained in the BIT even in the absence of cormuption. That being so, the
Tribunal considers it appropriate to deal first with the Claimants’ claims of breach of the BIT,
leaving to one side the specific allegations of corruption. In other words, the Tribunal will
begin by examining whether the facts of the case sustain the Claimants’ claims of breach of the
standard of fair and equitable treatment, even in the absence of corruption. It will then
examine the claims of impairment by arbitrary or discriminatory measures and expropriation.

The Tribunal will then deal with the Claimants’ case on corruption, and assess whether that
claim is made out. That approach is adopted on the basis that if the Claimants were able to
establish that they had been adversely affected by an otherwise defensible key decision
adopted by the authorities which had been tainted by corruption, the decision in and of itself is
likely to give rise to a breach of the requirements of fair and equitable treatment and/or be

1741 Nor indeed in the revised Prayer for Relief discussed above.

299

4.739

4.740

4.741

4.742

4.743

arbitrary or (depending on the precise circumstances) discriminatory and thus result in a breach
of the prohibition of impairment.

Finally, the Tribunal recalls that, as set out above, on 7 October 2011, following the London
Hearing, and in advance of hearing the Parties’ closing arguments at the Prague Hearing, it
circulated a list of issues on which it would appreciate receiving the submissions of the Parties.
This list of issues is set out in full at paragraph 1.136 above.

Preliminary Matters: Denial of Justice; Exhaustion of Local Remedies; and the
Relevance of Breaches of Domestic Law

Prior to turning to assess the merits of the Claimants’ claims, the Tribunal thinks it appropriate
to address at the outset three issues which were canvassed by the Parties in the course of the
written pleadings, and which, in the circumstances of the present case, are of transversal
relevance. Those issues are

a. the Respondent’s argument that all of the Claimants’ claims are in fact for denial of
justice, and fall to be assessed against the standard for denial of justice under
customary international law;

bd. the connected invocation by the Respondent of the requirement of exhaustion of local
remedies; and

c. the relevance of violations of domestic law.

The Respondent’s Argument that the Claimants’ Claims Are Essentially for Denial of
Justice

As regards the Respondent’s argument that the Claimants’ claims are all in essence, claims of
denial of justice, and that the more stringent requirements of such a claim must therefore apply
(both substantively, and in terms of exhaustion of local remedies) the Tribunal notes that no
mention of denial of justice is made anywhere in the BIT as a separate standard.

That said, the Tribunal equally notes that denial of justice is not limited to judicial proceedings
but may equally occur in administrative proceedings, and that a denial of justice in respect of
an investment constitutes one form of treatment by a respondent State that would in general
result in a violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard. However, equally, a denial of
justice approach is merely one way of characterizing conduct of a State, and it is by no means
an exclusive standard.

The Tribunal is of the view that in principle it is for the investor to allege and formulate its
claims of breach of relevant treaty standards as it sees fit. It is not the place of the respondent
State to recast those claims in a different manner of its own choosing and the Claimants’
claims accordingly fall to be assessed on the basis on which they are pleaded. While the facts
underlying a particular claim might also be characterized as resulting in a denial of justice, this
does not mean that more stringent conditions applicable to a claim for denial of justice must
necessarily apply to other claims to which the same facts may give rise.

300

4.744

4.745

4.746

4.747

4.748

The Respondent’s Invocation of the Requirement of Exhaustion of Local Remedies

The Respondent’s arguments as to the applicability of the denial of justice standard constitute
the point of departure for its related argument that the Claimants were required to exhaust local
remedies before raising their claims before the present Tribunal under the BIT.

Some tribunals have observed that whether or not an investor has had recourse to the local
courts of the host State in an attempt to obtain redress for the alleged harm suffered may be
relevant in assessing whether or not there has been a breach of the relevant treaty-based
standard of protection. But in these cases, where recourse to the local courts has been held to
be relevant to the question of breach, that does not make it into a mandatory precondition for
the admissibility of the claim before an investment tribunal, nor into a constitutive requirement
for the claim. Rather the extent to which an investor pursued available domestic remedies
(and to which it in fact obtained a remedy for its complaint) has been treated as constituting
one element which is relevant for the assessment of whether the investor has been treated in a
manner which constitutes a breach of the respondent State’s obligations for the protection of
the investment.

This is however different from a claim for denial of justice arising out of the operations of the
courts themselves, where the requirement to exhaust local remedies is not a condition of the
admissibility of the claim, but goes to its substance as a constitutive element of the claim itself;
it is precisely the fact that the error has gone unremedied by the State’s own courts which
constitutes the international wrong.

In brief, given that the Claimants have not presented their claims in the form of claims of
denial of justice, those claims are not subject to any requirement to exhaust such local
remedies as may have been available and effective. Nevertheless any remedies that were
available to the Claimants, and would have been or were effective to remedy the defects in the
local administrative proceedings, retain their potential relevance and the Tribunal will have
regard to them in assessing whether the conduct of the relevant authorities breached the
standards of protection contained in the BIT.

The Significance of Violations of Domestic Law

Finally, as the Claimants’ claims of breach of the standard of fair and equitable treatment rely
heavily on the alleged illegality of some of the decisions adopted by the domestic authorities,
the Tribunal observes it is well-established that a breach of domestic law does not, without
more, result in a breach of international law. As expressed by a Chamber of the International
Court of Justice in ELSI:

Compliance with municipal law and compliance with the provisions of a
treaty are different questions. What is a breach of treaty may be lawful in
municipal law and what is unlawful in the municipal law may be fully
innocent of violation of a treaty provision. 1742

The Chamber later observed:

1 Flettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI), ICJ Reports 1989, p. 15, at p. 51 (para. 73).

301

[T]he fact that an act of a public authority may have been unlawful in
municipal law does not necessarily mean that that act was unlawful in
international law, as a breach of treaty or otherwise.'™

4.749 That forms part of the more general principle, recognized in Article 27 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties, and more generally in Article 3 of the ILC’s Articles on
the Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, that the characterization of a
given act as internationally wrongful is independent of its characterization as lawful under the
internal law of a State. Article 3 of the ILC’s Articles provides

The characterization of an act of a State as internationally wrongful is
governed by international law. Such characterization is not affected by the
characterization of the same act as lawful by internal law.

 

4.750 _ As indicated in the ILC’s Cc y, the principle embodies two el -

First, an act of a State cannot be characterized as internationally wrongful
unless it constitutes a breach of an international obligation, even if it
violates a provision of the State’s own law. Secondly and most importantly,
a State cannot, by pleading that its conduct conforms to the provisions of its
internal law, escape the characterization of that conduct as wrongful by
international law,'™

4.751 The Tribunal has no doubt that these principles are applicable here, and that, accordingly, the
mere fact that a particular act is illegal under the domestic law of the Respondent does not
mean that it necessarily constitutes a breach of the substantive standards of protection
contained in the BIT, or vice versa. The Tribunal will return as appropriate to the implications
of these principles when discussing the breaches alleged by the Claimants of the specific
standards of protection contained in the BIT.

3. Alleged Breach of the Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard (Article 2(1) BIT)

4.752 The Claimants identified three “strands” encompassed in the fair and equitable treatment
standard, which it alleged were violated as a result of the conduct of the authorities of the
Respondent in the various administrative proceedings: frustration of the Claimants’ legitimate
expectations; violation of the requirement of transparency and predictability of the legal
system; and violations of due process. The Tribunal will not however deal with these
separately, but as elements entering into the assessment of whether the fair and equitable
treatment standard has been breached.

8 Toid., at p. 74 (para. 124).

4 TLC, Articles on the Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, State Responsibility, Commentary
to Article 3, paragraph (1). See also Compajita de Aguas dél Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal v Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment of 3 July 2002, paras. 95-96; SGS Société Génerale de
Surveillance SA v Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/13), Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of
6 August 2003, para. 147; and Noble Ventures, Inc. v Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/11), Award of 12 October
2005, at para. 53.

302

4.753

4.754

4.755

4.756

4.757

Prior to examining the substance of the Claimants’ claim, however, it is necessary to deal with
the debate between the Parties as to the applicable general standard under the obligation to
accord fair and equitable treatment contained in Article 2(1) of the BIT, and its relationship to
customary international law.

The Applicable Standard of Fair and Equitable Treatment Under the BIT and Its
Relationship to the Standard of Treatment under Customary International Law

The debate as to the relationship between the fair and equitable treatment standard embodied in
the BIT and the standard applicable under customary international law is, in the Tribunal’s
view, in the final analys an essentially academic one with little practical impact. What the
Tribunal is called upon to interpret and apply is the fair and equitable standard as embodied in
Article 2(1) of the BIT, which corresponds also to the limits of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction,
namely, whether the Respondent has complied with its obligations under the BIT.

The Respondent argues that the standard should be equated or limited to the minimum standard
under customary international law and invokes arbitral decisions adopted in the application of
Article 1105 of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). The Claimant argues
to the contrary that, since Article 2(1) of the BIT makes no reference to international law or the
international minimum standard, it must be taken to impose a standard higher than that
obtaining under customary international law. The Tribunal finds itself unable to accept either
view. It does not find NAFTA Article 1105 (entitled “Minimum Standard of Treatment”),
which explicitly requires the Parties to NAFTA to accord treatment, including fair and
equitable treatment, “in accordance with international law”, to be of particular assistance in
deriving the proper meaning to be given to a differently formulated provision in an
unconnected and free-standing bilateral investment agreement between two European States.
Conversely, it can see no logical basis for the Claimants’ submission that a failure to mention
international law in a treaty provision should be taken to be equivalent to the establishment of
a particular relationship to the customary international law standard, either in general or in
relation to a specific understanding of what the customary standard is.

Several investment tribunals have held that, when a bilateral treaty adopts a standard of fair
and equitable treatment without further qualification, the treaty is to be interpreted and applied
in its own right and on its own terms. The present Tribunal shares that view. The applicable
principles for the interpretation of Article 2(1) of the BIT are therefore those laid down by
Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. Under paragraph (1) of that
Article a treaty is to be interpreted “in good faith, in accordance with the ordinary meaning to
be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose”.

Article 2(1) of the BIT reads in full as follows:

Each Contracting Party shall in its territory promote as far as possible
investments by investors of the other Contracting Party and admit such
investments in accordance with its legislation. It shall in any case accord
such investments fair and equitable treatment.!”*

145 Tn the English-language translation agreed between the Parties,

303

4.758

4.759

4.760

4.761

4.762

It is followed by two further paragraphs laying down, respectively, the non-impairment
standard and the full protection standard. The language used is simple and straightforward, and
appears plainly to lay down a standard that incorporates ample flexibility to determine what
should be regarded as “fair and equitable treatment” in relation to the circumstances of
particular cases. There is no indication either within the treaty or in the other information
furnished by either the Claimants or the Respondent that the Parties to the treaty had intended a
special meaning to be given to any of its terms, as contemplated in Article 31(4) of the Vienna
Convention.

The immediate context of the reference to ‘fair and equitable treatment’ is the obligation in the
same paragraph on each Party to “promote as far as possible investments by investors of the
other Contracting Party and admit such investments in accordance with its legislation,” which
suggests that ‘fair and equitabl * should be und d against the d of the
Parties’ wish to promote and encourage the making of investments and their continued
management thereafter. The Tribunal sees further confirmation of this interpretation in the
treaty’s preamble, with its references to the intensification of mutual economic cooperation and
the creation of favourable conditions for reciprocal investments and its recognition that
“encouragement and reciprocal protection of investments are apt to strengthen all forms of
economic initiative, in particular in the area of private entrepreneurial activity”.

The conclusion that the fair and equitable treatment standard under the BIT is not as such
limited by ref to the mini standard of under y international law
(whatever the content of that standard may be), does not mean that the standard is necessarily
open-ended or subject to idiosyncratic interpretation by individual tribunals. In particular, there
is broad agreement in the decisions as to the core of what is required by the fair and equitable
treatment standard. As stated by the Mondev tribunal (in the context of application of Article
1105 NAFTA),

the question is whether, at an international level and having regard to
generally accepted standards of the administration of justice, a tribunal can
conclude in the light of all the available facts that the impugned decision
was clearly improper and discreditable, with the result that the investment
has been subjected to unfair and i1 itable . This is admittedly a
somewhat open-ended standard, but it may be that in practice no more
A Hilitioe 1746
precise formula can be offered to cover the range of possibilities.

The Tribunal will return as necessary to the question of the specific treatment which the fair
and equitable standard requires, and the types of conduct which may result in a violation, in the
context of its discussion of the three strands which the Claimants say constitute specific
elements of ‘fair and equitable treatment’.

The Claimants’ Claims Based on Breach of Their Legitimate Expectations

The Tribunal accepts the Claimants’ argument that frustration of an investor’s legitimate
expectations is capable of constituting a breach of the standard of fair and equitable treatment.
For a claimant’s expectations to qualify in this sense, however, they must normally be based on

248 Mondev International Limited v. United States of America (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2), Award of 11 October
2002, para. 127.

304

4.763

4,764

4.765

 

 

 

specific assurances given by the competent authorities to the investor prior to or at the time of
the making of the investment. The Tribunal will return below to the question of what specific
assurances were in fact given to the Claimants, and the scope of the legitimate expectations
which may reasonably have arisen as a result.

In the present case, however, the Claimants’ assertion is the general one that they had a
legitimate expectation that the law on planning and building permission would be applied in a
proper manner, and that that expectation was improperly frustrated as a result of the decisions
of the Respondent’s authorities and the way in which these decisions were taken.

Subject to the caveat that any such expectation must be within the limits of the reasonable, the
Tribunal is prepared to accept that the Claimants were entitled to expect that the law on
planning and building permissions would be properly applied by the competent administrative
authorities within the wider framework of Czech administrative law, and, that if the courts
were seized with disputes arising out of the foregoing, there would be fair disposition of such
disputes in accordance with internationally accepted standards of justice. By reasonable in
this context, the Tribunal means that it has to be accepted that it is an inherent feature of any
legal system that the competent administrative authorities (and courts), in applying domestic
law, may commit errors and make mistakes, or simply reach decisions as to the meaning of the
law or as to the facts of a case on to which a superior court or administrative authority
subsequently takes a different view. It has also to be accepted that it is not the role of an
international tribunal to sit on appeal against the legal correctness or substantive
reasonableness of individual administrative acts or the judgments of a municipal court
reviewing them. Its role is rather to assess whether the decision makers and the courts acted
fairly and consistently with accepted standards of due process, and that their decision making
was not tainted by improper motives. It follows that the possibility that a decision was wrong
under domestic law is not in and of itself a breach of the standard of fair and equitable
treatment, although it may in appropriate circumstances constitute a relevant factor to be
weighed in the balance alongside the availability of effective remedies. In other words, the
standard is about the operation of the State’s administrative and legal system as a whole.

A particular point to be borne in mind in this connection is that the expectations of a given
investor, however legitimate, do not exist in isolation, and removed from the factual
circumstances of the specific situation. The crucial factor in the present case is the existence
on the scene of a competing investor, Multi, whose actions are not attributable to the
Respondent and do not engage the Respondent’s international responsibility. Competition is
an inescapable component of the risk element that characterizes the making of an investment in
an open economic system. The fact therefore that Multi sought to exercise its legal rights in a
way that impinged adversely on the interests of its competitor, ECE, or asserted a claim to
standing to do so before the Czech courts or administrative authorities, is not something for
which the Respondent can be reproached by ECE under the standard of fair and equitable
treatment — so long as the courts and administrative authorities dealt with the competing claims
in conformity with the standard described in the preceding paragraph. _It is of the essence of
planning and building law that one of its central purposes is precisely to balance competing
interests, which in specific cases may be many, varied and conflicting.

305

4.766

4.767

4.768

4.769

4.770

One of the consequences of the above is that an investor dependent on the grant of a planning
or building permit must be taken to be aware of the possibility of delays in the decision making
process, and that there is a risk that other participants, including opponents and competitors,
will seek to slow or even halt the proposed project. The investor can have no ‘legitimate
expectation’ opposable to the host State that such delays will not occur. Whether delay can
reach a point at which it passes beyond what could reasonably have been anticipated is not a
matter of kind but of degree. It will therefore be heavily dependent on the particular facts, and
a tribunal will take special care to weigh the sequential investment decisions taken by the
investor against the actual or assumed state of the investor’s knowledge at the time that each
decision was made. The tribunal will also assess the extent to which the investor might itself
have caused or contributed to the delay. In brief, it is not the function of the doctrine of
‘legitimate expectations’ to remove the risk element from commercial investment, including
the risk of competitors or other parties resorting to domestic remedies.

As indicated above, ‘legitimate expectations’ in the context of investment arbitration would
normally be based on specific assurances given by the competent authorities to the investor,
and it is to that aspect that the Tribunal now turns.

i__Mr Assurance and the Claimants’ Expectations

The Claimants sought to make much of an assurance alleged to have been given by Mr

to representatives of ECE in August 2005. Although in the written pleadings the Claimants
had also invoked the fact that the City of changed the zoning plan so that the Galerie
project could be constructed on the intended site, in the end, as the argument developed in the
oral hearings, Mr $ assurance became the sole basis on which the Claimants relied for
their legitimate expectation that the planning process would be conducted in proper manner,
and that they could accordingly expect the grant of the planning and building permits in time to
allow an opening prior to or contemporaneous with Multi’s Forum project.

 

The Tribunal is not convinced that the assurance made by Mr can bear the weight
which the Claimants seek to make it carry.

As to the content of the assurance, when Mr was asked by Counsel for the Claimants
whether, when he had met with representatives of ECE in 2005, he had assured them that Multi
and ECE ‘would be treated fairly and equitably’, his response was that he had assured them
that “we approach all investors in the same manner.”!”” He later explained that the policy of
his administration when he was Mayor had been to provide support to all developers who were
interested in investing in the City, and, effectively, to leave it to the investors and to the market
to decide which projects were feasible.'“* That explanation is fully consistent with the
account of the relevant meeting provided by Mr in his witness statement who recounted
that “When the conversation turned to the role of Multi, the mayor remarked that both
developers would be measured against the same standard and that it is each developer's

"7 '5/104:18-23,
148 T5/118:5-16.

306

 

4.771

4.772

4.773

1749

responsibility to make the best out of the project”.'"° An assurance of this kind, in effect that
the City of would not take sides in the competition between different investors, falls
well short of any kind of promise that the necessary planning and building permits would be
granted within a particular time, or even that the permits would be granted at all.

An important factor in this regard is the limited competence of the City of and of Mr

as its Mayor, in relation to the overall permitting process. On the evidence, there is a
distinction under Czech administrative law between institutions of self-government (including
entities such as the City of ) and the central State authorities (which included the
Building Authority within MAL). Therefore, although the City of had competence
over the local zoning plan, it had no competence over the grant of planning or building
permits. In those circumstances, it would have been surprising if Mr had purported to
provide any assurance as to the conduct of the planning and building permit proceedings. The
Tribunal accepts his evidence, corroborated by that of Mr , that he did not do so, but
merely gave an assurance that the City of ' would support the respective projects of
Multi and ECE equally.

In actual fact, the evidence suggests that the City of did precisely that. Quite apart
from, as already noted, changing its zoning plan at the outset so as to permit the construction of
the Galerie project, it subsequently agreed to allow applications for the building permits in
respect of the external traffic constructions to be made in its name by Tschechien 7’s
contractor, SIAL (apparently in the hope that in doing so, Multi would be less likely to
challenge them). Moreover, once the overlap issue had arisen, the City of } entered into
a cooperation agreement by which it agreed to take steps to assist the Claimants in resolving
the problems which had arisen.’%° It follows, in the Tribunal’s view, that nothing in the
conduct of the City of including Mr , § specific assurance to ECE, can be taken
as the ground for any fixed expectation on the part of the Claimants that they would obtain the
necessary planning and building permits within a specific time.

ii__The Time Sensitivity of the Project

The Claimants argued that the relevant authorities of the Respondent must at the least have
been aware of the time-critical nature of the Galerie project. It must indeed have been clear to
any knowledgeable observer that Galerie and Forum were in stiff competition with one
another. Nevertheless the Tribunal would only be able to regard the Claimants’ commercial
objective as entering within the realms of “legitimate expectation” if the competent Czech
authorities had offered some form of specific assurance in that regard, and in such a way that
ECE could fairly be said to have relied upon it. That would however have to be proved by
evidence. The Tribunal has before it no evidence to that effect. In the Tribunal’s view, the
only express assurance provided was the one given by Mr ,. discussed above, and that
(as indicated) was primarily in the form of an assurance of non-discrimination as between the
Galerie and Forum projects.

statement, para. 10.

"78 Core 6/184 (Exhibit R-49).

307

4.774

4.775

4.776

In the Tribunal’s opinion, even if it had been shown that the Claimants had informed the
appropriate authorities at the outset of the commercial imperatives underlying an opening at
the same time or in advance of the Forum project, that would not mean that the Claimants, by
so doing, were able to transfer to the Respondent all or part of the commercial risk inherent in
the competitive situation in which the Claimants found themselves.

Given that finding, it is not necessary for the Tribunal to investigate in detail the
reasonableness of the Claimants’ alleged expectations, based on how much time the Claimants
had in fact assumed for completion of the permitting procedures when drawing up and
adopting their internal decisions to undertake the investment. Such evidence as the Tribunal
has seen suggests that, in preparing their time schedule for the construction and opening of
Galerie the Claimants budgeted only for the maximum statutory deadlines for the
granting of the various permits, and failed to take into account the possibility of appeals
against the grant of planning or building permits.'"! Both Mr and Mr agreed in
evidence that appeals were a possibility and that they were used to dealing with them,!”* and
there was further evidence that the Claimants had suffered severe delays over a project of the
same kind in Prague as a result of the filing of appeals. Mr , explanation was that,
judging from the site inspection, the situation was not “particularly sensitive” compared to
other projects. Mr” admitted that the time schedule was optimistic in not budgeting for
appeals, and that the Board of ECE knew this.’ He said that he had been assured by the
owner of the principal construction contractor that, in previous of that contractor’s projects, no
appeals had been lodged and on that basis he felt that appeals were not likely, and by SIAL, the
Claimants’ local project company, that appeals were not very common in the : area, at
least outside the specific field of mining operations raising environmental concerns, in which
some local NGOs were active.'”* These individual impressions notwithstanding, the minutes
of the ECE Board meeting on 23 July 2007 noted that “some protests” were to be expected in
respect of the planning permit,'”°* whilst those of the meeting held on 7 July 2008 recognized
that it was likely that Multi would appeal against the grant of the building permit. '*°

The above leaves in the mind of the Tribunal a picture of the Claimants knowingly entering
into what was characterized in the Memorial as a “horse race” with Multi as to who could
complete their respective projects first, on the basis of time estimates for the permitting process
which were not based on a realistically hard-headed calculation of the likelihood of appeals or
of their effect.

1751 '19/89:3-6 (Mr); T4/75:4-5 (Mr’ ).
"82 19/88:21 — 89:2 ; TA/131:11-13.
"S3-9/89:6-14 ; T4/77:20-21 and 78:1-13.

54 T4/131:3-10; T4/132:2-11; see also T4/76:6-10.
™55 Core 4/114, (Exhibit R-39).

1°58 Core 6/218 (Exhibit C-64).

308

ATTT

4.778

4.779

4.780

4.781

4.782

iii. The Planning Proceedings

In the. light of the above, the Tribunal can now turn to whether the Claimants’ reasonable
expectations of the normal and regular operation of the planning process were frustrated in a
way that might give rise to a breach of the standard of fair and equitable treatment.

The Tribunal notes that, although initially the Claimants raised multiple allegations of
procedural irregularity and unlawfulness in relation to individual actions and decisions in each
stage of the planning process, in the final analysis it relied essentially on the conduct of the
Extraordinary Review Proceedings, and the various stays adopted by MAL in the context of
the building permit proceedings.

As regards the alleged irregularities in the planning permit proceedings, including the episode
in which the notice of the opening of planning permit proceedings was removed prematurely
from the noticeboard, resulting in the need for it to be republished, the Claimants admitted that
the various relatively minor delays suffered at that time had no adverse effect on the realization
of the project and, in particular, on the timely progress of the further proceedings and the
possibility of Galerie opening in advance of or contemporaneously with Multi’s Forum centre.
However, they did argue strongly that it was only the premature taking down of the application
which permitted Multi to launch the process of appeal which set in train a course of events
gravely damaging to their interests.

As to the Extraordinary Review Proceedings in relation to MAL’s grant of the Planning
Permit, initiated by the Ministry further to a motion by Multi on 7 December 2007, although
these proceedings did not as such affect the entry into force of the planning permit, following
RAL’s rejection of Multi’s appeal on 3 December 2007, the Claimants assert that the pendency
of the proceedings created continuing uncertainty as to the validity of the Planning Permit and
that this was a factor contributing to the decision to abandon the project. They draw attention
to the fact that the First and Second Ministry Decisions purported to quash the planning permit,
albeit that those decisions never entered into force in consequence of Tschechien 7’s appeals to
the Minister. The existence of the Extraordinary Review Proceedings is also of significance
insofar as MAL purported to rely on the fact that they were pending in adopting the Second
and Third Stays of the Building Permit proceedings.

The next set of proceedings upon which reliance was placed was the Building Permit
proceedings which commenced consequent upon the applications filed on behalf of
Tschechien 7 starting on 20 February 2008. The Claimants assert that it was the conduct of
those proceedings, and in particular the delay caused by the adoption of the Second and Third
Stays, when taken with the uncertainty mentioned above over the validity of the Planning
Permit, that forced ECE to abandon the project once it became clear that even an Autumn 2010
opening was in jeopardy.

Before examining whether anything which occurred in the proceedings can be regarded as
rising to the level of a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard, the Tribunal recalls
its observations above that the mere occurrence of irregularities in administrative or court
proceedings, or the adoption of mistaken decisions, does not in itself give rise to a breach of
this kind. What is necessary in order for a breach to be found is something that falls outside
what is generally accepted as fair in administrative or judicial proceedings.

309

4.783

4.784

4.785

4.786

4.787

4.788

The Planning Permit Proceedings

As to the premature taking down of the planning permit, although the notice was taken down
early, a certain length of time, however limited, still remained within which an appeal could
have been filed, and the Tribunal cannot simply make the assumption that Multi would not
have filed an appeal within that time period.

The Extraordinary Review Proceedings

It came as an unpleasant surprise to the Claimants when the First Ministry Decision of 29
February 2008 upheld Multi’s challenge to RAL’s decision dismissing Multi’s appeal against
the grant of the planning permission. The Tribunal, for its own part, finds it hard to follow the
precise chain of reasoning which led the Ministry to reach this conclusion. However, as
previously noted, the present Tribunal does not sit as a court of appeal or review, and the
fundamental fact, despite the striking nature of some of the Ministry’s findings, (including as
to Tschechien 7’s status in the proceedings), is that the Decision was subsequently reversed by
the First Minister Decision upon Tschechien 7’s appeal, and therefore had no legal effect.

As regards the First Minister Decision itself, although the Claimants initially attempted to
characterize it as not only unusual, but also improper insofar as it departed from the prior
opinion of the Advisory Committee which had recommended the termination of the
proceedings, it was subsequently accepted by the Claimants, in the light of the evidence on
Czech law, that the Minister was not bound to follow the opinion expressed by the Committee,
and was free to adopt his own view. Nor, against this background, has the Tribunal been able
to find anything improper in the Minister’s decision to consult Dr on the approach he
should adopt, however unusual that course may have been.

As to the attack mounted by the Claimants on the Minister’s decision to remand the matter to
the Ministry for consideration of the question of whether the rights acquired in good faith by
Tschechien 7 under the planning permit would be disproportionately affected by any decision
to quash the planning permit, the legal experts agreed that, as a matter of Czech law, such a
course of action was open to the Minister, and the Tribunal can appreciate his logic in so
doing. It is not without significance that Tschechien 7 itself initially proposed to proceed this
way in its appeal of 12 March 2008,'”%” and it was only in a supplemental submission dated 18
April 2008 that it requested that the First Ministry Decision be cancelled and the proceedings
discontinued,'¥*

In summary, the Tribunal can see nothing which could give rise to a conclusion that the First
Minister Decision was anything other than an admissible application of the options which were
open to the Minister under Czech law.

As to the Second Ministry Decision adopted on 15 August 2008 following the remand,
although the Ministry again purported to quash the planning permit, once again its decision to
that effect was subsequently reversed and never had effect, having been quashed by the Second
Minister Decision upon Tschechien 7’s further appeal.

1757 Core 5/152 (Exhibits R-105/C-60).
158 Core 6/176, (Exhibit R-128).

310

 

4.789

4.790

4.791

4.792

4.793

 

To pass now to the Second Minister Decision of 4 December 2008, which was fully in the
Claimants’ favour, the Claimants’ main criticism is that it was delivered late, as well as
drawing attention to the fact that it was inconsistent with the First Minister Decision, despite
the factual basis not having changed. As already noted, however, the mere failure to comply
with a procedural time limit, resulting in a relatively minor delay in the rendering of the
Second Minister Decision, is not enough in and of itself to give rise to a potential breach of the
standard of fair and equitable treatment.

The Tribunal does not see anything in the way in which the Extraordinary Review Proceedings
were conducted which violates an investor’s legitimate expectation that the planning and
permitting process would be operated in a proper manner. The issuing of decisions by inferior
decision-makers which were subsequently overturned on appeal, the consequent delays, and
the extent of non-compliance with statutory time-limits for the rendering of decisions, are none
of them matters which should have been beyond the reasonable contemplation of an investor.

The Building Permit Proceedings

As to the building permit proceedings, the Claimants criticisms focus in particular on the
Second and Third Stays of the proceedings adopted by MAL. As set out in paragraph 2.20
above, the effect of a stay is not entirely to suspend the proceedings, but rather to stop the
running of time for the purposes of the time-limit within which the authority must reach its
decision. The adoption of a stay also stops time running for the purposes of calculation of the
time period of 15 days within which notification of the opening of proceedings has to be
displayed, as well as the period of 15 days within which participants in the proceedings are
able to submit their comments and objections.

Following the filing of the application for the main building permit on 20 February 2008, the
First Stay of the main building permit was issued by MAL on 13 March 2008, consequent
upon the applicant’s failure to file a complete application.'"° The missing information and
documents requested by MAL were supplied on 2 April 2008,!7 and the stay was lifted the
same day. The evidence before the Tribunal was that such an initial suspension of
proceedings occurs frequently in practice, in consequence of the great number and complexity
of documents to be submitted as part of an application. In the end, the Claimants made no
complaint about the delay caused by the First Stay, and admitted that it did not materially
impair the time schedule.'”"

The Parties and their legal experts disagreed as to the reason for the Second Stay, adopted on
28 April 2008. The Claimants argued that the stay was improper because it merely invited the
Developer “to submit supporting documents clearly demonstrating that the provisions of
Article 111[2] of the Czech Building Act have been satisfied”, without specifying the nature
and content of the further documents requested. In addition, they argued that, as a matter of
Czech administrative law, in accordance with the principle of procedural efficiency, a call for
the supply of further documentation should be made once in relation to any application and not
be divided in subsequent decisions, each causing an additional suspension of the proceedings,

"© Core 5/155 (Exhibit R-50).
17 Core 5/167, (Exhibit 29) i61)
176) °7/126:14-24 (Dr

311

 

4.794

4.795

4.796

4.797

and that the First Stay already having requested supplemental documentation, it was improper
for MAL subsequently to stay the proceedings in order to seek production of further
documents. Finally, the Claimants submitted that the Second Stay was improper insofar as it
purported to rely on the pendency of the Extraordinary Review Proceedings.

The Tribunal does not accept any of these criticisms. Article 111[2] of the Building Act,
contained in a provision dealing with applications for building permits, requires Building
Authorities to verify the “effects (impacts, influences) of the future use of the structure” which
is the subject of an application for planning permission. It would seem, judging from the
terms of the Second Stay, that MAL was not seeking further documents solely in respect of the
original application for building permission, but rather that the request for supplemental
information was provoked in part by the application filed by Tschechien 7 itself on 14 April
2008, apparently in an attempt to resolve the problems caused by the overlap and conflict
between the planning permission granted to Multi and the planning permission obtained by
Tschechien 7 for Construction IV.b, relating to the exterior roads. Tschechien7’s letter was
headed “partial abandonment of intention”, in which it set out its abandonment of its intention
to implement Construction IV.b, and asserted that, as a consequence the planning permit to the
extent that it related to Construction IV.b “becomes invalid as of the date of delivery of the
present notification [...]”.!7

Mr ‘s evidence was that he had regarded such an attempt to effect a partial abandonment
of the planning permit as legally impossible, on the basis that “the law says that if you leave
out a part of a construction, this is a change of the planning permit, and this has to be changed
whole. In other words, I am changing the whole planning permit, the original planning permit
no longer exists, and has to be replaced with a new planning permit, which again has to go
through the whole process, being put up on the public noticeboard and so on and so forth.”!”°
That this was Mr *s view at the time is reflected in the Second Stay itself, which stated
the view that the motion of 14 April 2008 “amounts to a modification of the planning permit”.

Dr ', the Claimants’ expert on Czech law, agreed that a partial abandonment of a
planning permit “was not possible”,'" and expressed the view that faced with such a situation,
“Gt is the obligation of the building authority to find what the actual intention of the participant
was”.!7° In addition, although present as a witness of fact called by the Respondent,
Dr . an expert in administrative law, stated his view that the approach adopted by
Tschechien 7 was flawed, noting that Tschechien 7 had sought to operate “a partial withdrawal
from some rights, which is legally a nonsense”.

Indeed, it appears to the Tribunal that Tschechien 7 subsequently realized the error in the
approach it had taken, or at least clearly understood the basis on which MAL was analysing the
situation created by its application for “partial invalidation”. For, by a motion dated 22 May
2008, Tschechien 7 withdrew its application for partial invalidation; the motion stated that the
wording of the Second Stay, “indicates beyond any doubt that the Building Authority in

1 Core 5/171 (Exhibit —_<-30; 63).
185 16/50:6-13.

 

1766 T7/31:6-8.

312

4.798

4.799

4.800

4.801

deems the 14 April 2008 filing of Tschechien 7 to be an application for a change to the
planning permit dated 16 July 2007” and stated that, although Tschechien 7 did not agree with
that analysis, it withdrew the motion as “it was not the intention of Tschechien 7 to initiate
proceedings on changes to the 16 July 2007 planning permit.”?”””

Given that the Second Stay was based in part upon Tschechien7’s application of 14 April
2008, rather than solely upon the original application for a planning permit, the argument
based on the principle of procedural economy proceeds on a mistaken basis. Quite apart from
this, given that the First Stay was adopted on 13 March 2008, the initial request for
supplementation of the application underlying that decision could not possibly have extended
to the matters arising from Tschechien 7’s application of 14 April 2008.

Finally, although the Claimants suggest that the Second Stay was motivated by the pendency
of the Extraordinary Review Proceedings, this is not borne out by the text itself of the Second
Stay. Although the text includes wording which in the circumstances can only be understood
as referring to the Extraordinary Review Proceedings, nevertheless the explanation of grounds
shows that the reason for the stay was not the pendency of the Extraordinary Review
Proceedings as such, but rather the need to verify the effects of due use of the construction in
circumstances in which various proceedings potentially affecting the overlap were pending, the
actual connection of the roads was not clear in light of the clash between the two planning
permits, and the Building Authority was therefore of the view that it was not in a position in
which it could verify “that the development will be sufficiently comprehensive and continuous
to ensure creation of the technical requirements for due and proper use of the construction”.

Following receipt of the withdrawal of Tschechien'7’s application for partial invalidation,
MAL put an end to the Second Stay on 2 June 2008 and decided to publish a notice of the
commencement of the building permit proceedings through display on the noticeboard. That
decision appears to have been linked to the fact that, on the next day, the proceeding to modify
Multi’s planning permit referred to in the Second Stay, which had been commenced by the
Building Office on 12 December 2007 proprio motu, was discontinued. The notice of
discontinuance noted that, on 17 April 2008, the application for building permission in respect
of, inter alia, Construction IV.a, had been filed, in which the City of i was specified as
builder, and reasoned that, since the City of ' was also the owner of the land plots and
the roads, “the ‘overlap’ of both respective planning proceedings will be removed within the
building proceeding”.!”® It appears that it was on this basis that MAL was of the view that the
overlap issue was resolved, and that accordingly there was no further need for supplemental
information as to the effects of Construction IV.b.

As to the Third Stay, there was no dispute between the Parties that it was adopted on a flawed
legal basis, and was thus unlawful. However its illegality was quickly identified by the
competent authorities as a result of the enquiry made by the lawyers acting on behalf of
Tschechien 7, and the Claimants ultimately obtained a remedy. In the circumstances, the
Tribunal does not regard the adoption of the Third Stay as rising to the level of a breach of an
investor's legitimate expectation that the law would be applied in a fair and reasonable manner.

177 Core 6/192, (Exhibit R-51).
1768 Core 6/199, (Exhibit R-47).

313

 

4.802

4.803

4.804

The Tribunal notes in that regard that the delay in the Building Permit proceedings occasioned
by the Third Stay cannot be attributed in its entirety to the Respondent; although the letter
from the Ministry obtained by Tschechien7 and provided to MAL on 31 July 2008 stated
clearly that the pendency of Extraordinary Review proceedings in relation to the planning
permit did not constitute a ground for staying the Building Permit proceedings, the ability of
MAL subsequently to discontinue the stay in the light of that letter was substantially
complicated by the fact that Tschechien 7, EKZ Prag 7 and the City of : subsequently
filed appeals with RAL against the various decisions constituting the Third Stay.

On the evidence before the Tribunal, the filing of those appeals meant that MAL was required
to provide the relevant files to RAL, which then prevented it from resuming the Building
Permit Proceedings of its own motion. At the same time, RAL was unable formally to quash
the decisions constituting the Third Stay inasmuch as all but one of the appeals had been filed
out of time.'7 Although RAL’s decisions put beyond any reasonable doubt that the Third
Stay was not justified, and that MAL should discontinue the Third Stay and recommence the
Building Permit proceedings sua sponte, further delay in that regard was caused by the
requirement of publication of RAL’s various decisions on the noticeboard for 15 days. The
crucial decision of RAL dated 8 October 2008 in relation to the main building permit
(Construction I), in which RAL rejected Tschechien 7’s appeal as out of time, but indicated
that there was no basis for the Third Stay, came into force on 25 October 2008. Very shortly
thereafter, on 29 October 2008 MAL did in fact resume the Building Permit Proceedings and
declared the evidence gathering phase of the building permit proceedings in that regard closed.
Of course, by that stage, on the Claimants’ case, the Board of ECE had already resolved to
abandon the project.

It thus appears to the Tribunal that, but for the filing of the appeals by Tschechien 7 and other
entities, MAL would have been able to discontinue the stay substantially earlier. The Tribunal
does not regard it as critical in this regard that the Claimants’ appeal was filed out of time.
More important is that Tschechien 7, despite having a strong basis from the Ministry’s letter
(which it had forwarded to MAL on 31 July) to argue that the Third Stay should not have been
adopted and should be discontinued, decided to file appeals which, owing to the procedural
requirements of Czech law, stood in the way of MAL taking any action on the basis of that
letter. Whatever its other merits or demerits, it is clear therefore that a significant element in
the delay caused by the Third Stay in the Building Permit proceedings was not attributable to
the Respondent.

The Due Process and Transparency Complaints

The Tribunal can deal somewhat more briefly with the Claimants’ claims of breach of the
standard of fair and equitable treatment on the basis of the other ‘strands’ identified by the
Claimants, namely violation of due process, and of the requirement that the legal system be
transparent and predictable. The Claimants’ reliance on these ‘strands’ subsided noticeably
during the course of the oral proceedings.

6 By contrast, RAL was able swiftly to quash the Third Stay insofar as it related to the water permit proceedings, as
the appeal by Tschechien 7 was filed in a timely fashion.

314

4.805

4.806

4.807

4.808

Taking first the question of due process, the Tribunal has no doubt that a failure to accord due
process in administrative or judicial proceedings may, if unremedied and of sufficient
seriousness, result in a violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard. The purpose of
due process is however, while enabling the decision-maker to exercise its administrative or
judicial powers, to see to it that that is done in a manner which is fair to the interests of an
investor; it follows that there can be no violation of fair and equitable treatment in a flawed
decision at first instance which is subsequently reversed on appeal, and the effects of which
were therefore only temporary.

The Claimants’ argue that the First Ministry Decision was a breach of due process because of
its denial to Tschechien 7 of the status of participant in relation to Multi’s appeal against the
planning permit. The fact remains however that the Decision was quashed by the First
Minister Decision, and in all subsequent phases of the Extraordinary Review Proceedings,
Tschechien 7 was treated as a participant. Moreover, albeit via a complex path through the
remand, the Second Ministry Decision and the Second Minister Decision, Tschechien7 did
ultimately prevail on the merits on the question which was the subject of the Extraordinary
Review Proceedings. The Tribunal notes in any event that the finding in the First Ministry
Decision that Tschechien7 was not a participant did not apparently have the effect of
precluding Tschechien7 from filing submissions in relation to Multi’s appeal in the
proceedings leading up to that Decision, which it duly did, and thereafter was able to appeal
against that decision, The defects in the First Ministry Decision and the procedures leading up
to it therefore seem to the Tribunal to be more formal than substantial. Finally, although the
two sets of Ministry and Minister decisions in the Extraordinary Review Proceedings were
undoubtedly complex and took time to complete, the Tribunal is of the view that the delays
involved were not out of the ordinary and thus not a violation of due process. The Tribunal
therefore sees no basis to conclude that Tschechien 7 was in fact denied due process in breach
of the standard of fair and equitable treatment.

The Tribunal can deal briefly too with the invocation by the Claimants of a transparency and
predictability ‘strand’ in the standard of fair and equitable treatment. The essential thrust of
this argument is, in turn, also closely related to the expectation that the relevant law is readily
ascertainable and will be applied in a proper manner, so that the analysis of the various
proceedings set out above is equally applicable to it.

The Tribunal begins by observing that many of the cases in which the requirement of
transparency or predictability of the legal system has been invoked have concerned situations
in which the law has been changed to the detriment of the investor following the making of its
investment. By contrast, in the present case the overall structure of Czech administrative law
remained unchanged throughout the relevant period. And, as regards planning law, the
possibility of appeals in relation to permitting matters (including the Extraordinary Review
procedure) at all times formed a part of the wider applicable system, and must therefore have
been within the Claimants’ reasonable contemplation when making and developing their
investment plans. As regards the Building Code in particular, the Tribunal notes that although
did undergo a change in 2007, there was no allegation that the change unduly disadvantaged
developers in general or the Claimants in particular. It seems in any event to have been the
case that a transitional device was available to developers to preserve the application of the

315

 

4.809

4.810

4.811

4.812

4.813

known and tried procedures, and that Tschechien 7 took advantage of it.” The Tribunal
cannot regard the complaints raised by the Claimants about the handling of their planning
permits as raising any serious question as to the transparency or predictability of the applicable
procedures.

Alleged Breach of the Prohibition of Expropriation (Article 4(2) BIT)

The Claimants also allege that the conduct of the Respondent’s authorities constitutes, in
effect, an expropriation or nationalization of their investment, in violation of Article 4(2) of the
BIT.

Article 4(2) provides, in relevant part

Investments of investors of either Contracting Party shall not be
expropriated, nationalized or subjected to any other measure the effects of
which would be tantamount to expropriation or nationalization in the
territory of the other Contracting Party except for public interest and
against compensation.

The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent’s submission that, to bring this provision into play,
there must have been some ‘taking’ of an investment. That applies equally to a claim for
indirect expropriation or, in the words of Article 4(2), “measures the effects of which would be
tantamount to expropriation or nationalization”.

The Tribunal in Metalclad framed the prohibition of direct or indirect expropriation and
measures tantamount to such expropriation in Article 1110 of the NAFTA as including

incidental interference with the use of property which has the effect of
depriving the owner, in whole or in significant part, of the use or
reasonably-to-be expected economic benefit of property even if not to the
obvious benefit of the host State.‘""

That has however been criticized as extending too far the boundaries of protection against
indirect expropriation. The Tribunal need not form a definitive view as to whether the
Metalclad standard is the appropriate one to be applied in the present case, as it is of the view
that even applying that standard, the Claimants’ claim of expropriation must fail.

 

The Claimants appear to equate the Metalclad Tribunal’s to the ibly-to-bi

expected economic benefit of property” to their own expectations of the economic benefit that
they would have obtained from the project if it had come to fruition in accordance with their
plans. The introduction of that approach would however subvert the notion of protection
against expropriation or measures tantamount to expropriation, and render it the equivalent of
no more than a further protection of the legitimate expectations of the investor. In the view of
the Tribunal, the Metalclad tribunal had in mind the economic benefits which any owner can

170 See paragraphs 2,5and 2.8 above.
1) Metalelad Corporation v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1), Award of 30 August 2000,

para. 103.

316

4.814

4.815

4.816

reasonably expect to enjoy as a result of his or her ownership of property. It is the
interference with those benefits, short of an outright taking of the property but equivalent in
terms of its intensity, seriousness and duration of its effects,’”” which may, in an appropriate
case, give rise to a finding of an indirect expropriation. The test is in other words an objective
one, based on a standard of reasonableness.

In any case, the Tribunal is of the view that the Claimants’ claim of a “creeping” expropriation
of their investment faces insurmountable difficulties on the facts. The Claimants insisted
throughout that their “investment” for the purposes of Article 1(1) of the BIT was their
shareholding or other participatory rights in Tschechien7 and BCE Praha. They were not
however able to point to any measure adopted by the Respondent which had adversely affected
their rights in that regard. The Claimants retain their participatory rights in Tschechien 7 and
ECE Praha; their complaint is that those rights are now worth less to them than they had
hoped and expected. That does not however in and of itself give rise to a claim of
expropriation, even if it could be shown that the reduction in value was solely attributable to
the actions of the Respondent.

Moreover, the Tribunal finds no basis for a finding that there has been either a direct or
indirect expropriation of the land plots on which the Galerie project was to be built; the plots
remain the property of Tschechien 7. Similarly, although those plots of land may be worth far
less to the Claimants in circumstances in which the Galerie project has not been built and there
must now be severe doubts as to its future commercial viability, the mere drop in value of
property cannot normally be characterized as amounting to an expropriation. As explained
above, the Claimants’ business model was to sell on projects of this kind to investors at a point
prior to the start of construction work, and enter into a long-term agreement with the investors
to manage the centre on their behalf. The expropriation claim therefore mistakenly conflates
the Claimants’ rights constituting their investment, which they hoped to exploit, and the
expectation of future benefit or future profits, if that exploitation had proved commercially
viable. The position might have been different had the Galerie project in fact been completed,
and had the Claimants now been complaining against some measure interfering in a substantial
way with their continuing right to its profitable exploitation. However, that is not the situation
with which the Tribunal is faced; the Claimants’ investment was at most for the most part
executory, and the anticipated value to the Claimants of the project if it had in fact been
completed cannot constitute something which was prospectively taken.

In the absence therefore of any ‘taking’ of the Claimants’ investment by the Respondent, the
claim for breach of the prohibition of expropriation contained in Article 4(2) of the BIT must
fail.

172 The Claimants recognized that in order for an expropriation to be found, the Tribunal would have to find
“significant and permanent deprivation” (T10/128:5-7).

317

 

4.817

4.818

4.819

4.820

4.821

Alleged Breach of the Prohibition of Impairment of Investments by Arbitrary or
Discriminatory Measures (Article 2(2) BIT)

The Applicable Standard
Article 2(2) of the BIT imposes an obligation upon the Contracting Parties not to

impair by arbitrary or discriminatory measures the management,
maintenance, use or enjoyment of investments in its territory of investors of
the other Contracting Party.

Although the Claimants originally only complained of the arbitrary nature of the conduct of the
authorities of the Respondent under the first limb of the test, reserving their position as
whether those measures could also be characterized as discriminatory, they subsequently
pleaded in the Memorial that the measures were also discriminatory by comparison with the
treatment of their competitor, Multi. As noted above, in Procedural Order No, 5 the Tribunal
rejected the Respondent’s application to strike out certain parts of the Memorial in which the
Claimants put forward a new claim alleging discrimination in breach of Article 2(2).

The Parties are in disagreement as to the appropriate standard to be applied to the prohibition
of impairment, in particular in the determination of whether the measures adopted by the
Respondent were arbitrary. In their written pleadings, the Claimants asserted that the
touchstone for the prohibition of arbitrary measures is whether the conduct in question was
rational. In that regard, they submitted that the threshold for a finding of arbitrary conduct
enunciated in the ELSI case was inconsistent with the standard enunciated in the BIT, and that
the correct standard is that submitted by the tribunal in Lauder, where arbitrariness was defined
as “depending on individual discretion [...] founded on prejudice or preference rather than on
reason or fact”.!””? In the alternative, they submitted that even if the ELSI standard is
applicable, that once a prima facie finding of arbitrariness has been shown, the burden shifts to
the State to provide an explanation which mitigates or explains the conduct in question.

By contrast, according to the Respondent, the applicable standard is that set out in ELS/ (see
paragraph 4.822 below). In any case, the Respondent questions whether the tribunal in Lauder
did in fact intend to introduce a lower standard than that set out in ELSI.

As to the standard applicable in respect of the prohibition of impairment by discriminatory
measures, the Claimants suggest that the standard for discriminatory conduct laid down by the
Tribunal in Saluka provides the appropriate test, namely that “(i) similar cases are (ii) treated
differently (iii) and without reasonable justification”.'"* The Respondent did not as such
dispute that Saluka provided the appropriate test, although it emphasized that a breach of the
prohibition of impairment on the basis of discriminatory measures would only occur when an
investment was in fact impaired by a difference in treatment in comparison to others in
comparable circumstances, and that difference in treatment was unjustified.

173 Ronald S. Lauder v. Czech Republic (UNCITRAL), Final Award of 3 September 2001, para, 221.
17 Saluka Investments B.V. v. The Czech Republic (UNCITRAL), Partial Award of 17 March 2006, para. 313.

318

4.822

4.823

4.824

4.825

In the Tribunal’s view the judgment of the Chamber of the International Court of Justice in the
ELSI case does indeed provide the appropriate standard:

Arbitrariness is not so much something opposed to a rule of law, but
something opposed to the rule of law. [...] It is a wilful disregard of due
process of law, an act which shocks, or at least surprises, a sense of judicial
propriety!”

The Tribunal finds no inconsistency between this dictum and the decision in Lauder v, Czech
Republic; there the tribunal referred to a decision “founded on prejudice or preference rather
than on reason or fact”.!’”° But in the view of the present Tribunal, a decision of a decision-
maker based on ‘prejudice or preference’ would normally constitute a wilful disregard of due
process of law and would be likely to surprise a sense of judicial propriety. Moreover, the
Tribunal cannot understand the Lauder tribunal to have been suggesting that the mere fact that
a decision involved the exercise of discretion automatically meant that it was arbitrary, but
rather to have been referring to decisions which are adopted at the whim of the decision-maker,
unconstrained by the facts or by reason.

Nor can the Tribunal accept that it is sufficient for an investor merely to establish a prima facie
case of arbitrariness, and that thereafter it is for the respondent State to provide evidence
mitigating or explaining the conduct. The Chamber in ELSI was clear in its statement that
“without more, unlawfulness cannot be said to amount to arbitrariness”; although the Chamber
subsequently observed that “a finding of the local courts that an act was unlawful may well be
relevant to an argument that it was also arbitrary”, it also clearly envisaged that such a finding
was not sufficient for that purpose. If an investor is able to show through its own evidence
(including, where relevant, through the decisions of the local courts as to its unlawfulness) that
a particular decision is presumptively arbitrary, it may well then be incumbent upon the
respondent State to rebut the prima facie showing of arbitrariness. But the burden of proof
remains; it is for a claimant to prove its case, including whether a decision complained of was
arbitrary.!7””

As to the second limb of the prohibition contained in Article 2(2) of the BIT, which prohibits
impairment by discriminatory measures, the Tribunal accepts the test enunciated by the Saluka
Tribunal, namely that:

State conduct is discriminatory, if (i) similar cases are (ii) treated differently
(iii) and without reasonable justification.'"*

15 Elettronica Sicula S.p.A. (ELSI), ICJ Reports 1989, p. 15, at p. 76 (para. 128).

176 Memorial, paras. 523-524.

"7 The authors of the academic commentary relied upon by the Claimants were not suggesting that there exists a
formal reversal of the burden of proof, but rather were making precisely the point that once strong evidence as to the
arbitrariness of a particular decision is adduced by a claimant, it falls de facto to the respondent State to rebut the
allegation.

178 Saluka Investments B.V. v. The Czech Republic (UNCITRAL), Partial Award of 17 March 2006, para. 313.

319

4.826

4.827

4.828

4.829

4.830

The Claimants’ Allegations of Breach

On the question of arbitrariness, although the Claimants assert that the decisions complained
about were prima facie arbitrary, they failed to put forward any coherent grounds as to why
this was the case. The Memorial simply asserted their arbitrariness and submitted that the
Respondent “has never explained why its authorities acted contrary to the law persistently”.!””°

The Tribunal refers to its discussion of the Claimants’ claims of breach of the standard of fair
and equitable treatment and is of the view that (although the converse is not always the case)
any decision that is arbitrary would necessarily breach the fair and equitable treatment
standard. That being so, it is not necessary for the Tribunal to review once again the individual
decisions of which complaint was made by the Claimants. It is sufficient for it to recall that,
as set out above in its consideration of fair and equitable treatment, on their face the majority
of the relevant decisions constituted reasonable applications of the applicable Czech law, even
if some of them contained legal errors.

However, the Third Stay adopted by Mr of MAL calls for special comment. The
decisions constituting the Third Stay were adopted on 9 and 10 July 2008. At that time, the
Ministry had already adopted the First Ministry Decision on 28 February 2008, which would
have affected the validity of the Planning Permit. Although that decision had never taken effect
and had subsequently in turn been overturned by the First Minister Decision adopted on
27 June 2008, nevertheless the Minister had remanded the case to the Ministry for further
decision. There was no dispute between the Parties or their legal experts that the Third Stay
was unlawful as a matter of Czech law, given that the pendency of the Extraordinary Review
Proceedings did not constitute a valid ground for suspension of the Building Permit
proceedings, and that that had been confirmed by the Ministry’s letter of 31 July 2008.

In those circumstances, although it is not disputed that the Third Stay was unlawful, the
Tribunal is of the view that it cannot be characterized as arbitrary. In the Tribunal’s view, it is
understandable that Mr , faced with the prospect that the decision of the Ministry upon
remand in the Extraordinary Review Proceedings might once again affect the validity of the
underlying Planning Permit, which would inevitably have rendered the Building Permit
proceedings moot, should have taken the view that it was better to stay the Building Permit
proceedings until the question was resolved. His evidence was that, at the time, he thought
that what he had done was lawful.'78° Although that was based on a misunderstanding of what
Czech law required in such circumstances (as Mr freely accepted at the hearing), the
Tribunal cannot but have some sympathy with the situation in which he found himself, and
cannot therefore characterize the decision he took as arbitrary.

Further, although the Second Minister Decision was adopted after the critical date on which the
Claimants assert that the decision was taken to abandon the Galerie project, brief comment is
also required on it, as the Claimants rely upon the different result reached as evidence that the
First Minister Decision had been arbitrary.

19 Memorial, para. 536.
180 T6/34:1-8,

320

4.831

4.832

4.833

4.834

4.835

4.836

4.837

4.838

The Tribunal cannot accept this submission. It has already noted that remand to the Ministry
was an option that was open to the Minister under Czech law; moreover, given both that the
assessment of the relative weight of rights acquired in good faith required a detailed factual
investigation and that a remand had been the outcome originally requested by the Claimants,
the Tribunal can find nothing inherently unreasonable in the Minister’s decision in favour of so
remanding the question. Moreover, the fact that the Minister in the Second Minister Decision
chose to terminate the proceedings does not demonstrate that his first decision was wrong; by
the time that Decision was taken the Ministry (in the Second Ministry Decision) had again
purported to invalidate the planning permit, and evidence was available as to the rights
acquired in good faith by Tschechien 7. In these circumstances, the Tribunal finds the Second
Minister Decision entirely understandable.

As to the Claimants’ claims of discriminatory treatment by comparison with the Forum project,
the Tribunal must begin by considering whether the two projects were sufficiently similar as to
require identical treatment.

The evidence of Mr was that the scale of the works involved in the two projects was
markedly different, and in particular, that the Galerie project was far more extensive, in
particular insofar as it involved major modifications to the external roads.'”"! From having
visited the site, and having had indicated to it the extent of the road modifications that the
Multi project involved, and that the Galerie project would have necessitated, the Tribunal is of
the view that there were material differences in the scale of the two projects.

Although the Claimants relied on the fact that the Galerie project required six separate
planning permits, whilst the Forum project had required only two, the Tribunal concludes that
that difference was at least in part attributable to the differing scopes of the two projects; both
building projects required only one building permit for the construction of the main building,
whereas four of the total of six building permits required for the Galerie project related to the
external road works, with the final permit relating to Galerie’s internal roads.

The Tribunal cannot moreover ignore the fact that, on the evidence before it, the splitting of
the permits was not imposed upon the Claimants, but was the result of negotiation and
agreement between the Claimants, the City of ° and MAL, apparently with a view to
minimizing the risk of appeals by Multi.

The Tribunal further sees nothing in the Claimants’ complaints of discriminatory treatment in
respect of the various appeals in the planning and building permit proceedings.

The Tribunal is satisfied that the principal cause of delay in the planning permit proceedings
and the Extraordinary Review Proceedings was the appeals filed by Multi, whereas Multi faced
only minor appeals in its own permitting proceedings. Once the appeal procedures were
instituted, they had to run their natural course. The Tribunal has already found that the actions
of Multi in that regard do not engage the legal responsibility of the Respondent.

As for the delays in the Building Permit Proceedings, the Tribunal sees no basis on which they
can properly be characterized as discriminatory. The First Stay was the result of the

"78! [6:48/21 — 49:5.

321

4.839

4.840

4.841

4.842

4.843

4.844

Claimants not having filed complete documentation, and, as the Claimant eventually accepted,
was relatively routine. The Second Stay was imposed principally as the result of the
uncertainties resulting from the overlap issue, and it goes without saying that, as Multi’s
building permit proceedings came first, they did not face similar problems. Finally, as to the
Third Stay, the Tribunal refers to its findings above, which provide no basis on which to
conclude that the misunderstanding by Mr of the relevant law was the disingenuous
result of any discrimination against the Respondent in favour of Multi.

The Tribunal therefore rejects the Claimants’ claims of breach of the prohibition of impairment
by arbitrary or discriminatory measures contained in Article 2(2) of the BIT.

The Claimants’ Allegations of Corruption

Having concluded that the various decisions adopted in the course of the proceedings do not,
on their face, disclose any violation of the various standards of protection invoked by the
Claimants, the Tribunal must now consider whether a different conclusion is warranted on the
basis of the Claimants’ allegations that those decisions were in fact procured by corruption.

The Claimants’ Position

No complaint of corruption was advanced in the Statement of Claim or the Memorial, although
as noted above, the Memorial made reference to general information drawn from NGO reports
as to the existence of corruption as well as noting the allegations against Minister in an
unrelated case and suggesting that it was a “striking coincidence” that in that case, the Minister
was accused of taking bribes from a real estate developer and in the present case, he is
primarily responsible for the failure of one real estate developer’s project to the advantage of
another real estate developer.!”*”

However, Part 2 of the Claimants’ Reply contains a section entitled, “Multi: A Case of
Corruption”, which argues that Multi had a “vital interest that its shopping centre would open
first and that GALERIE would open later, or preferably not open at all.” It contends
that Multi “therefore exercised undue influence on Mr to obstruct the permit
proceedings for GALERIE and instead to simplify matters in the Building Permit
Proceedings for [Multi’s project] FORUM.” It argues further that “Multi used its construction
firm which had an exceptionally good relationship to the mayor Mr i to influence
the local authorities.” 1

At the September hearing, the allegations of corruption formed a major component of the
Claimants’ case, and by the Prague hearing, they formed the lens through which the Claimants
submitted that all of their complaints were to be viewed.

The Claimants do not adduce any specific evidence of corruption. Their allegations of
corruption are inextricably bound up with their challenge to the merits of the decisions by
various officials of the Czech Republic which they challenge. At the oral hearings, it was

182 Above, paragraph 4.121 and Memorial, para. 286.
8 Reply, paras, 29-30.

322

repeatedly contended that those decisions were “bogus”,!” the implication being that no
official acting reasonably and lawfully would have arrived at these decisions. Therefore, the
Claimants assert, it is the combined weight of these unreasonable and unlawful decisions,
taken together with what they say is general evidence of corruption i in the Czech Republic,

. should lead the
Tribunal to the inference that corruption motivated the decisions impugned in this Arbitration.

4.845 After asserting their belief that Multi unduly influenced various officials at different levels of
the Czech Government so as to prejudice the Galerie project, the Claimants’ Reply observed:

Claimants admit that they do not have direct proof of Multi paying the
officials. However, this is not necessary. During the preparation of this
Reply, Claimants found numerous serious indices that leave no other option
but to conclude that a corruption scheme exists. The following summarizes
the various irregularities that have occurred in this case and that point to
the aforementioned scheme...

4.846 The Reply then sets out the evidence which the Claimants contend supports this allegation. It
begins by directing the Tribunal to general evidence of corruption in the Czech Republic. A
report prepared by Transparency International is cited in support of the proposition that the
Respondent suffers from systemic corruption.'° Ministerial resignations from the Czech
Government for improper acts are noted (the Minister of Environment and the Minister of
Transportation have both resigned since December 2010), as is the apparent suicide of an
officer of the anti-corruption police in Prague.'”” It is also noted that Mr _— , the then-
Minister who took two of the decisions that are challenged in this proceeding, was forced to
step down from office temporarily owing to allegations of improper conduct.!”8*

4.847 With regard to the City of . the Reply asserts that the Czech chapter of Transparency
International (“TIC”) has called a city “run by the building lobby”, because of close
connections between municipal politicians and local construction companies.'? The Reply
contends in particular that the ~ 1, which constructed Multi’s Forum :
complex, was Mayor former employer. is said to be highly influential in the
City’s developmental circles,!7° and, indeed, it was . . — that arranged ECE’s first meeting
with Mayor _ in 2005 and ECE’s Mr considered hiring because of its

184 See e.g. T1/103:24 — 104: 7: “The acts of this administration are so obviously unlawful, are so egregious and so
damaging that I can get there without having to prove corruption, but we cannot avoid the circumstances in which these
decisions were made at local and ministerial level. The decisions are perverse, they are unlawful, they are irrational,
they are legally incoherent. The suspensions are bogus in the second and third cases, and admittedly unlawful in the
third. They have catastrophic effects...”

1785 Reply, para. 40.

1786 Reply, paras. 41-43.

1787 Reply, para. 43,

1788 Reply, paras, 109-114. He returned to office in April 2008.

1789 Reply, para. 45. In fact, reference to Core 2/45 (Exhibit C-109), the Transparency International Czech Republic

report, shows that the report quotes an interview with then-Deputy Mayor of , in an October
2003 article in Reflex magazine in which she is quoted as saying that “... the volume of public contracts that gets
(is) the basis of the fact that * has the reputation of a city run by the building lobby.”

1799 Reply, paras, 44-50: “One of the construction companies most involved in corruption schemes is the company
which, coincidentally, was also the general contract for Multi's project FORUM”: Reply, para. 7.

323

 

 

perceived influence with City officials.'”"" The Reply asserts “that is well-known for
corruption, in particular corruption by construction companies”!”” and lists various contracts
that the ~ was said to have received as a result of its “corrupt entanglement” with
then-Mayor 193

4.848 This general evidence in support of the close relationships and allegedly corrupt acts in relation
to other building projects was supplemented by more specific evidence on the various permit
proceedings relating to the Galerie project, which came principally from the testimony
of Ms . Ms , a Czech lawyer in private practice at the time and
now an employee of ECE Praha, was one of the external legal counsel who advised
Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha on various issues relating to the permit proceedings and acted on
their behalf in filing motions and appeals. Her two witness statements attest to events in
which she participated, criticize various decisions taken at the municipal level and by the
Ministry and Minister of Regional Development, and recount statements made to her by
various Czech officials or recounted to her by Mr . Mr’ a partner in the
company SIAL, was the chief designer of the Galerie ~ project documentation and was
responsible for procuring the relevant permits for Tschechien 7, EKZ Prag 1 and the City of

4.849 For example, in her second witness statement, Ms testified that Mr told her that
between the First and Second Stays of the building permit proceedings, employees of MAL
had informed him that they had been instructed to find ways to obstruct the permit proceedings
forGALERIE  :and in particular, to find grounds for suspending the proceedings.!”*

4.850 Three officials in particular are singled out in the Claimants’ corruption case:

: at the time of the events giving rise to the claim:
Mr is alleged to have : a particularly close relationship to the principal of Mr
who was apparently best man at Mr . wedding.’ Mr was also a
former manager of and said to have been on the Company's Board of Directors.!”° Thus,
according to the Claimants, “through , there was a strong connection between
and Multi.”"”” In addition to identifying certain allegedly improper transactions
involving the company which occurred while Mr the Claimants
noted that he had recently been named in an investigation launched by the Czech anti-
corruption agency to inquire into the acts of certain municipal officials in relation to the letting
of contracts for the construction of works whens

1791 [4/82:14 -83:7.
1? Reply, para. 7.
17°? Reply, paras. 48-50.

i796 second witness statement, para. 61. Annexes 5 and 6 to Ms 1's statement contain translations of
contemporaneous notes of these conversations, recording Mr as saying * that a MAL employee “received an order
to find reason for suspension: ‘Mr. $ not the only one in the city hall’

15 Reply, para. 50.
16 Toid., para. 7.
197 Thid., para. 7.
1798 T5/88 et seq.

324

4.851

4.852

4 L « As noted above, it is contended
that due to Multi’s realisation that it could not compete with Galerie , it “therefore
exercised undue influence on Mr to obstruct the permit proceedings for GALERIE

and instead to simplify matters in the Building Permit Proceedings for FORUM.”"7?
The Tribunal is invited to analyse certain of the decisions adopted by MAL and to find that
they were tainted by corruption. Ms ‘s evidence is cited in support of this allegation.

- the Minister of Regional Development at the relevant time: The allegations of
corruption pertain not to the performance of his office as minister, but rather to a real estate
transaction in Vsetin. In this regard, it was noted that it was alleged in the Czech Republic that
when Mr was the Mayor of Vsetin, he took a bribe of 500,000 CZK from the H&B Real
Company relating to the sale of the majority share of the municipal housing company.'*”
From November 2007 until April 2008 Mr ~ stepped down from his positions in the
Czech government as result of allegations made by a Czech television station. He
subsequently returned to government and took the First and Second Minister decisions in the
Extraordinary Review Proceedings. Ms ‘s evidence as to alleged irregularities in the
acts of the Ministry and of the Minister himself is also cited in support of this allegation.

Allegations are also made against the unnamed official who took Tschechien 7’s Planning
Permit down from the public notice board prematurely'™”’ as well as unnamed officials within
the Ministry of Regional Development.’ Insofar as the Ministry of Regional Development
is concerned, it is not contended that the Ministry as a whole is implicated, but rather that
““ndividuals involved in the Extraordinary Review Proceedings” obstructed the Claimants.!°°>
As in the case of Mr . the allegation is that there must have been corruption at the
Ministry because Multi was the only party that benefited from certain decisions taken by the
Ministry.

On this basis the Reply asserts with respect to the corruption allegations:

Claimants submit that the following are the relevant issues to be decided:

¢ There was a corruption scheme involving Multi and individuals
within the authorities. Multi and its construction company
unduly influenced representatives of the City of and of MAL
as well as the Minister of Regional Development.

e As part of the corruption scheme, these individuals illegally
obstructed Claimants. Claimants were subjected to numerous non-
standard and unjustified delays in the Extraordinary Preview
Proceedings and in the Main Building Proceedings.

178 Reply, para. 30.

8 Reply, para. 110.

1801 71 /55:17 — 56:18 and T10/17:7-10" “...the only logical explanation that you can find for taking it down half a day
early is that it was a corrupt act, and it benefited Multi to do that.”

1802 Reply, para. 37.

1803 Thid.

325

 

4.853

4.854

4.855

4.856

© As part of the corruption scheme, these individuals also illegally
favoured Multi, in particular by applying an easier, but legally
inapplicable, type of proceeding and by illegally requiring only one
application for Multi's Building Permit.'*™*

It was further contended that the irregularities in the permit proceedings “were not a mere pear]
chain of coincidences, but the expression of a deliberate attempt to favour Multi over
Claimants” and when viewed against this background, “most other issues discussed in this
arbitration become irrelevant.”"®°° The Claimants point to differences in the treatment of their
permit applications and those of Multi and consider that this is “the most obvious indicator that
corruption is involved.”

There is a question as to whether the Claimants’ case was that the identified and unidentified
officials acted in concert. For example, Claimants made a point of excluding from their
accusations .Mr .and other
officials in the Czech administration who “did not participate in the corruption scheme of
Multi, Mr. Mr. and Mr. 71807 Although the suggestion of a “scheme”
involving different actors seemed to imply that it was being alleged that various officials in
different offices and at different levels of the State acted in concert with Multi, at the hearing
counsel for the Claimants took the position that it was not necessary for the Claimants to show
that the officials acted in concert in order to make out the claim,'®*

As noted above, Ms s testimony is of relevance to both the alleged breaches of the
BIT and to the corruption allegations. Her two witness statements submitted that: (i) incorrect
decisions were deliberately made by the authorities; (ii) the Extraordinary Review
Proceedings, as well as the Building Permit proceedings were delayed for improper reasons;
and (iii) incorrect and irregular procedures were followed by the Czech authorities in relation
to the various measures taken, or not taken, as the case may be.

With respect to the splitting of the Building Permit proceedings in February/March 2008
(where the parties disagree as to who pressed for this to happen), Ms *s written
evidence was that told her and her ECE colleagues that Mr
wanted the building permit process to be split; she argued against that approach, but

* informed her that he could not-do anything and that this was what Mr
wanted.'®? On her account, she subsequently telephoned Mr _—< but he shouted at her that
he would refuse the application if it was not split. She was herself against splitting the
applications because it did not make sense to her and she “did not trust Mr to keep his
word”!®!9 (although she did not say why). However, after discussion with ECE Mr

1804 Reply, para. 26.
1805 Reply, para. 27.
96 Reply, para. 117.
1807 Reply, para. 36.
1805 710/33:10-13.

1809
1810;

i second witness statement, paras. 38-39.
‘second witness statement, para. 41.

326

4.857

4.858

4.859

1811

prevailed and the applications were split. Her view was that the splitting of the individual
building permit process worked only to ECE’s disadvantage. "*"?

The Reply also contended that the “Claimants know from a conversation with two employees
of MAL that the employees were instructed to find pretexts for delaying the proceedings and in

particular to find reasons for suspensions.”’*? Ms testified that she was told by
Mr of SIAL, that two employees of MAL informed him that they had been instructed “to
find ways to obstruct the permit proceedings for GALERIE” 2”, and in particular that

“they were advised to find grounds for suspending the proceedings.”’*!>
With respect to the First Ministry Decision in the Extraordinary Review Proceeding,
Ms, testified that Ms told her that after that decision, (which
had held that Tschechien 7 was not a participant), Ms s had gone to see
. for a meeting at which Mrs ;
was present. Ms

recounted that Mrs ” was reported by Ms «to have been “aware of the
incorrectness of deciding that Tschechien7 is not a party to the [Extraordinary Review]
proceedings.”!®!* Ms i testified that this “greatly disturbed” her and to her “it seemed
as if Mrs and/or. had made the decision according to the instructions

of someone, but not according to the law.”"*'5 She did not elaborate on how she drew this
inference from the comment made to her by Ms

As for Minister decision not to follow the Advisory Committee’s recommendation
adopted on 22 April 2008, which had expressed the view that Multi’s objections to the
Planning Permit granted in favour of Tschechien7 “should be irreversibly refused”,’*!®
Ms testified that before the First Minister Decision, Ms ry

/, had informed her that according to her experience, the Ministry had never “before
differed from the Advisory Committee’s recommendation. She said further that she received
an e-mail which indicated that the Minister's decision on the challenge to the First Ministry
Decision had already been prepared in line with the Advisory Committee’s resolution of 20
May 2008 and that it was to be signed by the Minister. This of course did not occur and
Ms; noted that Ms was later transferred

(the implication apparently. being that she had been demoted for having
communicated with a representative of Tschechien 7.8" In the event, (as already indicated
above) the First Minister Decision differed from that recommended by the Advisory
Committee, which counsel for the Claimants characterized as highly irregular, '*!*

second witness statement, para. 46.

18!2 Reply, para, 9.
y13 Reply, paras. 57-61. second witness statement, paras. 61-63.

1815

{ second witness statement, para. 13.
second witness statement, para. 14.

1816 . second witness statement, para. 15.
i817) second witness statement, paras. 16-17. The Reply discussed this under the heading “Displacement of
188 -[10/21:2-5.

+ 327

4.860

4.861

4.862

4.863

4.865

Finally, in her second witness statement Ms .. hoted, with respect to the events
occurring within the Ministry, that after discussing various issues with Mr 1, it was
agreed that he would make a written witness statement for use in the arbitration proceedings.
She testified that she summarised the contents of their conversation and sent the summary as
the basis for a draft statement to Mr _ . one day after their meeting.’®”’ However,
Mr declined to prepare a witness statement along those lines. In the event, the
Claimants filed the draft of the matters to which Ms had expected Mr _ 1 to
attest.'°?

The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent objects to the corruption allegation on procedural grounds and rejects it as to
its merits. It characterizes the allegation as a new and belated theory in the Claimants’ case
and in the Rejoinder objected that the “change of claim” was a violation of Procedural Order
No. 1, Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, and basic notions of due process,'®>

With respect to the filing by the Claimants of the unsigned witness statement of Mr «
the-Respondent likewise.raised-both dural..and-sub ‘ive. objections;...it argued that
submitting an unsigned witness statement to be filed in the proceeding violated Article 25 of
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules and argued further that the reason why Mr «refused
to sign it was because it was untrue,'®* In this regard, the Respondent directed the Tribunal's
attention to Mr _ s signed witness statement filed with its Rejoinder in which
Mr -Mmakes precisely that point.

 

The Respondent also objected to the ex parte circumstances in which Mr was
interviewed by Ms } ind the Claimants’ failure to advise the Respondent that he and
another employee of the Ministry were being approached with a view to obtaining statements
from them for use in the present proceedings. **

On the merits of the corruption claim, in its Rejoinder the Respondent noted the absence of any
prior criminal complaint of corruption made to the relevant authorities in the Czech Republic

second witness statement, para. 21.
. second witness statement, para. 22.
second witness statement, paras. 33-35.

1822 Exhibit C122.

1823 Rejoinder, paras. 5-7.
1824 Rejoinder, para. 8.
185 Rejoinder, para. 11.

328

4.866

4.867

4.868

4.869

prior to the matter being raised in the Reply.'®® The Respondent asserts that the complaint is
entirely unsupported by the evidence and it takes issue with the use of newspaper clippings and
general studies of alleged corruption in the Czech Republic that have nothing to do with this
case.'®? Jt submitted with the Rejoinder witness statements by the individuals who are
specifically alleged to have engaged in corruption, 28

The Respondent stressed that the Claimants admitted that they had no evidence of Multi
paying bribes to government officials.’ In their written testimony, Messrs :
and each expressly denied the allegations of bribe-taking.'° When, at the hearing, the
allegations were put directly to Messrs : and , they repeated their denials,"

The Respondent also summarized in tabular form the various allegations with summaries of the
evidence said to support them and submitted that, with the exception of one paragraph of the
second witness statement of Ms there is no evidence which supports these

allegations. '**?

The Tribunal’s Findings
i. he Treatment of Mr Witness Statements

As noted above, the Tribunal was informed, prior to the hearing in London that Mr' _; had
decided that he would not attend to be examined on the contents of his two witness statements.
At the hearing, the reason provided by Counsel for the Claimants was that his business partners
feared that testifying against the Czech Republic would damage their firm’s professional
dealings with Czech authorities. °°

As also noted above, the Parties initially disagreed as to how the Tribunal should treat Mr
written statements in view of his non-attendance. The issue was one of some
considerable significance because in, addition to the content of his statements, which the
Respondent was now to be denied the chance to challenge in cross-examination, Ms
had testified as to statements attributed to certain officials that she said Mr had passed on
to her. '8*4 Thus, the crucial intermediary between the Claimants and the local building
authorities, on whose statements Ms irelied, would not be available to testify as to the
events in which he participated directly.

1826 Rejoinder, para. 19.
1827 Rejoinder, para. 21.
1828 Rejoinder, para. 22.
1829 Rejoinder, paras. 4 and 21.

1830 Rejoinder witness statements of Messrs. ” ; sand! (at paras, 2-3, 2-3, and 20, respectively).
3831 For TS5/115:3-9 and for (6/52:22-25. The allegation of corruption by Multi was not put to

Mr

1832 Rejoinder, para. 4.

183 T1/14:10-23.

1834 Ms. also testified in her second witness statement that Mr was not prepared to put the information
concerning his conversations with MAL officials into his witness statement because he feared disadvantages for his
future cooperation with the authorities in » given that he depended on a good relationship with the local
authorities for future projects. ( second witness statement, para. 63).

329

4.870 However as detailed above, after hearing the submissions of both parties, the Tribunal decided

that, consistent with Procedural Order No. 1, Mr statements should be struck from the
record.'**5 Accordingly, this Award makes no reference to the contents of either of his
statements.

ii, General Comments

4.871 The Tribunal accepts the submission of the Claimants that it is bound to consider allegations of
corruption. International tribunals cannot turn a blind eye to corruption and cannot decline to
investigate the matter simply because of the difficulties of proof.'**°

4.872 Corruption is a serious matter and when it is alleged, a tribunal must weigh the evidence with
care, both to see whether the allegation is made out (and if it is, to then determine the legal
consequences that follow) and at the same time to safeguard those against whom corruption is
alleged, if the allegations turn out to be unproven.

4.873 The burden of proof is undoubtedly on the party alleging corruption.’®” As for the standard of
proof that should be applied, different views have been expressed by tribunals, with some
holding that a stricter standard of proof is required’***, while others have found that the
seriousness of the allegation does not necessarily mean that the tribunal must apply a
heightened standard of proof.’ Irrespective of the standard of proof adopted by the Tribunal,
it must examine with care the facts alleged to prove corruption.

4.874 No direct evidence has been submitted to the Tribunal of any bribe either being offered by or
on behalf of Multi or being accepted by any Czech official at any level. Nor has any evidence
been submitted to sustain the allegation that the local construction company that is said
to enjoy particularly close links with local politicians and was constructing the Forum

1855 [9/126:10-127: 5.

1836 Counsel for the Claimants argued in his opening: “You also have your international law obligations. Tribunals, if I
may say so, with great respect, have to address this ‘problem. Tt is part and parcel of what’ "s going on internationally: the
OECD Convention, the other Model it on for are imposing
obligations on host states to combat corruption and take measures to deal with it.” T1/103:8-, i

187 Wena Hotels Ltd. Arab Republic of Egypt (CSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Award of 8 December 2000, paras. 77, 117.
See also EDF (Services) Limited v. Romania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/13, Award of 8 October 2009, para. 221.

1838 Judge Higgins made the general point in her Separate Opinion in Oil Platforms, that “the graver the charge, the
more confidence there must be in the evidence relied on.” (Separate Opinion of Judge Higgins in Oil Platforms (Iran v.
United States of America), ICJ Reports 2003, p. 225, at p. 234 (para. 33)). In the context of an allegation of corruption
in an investment treaty claim, the tribunal in EDF v. Romania, held that: “...corruption must be proven and is
notoriously difficult to prove since, typically, there is little or no physical evidence. The seriousness of the accusation of
corruption in the present case, considering that it involves officials at the highest level of the Romanian Government at
the time, demands clear and convincing evidence. There is general consensus among international tribunals and
commentators regarding the need for a high standard of proof of corruption”; EDF (Services) Limited v. Romania
(CSID Case No. ARB/05/13), Award of 8 October 2009, para. 221 (Footnotes omitted).

189 Th the course of considering allegations of fraud against the claimant, the tribunal in Libananco v. Turkey, accepted
that while fraud is a serious allegation, “it does not consider that this (without more) requires it to apply a heightened
standard of proof. While agreeing with the general proposition that ‘the graver the charge, the more confidence there
must be in the evidence relied on’ ... this does not necessarily entail a higher standard of proof. It may simply require
more persuasive evidence, in the case of a fact that is inherently improbable, in order for the Tribunal to be satisfied that
the burden of proof has been discharged”: Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey (ICSID Case No.
ARB/06/8), Award of 2 September 2011, para. 125.

 

 

 

330

shopping centre, in any way used its connections to induce officials to delay or thwart the
Claimants’ investment.

4.875 Nevertheless, the Reply contends that “significant ... circumstantial evidence points to a
corruptive scheme whereby Respondent intentionally obstructed GALERIE to enable
the competitor Multi to succeed...” '“° The Reply makes the point that it “is usually
impossible for the investor to gather anything more than circumstantial evidence, as is the case
here” and requests the Tribunal “to consider these difficulties when assessing the
evidence.”!**!

4.876 When considering the Claimants’ evidence the Tribunal has borne in mind the difficulties of
obtaining evidence of corruption. It is well aware that acts of corruption are rarely admitted or
documented and that tribunals have discussed the need to “connect the dots”.'™"? At the same
time, the allegations that have been made are very serious indeed. Not only would they (if
true) involve criminal liability on the part of a number of named individuals, they also
implicate the reputation, commercial and legal interests of various business undertakings
which are not party to these proceedings and which are not represented before the Tribunal.
Corruption is a charge which an arbitral tribunal must take seriously. At the same time, it is a
charge that should not be made lightly, and the Tribunal is bound to express its reservations as
to whether it is acceptable for charges of that level of seriousness to be advanced without
without either some direct evidence or compelling circumstantial evidence. That said, the
Tribunal must of course decide the case on the basis of the evidence before it. If the burden of
proof is not discharged, the allegation is not made out. The mere existence of suspicions
cannot, in the absence of sufficiently firm corroborative evidence, be equated with proof.

4.877 One of the main predicates of the Claimants’ corruption case is the allegedly ‘bogus’ measures
that the Claimants contend frustrated their investment.'*? The alleged unreasonableness
and/or unlawfulness of the decisions of MAL, the Ministry of Regional Development and the
Minister of Regional Development have been addressed by the Tribunal above, in its
consideration of each measure complained of, and the Tribunal has no need to revert to the
matter, All that needs to be said is that the predicate of a course of bogus measures has not

1840 Reply, paras. 1, 27.

1841 Reply, para. 451.

1842 Th this respect, the Tribunal notes the observation made by the tribunal in Methanex Corporation v. United States of
America, a claim under NAFTA Chapter Eleven and the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, where in somewhat similar
circumstances the claimant sought to prove that the State of California’s true motivation in enacting certain measures
‘was not its stated motivation: “Connecting the dots is hardly a unique methodology; but when it is applied, it is critical,
first, that al/ the relevant dots be assembled; and, second, that each be examined, in its own context, for its own
significance, before a possible pattern is essayed. Plainly, a self-serving selection of events and a self-serving
interpretation of each of those selected, may produce an account approximating verisimilitude, but it will not reflect
what actually happened...”: Methanex Corporation v. United States of America (UNCITRAL), Final Award on
Jurisdiction and Merits of 3 August 2005, Part II - Chapter B, Mr Gray Davis, ADM, and the US System of Political
Contributions, para. 3.

1883 T1/104:21-105: 6: “Now proving corruption, the hand in the till, the money in the briefcase, the transfer to a bank
account, is never easy. It’s never easy even for a government. But you have enough grounds to believe that there was a
real risk of corruption, simply by looking at what happens in and what happened with this minister. No doubt
about it. You have enough grounds in my submission to say, if you want to, that when you look at these perverse,
irrational and unlawful decisions, there is another explanation, and the other explanation is, as the Americans would
say, the fix is in”.

 

331

4,878

4.879

4.880

4.881

been made out by the Claimants, and has been rejected by the Tribunal. It remains however
the case that, even if a measure and the stated reasons therefore, is not ‘bogus’, it is still
possible that the decision was made corruptly. A decision which on its face appears to be
properly motivated or reasoned, could nevertheless have been made under improper influence
or for an improper purpose.

In the Tribunal’s opinion, the Claimants’ entire case on corruption encounters serious
difficulty.

The Tribunal must begin by stating that it finds to be deeply unattractive an argument to the
effect that ‘everyone knows that the Czech Republic is corrupt; therefore, there was corruption
in this case...’._ The Tribunal acknowledges that some effort was made to adduce specific
evidence of corruption, but it did feel that there was a strain of the ‘everyone knows’ argument
in the overall case, for example in the reliance on reports of NGOs as to the general presence
of corruption within the Czech Republic. The Tribunal does not close its eyes to the fact that
the Czech Republic, like other countries, has had, and reportedly still has, problems with
corruption. But the Tribunal remains vigilant against blanket condemnatory allegations which
can have the appearance of an attempt to ‘poison the well’ in the hopes of making up for a lack
of direct proof. Reference to other instances of alleged corruption may prove that corruption
exists in the State, but it does little to advance the argument that corruption existed in the
specific events giving rise to the claim. Nor do allegations of this kind, however seriously
advanced, give rise to a burden on the Respondent to ‘disprove’ the existence of corruption.
While the present Tribunal is therefore willing to “connect the dots”, if that is appropriate, the
dots have to exist and they must be substantiated by relevant and probative evidence relating to
the specific allegations made in the case before it.

Second, the Tribunal notes, as the Respondent has done, that there was no mention of
corruption in the Statement of Claim. When the Memorial was filed, it contained only
evidence of a general nature as to the existence of corruption as a problem within the Czech
Republic, coupled with press reports of (unconnected) allegations against Mr and
thetorical questions as to the motivations underlying the adoption of certain decisions taken by
the relevant authorities. Indeed, even the less far-reaching allegations simply of discrimination
against ECE and in favour of Multi were hardly adverted to in the Notice of Arbitration and
Statement of Claim and emerged clearly only in the Claimants’ last written pleading.

Third, there is no evid of any Du: aint of suspected corruption having
been made by Tschechien 7, ECE Praha o or ECE to any Czech authority during the relevant
period. Around the time of the first letters to Messrs and Mr «held a
press conference in which ECE threatened to bring an investment treaty claim.'*“ Yet, neither
Mr letters to Prime Minister _ nor Mr *s letter to Minister
adverted to any allegation of corruption. Had ECE felt itself to be the victim of corruption
however, it would have been advisable to express its suspicions to the relevant authorities with

184 T7113: 25 — 118: 21. Mr < testified that: “Since the minister was not willing to receive me, we had to take a
certain step, we called a press conference, and at this press conference I called for a swift legal decision in this matter so
that we would know what our position was, to be able to make a qualified decision as to whether to continue or not in
this project”.

332

4.882

4.883

4.884

4.885

a request that they be investigated.’ If all that was held were mere suspicions, it may be
understandable that ECE decided that it would be indelicate or counter-productive to voice
them. But that would not explain their absence from the Statement of Claim.

Fourth, there is the issue of the alleged agent of corruption, Multi, which is accused of having
created the entire scheme. In every case of corruption, there is not only the corrupted; there
must also be a corruptor. Multi is a leading European developer and competitor of ECE.
Prominent international firms have been charged and found guilty of foreign corrupt practices,
so a company’s size and standing in its sector is no guarantee that its officers and employees
will comply with legal prohibitions against corrupting foreign officials. However, when
allegations of this seriousness are made against a leading company or against a government,
there has to be a factual basis for them.

Admitting that they have no evidence that Multi engaged in improper acts of this nature, the
Claimants put their case on the following basis: (i) the governmental decisions being
challenged in this arbitration lacked any rational basis; (ii) the only beneficiary of the various
acts complained of was Multi; (iii) the decisions therefore must have been committed at
Multi’s behest; (iv) it follows that Multi corrupted the various governmental actors to handle
the permit applications and Extraordinary Review Procedure as they did.

Multi is not a party to this arbitration. Relevant officers and employees involved with the
Forum project in’ have not been called upon to give evidence by either Party, and Multi
has not had the allegations put to it, nor had an opportunity to respond. Although the
Claimants adduced general evidence of proven or suspected corruption in the Czech Republic
and :, they did not adduce any evidence of any prior or subsequent acts of corruption by
Multi in the Czech Republic or in any other country.

Even had such evidence been offered, it would have required careful evaluation. Although a
company may have been convicted of criminal offences in other contexts, it does not follow
that it has engaged in criminal or improper activity in the events giving rise to the claim. For
example, in Methanex Corporation v. United States of America, the tribunal rejected a
claimant’s attempt to assert that a third party company’s unlawful activity in another context
provided a basis for inferring that it had engaged in criminal or illegal activity with respect to
the enactment by the government of a particular measure that was injurious to the claimant’s
business interests. The Methanex tribunal held that:

The Tribunal has no legal basis for concluding that one unlawful activity of
a corporation which leads to a criminal conviction of some of its officers
transforms that entity into a criminal organisation for all purposes — either
tainting per se all other actions by any division, subsidiary or other vehicle,
no matter how separate or remote its activities from those upon which the
conviction was based; or creating a presumption of unlawful behaviour in
all other areas and thereby shifting the burden of proof.!*"*

1845 Such a request and the Respondent's response thereto would then form a fact in any subsequent international claim.
186 Methanex Corporation v. United States of America (UNCITRAL), Final Award on Jurisdiction and Merits of 3
August 2005, Final Award, Part II - Chapter B, para. 15.

333

 

 

 

4.886 The Tribunal has no doubt that Multi approached the market in a hard-headed fashion.
Mr: testified that Multi broke the “unspoken law” that developers do not interfere with
each other’s permitting processes and instead compete in the marketplace.'®” In fact, Multi
did quite the opposite, seeking to intervene in the permitting process, objecting to any change
in the traffic solution and launching the Extraordinary Review Procedure before the Ministry
of Regional Development. Multi plainly did not want Galerie ~ to succeed and it
appears to have done everything within its power to slow it down, including by emphasizing to
prospective tenants that it was ahead of ECE and would remain so and therefore they should
sign leases with its project. All these actions were within Multi’s rights and raise no
presumption of competition by unlawful means.

4.887 | The Claimants relied on a remark attributed to a Multi representative by a significant potential
tenant, , for whose tenancy both developers were competing. Mr ,an
ECE employee responsible for leasing, testified in his second witness statement that:

8 When I reviewed the negotiating history, which I had summarized for Mr
after had made their decision ... a discussion with Mr é
during the negotiations was called to mind. As mentioned before, I met Mr
° to discuss the issue. We also spoke
about the state of the permit proceeding and Multi. Mr 1 told me that
Multi (General Manager H. Dasbach) had notified him that would not
have to consider ECE in ~ because ECE was not going to obtain a
building permit. I cannot recall the exact wording. However, this was the
message conveyed by Multi. The object of competition turned up repeatedly
and in each negotiation due to the marketing of both properties in ~
9. Other tenants who had entered into negotiations with Multi were also
always perfectly informed about the status of the permit proceeding
regarding the GALERIE ” One example for that is New Yorker. I
would like to illustrate the facts and enclose an email that I received from
Mr on August 7, 2008, which was shortly before New Yorker
announced their refusal ... The email says that during the negotiations over
the extension of the preliminary lease agreement, New Yorker was also
negotiating with Multi and apparently fully informed about the details
regarding the status of our building permit proceeding. Again, the decisive
problem was, the email makes it clear, that we could not produce a
guarantee or evidence that we would be able to open the center, since the
building permit was still missing.”®

4.888 The Tribunal is unable to infer corruption from this account of what Multi was reportedly
telling and other would-be tenants in the competition between the two companies to
secure commitments from retailers to take spaces in their respective shopping centres. It is not
difficult to contemplate that Multi would have been contrasting its progress with Galerie

comparatively slow progress — slowed in terms of the pall cast over the Galerie
project by Multi’s own permitting objections to the Galerie project and its petition to
the Ministry to the E dinary Review Py di That is hard. d
‘87 12/79:20-25,
1848 Second witness statement of » paras. 8-9,

334

competition and the Tribunal does not doubt that Multi took the opportunity to emphasize its
competitive advantages at every turn. Moreover, as Mr «himself notes, he did not witness
the conversation between Mr and Mr , -and he did not recall the exact wording
of what Mr 3 told him Mr had said to Mr

iii__ Analysis of the Allegations in Detail

 

4,889 The Tribunal now turns to the allegations made against particular officials.

4.890 Although counsel for the Claimants submitted that they had no need to show a relationship
between the State actors that were alleged to have been corrupted, it warrants noting that other
than the structure prescribed by law as to the relationships between decision-makers, there was
no evidence of any relationship between any of the principal actors said to have acted
improperly to Multi’s benefit. In particular, the evidence shows that:

a. MAL, including its Building Office of which Mr ~ was the head, was separate
from the self-governing City of °

, and was not subject to its legal or other control.

b. Mr testified that he could not interfere with the decisions of the building
authority because the authority was independent of the Mayor’s office.'9 His
evidence in that regard was supported by that of the former deputy Mayor, Mr
a witness called by the Claimants. '*°°

c. The unnamed official who took the Planning Permit down half a day early was not in
Mr *s office, nor subject to his direction and control. Mr 's testimony in
response to a question from the President of the Tribunal was that after the error,
which he admitted was serious, was brought to his attention, he complained to the
Municipal Secretary and that steps were taken to prevent its reccurrence. '*5*

d. MAL was separated from the Ministry both in terms of the scope of their respective

istrative decisi king Ip! and by phy. The Ministry was
situated in Prague, not in . Further, in terms of hierarchy, RAL was interposed
between them, '**?

e. The Minister likewise was formally separated from the Ministry in terms of
administrative decision-making. The Advisory Committee was interposed between
Minister ‘cand the Ministry and there is no evidence that the Minister implicitly
or explicitly ordered his subordinates within the Ministry to render a particular
decision in the case of the First Ministry decision.'** Indeed, it appears that having

18 T5/109:20-23.

1850 -13/121:14 — 123:19.

1851 T6/59:10-18.

1852 RAL’s actions are not challenged by the Claimants and its only role in relation to the Extraordinary Review
Proceeding appears to be the transfer of the file under appeal.

'853 The evidence is that the Minister did discuss the appeal with Mrs } T6/131:1-9) but at that point the first
Ministry decision had already been issued. With respect to the Second Ministry Decision, there was no suggestion that

335

4.891

4.892

4.893

4.894

4.895

4.896

temporarily stepped down in November 2007, Mr did not in fact occupy the
office of Minister at the time that the First Ministry decision was taken (29 February
2008). On his evidence, he was reappointed to his position in April 2008/8 and
became seized of the appeal in May. '®°

Leaving aside the structure of the State’s decision-making apparatus, having reviewed the
evidence and the testimony, the Tribunal makes the following findings.

Mr.
Mr past employment relationship with and his friendship with Mr | ,
was not contested by Mr nor by the Respondent and can be taken to be common

ground. Without more, it is however in and of itself evidence only of a personal relationship,
not of corruption.

The Tribunal notes moreover whatever may be the case in relation to. __'s activities in
. in connection with developing facilities © ~ ~" hb
they do not relate to the Forum ; or Galerie projects. There is no dispute that
was Multi’s construction firm for the Forum project, but that too in and of itself is not
proof of an allegation that, through the intermediation of , Multi corrupted local officials.
Shortly before the hearing, it was announced that Mr eat

accused by the Czech anti-corruption police of abuse in relation to the
management of property. This was pursued by counsel for the Claimants during Mr
cross-examination.'*° The investigation raises questions, but the criminal process is in its
early stages and it is difficult for the Tribunal to make any assessment as to what it means in
terms of Mr s conduct as Mayor or his credibility as a witness in the proceeding.
Moreover, * *, it does not bear on the events at issue in this arbitration.
The Tribunal accordingly finds that this evidence is not decisive in sustaining the Claimants’
allegation against Mr

The Claimants are unable to point to specific evidence of any bribe or other favour said to have
been proffered to Mr by Multi or any agent thereof, including © It was contended
that the absence of such direct evidence is overcome by the evidence of Mr 's prior
employment relationship with and his friendship with the company’s principal which
enabled Multi to use “its construction firm ... to influence the local authorities.”"**” The
Tribunal does not share this view.

There are two glaring weaknesses with the allegation against Mr --. The first is that there
is nothing on the record that supports the view that he (or the City Council, for that matter), did
anything adverse to the interests of Tschechien7 or ECE Praha, and through them to the
Claimants. It was put to Mr ‘that he assured ECE’s representatives that ECE and Multi

 

he in any way ordered them to decide in a particular way other than consistently with the instructions set out in his
remand decision. This instruction was rendered within the applicable legal framework.

1854 T6/115:22-23.

1855 T6/1 16:11 — 117: 22.

1856 T5/88-92.

1857 Reply, para. 30.

336

4.897

4.898

4.899

4.900

4.901

would be treated fairly and equitably and he acknowledged that he informed the ECE
representatives that “we approach all investors in the same manner.”"** The Tribunal saw no
evidence that he did anything other than that.

Even more importantly, it is evident that the City could not and, on the Tribunal’s view of the
evidence before it, did not seek to interfere with the local offices of the State
administration.'*°° There is no evidentiary basis for a finding that the former Mayor acted
adversely to Tschechien 7’s interests, let alone that he was corrupted by Multi or any other
person.

Finally, even though the Reply had alleged that Mr was corrupted by Multi (through
), when it came to cross examining him, the allegation was not even put to him by
counsel for the Claimants. It was left to counsel for the Respondent to do so and the
allegation was met with a firm denial.®° Having regard to all of the evidence on record, Mr
s denial is accepted and the allegation of corruption against him is rejected for want of

proof.

Mr,

Likewise, there is no direct evidence of any bribe or other consideration being paid to to
Mr . The Claimants contend however that he must have acted at the behest of Multi
because Multi was the only party that benefited from certain decisions taken by the Building
Office within MAL.

As noted earlier, the corruption allegation against Mr :is bound up with the merits of the
complaints against certain decisions of the Building Office. However, the Tribunal observes at
the outset that some of MAL’s decisions were undoubtedly favourable to Tschechien 7. So for
example, MAL agreed to issue a Planning Permit that granted Tschechien 7 the right to remove
170,000 cubic metres of earth from the site so as to expedite the project’s construction pending
the issuance of the Building Permits. In the view of others, including both the Ministry and
the Minister, as well as the legal expert tendered by the Respondent, this was not in fact
permitted under the Old Building Code.'**' However that may be, the permission to excavate
was critical in allowing Tschechien7 to begin preparing the site for construction and in
retrospect, had it not been granted, the Claimants probably would not have proceeded with the
project at all because they could have had no real possibility of catching up with the Forum
project.

Mr *s office also ruled that Multi and others did not have standing to participate in the
Planning Permit proceedings, a decision which was upheld on appeal by RAL. The Claimants’
problems arose when Multi then referred RAL’s decision to the Ministry in the Extraordinary
Review Proceedings. Mr ~ , who testified that he had not previously encountered an

$858-15/104:18-23.

859 75/109:20-23, and 114:4 - 115: 2.

860 15/115:3-9.

186) The Respondent argues that this decision was incorrect; it was also one of the features of the Multi Extraordinary
Review proceedings that attracted the Minister’s attention.

337

4,902

4.903

Extraordinary Review proceeding'®”, was plainly influenced by the First Ministry decision
adopted on 22 February 2008 quashing the Planning Permit. Although it is common ground
that the Planning Permit remained in force and did not have legal effect due to the subsequent
appeal to the Minister, in the Tribunal’s view, it hung over the Building Permit proceedings.
The pendency of the Extraordinary Review Proceedings was in fact cited by MAL as a reason
to issue the Third Stay, and as noted above, played a role, albeit minor, in the decision to issue
the Second Stay.

So far as the splitting of the applications for Building Permits is concerned, the weight of the
evidence seems to indicate that the splitting was discussed and ultimately agreed between the
representatives of the City of and by the proponents of the Galerie project as a means
of attempting to reduce the possibility that Multi would appeal certain other applications for
Building Permit applications. At the time that the issue arose, Multi had already appealed
against the grant of the Planning Permit and was objecting to any change in the traffic solution.
It may well have been that the impetus to do so came from MAL and the City of -, and
the judgement that if the City of applied for certain of the road permits, that would
reduce the likelihood of Multi’s challenging such permits seems to have been borne out by
events. In the final analysis, it seems to the Tribunal that the question of who instigated the
splitting of the permit applications is hardly material because (as Ms pointed out in
her own testimony) MAL could have required this to be done on its own initiative.'®

The allegation that the “Claimants know from a conversation with two employees of MAL that
the employees were instructed to find pretexts for delaying the proceedings and in particular to
find reasons for suspensions” was one that arose from Ms 3 witness statements and
the notes of her conversations with Mr However, the Respondent filed a witness
statement from Ms in which she explicitly denied what she was alleged to have said
to Mr

7. [...] have never received from anybody any instructions or directions to
compound or protract intentionally the course of the building proceedings
regarding Galerie and I have always approached these proceedings
in a totally standard manner. As an ordinary desk officer at the building
authority I do not even come into contact with members of the city
management so I categorically reject the assertion that I got the instruction
to find a reason for staying the proceedings.

8 I do not know what Mr said to Ms ° .
nonetheless I have definitely not said to Mr “ anything of what Ms
says. Of course, this applies also to my alleged
speculations about tne relation of the city management of the project. I and
_ fave always communicated only and strictly to the point and our

ly the d ion that was
to be submitted in the proceedings.

We TeS3: 212-15.

1868

i second witness statement, para. 40.
witness statement , paras. 7-8.

338

4.904 Obviously, the Tribunal would have profited from the attendance of Mr' at the hearing. It
is left with Ms : $ notes and recollection of a conversation she held with Mr ;
about a conversation that he is said to have had with Ms’ _ i who was not called by the
Claimants for cross-examination, While this does not mean that the Claimants are to be taken |
to have thereby accepted her evidence, in the circumstances, the combination of Mr i
decision not to attend for cross-examination and the express denial by Ms" | of what she
is alleged to have said to him means that it is not possible to accept as proved Ms is
double-hearsay statement that Ms * had been instructed to find reasons to delay the
building permit proceedings.’ 865

4.905 The observation in RAL’s decision dated 7 October 2008 that MAL had “artificially
fabricated” a non-existent preliminary issue in order to justify the Third Stay,'®° which was |
heavily relied upon by the Claimants, in particular in opening at the hearing was undoubtedly
striking and suggestive, and raised some questions.

4.906 However, it was not entirely clear what was intended by those words, nor why they were |
placed in quotation marks in the Czech original of the decision; Mr when questioned
about the phrase, stated that he was unable to shed any light on what the author of the letter |
had intended, and the matter was not pressed by Counsel for the Claimants.'®°” \
4.907 Further, although a witness statement by the signatory of the decision, Dr had |
been submitted by the Respondent with the Counter-Memorial, and discussed the reasoning of
the decision of 8 October 2008 in some detail, it did not refer to or discuss the relevant passage
of the decision which had contained the suggestion that MAL had “artificially fabricated” the
preliminary issue. Dr. 's second witness statement, filed by the Respondent with
its Rejoinder, did not discuss the decision of 8 October 2008, and the Claimants elected not to
call Dr for cross-examination. As a consequence the Tribunal did not have the
benefit of hearing her evidence as to what had been intended or meant by the unusual phrase.

4.908  Insuch circumstances, the Tribunal feels unable to attach any great weight to the comment that
the preliminary issue had been “artificially fabricated”, which must be regarded as being
unexplained. In particular it does not feel able to interpret this as evidence of a view on RAL’s

part that Mr had been corrupted, and that corruption had been the reason for the
adoption of the Third Stay.
4.909 The Tribunal notes finally that, despite having alleged that Mr was corrupted by Multi,

when it came to confronting him at the hearing, the Claimants did not even put the bribery
allegation to him. It was left to Counsel for the Respondent to do so and, when asked whether

1865 The Tribunal is not in any way bound by technical common law rules against hearsay evidence, but when a party
relies upon alleged statements not witnessed by one person (Mrs and denied by the person alleged to have
made the statement and that witness is not challenged on cross-examination, and the intermediate witness (Mr )
declines to testify, it is appropriate to find that the party making the allegation has not discharged its burden of proving
the truth of the statement.

'8 Core 8/279 Exhibit R-59).

187 15:156:14 — 158:3; :T6:4:5 = 5:6.

 

339

4,910

4.911

4.912

4.913

he had ever accepted any form of bribe or kickback in connection with Galerie : or
Forum 2, Mr responded simply “no”,!®

Improper decisions by unnamed Ministry officials

The Tribunal is of the view that there was nothing per se objectionable about the Ministry’s
initiation of the Extraordinary Review Proceedings on the application of a party claiming to
have standing, in circumstances in which a subordinate decision-maker had denied that that
party had standing. No evidence was offered of any official within the Ministry having been
bribed by Multi or any party acting on its behalf, either in this regard or otherwise.

Although the reasoning of the First and Second Ministry decisions taken in the Extraordinary
Review proceeding are not entirely clear, and the parties dispute precisely what their findings
were, it is at the least clear that the Ministry thought that Multi did have standing to complain
about the grant of the Planning Permit to Tschechien7. At all events, the Ministry and
subsequently the Minister undoubtedly both considered that there were defects in the
procedure that resulted in the grant of the Planning Permit, since a ‘good faith acquisition of
rights’ analysis would not have been conducted had it been the view that the Planning Permit
was completely lawful.

As regards Ms | *s testimony that the Ministry’s Ms i told her in a telephone
conversation after the First Ministry Decision had been adopted that Ms i was
“aware of the incorrectness of deciding that Tschechien 7 is not a party to the [Extraordinary
Review] proceedings”, the latter allegation was not met with any denial or explanation from
Ms w from any other official of the Ministry. Moreover, it appears that the decision
not to consider Tschechien7 to constitute a participant in the Extraordinary Review
Proceedings was at the very least odd. In the circumstances, it seems not unreasonable that an
official could have expressed such a view privately. However, the inference drawn by Ms

does not necessarily follow from what she was told. She testified that from this

conversation “it seemed as if Mrs and/or her department had made the decision

according to the instructions of someone, but not according to the law.”"*” She does not say

that this is what Ms told her; rather, the conclusion is expressed as a surmise,

presumably of her own.

The point is illustrated by two instances. First, with respect to Minister s decision in

the First Ministry Decision not to follow the recommendation of the Advisory Committee, Ms
says that Ms a lawyer in the Ministry who acted as Secretary to the

Advisory Committee, had informed her in advance that according to her experience, the
Ministry had never before differed from what the Advisory Committee recommended, and that
a draft decision had been prepared on the basis of the Advisory Committee’s resolution for
signature by the Minister. Ms then notes that Ms : was later transferred to
another department of the Ministry; The implication plainly was that Ms had been
transferred or demoted for disclosing the internal workings of the Ministry to M. “871

1868 The question was put to him on re-direct. T6/52:22-25.

1869
1870
1871

‘second witness statement, para. 13.
second witness statement nt, para. 14.
second witness statement, paras. 16-17.

340

4.914

4.915

4.916

4.917

1872

and that this was evidence of a hostility towards the proponents of the Galerie project or its
legal representative.

The Respondent addressed this issue in the witness statement of Mr : . » filed with
the Rejoinder. Mr j _ was appointed Secretary to the Advisory Committee in October
2007. Prior to the transfer of Ms ° in approximately May 2008, he fulfilled that role
jointly with her, and he continued in the role alone after that. He testified that Mrs i
was in fact made head of a new section on European and international law created within the
Ministry,"®” in other words that Mrs was not punished, but rather promoted. His
evidence in that regard was not challenged in cross-examination.

Mr \ went on to address a number of other allegations. He described his understanding
of how the Minister’s First Decision came about, including the transfer of the file to the
Minister’s office,!*”? the precise times when various individuals, including Ms and
Dr : (about which more below) visited the Ministry to review the Minister’s Decision, the
preparation of the Second Minister Decision, the events relating to the draft witness statement
that Ms . prepared and sent to him for his review and signature, his view of the
allegations made by Ms 1 and an incident in which ECE had a law student contact the
Ministry pretending to seek for research purposes statistical information pertaining to the
number of times that the Minister had departed from the advice of his Advisory Committee,
that ‘research’ then being used in these proceedings.

Ms \ testified that the proceedings carried out by the Ministry were unusual and that
she received “worrying information” from Mr _ a who told her that “the file had
disappeared from the building of the Ministry overnight.”"*’* She noted further that, as she
experienced the situation in 2008, the employees of the Ministry were “very afraid” of the
Minister, and asserted that Mr once left the building with her to talk about changes in
the composition of the Advisory Committee “so that no one could hear us.”’*”5 Mr

denied all these claims, saying that there had been no disappearance of the file, but rather that
it had been requested by the Minister and therefore was put in his office for at least one day.
He also denied that there was an atmosphere of fear created in the Ministry when Mr ~

was Minister. He stated that he did not recall allegedly leaving the Ministry building because
“someone could hear us”, as alleged by Ms 1876 He also said that it was no secret
that the composition of the Advisory Committee had changed. '°””

In the judgement of the Tribunal, Ms was too ready to read improper motives or
undue pressure into the behaviour of various officials. The Tribunal can understand that her
suspicions may have been aroused, for example by the Ministry’s decision that Tschechien 7
did not constitute a participant in the proceedings, its decision in the First Ministry Decision to
quash the Planning Permit, the length of time taken for the Minister to address the appeal, and

witness statement, para. 9.

1873 This testimony related to the testimony of the then-Minister and Dr : as to how the former enlisted the latter
to assist him in reviewing the Advisory Committee’s draft and revising it to his satisfaction.

1874+
1875
1876

i second witness statement, para. 21.
second witness statement, para. 22.
witness statement, paras. 23-24,

'877 Toid., para. 24,

341

 

 

4.918

4.919

4.920

4.921

the Minister’s deviation from the recommendation of the Advisory Committee. But she was
wrong in her belief that under Czech law he was bound by the Advisory Committee’s
decision'®”* and altogether too prone to assume that everything that did not go the Claimants’
way came together as evidence of an all-embracing conspiracy against them.

Mr ~

In the case of the Minister, Mr , the Claimants are unable to point to specific evidence of
any bribe or other favour said to have been proffered to him by Multi or any agent on Multi’s
behalf. The evidence put forward for corruption by Mr is unrelated to the events giving
tise to the claim.

The frailty of this evidence is illustrated by the Claimants’ Reply. After complaining about the
prolongation of the Extraordinary Review Proceedings by taking “unnecessarily long” to
render his decision and by “illegally remanding the case to the Ministry instead of deciding it
in Claimants’ favour”, the Reply asserts:

... In doing so, the Minister ignored the opinions prepared by the legal
experts of his advisory committee and of his legal department, the only time
he did so in 20 cases decided over the last three years. It is telling that while
the legal experts from the committee and the legal department were ignored,
a representative of Multi was able to read the decision before it was issued
by the Minister. Coincidentally, the Minister has been involved in cases of
corruption before.'*”

The Tribunal has found that the facts as alleged in the first sentence of this paragraph were not
improper, and do not give rise to a breach of the Treaty. Although the Minister’s decision to
consult a member of the Advisory Committee, Dr , in respect of the recommendation
of the Advisory Committee and what he should do to decide the appeal was unusual, the
experts on Czech law for both parties agreed that the Minister was not bound to follow the
Advisory Committee’s view'*®° and Czech law did not prohibit him from engaging in this
course of conduct, including remanding the issue to the Ministry for further consideration.

With respect to the second allegation, namely, that a Multi representative read the decision
before it was issued, the Reply elaborates upon this under the heading “Multi inspects the First
Minister Decision before it is dispatched”:

99. There was another unusual circumstance related to the First Minister
Decision. Before the First Minister Decision was even dispatched, the legal

representative of Multi, Mr. +, JUDr. visited the Ministry of Regional
Development to inspect the file. As confirmed by the secretary of the
Ministry's appeal commission, Mr. 4, it seemed that Multi’s legal

counsel checked the wording as if it had been Multi’s own draft. Only
thereafter, the First Minister Decision was dispatched.

100. Claimants submit therefore that Multi had communicated with Mr.

1878 [4/156:8 — 157:10.
1879 Reply, para. 6.
1880 17/54: 2-15; 82-85.

to discuss the contents of the decision and requested the Minister to

illegally remand the proceedings back to the Ministry.

188)

4.922 This claim was supported once again by the evidence of Ms who testified
specifically that Dr on visiting the Ministry, “read the [Minister’s] resolution in a

manner as if he had be (sic) the creator of the resolution, and as if he wanted to review whether

the final version corresponded to his dra:

£71882

4.923 Ms: did not specify in her witness statement when this visit took place (other than to
say that it occurred before the First Ministry Decision was delivered), nor how she had

ascertained from those present that Dr

appeared to be checking the ministerial decision

to see if it corresponded to his draft. She did not witness this event personally and it must be

inferred that she considers Mr

1 to be her source, because she says: “Although,

according to Mr : , this procedure was very unusual, Mr had the Minister’s

resolution delivered.”!**

4.924 These allegations, if proven, would have been very damaging to the Respondent’s case,
because the obvious innuendo was that the Minister was improperly collaborating with Multi
in delivering its preferred resolution of the petition that it had filed. In a witness statement

filed with the Rejoinder, Mr

denied the allegation that he had allowed Multi to

influence his decision.'*** ~The Respondent also filed other direct evidence from Mr
which is of obvious significance because of the circumstantial nature of the allegations and the

fact that Ms ° ‘ claimed Mr

2 as her source of information. In the event, what

the Claimants filed was a draft witness statement that Ms had prepared which, she
said, accurately summarized her discussions with Mr but which, when presented with

it, Mr: | refused to sign.

4.925 In so doing Mr told Ms?

hat he would only provide his statement through

the law firm representing the Czech Republic in these proceedings."**> That statement was in
due course filed with the Rejoinder and in it Mr “ . rejected many of Ms 3
allegations. Of particular relevance to the question of whether Multi had any advance notice
of the Minister’s decision and whether Dr rt was complicit in formulating its terms,
according to Mr _ the Minister rendered his decision on 27 June 2008 and it was only
on 30 June 2008, three days later, at 14:30, that Dr! _ examined the file. Attached to Mr

v’s statement was an exhibit entitled, “Protocol on examination of the file dated 30 June

2008” to substantiate his testimony.

4.926 Mr also said:

[...] I consider the allegation of Ms. that in

examining the file Dr. «

1851 Reply, paras, 99-100.
882 second witness statement, para. 31.

1885 second witness statement, para. 32.
1884 ~ < Rejoinder witness statement, para. 20.
1885 { second witness statement, Annex 4.

gave me the impression that he was the author

343

 

 

4.927

4.928

4.929

4.930

1886

of the Minister’s decision dated 27 June 2008, to be absolute nonsense. In
examination of the file, he read the Minister’s decision and asked for its
copy. I do not know based on that it would be possible to assume the

above, 188
At the hearing, Mr ' k gave a full account of his decision to seek out the advice of Dr
1 and Dr *‘k in turn corroborated the Minister’s account. As noted above, Mr
denied Ms s account of their conversations and attached a document
showing that Dr visited the Ministry after the decision had been signed by the Minister.
There is no evidence on the record to indicate that there was any contact between Dr?! or

any other representative of Multi and the Minister. Confronted with this direct contradiction
between the witnesses, the balancing of direct versus secondhand evidence as to certain events,
and the documents, the Tribunal must conclude that the Claimants have not discharged the
burden of proof in respect of this serious allegation. In view of the contemporaneous
documentary evidence recording when Dr | inspected the already-released Decision, the
Minister’s explanation of his reaction to the opposing positions taken by his Ministry and the
Advisory Committee, his denial of any misconduct, the combined effect of his testimony and
that of Dr regarding the provenance of the First Ministerial Decision, Mr a’s
denial of the account provided by Ms ° *s of her conversations with him as to
Dr visit, and Mr evidence as to what in fact happened during that visit, the
assertion that Multi’s legal representative had any role in the drafting of the Minister’s decision
is not accepted.

Although he took some time to make the First and Second Minister decisions, on both
occasions during the pendency of the Extraordinary Review Proceedings Minister «
reversed the decisions of the Ministry by which they quashed the Planning Permit. Moreover,
to the Tribunal, his explanation of his reasons for deciding not to accept the Advisory
Committee’s draft decision had the ring of truth. It is understandable that a Minister could be
puzzled by the diametrically opposed positions taken by his Ministry and his Advisory
Committee.'**’ The fact that he took note of the extensive amount of groundworks authorized
by the Planning Permit, and his view that such a permit should not be used to authorize such
extensive works prior to receiving a building permit also made sense to the Tribunal.’***

While the First Minister Decision had the effect of continuing the Extraordinary Review
Proceedings, with some adverse impact on the tenants’ perception of the viability of the
Galerie . development, the evidence of the legal experts was that he was fully entitled to
order a remand, rather than terminate the proceedings.’ For the reasons set out above, the
Tribunal is able to appreciate the logic of ordering a remand in the particular circumstances,
and does not regard the Minister’s decision to do so as tainted by bias or unreasonableness.

Finally, whereas at paragraph 26 of the Reply, the Claimants alleged that: “Multi and its
construction company Syner unduly influenced ... the Minister of Regional Development”,
there is simply no evidence on the record to support this allegation and the Tribunal finds that

witness statement, para. 25.

1887 76/1 18:25- 119: 6; and 121:7-17.
1888 [6/1 19:7-18, 120:17-22, 122:25 — 123:13.
1889 77/125:14 — 125: 11; 126: 6-10.

344

4.931

4.932

4,933

4,934

4.935

the Claimants have also failed to discharge the burden of proof in respect of this aspect of their
case.

iv. The Tribunal’s Conclusion on the Allegations of Corruption

Much of the Claimants’ case rested in the end on Ms s testimony, or at least on
inferences which the Claimants wished to draw from it. For the reasons given above, although
the Claimants’ evidence raised a number of questions of process and motivation, it is far from
reaching a sufficient level of cogency. The Tribunal therefore cannot draw the inferences
which the Claimants wish, even without taking account of the counter-evidence produced by
the Respondent.

In sum, the Tribunal has found that the measures complained of do not rise to the level of a
breach of the BIT, and that the reasons given in all instances were comprehensible and not
unreasonable in the circumstances in which each decision was made. None of the measures in
question, including the Third Stay, was “bogus”, and the other evidence offered by the
Claimants did not discharge their burden of proof. In the light of the totality of the evidence
before it, the Tribunal does not find any substantial evidence of corruption, be it in respect of
individual acts or, as the Claimants put it, a “scheme” of corruption.

Conclusion

In conclusion, the Tribunal holds that the Claimants’ claims of breach of Articles 2(1), 2(2)
and 4(2) of the BIT fail in their entirety.

In the circumstances, the Respondent’s objection to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction over the
Claimants’ claims ratione temporis and ratione materiae, which the Tribunal joined to the
Merits, is moot.

However, if the matter had arisen, the Tribunal would have been inclined to hold that it had no
jurisdiction over the Claimants’ claims insofar as they related to losses occurring prior to the
acquisition by the Claimants of its interest in the relevant subsidiary, and/or that the Claimants
were unable to claim for losses suffered by each subsidiary prior to their acquisition by the
Claimants.

345

PART V
CAUSATION

A. INTRODUCTION

5.1 The Tribunal has thus concluded that no action taken by the Respondent resulted in any breach
of its obligations towards the Claimants under the BIT. However, in addition to denying any
breach of the substantive standards of protection contained in the BIT, the Respondent
mounted a sustained attack upon the Claimants’ case theory as to causation, and the Tribunal
considers it desirable to address this aspect of the case as it took up a significant part of the
pleadings and testimony.

5.2
B. CAUSATION BETWEEN THE ALLEGED BREACHES AND THE DECISION TO
ABANDON THE PROJECT.
5.3 '
5.4 '
5.5

1890 Memorial, para. 87.
1891 Reply, 210.

346




















5.98

Cc. CONCLUSION

5.99

197 Judgment of the Supreme Administrative Court (Ref. no. 6 As 38/2007 — 146), 19 March 2008; extracts at Core
5/159 (Exhibit Skulové-103).
98 Core 10/357 (Exhibit 24),

366

6.1

6.2

6.3

6.4

Part VI
Costs

A. THE COSTS OF THE ARBITRATION (EXCLUDING THE COSTS OF LEGAL
REPRESENTATION AND ASSISTANCE OF THE PARTIES)

The Parties have made the following payments by way of advance of the costs of the
arbitration:

April 2010: Claimants € 150,000; Respondent € 150,000
July 2011: Claimants € 200,000; Respondent € 200,000
October/December

2011: Claimants € 100,000; Respondent € 100,000
April/May 2013: Claimants € 90,000; Respondent € 90,000

The total advanced by the Parties therefore amounts to € 1,080,000, of which each Party has
paid € 540,000.

The fees of the members of the Tribunal are fixed as follows:

Sir Franklin Berman KCMG QC, € 253,750.00
Professor Andreas Bucher € 253,900.00
Mr J. Christopher Thomas QC € 214,813.49

For the purposes of Article 38 of the UNCITRAL Rules, the costs of the arbitration (other than
the costs of legal representation and assistance of the successful party) are in total
€ 1,060,196.43 made up as follows:

Fees of the members of the Tribunal (para. 6.3, above) € 722,463.49
Expenses of members of the Tribunal € 28,879.85

Fees and expenses of Mr Simon Olleson, Assistant /
Legal Secretary to the Tribunal (inclusive of VAT) € 166,157.41

Hearing Costs (Court reporter; interpretation; hearing
facilities, Tribunal’s hotel accommodation for hearings

and site visit) € 118,780.53
Copying of Core Bundle € 11,685.31
Registry Fees (PCA) € 11,682.50

367

 

6.5

6.6

6.7

6.8

6.9

Miscellaneous costs (bank charges on deposits;
courier expenses; conference calls) € 547.34

B. THE PARTIES’ CLAIMS FOR CosTS

Amongst the other relief sought, each Party has asked for its costs on an indemnity basis; the
Claimants did so in their Request for Arbitration and Statement of Claim, and their Memorial
and their Reply, whilst the Respondent did so in its Answer to the Statement of Claim,
Counter-Memorial and Rejoinder.

Pursuant to the request sent on behalf of the Tribunal dated 26 March 2013, the Parties
submitted their respective schedules of their legal costs and disbursements on 24 April 2013.

The costs claimed by the Claimants totalled € 941,204.60, comprising:

a. € 518,365.40 in respect of the fees and expenses of Counsel
b. € 376,120.82 in respect of experts’ fees and expenses; and
c. € 46,718.38 in respect of disbursements (translation; copying and courier fees; and

witness travel costs).
The Claimants later clarified that no claim was made in respect of VAT.

The costs claimed by the Respondent totalled CZK 89,477,833.12 (approximately
€ 3,454,742.59 using the exchange rate of €1 = approximately CZK 25.9 as at the date of the
submission), comprising

a. CZK 38,466,037.03 (approximately € 1,485,175.17), in respect of the fees and
expenses of Counsel;

b. CZK 30,874,399.40 (approximately € 1,192,061.76) in respect of experts’ fees and
expenses;

c CZK 5,230,709.74 (approximately € 201,957.91) in respect of disbursements; and in
addition

d. CZK 14,906,686.96 (approximately € 575,547.76) in respect of VAT.

As noted above (paragraphs 1.143-1.150), the Respondent waived its right to present
comments on the Claimants’ costs, whilst the Claimants’ provided their comments on the costs
claimed by the Respondent on 8 May 2013. Thereafter, on 10 May 2013, the Tribunal
authorized a further exchange of submissions limited to certain specific points raised by the
Claimants in their comments, with the Respondent filing its response to the Claimants’
comments on 17 May 2013, followed by the Claimants’ rejoinder on 29 May 2013.

368

6.10

6.11

6.12

6.13

6.14

Cc. SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES AS TO COSTS

The Claimants’ Comments, 8 May 2013

The Claimants noted a “substantial discrepancy” between the Parties’ respective costs, in
particular as regards attorney’s fees, the cost of experts, and VAT. Specificially, the Claimants
noted that

a. the Respondent’s legal costs were approximately three times their own;
b. the Respondent’s expert fees were approximately four times their own;
Cc the Respondent’s costs included a sum in excess of € 500,000 in respect of VAT,

whilst the Claimants had not included VAT, inasmuch as “most of the VAT paid
could be reclaimed from tax authorities”,

In the Claimants’ submission, the Respondent had no basis to claim reimbursement of VAT
which was an “attempt at unjust enrichment” to the extent that it related to VAT paid for
services provided in the Czech Republic, since any VAT paid by the Respondent to its advisers
had to be accounted for by the adviser to the Czech tax authorities, such that the VAT
“effectively went from one of Respondent’s pockets to the other”. The Claimants invoked
Article 38(e) of the UNCITRAL Rules in support of the argument that only legal and other
expenses in fact incurred by a party were covered, and that the cost of VAT was not incurred
where the money in question “effectively remains with the Party”.

The Claimants further argued that to the extent that the sums claimed were, on the other hand,
for VAT paid on services provided outside the Czech Republic, the Respondent should be put
to the proof of that.

The Claimants argued finally that Article 38(e) of the UNCITRAL Rules should be so
interpreted as to cover the costs of legal representation only to the extent that the Tribunal
determined the amount of such costs to be reasonable, and submitted that the unreasonableness
of the Respondent's cost claims for legal representation was established by their disproportion,
by a factor of three to one, by comparison with their own.

The Claimants submitted that the level of the Respondent’s costs was “further proof” of a
tendency to over-litigate, which had been apparent throughout the proceedings. They
maintained that if a party conducted an arbitration without regard to cost, and thus caused both
parties “extra and unnecessary expenses”, it did so at its own risk, and that the ensuing costs
should be borne by that party alone. They referred specifically to:

a, Attorney’s fees: it had been the Respondent’s “choice and risk to involve a large
team of attorneys from multiple jurisdictions thereby causing, inter alia,
disproportionate and not warranted travel, coordination and other costs”; by contrast,
the Claimants’ in-house resources had been “taken up completely over long periods
of time”, but no account was taken of that in their own costs submission; the Tribunal

369

|
|
t
|

 

6.15

6.16

6.17

6.18

should however take account of the fact that “parts of Claimants’ business were at
times paralyzed for any other business than this arbitration”;

b. Experts’ fees: there was no reasonable explanation for the disproportion between
expert costs, given that the Claimants’ valuation expert was “a reputable company
with experienced claim valuation specialists” who had conducted “an independent
audit”, whilst the Respondent’s expert had “only verified its outcome”;

c. Document production: the document production phase had been prolonged by the
Respondent’s “numerous requests and issues raised, including, for example,
Respondent’s request that the Tribunal find that Claimants did not submit a request
for document production at all, the numerous legal issues raised by Respondent, the
disproportionate requests to produce with which Claimants had to deal and the
general objections raised for most of Claimants’ requests”; the Claimants’ in-house
legal team had been taken up for weeks at a time dealing exclusively with the
Respondent’s requests, and the Claimants had in fact requested at the time that the
Respondent “be stopped in this strategy of causing a massive expenditure of time,
internal resources and costs”.

d. Submissions and core bundle: the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial had been
excessive in size, consisting of 15 binders; whilst the Claimants had proposed only 7]
documents for inclusion in the core bundle, the Respondent had proposed 446
documents; the resulting cost of approximately £10,000 for the production of copies
of the core bundle was absolutely disproportionate given the actual use made thereof
at the hearing.

The Respondent’s Reply on Costs, 17 May 2013

Pursuant to the Tribunal’s direction, the Respondent’s Reply on costs was limited to the issues
of 1) the disproportion between the parties’ respective costs claims; 2) the Czech Republic’s
claim for reimbursement of VAT; and 3) the conduct of the disclosure phase.

As to the disproportion between the parties’ costs claims, the Respondent submitted that its
overall costs of less than € 3.5 million were “absolutely standard for an investment arbitration”
and were in fact very reasonable given the fact-intensive character of the dispute. All of the
relevant facts had been new to the Czech Republic, and had required carefully study and
assessment by its legal team.

The above, as well as other factors, explained the discrepancy between the parties’ respective
costs: the Respondent had had to learn all the relevant facts, which had to be gathered from the
various administrative bodies, as well as documents produced by the Claimants pursuant to the
Tribunal’s orders, whereas the Claimants had known all relevant facts before the arbitration
was begun.

The Respondent further submitted that it had relied almost exclusively on external counsel and
experts, whilst the Claimants had used its internal team, without claiming their costs, so that
the Claimants’ was a partial costs claim only. The reliance on external counsel and experts was

370

6.19

6.20

6.21

6.22

6.23

 

fully justified, as the Respondent did not have the internal resources available in particular to
analyse the evidence, whereas there was no comparable need for Claimants’ external counsel
to analyse the proceedings to which Claimants had been party. The Respondent submitted that
it had also had to retain external experts “to match the Claimants’ knowledge of the various
commercial and technical aspects of their own business”. The Claimants had been free to
divide the work between their internal team and external counsel and experts as they saw fit,
but the fact that the Respondent had relied on external assistance did not render its higher costs
unreasonable.

The Respondent argued that it had incurred higher costs because of the way in which the
Claimants had pleaded the case, suggesting that the Claimants had pleaded the case in a
“conclusory manner”, for example merely pointing to the overall length of the administrative
proceedings and what they alleged were incorrect decisions, whilst it had fallen to the
Respondent to establish the full factual background and describe the “intense procedural
activity in each of the underlying administrative proceedings and provide the respective
evidence in order to defend against the Claimants’ conclusory allegations of delays”; the
process had been time-consuming and had involved high translation costs.

The discrepancy between the costs of the parties’ respective valuation experts explained itself
by reference to the obviously differing scope, level of detail, and sophistication of their reports.
The Respondent’s expert had done much more than merely critically assess and rectify the
assumptions made by the Claimants’ expert, and in addition had prepared “an independent
comprehensive analysis and two new valuations”. The Respondent also emphasized that,
although the Claimants’ experts had presumably had access to the Claimants’ accounting
documents, analyses and other information relating to the project, its own expert.had had to
gather those facts from the “limited documents” produced by the Claimants, publicly available
materials, and expert reports of the property experts.

Finally, the Respondent rejected the allegations of over-litigation, which were “utterly non-
specific, unsupported by any evidence and patently incorrect”. Its team was of a standard size,
and no larger than that of the Claimants, came only from the Czech Republic and the US,
whilst the Claimants’ team had members from Germany and the United Kingdom, so that the
allegation that the size and composition of its team had resulted in disproportionate and
unwarranted costs was “baseless speculation that the Claimants cannot specify, substantiate or
support with any evidence”.

The VAT claim was standard practice, and the Respondent had never before faced an objection
that such reimbursement would constitute unjust enrichment; its claims for legal costs,
including VAT, had been granted in Phoenix Action, as well as in the unpublished awards in
Consortium Oeconomicus, Voecklinghaus, European Media Ventures, and Nepolsky.

The Respondent described how, in accordance with its prevailing public procurement laws, all
services relating to its representation in the present proceedings (including services provided
by third parties, both inside and outside the Czech Republic) had been rendered and invoiced
through the local office of its legal representatives, explaining that all third party services had
been charged to the local office, which had paid the invoices, and then charged the relevant
amounts to its Ministry of Finance. It further explained that the Ministry of Finance was a

371

 

6.24

6.25

6.26

separate accounting unit, and that the costs charged to it in relation to the arbitration had been
recorded as expenses of the Ministry in the full amount invoiced, including VAT.

The VAT had been charged at the applicable statutory rate, and the Respondent’s legal
advisers were obliged by law to charge VAT on both their own services provided in the Czech
Republic, and services provided by third parties outside the Czech Republic. The Respondent
noted that, in accordance with the EU VAT Directives, the Ministry when acting as a public
authority was not entitled to reclaim input VAT, with the result that the VAT was irrecoverable
and constituted a real cost.

Furthermore:

a. it was not possible to verify whether all of the VAT paid to its legal advisers was in
fact paid to the Czech Tax Authorities, as there was an entitlement to set-off the VAT
paid on the inputs against the output tax received; it was moreover not possible to
trace the entire chain of VAT payments, and to verify whether each business in the
chain had in fact properly self-assessed and paid the correct amount of VAT, so that it
was not possible to establish whether the Czech Tax Authorities had in fact received
all of the VAT paid to the Respondent’s legal advisers;

b. moreover, even if the tax had been duly paid to the Czech Tax Authorities, it should
not be considered not to have been “incurred” as it had actually been paid,
independently of whether or not the tax authorities subsequently collected a
corresponding amount; the VAT collected by the tax authorities was redistributed to
various entities and non-governmental bodies, with a significant part being paid to
municipalities and regions, which were separate legal persons with independent
budgets, and a small amount was paid to the European Union.

c finally, as a matter of Czech law (which Respondent submitted was the applicable
law) reimbursement of legal costs, including VAT, was a legal obligation, and could
not constitute unjust enrichment.

The Respondent objected to the Claimants’ characterizations of the disclosure exercise, noting
that:

a. the Respondent had requested extensive document production in relation to “several
key aspects” of its defence, giving by way of examples the Claimants’ time
management of the project, the economics of the project, and circumstances and
motivations underlying the decision to abandon the project, and the Claimants’
decision to excavate in excess of the volume authorized in the Planning Permit. It
observed that, by contrast, the Claimants had “always had full access to the files
regarding the underlying administrative proceedings”;

b. the Respondent’s requests had been fully justified; it observed that it had initially
made 29 requests, the Parties had disputed only ten of them, and the Tribunal had
granted all but one of the Respondent’s requests in its Ruling on Document
Production, dated 15 July 2010. In contrast, it noted that the Claimants had initially

372

6.27

6.28

6.29

6.30

6.31

made nine requests, of which the Tribunal had rejected five, and granted four “but
only with significant limitations”;

c. the disclosure exercise had not ended in July 2010, and in particular, the Claimants in
March/April 2011 had submitted an additional eight document requests in relation to
the administrative proceedings in relation to Multi; the Respondent had been unable
to comply with those requests due to applicable confidentiality rules, but following
the ruling of the Tribunal, the Respondent had promptly produced 136 responsive
documents.

On that basis, the Respondent submitted that the document production exercise was “far from
one-sided”, and that although its requests had been more extensive that those made by the
Claimants, they had been fully justified and necessary for its defence.

The Claimants’ Rejoinder on Costs, 29 May 2013

The Claimants’ Rejoinder was in essence a reiteration and repetition of their earlier argument
on the “striking disproportion” of the Respondent’s costs. They expressly rejected the
Respondent’s justification based on the complexity of the case, which largely resulted from the
Respondent’s own litigation tactics, and the Claimants’ counsel and experts had faced the same.
complexity but had incurred significantly lower costs.

The Claimants rejected the suggestion that the Respondent’s legal and expert team had had,
uniquely, to learn the facts, noting that the same was true of their own team. They likewise
rejected the Respondent’s suggestion that the difference in costs was in part due to the fact that
Claimants had used its internal team, noting that the “overwhelming part” of the work had
been done externally; the Claimants’ external counsel had not been involved in the project or
the underlying administrative proceedings, and thus had had to study and assess the facts once
they had been instructed.

As regards the discrepancy between the costs of the valuation experts, the Claimants asserted
that their expert had carried out its own research, and had not simply relied on data provided
by the Claimants.

Finally, the Claimants denied that there was any “standard” level of fees in investment
arbitration, the only applicable standard being what a prudent and diligent party would have
spent for the protection and enforcement of its interests; their own costs were a suitable
benchmark in that regard.

As to the VAT question, relying upon the Respondent’s explanation of the way in which its
external counsel and experts had charged for their costs, the Claimants asserted that the
Respondent had “admitted that any and all services were rendered within the Czech Republic”,
that all VAT was incurred within the Czech Republic, and that, as a result, the Respondent paid
to its advisers’ Czech office the VAT incurred on the fees invoiced by its advisers which they
were obliged to account for to the tax authorities. They submitted that the services rendered to
the Respondent by its advisers’ Czech office and the VAT thereon were “the only ones
relevant for the Respondent’s request for reimbursement of VAT in the present case”, and that

373

 

 

6.32

6.33

6.34

6.35

6.36

6.37

6.38

based on those statements, the claim was clearly baseless; the Tribunal should, moreover, take
into account that the Respondent had claimed reimbursement of sums which it knew were not
due.

The Claimants submitted that those considerations were sufficient to dispose of the
Respondent’s claim in respect of VAT; however, in addition, “for the sake of precaution and
completeness only”, the Claimants also responded to the Respondent’s arguments as to the
“second ‘cycle’” of VAT.

In that context, they asserted that, whether third parties providing services to the Czech office
of the Respondent’s legal advisers were domiciled within or outside the Czech Republic, the
Respondent’s legal advisers could, in either case, reclaim the VAT paid by them from the tax
authorities.

On that basis, the Claimants submitted that VAT payments and refunds “create a cycle
independent of the charging of the fees and disbursements” by the Respondent’s legal advisers
to the Respondent. They likewise rejected the Respondent’s argument that, within the second
cycle, it was impossible to ascertain whether the full amount of the VAT charged had in fact
been received by the Czech tax authorities, since that boiled down to suggesting that the
Claimants should compensate the Respondent for the effects of potential tax fraud of other
taxpayers.

That the VAT received by the tax authorities was distributed to municipalities, regions and the
EU did not change the fact that the VAT initially went back to the central Government and was
thus not “incurred” by the Respondent.

As for the Respondent’s reliance on the argument that there would be no unjust enrichment as
a matter of Czech law because Czech law treated the reimbursement of costs as a legal
obligation, the Claimants argued first, that that was beside the point, as the issue in dispute was
precisely whether there was a legal obligation of reimbursement under Article 38(e) of the
UNCITRAL Rules, and second, that the qualification under Czech law was in any case
irrelevant as the proceedings were governed by the BIT, the UNCITRAL Rules, and French
Jaw as the lex arbitri.

As to the authorities cited by the Respondent, in Phoenix Action it was possible that the VAT
had not been incurred in the Czech Republic, but in another State; the Award was silent on the

point. The others were unpublished awards, which could not be relied on as it was not possible
to verify the Respondent's assertions.

D. THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION ON COSTS

Applicable Rules, and Issues for Decision

As regards the applicable rules and principles governing its powers to apportion costs, the
Tribunal recalls that:

374

6.39

6.40

6.41

6.42

6.43

a. pursuant to Article 38(e) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the costs of legal representation
and assistance of the successful party are to form part of the costs of the arbitration
only to the extent that the Tribunal determines that the amount of such costs is
reasonable, taking into account the circumstances of the case;

b. it has a wide power under Article 40 of the UNCITRAL Rules to apportion both the
costs of the arbitration generally and the costs of legal representation and assistance
of the ful party, if it i that to be ible in the circumstances.

The first issue which arises is which party is to be regarded as the “successful party” for this
purpose.

Although an argument might be made in favour of proceeding on an issue-by-issue basis in
assessing which party had been successful, the Tribunal is of the view that such an approach is
not appropriate in the present case; it plainly results from the decisions recorded in Parts III,
IV, and V above that, overall, the Respondent is the successful party, having won its case on
the merits, even though the Claimants were successful in their opposition to the Respondent’s
objections to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction. More precisely, the Respondent’s principal
jurisdictional objections based on the lack of an investment and the illegality of the Claimants’
investment were rejected, and its other objections ratione materiae and ratione temporis were
in part admitted by the Claimants, and in part joined by the Tribunal to the merits, whereas the
Tribunal has rejected all of the Claimants’ claims alleging breach of the BIT and its claims for
damages on their merits, as well as, in the alternative, on the basis of a lack of causation.

The Tribunal will return to the question of the Parties’ respective success on particular issues
in the context of its discussion of apportionment below.

It remains however for the Tribunal to decide:

a. whether the VAT paid by the Respondent to its legal advisers falls properly within the
costs of legal representation and assistance foreseen by Article 38(e);

bd. whether the Respondent’s costs of legal ion and assi are
within the meaning of Article 38(e) of the Rules;

c. whether, taking account of the circumstances of the case, it is reasonable for the
Tribunal to apportion either the costs of the arbitration, or the Respondent’s costs of
legal representation and assistance, or both, bearing in mind the applicable principles
set out in paragraph 6.38 above.

Recoverability of VAT
It is convenient first to consider the question whether, in principle, the VAT charged by the
Respondent’s legal advisers in respect of counsel’s fees and third party services should be

regarded as forming part of the Respondent’s costs of legal representation and assistance
within the meaning of the UNCITRAL Rules.

375

 

6.44

6.45

6.46

6.47

6.48

6.49

6.50

Although the matter is not explicitly so phrased in Article 38(e) of the UNCITRAL Rules,!°*
the Respondent did not dispute that Article 38(e) was limited to the costs that had been
‘incurred’ by the successful party. It is in any case, in the opinion of the Tribunal, necessarily
implicit that Article 38(e) relates to reimbursement (whether in whole or in part) of what it has
in fact cost the successful party to prepare and argue its case. Does that therefore encompass
VAT on legal fees and disbursements paid by a State to its legal advisers in circumstances in
which the legal advisers are then under a legal obligation to account for the VAT to the same
State’s tax authorities?

That question appears to be one of first impression; neither of the Parties has drawn the
Tribunal’s attention to any decision in which the issue had been expressly raised and dealt with
by an arbitral tribunal, nor is the Tribunal itself aware of any such decision. Conversely, and
without casting doubt upon the Respondent's assertion that it had in fact recovered VAT in the
cases in question, the decisions that were cited by the Respondent offer the present Tribunal
very little assistance.

The Respondent relied specifically on the Award in Phoenix Action. However the Award
contains no discussion of whether VAT should in principle be recoverable in circumstances
such as the present, and the point appears not to have been raised by the Claimant in that case.
Moreover the Award does not disclose on its face whether the amounts claimed by the
Respondent in that case did in fact include sums paid by it in respect of VAT charged by its
advisers, nor whether such VAT as it recovered was attributable to fees incurred in the Czech
Republic, or alternatively outside the Czech Republic.

Phoenix Action aside, the other arbitral decisions cited by the Respondent are unpublished and
have not been provided to the Tribunal. The Tribunal has, as a result, not been able to consider
how the issue of recoverability of VAT was raised by the successful party, resisted by the
unsuccessful party, or decided by the tribunal. It would not be proper, therefore, for the
Tribunal to take those decisions into account. The question accordingly falls to be decided on
first principles.

The Tribunal initially saw some force in the Respondent’s argument that it was not in any case
possible to ascertain whether the VAT was in fact eventually received by the State, since its
legal advisers would have been able to set off against it the input tax they had paid. The
Tribunal was rather less impressed by the further argument based on the difficulty of
ascertaining whether third parties in the supply chain had in fact correctly accounted for the
amount of VAT due.

However, the Tribunal has in the end reached the conclusion that a Respondent State ought not
in principle be allowed to recover as costs sums which, although paid out, it is entitled by law
(its own law) to be paid back via the liability of the payee to account for the VAT charged by
it.

It reaches that conclusion on the basis that, for the purposes of public international law, a State
is treated as a single legal person. In consequence, it is irrelevant whether under Czech law the
Ministry of Finance is entitled to recoup input VAT or whether the Ministry is a separate

1974 At Jeast in the English language version; the French text is more direct.

376

6.51

6.52

6.53

6.54

6.55

6.56

accounting unit. If the organs or constituent entities of a State are liable in law to pay VAT in
respect of services provided to them, then the correct analysis is that the State as such must be
regarded as both paying VAT and then recovering back the VAT paid, with the net result that
the State has incurred no overall financial detriment that can rank as part of its ‘costs’ for legal
representation and assistance in the conduct of an arbitration. In the view of the Tribunal, that
conclusion stands irrespective of whether the repayment operates by way of output tax on
services provided, or by way of a reverse charge in respect of services provided by third parties
located outside the Czech Republic.

The Tribunal regards it as beside the point that an individual entity providing services may be
entitled to set off any input tax it has itself been charged when remitting to the State the VAT
received. That is, in the Tribunal’s view, essentially an accounting operation as between the
individual taxpayer and the tax authorities. The economic reality is however that that the
cumulative total of the VAT due on the underlying transactions remains unaffected, as does the
fact that the tax levied ultimately finds its way into the hands of the State. It follows that, in
the absence of specific proof to the contrary in particular cases, the VAT levied on legal advice
and services to the State cannot be treated as part of the costs envisaged in Article 38(e) of the
Rules.

The Respondent has affirmed that all such services in the present case were invoiced through
the offices of its legal advisers located within the Czech Republic, and that the VAT claimed
consists solely of the output tax charged by its legal advisers on the fees charged by them and
disbursements made. The Tribunal expresses no view on the situation where the service
provider is based outside the territory of the Respondent State. In those circumstances it is
possible that different considerations may apply.

Reasonableness of the Costs Claimed by the Respondent.

The Tribunal begins by noting that there has been no suggestion that the sums claimed by the
Respondent were not in fact properly incurred by it. The only issue thus relates to whether the
costs incurred were reasonable.

As to the reasonableness of the sums claimed by the Respondent (excluding the VAT element;
see above), the Tribunal is of the view that, having regard to the circumstances of the case, the
costs claimed by the Respondent are not in principle unreasonable.

It will be convenient to take separately the legal costs and expenses, and the costs of expert
evidence, in that order.

The Claimants point to the marked discrepancy between the levels of the claims put in by the
Parties in respect of their legal representation. The existence of this discrepancy is undeniable,
but is not in itself proof of unreasonableness. One of the reasons for the discrepancy is that, as
the Claimants have themselves explained, some of the work undertaken by them on the case, in
particular in relation to disclosure, was done in-house, It is also not clear to the Tribunal
whether the Claimants have in fact claimed in full for all of the legal costs they incurred
(including their in-house costs), which, if so, would further undermine the usefulness of a bare
comparison between the two figures.

377

 

6.57

6.58

6.59

6.60

6.61

As to the nature and origin of the legal fees and expenses incurred, the Tribunal starts from the
proposition that litigating parties are entitled to be represented in a manner of their own
choosing. This is a basic right, figuring in various permutations in the leading contemporary
human rights conventions. To impose a cost penalty on a party to an investment arbitration for
choosing one way or another would clearly act as a brake on the exercise of this basic right,
which could in some circumstances be severe. The Tribunal does not believe that it was in any
way reprehensible that the two Parties in the present arbitration opted for different solutions
both as to the mixture of in-house and external legal resources employed, and as to the origin
and identity of their external legal advisers and counsel, and sees no sign that the choices each
of them made led in themselves to any over-litigation of the case. The Tribunal cannot
therefore entertain the Claimants’ criticism that it was in some way unreasonable for the
Respondent to retain Counsel from different jurisdictions, with the travel and coordination
costs which that necessarily entailed.

It is a common feature of investment arbitration that Parties choose to be represented by
Counsel and advisers based outside their own countries, as indeed happened in the present case
for Claimant and Respondent alike. It is a further feature of investment arbitration that
hearings may be held at locations other than those in which the Parties or their Counsel are
based, leading to additional costs for travel and accommodation for representatives of the
Parties and for witnesses, irrespective of who the legal counsel are. Once the Tribunal laid
down in Procedural Order No.1 that the seat of the arbitration would be Paris, and that hearings
would in principle be held in London, it became inevitable that both Parties would incur at
least some additional travel and accommodation costs.

The Tribunal cannot therefore see any basis, quantitative or qualitative, for a finding that the
scale of the Respondent's costs was in itself unreasonable.

Further, the Tribunal notes that the Claimants did not attempt to quantify more closely the
extent to which the Respondent’s costs should be considered unreasonable, other than the
comparison with their own claimed costs. But, in the view of the Tribunal, the standard under
the UNCITRAL Rules for assessing the reasonableness or otherwise of a successful Party’s
costs is an objective one, which depends on the nature of the case which the successful Party
had to establish or, as the case may be, to meet, not simply on a comparison with the level of
the costs incurred by the opposing Party.

The criterion should in other words be, in a case of genuine doubt as to the reasonableness of a
Party’s legal costs, an assessment of the amount of work which would reasonably have been
required in order adequately to defend the interests of the Party concerned. Many aspects of
the present arbitration were relatively straightforward. Such complexities as there were
derived mainly from the intricacies (which are quite substantial) of Czech planning legislation,
and to a lesser extent from the need to unravel the internal decision-making processes of the
Claimant group of companies. Both of these elements were however givens of the situation
that had led to the dispute which was brought to arbitration. And both meant, inevitably, that a
considerable effort in time and resources would be spent by both Parties in establishing, to the
satisfaction of the Tribunal, not merely what had actually happened, but its relevance in law to
the legal framework of the BIT under which the arbitration was brought.

378

6.62

6.63

6.64

6.65

6.66

6.67

6.68

That being so, the Tribunal does not find any basis to conclude in general terms that either
Party was responsible for ‘over-litigating’ the case. To the extent that a criticism of that kind
finds ground at all, it is in the extensive disputes in which the Parties enmeshed themselves
over document production. In that regard, however, the Tribunal does not believe that the
criticism can be levelled at one Party only. The Claimants’ specific complaint as to the effects
on its own in-house legal function of having to handle the question of disclosure is in no way
linked to the reasonableness of the costs incurred by the Respondent, and would at most have
been relevant to the reasonableness of the Claimants’ own costs claims.

As to the costs incurred in respect of experts, the Tribunal notes (as above) that it is not
disputed that the costs claimed in that respect were in fact incurred. The Claimants’ criticisms
focused in particular upon the difference between the level of fees of the Parties’ respective
valuation and tax experts, although the Tribunal notes that the fees paid by the Respondent to
its experts in all fields were consistently higher than those paid by the Claimants to its experts
in the same field.

In the Tribunal’s view, the Claimants have not put forward any cogent reasons for suggesting
that the costs claimed by the Respondent in respect of expert fees are unreasonable, and does
not accept in that connection the Claimants’ proposition that its valuation experts “conducted
an independent audit” whilst the Respondent’s experts “only verified its outcome”; it seems to
the Tribunal, from the scope of the reports, that both Parties’ experts carried out extensive
amounts of work.

In the Tribunal’s view, the overall level of the fees claimed by the Respondent in respect of the
fees paid to its valuation and tax experts, although at the upper end of the bracket which might
have been expected in a dispute of this type, cannot be characterized as having been
unreasonable, and the same is true in respect of the fees in respect of the other experts.

The Tribunal is not therefore minded to disallow for cost allocation purposes any part of the
Respondent’s claimed expenses. The Respondent’s costs of legal representation and
assistance, excluding the VAT element, which are to be treated as forming part of the costs of
the arbitration therefore amount to CZK 74,571,146.17, which, converted into Euros using the
exchange rate ruling on the day prior to the date on which this Award is made, °”* is equivalent

to € 2,888,898.86.

The question that remains is accordingly that whether the Respondent’s costs should be
apportioned in part.

Apportionment of Costs

The question whether to depart from the general principle that the unsuccessful party should
pay the costs of the arbitration and the question whether to apportion the successful party’s
costs of legal representation and assistance are similar in nature. The only difference is that
there is a rebuttable presumption under the UNCITRAL Rules that the costs of the arbitration

1975 Te, € 1 = CZK 25,813, being the reference exchange rate for 18 September 2013, as published by the European
Central Bank (http://www.ecb.europa. i ),

379

 

 

6.69

6.70

6.71

6.72

6.73

should follow the event, but no equivalent presumption for apportionment of the costs of
representation. Nevertheless, both raise issues of apportionment, and both are remitted under
the Rules to the wide discretion of an arbitration tribunal, based upon its assessment of
reasonableness, taking into account the circumstances of the case. The Tribunal is accordingly
of the view that the relevant criteria are in both cases essentially the same, and include in both
cases the extent to which the successful party has succeeded on the principal questions in issue
in the dispute.

In the present case, there are various circumstances which, in the view of the Tribunal, confirm
the appropriateness of the presumption that the costs of the arbitration should follow the event,
and at the same time confirm both that there should be some apportionment of those costs and
that, while the Respondent is entitled to recover the costs of defending itself, there should be
some apportionment of those costs as well.

First and foremost, the Respondent has totally succeeded on the merits. More specifically, a
central element in the Claimants’ case revolved around accusations of serious misconduct on
the part of a number of Czech public officials as well as third parties. If anything, this element
became even more central to the Claimants’ case as it was presented at the oral hearings. The
Tribunal has however found earlier in this Award that the Claimants’ entire case of corruption
was devoid of any real evidential support — so much so that the Tribunal was led on occasion
to wonder whether some of these insinuations of corruption ought ever properly to have been
made at all. But this cannot alter the fact that the case was made, and relied upon, and the
Respondent had to meet it. The Tribunal has already set out at paragraphs 4.871 and following
the serious view an investment tribunal is bound to take of corruption and the special duty that
this imposes on it to scrutinize with care the evidence led before it on that matter. But that is
not the same as saying that an investment tribunal can or should condone the bringing of wide-
ranging imputations of corruption without direct evidence to back them up, nor can it ignore a
party’s persistence in such allegations once it has become clear that the necessary evidence is
not available. Corruption is not always easy to prove, the Tribunal is mindful of that. That
does not however mean that corruption may be alleged without proof. The Tribunal has, at all
events, not allowed its judgement to be clouded by mere imputations of impropriety, and has
decided the case in strict objectivity on the basis of the evidence led before it.

Moreover, other aspects of the conduct of the Claimants in the present proceedings are open to
criticism as prejudicial to the orderly conduct of the arbitration, all of which had implications
as to costs. Prime amongst these rank the attempts to introduce new claims both late and out of
time; the continued reliance on an unsigned witness statement which Mr Kytlitka had
indicated he did not endorse; and the recruitment of a law student in an attempt to obtain
evidence under false pretences.

Set against this, however, is the fact that the Respondent maintained formally in being its
jurisdictional objections (even though certain among them were no longer being pursued in any
depth by the time of the oral hearings), and that, as indicated, the Tribunal has found in the
Claimants’ favour in that respect.

Furthermore, the Respondent is not immune from criticism of its own over the cost
implications of certain aspects of its conduct of the proceedings. The Tribunal sets aside in

380

6.74

6.75

6.76

this respect the unedifying argument that emerged between the Parties as to the propriety of Ms
Némcova’s involvement as legal representative of the ECE companies which in the end was
not being pursued in the decisive stages of the proceedings. It does however regard at least
some part of the Claimants’ strictures over the document production phase as well-founded,
although, as already indicated, it is of the view that both Parties are to blame and that each
contributed to the wide-ranging disputes over document production in which the Parties and
Tribunal became bogged down, leading eventually and inevitably to the modification of the
procedural timetable originally provided for in Procedural Order No, 1 and, as a consequence,
the vacation of the hearing window that had been foreseen for March 2011.

Having given careful consideration to the matters set out in paragraphs 6.70-6.73 above, the
Tribunal has come to the view that in broad terms they cancel one another out in the sense that,
when all of the circumstances of the case are taken into account, they give no grounds for
departing from the presumption that the costs of the arbitration should be borne by the
unsuccessful party, and that accordingly the Claimants should reimburse the Respondent its
share of these costs, At the same time the Tribunal is of the view that these same
circumstances, taken as a whole, do require an apportionment both of the costs of the
arbitration and of the Respondent's costs of legal representation and assistance, and that the
appropriate allocation is 85% : 15%.

Conclusion

The Tribunal accordingly orders that the Claimants are to make payment to the Respondent in
the sums of :-

a. € 371,068.75, being 35% of the costs of the arbitration (excluding the Respondent’s
costs of legal representation and assistance); and

b. € 2,455,564.03, being 85% of the Respondent’s costs of legal representation and
assistance (exclusive of VAT) (CZK 63,385,474.24), converted into Euros at the
exchange rate ruling on the day prior to the date on which this Award is made.

The total sum payable to the Respondent by the Claimants under paragraph 6.75 above is
€ 2,826,632.78, and will carry simple interest at the rate of 4% per annum as from the date of

this Award.

381

 

Part VIL
CONCLUSION AND OPERATIVE PART

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal holds:

A.

As to jurisdiction:

1.

that the Claimants’ respective shareholdings and other participatory interests
in Tschechien 7 and ECE Praha constitute an investment within the meaning
of Article 1(1) of the BIT and that that the Respondent’s objection to
jurisdiction based on the Claimants’ lack of an investment is therefore
rejected;

that the Respondent’s objection to jurisdiction on the basis of illegality is
rejected;

that the Respondent's objections to jurisdiction ratione materiae and ratione
temporis are joined to the merits;

that as a consequence it has jurisdiction to rule upon the merits of the
Claimants’ claims.

As to the merits:

that the Claimants’ new claims for breach of:

i. Article 3 (Most-Favoured Nation Treatment);

ii, Article 2(3) (Full Protection) and Article 4(1) (Full Protection and
Security); and

iii. Article 7(1) (the obligation to observe any obligation assumed with

regard to investments of investors)
are disallowed pursuant to Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules;

that the Claimants’ claim for breach by the Respondent of Article 2(1) (the
obligation to admit investments in accordance with its legislation) is deemed
to have been abandoned, and thus fails in limine;

that the Claimants’ claims for breach by the Respondent of:

i. Article 2(1) (the obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment);
ii. Article 4(2) (the prohibition of expropriation);
iii. Article 2(2) (prohibition of impairment of the management,

maintenance, use or enjoyment of investments by arbitrary or
discriminatory measures)

382

 

fail in their entirety and are rejected.

4. that, therefore, the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction ratione materiae
and ratione temporis do not call for a ruling from the Tribunal.

In accordance with Article 38 of the UNCITRAL Rules, the total costs of the
arbitrati including the Respondent’s costs of ion and assi are
fixed at € 3,949,095.29.

In accordance with paragraphs 6.75 and 6.76 above, the Claimants are to pay the
Respondent the sum of € 2,826,632.78 in respect of the costs of the arbitration
(including the Respondent's costs of legal representation and assistance).

Interest is to run on the sum payable under paragraph D above at the rate of 4% per
annum from the date of the present Award until payment.

383

 

Done at the place of arbitration, Paris, France on the aathday of September, 2013

Professor Andreas Bucher Mr J Christopher Thomas QC

Na

A} Franklin Berman KCM@ QC

 

384

