INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Eco Oro Minerals Corp.

Claimant

Republic of Colombia
Respondent

(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER No. 6
DECISION ON NON-DISPUTING PARTIES’ APPLICATION

Members of the Tribunal
Mrs. Juliet Blanch, President of the Tribunal
Professor Horacio A. Grigera Na6n, Arbitrator
Professor Philippe Sands, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mrs. Ana Constanza Conover Blancas

Assistant to the President of the Tribunal
Mr. Joao Vilhena Valério

18 February 2019

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

L

Procedural Order No. 6

INTRODUCTION

On 19 December 2018, Comité para la Defensa del Agua y el Paramo de Santurban,
the Center for International Environmental Law (CIEL), the Asociacion Interamericana
para la Defensa del Ambiente (AIDA), MiningWatch Canada, Institute for Policy
Studies (IPS) - Global Economy Project and the Centre for Research on Multinational
Corporations (SOMO) (together, the “Petitioners”) applied for leave to file a
non-disputing party submission in this arbitration (the “Application’”) pursuant to
Annex 831 of the Free Trade Agreement between Canada and the Republic
of Colombia signed on 21 November 2008 and which entered into force on
15 August 2011 (the “FTA” or “Treaty’) and Article 37(2) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules in force as of 10 April 2006 (the “Rules”). The Arbitral Tribunal has considered

the Application and, having deliberated, has decided as follows.

II. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

On 13 September 2017, the Petitioners wrote to the Tribunal advising that one or more
of them anticipated submitting a request for leave to participate in the arbitration as
amici curiae on the basis that “the decision whether to permit the Angostura mining
project to go ahead inspired intense public interest” and requesting the Tribunal to
(i) make available the documents submitted to or issued by the Tribunal by establishing
procedures for contemporaneous (or as nearly as practicable) publication of proceeding
materials, and (ii) establish a clear timetable for requesting leave for amici intervention,

in order to avoid disrupting the proceedings.

Further to the Tribunal’s invitation, on 22 September 2017 the Parties provided their

comments on the Petitioners’ letter.

The Claimant submitted firstly that “the scope and procedure for the public disclosure

of arbitration documents is a matter for the Tribunal to define in consultation with the

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

Procedural Order No. 6

parties” and secondly that it “would be premature to set a deadline for applications for

leave to present amicus curiae submissions prior to a first exchange of substantive

pleadings between the parties.”

The Respondent submitted that “in principle’, the Tribunal did not need to implement
any particular procedures for the publication of materials on the basis that the matter

would be discussed during the First Session scheduled for 21 November 2017.

On 30 November 2017, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, paragraph 25 of

which established the following:

25. Submissions by a Non-Disputing Party
Arbitration Rule 37(2), Treaty Article 831 and Annex 831

25.1 In accordance with Annex A: (i) an application to the Tribunal
for leave to file a non-disputing party submission may be
submitted no later than one month after the first exchange of
pleadings on jurisdiction or merits, as applicable, between the
Parties has taken place; and (ii) any non-disputing party
submission must be filed no later than one month before the
second exchange of pleadings on jurisdiction or merits, as
applicable, begins.

25.2 The Parties will be granted an opportunity to submit
observations in relation to any non-disputing party application
for leave to file a non-disputing party submission, and to any
non-disputing party submissions, as provided in Annex A.

25.3 In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 37(2) and
Article 831 of the Treaty, the Tribunal shall ensure that any
non-disputing party submission does not disrupt the proceeding
or unduly burden or unfairly prejudice either Party.

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

Procedural Order No. 6

25.4 In the event that a non-disputing party is granted leave to make
a submission, the Tribunal shall impose a deadline for such
submission in accordance with § 25.3 above. The Tribunal shall
likewise decide whether and to what degree a non-disputing
party granted leave to make a submission shall be granted
access to the pleadings submitted by the Parties, subject to the
deletion of confidential information and excluding their
supporting documentation (including exhibits, witness
statements, and expert reports). Access to the pleadings shall be
granted upon the execution of a non-disclosure agreement by
the non-disputing party.

25.5 Non-disputing parties that demonstrate the same significant
interest in the arbitration shall submit a joint submission.

25.6 An application to the Tribunal for leave to file a non-disputing
party submission, and the filing of a submission, if allowed by
the Tribunal, shall be made in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 37(2), and Article 831 and Annex 831 of
the Treaty.

7. In accordance with the procedural calendar set out in Annex A to Procedural Order
No. 1, as amended by Procedural Order No. 4 dated 10 October 2018 and by Procedural
Order No. 5 dated 21 December 2018:

(a) On 19 December 2018, the Petitioners filed their Application; and

(b) On 28 January 2018, the Parties filed their respective observations on the

Petitioners’ Application.

Ill. THE APPLICATION

8. The Petitioners seek the following in their Application:

(a) Permission to file a non-disputing party submission pursuant to Annex 831 of

the FTA and Article 37 of the Rules;

(b) Access to documents pursuant to Article 830 of the FTA; and

(c) Permission to attend the oral hearings pursuant to Article 830 of the FTA.

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

A.

Procedural Order No. 6

THE PETITIONERS

The Application is submitted by a coalition of six community organisations and
environmental and human rights non-profit organisations from Colombia, the United

States, Canada and The Netherlands.

Comité para la Defensa del Agua y el Péramo de Santurban is “a social platform
originated in the Department of Santander, Colombia with the goal of defending the
paramo ecosystem from mining. The Comité is comprised of a diverse sector

representation of civil society and was founded in 2009.”

The Center for International Environmental Law (CIEL) is a U.S. non-profit
organization based in Washington D.C., which “has used the power of law to protect
the environment, promote human rights, and ensure a just and sustainable society since
1989”. CIEL has “supported the Comité para la Defensa del Agua y del Paramo de
Santurbdn and the Mesa Nacional frente a la Mineria Metdlica (El Salvador) in their
efforts to protect their rights at judicial and non-judicial fora including arbitration.
CIEL supported the complaint by the Comité to the accountability mechanism of the

International Finance Corporation in alliance with international organizations.”

The Asociaci6n Interamericana para la Defensa del Ambiente (AIDA) is a “non-profit
organization founded in 1998 and registered in the U.S. AIDA is an international
environmental law organization that works for the protection of threatened ecosystems
in the hemisphere and the communities that depend on them. AIDA has worked for the
protection of paramos, closely with the Comite and local communities, providing them
legal advice free of charge, to protect the pdramo. Among the international legal tools
used, is that which relates to arbitration panels, national litigation, and investment
protection agreements. AIDA supported the complaint presented by the community to

the CAO.”

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

Procedural Order No. 6

MiningWatch Canada is “a Canadian non-profit organization working to coordinate a
public interest response given mineral policies and practices in Canada and globally
that threaten the environment and community wellbeing. With affected communities,
MiningWatch Canada carries out monitoring, analysis and advocacy to affect the
behavior of industry and public decision-makers. This has included work on the
arbitration suit between Pacific Rim Cayman LLC and El Salvador in coordination
with US and Salvadoran organizations, as well as the conflict over Eco Oro Minerals’
Angostura project with the Committee for the Defense of Water and Pdéramo of

Santurbdn in Bucaramanga, Colombia.”

The Institute for Policy Studies (IPS) - Global Economy Project “works with
organizations around the word that are concerned by the increase in arbitration
against states under the unjust and partial system of investor-state disputes. In
particular, IPS focuses on the recent ICSID suits at the World Bank, cases that
extractive industries initiate under investment protection clauses in trade and
investment agreements when governments respond to the demands of their citizens and

act to protect the environment.”

The Centre for Research on Multinational Corporations (SOMO) is “a critical,
independent, not-for-profit knowledge center on multinationals based in the
Netherlands. SOMO examines a wide variety of trade and investment mechanisms,
analyzing their impact on society and sustainable development goals. [SOMO]
advocate[s] for modern trade and investment policies that contribute simultaneously to
social justice, sustainability, and just economic development. SOMO also supports
communities in their complaints to non-judicial grievance mechanisms, including
the complaint by the Committee for the Defense of Water and Paéramo of Santurbdn in
Bucaramanga, Colombia to the grievance mechanism of the International

Finance Corporation.”

 

The Petitioners state that none of them have any affiliation with any disputing party.

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)
Procedural Order No. 6

 

B. SIGNIFICANT INTEREST

17. The Petitioners submit they have a significant interest in the arbitration, stating in the
Application that “[t]here is a strong civil society movement within and outside of
Colombia concerned with the effects of the commercial activities of Eco Oro Minerals
Corp. in relation to the Eco Oro gold mine. Colombian citizens have a lasting interest

in the outcome of the dispute between [the Claimant] and the state of Colombia.”

C. THE SUBJECT MATTER OF THE PROPOSED SUBMISSION

18. The Petitioners state that any submission they make will provide a “unique contribution
to the resolution of factual, legal and policy issues within the scope of the dispute. As
the briefs are not yet publicly available, [the Petitioners] are currently unable to
include the specific facts or law. Nevertheless, [the Petitioners] anticipate focusing on
international law regarding human rights and particularly the right to live in a

healthy environment.”
IV. THE PARTIES’ OBSERVATIONS

A. THE CLAIMANT’S OBSERVATIONS

19. The Claimant opposes the Application save that it accepts that, pursuant to the
provisions of the FTA and of Procedural Order No. 1, the Petitioners are entitled to
attend the oral hearings as Article 830(2) of the FTA and paragraph 21.8 of Procedural

Order No.1 allow public access to hearings.

20. The Claimant posits the subject matter of the Petitioners’ proposed submission would

be beyond the scope of the dispute,' that the Petitioners do not bring a perspective,

' Claimant’s Observations dated 28 January 2019, pp. 4 et seq.

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)
Procedural Order No. 6

 

particular knowledge or insight different from that of the Parties? and that they do not

have a significant interest in the arbitration.*

B. THE RESPONDENT’S OBSERVATIONS

21. The Respondent does not object to the Application and “considers that it would be

appropriate for the Tribunal to allow it.”

22. The Respondent asserts that the Petitioners have a significant interest in the proceeding,
as “the outcome of the proceeding may have a direct or indirect impact on the rights
or principles [they represent and defend]” and are “capable of assisting the tribunal in

better understanding a factual or legal issue related to the proceeding” .*
V. THE TRIBUNAL’S CONSIDERATIONS

A. REQUEST TO FILE A NON-DISPUTING PARTY SUBMISSION

23. Both Parties accept that the Tribunal has the discretion, upon consulting with the
Parties, to allow a non-disputing party to make a submission pursuant to Arbitration
Rule 37(2), provided that certain minimum criteria are met. Specifically, Arbitration

Rule 37(2) states as follows:

After consulting both parties, the Tribunal may allow a person or
entity that is not a party to the dispute (in this Rule called the “non-
disputing party”) to file a written submission with the Tribunal
regarding a matter within the scope of the dispute. In determining
whether to allow such a filing, the Tribunal shall consider, among
other things, the extent to which:

2 Id., pp. 8 et seq.
Id., pp. 10 et seq.

+ Respondent’s Observations dated 28 January 2019, p. 3, section I.

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

Procedural Order No. 6

(a) the non-disputing party submission would assist the Tribunal
in the determination of a factual or legal issue related to the
proceeding by bringing a perspective, particular knowledge or
insight that is different from that of the disputing parties;

(b) the non-disputing party submission would address a matter
within the scope of the dispute;

(c) the non-disputing party has a significant interest in the
proceeding.

The Tribunal shall ensure that the non-disputing party submission
does not disrupt the proceeding or unduly burden or unfairly prejudice
either party, and that both parties are given an opportunity to present
their observations on the non-disputing party submission.

24. Article 831 of the FTA further provides that:

Article 831: Submissions by a Non-Disputing Party

1. A Tribunal shall have the authority to consider and accept written
submissions from a person or entity that is not a disputing party and
that has a significant interest in the arbitration. The Tribunal shall
ensure that any non-disputing party submission does not disrupt the
proceedings and that neither disputing party is unduly burdened or
unfairly prejudiced by it.

2. An application to the Tribunal for leave to file a non-disputing party
submission, and the filing of a submission, if allowed by the Tribunal,

shall be made in accordance with Annex 831.

25. Annex 831 of the FTA provides as follows:

Annex 831
Submissions by Non-Disputing Parties

1. The application for leave to file a non-disputing party submission
shall:

(a) be made in writing, dated and signed by the applicant, and include
the applicant’s address and other contact details;

(b) be no longer than five typed pages;

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

26.

27.

Procedural Order No. 6

(c) describe the applicant, including, where relevant, its membership
and legal status (e.g., company, trade association or other non-
governmental organization), its general objectives, the nature of its
activities, and any parent organization (including any organization
that directly or indirectly controls the applicant);

(d) disclose whether the applicant has any affiliation, direct or
indirect, with any disputing party;

(e) identify any government, person or organization that has provided
any financial or other assistance in preparing the submission;

(f) demonstrate that the applicant has a significant interest and specify
the nature of this interest in the arbitration;

(g) identify the specific issues of fact or law in the arbitration that the
applicant will address in its written submission;

(h) explain why the Tribunal should accept the submission; and
(i) be made in a language of the arbitration.
[..]

The Tribunal therefore turns to the three limbs which Arbitration Rule 37(2) requires
it to consider amongst other things. The Tribunal finds it appropriate to consider these

in the following order.

The subject matter of the proposed submission is beyond the scope of the dispute

In their Application, the Petitioners’ only reference to the subject matter of their
intended submission is as follows: “[...] we anticipate focusing on international law
regarding human rights and particularly the right to live in a healthy environment’.
Whilst the Petitioners submit that they are currently unable to give more particularity
as the briefs are not yet publicly available, as noted by the Claimant, certain of the
arbitration documents are in fact publicly available, including the Claimant’s Notice of
Intent, Request for Arbitration, and Procedural Order No. 2 (which outlines the scope
of the Parties’ submissions as to jurisdiction). Indeed, as the Claimant further notes, the

Petitioners refer to Procedural Order No. 4, so they must have been aware of the

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

5

6

28.

29.

30.

Procedural Order No. 6

existence and availability of Procedural Order No. 2, even had they chosen not to

review it.

The Tribunal agrees with the Claimant’s submission that “[r]elevance to the actual
scope of the dispute is a fundamental requirement for admission as amicus curiae.”>
The Claimant is not seeking restitution of its investment but compensation arising out
of alleged breaches of the FTA, asserting that the Respondent’s actions have prevented
it from developing the Angostura Project. Accordingly, the Tribunal does not consider
that the Petitioners have sought to show how generalised issues of human rights, and
particularly the right to live in a healthy environment, may be said to relate to the scope

of the specificities of this dispute.

In coming to this conclusion, the Tribunal first notes the generality of the assertion by
the Petitioners and the total lack of any specificity from the Petitioners as to the
relevance to the legal scope of the dispute. The Petitioners have not even sought to
address how the matters they wish to raise could assist the Tribunal or the Parties in
their work. The Tribunal further notes that the Respondent, in its observations, has not
provided any further clarification, limiting its observation to a bald assertion that it
“considers the amici’s stated area of intervention, that is the ‘international law
regarding human rights and particularly the right to live in a healthy environment’ is

a legal issue germane to the resolution of this dispute.”®

Accordingly, the Tribunal does not find that the Petitioners have met even the most
minimum requirements that would be needed to establish that issues of human rights,
and particularly the right to live in a healthy environment, may be said to form a part

of the scope of the dispute.

Claimant’s Observations dated 28 January 2019, para. 15.
Respondent's Observations dated 28 January 2019, p.4, section B.

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

7

9

31.

32.

33.

Procedural Order No. 6

Assistance to the Tribunal

An amicus submission should assist the Tribunal by bringing a perspective, particular
knowledge or insight that is different from that of the disputing parties. The Tribunal
will therefore only accept amicus submissions from persons who establish to the
Tribunal’s satisfaction that they have the expertise, experience and independence to be
of assistance in this case. The Tribunal notes with approval the decisions in both
Apotex v USA’ and Bear Creek v Peru® which require a petitioner to demonstrate a
“perspective, knowledge or insight” that differs from that which has or will be provided

by the international counsel and experts who have been retained by both parties.

The Tribunal notes that the Petitioners have not sought to explain in their Application
what is the nature of their “perspective, knowledge and insight’ other than merely to
assert that it would be different to that of the disputing parties. Whilst the Respondent
supports the Petitioners’ Application, its observation is limited to the statement that it
“considers that the [Petitioners] Application substantiates their significant relevant

knowledge of the Santurbdn pdéramo and attendant social and environmental issues.”°

Given the Tribunal’s determination in paragraph 30 above that the Petitioners have not
established that issues of human rights and the right to live in a healthy environment
could form a part of the scope of this dispute, we do not find that a knowledge of

“the Santurbdn pdéramo and attendant social and environmental issues” could, as such,

Apotex Holdings Inc. and Apotex Inc. v United States of America (ICSID Case No ARB (AF)/12/1), Procedural

Order on the Participation of the Applicant, Mr Barry Appleton, as a Non-Disputing Party, 4 March 2013
(CL-133).
Bear Creek Mining Corporation v Republic of Peru (ICSID Case No ARB/14/21), Procedural Order No. 5
Regarding the Association of Human Rights and Environment of Puno, Peru (DHUMA), and Dr. Carlos Lépez
PhD, Senior Legal Adviser to the International Commission of Jurists Application to File a Written Submis
21 July 2016 (CL-136) and Procedural Order No. 6 Regarding the Application by the Columbia Center on
Sustainable Investment (CCSI) to File a Written Submission, 21 July 2016 (CL-135).

 

ion,

Respondent's Observations dated 28 January 2019, p. 4, section B.

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

mn

34.

35.

Procedural Order No. 6

assist the Tribunal in determining this dispute, in a manner that goes beyond the likely

submissions of the Parties.

Significant Interest

The Tribunal agrees with the decision in Apotex v USA that a significant interest must
comprise “more than a ‘general’ interest in the proceeding. For example, the applicant
must demonstrate that the outcome of the arbitration may have a direct or indirect
impact on the rights or principles the applicant represents and defends”.'° The
Petitioners rely on two grounds to substantiate their claim to have a significant interest:
(1) because of the “strong civil society movement” which is concerned with the effects
of the Claimant’s commercial activities with respect to the Eco Oro gold mine and
(2) that Colombian citizens have a lasting interest in the outcome of this dispute. The
Petitioners do not expand on why this gives them — or any of them — a significant
interest. In its observations, the Respondent merely submits that the Tribunal’s decision
on the merits will directly concern the communities that the Petitioners represent and
that the arbitration concerns Colombia’s rights to protect the environment and its water
resources.'! In this regard, the limited and open-textured wording of the Application is
not sufficient to establish that any such interest has been shown in connection with the

specifics of the dispute that is before this Tribunal.

Accordingly, on the basis of the strikingly limited Application, the Tribunal does not
find that the Petitioners have met the requirements of Arbitration Rule 37(2) and
Annex 831 of the FTA, or even sought to meet those requirements. Those provisions
impose on a petitioner a duty to set out reasoned arguments, and none are

sufficiently present.

"© Apotex Holdings Inc. and Apotex Inc. v USA (ICSID Case No ARB (AF)/12/1), Procedural Order on the
Participation of the Applicant, Mr Barry Appleton, as a Non-Disputing Party, 4 March 2013 (CL-133), para. 38.

Respondent's Observations dated 28 January 2019, p. 3, section A.

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

Procedural Order No. 6

36. On the basis of the materials adduced, the Tribunal therefore declines the Petitioners’

Application to file a non-disputing party submission.

B. REQUEST FOR ACCESS TO DOCUMENTS

37. As the Tribunal has determined that the Petitioners should not be granted leave to make
a submission, the Tribunal finds that the Petitioners should not be granted leave to

access the arbitration documents.

C. REQUEST TO ATTEND HEARINGS

38. Article 830(2) of the FTA provides as follows:

Hearings held under this Section shall be open to the public. The
Tribunal may hold portions of hearings in camera to the extent
necessary to ensure the protection of confidential information. The
Tribunal shall establish procedures for the protection of confidential
information and appropriate logistical arrangements for open
hearings, in consultation with the disputing parties.

39. Paragraph 21.8 of Procedural Order No. | further provides as follows:

In accordance with Article 830(2) of the FTA, hearings shall be open
to the public. The Tribunal may hold portions of hearings in camera
to the extent necessary to ensure the protection of confidential
information. The Tribunal shall establish procedures for the protection
of confidential information and appropriate logistical arrangements
for open hearings, in consultation with the parties. Pursuant to
Article 827(2) of the FTA, Canada, as the other Contracting Party to
the Treaty, shall have the right to attend any hearings. Upon written
notice to the disputing parties, the Government of Canada may make
oral and written submissions to the Tribunal on a question of
interpretation of the Treaty.

40. Considering the provisions referred to above, the Petitioners have the right to attend

the oral hearings as these shall be open to the public.

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)
Procedural Order No. 6

VI. DISPOSITIF
Al. Based on the foregoing, the Tribunal makes the following orders:
1. The Application to file a non-disputing party submission is denied.
2. The Application to obtain access to documents is denied.

3. The Tribunal confirms that the Petitioners have the right to attend the oral
hearings as, pursuant to Article 830(2) of the FTA and to paragraph 21.8 of

Procedural Order No. 1, such hearings are open to the public.

4. There shall be no order as to costs.

On behalf of the Tribunal,

[Signed]

Mrs. Juliet Blanch
President of the Tribunal
Date: 18 February 2019

