INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Eco Oro Minerals Corp.

Claimant

Republic of Colombia
Respondent

(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER No. 2
DECISION ON BIFURCATION

 

Members of the Tribunal
Mrs. Juliet Blanch, President of the Tribunal
Professor Horacio A. Grigera Na6n, Arbitrator
Professor Philippe Sands, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mrs. Ana Constanza Conover Blancas

Assistant to the President of the Tribunal
Mr. Joao Vilhena Valério

28 June 2018

Til.

Contents

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND 1
THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS 2
A. THE RESPONDENT’ S POSITION. 2
B. THE CLAIMANT’S POSITION, 7
ANALYSIS 1
A. LEGAL FRAMEWORK 11
B. DISCUSSION 12
1 FTA pre-arbitration notice formalities 14
2. Claims outside the jurisdiction ratione tempori
3. Definition of Investor 15
4. Denial of benefits 15
5 The measures at issue are outside the jurisdiction ratione materiae pursuant to

Article 2201(3) of the FTA 16
6. Quantum 16
7. Conclusi 16
DECISION 17

 

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

L

Procedural Order No. 2

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

In accordance with the procedural calendar set out in Annex A to Procedural Order No.

1 dated 30 November 2017 (“Procedural Order No. 1”):

(a) On 18 April 2018, the Respondent filed a request to address the objections to

jurisdiction as a preliminary question (the “Request for Bifurcation”); and

(b) On 18 May 2018, the Claimant filed its observations on the Respondent’s Request

for Bifurcation (“Claimant’s Observations”).

On 4 June 2018, the Parties were advised that the Tribunal was inclined to join the
jurisdictional objections to the merits, and that the majority of the Tribunal had been
discussing whether the most efficient conduct of the proceeding could lead it to
bifurcate the quantum phase and accordingly sought the Parties’ views by

15 June 2018.

On 15 June 2018, both Parties provided their views as requested.

On 20 June 2018, the Respondent sent an email containing its further views on the

Claimant’s letter of 15 June 2018.

On 20 June 2018, the Parties were advised that the Tribunal did not wish to receive
unsolicited communications in the future but, to ensure equality of arms, the Claimant
was invited to respond briefly to the Respondent’s further communication by 22 June

2018.

On 22 June 2018, the Claimant provided its response to the Respondent’s

unsolicited email.

Page 1 of 17

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

Procedural Order No. 2

II. THE PARTIES’ POSITIONS

A. THE RESPONDENT’S POSITION

7. The Respondent in its Request for Bifurcation argues that the Tribunal has the
discretionary authority to decide jurisdictional issues as a preliminary question
pursuant to Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 41(1), (3) and (4) of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules as well as pursuant to Article 829 of the Canada-Colombia
Free Trade Agreement (“FTA”). The Claimant did not dispute this.

8. The Respondent argues that pursuant to the terms of Article 829(2) of the FTA there is
a presumption in favour of bifurcation. The Respondent further states that it is a basic
tenet of public international law that “a State is not obliged to give an account of itself
on issues of merits before an international tribunal which lacks jurisdiction or whose
jurisdiction has not yet been established” ' and accordingly bifurcation not only ensures
procedural economy and efficiency, but it also is an effective tool to uphold these

fundamental rules of the settlement of international disputes.

9. The Respondent argues that the applicable test to be applied is that in Philip Morris v.
Australia.” This test requires the Tribunal to determine whether the jurisdictional
objections at issue: (i) were prima facie serious and substantial; (ii) could be examined
without prejudging or entering into merits; and (iii) if successful, disposed of all or an
essential part of the claims. The only difference between the Parties’ positions with
respect to the applicable test is that whilst the Respondent asserts that the first limb of

the test merely requires showing that the objections are not frivolous nor vexatious,>

Request for Bifurcation, para. 9 (citing T. D. Gill (ed), Rosenne’s The World Court, What it is and how it works
(2003) (RL-26), p.81 (internal quotations omitted)).

Id., paras. 13 et seq. (citing Philip Morris Asia Limited v. The Commonwealth of Australia, UNCITRAL, PCA
Case No. 2012-12, Procedural Order No. 8, Bifurcation of the Procedure, dated 14 April 2014 (“Philip Morris v.
Australia”) (RL-15), para. 109).

Id., para. 14 (citing Resolute Forest Products Inc. v. Government of Canada, PCA Case No. 2016-13, Procedural
Order No. 4, Decision on Bifurcation dated 18 November 2016 (RL-22), para. 4.4).

Page 2 of 17

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

Procedural Order No. 2

the Claimant asserts that the hurdle is higher, in that the objection must be “sufficiently

serious and substantial as to justify bifurcation” .*

10. The Respondent makes the following jurisdictional objections. Firstly, the Respondent
submits that the Claimant has not complied with the mandatory conditions precedent
set out in Article 821 of the FTA. The Respondent lists four such failures by the
Claimant and concludes that the Parties have accordingly not perfected their consent to
submit the dispute to arbitration with the consequence that the Tribunal lacks

jurisdiction.

11. The first failure asserted by the Respondent is that the Claimant has failed to deliver a
written notice of intent (“Nol”) stating the legal and factual basis for the claim,
including the measures at issue. The Respondent notes that the measures forming the
basis of the Request for Arbitration and detailed in its Memorial differ from those
referred in the NoI. The Respondent further notes that some measures detailed in the
Claimant’s first Memorial were only adopted by the Respondent after the submission

of the claim to arbitration.

12. The second failure asserted by the Respondent is the Claimant’s failure to comply with
the mandatory six-month cooling-off period contained in Articles 821(2)(b) and (c) of
the FTA. The Request for Arbitration was received by the Secretary-General of ICSID
on 8 December 2016 but only the first measure giving rise to the dispute had come into

effect over six months before this date.

13. The third failure asserted by the Respondent is that the Claimant failed to comply with
the FTA’s waiver requirements pursuant to Article 821(2)(e)(ii) of the FTA. In its view,
the Claimant’s waiver did not refer to any of the measures detailed in the NoI, Request
for Arbitration or Memorial, contrary to the Respondent’s obligations under the FTA.
Accordingly, the Respondent argues that the waiver did not unequivocally reflect the

Claimant’s intention of withdrawing its right to initiate or continue domestic

4 Claimant’s Observations, para. 139 (citing Glencore Finance (Bermuda) Limited v. Bolivia, PCA Case No. 2016-

39, Procedural Order No. 2, Decision on Bifurcation, dated 31 January 2018 (RL-25), para. 42 (emphasis omitted)).

Page 3 of 17

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

Procedural Order No. 2

proceedings with respect to the measures at issue in the arbitration. In any event, the
Respondent argues that the waiver cannot be effective with respect to measures which

came into force after the submission of the dispute to arbitration.

Finally, the Respondent asserts that the Claimant did not comply with the mandatory
time limitations contained in Article 821(2)(e)(i) as more than 39 months have passed
from the date on which the Claimant acquired knowledge both of the measures

allegedly in violation of the FTA and of the loss or damage resulting therefrom.

The Respondent asserts that the Claimant’s failure to comply with the above four
conditions precedent is prima facie serious and substantial as such failure nullifies the
Parties’ consent to arbitration under the FTA. The Respondent further asserts that this
objection is not entwined with the merits of the dispute and can be determined without
prejudging the merits. Finally, the Respondent argues that the objection is capable of
disposing of the entire case because it means that the Parties have not perfected their

consent to arbitration.

The Respondent’s second objection is that the claims are outside the jurisdiction
ratione temporis of the Tribunal because, it submits, the dispute arose prior to the entry
into force of the FTA. The Respondent first asserts that the ban on mining activities in
paramo ecosystems was put in place by laws and regulations which predate the FTA’s
entry into force in August 2011 and further that the Ministry of Environment
specifically directed the Claimant not to conduct mining activities in the relevant area
nearly 16 months before the substantive protections of the FTA would begin to cover

the Claimant’s investments.

The Respondent submits that this objection is serious and substantial as the
chronological record speaks for itself, and can be examined without prejudging the
merits. In the Respondent’s view, the Tribunal would only need to assess whether the
dispute existed before the FTA entered into force and is capable of disposing of the

whole case. If successful, the Tribunal would have no jurisdiction ratione temporis

Page 4 of 17

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

20.

21.

22.

Procedural Order No. 2

under the FTA to hear the claim as it concerns facts and acts taking place prior to the

entry into force of the FTA.

The Respondent’s third objection is that the Claimant does not meet the definition of
Investor under Article 838 of the FTA as a result of the claim being assigned to a U.S.
entity, Trexs Investments LLC (‘“Trexs”) prior to submission of the claim to arbitration
pursuant to an investment agreement such that Trexs is the real party in interest in this
arbitration. Trexs, being a U.S. entity and not a Canadian entity, is not protected under

the FTA.

The Respondent submits that this objection is serious and substantial as credible
evidence exits demonstrating the assignment. It also considers that the objection can be
examined without prejudging the merits because it relates to a limited and discrete set
of facts, and that it is capable of disposing of the entire case because the Tribunal has

no jurisdiction under the FTA to hear claims of a U.S. national under the FTA.

The Respondent’s fourth objection is that it was entitled to and did properly deny the
benefits of the FTA to the Claimant pursuant to Article 814(2) of the FTA. The
Respondent asserts that it took this action on 15 December 2016 on the basis that the
Claimant is owned and controlled by investors of a non-party to the FTA (pursuant to
the investment agreement with Trexs) and that it does not have substantial business

activities in Canada.

Again, the Respondent asserts that this objection is serious and substantial as there is
credible evidence indicating that the Claimant is owned and controlled by U.S.
nationals and has no substantial business activities in Canada, can be examined without
prejudging the merits because it concerns a distinct and discrete factual scenario which
is completely independent from the merits of the dispute, and is capable of disposing

of the entire case.

The Respondent’s fifth objection is that the measures at issue are outside the

jurisdiction ratione materiae of the Tribunal as concerning measures “necessary [t]o

Page 5 of 17

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

6

23.

24.

Procedural Order No. 2

protect human, animal, or plant life or health” and “[flor the conservation of living or
non-living exhaustible natural resources”, which are specifically excluded from the
scope of the FTA’s investment protections, including recourse to international
arbitration pursuant to the provisions of Article 2201(3) of the FTA.> The Respondent
asserts that the effect of this provision is to exclude the application of the provisions of
Chapter Eight of the FTA where these would “prevent a Party from adopting or
enforcing” the environmental measures at issue.° The Respondent asserts that the
measures adopted are excluded from the scope of the FTA’s Chapter Eight being
(i) necessary; (ii) not constituting arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination; and (iii) not

being a disguised restriction on international trade or investment.

The Respondent submits that the objection is serious and substantial as the measures
adopted are intended to protect a legitimate public welfare objective such as the
protection of the environment, that it can be examined without prejudging the merits as
the analysis for the Tribunal to undertake would relate to the Respondent’s general
efforts to protect the pdramo ecosystems and thus would not overlap with the
Tribunal’s assessment of the measures’ specific effect on the Angostura Project and

would be capable of disposing of the entire case.

With respect to the possibility of bifurcating the quantum phase, the Respondent argues
that such bifurcation could result in a reduction of costs and duration of proceedings as
the expert evidence filed in support of the quantum is voluminous. Moreover, even if
the Tribunal concluded that the Respondent’s actions give rise to liability, it is probable
that the scope, complexity and duration of the quantum phase will be significantly
reduced as a result of findings made by the Tribunal in the merits phase. The
Respondent further submits that there is no overlap between the merits and damages
phases such that there would be no procedural efficiency to be gained from hearing the

merits and quantum phases together.

Request for Bifurcation, para. 100 (internal quotations omitted).

Id., para. 102 (internal quotations omitted).

Page 6 of 17

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

Procedural Order No. 2

B. THE CLAIMANT’S POSITION

25.

26.

27.

28.

7

The Claimant first notes that whilst it agrees with the application of the test in Philip
Morris v. Australia, bifurcation should only be ordered if it offers the possibility of
significant efficiency gains and thus the Tribunal should determine the most

procedurally efficient and fair way to conduct the proceeding.

With respect to the Respondent’s first objection, the Claimant notes as an overriding
point that even if the Respondent’s objections were to be accepted by the Tribunal, they
would not dispose of the totality of the Claimant’s claims such that a substantial portion
of the case would still proceed to the merits in any event. The Claimant then responds

to each of the alleged “failures” detailed by the Respondent.

With respect to the inadequacies in the Nol, citing the Crystallex decision,’ the
Claimant submits that the later measures (“Related Measures”) are part and parcel of
the same dispute which had previously arisen and over which the Tribunal had
jurisdiction and that the investor could not be required to re-notify the State in relation
to a subsequent measure enacted after submission of the NoI which related to the same
subject matter. The Claimant further notes that pursuant to Article 46 of the ICSID
Convention, the Tribunal is empowered to hear “incidental” and “additional” claims
“arising directly out of the subject-matter of the dispute”. The Claimant thus submits
that as all the measures taken by the Respondent after service of the Nol arise directly
out of the same subject matter of the dispute and the measures described in the Nol,

there is no failure by it with respect to the content of the Nol.

The Claimant adopts the same arguments with respect to the second alleged failure,
again noting that the Respondent was aware that a dispute had arisen in respect of the

specific subject matter in excess of the six months cooling-off period and had no

Claimant’s Observations, para. 18 (citing Cyrstallex International Corporation y. Bolivarian Republic of

Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/112, Award dated 4 April 2016 (CL-85), para. 454).

Page 7 of 17

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

29.

30.

Procedural Order No. 2

obligation to renotify the Respondent of any subsequent related measures nor wait any

additional cooling-off period.

With respect to the third alleged failure, the Claimant notes that it provided a waiver
almost verbatim with the form required by Article 821(3) (as contained in Annex 821)
of the FTA. Accordingly, the Claimant submits that there can be no legitimate
complaint from the Respondent. The Claimant indicates that the waiver is valid also
with respect to measures that post-date the waiver. Firstly, the Claimant notes that
consent was perfected when the Request for Arbitration was submitted with the waiver
attached at which time the Parties’ consent to resolve the dispute by ICSID arbitration
was perfected. Secondly, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal extends to any additional or
incidental claims which concern the same subject matter. For the sake of completeness,
the Claimant finally notes that it has complied at all times with the waiver. Accordingly,
the Claimant asserts that the objection is frivolous and would not materially reduce the

scope of the subsequent phase of the proceedings.

The Claimant then turns to the fourth alleged failure. The Claimant agrees with the
Respondent that the cut-off date to evaluate the timeliness of Eco Oro’s claims pursuant
to Article 821(2)(e)(i) of the FTA is 8 September 2013. The Claimant asserts that
looking at its claims as currently pleaded, on a prima facie basis the Respondent’s
breaches arose from measures commencing in 2014 such that, prima facie, the claims
have been brought in a timely manner. The Claimant further asserts that the events
which took place prior to that date did not deprive it of its rights and thus could not
form the basis of a claim against the Respondent. Finally, the Claimant asserts that in
any event the objection is too intertwined with the merits to justify bifurcation and
would fail the second limb of the Philip Morris v. Australia test as it would require a
substantial and detailed analysis of the facts of all the State measures, a legal
assessment of the nature of each measure and an evaluation of the damages or loss

caused by each measure.

Page 8 of 17

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

Procedural Order No. 2

The Claimant finally argues that this objection fails on the third limb of the Philip
Morris v. Australia test in that, even if successful, the Tribunal would still retain
jurisdiction over the dispute as described in the NoI and would thus not substantially

reduce the scope of the dispute, let alone obviate the need for a merits phase.

With respect to the second objection, the Claimant repeats the arguments made in
respect of the fourth alleged failure of the first objection, as detailed in

paragraph 30 above.

The Claimant then turns to the third objection in relation to which it argues that it is a
company constituted under the laws of Canada and notes that is has not assigned its
claim to Trexs but merely granted it an economic interest in the proceeds of the claim.

Accordingly, the Claimant argues that this objection is frivolous.

With respect to the fourth objection, the Claimant notes that the Respondent’s attempt
to deny the Claimant benefits under the FTA was exercised after the claim had been
submitted. The Claimant asserts that pursuant to Plama® a denial of benefits clause can
only operate prospectively such that any attempt by the Respondent to deny the
Claimant the benefits under the FTA would have no retroactive effect. Accordingly,
the Claimant argues that bifurcation would be inappropriate as this objection would
have no effect on the admissibility of the Claimant’s claim. The Claimant further argues
that, as it is not owned or controlled by a national of a non-party and as it has substantial
business activities in Canada, the Respondent could not validly invoke the denial of

benefits clause in any event.

Finally, with respect to the Respondent’s fifth objection, the Claimant argues that the
Respondent’s interpretation of Article 2201(3) of the FTA is flawed in that, by
expressly referring to its applicability with respect to the provisions of Chapter Eight,
the purpose is to limit the remedies an investor can seek by preventing the right of

restitution; it does not operate to prevent an investor being permitted to seek

8 Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Decision of Jurisdiction dated
8 February 2005 (RL-3), cited in Claimant’s Observations, para. 103.

Page 9 of 17

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

36.

37.

38.

39.

Procedural Order No. 2

compensation for a breach of the FTA in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
Eight. The Claimant notes that it is not seeking restitution and accordingly this
provision is irrelevant and that, in any event, an analysis of whether the specific
measure is covered by Article 2201(3) of the FTA is inextricably linked with an

assessment of the merits and would not achieve a reduction of time or costs.

In conclusion, the Claimant argues that the Respondent’s objections are not serious or
likely to succeed, that even if successful they would not dispose of the entire case or a
material part of it, or are so intertwined with the merits that bifurcation would not be

efficient.

With respect to the Tribunal’s subsequent question as to bifurcating the quantum phase,
the Claimant argues that issues of quantum are closely intertwined with issues of
liability and jurisdiction such that there would be duplication of evidence leading to
additional cost and a longer proceeding. With respect to liability, the Claimant notes
that to determine whether there has been an indirect expropriation pursuant to
Article 811 of the FTA, it would be necessary for the Tribunal to determine the
economic impact of the measures in question. With respect to jurisdiction, the Tribunal
will be required to assess the Claimant’s knowledge that it has suffered loss or damage

as well as the date on which it acquired or should have acquired that knowledge.

Accordingly, the Claimant argues that it would be inappropriate to bifurcate the

quantum phase.

The Respondent, by an unsolicited email of 20 June 2018, responded to the Claimant’s
arguments in paragraph 37 above firstly by arguing that the assessment of the economic
impact of the measures in question does not rely on expert damages evidence as the
Claimant’s expert has assumed a 100% loss. Secondly, the Respondent argues that the
investor’s knowledge that it has suffered loss or damage does not require quantification

of actual damage but is limited to generic knowledge of the existence of damage.

Page 10 of 17

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

40.

Al.

42.

Procedural Order No. 2

In response, the Claimant argues that the Respondent is incorrect in its assertion that it
does not rely on expert evidence to assess the economic impact of the measures but
that, in any event, this does not have any relevance to the procedural efficiencies of
bifurcation. Pursuant to the text of the FTA, the Tribunal will need to assess the
difference in value of the investment pre and post the effect of the measures to
determine whether there has been a diminution of value such that there has been an
indirect expropriation. This, asserts the Claimant, will entail the Tribunal’s evaluation

of the Parties’ respective positions on quantum.

The Claimant further argues that the Respondent is incorrect to assert that no damages
assessment is necessary to determine its jurisdictional argument with respect to
knowledge of loss or damage. It notes that for the Respondent to succeed in its
jurisdictional objection, it will need to establish that the Claimant was or should have
been aware both of a breach of the FTA and that as a result it had incurred loss or
damage by the cut-off date. The Claimant argues that this will entail the Tribunal
assessing and comparing the effect of any measures that fall outside the limitation
period and the effect of the measures that form the basis of the Claimant’s claim which,

the Claimant asserts, will require an evaluation of causation and damages.

In conclusion, the Claimant submits that even if the Tribunal considers that any of the
Respondent’s objections were sufficiently serious and substantial to warrant
bifurcation and would dispose of or would significantly reduce the need for the merits
phase and are not intertwined with the merits, the Tribunal must still weigh up the delay
and costs that would be incurred if bifurcation were to be ordered against the time and

economy to be gained by bifurcation if the jurisdictional objections are successful.

Ill. ANALYSIS

A. LEGAL FRAMEWORK

43.

The Tribunal’s power to rule on the Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation is enshrined

in the ICSID Convention and in the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

Page 11 of 17

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

Procedural Order No. 2

44. Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention establishes that:

Any objection by a party to the dispute that that dispute is not within
the jurisdiction of the Centre, or for other reasons is not within the
competence of the Tribunal, shall be considered by the Tribunal which
shall determine whether to deal with it as a preliminary question or to
join it to the merits of the dispute.
45. Furthermore, Rule 41(4) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules provides in its relevant part

that:

The Tribunal [...] may deal with the objection as a preliminary
question or join it to the merits of the dispute. If the Tribunal overrules
the objection or joins it to the merits, it shall once more fix time limits
for the further procedures.

46. The Tribunal notes that Article 829 of the FTA provides as follows:

Article 829: Preliminary Objections

1. The Tribunal shall have the power to rule on preliminary objections
to jurisdiction and admissibility.

2. Any preliminary objection that the dispute should not be admitted
or registered, is not within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal or, for other
reasons, is not within the competence of the Tribunal, shall be made
in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules as early as possible.

B. DISCUSSION

47. The Tribunal does not agree that there is a general presumption in favour of bifurcation,
or that such a presumption is to be read into Article 829(2) of the FTA. The Tribunal
interprets this provision merely as imposing a requirement that if a jurisdictional

objection is made, then it should be made as early as possible.

48. The Parties agree that the matter as to whether the proceedings shall be bifurcated or
not is a matter that falls to be decided by the Tribunal, having regard to the principles
set out below, and the particular circumstances of each case.?

9

Request for Bifurcation, para. 12; Claimant’s Observations, para. 4.

Page 12 of 17

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)
Procedural Order No. 2

 

49. The Tribunal recognises that, as a general matter, three factors are to be examined by
the Tribunal in deciding whether to bifurcate (the so-called ‘three-part test’ applied in

Philip Morris v. Australia’):

(a

whether the objections raised are prima facie serious and substantial;

(b) whether the objection can be examined without prejudging or entering the merits

of the case; and

(c

if decided in the Respondent’s favour, whether the objection would dispose of all

or an essential part of the claims raised.

50. The Tribunal recognises the significance of the concerns raised by the Respondent with
respect to determining its jurisdiction before turning to issues of liability and/or
quantum. The Tribunal considers that, in applying the three-part test, it should seek to
determine what will best serve the Parties and the sound administration of justice, in
particular with respect to procedural efficiency. It recognises, too, that any additional
costs that may be incurred by the Respondent in the event that there is no bifurcation
may be taken into account when the Tribunal makes its final decision on costs. The
Tribunal further emphasises that at all times it has been guided by procedural economy
and fairness on a prima facie basis and has striven to ensure that it has not prejudged
the merits of any of the jurisdictional arguments — or any other arguments — made by

either Party.

51. The Tribunal therefore turns to consider each of the Respondent’s objections. In
undertaking this analysis, the Tribunal confirms that, at this stage of the proceedings,
it has formed no view whatsoever on the merits, whether in relation to liability or
quantum, or on any objection to jurisdiction. The Tribunal further determines that, with

respect to the first limb of the three-part test, for an objection to be held to be “serious

‘0 Philip Morris v, Australia, para. 109.

Page 13 of 17

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

52.

53.

54.

Procedural Order No. 2

and substantial” a higher threshold must be applied than merely requiring that the

objection is not frivolous or vexatious.

FTA pre-arbitration notice formalities

The Tribunal considers that to determine the validity of the first objection it will be
required to delve into the substance of the alleged breaches. In its view, the issues are
not sufficiently distinct from the merits that this consideration could be undertaken
without duplication of the Parties’ and the Tribunal’s efforts. The Tribunal further notes
— without forming a view on the matter — the Claimant’s submissions that even if the
Respondent were to be successful in making this objection, there is, at minimum,
perfected consent for claims arising out of measures detailed on the Nol, even if not for
claims arising out of subsequent measures. It considers that to determine this issue
without having regard to the merits would raise difficulties. Finally, the Tribunal agrees
with the Claimant that jurisdictional issues are to be decided prima facie on the basis
of the Claimant’s pleadings, which indicate that the Related Measures arise out of the
subject matter of the dispute covered by the Nol or alternatively are additional or
ancillary claims which are within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal pursuant to the
operation of Article 46 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 40(1) of the ICSID

Arbitration Rules.

The Tribunal comes to the same view as that expressed in paragraph 52 with respect to

the Claimant’s alleged failure to wait for the cooling-off period to expire.

The Tribunal agrees with the Respondent that the issue of whether the waiver was valid
appears to be an issue of legal assessment, which is not intertwined with the merits and
will not require an investigation into facts or issues that will be duplicated in a merits
hearing. The Tribunal notes, however, that even if determined in favour of the
Respondent, it will not resolve the totality of the Claimant’s claims. The Tribunal
further notes that without an examination of the merits of the claim, the Tribunal is
unable to determine the extent to which bifurcation of this objection would be capable

of disposing of a substantial part of the claim.

Page 14 of 17

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

Procedural Order No. 2

The Tribunal finds that to determine whether the claim is in breach of the FTA’s
mandatory time limits contained in Article 821(2)(e)(i), it would be necessary to
undertake an enquiry into the meaning and effect of the measures instituted by the
Respondent in 2010 — 2012 and into the Claimant’s actual knowledge as well as
considering this issue on an objective basis. The Tribunal considers that these issues
are so closely intertwined with the merits that it is unlikely that there would be a

procedural efficiency to be gained in bifurcating this issue.

The Tribunal does not therefore believe there would be any procedural efficiency in

bifurcating the first objection.

Claims outside the jurisdiction ratione temporis

The Tribunal considers that a determination of this objection will require the same
exercise to be undertaken as that with respect to the Respondent’s objection that the
Claimant is in breach of Article 821(2)(e)(i) of the FTA. As determined in paragraph 55
above, the Tribunal considers that the issues are so closely intertwined with the merits
that it is unlikely that there would be any procedural efficiency to be gained in

bifurcating this objection.

Definition of Investor

The Tribunal accepts that this is a discrete issue which could be determined without
consideration of the merits. However, having careful considered the material that is
currently before it, the Tribunal is not minded to order bifurcation of this objection on
the basis it does not appear, on a prima facie basis and without prejudice to its view
once the matter has been fully argued, that it amounts to a serious or substantial

objection such as to justify bifurcation.

Denial of benefits

Whilst the Tribunal accepts that this is a discrete issue which could be determined
without consideration of the merits, the Tribunal is not minded to order bifurcation of

this objection on the basis it does not appear, on a prima facie basis and without

Page 15 of 17

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

60.

61.

62.

63.

Procedural Order No. 2

prejudice to its view once the matter has been fully argued, that it is a serious or

substantial objection such as to justify bifurcation.

The measures at issue are outside the jurisdiction ratione materiae pursuant to
Article 2201(3) of the FTA

On the basis of the limited material that is available to the Tribunal at this stage, it is
not possible to determine with any confidence whether this is a discrete issue which
could be determined without consideration of the merits. However, the Tribunal
appreciates that it may be necessary to examine each measure to determine its purpose
and impact which would not lead to procedural fairness or efficiency and in any event
the Tribunal is not of the view that, on a prima facie basis and without prejudice to its
view once the matter has been fully argued, that this objection is serious or substantial

justifying bifurcation.

Quantum

The Tribunal has carefully considered the arguments of the Parties as to the utility of
bifurcating the quantum phase of the proceedings. On the basis of the material that is
currently available to it, the Tribunal considers that issues related to quantum are
closely intertwined with the merits, such that it is unlikely that any procedural

efficiencies would be obtained by such a bifurcation.

Conclusion

Accordingly, having weighed up the Parties’ competing arguments, the Tribunal does
not believe that the Respondent’s concerns are justified and it therefore does not order

bifurcation either of jurisdiction or of quantum.

In reaching this conclusion, on the basis of the material that is available to it at this
time, the Tribunal wishes to make clear that it has formed no view on whether or not it
has jurisdiction to hear some or all of the claims that have been put before it, or on any
aspect of the merits. It has simply concluded that, at this stage of the proceedings and

on the basis of the limited material that is available to it, it would be assisted by having

Page 16 of 17

Eco Oro Minerals Corp. v. Republic of Colombia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/16/41)

 

Procedural Order No. 2

the jurisdictional, merits and quantum issues fully argued together. Further, this
decision is entirely without prejudice to the allocation of costs in these proceedings,

which will be decided at a later stage.

IV. DECISION

64. For the foregoing reasons, the Arbitral Tribunal:

(a) Rejects the Respondent’s request to bifurcate the proceedings.

(b) Directs the Parties to follow Scenario 3 of the procedural calendar set out in
Annex A to Procedural Order No. 1, as amended in accordance with the Tribunal’s
communication of 12 March 2018 regarding the Respondent’s additional period of

nine calendar days to file its next substantive memorial.

(c) Reserves its decision on the costs of this application for a later stage.

On behalf of the Tribunal,

[Signed]

Mrs. Juliet Blanch

President of the Tribunal
Date: 28 June 2018

Page 17 of 17

