INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

EDF INTERNATIONAL S.A.
SAUR INTERNATIONAL S.A.
and

LEON PARTICIPACIONES ARGENTINAS S.A.

ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

(ICSID Case No. ARB/03/23)

Annulment Proceeding

DECISION

Members of the ad hoc Committee

Sir Christopher Greenwood, CMG, QC, President
Professor Teresa Cheng, SC
Professor Yasuhei Taniguchi

Secretary to the ad hoc Committee

Ms Anneliese Fleckenstein

Date of dispatch to parties: 5 February 2016

Representing the Argentine Republic:

Dr. Angelina Abbona

Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacién
(until 16 December 2015)

Dr. Carlos Francisco Balbin
Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién
Posadas 1641

C1112ADC Buenos Aires
Argentina

Representing EDF International et al:

Mr. Paolo Di Rosa

Armold & Porter, LLP

601 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20001

United States of America

and

Mr. Michael R. Rattagan

Mr. Ricardo Barreiro Deymonnaz
Rattagan, Macchiavello, Arocena
& Pejia Robirosa Abogados
Torre Alem Plaza

Avenida Leandro N. Alem 855, piso 8
C1001AAD Buenos Aires
Argentina

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Acronyms and Abbreviations Vii
I. Introduction 1
A. Procedural History of the Annulment Proceedings ............cccccseees eee eeeeeeeeseneneeeeeeeeees 1
B. Brief History of the Dispute 4
Cc. Summary of the Jurisdiction Decision and Award... ccc eens eee es eeteeeneeeeneeieee 7

1. The Jurisdiction Decision 7

2. The Award 9

a. Applicable law 9

b. The “umbrella clause” and Argentina’s compliance with specific commitments ........... 10

c. Fair and equitable treatment. 12

d. Claims in respect of actions taken before the emergency... eect eeeeeeeees 12

e. Other claims 13

f. Argentina’s defences 13

g. Quantum of Damages 14

IL. Grounds for Annul 14
A Challenges to Two Members of the Tribunal... ecceceeeceees cece eeeeseneeeeeeeeeeeees 15

B Applicable Law 16
Cc. Derivative Rights and the Umbrella Clause .....0.0.0.cccccceeeseseseseeeseeeeeeeeneneneeneeeeenenenees 17
D. Necessity 18

E Failure to Decide on Fund: | Evidence 18

F Failures in the Assessment of Damages .............cccccceseseseeeeseseseeseseseeeseeteneeeeeeeeeseeenenenees 18
III. The Nature of Annulment and the Powers of an ad hoc Committee .........c.cccccecceeessseeteseeteseeness 19
IV. Challenges to Two Members of the Tribunal 24

iii

A. Introduction 24

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The facts 24

1. Professor Kaufmann-Kohler. 24

2. Professor Remén 27

Cc. Arguments of the Parties 28
1. Argentina 28

a. General 28

b. Professor Kaufmann-Kohler 29

c. Professor Remén 31

2. The Claimants 32

a. General 32

b. Professor Kaufmann-Kohler 33

c. Professor Remén 35

D. The Decision of the Committee 36
1. The Legal Framework 36

a. Article 14(1) of the Convention 36

b. The Convention Machinery for Challenging an Arbitrator ...........c.cccccceesseseeteseeteeeenees 39

 

c. The Role of an ad hoc Committee ..

(1) The role of an ad hoc committee where no challenge has been made under Article 57

 

 

 

 

 

44
(2) The role of an ad hoc committee where a challenge has been made, and rejected,
under Article 57 48
2. Professor Kaufmann-Kohler. 52
3. Professor Remén 60
V. Applicable Law Issues 65
A. Introduction 65

 

B. Parties’ Arguments 66

 

 

 

 

1. Argentina 66

2. The Claimants 68

Cc. The Decision of the Committee 69
1. The Legal Framework 69

a. Manifest excess of powers (Article 52(1)(b) of the Convention) «0.0.0.0... eee 69

b. Failure to state reasons (Article 52(1)(e) of the Convention) ...........:ccceceeeeseeeeereteereees 71

c. Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure (Article 52(1)(d)) .........e 73

2. Application of the Argentina-France BIT and Non-Application of the Argentine-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Luxembourg BIT 75

3. Non-Application of Argentine Law 82

4. Discrimination 85

VI. Derivative Rights and Umbrella Clause Issues ...........c0ccccssseseseesesceeeeeeeeeseneeeeeeesetseeeeeeeeeenes 86
A. The Relevant Treaty Provisions 86
B. The Issues raised by Argentina and the Decision of the Commiittee.............0cccceceeeeee 89

a. The MEN Clause and the Umbrella Clauses...........c.csccccsscscesesseseessseeeseeseseesessesesteneaneneas 89

(1) Parties’ Position 89

(2) The Decision of the Committee 0.0.0.0. ceee eee ee cece eeeeeeeeeseseeeeteneteteeeneeeees 90

b. Derivative Rights 91

(1) Parties’ Position 91

(2) The Decision of the Committee 0.0.0.0. ceee eee ee cece eeeeeeeeeseseeeeteneteteeeneeeees 93

c. Privity of Contract. 99

(1) Parties’ Position 99

(2) The Decision of the Committee ..0........ccececssceeeeseeeeseseeeeseeeeeeseaeeeeeeseeeesseeeeeeeaeeeteeatee 101

Vil. Necessity Issue 105
A. The Issues Raised by Argentina 105

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B. Parties’ Arguments
1. Argentina
2. The Claimants
Cc. Committee’s Decision
1. The CMS and Enron Decisions
2. Article 5(3) of the Argentina-France BIT ........c ccc cee eeceeee cece tees eeeeneneeeeeeeetenenes
3. Necessity under Customary International Law .........cc cece eee eee eseeeeteeeseeeneneeneeeee
VII. Failure to Address Evidence
A. The Issues Raised by Argentina
B. Parties’ Arguments
1. Argentina
2. The Claimants
Cc. Committee’s Decision
IX. Causation and Damages
A. The Issues Raised by Respondent
B. Parties’ Arguments
1. Argentina
2. The Claimants
Cc. Committee’s Decision
X. Costs

 

XI. Dispositif

 

vi

106
106
111
112
112
116
119
126
126
127
127
128
129
131
131
132
132
134
135
143

145

AC
Award

BIT
Counter-Memorial
Disqualification Decision

ICSID, or the Centre

ICSID Arbitration Rules

ICSID Convention

Jurisdiction Decision

Memorial
RA

Rejoinder

Reply

Acronyms and Abbreviations

Claimants’ Annex; document submitted by the Claimants

Award of 11 June 2012 in EDF International SA and
Others v. Argentine Republic (ICSID ARB/03/23)

Bilateral investment treaty
Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Annulment
Decision of 25 June 2008 on the challenge to Professor

Kaufmann-Kohler in EDF International SA and Others v.
Argentine Republic (ICSID ARB/03/23)

International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes

International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings
(2006 version)

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States, 1965

Decision of 5 August 2008 on Jurisdiction in EDF
International SA and Others v. Argentine Republic (ICSID
ARB/03/23)

Argentine Republic’s Memorial on Annulment

Respondent’s Annex; document

Argentine Republic

submitted by the

Argentine Republic’s Rejoinder on Annulment

Claimants’ Reply on Annulment

I. Introduction

A. Procedural History of the Annulment Proceedings

On 9 October 2012, the Centre received from the Argentine Republic (“Argentina”) an
Application (the “Application”) for the Annulment of the Award rendered on 11 June 2012,
by the Tribunal in the arbitration proceeding between EDF International S.A. (“EDFT”), Saur
International S.A. (“Saur”) and Leon Participaciones Argentinas S.A. (“Le6én’) (collectively
“the Claimants”) and Argentina. The Application contained a request for the stay of
enforcement of the Award under Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID
Arbitration Rule 54(1). On the same day, the Centre acknowledged receipt of the

Application and transmitted a copy to the Claimants.

On 11 October 2012, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 50(2), ICSID’s Secretary-General
registered the Application and transmitted a copy of the Notice of Registration to the parties.
The parties were also informed that, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 52(2), the

enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed.

On 2 January 2013, the ad hoc Committee was deemed constituted by Sir Christopher
Greenwood (British), President of the Committee; Professor Teresa Cheng (Chinese) and

Professor Yasuhei Taniguchi (Japanese).

On 22 February 2013, the First Session was held with the Members of the Committee present
at the seat of the Centre in Washington, D.C. and the parties participating via telephone
conference. During that session, a procedural calendar for the conduct of the proceedings

was agreed upon by the parties.

On 25 February 2013, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 1 concerning the schedule
of the proceedings. On 5 March 2013, the Committee issued Procedural Order No. 2
concerning the schedule of the proceedings for the continuation of the provisional stay of
enforcement of the Award which had been granted by the Secretary-General in accordance

with Article 54(2) of the Arbitration Rules.

On 18 March 2013, Argentina filed a formal request for the stay of the enforcement of the
Award. On 3 April 2013, the Claimants filed observations on Argentina’s request. On 17

April 2013, Argentina filed a response and on 29 April 2013, the Claimants filed a reply.

On 28 May 2013, Argentina filed its Memorial on Annulment.

On 18 July 2013, the Committee issued a decision continuing the stay of enforcement of the
Award until 30 September 2013, upon which date the stay would be lifted unless Argentina

provided by 16 September 2013 an

unequivocal undertaking that, in the event the Award is not annulled (or is
annulled only in part), it will make payment of the principal and interest
awarded (or, in the event of partial annulment, awarded in those parts of the
Award which are not annulled) within ninety days of the final decision of the
Committee and without any requirement that the Claimants bring proceedings
in the courts of Argentina or that those courts or other Argentine national
authorities issue an order requiring payment, the stay of enforcement will be
lifted with effect from midnight on 30 September 2013 unless the Committee
otherwise decides.

In a letter dated 13 September 2013, Argentina declined to give the undertaking requested in
the Committee’s decision of 18 July 2013. Consequently, on 26 September 2013, the
Committee issued a further decision lifting the stay of enforcement of the Award which took

effect from midnight (Washington D.C. time) on 30 September 2013.

On 16 September 2013, EDF filed its Counter-Memorial on Annulment. Argentina filed its
Reply on Annulment on 6 December 2013 and on 25 February 2014, EDF filed its Rejoinder

on Annulment.

From 2 June to 3 June 2014 the Committee held a hearing on annulment at the seat of the

Centre in Washington D.C.. Present at the hearing were:-

- the ad hoc Committee: Sir Christopher Greenwood, President of the
Committee; Professor Teresa Cheng and Professor Yasuhei Taniguchi,
Members of the Committee; and Mrs. Anneliese Fleckenstein, Secretary

of the Committee;

- for the Argentine Republic: Dr. Javier Pargament, Subprocurador del Tesoro
de la Nacion; Dr. Gabriel Bottini; Mrs. Maria Alejandra Etchegorry and
Soledad Romero Caporale, and Mr. Nicolés Duhalde from the

Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacién; and

- for the Claimants: Mr. Paolo Di Rosa, Ms. Mallory B. Silberman, Mr. Pedro
G. Soto, Mr. Kelby Ballena (Legal Assistant) and Ms. Aimee Reilert
(Legal Assistant) from Arnold & Porter LLP; and Mr. Jean-Paul Palma
and Mrs. Isabelle Praud from EDF.

In a letter dated 29 July 2015, Argentina requested information from Professor Cheng in
connection with a disclosure made in the Total case'. Argentina supplemented its letter with a
further letter dated 3 August 2015, in which Argentina requested further information from
Professor Cheng. By letter dated 6 August 2015, Professor Cheng provided answers to both

of Argentina’s letters.

On 6 August 2015, Argentina filed a proposal for the disqualification of Professor Cheng in
the present proceedings, in accordance with Article 57 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID
Arbitration Rule 9 (the “Disqualification Proposal’). On the same day, the Centre informed
the parties that the proceeding had been suspended until the Disqualification Proposal was

decided, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(6).

Argentina filed its arguments on the Proposal on 19 August 2015; the Claimants replied to
the Proposal on 25 August 2015. Professor Cheng furnished explanations on 7 September
2015, as envisaged by ICSID Arbitration Rule 9(3). Argentina submitted additional

comments on 14 September 2015. The Claimants did not submit any additional comments.

On 17 September 2015 Argentina wrote to the Secretary of the Committee requesting
information from the members of the Committee regarding any past or present links with any
of the parties or their counsel currently engaged in litigation with Argentina. Sir Christopher
Greenwood and Prof. Yasuhei Taniguchi provided responses to this request by letters of 22

September and 6 October 2015, and 16 October 2015, respectively.

' Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/04/1).

On 20 November 2015, the Majority issued its Decision on the Proposal to Disqualify

Professor Teresa Cheng rejecting Argentina’s Disqualification Proposal.

On 22 December 2015, the proceeding was declared closed, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration
Rule 38(1).

B. Brief History of the Dispute

The dispute, which is described in detail in paragraphs 50-176 of the Award, has its origins in
the restructuring during the late 1990’s of the framework for the distribution of electricity in
the Argentine Province of Mendoza (“Mendoza”). On 28 May 1997, Mendoza enacted
Provincial Law No. 6,497 (the “Provincial Electricity Law’) and No. 6,498 (the
“Transformation Law”) which adopted a new regulatory framework for the provision of
electricity supplies in the Province. In accordance with that framework, the state-owned
electricity distributor was to be privatised. A new company, Empresa Distribuidora de
Energia de Mendoza S.A. (“EDEMSA”) was created. Mendoza sought the sale of 51% of the
Class “A” shares in EDEMSA and to that end retained Chase Manhattan Bank and Salomon
Smith Barney as advisers. In accordance with their remit, Chase Manhattan and Salomon
Smith Barney sought to attract foreign investors. They prepared an information
memorandum (the “Info Memo”) and held a number of “road shows”, including an exclusive
meeting with Electricité de France (“EDF”), the parent company of EDFI. They emphasised
the guarantees to investors under the regulatory framework and the concession which it was
envisaged would be granted to EDEMSA. That framework provided for tariffs to be fixed in
such a way as to ensure an investor was able to recoup expenditure and obtain a reasonable
rate of return on the investment. Tariffs were to be fixed for a five year period but with
provision for both an ordinary tariff review and an extraordinary tariff review. At the time,
the Convertibility Law of Argentina provided that the Argentine peso was convertible at the
rate of one peso to one US dollar. It was envisaged that the concession would contain
provisions guaranteeing that the costs and reasonable rate of return would be determined in
US dollars for purposes of assessing the tariff rate and that customers would then be invoiced
in pesos at the rate of one peso to one dollar. According to the Tribunal, these safeguards

were “key features of the sales pitch” by Chase Manhattan Bank and Salomon Smith

20.

Barney.” Investors wishing to bid for the shares in EDEMSA were required to accept and

initial a copy of the proposed concession.

A consortium company, SODEMSA, incorporated in Argentina, was formed by EDFI,
SAURI and Crédit Lyonnais together with Argentine co-investors. EDFI acquired a 45%
interest in SODEMSA and SAURI a 15% interest. The remaining 40% interest was acquired
by MENDINVERT, an Argentine company, in which Crédit Lyonnais held 70% of the
shares, the remainder being held by Argentine investors. Crédit Lyonnais subsequently
transferred its interest in MENDINVERT to Leén, a Luxembourg corporation which was
wholly owned by Crédit Lyonnais until 2004 when it became a wholly owned subsidiary of
EDFI.* SODEMSA successfully bid for 51% of the Class A shares in EDEMSA and in July
1998 EDEMSA and the Government of Mendoza concluded an agreement (“the Concession
Agreement”) on the terms envisaged. SODEMSA assumed control of EDEMSA and

commenced operations on 1 August 1998.

In late 2001 and early 2002 Argentina experienced an acute economic emergency which saw
the appointment and resignation of four presidents in a period of three weeks.* The scale of
the situation facing Argentina was described by the tribunal in the Continental Casualty case

which spoke of —

acrisis that brought about the sudden and chaotic abandonment of the cardinal
tenet of the country’s economic life, such as the fixed convertibility rate which
had been steadfastly recommended and supported for more than a decade by
the IMF and the international community; the near collapse of the domestic
economy; the soaring inflation; the leap in unemployment; the social hardships
bringing down more than half the population below the poverty line; the
immediate threats to the health of young children, the sick and the most
vulnerable members of the population; the widespread unrest and disorders; the
real risk of insurrection and extreme political disturbances; the abrupt
resignations of successive presidents and the collapse of the government,
together with a partial breakdown of the political institutions and an extended
vacuum of power...>

2 Award, para. 1008.

3 Jurisdiction Decision, para. 133.

+ Award, paras. 141-156.

5 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/9), Award of 5 September 2008,
para. 180 (“Continental Casualty”).

21.

22.

23.

A National Emergency Law was adopted in January 2002 which abrogated the fixed parity
between the peso and the US dollar and allowed the peso to float on the exchange markets. It
rapidly dropped to an exchange rate of approximately three pesos to one dollar. The National
Emergency Law, which was adopted in slightly modified form by the Province of Mendoza,
also abrogated tariff terms in public utility concessions involving foreign currencies,
including the relevant clauses in the Concession Agreement. The effect was that EDEMSA
was obliged to accept payment calculated on the basis of parity between the peso and the US
dollar even though the peso was then worth only approximately one third of a dollar; an
effect known as “pesification”. In addition, the emergency measures adopted by Argentina
and Mendoza precluded utility companies from suspending or changing the performance of
their obligations. The emergency measures made provision for renegotiation of contracts.
EDEMSA entered into negotiations with the authorities in Mendoza ° but no revision of the
tariff was agreed until 7 April 2005, one week after the Claimants had sold their interests in

SODEMSA to an Argentine company, IADESA, owned by Argentine investors.

On 16 June 2003, EDFI and SAURI filed a request for arbitration. That request was
subsequently amended to add Leon as a claimant. The Claimants maintained that the effect
of (a) a series of measures taken by Mendoza prior to the emergency and (b) the measures
taken as a result of the emergency which commenced in late 2001 was to destroy the
economic equilibrium of the Concession Agreement. They contended that the equilibrium
was not restored until after they had, in an attempt to mitigate their losses, sold their interests
to IADESA. Under the terms of that sale, the Claimants retained their rights in respect of the
ICSID claim they had instituted.

The Claimants maintained that the pre-emergency interference with their investment and the
emergency measures constituted violations of the Argentina-France Agreement for the
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments (the ““Argentina-France BIT”), and, to
the extent relevant (a matter considered below), the Mutual Investment Promotion and
Protection Treaty between Argentina and the Belgium-Luxembourg Economic Union (the
“Argentina-Luxembourg BIT”). The Claimants contended that the measures taken both

before and during the emergency were arbitrary and discriminatory, that they constituted

6 Award, paras. 157-169.

24.

25.

26.

unfair and inequitable treatment, violated the requirement of full protection and security and
amounted to indirect expropriation. In addition, the Claimants maintained that the failure to
respect the commitments entered into in the Concession Agreement and by means of the
regulatory framework of laws adopted by Argentina and Mendoza contravened the Most
Favoured Nation (“MFN”) clause in Article 4 of the Argentina-France BIT, because other
BITs concluded by Argentina, notably those with Luxembourg and Germany, contained
umbrella clauses making failure to comply with specific commitments entered into in

connection with an investment a breach of treaty.

Argentina challenged the jurisdiction of the Tribunal on several grounds. For present

purposes, the objections which are of particular relevance are that:-

(i) the Claimants no longer owned any relevant investment after the sale of shares to

TADESA; and

(ii) the Claimants lacked standing to present claims for injuries allegedly suffered by

EDEMSA.

Argentina also denied that the claims were well-founded on the merits, asserting in
particular that the emergency measures were necessary and legitimate responses to an acute

economic emergency.
C. Summary of the Jurisdiction Decision and Award

1. The Jurisdiction Decision

On 5 August 2008, the Tribunal issued a decision on jurisdiction (the “Jurisdiction
Decision”) dismissing Argentina’s objections to jurisdiction. Although it will be necessary,
in the course of this decision, to refer to other points in the Jurisdiction Decision, for present

purposes it is sufficient to note two aspects of the Tribunal’s findings on jurisdiction.

First, the Tribunal considered that the jurisprudence of the International Court of Justice and
arbitral tribunals made clear that “as a general matter, the date when proceedings are

instituted serves as the relevant time to establish jurisdiction”.” Accordingly, jurisdiction had

7 Jurisdiction Decision, para. 93.

27.

28.

to be assessed as at the date in 2003 when proceedings were commenced, irrespective of the
subsequent transfers of interest. It therefore proceeded on the basis that SAURI and Leén
should remain parties,’ while leaving open the question whether they continued to possess
substantive rights.? The Tribunal approached Leén’s claims on the basis that they were

founded upon the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT.!°

Secondly, the Tribunal rejected Argentina’s objection that the Claimants lacked standing.
That objection was based upon a series of arguments concerning the nature of the Claimants’
interests and, in particular, the fact that the Concession Agreement was between Mendoza
and EDEMSA, whereas the Claimants held shares in SODEMSA, which in turn held shares
in EDEMSA. The Tribunal held that neither Article 25 of the ICSID Convention, nor the
relevant provisions of the Argentina-France and Argentina-Luxembourg BITs required that
an investment be held directly, so that the fact that the Claimants’ interests in EDEMSA were

indirect was not an obstacle to jurisdiction.'!

Argentina had also argued that, in accordance with the judgments of the International Court
of Justice in the Barcelona Traction,'* ELSI and Diallo '* cases, international law did not
recognize any right for the shareholders in a company to maintain a claim in respect of a
wrong allegedly done to the company. The Tribunal held that these judgments concerned the
right of diplomatic protection by a State and were inapplicable to claims brought by investors
in their own name under the terms of a bilateral investment treaty.'> In the present case, the
Tribunal held, the terms of both the Argentina-France BIT and the Argentina-Luxembourg

BIT were broad enough to cover indirect investments. It also stated that:

174. Finally, this Tribunal cannot ignore the common-sense meaning given to
“investment”. Holding shares in a company normally means ownership of an
investment in the underlying economic activity conducted by that entity,
directly or indirectly. Every day people speak of oil, mining or timber

8 Jurisdiction Decision, para. 92.

® Jurisdiction Decision, para. 95.

See, e.g., Jurisdiction Decision, paras. 7-8, 51, 68, 97 and 177-198.

41 Jurisdiction Decision, paras. 137-8 and 157-163.

"2 Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company (Belgium v. Spain), 1.C.J. Reports 1970, p. 3 (“Barcelona
Traction”).

83 Elettronica Sicula S.p.A (United States of America v. Italy), I.C.J. Reports 1989, p. 15 (“ELST”).

4 Ahmadou Sadio Diallo (Republic of Guinea v. Democratic Republic of Congo) (Preliminary Objections),
1.C.J. Reports 2007, p. 582 (“Diallo”).

'S Jurisdiction Decision, para. 171.

29.

30.

investments, even though ownership resides in shares rather than rigs, gold
deposits or forests. Stock in a bank might be said to implicate an investment in
the financial services industry, when in fact the ownership relates to corporate
securities of a distinct legal person, which in turn owns a loan portfolio and the
bricks and mortar of a vault or building. To use language in any other way
would create an artificial formalism unworthy of a living legal system.

175. In short, for treaty-based investment arbitration, the concept of investment
must be understood to include the underlying business represented by the
shares of the investment vehicle. Otherwise, an expropriation which left an
empty corporate shell would never be compensable.

2. The Award

On 11 June 2012, the Tribunal issued its Award. It concluded that Argentina had breached
its obligations to respect its specific commitments undertaken in connection with EDF’s
investment and to afford the Claimants fair and equitable treatment.'° It rejected the
Claimants’ other claims. The Tribunal awarded damages to the Claimants in the amount of
US$ 136,138,430 as of December 2001, with interest compounded annually at the rate for ten
year U.S. Treasury Bonds until payment of the Award.'7? The Award runs to over three
hundred pages; it is unnecessary to summarise all of its reasoning here and the Committee
therefore reviews only those parts that are directly relevant to the issues raised in the

Application for annulment.

a. Applicable law

Leon invoked the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT in the Amended Request for Arbitration, and
the Tribunal in its Jurisdiction Decision proceeded on the basis that Leén’s claims were

governed by that Treaty.'* In the Award, however, the Tribunal noted that

Claimant Leén is said to be an assignee of the investment made in Argentina
by its French parent company, Crédit Lyonnais, and hence has standing to file
arbitrations under the Argentina-France BIT. See Amended Request footnote 1.
Nevertheless, to the extent its Luxembourgian corporate nationality is found to
preclude standing, Leén invokes provisions of the Agreement between the
Government of Argentina and the Belgian/Luxembourg Economic Union for
the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments, signed on 28 June

   

'6 Award, Dispositif, para. I.
"7 Award, Dispositif, paras. Il and II

'8 See para. 26, above. The claims of EDFI and SAURI were governed only by the Argentina-France BIT.
The Argentina-Luxembourg BIT was relevant to those claims only insofar as it was invoked in connection with
EDFI and SAURI’s argument based on the MFN clause.

31.

32.

33.

1990 and which entered into force on 20 May 1993 (“Argentina-Luxembourg
BIT”).”°

The Tribunal subsequently concluded that the case should be decided exclusively on the
basis of the Argentina-France BIT and that it was unnecessary to refer to the Argentina-
Luxembourg BIT, save in respect of the argument based on the MEN clause in the

Argentina- France BIT.”°

Regarding the role of Argentine law in determining Argentina’s international liability, the
Tribunal concluded that the terms of the Argentine-France BIT provided the foundation and
framework for its decision.”! The fact that the Argentine Government was vested with broad
authority by Argentine law to deal with the national economic crisis did not change the
Tribunal’s conclusion. Finally, the Tribunal was not convinced by the evidence that
Argentina was not able to comply with its international obligations due to its need to

guarantee human rights.??

b. The “umbrella clause” and Argentina’s compliance with specific
commitments

The Claimants argued that the MFN clause in Article 4 of the Argentina-France BIT enabled
them to rely upon “umbrella clauses” in other Argentine BITs and thus to claim in respect of
alleged breaches by Argentina of commitments specifically undertaken with regard to the
investment, in particular the clauses in the Concession Agreement guaranteeing the rate of
return and the calculation of tariffs by reference to the US dollar. Argentina denied that the
MEN clause could be used in that way and maintained that, even if the MFN clause was
broad enough to permit reliance on the umbrella clauses in other BITs, those clauses did not
assist the Claimants as they were not party to the Concession Agreement and that Agreement

gave exclusive jurisdiction to the Argentine courts.

The Tribunal held that the MFN clause did permit recourse to umbrella clauses in other

BITs.”* While noting the existence of considerable controversy over the use of MFN clauses

9 Award, para. 9.

2 Award, paras. 884-887.
21 Award, paras. 898-908.
2 Award, paras. 909-914.
23 Award, paras. 925-937.

  

34.

35.

to obtain recourse to arbitration on terms more favourable than those in the treaty applicable
to an investor, it held that no similar controversy existed with regard to the use of MFN
clauses to obtain recourse to the substantive protection afforded by other treaties. The
Tribunal considered that the terms of Article 4 of the Argentina-France BIT clearly permitted

recourse to the umbrella clauses invoked by the Claimants.

The Tribunal also rejected Argentina’s arguments regarding the meaning and scope of the
umbrella clauses on which the Claimants relied (principally those in the Argentina-Germany

and Argentina-Luxembourg BITs). The Tribunal held that

This does not mean that all contractual breaches necessarily rise to the level of
treaty violation. However, the serious repudiation of concession obligations
implicated by failure to respect the currency clause ... must clearly be seen as a
violation of “commitments ... undertaken with respect to investors” (Article
10(2) Argentina-Luxembourg BIT) and “a commitment undertaken in
connection with the investments made by nationals or companies from the
other Contracting Party”. (Article 7(2) Argentina-Germany BIT).”*

The Tribunal considered that the pesification of tariffs combined with the fact that EDEMSA
was forbidden to vary or suspend its own performance under the Concession Agreement, and
the absence of any increase in tariffs until 2005 undermined the entire basis on which the
Province of Mendoza had solicited investment.?> The Tribunal stated that it was unconvinced
by Argentina’s argument that maintaining the Currency Clause and other provisions of the
Concession Agreement would have extinguished the principle of fair and reasonable tariff
rates and that the measures taken were in practice of benefit to EDEMSA.”° It held that there
was no evidence that the Emergency Measures benefited EDEMSA’s economic position; on
the contrary, the Tribunal found that these measures affected EDEMSA’s profitability,
altering the economic equilibrium of the Concession Agreement.”’ Additionally, this
financial equilibrium was never restored, even after financial indicators showed a stable trend

8

towards recovery.** The Tribunal therefore concluded that Argentina had “breached its

24 Award, para. 940.

25 Award, paras. 943-993 and 1008.
2 Award, para. 976.

2” Award, paras. 979-981.

28 Award, para. 986.

36.

37.

obligations ... to respect specific commitments undertaken in connection with Claimants’

investment”.”?

c. Fair and equitable treatment

With regard to the claim that Argentina’s actions contravened Article 3 of the Argentina-
France BIT (fair and equitable treatment), the Award concluded that Argentina’s violation of
certain obligations under the umbrella clause, operated “in tandem’ with the breach of its
duty to afford EDF’s investments Fair and Equitable Treatment.*° The Tribunal found that it
did not need to decide whether Article 3 established an independent standard of fairness or
coincided with the customary international minimum standard. According to the Tribunal,
Article 3 required Argentina to respect international law in principle and in practice, and its
failure to abide by express commitments without re-establishing the economic equilibrium
within a reasonable time, constituted inequitable treatment.*! The Tribunal considered that
the application of this provision depended on the factual context of the Host State’s actions
and, in this regard, it was mindful that the economic crisis was relevant to the interpretation
of the fair and equitable treatment standard. The investor’s expectations were to be balanced
against the Host State’s need to take action in a crisis. However, fairness and equity also
required that the Host State respect the fundamental representations of a concession once the
crisis was over.” The Tribunal concluded that there had been a breach of Article 3 of the

Argentina-France BIT.**

d. Claims in respect of actions taken before the emergency

Subsequently, the Tribunal dealt with EDF’s claims that, prior to the enactment of the
Emergency Measures, Argentina had breached its obligations by unilaterally modifying the
regulatory framework and the Concession Agreement, in a way that had negative effects on
EDEMSA, and changing the financial equilibrium of the contract to EDEMSA’s detriment.**

The Tribunal found that Argentina was liable only in respect of the claims related to the

2° Award, Dispositif, para. 1.

3° Award para. 994.

31 Award paras. 999, 1009-1011.
52 Award paras. 1004-1005.

33 Award, Dispositif, para. I

4 Award para, 1023.

38.

39.

40.

modification of the Tariff Regime, namely:*° (i) modification of the fee structure for large
users; (ii) reduction of contracting periods with users; and (iii) incorporation of an option for
users to choose between categories at their discretion (Optional T-2 tariff category).*° It

dismissed the other claims regarding actions taken before the emergency.

e. Other claims

The Tribunal dismissed the Claimants’ other claims, holding that the measures taken by
Argentina were not arbitrary or discriminatory *” and that they did not violate the requirement
to provide full protection and security.** The Tribunal also held that Argentina’s actions did

not amount to indirect expropriation.*?

f. Argentina’s defences

During the proceedings on the merits, Argentina asserted several affirmative defences.*” The
Award rejected the argument that these defences precluded a finding against Argentina,

holding that they were not a bar to the Claimants’ recovering compensation.

With regard to Argentina’s defence of necessity, the Tribunal held that, since the Award was
based exclusively upon the Argentina-France BIT, the necessity defence in Article 3(2) of the
Argentina-Luxembourg BIT was inapplicable.*! The Tribunal also concluded that Argentina
had failed to establish that the requirements for a defence of necessity under customary
international law had been met. The Tribunal maintained that “necessity must be construed
strictly and objectively, not as an easy escape hatch for host states wishing to avoid treaty
obligations which prove difficult”.*?_ In that connection, the Tribunal considered that
Argentina had failed to demonstrate that the measures taken were the only way for it to
safeguard its essential interests, that it had not contributed to the state of necessity by its own

actions, or that it had returned to the status quo when possible or paid compensation.*?

35 Award para. 1026.

36 Award paras. 1027-1100.

37 Award, paras. 1101-1107.

38 Award, paras. 1108-1112.

3° Award, paras. 1113-1118.

“© Award paras. 1119.

“1 Award, para. 888 and paras. 1149-1152.
“2 Award, para. 1171.

8 bid.

Al.

42.

43.

The Tribunal further dismissed Argentina’s inadmissibility defence that any claim based on a
denial of justice in connection with the Pre-Emergency Measures should be dismissed in
limine, because they were not pleaded by EDF in its Memorial on the Merits.*4 The Tribunal
found that EDF had not made a separate claim of denial of justice, but instead framed its
arguments in the context of fair and equitable treatment and full protection and security.
Additionally, Argentina’s defence regarding EDF’s double recovery of damages caused by
the Pre-Emergency Measures was dismissed; the Tribunal concluded that EDF had not

received any redress for such damages.*>

g. Quantum of Damages

The Tribunal assessed damages on a discounted cash flow (“DCF”) basis, having noted that
the Parties agreed that the alternative methods of valuation considered were not appropriate.“
It awarded damages of US$ 2,502,797.00 in respect of the losses sustained prior to the
emergency and of US$ 133,635,633 in respect of the losses caused by the emergency
measures. The latter figure was calculated as at 31 December 2001 by taking the value of the
Claimants’ stake in EDEMSA (44.88% of the total)*” had the emergency measures not been
taken (the “but for” scenario) and then deducting the amount which might reasonably have

been received in the 2005 sale to IADESA, valued as of 31 December 2001.

II. Grounds for Annulment

Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention provides that —

Either party may request annulment of the award by an application in writing
addressed to the Secretary-General on one or more of the following grounds:-

(a) that the Tribunal was not properly constituted;

(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;

. 1091-1096.

s. 1098-1100.

“© Award, paras. 1186-1188.

47 It will be recalled that SODEMSA held 51% of the Class A shares in EDEMSA but that 40% of the shares in
SODEMSA were held by MENDINVERT, a company in which only 70% of the shares were held by one of
the Claimants, the remainder being held by Argentine investors. Thus, only 88% of SODEMSA was
ultimately owned by the Claimants. 88% of 51% yields a figure of 44.88%.

 

 

14

44.

4S.

46.

(c) that there was corruption on the part of a member of the Tribunal;

(d) that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure; or

(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.

In its Application, Argentina seeks annulment on all of the above grounds except for that set
out in Article 52(1)(c), i.e. corruption on the part of a member of the Tribunal. Argentina’s
objections to the Award concern six different issues, in respect of most of which it seeks
annulment on more than one of the grounds set out in Article 52(1). The Tribunal has
therefore structured its Decision by reference to these six issues, rather than by the Article 52
grounds on which annulment is sought. Argentina’s arguments in respect of each issue, and
the Claimants’ response thereto, are considered in detail in the subsequent sections of this
Decision. It is, however, useful to set out a brief overview of the six issues and the grounds

invoked in respect of each of them at this stage.
A. Challenges to Two Members of the Tribunal

Argentina maintains that neither Professor Gabrielle Kaufmann-Kohler nor Professor Jestis
Rem6n possessed the requisite qualifications of independence and impartiality demanded by
Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention, with the result that the Award should be annulled
because the Tribunal was not properly constituted (Article 52(1)(a)) and there was a serious

departure from a fundamental rule of procedure (Article 52(1)(d)).

In the case of Professor Kaufmann-Kohler, Argentina refers to the fact that in 2006 she
became a director of the Swiss Bank UBS. When Argentina discovered this fact in
November 2007, Argentina proposed, under Article 57 of the Convention, that she should be
disqualified because UBS had various interests in, and links to, EDF.** In accordance with
Article 58 of the Convention, the challenge to Professor Kaufmann-Kohler was heard by the
two remaining members of the Tribunal, Professor Park and Professor Remén, who issued a
decision on 25 June 2008 (“the Disqualification Decision”) dismissing the challenge. *?

Argentina maintains that when a challenge to an arbitrator is dismissed, it is open to the party

RA 512.
*RAS21.

47.

48.

49.

which brought that challenge to seek annulment of the award and that an ad hoc Committee
may annul the award under either or both of the grounds in Article 52(1)(a) and (d) if it

considers that the challenged arbitrator lacked the qualifications required by Article 14(1).

In the case of Professor Remén, the application for annulment arises in a different context
both procedurally and substantively. In April 2012 Professor Remon informed the parties
that the law firm of which he was a partner acted for the Spanish company Repsol and that if
the firm was asked by Repsol to represent it in any proceedings which it might bring against
Argentina in connection with the measures taken by Argentina in relation to Repsol’s
interests in the Argentine company Yaciementos Petrofileros Fiscales (“YPF”), then he
would abstain from any involvement in those proceedings until the Award in the present case
had been issued.*° Argentina called for his resignation on the ground that this disclosure
showed the existence of a professional relationship between the law firm and a company
already in dispute with Repsol and that this relationship, together with the fact that Professor
Rem6n had made clear that he was prepared to act for Repsol against Argentina in the future,
showed that he lacked the requisite qualities of independence and impartiality.*! Professor
Rem6n declined to resign. Since the proceedings had already been closed at the date of the
disclosure, Argentina was unable to propose disqualification under Article 57. The matter is

thus raised for the first time in the annulment proceedings.
This aspect of Argentina’s case is addressed in Part IV of this Decision.
B. Applicable Law

Argentina criticises the Tribunal’s decision on the applicable law on three grounds. First, it
maintains that the Tribunal should not have decided the entire case solely on the basis of the
Argentina-France BIT given that Leén, which remained a Claimant, was a Luxembourg
corporation. Secondly, it maintains that the Tribunal wrongly underplayed the importance of
Argentine law as part of the applicable law. Lastly, it contends that the decision of the
Tribunal in the Award that there was no general requirement that a claimant prove the
existence of discrimination in order to establish a breach of the Argentine-France BIT was at
odds with what the Tribunal had said in its Jurisdiction Decision.

RA 531.
5! RA 532.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

For Argentina each of these aspects of the Tribunal’s findings constitutes an annullable error.
It maintains that they involved a manifest excess of power (within Article 52(1)(b)). In
addition, Argentina argues that the Tribunal failed adequately to state the reasons for its
conclusions on these points, thus making the Award subject to annulment under Article
52(1)(e). Finally, Argentina contends that the manner in which the Tribunal dealt with these
issues entailed a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure calling for

annulment under Article 52(1)(d).

The Committee addresses this aspect of Argentina’s challenge to the Award in Part V of this

Decision.
C. Derivative Rights and the Umbrella Clause

Argentina also seeks the annulment of the Award on the ground that the Tribunal mishandled
the issue of the Claimants’ assertion of derivative rights and their reliance on the umbrella

clauses in treaties other than the Argentina-France BIT.

Argentina maintains that the Tribunal erred in holding that, contrary to the principle of
international law enunciated in the Barcelona Traction, ELSI and Diallo judgments,>> the
Claimants could maintain a claim for wrongs which, if they existed at all, had been suffered
by EDEMSA and not by the Claimants. It further contends that the Tribunal was wrong in
holding that the MFN Clause in the Argentina-France BIT permitted the Claimants to rely
upon the umbrella clauses in the Argentina-Luxembourg and Argentina-Germany BITs and
that, even if the umbrella clauses were applicable, they did not assist the Claimants as they
did not alter the nature of the Concession Agreement as a contract which, so far as the
Claimants were concerned, was res inter alios acta. Again, Argentina contends that these
errors entailed a manifest excess of power, a failure to state reasons and a serious departure

from a fundamental rule of procedure.

This aspect of Argentina’s challenge to the Award is addressed in Part VI of this Decision.

2 See para. 28 and footnotes 12-14, above.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

D. Necessity

Argentina contends that the Tribunal committed further annullable errors in the way in which
it treated the issue of necessity. Its decision not to apply Article 3(2) of the Argentina-
Luxembourg BIT, its decision that Article 5(3) of the Argentina-France BIT did not justify
the measures taken and its decision that the requirements for a defence of necessity under
customary international law were inapplicable are, according to Argentina, grounds for

annulment for manifest excess of power and failure to state reasons.
This aspect of the challenge to the Award is addressed in Part VII of the present Decision.
E. Failure to Decide on Fundamental Evidence

Argentina maintains that the Tribunal failed to address fundamental evidence which could
have had a decisive influence on the case and thereby committed a manifest excess of power,
failed to state the reasons for its decision and seriously departed from a fundamental rule of
procedure. This part of Argentina’s challenge to the Award concerns primarily evidence
from official bodies in the French State critical of EDFI’s investment strategy in Argentina
and the evidence of Engineer Neme regarding the privatisation of electricity distribution in

Mendoza, all of which Argentina claims is ignored in the Award.

The Committee will address this part of Argentina’s challenge to the Award in Part VIII of

the present Decision.
F. Failures in the Assessment of Damages

Finally, Argentina asserts that the Tribunal’s assessment of damages is fundamentally flawed
in several ways, including the examination of the question of causation, the evidence referred
to in relation to quantum and the assessment of EDEMSA’s viability in 2001. Argentina
maintains that these errors amount to a manifest excess of power, failure to state reasons and

a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.

This part of the challenge to the Award will be considered in Part IX of the Decision.

61.

62.

63.

III. The Nature of Annulment and the Powers of an ad hoc Committee

Before discussing the different grounds on which annulment is sought in the current case, it is
necessary briefly to consider the nature of annulment proceedings and the powers of an ad

hoc committee.

First, it is clear from the text of Article 52(1) that it is only an award which a party may seek
to annul, not a decision which a tribunal may have taken as part of the steps leading to an
award.>* Thus, it is not open to a party to seek annulment of a decision not to disqualify an
arbitrator or a decision that the tribunal possesses jurisdiction in a case. A party which is
dissatisfied with a decision must wait until the tribunal gives its final award. Only then may
it commence annulment proceedings. Of course, it is open to the party to argue that the
award should be annulled because it is tainted by an error in the earlier decision; for example,
a party is free to argue that the award entailed a manifest excess of powers because the
tribunal had earlier taken a decision on jurisdiction which was fatally flawed. Indeed, one
leading commentator considers that “decisions on jurisdiction are eventually incorporated
into awards either explicitly or by implication” and that “at that stage they become subject to
annulment as parts of awards”.™+ But it is the award itself, and only the award, which the ad

hoc committee can annul.

Argentina’s Application requests only the annulment of the Award. However, in the Prayer
for Relief set out at the end of its Memorial,>° and in the Prayer at the end of the Reply,*°
Argentina requests the Committee to annul both the Award and the earlier Decision on
Jurisdiction. For the reasons just given, the Committee has no power to annul the Decision as
such. However, in paragraph 2 of the Reply Argentina makes clear that “the annulment of
the Decision on Jurisdiction [is] not requested separately from, but jointly with, that of the
Award”. The Committee considers that the Prayers in the Memorial and the Reply must be
read in the light of the Application and the explanation in paragraph 2 of the Reply. It will

therefore proceed to consider Argentina’s criticisms of the Decision on Jurisdiction as

53 Schreuer, Malintoppi, Reinisch and Sinclair, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (Cambridge, 2™
edition, 2009), Article 52, para. 61 (p. 921) (“Schreuer, Commentary”).

4 [bid., Article 52, para. 62 (p. 921), emphasis added.

58 Memorial, para. 198.

$6 Reply, para. 157.

64.

65.

advanced in support of arguments that the Award should be annulled and not as a request —
which would necessarily fall outside Article 52 of the Convention — for the annulment of the

Decision as such.

Secondly, it is a well established principle that, as the ad hoc committee in MTD Equity and
MTD Chile v. Republic of Chile put it —

Under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention, an annulment proceeding is not an
appeal, still less a retrial; it is a form of review on specified and limited
grounds which take as their premise the record before the Tribunal.*”

The ad hoc committee in Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates was similarly insistent on this

point, commenting that —

... annulment review, although obviously important, is a limited exercise, and
does not provide for an appeal of the initial award. In other words, ... ‘an ad
hoc committee does not have the jurisdiction to review the merits of the
original award in any way. The annulment system is designed to safeguard the
integrity, not the outcome, of ICSID arbitration proceedings.’ **

The Soufraki Committee went on to analyse this role of an ad hoc committee as the

safeguard of the integrity of the proceedings in greater detail.

In the view of the ad hoc Committee, the object and purpose of an ICSID
annulment proceeding may be described as the control of the fundamental
integrity of the ICSID arbitral process in all its facets. An ad hoc committee is
empowered to verify (i) the integrity of the tribunal — its proper constitution
(Article 52(1)(a)) and the absence of corruption on the part of any member
thereof (Article 52(1)(c)); (ii) the integrity of the procedure — which means
firstly that the tribunal must respect the boundaries fixed by the ICSID
Convention and the Parties’ consent, and not manifestly exceed the powers
granted to it as far as its jurisdiction, the applicable law and the questions
raised are concerned (Article 52(1)(b)), and secondly, that it should not commit
a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure (Article 52(1)(d));
and (iii) the integrity of the award — meaning that the reasoning presented in
the award should be coherent and not contradictory, so as to be understandable
by the Parties and must reasonably support the solution adopted by the tribunal
(Article 52(1)(e)). Integrity of the dispute settlement mechanism, integrity of

57 MTD Equity and MTD Chile v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/07), Decision on Annulment of
21 March 2007, 13 ICSID Reports 500, para. 31 (“MTD”).

58 Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/07), Decision on Annulment
of 5 June 2007, para. 20 (“Soufraki”).

20

66.

67.

68.

69.

the process of dispute settlement and integrity of solution of the dispute are the
basic interrelated goals projected in the ICSID annulment mechanism.*?

Thirdly, as the Soufraki Committee also explained —

Article 52 of the ICSID Convention must be read in accordance with the
principles of treaty interpretation forming part of general international law,
which principles insist on neither restrictive nor extensive interpretation, but
rather on interpretation in accordance with the object and purpose of the
60
treaty.
The reference to principles of treaty interpretation is to the principles laid down in Articles
31 to 33 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1969. Although the Vienna
Convention is not, as such applicable to the ICSID Convention, which predates it, the

provisions of the Vienna Convention on treaty interpretation are generally regarded as

declaratory of customary international law

Lastly, it is clear from the text of Article 52 that an award may be annulled only on one or
more of the five grounds set out in Article 52. An ad hoc committee is not entitled to range
beyond those five grounds. Its function is not to consider whether or not it agrees with the
reasoning or the conclusions of the tribunal but only to determine whether or not one or more

of the five grounds has been made out.

None of these points is contested in the present proceedings, although the Parties differ in the
way that they seek to apply them to the specific issues in the case. They were also in broad

agreement regarding the approach which a committee must take to questions of fact.

The Claimants maintain that the burden of proof is always upon the party seeking

annulment.°! At the hearings the Claimants developed this argument in the following terms:

The second principle is that the burden of proof is on Argentina to substantiate
its claims. Argentina is the proponent of annulment in this proceeding and, as
such, bears the burden of proof. This means that if the Committee members
are undecided or on the fence on particular arguments or issues, then it must
decide — the Committee must decide against annulment.

59 Soufraki, note 58, above, para. 23.
© Tbid, para. 21.

6! Counter-Memorial, para. 30.

® Transcript, p. 114; see also p. 189.

21

70.

71.

Argentina does not dispute that, where it asserts the existence of a particular fact, it bears the
burden of proving that fact, although it sometimes asserts that the Committee should infer or

assume the existence of certain facts (see, e.g., para. 171, below). The Committee considers

 

that the principle that a party bears the burden of proof in respect of any fact whose
existence it asserts is well established both in ICSID jurisprudence ® and elsewhere.™
Nevertheless, in annulment proceedings the importance of the principle that a party bears the
burden of proof in respect of a fact which it asserts has to be seen in the light of the principle
that, as the Helnan Committee observes “it is no part of the function of an annulment
committee to reconsider findings of fact made by an ICSID arbitral tribunal”. Moreover,
in the present case, many of the facts (particularly with regard to the allegations concerning

the independence and impartiality of arbitrators) are not in dispute.°°

However, the Claimants’ argument, as quoted above, goes beyond the burden of proof with
regard to matters of fact and urges that “if the Committee members are undecided or on the
fence on particular arguments or issues” (emphasis added), then the Committee must decide
against annulment. That comes close to an argument that there is a presumption in favour of
upholding the Award. In that context the Committee recalls the observation of the Soufraki
Committee that “such presumption ... finds no basis in the text of Article 52 and has not been
used by annulment committees”.©’ The Committee agrees with that analysis. The concept of
burden of proof is confined to matters of fact; it does not extend to a general principle that
when in doubt about “particular arguments or issues” a committee must find in favour of

upholding the award.

There is, however, one issue regarding the powers of an ad hoc committee on which the

Parties are in marked disagreement. That concerns whether a committee which finds that one

6 See, e.g., in relation to the burden of proof in relation to an application to disqualify an arbitrator, Nations
Energy Corp. v. Panama (ICSID Case No. ARB/06/19), Decision on Challenge to an Arbitrator of 7
September 2011, para. 56.

© See, e.g., the Judgment of the International Court of Justice in Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay, (Argentina
v. Uruguay), ICJ Reports 2010-1, p. 71, para 162.

65 Helnan International Hotels A/S v. Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/19), Decision on Annulment of 4 June
2010, (“Helnan”), para. 20. See also Fraport AG v. Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25), Decision on
Annulment of 23 December 2010 (“Fraport”), para. 84. Both are cited at Counter-Memorial, para. 3.

° Argentina expressly accepted as much; Transcript, p. 255.

© Soufraki, note 58, above, para. 22.

22

72.

723.

or more of the grounds set out in Article 52 has been established in respect of an award is
obliged to annul the award or has a discretion whether or not to do so. The Claimants assert
that a committee always has a discretion not to annul and that it may exercise that discretion
on grounds of fairness, taking account, for example, of the length of the proceedings. By
contrast, Argentina maintains that, if a committee considers that one of the grounds for

annulment has been made out, then the committee is obliged to annul the award.®°
The Committee notes that the final sentence of Article 52(3) is in the following terms:

The Committee shall have the authority to annul the award or any part thereof
on any of the grounds set forth in paragraph (1).

Esta Comision tendra facultad para resolver sobre la anulaci6n total 0 parcial
del laudo por alguna de las causas enumeradas en el apartado (1).

Le Comité est habilité a annuler la sentence en tout ou en partie pour |’un des
motifs énumérés 4 |’alinéa (1) du présent article.

(The emphasis has been added by the Committee.)

The Committee considers that the italicised words clearly indicate that committees were
intended to have a degree of discretion. To say that a committee “shall have the authority to

annul the award” is very different from saying that a committee “shall annul the award”.
Moreover, the Committee notes that other ad hoc committees have proceeded on the basis
that annulment was not mandatory and that they enjoyed a discretion whether or not to annul
the award under consideration.”” The Committee concludes that, even if an Article 52(1)
ground is made out, it nevertheless retains a discretion as to whether or not to annul the
award. That discretion is by no means unlimited and must take account of all relevant
circumstances, including the gravity of the circumstances which constitute the ground for

annulment and whether or not they had — or could have had — a material effect upon the

68 Counter-Memorial, para. 57; Transcript, pp. 110, 132 and 189.

® Transcript, pp. 271-274.

7 See, in particular, Amco v. Indonesia (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1), Decision on Annulment of 3 December
1992, 9 ICSID Reports 15, para. 1.20 (“AMCO II"); Maritime International Nominees Establishment v.
Republic of Guinea (ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4), Decision on Annulment of 22 December 1989, 4 ICSID
Reports 86, paras. 4.09-4.10 (“MINE”); Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal v.
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment of 3 July 2002, 6 ICSID Reports
358, para. 66 (“Vivendi I’). See also Schreuer, Commentary, note 53, above, Article 52, paras. 466-485.

23

74.

75.

76.

outcome of the case, as well as the importance of the finality of the award and the overall

question of fairness to both Parties.

IV. Challenges to Two Members of the Tribunal

A. Introduction

As outlined above (paras. 46 to 47), Argentina maintains that the Award should be annulled
because of the existence of conflicts of interest in the case of both Professor Kaufmann-
Kohler and Professor Remén. In each case Argentina contends that the conflict of interest
was such that the Tribunal cannot be regarded as having been properly constituted (thus
affording a ground for annulment under Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention). It also
argues that, since the right of each party to have the case determined by a tribunal whose
members meet the requirements of independence and impartiality constitutes a fundamental
tule of procedure, the fact that two members of the Tribunal did not meet those requirements
means that there has been a serious departure from that fundamental rule (thus affording a
ground for annulment under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention).”!

Since the facts on which Argentina relies are, for the most part, not in dispute between the
Parties, the Committee will briefly set out those facts before reviewing the arguments of the

Parties.
B. The facts

1. Professor Kaufmann-Kohler

Professor Kaufmann-Kohler became a director of UBS in April 2006, two and a half years
after her appointment as an arbitrator and nearly two years after the Tribunal was
constituted.’ It is not in dispute that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler did not inform the Parties
of her appointment as a director of UBS. She did, however, give UBS a list of the
arbitrations in which she was then involved and asked UBS to investigate whether there was

a conflict of interests. According to a letter which she wrote to the other members of the

™ Memorial, para. 33.
™ Award, paras. 11-16.

 

24

77.

78.

Tribunal (Professor Park and Professor Rem6n) after she was challenged by Argentina,”
UBS replied that the only conflict was with her involvement as a member of the jury for the
America’s Cup, a conflict which arose from the fact that UBS sponsored one of the
competitors. Professor Kaufmann-Kohler withdrew from the America’s Cup jury in light of

this response.

Argentina maintains that it became aware of Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s appointment at
UBS in November 2007. It then filed a proposal, in accordance with Article 57 of the ICSID
Convention,” that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler be disqualified from the Tribunal.”> In the
light of that proposal, Professor Kaufmann-Kohler wrote to UBS inquiring whether the links
between EDFI and UBS detailed in Argentina’s challenge did in fact exist.” By a letter
dated 20 December 2007, Dr Karin Eugster, Legal Adviser to UBS, and Dr Bernhard
Schmid, General Counsel of the Corporate Center of UBS, replied giving details of certain
links between UBS and EDFI.”’ That letter was sent to the Tribunal on 21 December 2007

under cover of a letter from Professor Kaufmann-Kohler.

Argentina challenged Professor Kaufmann-Kohler on the basis of five connections between

UBS and EDFI:-

(a) that UBS had listed EDF, the parent company of EDFI, as one of the companies in
which it recommended investment;’®
(b) that UBS and EDF had common interests in AEM Milan, an Italian company which

was controlled by EDF through a subsidiary;”?

(c) that UBS and EDF both held shares in Motor Columbus, a Swiss company, 80
although the 20 December 2007 letter from UBS made clear that UBS had disposed of its
shareholding in Motor Columbus before Professor Kaufmann-Kohler became a UBS

director;

3 Letter of 21 December 2007.

74 See para. 112 below.

RA 512.

% Letter of 17 December 2007, RA 513.
TRASI4.

78 RA 512, para. 36.

7 RA 512, para. 37.

80 RA 512, para. 38.

25

79.

80.

81.

(d) that in October 2005 EDF and the French State had entered into an agreement with a
group of financial institutions which included UBS in connection with a share offer in the

French financial market;*! and
(e) that the UBS Foundation listed EDF securities as part of its portfolio.*

In addition, on 14 May 2008, Argentina drew the attention of the remaining members of the
Tribunal to a press release concerning Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s role in the removal of
certain directors of UBS following problems at the bank. According to Argentina, this
incident demonstrated the degree of Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s influence on the Board of

Directors.*

Finally, Argentina maintained that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s failure to notify the Parties
of her appointment as a director was itself a factor which could raise questions concerning

her impartiality or independence.**

In accordance with Article 58 of the ICSID Convention,*> Argentina’s challenge to Professor
Kaufmann-Kohler was heard by the remaining members of the Tribunal, Professor Park and
Professor Remén. They issued their Disqualification Decision on 25 June 2008. That

decision dismissed Argentina’s proposal for disqualification on the grounds that:

The facts asserted by Respondent give no reason to suppose that Professor
Kaufmann-Kohler would be biased in favour of Claimants. Her position as a
non-executive director at UBS gives her no financial interest in any of the
Claimant companies. Nor would she benefit in any way from an award in
favour of Claimants.*°

The remaining members of the Tribunal considered whether Professor Kaufmann-Kohler

might favour the Claimants on the ground that a victory for them might result in some

81 RA 512, para. 39.

8 RA 512, para. 40.

83 Disqualification Decision, para. 46.
®4 RA 512, paras. 56-64.

85 See para. 112, below.

86 Disqualification Decision, para. 71.

26

82.

83.

84.

benefit to UBS “‘an entity with which Professor Kaufmann-Kohler feels a sense of emotional

solidarity and psychological identification by virtue of her position”*’ but concluded that:

While the prospect of such subconscious influence can never be completely
excluded, the possibility remains remote, tenuous and speculative. The
outcome of this arbitration cannot be expected to have any material impact on
the fortunes of UBS. Just as de minimis would be the effect on Professor
Kaufmann-Kohler’s psychological, social or economic well-being.**
The remaining members also concluded that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler had not violated
any ICSID obligation of disclosure and that, in any event, “we cannot accept that her non-
disclosure of the Board membership indicated a manifest lack of reliability in the exercise of

independent judgment”.*?

2. Professor Remén

As the Committee has already noted (para. 47, above), the challenge to Professor Remén
differs, both procedurally and substantively, from that to Professor Kaufmann-Kohler. It
differs procedurally, because it was raised only after the proceedings before the Tribunal had
been closed. Accordingly, it could not be considered by the remaining members of the
Tribunal under the procedure in Article 58 of the ICSID Convention. It differs substantively,

because it involves a somewhat different allegation of a conflict of interest.

Prompted by an announcement in the media on 16 April 2012 regarding Argentina’s intention
to expropriate an investment by the Spanish company Repsol, Professor Rem6n informed the
parties on 18 April 2012 that the law firm in which he is a partner, Uria Menéndez, had
traditionally provided legal services to Repsol and that he had personally represented Repsol
in various proceedings. He then stated that should Repsol request the assistance of Uria
Menéndez regarding the Argentine Republic’s measures, he would refrain from taking part in
the matter as long as the arbitration proceeding between EDFI and Argentina was ongoing.”

In light of these statements, Argentina requested the resignation of Professor Rem6n on 27

87 Disqualification Decision, para. 72.
88 Disqualification Decision, para. 73.
8 Disqualification Decision, para. 98.
% Memorial, para. 62.

27

85.

86.

87.

April 2012. According to Argentina, “he could no longer be relied upon to exercise

independent judgment pursuant to Article 14 of the ICSID Convention”.*!

In response, Professor Remén asserted that his impartiality and independence in the EDFI
case had not been compromised, because the drafting of the Award had been “completed
several weeks before the announcement of the expropriation”.°? Argentina argues, however,
that although Professor Remon’s letters made reference to information published in the media
on 16 April 2012, the arbitration proceedings subsequently commenced by Repsol (in which
it was represented by Uria Menéndez) also concerned measures emanating from an earlier
date. According to Argentina, this fact, compounded by Professor Rem6n’s position in the
law firm and the firm’s previous representation of Repsol, points to the conclusion that
Professor Remén knew about the dispute between Repsol and the Argentine Republic during
the deliberations and the drafting of the Award in the present case, thereby compromising his

independence and impartiality.”
C. Arguments of the Parties

1. Argentina
a. General

As the Committee has already noted, Argentina bases this part of its case for the annulment
of the Award on both Article 52(1)(a) and 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention. It maintains
that a tribunal cannot be regarded as properly constituted for the purposes of Article 52(1)(a)
if one of its members did not offer the guarantee of independence and impartiality required
by Article 14(1) of the Convention.* In addition, it contends that for a tribunal to hear a case
when one of its members could not be relied upon to be independent and impartial entailed a
serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure affecting due process and a

respondent’s right of defence, warranting annulment of the award under Article 52(1)(d).°°

According to Argentina, the standard required by Article 14(1) is that an arbitrator must be

someone who can be relied upon to be impartial and to exercise independent judgement.

°! Memorial, para. 63.

° Letter of 11 May 2012, RA 535.

°3 Memorial, para. 65; Reply, para. 25.

°4 Memorial, para. 11. For the text of Article 14(1), see para. 107, below.
°5 Memorial, para. 59; Transcript, p. 82.

28

88.

89.

Under Article 57, there has to be a manifest lack of those qualities. That exists where it can
be discerned with little effort and without deeper analysis.*° Argentina contends that the
decision on disqualification by the Chairman in Blue Bank °’ confirms that, when a party

challenges an arbitrator it need not prove actual bias but only the appearance of bias.”®

According to Argentina, an ad hoc committee is empowered to determine whether or not
such a conflict of interest exists and to annul the award if it concludes that one of the
members of the tribunal manifestly lacked the qualities required by Article 14(1). That is the
case irrespective of whether a challenge has been rejected by the remaining members of the
tribunal in proceedings under Article 58 of the ICSID Convention.’ In such a case,
Argentina maintains that an ad hoc committee has to approach the matter de novo and is not
bound to follow the findings of fact or the ruling on the law made by the remaining members
of the tribunal.!© Argentina contends that, if an ad hoc committee concludes that one of the
members of the tribunal manifestly lacked the qualities required by Article 14(1), then it is
required to annul the award. It denies that the committee has a discretion not to annul in such

a case, !0!

b. Professor Kaufmann-Kohler

With regard to the position of Professor Kaufmann-Kohler, Argentina contrasts the findings
made by Professor Park and Professor Rem6n in the Disqualification Decision with the
analysis of a very similar allegation of conflict of interests, also arising out of Professor
Kaufmann-Kohler’s membership of the UBS Board, by the ad hoc committee in Vivendi II.'°
In its decision in that case, the ad hoc committee was, according to Argentina, highly critical

of Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s conduct. The Vivendi IJ committee had before it evidence

°° Memorial, para. 43.

°7 Blue Bank International and Trust v. Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/12/20), Decision of the Chairman of
12 November 2013 (“Blue Bank”).

°8 Reply, paras. 28-29.

% Transcript, pp. 82-87.

100 Reply, para. 6; Transcript, pp. 83-84.

‘6! Transcript, p. 273-274.

‘2 Compania de Aguas del Aconquija SA and Vivendi Universal SA v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment of 19 August 2010 (“Vivendi IT”).

29

90.

91.

from Professor Wolfram and Professor Mistelis on the independence of arbitrators.!°? The

Vivendi II Committee commented:

As to the basic issue of the compatibility of a directorship in a major
international bank and the function of international arbitrator, Professor
Wolfram, strongly supported by Professor Mistelis during the hearing, makes
the obvious point that a director in the exercise of his or her function is under a
fiduciary duty vis-a-vis the shareholders of the bank to further the interests of
the bank and therefore postpone [sic] conflicting interests.

 

That is fundamentally at variance with his or her duty as independent arbitrator
in an arbitration involving a party in which the bank has a shareholding or
other interest, however small it may be. Since a major international bank has
connections with or an interest in virtually any major international company
(which companies are also the most likely to end up in international
arbitrations), this suggests that the positions of a director of such a bank, and
that of an international arbitrator, may not be compatible and should not be, or
in a modern international arbitration environment, should no longer be
combined.!™

The Vivendi I decision continued:

The ad hoc Committee thus understands the argument that the ... Tribunal was
no longer properly constituted after the board appointment of Professor
Kaufmann-Kohler, and that there was a serious departure from a fundamental
tule of procedure and considers that this could lead to annulment whenever
justified within the context of the case under consideration.!

The Vivendi IJ Committee did not, however, annul the award in that case, because it
concluded that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler had not become aware of the existence of UBS
interests in the claimant companies until after the award had been rendered and the
Committee consequently accepted “that the relationship between UBS and the Claimants had
no material effect on the final decision of the Tribunal, which was in any event
unanimous”.!° Argentina points out that no such consideration applies in the present case,

since Professor Kaufmann-Kohler became aware of the connection between UBS and EDFI

103 A report by Judge Wolfram was submitted to the remaining members of the Tribunal in the present case and

was part of the record before the ad hoc Committee in the annulment proceedings. Professor Mistelis did not
testify in the present case and his evidence in Vivendi II is not part of the record in the present case; it cannot
therefore be considered by the Committee; see Transcript, pp. 290-291.

'04 Vivendi IT, note 102, above, paras. 217-218.

'°5 Vivendi IT, note 102, above, para. 232.

106 Vivendi I, note 102, above, para. 235.

30

92.

93.

94.

not later than December 2007 when she received the letter from Dr Karin Eugster and Dr
Bernhard Schmid.'’ Argentina therefore maintains that the conflict of interest created by
Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s membership of the UBS Board should lead to the annulment

of the Award.'°*

c. Professor Remon

With regard to Professor Remon, Argentina begins by explaining that it was unable to submit
a proposal for his disqualification to the remaining members of the Tribunal, because it only
became aware of his involvement with Repsol when it received his letter of 18 April 2012
whereas the proceedings had been declared closed on 13 March 2012. It had, however,

expressly reserved its rights under Article 52(1)(a) and (d).!

Given the professional links between Professor Rem6n and his law firm, and between the
latter and Repsol, Argentina maintains that a third party would perceive an obvious
appearance of lack of impartiality.''? Further, Argentina asserts that the Repsol dispute
materialized at the end of 2011, before the deliberations and drafting of the Award in the

present case were concluded.'!!

In any event, Argentina maintains that, given the advice Professor Remon and his firm were
providing Repsol during the deliberations, and given the fact that Repsol was during that time
planning and implementing a legal strategy against Argentina, the date when the dispute
finally materialized is almost irrelevant.''? Additionally, Professor Rem6n’s obligation of
impartiality and independence did not end when the Tribunal concluded its deliberations and
drafting, but when the Award was actually rendered, which happened only after the

disclosure.!!3

‘7 See para. 77, above.

108 Memorial, para. 57-59.
‘69 Memorial, para. 66.

40 Reply, para. 30.

41 Reply, para. 34.

"2 Reply, para. 35 and 38.
43 Reply, para. 36.

31

95.

96.

2. The Claimants
a. General

The Claimants disagree with Argentina regarding the role and powers of an ad hoc
committee confronted with the argument that a member, or members, of a tribunal lacked the
requisite qualities of independence and impartiality. In their view, Articles 57 and 58 of the
ICSID Convention, together with Rule 9 of the Arbitration Rules, require that any challenge
to an arbitrator be made in a timely fashion (otherwise it will be deemed to have been
waived, by virtue of Rule 27 of the Arbitration Rules) and that it be made to the remaining
members of the tribunal (or, in certain circumstances to the Chairman of the ICSID
Administrative Council). While the Claimants accept that, if the facts on which a challenge
is based do not come to light until after proceedings have closed, recourse to this procedure is
impossible and the matter can therefore be brought before an ad hoc committee, they
maintain that the only ground on which annulment can be sought is that of a serious departure
from the fundamental rules of procedure (Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention). The
Claimants deny that Article 52(1)(a) is relevant, since the reference to the tribunal having
been “properly constituted” refers to whether the correct procedures for the appointment of
arbitrators were followed, not to whether the arbitrators meet the requirements of

independence under Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention.'!*

Moreover, where a challenge was made to, and rejected by, the remaining members of the
tribunal, the Claimants contend that the role of the ad hoc committee is even more limited.
Initially, the Claimants contended that, in such a case, it is not open to the aggrieved party to
raise the issue at all in annulment proceedings since annulment is available only in respect of
the award itself and not in respect of the separate decision on disqualification. '!> In this
respect, the Claimants refer to the decision of the ad hoc committee in Azurix.!'© The Azurix
Committee held that Article 52(1)(a) of the ICSID Convention was concerned only with the
procedure for appointment of arbitrators and not with whether the requirements of Article
14(1) of the Convention were satisfied. It concluded that “a Committee would only be able
to annul an award under Article 52(1)(a) if there had been a failure to comply properly with

14 Transcript, pp. 157-158.

415 Counter-Memorial, paras. 25-27; Rejoinder, para. 6.

46 Azurix Corporation v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12), Decision on Annulment of 1
September 2009 (“Azurix”).

32

97.

98.

the procedure for challenging members of the tribunal set out in the other provisions of the

ICSID Convention”.!!”

At the hearing, the Claimants to some extent resiled from this position. They now accept that
an ad hoc committee can review the question whether an arbitrator met the requirements of
Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention in a case where the conclusion of the remaining
members of the tribunal that that arbitrator did meet those requirements is so untenable that it
is one which no reasonable decision-maker could have reached.'!® However, the Claimants
consider that the committee may not approach the matter de novo, that it is bound by the
factual findings of the original decision-maker (i.e. the remaining members of the tribunal or
the Chairman of the Administrative Council) and that it should defer to the legal findings of
that body.''? According to the Claimants, the Vivendi II decision, far from supporting
Argentina’s case, merely serves to demonstrate how high is the standard for challenge to an
arbitrator in annulment proceedings.!”° It is necessary for the party seeking annulment to
show that there was a manifest lack of the qualities required by Article 14(1) of the ICSID
Convention and that the lack of independence and impartiality of the arbitrator had a material
effect on the outcome of the proceedings.!*!_ The Claimants also maintain that the burden of
proof lies with the party challenging an award and that, in case of doubt, there is a
presumption in favour of the validity of an award.'?? Finally, the Claimants contend that
even where a ground for annulment is made out, a committee has a discretion whether or not
to annul the award and that, in the present case, the length of the proceedings and the
hardship which annulment would cause to the Claimant suggest that it would be proper for
the Committee to exercise its discretion not to annul the award even if it finds that one of the

grounds for annulment has been made out.!?*

b. Professor Kaufmann-Kohler

With regard to Professor Kaufmann-Kohler, the Claimants maintain that “given that the

factual predicate upon which this claim is based was squarely rejected by the authority

47 Thid, para. 280

48 Transcript, pp. 161-162 and 292-293.
49 Transcript, p. 158-160.

20 Counter-Memorial, para. 49.

'21 Rejoinder, para. 16.

‘22 Transcript, pp. 114-115.

"23 Transcript, p. 118.

33

99.

100.

101.

empowered to decide that issue, Argentina’s claims must be dismissed as an impermissible
attempt at appeal”.'24 The Claimants point to the findings in the Disqualification Decision
that the links between Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s participation in the UBS Board and
EDFI were minimal and indirect and the finding that there was no evidential basis for holding
that those links would have affected Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s approach to the case. The
Claimants emphasise that the test of appearance of bias is an objective one; it is not enough
that a party states that it considers there is an appearance of bias; it is necessary to establish
that a reasonable person in possession of all the facts would conclude that there was a

reasonable likelihood of bias.

The Claimants deny that the analysis in the Disqualification Decision is in any way
untenable. They point to the fact that the remaining members of the tribunal in Suez
Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona SA and InterAguas Servicios Integrales del Agua
SA v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17) and Suez Sociedad General de
Aguas de Barcelona SA and Vivendi Universal SA v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/03/19), decision of 12 May 2008 (‘Suez IP’), confronted with a challenge to Professor
Kaufmann-Kohler based upon her membership of the UBS Board, rejected that challenge on
grounds very similar to those in the Disqualification Decision in the present case. According
to the Claimants, the fact that another tribunal reached the same conclusion on closely similar

facts is a powerful indication that the decision in the present case was not unreasonable.

The Claimants distinguish Vivendi I on the basis that the links between UBS and Vivendi
were closer than the links on which reliance is placed in the present case. They also
emphasise that the Vivendi IJ Committee did not, in the event, annul the award in that case. In
this context, the Claimants point to the considerable weight given by the Committee in
Vivendi II to the fact that the award in that case was unanimous and stress that the same is

true of the Award in the present proceedings.

Finally, the Claimants endorse the finding of the remaining members of the Tribunal that the
failure to disclose Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s appointment to the UBS Board was not a
ground for annulment of the Award and point to the fact that the Suez IJ decision was to the

same effect.

"24 Counter-Memorial, para. 42.

34

102.

103.

104.

c. Professor Remon

According to the Claimants, Argentina’s challenge to Professor Rem6én merely invokes
Article 52 of the ICSID Convention as a ground for seeking annulment but fails to
substantiate its claim; Argentina asks the Tribunal to assume certain facts that allegedly prove

Professor Remén’s lack of impartiality.!?>

The Claimants argue that even on the limited discussion provided by Argentina, the
circumstances surrounding Professor Rem6n’s disclosure do not justify annulment.'?° The
drafting of the Award had been concluded well before 16 April 2012 when the media
reported the Argentine Government’s intention to expropriate the stake that Repsol had in the
Argentine company YPF. On 18 April 2012, Professor Remé6n sent his disclosure to the
parties.'2” On 27 April 2012, Argentina requested the resignation of Professor Remén.!7* On
11 May 2012, Professor Remén responded to the parties comments and informed them of the
completion of the deliberations and drafting of the Award several weeks before the
expropriation announcement,'?? something which was confirmed by Professor Kaufmann-
Kohler in a letter which she sent to the Tribunal on the same date.'*° The Award was signed
thereafter by all three Tribunal members.'*! According to the Claimants, even if there was a
conflict of interest, which it denies, such conflict could not have had a material effect on the

outcome.!??

Regarding Argentina’s argument that the requirement that an arbitrator be independent and
impartial exists until the award is rendered, the Claimants counter that neither they nor
Professor Rem6n have ever suggested otherwise. In fact, Professor Remon stated in his letter

that he would refrain from taking part in the Repsol matter as long as these “proceedings are

ongoing”.!*

'25 Counter-Memorial, paras. 64-66; Rejoinder, para. 32.

'26 Counter-Memorial, para. 69.

27 RA S31.

28 RA 532.

9 RA 533.

30 AC 16.

‘5 Counter-Memorial, paras. 70, 71, 73; Rejoinder, para. 31.
‘82 Counter-Memorial, para. 74; Rejoinder, paras. 30, 43.

33 Rejoinder, para. 34.

35

105.

106.

107.

The Claimants state that if, as argued by Argentina, it were the case that the conflict
materialized in 2011, Argentina should have raised the issue then. By failing to do so,
Argentina waived its right to challenge the Award on the basis of an alleged conflict of

interests which had already arisen before the Award was completed.'**

In any event, the Claimants argue, Argentina has not met the high threshold for annulment to
be warranted in this case. Indeed, Professor Remén stated that he would not assume
representation of Repsol as long as the present arbitration was ongoing. Contrary to what
Argentina suggests, this declaration was not an admission that Prof. Remén would become
adverse to Argentina as soon as this case was over. Moreover, the IBA Guidelines on
Conflict of Interests impose no obligation of independence and impartiality once the
arbitration has concluded and the tribunal becomes functus officio.'*> Finally, the Claimants

again highlight the fact that the Award was rendered unanimously.!*°
D. The Decision of the Committee

1. The Legal Framework
a. Article 14(1) of the Convention

The qualifications which members of ICSID arbitration tribunals are required to possess are

set out in Article 14(1) of the Convention. The English text of Article 14(1) provides that:

Persons designated to serve on the Panels shall be persons of high moral
character and recognized competence in the fields of law, commerce, industry
or finance, who may be relied upon to exercise independent judgment.
Competence in the field of law shall be of particular importance in the case of
persons on the Panel of Arbitrators. (Emphasis added.)

Although that provision deals with the qualifications which must be possessed by persons
appointed to the Panel of Arbitrators '*’ maintained by ICSID in accordance with Articles 12
and 13 of the Convention, Article 40(2) requires that “arbitrators appointed from outside the

Panel of Arbitrators shall possess the qualities stated in paragraph (1) of Article 14”.

'34 Rejoinder, paras. 36-37.

'35 Rejoinder, para. 42.

'36 Rejoinder, para. 44.

'57 Article 14(1) is also applicable to persons appointed to the Panel of Conciliators.

36

108.

109.

There is a difference between the Spanish and English texts of Article 14(1). Where the
English text refers to persons who “may be relied upon to exercise independent judgment”,
the Spanish version speaks of persons who “‘inspirar plena confianza en su imparcialidad de
juicio”. Since the Convention is equally authentic in English, French and Spanish, '** the
general practice has been to require that arbitrators may be relied upon to exercise
independent judgment and inspire full confidence in their impartiality.'*° While the concepts
of impartiality and independence have sometimes been viewed as one and the same, '° the
Committee considers that, though closely related, they are in fact distinct. As one recent

decision puts it:

Impartiality refers to the absence of bias or predisposition towards a party.
Independence is characterized by the absence of external control.
Independence and impartiality both ‘protect parties against arbitrators being

influenced by factors other than those related to the merits of the case’.!+!

Article 14(1) does not require proof of actual dependence or bias; it is sufficient to establish
the appearance of dependence or bias.'4” The test, however, is an objective one. It is not
enough that the party challenging an arbitrator perceives that that arbitrator lacks the requisite

qualities of independence and impartiality.'*? As the Blue Bank decision put it:

The applicable legal standard is an ‘objective standard based on a reasonable
evaluation of the evidence by a third party’. As a consequence, the subjective
belief of the party requesting the disqualification is not enough to satisfy the
requirements of the Convention.'+

138 The French text requires persons who “offrir toute garantie d’indépendance dans l’exercice de leurs
fonctions” and is thus substantially identical to the English.

8 See Suez Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona SA and InterAguas Servicios Integrales del Agua SA v.
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/17) and Suez Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona SA and
Vivendi Universal SA v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/03/19), decision of the unchallenged
arbitrators of 22 October 2007 (“Suez I’), para. 28; Blue Bank, note 97, above, para. 58; and Burlington
Resources Inc. v. Ecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/08/05), decision of the Chairman of 13 December 2013,
para. 65 (“Burlington”).

'40 See, e.g., Urbaser SA v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/26), decision of the unchallenged
arbitrators of 12 August 2010, para. 38 (Urbaser’).

'41 Blue Bank, para. 59. See also Suez I, note 139, above, para. 29; and Burlington, note 139, above, para. 66.
'2 Blue Bank, note 97, above, para. 59.

'43 See, e.g., the decision the unchallenged members of the ad hoc Committee in relation to the challenge to the
President of that Committee in Vivendi I, note 70, above, para. 25, and Suez I, note 139, above, para. 41.

'44 Blue Bank, note 97, above, para. 60, quoting Suez I, note 139 above, at para. 39.

37

110. The standard of appraisal was also the subject of detailed analysis in the decision of the two

111.

remaining arbitrators on a challenge to an arbitrator in SGS v. Pakistan:

The standard of appraisal of a challenge set forth in Article 57 of the
Convention may be seen to have two constituent elements: (a) there must be a
fact or facts (b) which are of such a nature as to ‘indicat[e] a manifest lack of
the qualities required by’ Article 14(1). The party challenging an arbitrator
must establish facts, of a kind or character as reasonably to give rise to the
inference that the person challenged clearly may not be relied upon to exercise
independent judgment in the particular case where the challenge is made. The
first requisite that facts must be established by the party proposing
disqualification, is in effect a prescription that mere speculation or inference
cannot be a substitute for such facts. The second requisite of course essentially
consists of an inference, but that inference must rest upon, or be anchored to,
the facts established. An arbitrator cannot, under Article 57 of the Convention,
be successfully challenged as a result of inferences which themselves rest
merely on other inferences.'*

The Parties in the present case were largely agreed upon this standard. In the course of
responding to a question put by a Member of the Committee at the hearing, the Claimants
maintained that the Blue Bank decision and some other recent decisions went further in the
direction of disqualification for the appearance of bias than had previous decisions and
suggested that it would be unfair to apply the same approach to an evaluation of the decision
on the challenge to Professor Kaufmann-Kohler (to which the Committee will shortly
turn).'4° However, the Committee does not understand the Claimants to suggest that the
statement from Blue Bank quoted in paragraph 109, above, was incorrect. On the contrary,
the Claimants expressly accepted that “the notion that an arbitrator should not only serve
justice but appear to serve justice is a long-standing one”.'*”7 The Committee considers that
the Claimants accepted that the standard to be applied is the one described above but took
issue with certain recent applications of that standard. In the opinion of the Committee, the
standard applied under Article 14(1) is whether a reasonable third party, with knowledge of
all the facts, would consider that there were reasonable grounds for doubting that an arbitrator

possessed the requisite qualities of independence and impartiality.

45 $GS Société Générale SA y. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/13), Decision on
challenge to an arbitrator of 19 December 2002, 8 ICSID Reports 402 (“SGS”).

'46 Transcript, pp. 187-8 (Di Rosa).

47 Transcript, p. 186 (Di Rosa).

38

112.

113.

114.

115.

b. The Convention Machinery for Challenging an Arbitrator

In addition to specifying the qualities which an arbitrator must possess, the Convention also
lays down a machinery by which a party may challenge an arbitrator about whom it considers
there is reason to doubt that he or she lacks one or more of those qualities. Article 57 of the

Convention provides in relevant part that:

A party may propose to a Commission or Tribunal the disqualification of any
of its members on account of any fact indicating a manifest lack of the qualities
required by paragraph (1) of Article 14.

That provision has to be read together with Article 58, which states that:

The decision on any proposal to disqualify a conciliator or arbitrator shall be
taken by the other members of the Commission or Tribunal as the case may be,
provided that where those members are equally divided, or in the case of a
proposal to disqualify a sole arbitrator, or a majority of the conciliators or
arbitrators, the Chairman shall take that decision. If it is decided that the
proposal is well-founded the conciliator or arbitrator to whom the decision
relates shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of Section 2 of
Chapter III or Section 2 of Chapter IV.

A number of points need to be borne in mind regarding these provisions. First, these
provisions make clear that the decision on a challenge to an arbitrator for failure to meet the
requirements of Article 14(1) should normally be taken by the two remaining members of the
Tribunal, while providing a default decision-maker, in the form of the President of the World
Bank in his capacity as Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council,'*® to resolve that

question in the cases specified in Article 58.

Secondly, because only a duly constituted tribunal can take a decision, a challenge may be
brought under Article 57 only once the tribunal in the case has been constituted. Moreover,
Rule 9(1) of the Arbitration Rules is explicit that a proposal under Article 57 may not be

made after the proceedings have been declared closed.

Thirdly, the mechanism created by Articles 57 and 58 is clearly designed to ensure that a
challenge can be swiftly resolved before the case proceeds any further. The emphasis on a

swift resolution is confirmed by the Arbitration Rules. Rule 9 requires that ‘a party

'48 ICSID Convention Article 5.

39

116.

117.

118.

proposing the disqualification of an arbitrator pursuant to Article 57 of the Convention shall
promptly, and in any event before the proceeding is declared closed, file its proposal with the
Secretariat”. A party that fails to file its request within a reasonable time of becoming aware
of the circumstances which it maintains should lead to disqualification will be held, in

accordance with Rule 27, to have waived its right to challenge the arbitrator.

Lastly, Article 57 expressly requires that a proposal for disqualification be based upon facts
indicating a “manifest” lack of the qualities required by Article 14(1) of the ICSID
Convention. The term “manifest” is not defined in Article 57. Schreuer’s Commentary
points out that the case-law on the meaning of the same term in Article 52(1)(b) (annulment
on the ground that a tribunal “manifestly exceeded its powers”) has not always been
consistent, sometimes treating “manifest” as referring to the ease with which the fault can be
perceived and sometimes as related to the gravity of the fault.'*° In the context of Article 57,
however, the prevailing view is that “manifest” means “evident” or “obvious” and that, in the
words of the Blue Bank decision “it relates to the ease with which the alleged lack of the
qualities can be perceived”.'>! In the present case, both Parties have adopted this approach

and the Committee agrees that it represents the correct interpretation of Article 57.

c. The Role of an ad hoc Committee

Since Articles 57 and 58 establish a machinery for dealing with challenges to arbitrators, the
next question to be considered is whether there is any role for an ad hoc committee, or, to put
the matter differently, can the fact that there is reason to doubt whether one or more of the
members of a tribunal possessed the qualities required by Article 14(1) of the Convention

constitute a ground for annulment under Article 52?

The Azurix Committee considered that that question had to be answered in the negative.
Since the role of annulment was strictly limited under the Convention and Articles 57 and 58
created a machinery for the resolution of challenges to arbitrators, the Azurix Committee
concluded that an ad hoc committee was limited to examining whether or not there had been

a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure in the way in which the challenge

49 See, e.g., Suez 1, note 139, above, paras. 23-26.
‘59 Schreuer, Commentary, note 53, above, Article 52, paras, 134-154.
'S! Blue Bank, note 97, above, para. 61.

40

119.

120.

had been addressed.'°? Even where the facts said to demonstrate that an arbitrator lacked the
requisite qualities came to light only after the proceedings had closed, and thus could not be
dealt with under Articles 57 and 58, the Azurix Committee considered that the matter could
not be a basis for annulment but could only be raised by way of proceedings for the revision
of the award under Article 51.'° By contrast, the Vivendi IJ Committee, faced with a
challenge to Professor Kaufmann-Kohler based upon facts which had come to light only after
the proceedings had closed, was clear that such matters could constitute grounds for

annulment.!*+

Whether the existence of facts suggesting that an arbitrator lacks the qualities required by
Article 14(1) of the ICSID Convention is capable of being a ground for annulment depends,
first, on whether this matter falls within any of the five grounds for annulment set out in

Article 52.

As set out above, Argentina has relied upon two of these grounds. It argues, first, that if there
is reason to believe that one of the arbitrators lacks the requisite qualities, then the tribunal
has not been properly constituted (Article 52(1)(a)). Secondly, Argentina maintains that
since the right to an independent and impartial tribunal is a fundamental rule of due process,
if a case were decided by a tribunal whose members did not meet the requirements of
independence and impartiality in Article 14(1), there would necessarily have been a serious
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure (Article 52(1)(d)). The Claimants accept that
annulment might be possible under Article 52(1)(d), although (at least initially) they
maintained that this was true only where the relevant facts were discovered after the close of
proceedings and thus could not have been dealt with under Articles 57 and 58. However, like
the Azurix Committee, they dispute the relevance of Article 52(1)(a), arguing that that
provision is limited to cases in which the procedure for constitution of the tribunal, laid down
in Articles 37-39 had not been followed and that it does not provide that a tribunal is not
properly constituted simply because one of its members does not possess all of the qualities

required by Article 14(1). The Claimants suggest, however, that in practice it makes no

, note 116, above, para. 280.
, note 116, above, para. 281.
'S4 Vivendi II, note 102, above, para. 232.

 

41

121.

122.

123.

124.

difference whether the qualifications of an arbitrator are considered relevant to Article

52(1)(a) or (d) (or both) since the standard of review is the same under both provisions.

The Committee accepts that it may well make no difference whether these issues are
considered under paragraph (a) or paragraph (d) of Article 52(1) but the matter was fully
argued before it and has been the subject of differing views in the case-law and literature. It

will, therefore, examine the relevance of both provisions.

There is general acceptance that Article 52(1)(d) may be applicable to a case in which a
challenge to an arbitrator has been dealt with under Articles 57 and 58 of the Convention in a
manner which itself involves a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, for
example because one party was not given the opportunity to be heard. Such cases are,
however, likely to be extremely rare and no allegation of that kind is made in the present
case. The more important question, both as a matter of general principle and in connection
with the present case, is whether the fact that a case has been heard by a tribunal one or more
of whose members failed to meet the requirements of independence and impartiality in

Article 14(1) means that the procedure as a whole is flawed.

Article 52(1)(d) gives a committee power to annul an award where there has been a serious
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure. It is difficult to imagine a rule of procedure
more fundamental than the rule that a case must be heard by an independent and impartial
tribunal. The Committee accordingly considers that, in principle, an ad hoc committee can
examine under Article 52(1)(d) not only allegations that the procedure by which a challenge
to an arbitrator was determined was flawed but, more importantly, allegations that the lack of
independence and impartiality of an arbitrator meant that there was a serious departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure in the arbitration as a whole.

In that context, it is important to recall that it is only an award which can be the subject of
annulment and not any previous decision of a tribunal (see paragraph 62 above). There can,
therefore, be no question of an ad hoc committee annulling the decision taken by the
remaining members of a tribunal under Article 58 to reject a proposal for disqualification.
The only way in which that decision can be called into question in annulment proceedings is
if it is considered to taint the award which is subsequently adopted. Any consideration of the

role of Article 52(1)(d) must take that into account. If an award may be tainted by the fact

42

125.

126.

that a decision whether or not to disqualify an arbitrator was taken in a manner which was
procedurally deficient, a fortiori an award may be tainted by the fact that the award itself was
adopted by a tribunal one or more of whose members did not meet the requisite standard of

impartiality and independence.

The Committee therefore considers that the fact that there is reasonable doubt about whether
an arbitrator possessed the qualities of independence and impartiality required by Article

14(1) is a ground on which an award might be annulled under Article 52(1)(d).

Turning to Article 52(1)(a), the Committee considers that the Claimants take too narrow a
view of the scope of that provision. In providing for annulment on the ground that “the
Tribunal was not properly constituted”, that paragraph must be taken as referring to
compliance with all of the requirements of Chapter IV, Section 2, of the Convention, entitled
“Constitution of the Tribunal”. One of the provisions in that section is Article 40. Article
40(1) provides that arbitrators may be appointed from outside the Panel of Arbitrators
maintained by ICSID but Article 40(2) then requires that “arbitrators appointed from outside
the Panel of Arbitrators shall possess the qualities stated in paragraph (1) of Article 14”. That
provision is mandatory and is one of those relating to the constitution of a tribunal. It follows
that an appointment from outside the Panel of an arbitrator who does not possess the qualities
stated in Article 14(1) will mean that the tribunal has not been properly constituted in that it
has not been constituted in accordance with all of the requirements of Chapter IV, Section 2.
In the case of arbitrators appointed from the Panel of Arbitrators, since Article 14(1) already
requires that they possess the qualities stated in that provision, it might be thought that
whether a person does or does not possess those qualities is relevant to his appointment to the
Panel rather than to the constitution of a particular tribunal. However, independence and
impartiality are not qualities the existence of which can be assessed purely in an abstract or
general way; what matters most is that an arbitrator can be relied upon to be independent and
impartial in relation to the particular parties and issues arising in a given arbitration.
Accordingly, whether appointed from the Panel or from outside it, an arbitrator must possess
those qualities in relation to the specific case for which he or she is appointed. If he or she
does not do so, then, in the view of the Committee, the tribunal has not been properly

constituted.

4B

127.

128.

129.

130.

The Committee therefore concludes that the fact that an arbitrator does not meet the standard
required under Article 14(1), as set out in para. 111, above, is also a ground on which an

award might be annulled under Article 52(1)(a).

Moreover, the Committee does not consider that the question whether or not a tribunal has
been properly constituted is one which can be answered only at the outset of proceedings.
While it is obviously necessary to establish that a tribunal is properly constituted at the time
that it begins work,'* once it is accepted that the proper constitution of the tribunal requires
that each of its members fulfil the requirements of Article 14(1), it becomes clear that
changes in the circumstances of an arbitrator may mean that a tribunal which was properly

constituted at the outset may cease to be so during the course of the proceedings.

That still, however, leaves the question how an ad hoc committee is to discharge its role
under Article 52 in respect of allegations about the independence and impartiality of an
arbitrator. In this respect, the Committee considers that there is an important difference
between those cases in which the issue of disqualification has been raised under Article 57
and rejected under Article 58 and those in which it has not. That distinction is particularly
important in the present case, because Argentina’s case for annulment in respect of its
challenge to Professor Kaufmann-Kohler falls into the first category, whereas its case with

regard to Professor Remon falls into the second.

(1) — The role of an ad hoc committee where no challenge has been made under

Article 57
It is convenient to begin with this second category. Article 9 of the Arbitration Rules
requires that any challenge to an arbitrator must be raised “promptly, and in any event before
the proceeding is declared closed”. The Committee does not consider that this wording
precludes a party from raising the matter on annulment in a case where the facts on which a
challenge can be based came to light only after the proceedings had been declared closed. As
has been explained in Part III, above, an ad hoc committee is the guardian of the integrity of
the procedure. The Committee has already expressed the view that there is no rule of

procedure so fundamental as that which stipulates that a case shall be decided by an

‘55 In the present case, the Parties confirmed their agreement that the Tribunal had been properly constituted at
the first ion of the Tribunal, Decision on Jurisdiction, para. 22.

  

44

131.

132.

independent and impartial tribunal as well as that a tribunal cannot be regarded as properly
constituted if one or more of its members does not possess the requisite qualities of
independence and impartiality. Accordingly, the Committee cannot read Rule 9 as
precluding a party from raising this issue in annulment proceedings where it was not able to
raise it before the closure of the main proceedings. The Committee has taken careful note of
the views of the Azurix Committee (discussed in para. 118, above) that in such a case the
issue should be raised in proceedings for revision under Article 51 and not for annulment but

it respectfully disagrees and prefers the approach of the Vivendi IJ Committee on this point.

Nevertheless, the Committee must also take into account the requirement of promptness in

Rule 9 and the provision of Rule 27 that —

A party which knows or should have known that a provision of the
Administrative and Financial Regulations, of these Rules, of any other rules or
agreement applicable to the proceedings, or of an order of the Tribunal has not
been complied with and which fails to state promptly its objections thereto,
shall be deemed — subject to Article 45 of the Convention — to have waived its
right to object.

Accordingly, a party which is, or should have been, aware of the facts which it claims give
rise to reasonable doubt about whether an arbitrator possesses the requisite qualities of
independence and impartiality has a duty to raise the issue promptly. If it fails to do so, it
will have waived its right to object. A party which could have raised the matter under
Articles 57 and 58 before the proceedings were declared closed but failed to do so cannot,
therefore, raise it on annulment. The mechanism created by the ICSID Convention for
resolving challenges to arbitrators does not permit a party to keep such a challenge up its
sleeve for use only at the annulment stage.'*° The first task for an ad hoc committee faced
with an application for annulment based upon allegations regarding the independence and
impartiality of a member of the tribunal which was not raised during the proceedings before

the tribunal is, therefore, to determine whether there has been a waiver under Rule 27.

If the committee concludes that there has been no waiver, then it must proceed to consider the

application under either or both of Article 52(1)(a) and (d). Since there has been no prior

56 See CDC Group v. Republic of the Seychelles (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14), Decision on Annulment, 29
June 2005, 11 ICSID Reps. 206, paras. 51-55 (“CDC”). See also, Schreuer, Commentary, note 53, above,
Article 57, paras. 11-12 and Article 52, paras, 119-129.

45

133.

134.

consideration of the issue under Articles 57 and 58, the committee must necessarily approach
de novo the question whether there exist grounds which a reasonable third party would
consider give rise to reasonable doubts whether a member of the tribunal was sufficiently
independent and impartial (the standard which the Committee has already determined is the
one applicable under the Convention, see para. 108, above). That is so both in terms of
finding the relevant facts and making the required legal rulings. The burden of proof in

respect of any assertion is on the party making that assertion.

The Claimants contend that, even if it concludes that there were reasonable grounds to doubt
the impartiality or independence of a member of the tribunal, a committee may annul only if
it concludes that there was a material effect on the award. The Committee has difficulty in
accepting this proposition, at least in the terms in which it was put by the Claimants.'>” It has
already been established that the test is not one of whether an arbitrator actually lacked
independence or impartiality but whether a reasonable third person, with knowledge of all the
facts, would consider there were reasonable grounds for doubting that an arbitrator possessed
the requisite qualities of independence and impartiality (see paras. 109 and 111, above). The
Committee notes that it will generally be difficult to show how reasonable doubts about the
independence or impartiality of an arbitrator — as opposed to actual bias or lack of
independence — had a material effect on the award. Even in the case of actual bias or lack of
independence, it may still be difficult to establish that such an effect existed, because of the

confidentiality of the deliberations.

What can sometimes be established, however, is that even if the doubts about an arbitrator are
well-founded — in other words if that arbitrator really did lack impartiality or independence —
the award could not have been affected. That would be the case, for example, where the facts
affecting the arbitrator’s lack of independence or impartiality only came into existence after
the award had been finalised but before it was actually rendered. While the Committee
agrees with Argentina that the duty of independence and impartiality subsists throughout the
proceedings until the award is rendered, it considers that if an arbitrator ceased to be
independent or impartial only after the award has been finalised, his lack of the requisite

qualities could not have affected the award and would not, therefore, constitute a ground for

'57 See, e.g., Transcript, p. 293.

46

135.

136.

annulment. In short, the party seeking annulment is not required to prove that a lack of
impartiality or independence did have a material effect on the award but it must establish that

it could have done so.

In that context, it is necessary to consider a further argument advanced by the Claimants,
namely that a lack of impartiality or independence on the part of one arbitrator could not have
had an effect upon the award if the award was unanimous. That argument receives a degree
of support from the decision of the Vivendi IJ Committee since one of the reasons it gave for
its decision not to annul the award was that the tribunal had been unanimous. The Committee
does not consider that that factor was decisive. The main reason given by the Vivendi I
Committee for its decision was that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler became aware of the links
between UBS and the claimant companies in that case only after the award had been rendered
(a consideration which does not apply in the present case). There is nothing in the decision to
suggest that the Vivendi IJ Committee considered that the fact that an award had been adopted
unanimously meant that doubts regarding the independence or impartiality of one of the
members of the tribunal would never be grounds for annulment. The present Committee does
not consider that such a broad proposition could be correct. It is impossible to tell what
degree of influence on one or both colleagues an arbitrator might have had in the course of
what are necessarily confidential deliberations. The fact that an award was rendered
unanimously may be a relevant consideration in relation to the exercise of the discretion not
to annul an award but the Committee does not accept that unanimity necessarily precludes

annulment.

Accordingly, in a case in which an application for annulment is made on the basis that there
were reasonable grounds to doubt the independence or impartiality of one of the arbitrators
and no proposal for disqualification had been made before the proceedings were declared

closed, the role of an ad hoc committee is to decide the following questions:-

(a) was the right to raise this matter waived because the party concerned had not raised it

sufficiently promptly ?

(b) if not, has the party seeking annulment established facts the existence of which

would cause a reasonable person, with knowledge of all the facts, to consider that there

47

137.

138.

139.

were reasonable grounds for doubting that an arbitrator possessed the requisite qualities of

independence and impartiality ? and

(c) if so, could the lack of impartiality or independence on the part of that arbitrator —
assuming for this purpose that the doubts were well-founded — have had a material effect

on the award ?

With respect to each question, the committee must approach the matter de novo.

(2) The role of an ad hoc committee where a challenge has been made, and

rejected, under Article 57
We turn then to the other category of case, namely one in which the party seeking annulment
had proposed disqualification of the arbitrator during the proceedings but the remaining
members of the tribunal (or the Chairman of the Administrative Council in those cases for
which Article 58 so provides) hearing the matter under Article 58 of the ICSID Convention
had dismissed the proposal. Here the entire procedural context is different. There is an
existing evidential record which has been considered by the remaining members of the
tribunal (or the Chairman) and their decision will contain findings of fact, as well as rulings
on the legal issues arising from the facts as found. The question, therefore, is what is the
relationship between those findings and rulings by the Article 58 decision-maker and the role

of the ad hoc committee at the annulment stage?

On this question the Parties are in marked disagreement. Argentina argues that the role of the
ad hoc committee is the same as it is in a case where no previous challenge has been made,
namely to examine the issues de novo and take a decision. The Claimants, on the other hand,
now contend (see paras. 96 to 97, above) that the committee’s role is to review whether or not
the decision taken under Article 58 was tenable, in the sense that it was one which a
reasonable decision-maker could take. According to the Claimants, it is not open to a
committee to reconsider the facts or to substitute its own view for that of the body charged

with taking the decision under Article 58.

The Committee considers that with regard to this question two points are of fundamental
importance. First, the drafters of the ICSID Convention considered that challenges to the

independence or impartiality of an arbitrator should be heard by the remaining members of

48

140.

141.

the tribunal (or the Chairman of the Administrative Council), and should be addressed
promptly, and before the case proceeds any further. In this context, the Committee notes that
the Vivendi IT Committee seemingly accepted the suggestion that arbitrators called upon to
determine a challenge to another member of their tribunal might be more inclined than would
an ad hoc committee to raise the threshold for a challenge.'** That observation by the
Vivendi IT Committee was based upon the evidence of Professor Mistelis which, as the
Committee has already observed (para. 89 and footnote 103, above), is not part of the record
in the present proceedings and cannot, therefore, be taken into account. Nevertheless, even if
the Committee had before it evidence of such a tendency on the part of arbitrators, that could
not detract from the fact that the ICSID Convention entrusts decisions on proposals to
disqualify an arbitrator to the remaining members of the tribunal (except where, as already
explained, the Chairman of the Administrative Council acts as the default decision-maker).
An ad hoc committee must respect that choice and work within the framework laid down by

the Convention.

Secondly, however, the ICSID Convention also establishes the ad hoc committee as the
guardian of the integrity of the arbitral procedure (see para. 65, above). As the Committee
has already stated, the independence and impartiality of the members of the tribunal is a
matter which goes to the very heart of the integrity of the arbitral procedure. The question,
therefore, is how should an ad hoc committee act in order to respect both of these

fundamental considerations.

The Committee considers that the second consideration must lead it to reject the approach
taken by the Azurix Committee, namely that an ad hoc committee has no role in respect of a
challenge to an arbitrator which had been considered by the remaining members of the
tribunal under Articles 57 and 58 of the Convention beyond examining whether there had
been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure in the manner in which the
remaining members had dealt with the proposal for disqualification. The Committee
considers that such an approach is incompatible with the duty of an ad hoc committee to

safeguard the integrity of the arbitral procedure. It thus rejects the position initially adopted

'S8 Vivendi II, note 102, above, paras. 208-210.

49

142.

143.

on this issue by the Claimants, while observing, as it has already noted, that the Claimants

resiled from that position at the hearing (see para. 97, above).

Nor, however, can the Committee accept that, as Argentina has suggested, an ad hoc
committee should approach the issue of an arbitrator’s independence and impartiality de
novo, thus disregarding entirely the outcome of the proceedings under Articles 57 and 58. To
do so would be incompatible with the scheme for resolving challenges to arbitrators devised
by those who concluded the ICSID Convention. That scheme was designed to resolve such
challenges swiftly and at the earliest possible stage of the proceedings, so that the parties
were not involved in the expense and loss of time necessarily involved in obtaining a final
award from the tribunal before it was established that the tribunal — as constituted — was
entitled to hear the case. By contrast, reference to an ad hoc committee can be made only
after a final award has been made by a tribunal. During the negotiation of the ICSID
Convention a proposal that a party be given an immediate right of recourse to an ad hoc
committee after the tribunal had decided that it was properly constituted, without having to
wait for the award, was defeated.'*? To allow a party which had unsuccessfully challenged
an arbitrator at an early stage of the proceedings to raise the same challenge for consideration
de novo before an ad hoc committee, after what may well have been lengthy and expensive
proceedings on the merits, would run completely counter to the scheme for early resolution of
a challenge. In effect, the proceedings under Articles 57 and 58 would serve no useful
purpose, other than to ensure that the right to challenge the arbitrator was not waived; it

would be as if such proceedings had never taken place.

Moreover, it must be recalled that annulment proceedings are not an appeal (see Part III,
above). The role of an ad hoc committee in proceedings for the annulment of an award is not
to determine whether the tribunal was correct in the decisions that it took; it is a supervisory
role, limited to determining whether or not one of the grounds of annulment has been made
out. The fact that questions as to whether or not a member of the tribunal which issued the
award possessed the requisite qualities of independence and impartiality goes to a matter of
fundamental importance does not alter the relationship between the role of the ad hoc

committee and that of the body entrusted with making the original decision. The question

5 Documents concerning the Origin and Formulation of the ICSID Convention, vol. II, pp. 851-853.

50

144.

145.

whether a tribunal has exceeded its jurisdiction is equally fundamental. Just as Article 57
entrusts decisions on challenges to an arbitrator to the remaining members of the tribunal (or
the Chairman of the Administrative Council), so Article 41 empowers the tribunal to
determine a challenge to its jurisdiction. Ad hoc committees have, however, declined to
accept that every jurisdictional error has to be considered annullable, or to treat applications

for annulment based on jurisdictional error as more akin to appeals.'©°

In short, the role of an ad hoc committee is not to determine whether or not an arbitrator
possesses the requisite qualities of independence and impartiality; Articles 57 and 58 entrust
that function to the remaining members of the tribunal, or to the Chairman of the
Administrative Council. Only if the matter is raised for the first time after the proceedings
are closed does the ad hoc committee become the primary decision-maker in respect of this

issue.

The Committee therefore considers that its role in relation to an application for annulment
based on the alleged lack of independence or impartiality of an arbitrator is a more limited
one in a case where the remaining members of the tribunal, or the Chairman of the
Administrative Council, have already taken a decision on whether that arbitrator should be
disqualified than in a case where the issue of independence or impartiality is raised only after
the proceedings have closed. In the former type of case, an ad hoc committee does not write
on a blank sheet: it is faced with existing findings of fact and assessment of those facts, as
well as with an application of the law to those facts. While a committee is not bound to
uphold the decision of the remaining members of the tribunal (or the Chairman of the
Administrative Council), nor can it simply disregard that decision. It is limited to the facts
found in the original decision on disqualification. Moreover, commensurate with the
principle that an ad hoc committee is not an appellate body, it may not find a ground of
annulment exists under either Article 52(1)(a) or 52(1)(d) unless the decision not to
disqualify the arbitrator in question is so plainly unreasonable that no reasonable decision-

maker could have come to such a decision.

160 Soufraki, para. 118.

Sl

146.

147.

148.

It is within this legal framework that the Committee has considered Argentina’s application
for annulment on the basis of the alleged lack by Professor Kaufmann-Kohler and Professor

Rem6n of the requisite qualities of independence and impartiality.

2. Professor Kaufmann-Kohler

The facts on which Argentina bases its claim that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler lacked the
requisite qualities of independence and impartiality are set out in paras. 76 to 82, above.
They are not in dispute. The grounds of Argentina’s claim before the Committee are the
same as those raised (see para. 81, above) before the remaining members of the Tribunal.'®!
The Disqualification Decision given by the remaining members, after reviewing the facts and
the procedure which had been followed for dealing with Argentina’s challenge, noted that the
relevant test was “whether Professor Kaufmann-Kohler ‘may be relied upon to exercise

independent judgment’” and stated that “if reasonable doubts exist on this matter, she should
cease to serve in these proceedings”.!°? As noted in paras. 81 to 82, above, Professors Park
and Remén concluded that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s non-executive directorship at UBS
gave her no financial interest in any of the Claimant companies and that she would not
benefit in any way from an award in their favour.'® They also rejected as “remote, tenuous
and speculative” the suggestion that, even without any prospect of financial benefit, Professor
Kaufmann-Kohler might favour EDFI on the ground that she had a sense of solidarity with

UBS.

Professors Park and Remé6n then reviewed each of the five grounds (see para. 78, above) on
which Argentina maintained that there existed between UBS and EDFI connections
sufficient to give rise to a conflict of interest on the part of Professor Kaufmann-Kohler

once she had become a director of UBS. They concluded as follows:-

(a) with regard to the fact that UBS recommended EDF, the parent company of EDFI, as a
good investment opportunity, they noted that this gave Professor Kaufmann-Kohler no

direct incentive to favour EDFI and concluded that “the connection remains

'6l There was at that time no challenge to Professor Remon and the grounds on which he was subsequently
challenged by Argentina relate to events said to have occurred several years after he and Professor Park had
ruled on the challenge to Professor Kaufmann-Kohler.

16 Disqualification Decision, para. 64.

'63 Disqualification Decision, para. 71.

 

52

(b

(c

(d

speculative and indirect, and thus not determinative for the purposes of this

>> 164

challenge They considered, however, that ‘a different conclusion might be

indicated if an arbitrator held a substantial equity stake in a bank which owned and
actively promoted a company that was party to the relevant proceedings”.!°

with regard to the fact that UBS and a subsidiary of EDF both held shares in AEM
Milan, they noted that UBS’s stake in AEM was below 1.5% and was held in the
ordinary course of its business activity as one of the largest banks in the world. They
did not consider that it could affect the independence of Professor Kaufmann-
Kohler.!

they reached a similar conclusion with regard to the fact that UBS and EDF had both
held shares in Motor Columbus,'® a conclusion which was reinforced by the fact that
UBS had sold its shareholding before Professor Kaufmann-Kohler became a
director.!®

with regard to the involvement of UBS in a consortium that assisted in the placement
of EDF shares on the French market, they noted that UBS had not itself bought shares
in the course of this placement and concluded that “we are unable to perceive any link
between that consortium’s activity and the way Professor Kaufmann-Kohler will

evaluate the issues in this case”.!®

(e) it was the fact that the UBS Investment Foundation held an investment in EDF that the

remaining members of the Tribunal considered “stands on a somewhat different

footing from Respondent’s other arguments”. They noted, however, that

the Foundation is an institution for the collective investment of assets by
Swiss pension funds. Ultimately, the assets of the Foundation will
benefit the various Swiss pension funds that have joined in the
institutions which participate in the Foundation.'”°

They also noted that the total investment in EDF fell below 1.5%. Even had the investment

in EDF been held by UBS itself, Professors Park and Remon considered that “‘a stake of less

164 Disqualification Decisi
Disqualification Decisi
166 Disqualification Decisi
167 Disqualification Decisi
168 Disqualification Decisi

165

‘69 Disqualification Dec!

 

ion, para. 87.

17 Disqualification Decision, para. 93.

53

149.

150.

151.

152.

than 1.5% would not be significant enough to have an impact on the independence of

Professor Kaufmann-Kohler.”!7!

Finally, Professors Park and Remén considered whether Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s
failure to disclose her directorship of UBS was, in itself a sufficient ground for

disqualification. They concluded that it was not:

With respect to the alleged failure to disclose, we cannot accept that non-
disclosure of the Board membership indicates a manifest lack of reliability in
the exercise of independent judgment, the standard to be applied in this
challenge. Whatever level of disclosure might be required under the ICSID
Convention, a failure to inform the parties about this Board membership does
not rise to that plane.!””

Professors Park and Remon also considered in detail the report by Professor Wolfram,
submitted by Argentina, the decision of the United States Court of Appeals in New Regency
Productions Limited v. Nippon Herald Films Inc., 501 F 3d 211 co" Circuit, 2007) to which
Argentina had drawn their attention, and the press release regarding Professor Kaufmann-
Kohler’s role in removing certain officials of UBS but concluded that none of them altered

the conclusions they had reached.

The Committee notes that there is no suggestion that, in considering the proposal to
disqualify Professor Kaufmann-Kohler, Professors Park and Remon failed in any way to
accord due process to both Parties. There is no hint here of any serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure in the way in which the proposal for disqualification was

handled.

Nor is there any suggestion that the remaining members of the Tribunal applied the wrong
standard. It is true that in setting out that standard the Disqualification Decision refers only
to whether Professor Kaufmann-Kohler “may be relied upon to exercise independent
judgment” and makes no separate mention of a requirement of impartiality,'’? whereas the
Committee has held that the standard laid down in Article 14 of the Convention, taking
account of the English, French and Spanish texts, is one of independence and impartiality

71 Disqualification De

'? Disqualification De
3 Disqualification Decision, para. 64.

 

54

153.

154.

155.

(see para. 108, above). However, other passages in the Disqualification Decision make clear
that Professors Park and Remon had both impartiality and independence in mind. Thus, they
opined that “non-disclosure in itself cannot be a ground for disqualification, it must relate to
facts that would be material to a reasonable likelihood of impartiality or lack of
independence, which is not the case here”.'”4 In the circumstances, the Committee does not
consider that the fact that the remaining members of the Tribunal formulated the standard as
they did can sustain the conclusion that their decision was one which no reasonable decision-

maker could have made.

Nor is there a plausible argument that the Disqualification Decision did not address the
different elements in Argentina’s proposal to disqualify Professor Kaufmann-Kohler. As the
Committee has endeavoured to show, that decision meticulously addressed each and every
element which was said to demonstrate that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler lacked the requisite

qualities of independence and impartiality.

Argentina’s case before the Committee comes down, therefore, to an argument that the
Disqualification Decision came to the wrong conclusion. In advancing that argument,
Argentina relies heavily upon the decision of the ad hoc Committee in Vivendi I. As the
Committee has already explained (see paragraphs 89 to 91, above), that decision took a far
more critical view of Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s position than did the Disqualification
Decision in the present case, although the Vivendi IT Committee ultimately decided not to
annul the award. Since the fact of Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s appointment to the UBS
Board did not come to light until after the proceedings in Vivendi IT had been closed, the ad
hoc Committee in that case necessarily had to approach the question whether there was

reason to doubt Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s independence or impartiality de novo.

The Committee has studied the decision in Vivendi IJ with care. It notes, however, that,
although, as in the present case, Vivendi IJ was concerned with Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s
directorship of UBS, there are nevertheless differences between the two cases. In particular,
there is a difference between the investment which UBS was found to have in the claimants
in Vivendi IT and its investment in EDF in the present case. As has already been explained,

the investment in the present case consisted of a share of less than 1.5% in EDF, the parent

"4 Disqualification Decision, para. 123 (emphasis added).

55

156.

company of the Claimant, EDFI. That investment was held by the UBS Foundation for the
benefit of various Swiss pension funds. The other UBS shareholdings — in AEM Milan and
its former shareholding in Motor Columbus — were in companies that were part-owned by the
parent company of EDFI and were not involved in the arbitration. By contrast, in Vivendi II,
it seems that UBS was the largest shareholder in the Claimant itself.!”> In commenting on the
decisions on disqualification in the present case and in Suez I, the Vivendi IT Committee

commented that

Each relationship was different and must, like the relationship between UBS
and Vivendi, be considered individually. Notably, a larger or smaller
participation of UBS in the one or in the other company may have relevance in
this connection. (Emphasis added)!7°

The Tribunal in the present case also considered that the size of an investment might be

important in this regard. '77

In addition, the Committee notes that the Vivendi IT Committee placed considerable weight
on what it described as “the obvious point that a director in the exercise of his or her function
is under a fiduciary duty vis-a-vis the shareholders of the bank to further the interests of the
bank and therefore postpone [sic] conflicting interests” and considered that “that is
fundamentally at variance with his or her duty as independent arbitrator in an arbitration
involving a party in which the bank has a shareholding or other interest, however small it

may be”.'”8 On that basis, the Vivendi IJ Committee considered that

Since a major international bank has connections with or an interest in virtually
any major international company (which companies are also the most likely to
end up in international arbitrations), this suggests that the positions of a
director of such a bank, and that of an international arbitrator, may not be
compatible and should not be, or in a modern international arbitration
environment, should no longer be combined.!7?

"75 Vivendi II, note 102, above, para. 20. See, however, para. 99. These paragraphs set out the submissions of
the parties. The Tribunal did not make a finding about the extent of the UBS holding in Vivendi or whether
any part of it was held on behalf of third parties.

'%6 Vivendi II, note 102, above, para. 214.

177 Disqualification Decision, para. 78.

"78 Vivendi IT, note 102, above, paras. 217-218.

"79 Vivendi IT, note 102, above, para. 218.

56

157.

158.

The Vivendi IJ Committee emphasised, in this context, the report of Professor Wolfram
(which is also part of the record in the present case) and the evidence of Professor Mistelis
(which is not). Since the present Committee has not seen the evidence of Professor Mistelis,
it cannot tell on what basis he suggested that there might be a conflict between the fiduciary
duty of a director and the duty of an arbitrator and, specifically, whether he based his
comments on any particular legal system’s rules on fiduciary obligations. Before the present
Committee, Argentina rightly did not attempt to rely upon Professor Mistelis '*° and there is
no evidence before the Committee regarding fiduciary duties under any particular system of
law. The Committee can only, therefore, consider this issue as a matter of general principle
and in the light of the report of Professor Wolfram. On that level, however, the Committee is
not persuaded that a director of a bank would have a fiduciary duty to the shareholders of the
bank to act in any particular way when sitting as an arbitrator. The point which was
emphasised by the Vivendi IJ Committee was that “a director in the exercise of his or her
function is under a fiduciary duty vis-a-vis the shareholders of the bank” (emphasis added).
The phrase “in the exercise of his or her function” can only refer to that person’s function as
a director. If a non-executive director of a bank sits as an arbitrator, they are not acting in the
exercise of their function as a director when they exercise the quite different function of
arbitrator. Of course, a conflict of interest might arise in such a case — it would obviously do
so if the bank was a party to the arbitration in question — but, at least as a matter of general
principle, it would not be the existence of any fiduciary duty to the shareholders of the bank

which would be the basis of that conflict.

The Committee also notes the observation of the Vivendi IJ Committee that the roles of
director of a major international bank and arbitrator “may not be compatible and should not
be, or in a modern international arbitration environment, should no longer be combined”. It
may be the case that, in future, such positions will not be combined. The Committee notes
that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler has resigned from the UBS Board. However, what the
position should be in the future is not the issue. What matters for the purposes of the present
proceedings is whether the remaining members of the Tribunal acted unreasonably in
concluding that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s directorship of UBS did not require her

disqualification.

'80 Transcript, pp. 281 and 286.

S7

159.

160.

That another reasonable tribunal could have reached the same decision as Professors Park and
Remén is clear from the fact that another tribunal did in fact do so. In the Suez I] decision on
disqualification, which again involved a proposal to disqualify Professor Kaufmann-Kohler
on the grounds of her directorship of UBS, the remaining members of the tribunal —
Professors Salacuse and Nikken — dismissed the proposal to disqualify. They held (for the
same reasons as this Committee, see para. 108, above) that an arbitrator was required to be
both independent and impartial.'*! Having noted the size of UBS and the enormous range of
its investments, '*? they held that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s membership of the UBS
Board did not in itself give rise to a conflict of interest, as UBS was not involved in the
arbitration, but was relevant only because it might suggest a degree of connection between
Professor Kaufmann-Kohler and the claimants since UBS held shares in the claimants on

behalf of third parties. '* They then stated:

But the fact of an alleged connection between a party and an arbitrator in and
of itself is not sufficient to establish a fact that would establish a manifest lack
of that arbitrator’s impartiality and independence. Arbitrators are not
disembodied spirits dwelling on Mars who descend to earth to arbitrate a case
and then immediately return to their Martian retreat to await inertly the call to
arbitrate another. Like other professionals living and working in the world,
arbitrators have a variety of complex connections with all sorts of persons and
institutions.'*

What was necessary, according to Professors Salacuse and Nikken, was to evaluate the
degree of connection between the arbitrator and the party to the arbitration by reference to the
proximity, intensity, dependence and materiality of that connection. In relation to Professor
Kaufmann-Kohler’s connection with the claimants as a result of her membership of the UBS
Board, they found that the link fell short of anything which would give rise to reasonable
doubts about her impartiality or independence. The UBS investment was not strategic and
“with respect to any alleged benefit flowing to UBS as a result of this arbitration, it should be
pointed out that UBS’s holding in Suez and Vivendi would have an insignificant effect on

UBS profitability given the enormous size and scope of UBS global operations”.'®° Under

8! Suez IT, para. 28.

'82 Suez I, para. 10.
83 Suez II, para. 31.
'84 Suez II, para. 32.

85 Suez IT, para. 36.

58

161.

the system which prevails in Switzerland of separation of the Board of Directors from the
management of a company, Professor Kaufmann-Kohler had no knowledge of the UBS
shareholdings in the claimants until the challenge, had no role in making them or in
monitoring their performance, and “no direct relationship with the claimants by virtue of her
directorship”.'*° There was no frequency of interaction between Professor Kaufmann-Kohler
and the claimants and Professor Kaufmann-Kohler would derive no benefit from an award in
favour of the claimants. Professors Salacuse and Nikken also rejected the argument that
Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s failure to disclose her membership of the UBS Board was
indicative of a lack of impartiality or independence. Such a duty arose only where the
arbitrator reasonably believed that circumstances existed which might cause a reasonable
person to doubt whether that arbitrator would behave independently and impartially.
Professor Kaufmann-Kohler had inquired with UBS about conflicts of interest and been told
that (with the exception of her participation in the Americas Cup Jury) there were none; it

had been reasonable for her to rely upon that advice.!8”

The Committee considers that both the Disqualification Decision in this case and the one in
Suez Il are carefully reasoned and comprehensive in their consideration of the issues. The
Disqualification Decision in the present case carefully assesses the significance of the
indirect links which Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s membership of the Board of UBS created
with EDFI. The Committee considers that Professors Park and Rem6n were plainly correct
in identifying the ownership by the UBS Foundation of shares in EDFI’s parent company,
EDF, as the critical issue. The fact that UBS and another subsidiary of EDF held shares in
AEM Milan did not give UBS an interest of any kind in the success or failure of EDF or
EDFI. A fortiori, no conflict of interest could arise from the fact that UBS had held shares in
Motor Columbus, in which EDF also had a substantial shareholding, given that it had
disposed of those shares before Professor Kaufmann-Kohler became a director of UBS. The
participation of UBS in the financial consortium which assisted in the placement of EDF
shares on the French market similarly created no community of interest between UBS and
EDF, while the fact that UBS listed EDF as a good investment opportunity is too remote a

connection to give rise to a conflict of interest. None of the findings in the Disqualification

'86 Suez IT, para. 40.
'87 Suez II, para. 48.

59

162.

163.

164.

165.

Decision on these points are ones which it could plausibly be said that no reasonable tribunal

would have made.

The fact that the UBS Foundation held shares in EDF, as the Tribunal remarked, “stands on a
somewhat different footing”. Nevertheless, the Committee considers that, as Professors Park
and Remén held, the fact that the ultimate beneficiary of any rise in the value of those shares
would be the Swiss funds which participated in the Foundation and not UBS itself, the
relative insignificance of the investment when seen in the context of the overall size of UBS’s
investments and the fact that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler had no responsibility for, or
involvement in, the management of this or other investments were grounds on which any
reasonable decision-maker could, and would be likely to, conclude that there was no basis for
holding that Professor Kaufmann-Kohler manifestly lacked the requisite independence and
impartiality. It is noticeable that at least one other decision-maker, namely the tribunal in

Suez IT, did indeed reach such a conclusion.

The same is true of the failure by Professor Kaufmann-Kohler to disclose her appointment to
the UBS Board. Both Professors Park and Remon in the present case, and Professors
Salacuse and Nikken in Suez I, carefully explained why that failure was not sufficient to

indicate a lack of independence or impartiality.

The Committee has taken note of the fact that the Vivendi IJ Committee, though eventually
deciding not to annul the award in that case, took a far more critical view of Professor
Kaufmann-Kohler’s conduct. Nevertheless, the Committee considers that the Vivendi II
decision does not cause it to conclude that the Disqualification Decision in the present case
was unreasonable. It therefore dismisses the application that the Award should be annulled
on account of Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s directorship of UBS or her non-disclosure of

that directorship.

3. Professor Remén

The Committee turns, therefore, to Argentina’s challenge to Professor Remon. As has
already been explained, this challenge is raised for the first time before the Committee and

must therefore be considered de novo. The challenge came about because of a letter written

60

166.

by Professor Rem6n to the Secretary of the Tribunal on 18 April 2012.'** It is therefore

worth quoting that letter in full:-

On 16 April 2012, the media have informed that Argentina has announced the
expropriation of the 51% stake that the Spanish company Repsol has in Ypf. I
hereby wish to inform:

1. That the law firm Uria Menéndez, of which I am a partner, is among the
firms that have traditionally provided legal advisory services to Repsol. I
have actually acted as counsel for Repsol in various proceedings.
Naturally this fact does not affect nor shall it affect my impartiality or
independence in any way whatsoever in this arbitration (ICSID case No.
ARB/03/23).

If Repsol were to request any kind of assistance from Uria Menéndez in
connection with the mentioned decision to expropriate, I would refrain
from taking part in the matter while these proceedings are ongoing.

N

»

Professor Remon concluded by expressing his wish that this information be communicated

to the Parties.

On 27 April 2012, Argentina wrote requesting Professor Remén’s resignation on the basis
that his relationship, through the firm Uria Menéndez, with Repsol, a company now in an
adversarial situation vis-a-vis Argentina, created reasonable doubts about his independence
and impartiality.'*° The Claimants also submitted observations, on 2 May 2012, rejecting the
suggestion that Professor Remén should resign.'®” Professor Rem6n responded, on 11 May

2012, in the following terms:

After the analysis of the communications of the parties, dated 27 April and 2
May, bearing in mind that the deliberations of the Tribunal and the drafting of
the award were completed several weeks before the announcement of the
expropriation, I confirm that the facts that, for the sake of transparency, I
included in my letter of disclosure do not affect my impartiality or
independence as arbitrator in these proceedings.

The Award was signed by Professor Park, the Chairman, on 8 May 2012, by Professor
Kaufmann-Kohler on 11 May 2012 and by Professor Remén on 14 May 2012. It was

handed down to the Parties on 11 June 2012. On 4 December 2012 Repsol commenced

'88 RA 531.
'89 RA 532.
19 AC 9.

61

167.

168.

arbitration proceedings against Argentina. Uria Menéndez represented Repsol in those

proceedings.

Those who have been required to take decisions on whether or not to disqualify an arbitrator
on account of the involvement of his or her law firm in separate proceedings against one of
the parties have unsurprisingly taken the view that the fact that the law firm of which an
arbitrator is a member is acting against one of the parties to the arbitration in separate
proceedings will frequently raise reasonable doubts about the independence and impartiality
of the arbitrator, especially where the arbitration concerns legal issues similar to those

°! However, those cases involved arbitrators whose law

involved in the other proceedings.!
firms were already engaged in proceedings in which they acted for a party adverse to one of
the parties in the arbitration before the arbitration proceedings had concluded. In the present

case, the timetable is very different.

There is no indication in Professor Rem6n’s letter of 18 April 2012 that Uria Menéndez was
at that stage actually representing or advising Repsol in a manner adverse to Argentina, only
that it might at some future stage be asked to do so. That possibility does not, in itself, create
a conflict of interests. Nor does the Committee accept Argentina’s submission that Professor
Rem6n’s comment that “if Repsol were to request any kind of assistance from Uria
Menéndez in connection with the mentioned decision to expropriate, I would refrain from
taking part in the matter while these proceedings [i.e. those in the case between the present
Claimants and Argentina] are ongoing” indicates that once the arbitration in the present case
had concluded he would be in a position adverse to Argentina. The Committee accepts that
the fact that Repsol did not commence arbitration proceedings until 4 December 2012, nearly
six months after the Award in the present case had been given to the Parties, is not in itself
decisive. If an arbitrator’s law firm is advising an entity in preparation for the
commencement of legal proceedings against one of the parties to the arbitration, that fact
would present a conflict of interests irrespective of whether those proceedings had actually
been commenced at that time. However, the conflict of interests would not arise until the
firm started to give such advice or otherwise to act for that entity in a matter in which it was
adversarial to the party to the arbitration.

"9! See Blue Bank, note 97, above, paras. 67-68 and ICS Inspection Control Services Ltd. v. Argentina,
Decision of the Appointing Authority, 17 December 2009, pp. 4-5.

62

169.

170.

Argentina points to the attendance of a partner in Uria Menéndez, acting as Repsol’s proxy,
at a meeting of the shareholders of YPF on 6 June 2012, that is five days before the Award

was given to the Parties. According to the minutes of that meeting,'?

that partner made
reference to a dispute between Repsol and Argentina. Argentina maintains that the duty of an
arbitrator to act independently and impartially does not cease when the award is completed
but only when the award is given to the parties. While the Committee agrees that the duty to
act independently and impartially continues until the award has been delivered, it does not
accept the conclusion which Argentina seeks to draw with regard to the present case. By 6
June 2012, the Award had already been completed and signed by all three members of the
Tribunal. While an arbitrator remains obliged to act independently and impartially up to the
moment that the award is delivered, once that arbitrator has signed the award there is
normally no further occasion for the arbitrator to act in relation to the arbitration proceedings;
certainly there is no evidence before the Committee that Professor Rem6n was called upon to
perform any act as arbitrator after he had appended his signature to the Award on 14 May

2012.

Moreover, for the reasons already given (paragraphs 133 to 134, above), a conflict of
interests would constitute a ground for annulment only if it could have had an effect upon the
award. In the present case, Professor Remén’s letter of 11 May 2012 makes clear that the
drafting of the Award had been completed several weeks before the announcement of 16
April 2012. There is no reason to doubt the truth of that statement, which is confirmed on
this point by Professor Kaufmann-Kohler’s letter of the same date. On the contrary, the
length (over 300 pages) and complexity of the Award, together with the fact that it was to be
rendered in both English and Spanish and thus had to be translated from the language in
which it had been drafted, also point to the conclusion that the drafting must have been
completed before 16 April if the Award was to be delivered on 11 June 2012. It follows that,
even if Uria Menéndez became involved in advising Repsol about possible proceedings
against Argentina between 16 April and 11 June 2012, the conflict of interest thus created for
Professor Remén could not have influenced the Award and cannot, therefore, constitute a

ground for annulment.

12 RA 542.

63

171.

172.

173.

174.

Nevertheless, there is one further matter to consider. Argentina points to the fact that
Repsol’s Notice of Arbitration referred not just to formal expropriation but also to other steps
taken before the announcement of 16 April 2012 and going back to the last weeks of 2011.
Since Uria Menéndez was, according to Professor Remén’s letter of 18 April 2012, one of the
firms which “traditionally provided legal advisory services to Repsol’, it should be inferred
that they were already engaged in advising Repsol regarding its relations with Argentina and

the legal strategy it should adopt as early as November 2011.!%

The Claimants counter that this is pure speculation and that, even if it were well-founded,
since Argentina knew what it intended to do vis-a-vis Repsol, it must be taken to have waived
any objection to Professor Rem6n as regards any conflict of interest arising out of events in

late 2011 or early 2012.

The Committee does not accept the Claimants’ waiver argument. That argument would have
been well-founded had Uria Menéndez been representing Repsol in court or arbitration
proceedings in the period November 2011 to March 2012, since Argentina would have been
aware of the firm’s involvement in proceedings against Argentina. The same cannot be said,
however, regarding any advisory role that Uria Menéndez might have had. There is no
reason to assume that Argentina would have known which law firm, if any, was advising
Repsol regarding its relations with Argentina in that period, unless that firm was openly
engaged in correspondence or meetings and there is no evidence to suggest that that was the

case.

Nevertheless, the Committee agrees with the Claimants that Argentina’s argument about the
role that Uria Menéndez may have played before the announcement of 16 April 2012 is
purely speculative. No evidence whatever has been put before the Committee that would
enable it to conclude that Uria Menéndez was advising Repsol regarding a legal strategy vis-
a-vis Argentina during that period. The Committee agrees with the observation of the SGS

Tribunal quoted at paragraph 110, above, and, in particular, with that tribunal’s comment that

93 Memorial, paras. 62-67.

64

175.

176.

177.

“an arbitrator cannot, under Article 57 of the Convention, be successfully challenged as a

result of inferences which themselves rest merely on other inferences”.!**

Accordingly, the Committee also dismisses Argentina’s application to annul the Award on
the ground of a supposed lack of independence and impartiality on the part of Professor

Remé6n.

Vv. Applicable Law Issues

A. Introduction

Argentina maintains that, in deciding on the applicable law, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded
its powers (ICSID Article 52(1)(b)), failed to state the reasons on which the Award was based
(ICSID Article 52(1)(e)) and was guilty of a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure (ICSID Article 52(1)(d)).!°

These allegations concern three aspects of the Award. The first concerns the decision of the
Tribunal that the “Claimants’ claims may be decided solely on the basis of the Argentina-
France BIT”,'*° thereby excluding application of the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT. The
second concerns the failure of the Tribunal to apply Argentine law, which Argentina had
argued was “essential in determining the nature and scope of Claimants’ treaty-based rights
as well as in deciding whether a breach of such rights has occurred”.!°” In addressing that

argument, the Tribunal concluded that -

... in the context of its mandate under the Argentine-France BIT, the terms of
that treaty provide the lodestar for decision. It may well be that a national
court deciding analogous issues would come to a different conclusion.
However, in the present dispute the BIT supplies the primary foundation and
framework for the Tribunal’s consideration of investor protection.'

'% SGS, note 145, above, 8 ICSID Reports 402.
195 Application, paras. 32-47.

'96 Award, para. 887.

97 Award, para. 903.

198 Award, para. 904.

65

178.

179.

180.

The third aspect of the Award challenged under this heading is the Tribunal’s conclusion
that, in its Jurisdictional Decision, it had “laid down no general requirement of

discrimination as a basis for liability under relevant treaty provisions”.!°

B. Parties’ Arguments

1. Argentina

Argentina maintains that it is now well-established that one form of manifest excess of
powers is the failure of a tribunal to apply the applicable law 7 and that the Tribunal so
failed in three respects. First, it held that Leén’s claim was governed by the Argentina-
France BIT, rather than the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT, notwithstanding that Leén was a
Luxembourg corporation. Secondly, it failed to apply Argentine law in breach of a clear
directive in the BITs. Argentina also maintains that the Tribunal failed to state reasons for

this aspect of its decision.

Argentina contends that Leén, which remained a Claimant throughout the proceedings and
thus benefits from the Award, could not have had standing to claim under the Argentina-
France BIT, because it was at all times a Luxembourg corporation. To apply the Argentina-
France BIT to Le6n’s claims was, therefore, a manifest excess of power. According to
Argentina, it was also contrary to the approach taken in the Jurisdiction Decision, where the
Tribunal had found that it possessed jurisdiction over Leén’s claims under the Argentine-

Luxembourg BIT.

In addition to exceeding its powers in this respect, the Tribunal also failed to explain how the

201 To the extent that it could be said to have

Argentina-France BIT could apply to Le6n.
attempted to do so, its reasoning was contradictory in that it referred to Leén’s cession of its
rights to EDFI after proceedings had commenced, whereas the Tribunal had made clear in the
Jurisdiction Decision that it was the state of affairs at the time of the commencement of

proceedings that was decisive.

‘99 Award, para. 920.
20 Memorial, paras. 138-9.
28! Transcript, pp. 68-75.

66

181.

182.

183.

While the application by the Tribunal of the Argentina-France BIT was one aspect of a
manifest excess of powers, the failure to apply the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT to Leén’s
claims was another. According to Argentina, it was that treaty which plainly constituted the
applicable law in respect of Le6n and the Tribunal’s failure to apply it deprived Argentina of
the ability to rely on the “public order” defence afforded by Article 3(2) of the Argentine-
Luxembourg BIT, which the Tribunal expressly recognized might have made a difference to
the outcome of the case.”°? Again, this decision entailed not just a manifest excess of powers
but also a failure to state reasons. In particular, Argentina refers to what it characterizes as
contradictions between different parts of the Award and between the Award and the

Jurisdiction Decision.

As a distinct ground for annulment, Argentina challenges the Tribunal’s decision that the
case was to be decided by reference only to the Argentina-France BIT and international law
and not to apply the law of Argentina. According to Argentina, this approach ignored the
provisions of Article 42(1) of the Convention which requires a tribunal — in the absence of
agreement by the parties — to “apply the law of the Contracting State (including its rules on
the conflict of laws) and such rules of international law as may be applicable”. The result
was that the Tribunal failed to apply Argentine law as the law governing the Concession
Agreement and, more fundamentally, disregarded the extensive powers which the
Constitution of Argentina gave to the government to deal with emergencies such as that of
2001-02. The Tribunal had also failed to state its reasons since it referred only to the
principle of international law that, in the event of a conflict, international law prevails over
national law without giving any indication of what conflict it considered to exist between

international law and the law of Argentina.

Finally, Argentina refers to what it terms a contradiction between the Jurisdiction Decision
and the Award with regard to the issue of discrimination. According to Argentina, in the
Jurisdiction Decision, the Tribunal held that the Claimants would have to prove
discrimination in order to establish a case of breach of either BIT. In the Award, however, it
repudiated that finding and held that discrimination was not a requirement for the

establishment of a breach of the fair and equitable treatment standard or certain other

202 Award, para. 888.

67

184.

185.

186.

187.

provisions of the treaties. Argentina again characterises this decision as a manifest excess of
power and argues that the Tribunal failed to give a coherent and non-contradictory statement

of its reasons, as well as departing in a serious way from a fundamental rule of procedure.

2. The Claimants

The Claimants reject the suggestion that the Tribunal erred in any annullable fashion in
relation to the applicable law. They maintain that Argentina invokes three separate
paragraphs of Article 52(1) but treats them as largely indistinguishable. According to the
Claimants, even though an application for annulment may raise more than one paragraph of
Article 52(1), each is a separate ground for annulment which must be independently
established.” In particular, the Claimants maintain that Argentina has not properly pleaded,
let alone substantiated, its argument that the Tribunal departed in a serious way from a
fundamental rule of procedure. *°* Moreover, according to the Claimants, Argentina’s
arguments fail to distinguish between a failure to apply the applicable law and misapplication
of that law, as well as ignoring the limitations placed on annulment by the relevant parts of

Article 52(1).

While the Claimants accept that Article 52(1)(b) applies to a manifest failure to apply the
applicable law, they maintain that it has no application to “incorrect” application, departure
from the view taken by other tribunals regarding the same or a similar issue, or failure to cite

any text to support a proposition that it considers to derive from the treaty.7°>

The Claimants argue that Leén was added as a claimant in the Amended Request only
because Crédit Lyonnais, its French parent company, had transferred to Le6n its shares in
MENDINVERT. The Amended Request invoked the Argentina-France BIT and only
pleaded the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT as a fallback position to be relied upon in the event

that the Tribunal were to decide that Leén could not rely upon the Argentina-France BIT.?°°

With regard to the non-application of Argentine law, the Claimants maintain that the claims

were for violation of the Argentina-France BIT and were therefore necessarily to be decided

203 Counter-Memorial, paras. 119-120.
24 Rejoinder, para. 77.

285 Counter-Memorial, paras. 126-130.
206 Rejoinder, paras. 83-85.

68

188.

189.

190.

191.

in accordance with the terms of that treaty and the principles of international law. The

Tribunal had carefully analysed and explained its decision not to apply Argentine law.

On the issue of discrimination, the Claimants maintain that Argentina misrepresents the
Jurisdiction Decision and submit that the Award clearly explained that the Jurisdiction

Decision was not laying down a general requirement of discrimination.

Finally, the Claimants contend that Argentina’s claim that there was a serious departure from
a fundamental rule of procedure is misconceived. There was no indication “what aspect of
Argentina’s right of defense was impaired”.?” Indeed, the whole issue of applicable law was

extensively briefed by both Parties.?°*

C. The Decision of the Committee

1. The Legal Framework

Before turning to the detail of this particular head of Argentina’s Application for annulment
of the Award, it is necessary first to make some observations regarding the three paragraphs
of Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention invoked by Argentina, although there appeared to
be little if any difference between the Parties regarding the requirements of each paragraph

(as opposed to their application to the facts of the present case).

a. Manifest excess of powers (Article 52(1)(b) of the Convention)

The terms of Article 52(1)(b) make plain that the paragraph lays down two requirements
which must be met if an Award is to be annulled on this ground. First, the tribunal must have
exceeded its powers and, secondly, that excess of power must be “manifest”. The most
obvious instance of an excess of power by a tribunal is the decision of an issue which falls
outside the jurisdiction of the tribunal under the ICSID Convention or the relevant BIT (or
other instrument conferring jurisdiction). However, decisions of ad hoc committees in other
cases have made clear that it is also an excess of power for a tribunal to fail to apply the law

applicable to the case or to the particular issue in the case.

20 Rejoinder, para. 106.
208 Rejoinder, para. 107.

69

192. The requirement that the excess of powers be “manifest” refers to how readily apparent the

193.

 

exces

  

is, rather than to its gravity. In the words of one leading commentary on the ICSID

Convention —

In accordance with its dictionary meaning, “manifest” may mean “plain”,
“clear”, “obvious”, “evident” and easily understood or recognized by the mind.
Therefore, the manifest nature of an excess of powers is not necessarily an
indication of its gravity. Rather, it relates to the ease with which it is
perceived. ... An excess of powers is manifest if it can be discerned with little
effort and without deeper analysis.7°

This view has been endorsed in several decisions of ad hoc committees. Thus, in Wena

Hotels Ltd. v. Egypt, the committee stated that —

The excess of power must be self evident rather than the product of elaborate
interpretation one way or the other. When the latter happens, the excess of
power is no longer manifest.?!”

Similarly, the committee in CDC Group v. Seychelles stated —

As interpreted by various ad hoc committees, the term “manifest” means clear
or “self-evident”. Thus, even if a tribunal exceeds its powers, the excess must
be plain on its face for annulment to be an available remedy. Any excess
apparent in a tribunal’s conduct, if susceptible of argument “one way or the
other” is not manifest. As one commentator has put it, “if the issue is
debatable or requires examination of the materials on which the tribunal’s
decision is based, the tribunal’s determination is conclusive.”?!!

While the Committee agrees that an excess of powers will be manifest only if it can readily
be discerned, it considers that this does not mean that the excess must, as it were, leap out of

the page on a first reading of the Award. The reasoning in a case may be so complex that a

 

degree of inquiry and analysis is required before it is clear precisely what the tribunal has
decided. In such a case, the need for such inquiry and analysis will not prevent an excess of

powers from being “manifest”.?!? Moreover, in any case some examination of the materials

209 Schreuer, Commentary, note 53, above, Article 52, para. 135.

210 Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4) 6 ICSID Reports 129 at para. 25 (“Wena”).
211 CDC, note 156, above, para. 41.

?!2 See, e.g., the Decision of the ad hoc committee in Vivendi I, note 70, above.

70

194.

195.

on which the tribunal’s decision was based may be necessary. The Committee in Duke

Energy Ltd v. Peru put the point in the following terms —

An ad hoc committee will not therefore annul an award if the tribunal’s
disposition on a question of law is tenable, even if the committee considers it
incorrect as a matter of law. The existence of a manifest excess of powers can
only be assessed by an ad hoc committee in consideration of the factual and
legal elements upon which the arbitral tribunal founded its decision and/or
award based on the parties’ submissions. Without reopening debates on
questions of fact, a committee can take into account the facts of the case as
they were in the record before the tribunal to check whether it could come to its
solution, however debatable. Is the opinion of the tribunal so untenable that it
cannot be supported by reasonable arguments? A debatable solution is not
amenable to annulment, since the excess of powers would not then be

“manifest”?!

The Committee agrees with this analysis. It notes also that the Duke Committee stated that —

No distinction is to be drawn in this regard between the standard to be applied
to determining an excess of power based on alleged excess of jurisdiction and
any other excess of power. In both cases, the excess must be manifest.?!*

b. Failure to state reasons (Article 52(1)(e) of the Convention)

The provision of Article 52(1)(e) that an award may be annulled if it “fails to state the
reasons on which it is based” is closely tied to the provision of Article 48(3), which requires
that “the award shall deal with every question submitted to the Tribunal, and shall state the

reasons upon which it is based”.

The requirement to state reasons is an important one but it is equally important that an ad hoc
committee is not drawn into using Article 52(1)(e) as a means for conducting an appeal.
Article 52(1)(e) empowers a committee to annul an award if there has been a failure to state
the reasons on which the award is based; it does not entitle a committee to annul an award
because it finds the reasoning unconvincing. The point was very clearly made by the Vivendi

7 Committee in the following passage —

A greater source of concern is perhaps the ground of “failure to state reasons”,
which is not qualified by any such phrase as “manifestly” or “serious”.

213 Duke Energy International Peru Investments No. 1 Limited v. Republic of Peru (ICSID Case No.

ARB/03/28), Decision on Annulment of | March 2011, para. 99 (“Duke”).
24 Thid, para. 98.

71

However, it is well accepted both in the cases and the literature that Article
52(1)(e) concerns a failure to state any reasons with respect to all or part of an
award, not the failure to state correct or convincing reasons. It bears repeating
that an ad hoc committee is not a court of appeal. Provided that the reasons
given by a tribunal can be followed and relate to the issues that were before the
tribunal, their correctness is beside the point in terms of Article 52(1)(e).
Moreover, reasons may be stated succinctly or at length, and different legal
traditions differ in their modes of expressing reasons. Tribunals must be
allowed a degree of discretion as to the way in which they express their
reasoning.

In the Committee’s view, annulment under Article 52(1)(e) should only occur
in a clear case. This entails two conditions: first, the failure to state reasons
must leave the decision on a particular point essentially lacking in any
expressed rationale; and second, that point must itself be necessary to the
tribunal’s decision. It is frequently said that contradictory reasons cancel each
other out, and indeed, if reasons are genuinely contradictory so they might.
However, tribunals must often struggle to balance conflicting considerations,
and an ad hoc committee should be careful not to discern contradiction when
what is actually expressed in a tribunal’s reasons could more truly be said to be
but a reflection of such conflicting considerations.!>

196. Similarly, the Wena committee explained that —

The ground for annulment of Article 52(1)(e) does not allow any review of the
challenged award which would lead the ad hoc committee to reconsider
whether the reasons underlying the tribunal’s decisions were appropriate or
not, convincing or not. As stated by the ad hoc committee in MINE, this
ground for annulment refers to a “minimum requirement” only. This
requirement is based on the tribunal’s duty to identify, and to let the parties
know, the factual and legal premises leading the tribunal to its decision. If
such a sequence of reasons has been given by the tribunal, there is no room left
for a request for annulment under Article 52(1)(e).

Neither Article 48(3) nor Article 52(1)(e) specify the manner in which the
Tribunal’s reasons are to be stated. The object of both provisions is to ensure
that the parties will be able to understand the tribunal’s reasoning. This goal
does not require that each reason be stated expressly. The tribunal’s reasons
may be implicit in the consideration and conclusions contained in the award,
provided they can be reasonably inferred from the terms used in the
decision.?!

25 Vivendi I, note 70, above, paras. 64-65.
26 Wena, note 210, above, paras. 79 and 81.

72

197.

198.

199.

A tribunal is required to answer each “question” put to it and must therefore give sufficient
reasons to meet the “minimum requirement” referred to by the Wena committee in respect of
each question. It is not, however, required to deal explicitly with every detail of every
argument advanced by the parties or to refer to every authority which they invoke. As the

Enron committee explained —

. a tribunal has a duty to deal with each of the questions (“pretensions”)
submitted to it, but it is not required to comment on all arguments of the parties
in relation to each of those questions. Similarly, the Committee considers that
the tribunal is required only to give reasons for its decision in respect of each
of the questions. This requires the tribunal to state its pertinent findings of fact,
its pertinent findings as to the applicable legal principles, and its conclusions in
respect of the application of the law to the facts. If the tribunal has done this,
the award will not be annulled on the basis that the tribunal could have given
more detailed reasons and analysis for its findings of fact or law, or that the
tribunal did not expressly state its evaluation in respect of each individual item
of evidence or each individual legal authority or legal provision relied on by
the parties, or did not expressly state a view on every single legal and factual
issue raised by the parties in the course of the proceedings. The tribunal is
required to state reasons for its decision, but not necessarily reasons for its

reasons.?'7

The Committee agrees with these observations regarding the scope and purpose of Article
52(1)(e). Nevertheless, it remains an important part of the annulment process and, as the
decision of the ad hoc committee in CMS demonstrates, where a tribunal has failed to give
reasons which enable the parties to understand the decision on a question before it, that part

of its award is liable to annulment.”!®

c. Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure (Article
52(1)(d))

The English text of Article 52(1)(d) provides that an award may be annulled if “there has
been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure”. The French text is to the
same effect, requiring “inobservation grave d’une régle fondamentale de procedure”.
However, the Spanish text speaks only of “quebrantamiento grave de una norma de
217 Enron Creditors Recovery Corp. and Ponderosa Assets LP y. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/O1/3), Decision on Annulment of 30 July 2010, para. 222 (“Enron”).

218 CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8), Decision on
Annulment of 25 September 2007, para. 96 (“CMS”).

73

200.

procedimiento”. While all three texts thus require that the breach must have been “serious”
(“grave” in French and Spanish), only the English and French texts require that the rule of
procedure involved must have been “fundamental”. The English, French and Spanish texts of
the Convention are equally authentic, so the difference between them has to be resolved by
application of the principles of international law regarding treaty interpretation. The relevant
principle is generally understood to have been codified in Article 33 of the Vienna
Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969, paragraph (4) of which provides that “when a
comparison of the authentic texts discloses a difference of meaning which the application of
Articles 31 and 32 does not remove, the meaning which best reconciles the texts, having
regard to the object and purpose of the treaty shall be adopted”. In the case of Article
52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention, the English and French texts unequivocally require a
departure from a “fundamental” rule of procedure and are thus narrower than the Spanish
text, which refers only to a rule of procedure. Since the common ground between the three
texts is that they all permit annulment in the case of a serious breach of a “fundamental” rule
of procedure, it would appear that the meaning which best reconciles the three texts is one
which requires a “serious” departure from a “fundamental” rule of procedure. The
Committee also considers that this interpretation sits more happily with the object and
purpose of the Convention, which assigns a restricted role to annulment proceedings, as
discussed in Part III of this Decision. This interpretation is also the one consistently adopted

in the jurisprudence of ad hoc committees.”!°

The Committee therefore proceeds on the basis that Article 52(1)(d) authorizes annulment
only if two conditions are met: the rule of procedure involved must have been fundamental
and the breach of that rule must have been serious. The implications of this two-fold

requirement were summarized by the MJNE Committee in the following terms —

A first comment on this provision concerns the term “serious”. In order to
constitute a ground for annulment the departure from a “fundamental rule of
procedure” must be serious. The Committee considers that this establishes
both quantitative and qualitative criteria: the departure must be substantial and
must be such as to deprive a party of the benefit or protection which the rule
was intended to provide.

29 See, in particular, Repsol YPF Ecuador SA v. Petroecuador (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/10), Decision on
annulment of 8 January 2007, para. 81 (“Repsol”) and Schreuer, Commentary, note 53, above, Article 52,
paras. 280-281.

74

201.

202.

203.

A second comment concerns the term “fundamental”; even a serious departure
from a rule of procedure will not give rise to annulment, unless that rule is
“fundamental”. The Committee considers that a clear example of such a
fundamental rule is to be found in Article 18 of the UNCITRAL Model Law on
International Commercial Arbitration which provides: “the parties shall be
treated with equality and each party shall be given full opportunity of
presenting his case.” The term “fundamental rule of procedure” is not to be
understood as necessarily including all of the Arbitration Rules adopted by the
Centre.”

2. Application of the Argentina-France BIT and Non-Application of the
Argentine-Luxembourg BIT
In its Award, the Tribunal noted that “the Parties are for the most part in accord that this case
can and should be decided solely on the basis of the Argentine-France BIT”.??! It went on,

however, to observe that an important exception lay in Argentina’s

“affirmative defense, asserted exclusively against Claimant Leon, namely that
Article 3(2) of the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT applies to expressly exempt

Argentina from any liability which might result from “...measures necessary
> 222

to maintain public order’
The Tribunal held, however, that the entire case fell to be decided under the Argentina-
France BIT and that it was not necessary to apply the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT.2”* Article
3(2) of the latter treaty thus became irrelevant to the decision, although the Tribunal noted

that —

Had the Tribunal decided to grant relief on the basis of Article 3(2) of the
Argentina-Luxembourg BIT, then the “public order” defense of that provision
might have had consequences. Such is not the case, however.?7*

In its Application, and in the written pleadings, Argentina complains of the failure to apply
the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT.” At the oral hearings, however, while maintaining that

complaint, Argentina added an argument that the Tribunal committed a manifest excess of

220 MINE, note 70, above, paras. 5.05-5.06.

21 Award, para. 179.

22 Award, para. 180.

223 Award, paras, 884-887.

24 Award, para. 888.

25 Application, paras. 33-34; Memorial, paras. 141-144; Reply, paras. 90-99.

75

204.

205.

206.

power in deciding that the Argentina-France BIT applied to Leén’s claims; since Leén was a
Luxembourg company, Argentina argues, there was no basis on which its claim could fall
within that treaty.?°

The Claimants maintain that it was not open to Argentina to challenge the Award on this
basis at so late a stage in the proceedings.*?’? The Committee does not agree. While it is a
matter for regret that the issue was not more clearly pleaded, the Committee considers that
the complaint about the application of the Argentina-France BIT is merely the other side of
the coin from the complaint about the failure to apply the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT to

Le6n’s claims. The issue was therefore raised in a timely fashion.?7*

The Claimants also argue that the position of Leén was irrelevant, because in 2005, long
before the date of the Award or even of the pleadings on the merits, Leén’s interests in
SODEMSA had been transferred to IADESA and its right to maintain the ICSID claim to
EDFI, so that, by the time of the hearings on the merits, EDFI owned the rights to the entire
ICSID claim.” On that basis, the Claimants argue that “the Tribunal reached the logical
conclusion that it didn’t need to apply the Luxembourg BIT because there was nothing there
to apply it to”.?7° Argentina counters that Leén remained a claimant throughout the
proceedings, that the dispositif granted relief, including the declaratory relief in its first
paragraph, to “the Claimants” without distinguishing between them and that the Jurisdiction
Decision had ruled that the critical date was that of the request for arbitration, which was why

Le6n and SAURI had remained claimants.”*!

In order to analyse this argument, it is necessary to recall the history of the Claimants’
involvement in EDEMSA. In July 1998, when the Government of Mendoza concluded with
EDEMSA the Concession Agreement which was at the heart of the case before the Tribunal,

51% of the shares in EDEMSA were purchased by a consortium of EDFI, SAURI and Crédit

226 Transcript, p. 60.

227 Transcript, p. 211.

8 The Claimants also suggested that Argentina raised the issue of the application of the Argentina-France BIT
in response to a question from the Committee (Transcript, p. 212). However, the transcript shows that counsel
for Argentina had raised this point shortly before the Committee put the question to which the Claimants refer
(see Transcript, pp. 60-61.

22° Transcript, pp. 212-215.

230 Transcript, p. 215.

231 Transcript, pp. 60-68 and 265-270.

76

207.

208.

Lyonnais (all of which are, and were then, French companies) and Argentine co-investors.
That shareholding was held by SODEMSA, a company incorporated in Argentina. EDFI
held 45% of the shares in SODEMSA and SAURI 15%. The remaining 40% were held by
another Argentine company, MENDINVERT. Crédit Lyonnais held a 70% shareholding in
MENDINVERT with the remaining 30% being held by Argentine investors. Crédit Lyonnais
subsequently transferred its shareholding in MENDINVERT to Leén, a company
incorporated in Luxembourg that was wholly owned by Crédit Lyonnais. That was how
matters stood at the time the Amended Request for Arbitration was filed on 4 August 2003.
The Amended Request sought to add Léon as a claimant to the proceedings already instituted

by EDFI and SAURI on 16 June 2003. The Tribunal noted that:

Claimant Leén is said to be an assignee of the investment made in Argentina
by its French parent company, Crédit Lyonnais, and hence, has standing to file
arbitrations under the Argentina-France BIT. See Amended Request footnote
1. Nevertheless, to the extent its Luxembourgian corporate nationality is found
to preclude standing, Le6n invokes the provisions of the [Argentina-
Luxembourg BIT].?*?

In 2004 Leén became a wholly-owned subsidiary of EDFI.?** Subsequently Ledn sold its
shares in MENDINVERT to an Argentine company, IADESA, but transferred its right to the
present ICSID claim to EDFI.7** At the same time, EDFI, which had earlier acquired
SAURT’s shares in SODEMSA, sold its entire shareholding in SODEMSA to IADESA, while

retaining the right to the ICSID claims. ?*°

In its Jurisdiction Decision, the Tribunal held that “as a general matter, the date when

99236

proceedings are instituted serves as the relevant time to establish jurisdiction and cited

both arbitral and International Court of Justice authority to that effect. Accordingly, the
Tribunal concluded that, notwithstanding the transfers in 2004, SAURI and Ledén should

remain claimants.737 Nevertheless, it added that “whether SAURI and Leon still have

232 Award, para. 9.

233 Jurisdiction Decision, para. 7.

284 Jurisdiction Decision, para. 88.

°35 Jurisdiction Decision, para. 91. In the Jurisdiction Decision, the Tribunal rejected Argentina’s argument,
based on the award in Loewen Group v. United States of America, 128 International Law Reports 334, that the
lack of continuous ownership from the date the dispute arose to the culmination of arbitration proceedings
precluded jurisdiction. No challenge is made to that ruling in the present proceedings.

236 Jurisdiction Decision, para. 93.

237 Jurisdiction Decision, paras. 92 and 95.

77

substantive rights is a different issue, which the Tribunal will need to review together with

the merits”.?°

209. When addressing the merits in its Award, the Tribunal held:

884. The Tribunal notes that Claimants do not base their substantive request for
relief on the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT, except to the extent of provisions
that might be incorporated by reason of the Most Favored Nation clause in the
Argentina-France BIT. See Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief on the Merits at
paragraph 59.

885. While Claimants did invoke the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT in their
Request for Arbitration, as well as certain subsequent pleadings, they did so
only insofar as that BIT might have been relevant to claims by Leén. Claimant
[sic] further noted that the relevant interests were held at the outset entirely by
French companies.

886. At present, French investors again own all of the shares considered by the
Tribunal in its findings of liability and quantum, including any which for a time
were owned by Le6én. Crédit Lyonnais (incorporated in France) was the initial
owner of the relevant shares which were subsequently transferred to Leon, its
wholly-owned subsidiary. Ultimately, those shares were acquired by EDFI, a
French investor which now possesses all relevant rights. See Claimants’ Post-
Hearing Brief on the Merits, paragraphs 59-60.

887. Accordingly, Claimants’ claims may be decided solely on the basis of the
Argentina-France BIT.”

210. There is no doubt that this passage demonstrates that the Tribunal considered that the real
claim which it had to consider was that of EDFI which, by the time of the Award, possessed
all relevant rights to the ICSID claims. The Committee sees no contradiction between that
recognition and the finding, in the Jurisdiction Decision, that the critical date for purposes of
ascertaining jurisdiction was the date on which the arbitration proceedings were commenced.
As the Tribunal made clear in its Jurisdiction Decision, the issue of jurisdiction is separate
from the question what, if any, substantive rights each Claimant possessed.?*° Nevertheless,
while the Tribunal quite rightly focussed on the position of EDFI, the Committee does not
accept the Claimants’ contention that the position of Leén (and by implication also of

238 Jurisdiction Decision, para. 95.

239 See also Award, paras, 1151-1152.
240 Jurisdiction Decision, para. 95.

78

211.

212.

SAURI, though no challenge has been made in respect of this company) became irrelevant.
Leon and SAURI remained Claimants and the relief granted in the dispositif was granted to
“Claimants” without any distinction between them. While Leén might be unable to enforce
the award of damages given that it has assigned its rights to EDFI, all three Claimants may be
said to have the benefit of the declaratory relief granted in paragraph I of the dispositif, which

records the Tribunal’s decision that —

Respondent has breached its obligations to (i) respect specific commitments
undertaken in connection with Claimants’ investment and (ii) afford Claimants
Fair and Equitable Treatment with respect to their investment.

The Committee is not persuaded by the Claimants’ argument that this paragraph was not
declaratory relief but “really just articulation of the conclusion by the Tribunal that
Argentina had violated the BIT” and that “it didn’t actually confer any relief as such”.”4!
The form of the paragraph and its place in the dispositif means that it cannot be dismissed so
readily. Moreover, the Claimants’ Reply on the Merits in the proceedings before the
Tribunal had concluded with a section entitled “Claimants’ Request for Relief’ which
expressly requested that the Tribunal make the determination which appeared at paragraph I

of the dispositif +? and the Award duly recited that request.?47

The question, therefore, is whether, in the light of its earlier ruling on jurisdiction, the
Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by holding that Leén possessed rights under the

Argentina-France BIT. In the Committee’s view the Tribunal did not do so.

It is necessary to recall that at all relevant times Leén was wholly owned by a company with
its seat in France — initially Crédit Lyonnais and, later, EDFI. It held its investment in
Argentina (the shares in MENDINVERT which in turn held shares in SODEMSA, which in
turn held shares in EDEMSA) by virtue of an assignment from its then parent company,
Crédit Lyonnais, and later assigned its rights to the ICSID claims to EDFI. In other words,
this was an essentially French investment, ultimate ownership and control of which rested at

all times with a French company. It would be an unduly formalistic approach to hold that, in

241 Transcript, p. 214.
242 Claimants’ Reply on the Merits, para. 712; AC 15.
243 Award, para. 880.

79

213.

214.

215.

these circumstances, the claim fell outside the scope of the Argentina-France BIT unless the
terms of that treaty compelled such a decision. The Committee does not consider that they do

so.

On the contrary, the Committee notes that standing to claim under the Argentina-France BIT
is governed by Article 8(1) of the BIT which covers “any dispute concerning investments in
the terms of this Agreement between one Contracting Party and an investor of the other
Contracting Party” (emphasis added). The term “investor” is defined by Article 1(2) of the

BIT, paragraph (c) of which provides, in relevant part, that:
The term “investors” means:

c) artificial persons effectively controlled directly or indirectly by ... artificial
persons having their seat in the territory of either of the Contracting Parties and
constituted in accordance with its legislation.

The Committee considers that this provision encompasses Le6n, because it was effectively
controlled at the time of the Amended Request by Crédit Lyonnais and subsequently by
EDFI, both of which were companies constituted under the law of France and having their

seats in France.

In these circumstances, the Committee considers that the Tribunal’s decision that Leén’s
claims fell within the ambit of the Argentina-France BIT cannot be considered to involve a
manifest excess of power. Since, as the Committee has already explained — and as is clear
from Argentina’s own submissions — the Tribunal’s decision not to apply the Argentina-
Luxembourg BIT is just the other side of the coin of its decision to apply the Argentina-
France BIT, the Committee also concludes that that decision involved no manifest excess of

powers.

The Committee does not accept that the Tribunal failed to state the reasons for its decision on
the application of one BIT and the non-application of the other. The Tribunal made clear,
first, that the claim was brought under the Argentina-France BIT with reliance being placed
244

on the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT only as an alternative. It traced carefully the

24 Award, para. 9.

80

216.

217.

ownership of Le6n and its position vis-a-vis the other Claimants.”* Its reasoning shows that
its conclusion that the only BIT to be applied was that between Argentina and France was
based upon the fact that the investment was originally held entirely by French companies and
that Leén was involved only by virtue of a transfer from its parent company by which it
continued to be owned and controlled, and that, by the time of the hearing, the relevant rights
were held entirely by EDFI. The Committee considers that this reasoning is sufficient to

enable the reader to follow the logic behind this aspect of the Award.

Nor is the Committee persuaded by Argentina’s argument that the Tribunal contradicted
itself. The Committee sees no contradiction between the references to the Argentina-
Luxembourg BIT in the Jurisdiction Decision and the conclusion in the Award that the law
applicable to the substantive issues was that contained in the Argentina-France BIT. The fact
that, even after concluding that the case fell to be determined by reference to the latter treaty,
the Tribunal continued to refer to the interpretation of the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT 7“° is
explained by the fact that the Claimants were invoking the umbrella clause in that treaty. But
they did so by relying upon the MFN Clause in the Argentina-France BIT and it was on that
BIT that they based their claim. As for the supposed conflict between paras. 886 and 1099 of

the Award, to which Argentina referred at the hearing,*”

the Committee can discern no such
contradiction. The two paragraphs are dealing with different matters: the first shows that
EDFI ultimately acquired all of Leén’s rights to the ICSID claim, while the latter makes clear
that Leén and EDFI did not transfer the rights to the ICSID claim when they sold their shares

in MENDINVERT and SODEMSA respectively to IADESA.

Finally, the Committee does not accept Argentina’s argument that there was a serious
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure in respect of this issue. Although such a
departure was alleged in the Application and the Memorial, it was not seriously developed
until a brief passage in paragraphs 98-99 of the Reply, where Argentina alleged that the
“decision to depart from the critical date in the Decision on Jurisdiction and not to apply the
Argentina-Luxembourg BIT impaired due process”. That impairment is said to result from

the fact that Argentina was denied a defence (under Article 3(2) of the Argentina-

245 Jurisdiction Decision, paras. 9, 82-92; Award, paras. 72, 171-175, 884-887 and 1151.
246 See, for example, Award, para. 889.
247 Transcript, p. 59.

81

218.

Luxembourg BIT) that might have affected the quantum of damages. That, however, is not
really an argument about due process but about the substance of the Tribunal’s decision.
Argentina considers that the Tribunal’s decision on applicable law was wrong but that does
not make it an abuse of process. There is no evidence that the matter was not fully argued or
that Argentina was in any way denied the opportunity to put its case. Consequently, there is

no ground for annulment under Article 52(1)(d).

3. Non-Application of Argentine Law

Argentina also challenges what it characterises as the failure of the Tribunal to apply the law
of Argentina and its failure to state its reasons for so doing. In this context it is important to
recall the provisions of the ICSID Convention and the BIT on applicable law. Article 42(1)

of the ICSID Convention provides —

The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such rules of law as
may be agreed by the parties. In the absence of such agreement, the Tribunal
shall apply the law of the Contracting State party to the dispute (including its
tules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of international law as may be
available.?4

Article 8(4) of the Argentine-France BIT provides —

The arbitration organization shall rule based on the provisions of this
Agreement, on the laws of the Contracting Party that is a party to the dispute —
including rules relating to the conflicts of laws — and on the terms of any
special agreements made in connection with the investment, and on the
principles of international law on the subject.

The authentic texts are as follows —

248 The French text reads —

 

Le Tribunal statue sur le différend conformément aux régles de droit adoptées par les parties. Faute d’accord
entre les parties, le Tribunal applique le droit de l’Etat contractant partie au différend—y compris les régles
relatives aux conflits de lois—ainsi que les principes de droit international en la matiére.

 

The Spanish text reads —
El Tribunal decidira la diferencia de acuerdo con las normas de derecho acordadas por las partes. A falta de
acuerdo, el Tribunal aplicaré la legislacion del Estado que sea parte en la diferencia, incluyendo sus normas de

derecho internacional privado, y aquellas normas de derecho internacional que pudieren ser aplicables

There appears to be no difference between the three texts.

82

219.

220.

L’organe d’ arbitrage statuera, sur la base des dispositions du présent Accord,
du droit de la Partie contractante partie au différend — y compris les régles
relatives au conflits de loi - , des termes des accords particuliers éventuels qui
auraient été conclus au sujet de l’investissement ainsi que des principes de droit
international en la matiére.

 

and

El 6rgano arbitral decidira en base a las disposiciones del presente Acuerdo, al
derecho de la Parte Contratante que sea parte en la controversia — incluidas las
normas relativas a conflictos de leyes — y a los términos de eventuales acuerdos
particulares concluidos con relacién a la inversién como asi también a los
principios del Derecho Internacional en la materia.

While the English translation may be a little inelegant (e.g. in using “laws”, rather than
“law” as the translation of “droit” and “derecho”), in substance there is no difference

between these texts.

Article 8(4) of the BIT constitutes the agreement between the Parties regarding the applicable
law, since the BIT constitutes the text of the arbitration agreement.*4? The applicable law
thus consists of the text of the BIT itself, the law of Argentina and the principles of
international law, as well as the terms of any relevant special agreement, such as the
Concession Agreement. However, the fact that a particular legal system supplies part of the
applicable law does not mean that that law governs a given issue in dispute between the
Parties. Which of the various applicable laws determines the answer to any particular
question will depend upon the nature of that question. Thus, the interpretation and
application of the Concession Agreement clearly fall to be determined by reference to
Argentine law as the proper law of that contract. By contrast, if the issue to be determined
concerns the interpretation or application of the BIT, those are questions governed by

international law.

It is in that light that the Tribunal’s findings that “in the context of its mandate under the
Argentine-France BIT, the terms of that treaty provide the lodestar for decision” and that “in

the present dispute, the BIT supplies the primary foundation and framework for the

249 Schreuer, Commentary, note 53, above, p. 558, Article 42, para. 23.

83

221.

Tribunal’s consideration of investor protection” °°

are to be understood. The issues before
the Tribunal concerned allegations of breaches of the BIT. Those issues could only be
resolved by reference to the terms of the BIT and the principles of international law on
subjects such as treaty interpretation. Before the Tribunal Argentina had argued that
Argentine law conferred broad powers for addressing an emergency such as the economic
crisis confronting Argentina in 2001-2002. The Tribunal concluded, however, that even if
Argentine law would have permitted the various actions taken by the Federal and Mendoza
authorities which affected the Claimants’ investment, that would not have prevented those
actions from constituting a breach of the BIT. That conclusion followed from the principle of
international law, reflected in Article 27 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
1969 and Article 3 of The International Law Commission Articles on State Responsibility,
that a State cannot rely upon its internal law to justify a failure to perform its treaty
obligations and that the wrongfulness of an act under international law is not affected by the

characterisation of that act as lawful by national law.?>!

There was, therefore, no manifest
excess of power in the form of a failure to apply the applicable law. The Tribunal had noted
the relevant principles of Argentine law in its Award but its conclusion was that those
principles did not affect the specific issues which the Tribunal had to decide because those
issues were governed by the terms of the BIT interpreted and applied in the light of the
relevant principles of international law. That conclusion is amply supported by authority 7°?

and appears to the Committee irreproachable as a matter of logic.

Nor is the Committee persuaded that the Tribunal failed adequately to state the reasons for
this conclusion. Argentina argues that the Tribunal referred to the primacy of international
law in the event of a conflict between Argentine law and international law without anywhere
indicating what conflict existed. However, the Tribunal’s reasoning is quite clear. The
Tribunal considered that whatever Argentine law provided would make no difference to the
outcome on the issues before the Tribunal: if Argentine law pointed to the same outcome as
international law, then it plainly made no difference, and if it pointed to a different outcome

then international law prevailed. That reasoning plainly did not convince Argentina but

250 Award, para. 904.

251 Award, paras. 905-908.

252 See, e.g., the authorities cited in para. 908 of the Award and the discussion in Schreuer, Commentary, note
53, above, pp. 617-630, Article 42, paras. 204-230.

84

222.

223.

224.

225.

Article 52(1)(e) does not permit annulment on the ground that a tribunal’s reasoning appears
unconvincing. As the Committee has already explained (see paras. 199 to 200, above), the
only question is whether “the reasons given by a tribunal can be followed and relate to the

issues that were before the tribunal, their correctness is beside the point”.?>3

The Committee cannot discern any basis on which the Tribunal could be said seriously to

have departed from any fundamental rule of procedure in respect of this part of its decision.

4. Discrimination

Argentina’s final challenge under this heading is to the Tribunal’s decision on whether or not
the Claimants had to prove discrimination in order to establish the existence of a breach of

the BIT.

This challenge is founded upon paragraph 146 of the Jurisdiction Decision, in which the

Tribunal stated —

To establish treaty breaches, Claimants must prove that Respondent’s
enactment and implementation of the Emergency Measures constituted
discriminatory behaviour as defined in the French and Luxembourg investment
treaties. The Tribunal would need to examine inter alia Respondent’s motives
and the impact of the Emergency Measures, and whether they constituted an
attempt to deprive Claimants of their rights simply because they were foreign
investors.

In the Award, the Tribunal dismissed the Claimants’ claim that the measures taken violated
the prohibition of discrimination.*>+ However, it rejected Argentina’s argument that the
passage just quoted from the Jurisdiction Decision laid down a general requirement of
discriminatory intent as a pre-requisite to recovery under any of the provisions of the BIT. It
is worth quoting the entire passage in the Award in which this issue was addressed. The
Tribunal quoted paragraph 146 of the Jurisdiction Decision (set out above) and continued -
916. When read in context, the quoted language does not require
discrimination as a necessary pre-requisite to recovery. Rather, the relevant

language addressed Respondent’s jurisdictional objection pursuant to Article
25(1) of the ICSID Convention.

253 Vivendi I, note 70, above, para. 64.
24 Award, paras, 1101-1107.

85

226.

227.

228.

917. In that connection, the Tribunal had to consider whether Claimants had
demonstrated prima facie that the present dispute bore a direct relationship to
their investments. Decision on Jurisdiction of 5 August 2008, at paragraph
142.

918. In finding that such a relationship existed, and for that purpose alone,
the Tribunal noted Claimants’ allegation about a pattern of discriminatory
conduct.

919. The Tribunal went on to say that the Respondent would be given an
opportunity to test such contentions, with Claimants bearing the burden of
proving the alleged discrimination.

920. The Tribunal laid down no general requirement of discrimination as a
basis for liability under relevant treaty provisions, but simply stated that any
allegations of treaty breach based on discrimination would need to be proven
by Claimants.

The Committee considers that the conclusion reached by the Tribunal is entirely compatible
with the terms of the BIT and with the relevant parts of the Jurisdiction Decision. It thus
entailed no manifest excess of powers. The reasoning is clear and enables the reader to
understand what the Tribunal decided, so that there is no annullable failure to state reasons
under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention. Nor can the Tribunal see anything which

might suggest a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.

Accordingly, the Committee dismisses the application for annulment of the Award on the

grounds discussed in this section of the Decision.

VI. Derivative Rights and Umbrella Clause Issues

A. The Relevant Treaty Provisions

This part of the case turns on the decision of the Tribunal that, by virtue of the MFN Clause
in Article 4 of the Argentina-France BIT, the Claimants could rely upon the umbrella clauses
in the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT and the Argentina-Germany BIT. It then held that
Argentina had violated its obligation to respect the commitments referred to in those umbrella

clauses. Article 4 of the Argentina-France BIT provides in relevant part —

86

229.

230.

Within its territory and in its maritime zone, each Contracting Party shall
provide to the investors of the other Party, with respect to their investments and
activities associated with such investments, a treatment no less favourable than
that accorded to its own investors or the treatment accorded to investors of the
most favoured Nation if the latter is more advantageous. ...

There is no suggestion that this English version is not a satisfactory translation of the

authentic French and Spanish texts.

The umbrella clause in the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT (Article 10(2)) reads as follows —

Each of the Contracting Parties shall respect at all times the commitments it
has undertaken with respect to investors of the other Party.

This English translation was the one used throughout the arbitration proceedings. The
Claimants referred to it as an agreed translation >> but that was contested by Argentina °°
and it seems from the Jurisdiction Decision that it was in fact a translation provided by the
Claimants.?°’ It is true, however, that it was the translation used, apparently without adverse
comment, by both Parties throughout the proceedings before the Tribunal and, indeed, a
copy of it was included in the bundle of core materials provided to the Committee by
Argentina at the hearings on annulment. Nevertheless, during the course of the hearings,
Argentina suggested that the translation was not an entirely accurate reflection of the

authentic texts. The Spanish text reads —

Cada una de las Partes Contratantes respetarad en todo momento los
compromisos contrafdos con los inversores de la otra Parte Contratante.

According to Argentina, a more accurate translation would be —

Each Contracting Party shall respect at all times the commitments entered into
with the investors of the other Contracting Party.?°*

A similar issue arose with regard to the umbrella clause in the Argentina-Germany BIT
(Article 7(2)). The translation used in the proceedings before the Tribunal reads —

255 Transcript, p. 328.

256 Transcript, p. 331.

257 Jurisdiction Decision, p. 21, n. 14.
258 Transcript, p. 239 and slide 9 from the Respondent’s Closing Statement folder.

87

231.

Each Contracting Party shall comply with any other commitment undertaken in
connection with the investments made by nationals or companies from the
other Contracting Party in the former’s territory.

The Spanish text reads —

Cada Parte Contratante cumplira cualquier otro compromiso que haya
contraido con relacién a las inversiones de nacionales o sociedades de la otra
Parte Contratante en su territorio.

According to Argentina, a more accurate translation would be —

Each Contracting Party shall comply with any other commitment it has entered
into in relation to the investments of nationals or companies of the other
Contracting Party in the former’s territory.??

The Claimants object to the introduction by Argentina of these new translations during the
oral proceedings, especially as they were introduced during the second round of argument.”°
The Committee agrees that it is highly unfortunate that, if there was a problem with the
translations into English, that point was not raised far earlier in the proceedings. It does not
consider, however, that it can prevent Argentina from raising the point now. The Argentina-
Luxembourg BIT is authentic in Dutch, French and Spanish, while the Argentina-Germany
BIT is authentic in German and Spanish. In each case the translation into English is
unofficial. To the extent that the issue is whether the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its
powers, the Committee considers that it cannot disregard a possible difference between the
unofficial translation and the authentic texts. It is a different matter when the issue is whether
the Tribunal failed to state its reasons. The Committee considers that a tribunal cannot be
faulted, so far as the question whether it adequately stated its reasons is concerned, for having
used a translation which neither Party had at any time during the proceedings before the
Tribunal, suggested might be inaccurate. In the end, for the reasons given below, nothing

turns on the differences between the various translations provided.

259 Transcript, p. 239 and slide 9 from the Respondent’s Closing Statement folder.
260 Transcript, p. 328.

88

232.

233.

234.

B. The Issues raised by Argentina and the Decision of the Committee

Argentina’s challenge under this heading has three different limbs. Since each of these three
limbs raises discrete issues, it is more convenient to organize this part of the Decision by
addressing each limb in a separate section, rather than reviewing the Parties’ arguments on all

three points and then proceeding to the analysis of the Committee.

In respect of each limb, Argentina appears to argue that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its
powers, failed to state the reasons for its decision and was guilty of a serious departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure.”°!

No particulars are given, however, and no supporting
argument advanced in respect of the claim of a serious departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure. The Committee therefore dismisses this aspect of Argentina’s challenge, although
it would add, for the sake of completeness, that it considers that there is nothing in the record
which might suggest — let alone establish — a serious departure from a fundamental rule of

procedure.

a. The MFN Clause and the Umbrella Clauses
(1) — Parties’ Positions

Argentina’s first argument is that an MEN clause cannot be used to import into the treaty in
which it is located a form of protection different from those which are already provided for in

that treaty.?°? In that respect, it employs an ejusdem generis argument and invokes the

263

decision in Hochtief v. Argentine Republic,~*’ in which an ICSID tribunal, called upon to

determine the scope of the MFN clause in the Argentina-Germany BIT, observed —

. it cannot be assumed that Argentina and Germany intended that the MFN
clause should create wholly new rights where none otherwise existed under the
Argentina-Germany BIT. ... The MEN clause is not a renvoi to a range of
totally distinct sources and systems of rights and duties; it is a principle
applicable to the exercise of rights and duties that are actually secured by the
BIT in which the MFN clause is found.“

26! Application, paras, 23-25.

262 Application, para. 23; Memorial, para. 95; Transcript, pp. 38-40 and 243-246.

23 Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/31), Decision on Jurisdiction
of 24 October 2011 (“Hochtief”).

264 Thid, para. 81.

89

235.

236.

237.

238.

According to Argentina, the application of the MFN clause by the Tribunal thus involved a
manifest excess of powers. In addition, Argentina complains that the Tribunal never properly

stated the reasons for its decision on this point.

The Claimants counter that this argument is precisely the one that was rejected in the

Jurisdiction Decision.?%

Whereas Hochtief concerned the use of an MEN clause to import an
investor-State arbitration provision from another BIT (a matter which has proved very
controversial), the Tribunal in the present case used the MEN clause in the Argentina-France
BIT to import a substantive standard of protection entirely compatible with those already
provided for in the Argentina-France BIT. According to the Claimants, that is precisely what
such clauses have always been used to achieve and there is no controversy about the legality
of such use. Moreover, the Tribunal explained in detail in its Award the reasoning which led

it to its conclusion on the MEN clause.

(2) The Decision of the Committee

The Committee considers that the Tribunal’s employment of the MFN clause involved no
annullable error. The language of the MFN clause, which is quoted in paragraph 228, above,
is quite broad enough to embrace the use of an umbrella clause in another BIT. The clause
refers to “treatment” accorded to investors of the most favoured nation. If German investors
in Argentina have the benefit of a treaty provision requiring the Host State to honour
commitments undertaken (or entered into) in relation to their investment, then they are being
accorded a form of treatment which is not expressly granted to French investors by the
Argentina-France BIT. That situation falls squarely within the terms of the MFN clause.
Even if Argentina is right in arguing that MFN clauses should be subjected to an ejusdem
generis limitation — as to which, it is unnecessary for the Committee to comment — the
umbrella clause is part of the same genus of provisions on substantive protection of
investments as the fair and equitable treatment clause and other similar provisions which

feature in the Argentina-France BIT.

The Committee considers that Hochtief dealt with an entirely different issue, namely whether
an MEN clause can be employed so as to give the investor claiming under one BIT the

benefit of a more generous arbitration provision in another BIT. That issue has divided

265 Counter-Memorial, paras. 87-89; Rejoinder, paras. 55-57; Transcript, pp. 334-335.

90

239.

240.

241.

tribunals with roughly equal numbers of decisions upholding and rejecting the application of
the MEN clause to an arbitration provision. The present case, however, concerns the use
of an MEN clause to take advantage of a provision on substantive treatment. On that
question, there has been a far greater degree of unanimity. It is true that the comment in
Hochtief quoted above (see paragraph 234, above) is cast in broader terms but it has to be
seen in the context of the issue actually confronting the tribunal in that case. Moreover, as
the Committee has already stated, the obligation to honour commitments undertaken with
regard to investments is part of the same genus of treatment of investments protected by
provisions in the Argentina-France BIT. The Committee thus rejects the argument that there
was a manifest excess of powers when the Tribunal applied the MEN provision to allow the

Claimants to rely upon the umbrella clauses in other Argentine BITs.

Nor was there any failure on the part of the Tribunal to state the reasons for its decision on
this point. On the contrary, these are set out in some detail at paragraphs 921 to 937 of the
Award.

b. Derivative Rights
(1) — Parties’ Positions

The second limb of Argentina’s argument under this heading is encapsulated in the following

passage in the Memorial —

General international law does not allow indirect actions like those exercised
by the Claimants in this arbitration and allowed by the Tribunal. To be able to
lodge a claim in this respect, Claimants should have been holders of the rights
invoked.?”

Argentina maintains that this principle is based upon the decisions of the International Court
of Justice in Barcelona Traction, ELSI, ?® and Diallo?” According to Argentina, these

cases, reflecting the position under municipal law, draw a sharp distinction between the

266 Compare the decisions on this point in Siemens AG v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8, 3 August
2004, and Hochtief with those in Wintershall AG v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/14, 8 December 2008,
and Daimler Financial Services v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/01, 22 August 2010. All four cases
were decided under the Argentina-Germany BIT.

267 Memorial, para. 70. See also Reply, para. 61.

268 Barcelona Traction, note 12, above.

269 ELSI, note 13, above.

2 Diallo, note 14, above.

91

242.

243.

244.

shareholder and the company and should have been applied by the Tribunal to preclude the

Claimants from claiming for wrongs allegedly done to EDEMSA.

In addition, Argentina contends that the approach adopted by the Tribunal had the effect of
rendering otiose the final clause of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, which provides

that —

“National of another Contracting State” means:

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State other
than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties consented to
submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration and any juridical person
which had the nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute on that
date and which, because of foreign control, the parties have agreed should be
treated as a national of another Contracting State for the purposes of this
Convention. (Emphasis added)
According to Argentina, this provision was inserted in the Convention precisely because the
general rule was that shareholders cannot claim for wrongs done to the company and a
means had therefore to be found to enable a company incorporated in the respondent State to

claim in its own right.

To allow shareholders to claim, according to Argentina, carries the risk of double recovery
for the same wrong. Argentina accuses the Tribunal of having failed to recognize this risk in
its Award. It also maintains that the Tribunal’s reasoning is contradictory in that “the
Tribunal firstly mixed up and then separated EDEMSA and its shareholders in a particularly
arbitrary way”.?”! In particular, it complains that the Tribunal ignored the increase in tariffs
permitted to EDEMSA in 2005 on the ground that the Claimants had already divested

themselves of their interests in the company by then.?”?

Argentina maintains that, by allowing the Claimants to claim for wrongs allegedly done to
EDEMSA rather than to themselves, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers and also

failed to state its reasons for so doing.

27! Memorial, para. 74.
2” Memorial, para. 75.

92

245.

246.

247.

248.

249.

The Claimants maintain that the Tribunal correctly dismissed Argentina’s argument on this
point in its Jurisdiction Decision.2”* According to them, the decisions of the International
Court of Justice were concerned with the right of a State to diplomatic protection of nationals
and not the right of investors to bring claims on their own behalf pursuant to provisions in a

BIT. The provisions of the Argentine-France BIT define “investor” and “investment” in

 

sufficiently broad terms that investors such as the Claimants were empowered to bring claims
in respect of their investments notwithstanding the existence of a local company as the
vehicle for that investment. Moreover, the Claimants maintain that it was Argentina which
had insisted that the Concession could be held only through the medium of a locally-

incorporated company.?”+

The Claimants also reject the suggestion that the Tribunal ignored the measures adopted to
EDEMSA’s benefit after the Claimants had divested themselves of their interests. On the
contrary, they assert that the Tribunal rejected the Claimants’ argument that it should
disregard events after that date and insisted on reducing the amount of damages payable as a

result.”°

The Claimants thus deny that there was any manifest excess of powers and contend that the

Tribunal adequately stated the reasons for its decision.

(2) The Decision of the Committee

The Tribunal rightly considered that whether or not the Claimants could maintain a claim in
respect of measures which directly affected EDEMSA is a matter governed by the terms of

the ICSID Convention and the Argentina-France BIT.

Within the Convention, the governing provision is Article 25, the relevant part of which

provides that —

(1) The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any constituent
subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to the Centre by that
State) and a national of another Contracting State, which the parties to the

23 Counter-Memorial, paras. 109-111.

24 Transcript, p. 210.
275 Counter-Memorial, paras. 112-116.

93

250.

251.

252.

dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the parties have
given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent unilaterally.

(2) “National of another Contracting State” means:

(b) any juridical person which had the nationality of a Contracting State other
than the State party to the dispute on the date on which the parties consented to
submit such dispute to conciliation or arbitration and any juridical person
which had the nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute on that
date and which, because of foreign control, the parties have agreed should be
treated as a national of another Contracting State for the purposes of this
Convention.

It is not contested that all of the Claimants are juridical persons which, on the relevant date,
had the nationality of a Contracting State other than Argentina. It is also uncontested that
EDEMSA was an Argentine juridical person and that there was no agreement of the kind
mentioned in the final clause of Article 25(2)(b) which would have enabled EDEMSA to be a
party to the proceedings. Finally, the Committee recalls that, in its Jurisdiction Decision, the
Tribunal held that Article 25 required that “the dispute must arise directly from an investment
but the investment itself need not be direct”.?”° That is plainly a correct reading of the

language of the provision.

The Committee does not agree that the Tribunal’s approach rendered the final clause of
Article 25(2) redundant. That clause deals with the situations in which a company, such as
EDEMSA, incorporated in the respondent State can maintain a claim under the Convention.
To hold, as the Tribunal did, that the investors who ultimately controlled EDEMSA can claim
in their own right for a breach of treaty allegedly committed against EDEMSA is not at all
the same as allowing EDEMSA itself to claim. For example, had there been an agreement of
the kind envisaged in the final clause of Article 25(2), EDEMSA could have maintained a

claim for breach of contract, something which the Claimants were unable to do.

The Committee thus concludes that the Tribunal committed no manifest excess of powers in

ruling that the requirements of Article 25 of the Convention were satisfied.

26 Jurisdiction Decision, para. 159.

94

253. Article 8(1) of the BIT provides that the dispute settlement provisions in Article 8 apply to
“any dispute concerning investments in the terms of this Agreement between one Contracting
Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party”. The “terms of this Agreement” which

govern the meaning of “investments” are those of Article 1(1), which provides —

The term “investments” means the assets such as goods, rights, and interests of
any nature, including but not limited to:

(a) movable and immovable property and any property rights such as
mortgages, privileges, usufructs, bonds, and analogous rights;

(b) shares, issue premiums, and other forms of participation, even minority
or indirect participation, in companies established in the territory of one of the
Contracting States;

(c) debentures, claims, and rights to any performance under contract
having a financial value;

(d) copyrights, industrial property rights (such as invention patents,
licenses, registered trademarks, industrial models and designs), technical
processes, registered names and goodwill;

(e) concessions granted by law or under contract, in particular concessions
to search for, cultivate, extract, or exploit natural resources, including those
located in the maritime zone of the Contracting Parties.

With the understanding that such assets must be or must have been invested
and, in compliance with the provisions of this Agreement, the associated rights
defined in accordance with the legislation of the Contracting Party in whose
territory or maritime zone the investment was made before or after the entry
into force of this Agreement.

254. The term “investors” is defined by Article 1(2), the relevant part of which provides that —

The term “investors” means:

(b) artificial persons constituted in the territory of either of the Contracting
Parties in accordance with its legislation and having their seat in that country;

(c) artificial persons effectively controlled directly or indirectly by
nationals of either of the Contracting Parties or by artificial persons having

95

255.

256.

their seat in the territory of either of the Contracting Parties and constituted in
accordance with its legislation.

The Committee considers it plain that this language is broad enough to include a claim
maintained by the Claimants in respect of damage allegedly caused to their investment, held
through SODEMSA (and in one case through MENDINVERT and SODEMSA) in
EDEMSA.

The Committee does not consider that the line of decisions in the International Court of
Justice, beginning with Barcelona Traction, lays down a general principle of international
law which precludes investors like the Claimants from maintaining a claim under the terms of
a BIT if those terms are wide enough to permit them to do so. The International Court of
Justice was not dealing in those cases with claims brought by shareholders under the terms of
a BIT but with the exercise of diplomatic protection by a State which asserts that a wrong has
been done to the State itself through the treatment of its national. That these cases are not
addressing the situation of investors claiming under a BIT is made clear in the following

passage from the 2007 Judgment in Diallo —

The Court is bound to note that, in contemporary international law, the
protection of the rights of companies and the rights of their shareholders, and
the settlement of the associated disputes, are essentially governed by bilateral
or multilateral agreements for the protection of foreign investments, such as
treaties for the promotion and protection of foreign investments, and the
Washington Convention of 18 March 1965 on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes, which created an International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID), and also by contracts between States and foreign investors.
In that context, the role of diplomatic protection somewhat faded, as in practice
recourse is only made to it in rare cases where treaty régimes do not exist or
have proved inoperative. It is in this particular and relatively limited context
that the question of protection by substitution might be raised. The theory of
protection by substitution seeks indeed to offer protection to the foreign
shareholders of a company who could not rely on the benefit of an international
treaty and to whom no other remedy is available, the allegedly unlawful acts
having been committed against the company by the State of its nationality.
Protection by “substitution” would therefore appear to constitute the very last
resort for the protection of foreign investments.?””

2” CJ. Reports 2007, pp. 614-615, para. 8.

96

257.

258.

259.

The Barcelona Traction and Diallo judgments establish that there is no right under
customary international law for a State to exercise diplomatic protection in respect of a
wrong done to a company on the basis that the shareholders of the company are its nationals.
They in no way preclude the possibility that States may agree by treaty to grant such a right
to a State (as the Court found was the case in ELS/) or to the shareholders themselves.
Whether they are considered to have done so will depend upon the terms of the treaty, which

in this case are clear.

The Committee notes that the consistent practice of other tribunals and ad hoc committees
has been the same in this respect as the approach taken by the Tribunal in the present case.

Thus, the ad hoc committee in CMS held that —

. nothing in general international law prohibits the conclusion of treaties
allowing “claims by shareholders independently from those of the corporation
concerned ... even if those shareholders are minority or non-controlling
shareholders”. Such treaties and in particular the ICSID Convention must be
applied as lex specialis.?”

A similar approach can be found in the other cases which have considered this issue.?””

The Committee understands the concern voiced by Argentina that claims by shareholders for
wrongs done to the company might lead to double recovery. However, that risk is one
against which any competent tribunal will be on its guard. The Tribunal in the present case
was clearly aware of this risk and took steps to guard against it. Thus, it carefully discusses
double recovery in paragraphs 1098-1100 and 1137-1143. There is no indication in the

Award or in the pleadings before the Committee that there has been any double recovery.

Thus, the Committee concludes that there has been no manifest excess of power in this aspect

of the Tribunal’s decision.

278 CMS, note 218, above, para. 69 (quoting the Jurisdiction Decision in that case).

279 See, e.g., Azurix Corporation v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12) Decision on Jurisdiction
of 8 December 2003, paras. 64-65; El Paso Energy International Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case
NO. ARB 03/15), Decision on Jurisdiction of 27 April 2006, para. 138; Siemens AG v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/02/8), Decision on Jurisdiction of 3 August 2004; Hochtief, Decision on Liability of 29
December 2014, paras. 172.

97

260.

261.

262.

The Committee also considers that the Tribunal has satisfied the requirements of the
Convention to state the reasons for its decision. Those reasons are carefully set out at
paragraphs 164-176 of the Jurisdiction Decision and are reflected in the Award. The
Committee does not agree that the Tribunal’s reasoning on this point is in any respect
contradictory. It notes Argentina’s argument that there is a contradiction between paragraphs

930 and 939 of the Award. Paragraph 930 states —

In this connection, it is necessary to reject Respondent’s argument based on the
forum selection clause in Article 40 of the Concession Agreement. Claimants
were not party to that Concession. Their claim rests on breach of investment
treaties, which as such clearly fall within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction.

Paragraph 939 states —

Concession agreements granted to foreign investors for specific investments,
such as those at issue in this arbitration, fall within the protection of an
umbrella clause.

Argentina contends that the latter paragraph suggests, contrary to the reasoning of the earlier
one, that the Claimants were themselves parties to the Concession Agreement. The
Committee does not agree. Read in context, paragraph 939 of the Award is describing what
the Tribunal considered to be the underlying economic reality, namely that the Claimants had
invested in the Concession (in this respect, see also paras. 174-175 of the Jurisdiction
decision, quoted in para. 28, above). It was not dealing with the issue of who was party to the
contract in the strict sense. The Committee notices that Argentina itself sometimes used
terms in a similarly general way. Thus, in its Counter-Memorial in the proceedings before
the Tribunal, Argentina referred to “the year when SODEMSA was awarded the
concession”, °° whereas it was EDEMSA, not SODEMSA, which was party to the

Concession Agreement.

The Committee thus dismisses Argentina’s claim to annul the Award on this ground.

289 Counter-Memorial on the Merits, para. 179, quoted in the Award at para. 958.

98

263.

264.

265.

c. Privity of Contract
(1) — Parties’ Positions

Lastly, Argentina argues that even if the umbrella clauses could be incorporated into the
Argentina-France BIT, they would not alter the nature of the commitments undertaken (or
entered into) in the Concession Agreement which were obligations undertaken by the
Province of Mendoza to EDEMSA and not to the Claimants. According to Argentina, the

application of an umbrella clause does not alter the requirement of privity of contract.?*!

Argentina’s main argument in this respect is that the Tribunal failed to state the reasons for
its decision.?*? It relies heavily on the decision of the ad hoc committee in CMS in which
similar issues were raised regarding the effect of the umbrella clause in the Argentina-USA

BIT. The CMS Committee stated that —

The effect of the umbrella clause is not to transform the obligation which is
relied on into something else; the content of the obligation is unaffected as is
its proper law. If this is so, it would appear that the parties to the obligation
(i.e. the persons bound by it and entitled to rely on it) are likewise not changed
by reason of the umbrella clause.”*?

It considered that the tribunal in that case had failed properly to grapple with that issue, so
that “in the end it is quite unclear how the Tribunal arrived at its conclusion that CMS could

284

enforce the obligations of Argentina to TGN” with the result that there existed “a

significant lacuna in the Award, which makes it impossible for the reader to follow the

reasoning on this point.”?°>

According to Argentina, the same failure is discernible in the Award in the present case.
Argentina argues that the Tribunal confused the question of whether the obligations in
question arose under the Concession Agreement or under the BIT. Argentina emphasised
that it was “not questioning the nature of the claims put forward but the person that has put

them forward, i.e. EDF instead of EDEMSA”.?8° It invokes two other cases in which

28! Application, paras. 23-25; Memorial, paras. 72-91; Reply, paras. 43-70.
282 Transcript, p. 236.

283 CMS, note 218, above, para. 95(c).

284 CMS, note 218, above, para. 96.

285 CMS, note 218, above, para. 97.

286 Reply, para. 58.

99

266.

267.

268.

tribunals faced with what it describes as umbrella clauses in effectively similar terms to those
in the BITs at issue in the present case, held that an umbrella clause did not give a claimant
the right to enforce, as treaty obligations, obligations contained in contracts to which that
claimant was not party.”*” It questioned why the Award in the present case made no reference
to the first of those cases.”** Finally, Argentina contended that “the Argentine Republic did

not undertake any obligation whatsoever vis-a-vis the Claimants”.?*°

Although Argentina’s main argument concerned the alleged failure of the Tribunal to state
the reasons for its decision, it also maintained that the Tribunal’s decision to apply the
umbrella clauses in the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT and the Argentina-Germany BIT so as to
allow the Claimants to enforce against Argentina obligations to which they were not party

involved a manifest excess of powers.

The Claimants deny that there was either a failure to state reasons or a manifest excess of
powers by the Tribunal.?”° They point, first, to what they maintain are significant differences
between the umbrella clauses at issue in the present case and those in CMS, Azurix and
Burlington, in particular, the fact that the umbrella clauses in the present case speak of

commitments “undertaken”, whereas those in the other cases use the phrase “entered into”.29!

292.

They also refer to the award in Continental Casualty ~’~as taking a different view of the scope

of umbrella clauses, although the claim for a breach of the umbrella clause in that case was

unsuccessful.

The Claimants maintain that the Tribunal set out the reasons which led it to its decision on
the scope of the umbrella clause, adopting the reasoning of Professor Dolzer, who appeared
as an expert witness for the Claimants, that the application of the clause was not dependent

upon privity of contract. They contend that Argentina expressly argued the CMS point before

287 See Memorial, para. 88, and Transcript pp. 29-30, citing Azurix Corporation v. Argentine Republic (ICSID
Case No. ARB/O1/12) Award of 14 July 2006, 14 ICSID Reports 374, para. 384, and Burlington v. Ecuador
(ICSID Case No. ARB/08/05), Decision on Liability of 24 December 2012. Argentina also referred to the
award in Hamester v. Ghana (ICSID Case No. ARB/07/24) Award of 18 June 2010, though without close
analysis of the umbrella clause at issue in that case.

°88 Transcript, p. 31, referring to the Azurix award; the decision in Burlington did not appear until after the
Award in the present case.

289 Memorial, para. 87.

2° Counter-Memorial, paras. 78-117; Rejoinder, paras. 47-67; Transcript, pp. 206-210 and 327-335.

2°! Transcript, pp. 206-7.

2°2 Continental Casualty, note 5, above, paras. 286-303.

100

269.

270.

271.

the Tribunal which took full account thereof. With regard to the failure to cite the Azurix
award, the Claimants emphasise that the duty to state reasons does not entail the requirement

to refer expressly to every authority cited by the parties.

(2) The Decision of the Committee

The Committee considers that it should begin its consideration of this issue by addressing the
Parties’ submissions regarding the texts of the different umbrella clauses at issue in the
present case and in the cases of CMS, Azurix and Burlington. In CMS and Azurix, the
umbrella clause was that contained in the Argentina-USA BIT. In Burlington it was the
umbrella clause in the Ecuador-USA BIT. In the present case, of course, the umbrella
clauses are those found in the Argentina-Luxembourg and Argentina-Germany BITs.
Although the Award refers to the English texts of those clauses, that text is not an official
one, whereas in the case of the Argentina-USA and Ecuador-USA BITs English was one of
the authentic languages of the treaty. By contrast, all four treaties are authentic in Spanish.
For that reason, the Committee has already held (see paragraph 231, above) that,
notwithstanding the late stage at which Argentina raised this point, it cannot exclude
Argentina’s argument that the English text referred to in the Award is not an entirely accurate

translation.

The relevant clauses in the BITs at issue in CMS, Azurix and Burlington are in the same terms

Each Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into with regard to
investments.

The Claimants have sought to distinguish those cases by highlighting the fact that the two
BITs at issue in the present case use the term “undertaken”, rather than “entered into”. The
Committee does not attach any weight to this point. The Spanish texts of all four treaties use
the same term, “contraido” (or “contraidos”). No significance can therefore attach to the fact
that the unofficial English texts of the Argentina-Luxembourg and Argentina-Germany BITs
employ the word “undertaken” as a translation. In any event, the Committee does not see a
meaningful distinction between “entered into” and “undertaken” in the context of the issues

in this case.

101

272.

273.

274.

275.

Although the point was not discussed in the annulment proceedings in the present case, the
Committee also considers that the use of the term “commitments”, in the two BITs at issue in
the present case, as opposed to “obligations” (the term used in the BITs at issue in CMS,
Azurix and Burlington) cannot be regarded as significant since, once again, the Spanish texts

of all four treaties use the same term, “compromisos”.

The Committee has therefore proceeded on the basis that the umbrella clauses in the present

case are substantially the same as those in the CMS, Azurix and Burlington cases.

Since Argentina has relied principally upon Article 52(1)(e) of the Convention, the
Committee will begin by considering whether the Tribunal has failed to state the reasons for
its decision that Argentina had violated its obligation to “respect specific commitments

undertaken in connection with Claimants’ investment”.?°?

The Award deals with the reasons which led the Tribunal to its conclusion as follows:-

dd) the Claimants were claiming not for breach of contract but for breach

of treaty;?"4

(2) concession agreements constitute commitments undertaken (or

obligations entered into) with respect to the investment; 7°>

(3) not all contractual breaches necessarily rise to the level of treaty
breaches but the “serious repudiation of concessions [sic] obligations
implicated by failure to respect the currency clause... must clearly be seen as
a violation of ‘commitments ... undertaken with respect to investors’ (Article
10(2) Argentina-Luxembourg BIT) and “a commitment undertaken in
connection with the investments made by nationals or companies from the

other Contracting Party” (Article 7(2) Argentina-Luxembourg BIT);?°°

293 Award, Dispositif, para. (i).
24 Award, para. 930.
285 Award, para. 939.
286 Award, para. 940.

102

276.

(4) the Concession was carefully constructed so that the risk of currency
fluctuation, in the sense of an end to the parity exchange rate and

convertibility, was placed upon the Province and not the investors;?°”

(5) the acts of which complaint was made were sovereign acts rather than
acts carried out by Mendoza in the capacity of a party to the Concession

Agreement;?°°

(6) the Concession Agreement, though concluded with EDEMSA was
clearly adopted with the shareholders in mind. Article 12 of the Agreement

prohibited the transfer of shares without prior consent for a fixed period;?”?

(7) the principal guarantees in the Concession Agreement were specifically
employed in order to attract the Claimants as investors. As the Tribunal put it

The Province of Mendoza had clearly embarked on a campaign to
attract foreign investors in purchasing 51% of EDEMSA “Class A”
shares. ... Key features of the sales pitch included (i) the creation of a
regulatory agency; (ii) the Currency Clause; (iii) the Cost Adjustment
Clause; (iv) the Extraordinary Tariff Adjustment Clause; (v) an initial
tariff schedule with a fixed term of five years; (vi) a concession with a
duration of thirty years.*°°

Taken together, these parts of the Award seem to the Committee to state the reasons for the
Tribunal’s conclusion in a way which enables the reader to follow the reasoning and thus sets
the Award apart from the award in CMS. In particular, the Award highlights the extent to
which the Province of Mendoza, whose acts are — for the purposes of international law —
attributable to the Argentine Republic, went out of its way to make commitments to the
Claimants as prospective foreign investors that the Concession regime would be a financially

stable one.*”!

287 Award, paras, 943-969.

298 Award, para. 941.

29 Award, para. 942.

300 Award, para. 1008.

30! Tn addition to Award, para. 1008, see paras. 63-66.

103

277.

278.

279.

280.

The broad language of the umbrella clauses, particularly that in the Argentina-Germany BIT,
which spoke of commitments undertaken (or entered into) with regard to investments, rather

than with investors, was also emphasised.*°?

In these circumstances, the Committee cannot conclude that the Award is one in which, to
borrow the language of the CMS Committee, “it is quite unclear how the Tribunal arrived at
its conclusion”. That conclusion is not altered by the fact that the Award does not expressly
distinguish the Azurix award or the CMS decision. As the Committee has already explained
(see paragraphs 194 to 198, above), it is not necessary for an award to address every authority

cited to it in order to comply with the requirement to state the reasons on which it is based.

Nor does the Committee consider that there was a manifest excess of powers. It is true that
the reasoning of the Award on this point is somewhat different from that in CMS, Azurix, and
Burlington. However, each of these cases has to be assessed in the light of its own facts.
Moreover, the Award is similar in its reasoning to the statements made by the tribunal in
Continental Casualty, although the tribunal there came to a different conclusion on the facts.
The most that can be said is that an opposite approach to that adopted is also arguable and

that is not enough to warrant annulment on the grounds of manifest excess of powers.

The Committee thus dismisses this part of Argentina’s application for annulment. For the
sake of completeness, it would add that, had it taken a different view, it would have annulled
only the first part of paragraph I of the dispositif and not, as Argentina urges, the whole
Award. Argentina points to the passage at the start of that part of the Award in which the
Tribunal states that “[Argentina’s] breach of certain obligations under the applicable umbrella
clause operates in tandem with breach of Article 3 of the Argentine-France BIT, providing a
duty to accord Fair and Equitable Treatment”.*°? Argentina argues that this passage shows
that the finding of a breach of the duty to accord fair and equitable treatment is dependent
upon, and inseparable from, the finding of a breach of the umbrella clauses. The Committee
does not read it that way. Rather, the Committee considers that this passage, together with
the section on fair and equitable treatment which follows, demonstrates that the inducements

offered to investors — and specifically to the Claimants — to invest in EDEMSA were one of

302 Award, para. 938.
303 Award, para. 994.

104

281.

the reasons why the Tribunal considered that there had been a breach of the fair and equitable
treatment standard. Even if the stricter approach to umbrella clauses espoused in some other
cases had been adopted, the Committee considers that the significance of these inducements
and the expectations which they engendered, would have remained valid, as the CMS
Committee recognized.*™* Since the award of damages in paragraph III of the dispositif would
be sustained by a finding of breach of the fair and equitable treatment obligation without any
finding of a breach of the umbrella clauses, even if the Committee had upheld Argentina’s
case on the umbrella clauses, there would have been no basis to annul the whole of the

Award.

VII. Necessity Issue

A. The Issues Raised by Argentina

The next argument raised by Argentina concerns the Tribunal’s treatment of three
“affirmative defences” advanced by Argentina, each of which concerned the effects of the
economic emergency which arose in Argentina and to which the Committee has already

referred.*°> Argentina complains of:-

qd) the Tribunal’s failure to apply Article 3(2) of the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT
3° Which the Tribunal acknowledged “might have had consequences” °°” had the

Tribunal found the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT applicable;

(2) the Tribunal’s failure to apply Article 5(3) of the Argentina-France BIT,*%

which Argentina maintains afforded it a defence; and

(3) the Tribunal’s handling of Argentina’s defence based upon customary

international law principles regarding the state of necessity.

304 CMS, note 218, above, para. 89.

305 See paras. 39-41, above.

306 Article 3(2) provides:

“Without prejudice to measures necessary to maintain public order, investments shall enjoy permanent
protection and security, to the exclusion of any unjustified or discriminatory measure that could impede in fact
or in law its management, maintenance, use, enjoyment or liquidation.” (Unofficial translation into English
provided by Argentina).

507 Award, para. 888.

308 See para. 283, below.

105

282.

283.

The Committee has already held (see paragraphs 201 to 217, above) that the Tribunal
committed no annullable error in deciding that the case fell to be determined by reference to
the Argentina-France BIT and that the Argentina-Luxembourg BIT was inapplicable. It is
not, therefore, necessary to address in this part of the Decision the first point raised by
Argentina. Accordingly, the Committee will here confine itself to the second and third points

set out in the preceding paragraph.
B. Parties’ Arguments

1. Argentina

According to Argentina, because the measures which were the subject of the Claimants’ main
case were taken in response to the national emergency which confronted Argentina, the
Tribunal should have applied Article 5(3) of the Argentina-France BIT, the English

translation of which provides:

Investors of one Contracting Party whose investments have suffered losses
owing to war or any other armed conflict, revolution, state of national
emergency, or rebellion occurring in the territory or in the maritime zone of the
other Contracting Party shall be accorded by the latter Contracting Party
treatment no less favourable than that granted to its own investors or to those of
the most favoured Nation.

Although there appears to be no ground for criticism of this translation, the importance of
the provision makes it useful also to quote the official French and Spanish texts of Article

5(3), which provide:

Les investisseurs de l’une des Parties contractantes dont les investissements
auront subi des pertes dues a la guerre ou 4 tout autre conflit armé, révolution,
état d’urgence nationale ou révolte survenu sur le territoire ou dans la zone
maritime de l’autre Partie contractante, bénéficient, de la parte de cette
derniére, d’un traitement non moins favourable que celui accordé a ses propres
investisseurs ou 4 ceux de la nation la plus favorisée.

and

106

284.

285.

Los inversores de una Parte Contratante cuyas inversiones hubiesen sufrido
pérdidas a causa de una guerra o de cualquier otro conflicto armado,
revoluci6n, estado de emergencia nacional o rebeli6n ocurrido en el territorio 0
en la zona maritima de la otra Parte Contratante, recibirdn de esta Ultima un
tratamiento no menos favorable que el acordado a sus propios inversores 0 a
los de la Nacién més favorable.

Argentina maintains that the situation which it faced was a “national emergency” (“estado de
emergencia nacional”) within the meaning of this provision and that, consequently, in taking
measures to address that emergency, Argentina’s only obligation to the Claimants was one of
non-discrimination.* In other words, the effect of Article 5(3) was that measures taken to
address a national emergency were not subject to the obligations of fair and equitable
treatment, full protection and security and the prohibition of expropriation set out in Article
5(1) and (2), or to any obligation arising out of an umbrella clause in another BIT which
might have been given effect by virtue of Article 4 of the Argentina-France BIT. That was
the analysis arrived at in respect of a provision substantially identical to Article 5(3) by the
tribunal in L.E.S.1. S.p.A. and Astaldi S.p.A. v. Algeria.*'° The Tribunal, however, rejected

Argentina’s argument, holding that —

The plain language of Article 5(3) makes clear that it serves as a non-
discrimination provision, not a shield against host State liability for treaty
violation?!

Argentina maintains that this decision renders Article 5(3) superfluous, because the
Claimants were already entitled to non-discrimination by virtue of the provisions of Article 4
of the BIT.*'? Argentina maintains that it had put that argument to the Tribunal, which had
failed to address it in the Award. The Tribunal had failed to explain why Article 5(3) was not
applicable and had not dealt with the authorities relied upon by Argentina.*!? Moreover, the
Tribunal had contradicted itself by saying that, while Article 5(3) did not operate to exempt
Argentina from liability in respect of non-discriminatory measures taken to address the

national emergency, that provision nevertheless had to be understood against the background

3° Memorial, paras. 162-163.

30 LES. S.p.A. and Astaldi S.p.A. v. People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria (ICSID Case No. ARB/05/03),
Award of 12 November 2008 (“L.E.S.1.”).

31! Award, para. 1157.

32 Reply, para. 114.

313 In particular, the award in L.E.S.[., note 310, above; see Memorial, para. 165.

107

286.

287.

of customary international law rules on State responsibility in times of war or national

emergency,*!* even though the Claimants’ own expert *!° had accepted that those rules

provided for a degree of exemption from liability.*'

Furthermore, Argentina maintains that the Tribunal distorted its argument by saying that
Argentina had likened Article 5(3) of the Argentina-France BIT to Article XI of the
Argentina-USA BIT.*!” Article XI provides that:

This Treaty shall not preclude the application by either Party of measures
necessary for the maintenance of public order, the fulfilment of its obligations
with respect to the maintenance or restoration of international peace or
security, or the Protection of its own essential security interests.

This provision was at the heart of the awards in Continental Casualty Company v. Argentine
Republic *'8 and LG&E v. Argentine Republic, *'° in which tribunals assessing Argentina’s
emergency measures against the yardstick of the Argentina-USA BIT held that Argentina
was relieved of its liability in respect of those measures by virtue of the provisions of Article
XI. The Tribunal in the present case held that “the substance of Article 5(3) bears no
resemblance to Article XI of the Argentina-US BIT”32° Argentina maintains, however, that
it did not argue that Article 5(3) and Article XI were analogous but referred to the
Continental Casualty and LG&E awards in order to draw similarities with the factual

assumptions analysed in those cases.*?!

Argentina similarly criticises the Tribunal’s approach to necessity under customary
international law. The Tribunal held that customary international law recognized the state of
necessity as a circumstance precluding wrongfulness. In applying this aspect of customary
international law, it relied upon Article 25 of the International Law Commission (“ILC”)

Articles on State Responsibility. Article 25 provides:

314 Award, para. 1158.

315 Professor Dolzer, whose first report is exhibit RA 543.

316 Memorial, para. 168; Transcript, p. 94.

317 See, e.g., Award, para 1155.

3!8 Continental Casualty, note 5, above.

319 LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International Inc. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID
Case No. ARB/02/1), Decision on Liability of 3 October 2006 (“LG&E”).

320 Award, para. 1161.

321 Reply, para. 116.

108

qd) Necessity may not be invoked by a State as a ground for precluding the
wrongfulness of an act not in conformity with an international obligation of
that State unless the act:

(a) is the only means for the State to safeguard an essential interest
against a grave and imminent peril; and

(b) does not seriously impair an essential interest of the State or
States towards which the obligation exists, or of the international
community as a whole.

(2) In any case, necessity may not be invoked by a State as a ground for
precluding wrongfulness if:

 

(a) the international obligation in question excludes the possibility
of invoking necessity; or

(b) the State has contributed to the situation of necessity.

The Tribunal noted that the question how far the provisions of Article 25 codified customary
international law was a subject of debate *” but considered it did not need to enter into that

debate, because

... both sides in this arbitration stipulate that the Tribunal’s analysis should
take as applicable legal norms the State of Necessity defense presented by the
contours articulated in ILC Article 25. Neither side has argued for application
of a standard more favorable to host states than the norms of Article 25.°7

288. The Tribunal concluded that Argentina’s conduct fell outside the scope of the defence of
necessity on three grounds, First, it was “not convinced that those measures, as presented
and explained in these proceedings, were the only means by which [Argentina] could have
protected its public interests”.*** Secondly, and “equally as important” according to the
Tribunal, it had “difficulty finding that [Argentina] did not contribute to the situation which
produced the 2001 crisis”.*?° Lastly, the Tribunal considered that even if Argentina’s

conduct could have been justified under the state of necessity, Argentina was nevertheless
322 Award, para. 1167.
333 Award, para. 1168.

34 Award, para. 1172.
325 Award, para. 1173.

109

289.

290.

291.

obliged to return to the status quo once that became possible and that Argentina had failed to

do so.376

Argentina maintains that the Tribunal distorted its position. While Argentina had referred to
Article 25, it denies it had accepted that Article 25 codified the customary international law
on the state of necessity. The Tribunal had therefore not been justified in proceeding to deal
with Argentina’s customary international law defence on the basis of Article 25 without
explaining why that provision was authoritative, or in applying its provisions as though it was

a treaty.??”

Argentina also criticises the Tribunal’s application of the necessity standard. Invoking the
decision of the ad hoc committee in Enron v. Argentine Republic, *° Argentina maintains
that the Tribunal failed to identify the legal standard to be applied in order to determine
whether the emergency measures were the “only means” by which Argentina could safeguard
its essential interests, failed to evaluate the evidence submitted by Argentina and failed to
state reasons for its decisions. In particular, it did not set out the alternative measures which
it considers could have been adopted. *?? With regard to the requirement of “non-
contribution”, Argentina again argues that the Tribunal failed to identify the legal standard to
be applied and did not properly explain its reasons. It maintains that the Tribunal wrongly
considered, on the basis of an expert report tendered by Argentina, that Argentina had
accepted that it was partly to blame for the crisis and should not have placed so much weight
on a statement by the then President of Argentina in early 2002, regarding which counsel for

Argentina referred to “the relatively low weight that politicians’ words have”.**°

Lastly, Argentina maintains that the Tribunal invented a new exception to the defence of
necessity, over and above those in Article 25, when it held that even if there had been a state
of necessity, Argentina was under a duty to re-establish the status quo, once the emergency

had passed.#!

326 Award, para. 1177.

327 Memorial, paras. 170-176; Reply, paras. 120-122.

28 Enron, note 217, above.

9 Transcript, pp. 96-97; Memorial, paras. 177-178.

330 Transcript, p. 98; Memorial, paras. 177-179; Reply, paras. 123-124.
33! Memorial, paras. 175-176; Reply, para. 121.

110

292.

293.

294.

In summary, with regard to both Article 5(3) and customary international law, Argentina
contends that “the Tribunal not only failed to state the reasons for its decision in this respect
but manifestly exceeded its powers in failing to consider the laws it was required to apply and
distorting the arguments presented by Argentina, thus departing from a fundamental rule of

procedure”.**?

2. The Claimants

The Claimants counter that the Tribunal committed no annullable error in respect of this part
of the case. With regard to Article 5(3) of the Argentina-France BIT, the Claimants argue
that the Tribunal was right to conclude, after extensive consideration, that Article 5(3) was a
non-discrimination provision and not a charter for dispensing with the protections afforded
by other provisions of the BIT.*? The Tribunal did not distort Argentina’s argument
regarding Article 5(3) and Article XI of the Argentina-USA BIT; on the contrary, it
accurately recorded Argentina’s position that the Tribunal should apply, mutatis mutandis,
the analysis in the Continental Casualty and LG&E, awards which had turned on Article
X13 Argentina had thus been seeking to persuade the Tribunal to give Article 5(3) the same
effect that the tribunals in Continental Casualty and LG&E had accorded to Article XI. The
Tribunal had also addressed Argentina’s argument that a restrictive interpretation of Article
5(3) would render that provision superfluous given the non-discrimination obligation already
inherent in Article 4, 3° and rejected it. Lastly, the Claimants contend that, even if this
analysis was wrong (which they maintain was not the case), it was not ground for

annulment.**°

On the customary international law of necessity, the Claimants maintain that Argentina had
in fact accepted that Article 25 of the ILC Articles reflected customary international law and
had submitted arguments regarding each part of the provisions of Article 25.*°7. The
Claimants deny that the Award is not fully reasoned. They contend that the Tribunal was

clear about the standard to be applied and held that “necessity must be construed strictly and

332 Memorial, para. 180.

333 Transcript, p. 217.

334 Counter-Memorial, paras. 180-181; Rejoinder, paras. 114-119; Transcript, pp. 217-218.
335 Rejoinder, paras. 112-113, citing para. 1157 of the Award.

336 Rejoinder, para. 113.

337 Counter-Memorial, paras. 162-165; Rejoinder, paras. 122-123; Transcript, pp. 218-219.

111

295.

296.

objectively, not as an easy escape hatch for host states wishing to avoid treaty obligations
which prove difficult”.*** With regard to the Enron Committee’s decision, they criticise it as
containing internal contradictions **° and emphasise that even that decision makes the point
that reasons may be implicit"? According to the Claimants, the Tribunal dealt carefully with
the arguments regarding whether the measures adopted by Argentina were the only way of
dealing with the crisis and whether Argentina had contributed to the crisis by its own actions.
The statement by the President regarding the latter point was only one of the factors taken
into account and, in any event, the Committee lacks jurisdiction to re-assess the probative

value which the Tribunal accorded to evidence before it.*4!
C. Committee’s Decision

1. The CMS and Enron Decisions

The Committee begins by noting that the issues raised in this part of the case have been the
subject of considerable attention from tribunals and ad hoc committees in other cases. In
particular, the Parties have referred at some length to the decisions of the ad hoc committees
in CMS and Enron, both of which concerned the same Argentine crisis. While there is no
concept of binding precedent in ICSID jurisprudence, it is important that the Committee takes
note of what other committees have said in respect of the issues which it is now required to
consider. The Committee will, therefore, begin with a brief analysis of the CMS and Enron

decisions.

The CMS case concerned a claim brought under the Argentina-USA BIT in response to
which Argentina raised arguments under Article XI of that treaty and the customary
international law of necessity. Those arguments were rejected by the Tribunal and raised
again by Argentina in the annulment proceedings in which Argentina alleged that the tribunal
had failed to state the reasons for its decision and manifestly exceeded its powers. The CMS
Committee rejected the application for annulment on those grounds (although it annulled the

award in part on a different ground).

338 Award, para. 1171.

339 Transcript, pp. 219-220.
40 Transcript, p. 221.

341 Rejoinder, para. 126.

112

297.

298.

299.

The CMS Committee was critical of what it saw as the tribunal’s failure properly to analyse
the relationship between Article XI of the BIT and the customary international law on
necessity. In the view of the Committee, Article XI of the BIT was a threshold requirement
in that, if it applied, the substantive obligations under the rest of the BIT were rendered
inapplicable. By contrast, Article 25 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility provided for
an excuse which became applicable only once it was established that there had otherwise
been a breach of the obligations under the BIT.*? It considered that the tribunal had failed to
understand or explain this relationship and had thereby made an error of law.*“* Moreover,
by treating necessity and Article XI as existing on the same footing it had made a further
error, since if necessity meant that there had not even been a prima facie breach of the treaty,
then it occupied the same field as Article XI, which was /ex specialis and should have been
accorded priority.*“+ The tribunal’s failure to appreciate this relationship also entailed a
misinterpretation of Article XI. Nevertheless, while recognizing that these errors “could have
had a decisive impact on the operative part of the Award,” *° the CMS Committee held that it

was not empowered to annul the award. It summed up the position in the following terms:

The Committee recalls, once more, that it has only a limited jurisdiction under
Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. In the circumstances, the Committee
cannot simply substitute its own view of the law and its own appreciation of
the facts for those of the Tribunal. Notwithstanding the identified errors and
Jacunas in the Award, it is the case in the end that the Tribunal applied Article
XI of the Treaty. Although applying it cryptically and defectively, it applied it.
There is accordingly no manifest excess of powers.**°

The Committee also declined to annul for failure to state reasons. It was critical of the
tribunal’s brief explanation of why Article XI was considered inapplicable on the facts *4” but

held that “although the motivation of the Award could certainly have been clearer, a careful

reader can follow the implicit reasoning of the Tribunal”.*#*

The Enron case likewise concerned a claim brought under the Argentine-US BIT. Again the

Tribunal had rejected Argentina’s arguments based on Articles [V(3) and XI of that BIT and

342 CMS, note 218, above, para. 129.
343 CMS, note 218, above, paras. 131-132.
34 CMS, note 218, above, paras, 133-134.
445 CMS, note 218, above, para. 135.
346 CMS, note 218, above, para. 136.
347 CMS, note 218, above, para. 125.
348 CMS, note 218, above, para. 127.

113

300.

301.

the customary international law of necessity, and again Argentina sought annulment of the
award on the grounds of failure to state reasons and manifest excess of powers. Unlike the
CMS Committee, however, the Enron Committee annulled the award for manifest excess of
powers in relation to the findings on Article XI and the customary international law on

necessity, as well as for failure to state reasons.°4?

The Enron Committee began by noting that both Parties had treated Article 25 of the ILC
Articles on State Responsibility as representing the customary international law on necessity
and the tribunal had proceeded on that basis. The Enron Committee observed that, even if
the Committee had taken a different view of the status of Article 25, “it could not amount to
an annullable error for the Tribunal to give an applicable legal rule an interpretation on which

both parties were agreed.” *°°

The Enron Committee held, however, that the tribunal’s application of the Article 25 criteria
was flawed in important respects. First, it considered that the tribunal had failed to “address
a number of issues that are essential to the question of whether the ‘only way’ requirement

» 351 Tn this context, the Enron Committee considered that the requirement that the

was met
measures taken be, in the words of Article 25, “the only means for the State to safeguard an
essential interest against a grave and imminent peril” was open to more than one
interpretation and that the tribunal had failed to identify what legal standard was to be
applied, whether the relative effectiveness of different measures was a factor to be taken into
account and who was to determine whether or not alternative means had actually been open

to the State at the relevant time.*°? The Committee concluded that —

It is not for the Committee in these annulment proceedings to provide answers
to these questions. It was however necessary for the Tribunal, either expressly
or sub silentio, to decide or assume the answers in order to apply the ‘only
way’ provision of Article 25(1)(a) to the facts of the case.*°

The Enron Committee considered that the tribunal had placed too much reliance on the

report of an economic expert whose view could not be said to have been an analysis of

4 Enron, note 217, above, operative part, paras. | and 2.
350 Enron, note 217, above, para. 356.

351 Enron, note 217, above, para. 368.

352 Enron, note 217, above, paras. 370-372.

353 Enron, note 217, above, para. 373.

114

302.

303.

304.

305.

whether other means were open to Argentina as a matter of law. The Enron Committee
accepted that the parties had not identified these issues in their pleadings but nevertheless
stated that “the Tribunal is required to apply the applicable law, and is required to state

sufficient reasons for its decision”.>*4

Secondly, the Enron Committee held that the tribunal in that case had failed to make a clear
finding on whether or not the measures taken by Argentina had “seriously impair[ed] an
essential interest of the State or States towards which the obligation exists, or of the
international community as a whole” and had confused this issue with that of non-

justiciability in a different context.**> The Committee held that —

The Tribunal nowhere states expressly that it finds the requirement in Article
25(1)(b) of the ILC not to be satisfied in this case. The Committee considers it
unclear whether the Tribunal ultimately did make such a finding or not. To the
extent that the Tribunal did make such a finding, the Committee considers that
it is entirely unclear on what basis that finding of law was made ...>*°

Lastly, the Enron Committee considered that the tribunal’s finding that Argentina had
contributed to the emergency and was therefore precluded by the principle stated in Article
25(2)(b) from relying on the defence of necessity was flawed. The tribunal had failed to
address the question what was the legal standard to apply and had again uncritically adopted

the findings of the economic expert witness.?°”

The Enron Committee thus concluded that the tribunal’s finding on necessity under
customary international law involved a manifest excess of powers (in the form of a failure to
apply the applicable law) and a failure to state reasons. Since that finding by the tribunal also
laid the foundations for its finding that Argentina could not rely upon Article XI of the

Argentina-USA BIT, the Enron Committee also annulled the finding regarding Article XI.***

As has already been explained, the analysis of these issues by the CMS Committee and the

Enron Committee are not binding upon the Committee in the present case. The Committee

34 Enron, note 217, above, para. 376.
355 Enron, note 217, above, paras. 379-384.
356 Enron, note 217, above, para. 384.
357 Enron, note 217, above, paras. 385-393.
388 Enron, note 217, above, para. 405.

115

306.

307.

308.

309.

has, however, taken them into account in its own examination of the issues raised concerning

Article 5(3) of the Argentina-France BIT and necessity under customary international law.

2. Article 5(3) of the Argentina-France BIT

With the analysis of the CMS Committee in mind, the Committee considers that it must begin
with the question whether the Tribunal committed an annullable error in its treatment of
Argentina’s reliance on Article 5(3) of the Argentina-France BIT (the text of which is set out

at para. 283, above).

The Tribunal did not make the mistake for which the CMS Committee criticised the tribunal

in that case 3°

of confusing the application of this provision with the question whether the
customary international law of necessity was applicable. On the contrary, the Tribunal began
by determining whether or not Article 5(3) meant that Argentina was not prima facie in
breach of treaty * before considering whether, if there was a prima facie breach of treaty,

the wrongfulness of the act was precluded by the circumstance of necessity.**!

The Tribunal rejected Argentina’s proposed interpretation of Article 5(3) as providing that, in
the event of an emergency of the kind described in that provision, the host State’s only duty
towards the investor was one of non-discrimination. It found, instead, that “the plain
language of Article 5(3) makes clear that it serves as a non-discrimination provision, not a

shield against host state liability for treaty violation”.*® It determined that

Article 5(3) may best be understood against the background of the rules of
customary international law on State responsibility toward foreign investors
during periods of war, insurrection and other extraordinary circumstances,
which determines host State responsibility toward aliens.

Contrary to what has been suggested by Argentina, the Committee sees no contradiction
between these two paragraphs of the Award. It is important to bear in mind that much of the
jurisprudence on customary international law on State responsibility towards aliens during

times of war and other emergency was concerned with the obligations of the State to

389 See para. 297, above.

360 Award, paras, 1152-1162.
36l Award, paras, 1163-1181.
362 Award, para. 1157.

363 Award, para. 1158.

116

310.

311.

compensate for damage caused by acts which were not attributable to the State itself (e.g.,
damage done to a foreign investor’s property by rioters or insurgents). In general, customary
international law did not require compensation in such circumstances.» The Tribunal’s
reasoning that “Article 5(3) leaves those customary rules untouched and indeed supplements
their content by requiring equality of treatment in response to such circumstances” *° is in no
way incompatible with its decision that it does not operate as a “shield against host state
liability for treaty violation” *© by disapplying other substantive protections afforded by the
BIT.

As the Tribunal pointed out, the contrast with Article XI of the Argentina-USA BIT (the text
of which appears at para. 286, above) is striking. The latter provision expressly states that the
other provisions of that treaty “shall not preclude the application ... of measures necessary

for the maintenance of public order”. No such language appears in Article 5(3).

Turning to Argentina’s contention that the Tribunal distorted its argument regarding Article
5(3), the Committee doubts whether, even if this contention were accepted, such a distortion
would amount to a manifest excess of powers, a failure to state reasons or (to the extent that
Argentina makes such a case) a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure. The
Committee does not, however, accept that the Tribunal distorted Argentina’s argument. It is
true that the Tribunal observed that Argentina “argues that Article 5(3) is analogous to
Article XT” *°’ whereas Argentina had denied an allegation by the Claimants that it sought to
assimilate the two provisions.*°* Nevertheless, the essence of Argentina’s argument before
the Tribunal was that Article 5(3) had the same effect as Article XI in that, according to
Argentina, in the conditions of emergency described therein, Article 5(3) rendered
inapplicable the other provisions of the BIT affording investors substantive protections and
replaced them with a significantly more limited obligation of non-discrimination.® In these
circumstances, the Tribunal’s analysis that Argentina treated Article 5(3) as “analogous” to

Article XI cannot be regarded as a distortion.

364 See, e.g., the Award in the Home Missionary Society of the United Brethren in Christ (United States) v.
United Kingdom, (1920 VI Reports of International Arbitral Awards), p. 42.

365 Award, para. 1159.

366 Award, para. 1157.

367 Award, para. 1155.

368 Rejoinder on the Merits (RA 524), para. 641.

3? Counter-Memorial on the Merits (RA 523), para. 256.

117

312.

313.

314.

The Tribunal’s interpretation of Article 5(3) is an entirely plausible one. It accords more
naturally with the text of the provision than does that advanced by Argentina. The
Committee is not persuaded by Argentina’s contextual argument, namely that if Article 5(3)
were treated as no more than a non-discrimination provision it would be otiose since Article 4
of the Argentina-France BIT requires each Party to provide to investors of the other Party
“treatment no less favourable than that accorded to its own investors”. It is by no means
unusual for the parties to a treaty to include, ex abundante cautela, a provision which may
not be strictly necessary. Indeed, the Argentina-USA BIT includes a provision (Article
TV(3)) 37° which is quite similar to Article 5(3) of the Argentina-France BIT, notwithstanding
that it contains not only a general non-discrimination provision but also the more sweeping
exclusionary provision of Article XI. The Committee also notes that the Enron tribunal (in a
part of the award which was not annulled by the ad hoc committee in that case) reached a

very similar interpretation of the comparable provision in the Argentina-USA BIT.

The Committee is aware that the tribunal in LE.S.L S.p.A. and Astaldi S.p.A. v. Algeria*"
took a different view of the scope of a provision substantially identical to Article 5(3) (a fact
noted by the Tribunal *’*). In an annulment proceeding, however, an ad hoc Committee is
not required to choose between two such different interpretations. The question is not
whether the Tribunal was correct in its interpretation of Article 5(3) but whether it applied

that provision. In the words of the Enron Committee —

It may well be that different interpretations of this provision are possible.
However, ... it is not for the Committee to determine whether or not the
interpretation given to this provision by the Tribunal was correct or not.
Whether it did so correctly or not, the Tribunal applied this provision as part of
the applicable law.*”*

The Committee thus concludes that the Tribunal’s treatment of Article 5(3) of the Argentina-

France BIT involved no manifest excess of powers.

37 Article IV(3) provides —

Nationals or companies of either Party whose investments suffer losses in the territory of the other Party owing
to war or other armed conflict, revolution, state of national emergency, insurrection, civil disturbance or other
similar events shall be accorded treatment by such Party no less favorable than that accorded to its own
nationals or companies or to nationals or companies of any third country, whichever is the more favourable
treatment, as regards any measures it adopts in relation to such losses.

37! 1. E.S.1, note 218, above.

372 Award, para. 485, footnote 54.

333 Enron, note 217, above, para. 398.

118

315.

316.

317.

318.

Nor does the Committee consider that the Tribunal failed to state reasons as required by
Article 48(3) and Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention. As the Committee has already
explained, what is required is that a reader can follow the Tribunal’s reasoning, not that he or
she must be persuaded by it.>”* The reasoning in the Award on the scope and application of
Article 5(3) is perfectly comprehensible. The Committee does not accept that the Tribunal
committed an annullable error by not referring expressly to Argentina’s contextual argument
(outlined in paragraph 312 above). As the Enron Committee explained, while a tribunal has a
duty to deal with each question put to it, “it is not required to comment on all arguments of
the parties in relation to each of those questions”.*”° In the present case, the questions which
required an answer were: what was the meaning of Article 5(3) and how did it apply to the
facts of the present case. The Tribunal answered those questions and stated sufficient reasons

for the answers which it gave.

Finally, and for the sake of completeness,*”°

the Committee observes that it can see no trace
of a serious departure on the part of the Tribunal from a fundamental rule of procedure in the

Tribunal’s handling of the Article 5(3) issue.

3. Necessity under Customary International Law

Since it had held that Article 5(3) of the BIT did not relieve Argentina of liability and that
there was a prima facie breach of the BIT, it was therefore necessary for the Tribunal to

377

consider Argentina’s subsidiary plea °’’ of necessity under customary international law.

In addressing this plea, the Tribunal applied the provisions of Article 25 of the ILC Articles
on State Responsibility (the text of which is set out at paragraph 287, above). It did so,
without entering into the “theoretical question of how far the various aspect of ILC Article 25
codify customary defences related to necessity,”*”* because “neither side has argued for

application of a standard more favorable to host states than the norms of Article 25”.°” Asa

374 See paras. 194 to 197, above.

375 Enron, note 217, above, para. 222.

576 Tt is not entirely clear whether Argentina intended to raise this issue as a separate ground for annulment
under Article 52(1) (d) of the Convention.

377 So termed by Argentina in its Counter-Memorial on the Merits (RA 523), para. 620.

378 Award, para. 1167.

379 Award, para. 1168.

119

319.

320.

threshold question, it is necessary to consider whether the Tribunal committed an annullable

error in taking this approach, since Argentina had maintained that —

There is no doubt that the ILC Draft takes from customary law the state of
necessity institute. However, international custom does not make such a
detailed statement as to the requirements or exceptions of such cause which
excludes illegality, as it appears in each of the paragraphs which constitute the
ILC articles.**°

The Committee does not consider that the Tribunal can be faulted for having taken the
provisions of ILC Article 25 as its point of reference. It is true that Argentina questioned
whether all of the detail of Article 25 reflected customary international law and disputed what
it described as the Claimants’ propensity to “refer to each of the paragraphs of Article 25 as
though it were the final text of a treaty in full force and effect”.**! At no point, however, did
Argentina indicate what aspects of Article 25 it considered did not reflect customary
international law. Nor, more importantly, did it at any stage advance a positive case in favour
of a standard of necessity materially different from that set out in Article 25. On the contrary,
Argentina joined issue with the Claimants on each of the principal requirements of Article 25

and it summed up the differences between the Parties in the following terms:

... the discussion between the Parties as to whether the state of necessity can be
applied as a principle of customary international law seems to be limited to
knowing: (a) whether the measures were necessary; (b) whether the Argentine
Republic did not “substantially” contribute to cause the crisis; (c) whether
those measures were the only suitable means.***

Those are precisely the key issues under Article 25. The Committee therefore concludes that
the Tribunal was correct in stating that “neither side has argued for application of a standard
more favorable to host states than the norms of Article 25” and committed no annullable

error in treating Article 25 as a statement of the applicable customary international law.

The Tribunal then stated the test it had to apply and its overall conclusions in the following

terms:

380 Counter-Memorial on the Merits (RA 523), footnote 679.
38! See Rejoinder on the Merits (RA 524), para. 629.
382 Comments of the Argentine Republic on Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief (RA 529), para. 146.

120

321.

322.

323.

Necessity must be construed strictly and objectively, not as an easy escape
hatch for host states wishing to avoid treaty obligations which prove difficult.
In this connection, [Argentina] has failed to meet its burden to demonstrate
three key elements of ILC Articles 25 and 27: (i) that the wrongful act was the
only way to safeguard Argentina’s essential interest under Article 25(1)(a); (ii)
that [Argentina] did not contribute to the situation of necessity; and (iii) that
[Argentina did not return to the status quo when possible, or compensate
Claimants for damage suffered as a result of the relevant measures.**?

Elaborating upon its reasons, the Tribunal made the following comments:

1172. The Tribunal does not call into question [Argentina’s] good faith in
asserting that the tariff freeze was enacted to safeguard the country’s vital
interests, such as protecting of Argentina’s indigent population (Respondent’s
Post Hearing Reply on the Merits at paragraph 148). However, regardless of
whether the Emergency Measures related to the concession did much to affect
the macro-economic conditions in Argentina, the Tribunal is not convinced that
those measures, as presented and explained in these proceedings, were the only
means by which [Argentina] could have protected its public interests.

1173. Equally as important, the Tribunal has difficulty finding that [Argentina]
did not contribute to the situation which produced the 2001 crisis. Quite
significantly, in May 2002 the then President of the Argentine Republic, Mr
Eduardo Duhalde, affirmed in The Washington Post that, “[O]ur crisis is
homegrown — made in Argentina, by Argentines”. See Claimants’ Post
Hearing Brief on Merits at paragraph 167 and Exhibit CL-35. Although
external factors may have aggravated the economic turmoil, Argentina’s
contribution to its economic situation is clear or was far from negligible.

In paragraphs 1174-1176, the Tribunal discussed further the nature of Argentina’s
contribution to the emergency, referring to the Argentine Government’s continued failure to
achieve primary surpluses sufficient to stop an unsustainable debt ratio (para. 1174), the fixed
exchange regime, policies which decreased employer contributions to the social security

scheme and increases in public spending (para. 1175) and concluding (para. 1176) that —

Although it is not for this Tribunal to opine acceptable or unacceptable
economic risks as a general matter, the duty to consider the State of Necessity
Defense raised by [Argentina] requires the Tribunal to take note of the role
played by [Argentina] in bringing about its own economic adversity.

The Tribunal then turned to the duration of any state of necessity. It held that —
383

Award, para. 1171.

121

324.

325.

326.

1177. Finally, even if [Argentina’s] conduct might be excused under the State
of Necessity Defense, [Argentina] remains obligated to return to the pre-
necessity status quo when possible. Moreover, the successful invocation of the
necessity defense does not per se preclude payment of compensation to the
injured investor for any damage suffered as a result of the necessity measures
enacted by the State.

1178. The Tribunal considers that, at some reasonable point in time,
[Argentina] should have compensated Claimants for injury suffered as a result
of measures enacted during any arguable period of necessity in late December
2001. As mentioned earlier, ILC Draft Article 27 provides that “[t]he
invocation of a circumstance precluding wrongfulness [is without prejudice to]
compliance with the obligation in question, if and to the extent that the
circumstance precluding wrongfulness no longer exists”.

The Tribunal considered that Argentina had failed to restore compliance once it had become
possible to do so, as there had been no increase in tariffs until more than three years had

elapsed and the Claimants had sold their interests in an attempt to mitigate damages. ***

Finally, the Tribunal observed that eight other tribunals had rejected Argentina’s necessity
defence under Article 25 and that the only two tribunals to have upheld a state of necessity

defence had done so by invoking Article XI of the Argentina-USA BIT.**>

Argentina attacks this part of the Award as a failure to apply the applicable law, thus
entailing a manifest excess of powers, and for a failure to state the reasons on which the
Award was based. In doing so, it relies heavily upon the decision of the Enron Committee,
maintaining that the Tribunal in the present case fell into the same error in respect of its
findings on “only way” and “contribution” that had led to the annulment of the award in
Enron. Argentina also contends that the Tribunal invented the requirement of restoring the

status quo.

At the outset, three points require emphasis. First, the three findings by the Tribunal —
namely, that the measures adopted were not the only means by which Argentina might have
responded to the crisis, that Argentina had itself contributed to the economic crisis, and that

Argentina had failed to take steps to restore the status quo or compensate the Claimants once

384 Award, paras, 1179-1180.
385 Award, para. 1181.

122

327.

328.

329.

330.

it became possible to do so — have to be considered together. The question before the
Tribunal, at this point in the Award, was whether Argentina could successfully rely upon the
customary law defence of necessity in order to preclude the wrongfulness of its acts. The
Tribunal considered that Argentina could not do so, because it had failed to discharge its

burden in relation to each of these three requirements.

Secondly, there can be no doubt that the Tribunal did make clear findings in respect of each
of these matters. There is no scope here for the Committee to arrive at the conclusion
reached by the Enron Committee that it is unclear whether the Tribunal made any finding at
all. Nor, again in contrast to the Enron case, did the Tribunal simply adopt the evidence of an

expert as to economic matters and treat that as conclusive of a legal question.

Lastly, it is again important to recall that the standard on annulment is not whether a tribunal
applied the applicable law correctly, but whether it applied it at all, and not whether its
reasons are persuasive but whether they explain the basis on which the tribunal arrived at its

conclusions.

The Committee considers that there is no doubt that the Tribunal applied the customary
international law of necessity. The first two tests which it applied - whether the measures
taken by Argentina were the only means to address the crisis and whether Argentina had
contributed to its own economic plight — not only feature in Article 25 of the ILC Articles but
also in all contemporary discussion of necessity and were expressly identified by Argentina
(as well as the Claimants) as key issues for decision.**° The fact that the Tribunal’s reasoning
on these points was concise cannot, in the Committee’s opinion, amount to a failure to apply
the law and thus a manifest excess of powers. In that regard, the Committee respectfully

differs from the approach of the Enron Committee and prefers that of the CMS Committee.**”

The third requirement, namely to restore the status quo or compensate the Claimants, requires
more discussion. That requirement, which the Committee derived from Article 27 of the ILC
Articles, had not been the subject of such detailed argument by Argentina (although it had
been raised by the Claimants). Nevertheless, the Committee cannot accept that it was
“invented” by the Tribunal. The Tribunal’s analysis on this point seems to the Committee to

38 See para. 319, above.
58 See para. 297, above, quoting para. 136 of the CMS Decision, note 218, above.

123

331.

332.

333.

reflect what is inherent in the very concept of necessity. If a departure from a legal
obligation can be justified by a state of necessity, it can be justified for only so long as that
state of necessity exists. That limitation is clearly stated in the correspondence between the
British and United States Governments in the Caroline case, which is generally regarded as a
critical instance of State practice leading to the development of the modern law of
necessity.*** Moreover, the Committee observes that the Tribunal’s finding on this point was
obiter, since the Tribunal had already found that Argentina was not entitled to rely upon the

defence of necessity in any event.

Finally, the Committee considers that the Tribunal cannot be faulted for having approached
this part of the case on the basis that the burden was on Argentina to establish that its conduct

satisfied the requirements of customary law, as it is for the Party which seeks to rely upon a

 

defence to establish that its conduct satis

 

es the requirements of the law for the application of

that defence.

Accordingly, the Committee rejects the argument that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its

powers.

The Committee therefore turns to the question whether the Tribunal failed adequately to state
the reasons for its decision. The Tribunal’s reasoning on each of the three issues on which it
held that Argentina had failed to establish its case —- namely whether the emergency measures
adopted were the “only means” by which Argentina could have protected its essential
interests, whether Argentina had contributed to the emergency in which it found itself and
whether Argentina should have restored the status quo after the immediate emergency had
passed or paid compensation — is concise. Relying, in particular, on the Enron Committee’s
decision, Argentina is critical of this brevity. It points, for example, to the fact that the
Tribunal’s findings on the “only means” issue are set out in a single paragraph which gives
no indication of any alternative means which might have been available and states simply

that “the Tribunal is not convinced that those measures, as presented and explained in these

388 See Crawford, State Responsibility: The General Part (Cambridge, 2013), p. 310 and the correspondence
between the British and United States Governments quoted therein.

  

124

334.

335.

proceedings, were the only means by which [Argentina] could have protected its public

interests.”3°°

That brevity must, however, be seen in context. As the Committee has already explained, the
question which the Tribunal was required to answer was whether or not Argentina could
successfully rely upon the customary law defence of necessity in order to preclude the
wrongfulness of its acts. The burden was on Argentina to establish that it could do so. The
Tribunal found that it had failed to discharge that burden. It gave two principal reasons for
that decision. Those reasons were, first, that it was not convinced that the measures adopted
satisfied the “only means” requirement; and secondly, that it was not convinced that
Argentina had not contributed to the emergency. It added that, even if — contrary to its
principal conclusion — Argentina had satisfied it on those two points, it would still have been
unable to rely upon the defence of necessity in respect of its failure either to restore the status
quo or pay compensation once the state of necessity had come to an end. A reader would
have no difficulty following this line of reasoning (whether or not they were persuaded by it).
While each of the reasons on which the Tribunal based its conclusion regarding necessity
might have been more fully explained, a tribunal is required only to state the reasons for its

decision, not to give reasons for each and every one of those reasons.*””

Moreover, the part of the Award in which the Tribunal set out its decision on necessity
(paras. 1163-1181) has to be read together with the earlier section (paras. 493-592) in which
it reviews the arguments of the Parties and summarises the evidence before it. It is clear, for
example, if one reads paragraph 1172 together with paragraphs 530-556 that the Tribunal’s
finding regarding the “only means” reason did not come out of the blue but was based upon a
careful analysis of the evidence before it regarding whether other avenues had been open to
Argentina. The Committee understands the point, made by the Enron Committee, that the
concept of “only means” is open to more than one interpretation but it notes that other courts
and tribunals have found it unnecessary to elaborate upon those interpretations in reaching a
conclusion regarding whether the measures before them were the only means open to the
party claiming necessity. The International Court of Justice, for example, did not elaborate

upon the meaning of this requirement in its judgment in Gabcikovo-Nagymaros

389 Award, para. 1172.
3% See Soufraki, note 58, above, para. 131 and Enron, note 217, above, para. 222.

125

336.

337.

338.

(Hungary/Slovakia)*! or in its advisory opinion in Legal Consequences of the Construction
of a Wall in the Palestinian Occupied Territory.** In the light of the principle that necessity
is an exceptional plea which must be strictly applied (a principle expressly stated in
paragraph 1171 of the Award), one leading commentary on the law of State responsibility
observes succinctly that “here ‘only’ means ‘only’; it is not enough if another lawful means is

more expensive or less convenient”.*”?

Having examined both the finding of the Tribunal and its analysis of the evidence, the
Committee considers that it is implicit in the reasoning of the Tribunal in the present case that
the Tribunal considered that, whatever test was applied, the evidence submitted by Argentina
failed to establish that the measures which it had taken were the only means of protecting its
essential interests in the face of the economic crisis. Since even the Enron Committee
accepted that it was sufficient that reasons be implicit, the Committee concludes that there
was no failure to state reasons on this point. The same applies to the Tribunal’s findings
regarding Argentina’s contribution to the crisis and the failure to restore the status quo or pay
compensation. Accordingly, the Committee rejects Argentina’s argument that the Tribunal

failed to state reasons for this part of the Award.

Lastly, and in the event that Argentina is raising a challenge under Article 52(1)(d) of the
ICSID Convention,** the Committee concludes that there is nothing in the record to suggest
that the Tribunal was guilty of a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure in

relation to this part of the Award.

VII. Failure to Address Evidence

A. The Issues Raised by Argentina

Argentina also seeks the annulment of the Award on account of what it describes as the
failure of the Tribunal to consider “fundamental evidence ... which could have had a decisive

influence” on the outcome of the case.**° This ground relates to (a) evidence tendered by

3! LCJ. Reports 1997, pp. 44-45, para. 56.
32 C.J, Reports 2004, p. 195, para. 140.
33 Note 388, p. 311.

34 See para. 316and footnote 376, above.
3°5 Memorial, para. 113.

126

339.

340.

Argentina regarding the criticism of EDF and EDFI’s management and global investment
strategy and (b) the evidence given under cross-examination by Engineer Neme (a witness
called by the Claimants but who had been involved on behalf of the Province of Mendoza in
the privatisation of electricity provision) concerning the link between the Currency Clause in
the Concession and the Argentine Convertibility Law regarding convertibility between the
Argentine peso and the United States dollar. Argentina maintains that the failure of the
Tribunal to consider this evidence is cause for annulment on the ground of (i) manifest excess
of powers (Article 52(1)(b) of the Convention), (ii) failure to state the reasons on which the
Award was based (Article 52(1)(e)), and (iii) serious departure from a fundamental rule of

procedure (Article 52(1)(d)).
B. Parties’ Arguments

1. Argentina

Argentina’s first complaint concerns the failure of the Tribunal to mention a number of
reports from French State entities (notably the National Assembly Investigation Committee
on the Management of State-Owned Companies and the Court of Audit) on the management
of EDF. These reports were highly critical of EDF’s investments in certain parts of the world
and blamed EDF management for poor investment decisions. *°° According to Argentina,
they demonstrated that the investment in Argentina had been a bad decision and that EDF

withdrew from Argentina in 2005 for reasons unconnected with the emergency measures.

The second point raised by Argentina concerns the response given by Engineer Neme to
questions from Argentina’s counsel regarding the scope and purpose of the Currency Clause
in the Concession. Engineer Neme had said that when the Concession was drafted, no-one
had contemplated that the peso would cease to be convertible, although they did envisage that
the exchange rate might alter. He added that, had anyone contemplated the possibility of an
end to convertibility, he doubted that the Currency Clause would have been included. *°”

According to Argentina, this testimony was “conclusive evidence submitted by Claimants

3° Memorial, paras. 113-119; Reply, para. 72.
387 Hearing on the Merits, English Transcript, Day 3, pp. 942-943, excerpted in Memorial, para. 131.

127

341.

342.

343.

that the reference to the calculation in U.S. dollars would never have been conceived to be

applied within the framework of the abandonment of convertibility”.***

Neither the French State reports, nor the evidence of Engineer Neme, is referred to by the

Tribunal in its Award.

Argentina makes clear that it does not seek annulment on the ground that the Tribunal should
have given weight to these two pieces of evidence but only on the ground that the Tribunal
should not have ignored them.*” It maintains that, by doing so, the Tribunal made three
errors. First, it failed to deal with all of the questions submitted to it by the Parties, thereby
contravening Article 48(3) of the Convention which requires a tribunal to deal with every
question submitted to it. As was demonstrated by the decision of the ad hoc committee in
Amco I*° and confirmed by the leading commentary on the Convention,*! such a failure can
amount to a manifest excess of powers. Secondly, the absence of any discussion of these
items of evidence meant that there was a failure on the part of the Tribunal to state the
reasons on which the Award was based. Lastly, by failing to consider or evaluate evidence
which was “a central part of [Argentina’s] defense”, the Tribunal was guilty of a serious

departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.*°”

2. The Claimants

The Claimants maintain that there was no annullable error in the Tribunal’s handling of the
evidence. Although a tribunal has a duty to deal with every question that was submitted to it,
it is not obliged to deal expressly with each argument or piece of evidence put before it in
respect of each question.*°? It was for the Tribunal to decide upon the admissibility and
probative weight of each item of evidence put before it.4°* The Tribunal had carefully
analysed and evaluated all the evidence put to it and had decided all of the questions
submitted by the Parties. The Claimants therefore maintain that the Tribunal’s reasoning was

clear and met the requirements of Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention. They therefore

3°8 Memorial, para. 132.

3 Reply, paras. 77-78.

“0 Amco Asia Corporation and Others v. Indonesia (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1), Decision on Annulment of
16 May 1986, para. 32, 1 ICSID Reports 509 (“Amco 1”).

401 Schreuer, Commentary, note 53, above, pp. 816-817, para. 47.

#2 Reply, para. 74. See also Transcript, pp. 40-54.

“3 Counter-Memorial, paras. 184-190; Rejoinder, paras. 70-74.

“4 Counter-Memorial, para. 184; Rejoinder, para. 70.

128

344.

345.

346.

contend that there was no excess of powers, failure to state reasons or departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure.
C. Committee’s Decision

Although Argentina raises three separate grounds for annulment in respect of the Tribunal’s
handling of the evidence, these are closely related, as is shown by the decisions of the Amco I

and Kléckner I Committees, to which Argentina refers.45

With regard to Argentina’s claim that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers, the
Committee accepts that a failure on the part of a tribunal to decide one or more of the
questions submitted to it by the Parties could constitute such an excess (just as a failure to
exercise jurisdiction is capable of amounting to an excess of powers),*°° although it notes that
the principal remedy in such a case appears to lie in an application for a supplementary

decision under Article 49, rather than for annulment under Article 52(1)(b).4°”

Nevertheless, Article 48(3) requires only that a tribunal decide every question submitted to it.
A “question” within the meaning of Article 48(3) is an issue which must be decided in order
to determine all aspects of the rights and liabilities of the parties relevant to the case in hand.
In making its case in relation to such a question, a party may advance several distinct
arguments and refer to one or more items of evidence and legal authorities in support thereof.
A tribunal is not required to rule separately on each argument of law or point of fact on which
the parties are in disagreement, so long as it decides the question to which those arguments
relate. What does, or does not, constitute a question that has to be decided is an objective
matter and not one which can be shaped by the way in which a party chooses to put its case

or the emphasis which it places on any particular point.*°

“65 Ameo I, note 400, above, para. 32; Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH v. Cameroon (ICSID Case No. ARB
81/2), Decision on Annulment of 3 May 1985, para. 115, 2 ICSID Reports 95.

406 See Vivendi I, note 70, above, para. 86.

407 See Schreuer, Commentary, note 53, above, p. 816, para. 43 and Wena Hotels, note 210, para. 75. A
proposal to make the failure to decide every question a separate ground for annulment was rejected (History of
the ICSID Convention, vol. Il, pp. 848-849).

#8 The ad hoc committee in CDC, note 156, above, para. 57, made the point that the terminology used by a
party could not define the question the tribunal was obliged to answer; “the Tribunal was required to answer a
legal question, or to put it another way, come to a conclusion about the Parties’ rights and liabilities”.

129

347.

348.

349.

The reports of the various French State bodies regarding the management of EDF and EDFI
constituted part of the evidence put forward by Argentina in support of an argument that the
Claimants were partly to blame for their own predicament and that they divested themselves
of their participation in SODEMSA for reasons that had nothing to do with the emergency
measures but rather reflected a changed investment strategy in light of the criticism of the
management made in those reports. The significance of that evidence was not a question in
its own right but merely one of the factors put forward by one Party in support of its
arguments. The Tribunal rejected the argument that the rights and liabilities of the Parties
were affected by the quality of EDF’s decision to invest.*” As such, the Tribunal decided the
question submitted to it and was not obliged to mention all of the evidence which had been

put forward.

The same is true of the evidence of Engineer Neme. The answers given by Engineer Neme in
cross-examination suggested that the Province of Mendoza had not approached the Currency
Clause with a view to its application in the event of the convertibility of the peso being
ended. That evidence was, however, only part of the evidence invoked by Argentina in
support of an argument that the Currency Clause was tied to the continuation of the
Convertibility Law and therefore did not apply to measures taken after the peso ceased to be
convertible. In other words, the question which the Tribunal had to decide was whether, in
light of all that evidence, the Currency Clause was or was not applicable when the peso
ceased to be convertible in January 2002. The Tribunal considered that issue at some length
in paragraphs 943-969 of the Award and rejected Argentina’s interpretation of the Currency
Clause (see, in particular, paragraphs 953 and 958-960). It therefore decided the question
which had to be determined in order to arrive at a conclusion as to the rights and liabilities of
the Parties. Accordingly, the Committee considers that the Tribunal was not guilty of an

excess of powers.

The same reasoning must also lead the Committee to reject Argentina’s argument that the
Award should be annulled for failure to state the reasons on which it was based. As the
Committee has already explained, the requirement to state reasons is limited in scope. So

long as a reader can follow the reasoning in the Award, the fact that it does not deal with each

“9 Award, paras, 992-993; see also paras 1223-1229.

130

350.

351.

352.

authority or every item of evidence is immaterial.*!? The fact that the Tribunal did not find it
necessary to deal with Engineer Neme’s evidence as to what was or was not within the
contemplation of the Mendoza authorities at the time of the drafting of the Concession is not,
therefore, a failure to comply with the requirement of Article 48(3) or grounds for annulment

under Article 52(1)(e).

Nor does the Committee consider that there was a serious departure from a fundamental rule
of procedure. Of course a tribunal must comply with the rules of due process +!! and those
include the duty to afford the parties an equal opportunity to present their case, to call
witnesses and to cross-examine the witnesses of the other party. That does not, however,
require a tribunal to discuss any particular item of evidence in detail, or at all, where it is not
necessary to do so in order to decide the questions before it. Article 52(1)(d) of the
Convention cannot be used to impose a duty to give reasons which goes beyond the duty
already set out in Article 48(3) and given effect, in the context of annulment, by Article

52(1)(e).

The Committee therefore rejects Argentina’s application for annulment on the basis of an

alleged failure to consider certain evidence.

IX. Causation and Damages

A. The Issues Raised by Respondent

Finally, Argentina seeks the annulment of the Award on the grounds that, in assessing the
damages payable in respect of the breaches which it identified, (i) the Tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers by failing to apply the applicable law, (ii) failed to state the reasons on
which this part of the Award was based, and (iii) was guilty of a serious departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure.

41° See the authorities cited in paras. 194 to 198, above and, in particular, Enron, note 217, above, para. 222.
411 See paras. 199 to 200, above.

131

353.

354.

355.

356.

357.

B. Parties’ Arguments

1. Argentina

Argentina maintains that the Tribunal relied exclusively on the evidence of the Claimants’
valuation experts (LECG), without properly considering the fact that their methodology had
been challenged by Argentina and its experts (MBG).*!* Argentina alleges, in particular, that

the Tribunal committed the following errors.

First, it ignored what Argentina characterises as serious flaws in LECG’s macroeconomic
analysis and, in particular, LECG’s assumption that if there had been an increase in tariffs
after the start of the emergency, that would not have resulted in a sharp drop in demand for
electricity, thefts and failures to collect payment from customers. Argentina contends that it
challenged these assumptions on the part of LECG but that the Tribunal ignored its counter-

arguments.*!?

Secondly, Argentina points to the fact that, in rejecting Argentina’s argument that by
December 2001 EDEMSA had no value, the Tribunal relied on the ratings given to EDEMSA
at that time by the credit ratings agencies and ignored Argentina’s argument that the

agencies’ methodologies were flawed and their rating unreliable as an indicator of value.*!*

Thirdly, according to Argentina, LECG failed to take proper account of the debt accrued by
EDEMSA between the date of the Claimants making their investment in 1998 and the end of
2001 and the Tribunal failed to address this criticism of the LECG Report.*!>

Lastly, Argentina maintains that the Tribunal awarded over US$ 2 million in respect of pre-

emergency measures notwithstanding its comment that the Claimants’ expert reports “took a

significant number of twists and turns in this respect”,*!® and took account of contractual

issues which were not assessed even by the Claimants.*!”

“12 Memorial, paras. 181-187; Reply, paras. 133-156.
“13 Memorial, para. 183-185.

414 Memorial, para. 186.

“15 Memorial, para. 187.

16 Award, para. 1321.

+17 Memorial, para. 188.

132

358.

359.

360.

361.

In addition, Argentina maintains that the Tribunal committed a manifest excess of powers by
failing to apply the law applicable to determining the standard of compensation in respect of
a breach of the requirement of fair and equitable treatment. According to Argentina, the
Tribunal took as the standard the “genuine value” standard provided for by Article 5(2) of the
Argentina-France BIT in respect of expropriation, without explaining how that standard
could be applied to a case in which the allegation of expropriation had been rejected.*!* In
doing so, the Tribunal ignored the distinction between primary and secondary rules and failed

to apply the international law standard of reparation for unfair or inequitable treatment.*!”

Argentina also criticises the Tribunal for taking the value of the Claimants’ investment in
EDEMSA as at 1998 when the Tribunal had itself accepted that the appropriate date was 31
December 2001, thereby requiring Argentina to compensate the Claimants for losses suffered
as a result of the changed economic conditions in the country, as well as for those caused by

the emergency measures.*”°

With regard to the Claimants’ duty to mitigate their loss, Argentina accuses the Tribunal of
having accepted the principle but then failing properly to apply it. The Claimants had sold
their share in EDEMSA in March 2005, shortly before the revision of tariffs, for US$ 2
million to IADESA. IADESA had then resold the shares in 2007 for a much higher price.
Although the Tribunal had accepted that damages had to be reduced to take account of the
difference between the 2005 and 2007 sale prices, it had without explanation reduced that

difference by 50% and then applied a discount to arrive at a 2001 price.*7!

Finally, Argentina maintains that the Tribunal reversed the burden of proof by holding that
Argentina had failed to offer any convincing explanation as to why the official valuation
figure of 1998 should be used as the basis for valuation rather than the amount actually paid
by the Claimants, whereas the burden was on the Claimants to justify the figure which they

asserted should be used as the basis of valuation.47?

+18 Memorial, paras. 189-193.

419 In this respect, Argentina pointed in particular to the award in Lemire v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No.
ARB/06/18), Award of 28 March 2011, paras. 148-149. See Reply, para. 151.

+20 Memorial, para. 194.

+21 Memorial, para. 196.

+22 Memorial, para. 197.

133

362.

363.

364.

365.

2. The Claimants

The Claimants contend that Argentina’s complaints are no more than a reflection of its
disappointment that the Tribunal rejected its preferred methodology for calculating
compensation and do not point to any annullable error.*??_ They point to authorities which

show that a tribunal enjoys a broad discretion in relation to the assessment of

4

compensation **4 and to a series of awards which had adopted the same approach to

compensation for unfair or inequitable treatment as that taken by the Tribunal.*?°

According to the Claimants, the Tribunal carefully analysed both the Claimants’ and
Argentina’s experts’ reports and gave reasons for preferring the analysis of LECG to that of
Argentina’s expert (MBG).*?° The Claimants cite the observation of the Vivendi II

Committee that

... a Tribunal may rely in this connection on expert and other testimony with
which it agrees and may disregard other testimony. That is one of its principal
tasks; cf also [Arbitration] Rule 34. It is generally accepted that a Tribunal has
in these matters substantial discretion and does not need to explain expert
views. ... where a Tribunal agrees with one of the parties or with experts, it is
not improper or unexpected for it to adopt the language used by them in the
pleadings or in written testimony.*?’

With regard to mitigation of loss, the Claimants maintain that the Tribunal agreed with

Argentina and substantially reduced the Claimants’ damages accordingly.*”

The Claimants deny that the Tribunal exceeded its powers, failed to state the reasons on
which this part of the Award was based or committed a serious departure from a fundamental

tule of procedure.

“23 Counter-Memorial, para. 197.

4 In particular, the decision of the ad hoc committee in Impregilo SpA v. Argentina (ICSID Case No. 07/17),
Decision on annulment of 24 January 2014 (“Impregilo”), para. 160.

5 In particular, Ron Fuchs v. Georgia (ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/15), Award of 3 March 2010, paras. 532-537.
“26 Counter-Memorial, paras. 197-205.

2” Vivendi I, note 102, above, para. 249.

“28 Counter-Memorial, paras. 114-117; Rejoinder, para. 134.

134

366.

C. Committee’s Decision

Unsurprisingly, given the nature of the case before it, the part of the Award which deals with
the issue of damages is complex. In paragraphs 593-877, the Tribunal reviews in detail the
arguments of the Parties. Its own analysis and findings are set out at paragraphs 1182-1336.
Before considering Argentina’s challenge to that part of the Award, the Committee considers

it useful to set out the Tribunal’s own summary of its findings. The Tribunal held:

1182. Given the number of moving parts in determining quantum, the
Tribunal sets forth the following road map of its computation, with details and
justification included later in this section of the Award.

Claimants Total Damages as of December 2001

Damages caused by Emergency Measures US$ 133,635,633
Damages caused by Pre-Emergency Measures US$ 2,502,797
Total Damages as of 31 December 2001 US$ 136,138,430

1183. In calculating the quantum of damages, the Tribunal has generally
adopted the LECG model as follows, taking 31 December 2001 as the
valuation date.

(i) Damages caused by the Emergency Measures will be calculated as the
difference between two values: the value of Claimants’ stake in EDEMSA
under a scenario free of the Emergency Measures (“but for” scenario) and the
value of the same stake under a scenario with the Emergency Measures
(“actual” scenario), taking 31 December 2001 as the valuation date.

(ii) The “but for” value (EDEMSA in the absence of the Emergency
Measures) determined by DCF #29 method discounted as of 31 December 2001;

(iii) | From that amount the Tribunal subtracts the amount which should
reasonably have been received by the Claimants in the 2005 sale of its
EDEMSA shares discounted to 31 December 2001;

(iv) To that amount, the Tribunal adds damages attributable to Pre-
Emergency Measures, again valued as of 31 December 2001.

1184. Following this three-step approach yields figures as follows:
#9 Discounted Cash Flow.

135

Step 1: DCF calculation of Claimants’ investments in the absence of the Emergency
Measures as of 31 December 2001

Firm value (Discount rate, WACC “° 11.34%) US$ 448,855,587

Financial Debt (Dec 2001 book value) US$ (119,644,020)
Equity Value US$ 329,211,567
Value of Claimants’ Investment in EDEMSA

(44.88% share) US$ 147,750,151

Step 2: Subtracting price which might reasonably have been received in the 2005
sale valued as of 31 December 2001

Value of Claimants’ Investment in EDEMSA US$ 147,750,151
2005 Sale discounted to 31 December 2001 US$ 14,114,518
Total damages caused by Emergency Measures US$ 133,635,633
Step 3: Inclusion of Pre-Emergency Damages US$ 2,502,797.00
Total: US$ 136,138,430

367. The Committee also considers it important to recall the limits which the annulment process
necessarily imposes upon its task in considering this aspect of the case. Those limits were

aptly summed up by the Jmpregilo Committee in the following terms:

The Committee cannot review de novo the facts, evidence and criteria used by
the Tribunal in assessing the damages nor the amount of compensation
awarded to Impregilo. It is clear that Argentina disagrees with the causal
connection found by the Tribunal between the damages and the disputed
measures; that it considers that there was a gap in the analysis of causation and
that the evidence produced should have resulted in a different compensation;
and that it disagrees with the interpretation by the Tribunal of the applicable
law in the assessment of the damages. However, a disagreement with the
analysis of the Tribunal as to causation, or with respect to the assessment of the
evidence or the interpretation of the law does not constitute ground for
annulment under Article 52. ... Of course, the assessment of damages cannot
be arbitrary, but a Tribunal’s determination of the amount of compensation
allows for a high level of discretion and a disagreement with the criteria used
by the Tribunal cannot be a ground for annulment of an award.**!

439 Weighted Average Cost of Capital.
“51 Impregilo, note 424, above, para. 160.

136

368.

369.

370.

That is not to say that an award cannot be annulled on the basis of the tribunal’s treatment of
the issue of damages. As the last sentence of the passage from Jmpregilo quoted above
makes clear, assessment of damages cannot be arbitrary. If a tribunal, in assessing damages,
manifestly exceeds its powers by failing to apply (as opposed to arguably misapplying) the
applicable law, fails to state the reasons on which its award is based, or is guilty of a serious
departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, then the award can be annulled and awards
have been annulled on account of such errors in the treatment of damages. Nevertheless,
criticisms of the way in which the tribunal has applied the law or disagreements with its
handling of the evidence, the methodology selected, or its computation of damages — even if
well-founded — cannot lead to annulment. Nor is a tribunal required to address each point

raised in evidence in order to comply with the requirement to state reasons for its award.

With those considerations in mind, the Committee begins with what it regards as Argentina’s
most fundamental criticism of this part of the Award, namely that the Tribunal failed to apply
the applicable law in order to determine the standard of damages and thus manifestly
exceeded its powers. That criticism turns on paragraph 1210 of the Award, in which the
Tribunal, after noting that it had found that Argentina was responsible for denying the

Claimants fair and equitable treatment, said:

The fairest measure of damages for that breach would be the genuine value of
the investment. Such a standard has been recognized in Article 5 of the
Argentina-France BIT as the appropriate measure of compensation in cases of
dispossession. Article 4 [sic]*** of the Argentina-France BIT does not present
any alternative formulation for determining the valuation of a business
diminished by unfair or inequitable treatment. Consequently, the Tribunal
finds it appropriate to examine the value of EDEMSA had it not been reduced
by the Emergency Measures.

Since the Tribunal had already held that the Claimants had not been dispossessed, **
Argentina complains that this finding constitutes a manifest excess of power, because the
Tribunal applied the standard of compensation laid down for one type of breach to another,

quite different, one without any warrant for doing so.

432 Fair and equitable treatment is actually dealt with in Article 3.
53 Award, paras. 1113-1118.

137

371.

372.

373.

Paragraph 1210 must, however, be taken in context. The Tribunal did not simply take the
BIT standard of compensation for expropriation and apply it to a denial of fair and equitable
treatment without justification. It had already explained (in paragraph 1183 of the Award,
which is quoted in paragraph 366, above) that damages would be calculated on the basis of
the difference between the actual value of the Claimants’ investment in EDEMSA (i.e. after
the effect of the emergency measures) and the value which that investment would have had
“but for” the effect of those measures. That is no more than an application of the principle
that the purpose of damages is to place the injured party, as nearly as possible, in the position
which it would have occupied had the wrongful act not occurred. That principle is so well
established in international law ** as to require no discussion. There is no reason to think
that, as a matter of general principle, it does not apply to a denial of fair and equitable
treatment and nothing in the Argentina-France BIT requires a tribunal to apply a different
standard in such a case, as the Tribunal noted in paragraph 1210 of the Award. In the
Committee’s view, in selecting this standard as the basis for calculating damages, the
Tribunal correctly applied international law, which was the law applicable to determining the
consequences of a breach of treaty. Moreover, even if it were open to argument that the
Tribunal had misunderstood the relevant international law, that would have been a case of.
misapplication rather than non-application of the applicable law and would thus have entailed

no excess of powers within Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

The Committee therefore rejects the argument that, in determining the standard of
compensation the Tribunal committed a manifest excess of powers. It also rejects the
argument that there was a failure to state reasons on this point. Taken as a whole, this part of
the Award makes quite clear the basis on which damages were awarded. Nor can the
Committee see any basis here for a finding that there was a serious departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure.

Turning to the way in which the Tribunal applied the standard just set out and the
methodology it used to determine the actual and “but for” valuations, it is true that the
Tribunal generally adopted the approach set out in the LECG Report and rejected the
alternative methodology suggested by Argentina and MBG. The Committee cannot accept,

434 See, e.g., the Judgment of the Permanent Court of International Justice in the Factory at Chorzow, P.C.LJ.
Series A, No. 17, p. 47 and Article 36 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility and the commentary thereon.

138

374.

375.

376.

however, that the Tribunal did so uncritically, or that it failed to explain why it preferred one
approach to the other. On the contrary, paragraphs 1189-1208 of the Award explain — in
considerable detail — why the Tribunal considered that MBG’s methodology could not be
accepted. The Tribunal identified a number of specific flaws in MBG’s methodology. It then
stated that “‘the difficulties with the MBG models are further highlighted by the fact that said
experts of [Argentina] abandoned their earlier model” during the proceedings and “failed to
advance any principled reason for their willingness to abandon the assumptions and results
calculated in the merits phase”.**> It then went on, in paragraphs 1209-1222 (as well as in the
subsequent analysis), to show why it was relying upon the LECG approach and to verify

different aspects of that approach.

With regard to the four specific points made by Argentina (and summarised in paragraphs
354 to 357, above), the Committee would make the following observations. First, the
Tribunal explained (in paragraph 1191 of the Award) why it rejected Argentina’s argument
that a rise in the tariffs would have led to a dramatic drop in demand and its criticisms of the

macroeconomic assumptions in the LECG reports.

Secondly, the Tribunal explained (in paragraphs 1192 to 1197 of the Award) why, contrary to
the position advanced by Argentina, it considered that the credit agencies’ ratings of
EDEMSA were probative of the value of that company and thus of the Claimant’s
investment. It commented, in particular, on the fact that one agency, “Fitch”, had relied upon
the guaranteed cash flows to which EDEMSA was entitled under the Concession as a key
element in its high valuation in late 2001 and had removed those cash flows following the

emergency measures, when it gave EDEMSA a far lower rating.**°

Thirdly, contrary to what is suggested by Argentina, the Award shows that the debt burden
taken on by EDEMSA was taken into account in arriving at a valuation of the Claimants’
investment as of 31 December 2001, as the calculations in paragraph 1183 of the Award (set

out in paragraph 366, above) make clear.

“35 Award, paras. 1198 and 1200.
“86 Award, para. 1194.

139

377.

378.

379.

Lastly, the fact that the Tribunal found that the Claimants’ experts engaged in a number of
“twists and turns” in relation to quantification of the effect of the pre-emergency measures in

no way invalidates the Tribunals’ own analysis of this issue at paragraphs 1318-1323.

Of course, Argentina disagrees with the analysis of the Tribunal on all of these points and
disputes the reasoning it adopted and the evaluation it made of the different expert reports
but, as the Committee has already explained,*” that is not a basis on which the Committee

could annul the Award even if it agreed with every one of those criticisms.

Similarly, the Committee sees no basis for annulling the Award on the basis of the way in
which the Tribunal calculated the value of the Claimants’ investment or its approach to
causation. The essence of Argentina’s challenge on this point is that the Tribunal, having
accepted Argentina’s submission that the investment had to be valued as at 31 December
2001,*8 based its valuation on the price which the Claimants had paid in 1998. However, the
Tribunal did not take the 1998 price as the “but for” valuation but only as a starting point for

arriving at the “but for” figure. That is clear from the following passage in the Award:

1232. To determine genuine value one usually asks what a willing buyer
would have paid for a business as of a particular date, which in our case would
be the end of December 2001. For an electricity company, such a buyer would
look to revenue streams that might be generated and thus examine the local
tariff regulatory regime to see what cash might be expected. The buyer would
note that Article 43 of the Mendoza Provincial Electricity Law says that
investors receive a reasonable rate of return (una tasa de rentabilidad
razonable) on the amount invested. Since we do not have an actual investment
in December 2001, the next best starting point would be the amount actually
paid for the investment on which a reasonable return can be calculated.
Bidders normally determine their price as a function of forecasts of a project’s
viability in the light of variables which include projected revenue and costs.

1233. The willing buyer would also look at other aspects of the regulatory
framework. Provincial Decree 197/98 allow [sic] share capital to be increased
in an amount that reflects “the societies’ assets, the value of the concession
granted by the Province of Mendoza, determined by the proportional amount of
the willing economic bid of the tender,” Emphasis added.

3) See para. 367, above.
“38 Award, paras, 1183 and 1279.

140

380.

381.

382.

1234. Of course, the amount invested is not the end of the story. Other
elements have to be taken into consideration. Indeed, the method adopted by
the Tribunal has yielded a value of approximately $ 147 million, down from
the $ 209 million pro rata investment attributable to Claimants’ shares in
EDEMSA. For the sake of good order, the Tribunal again notes that
Claimants’ stake was 44.88% of the capital, and that the $ 237 million bid was
for 51% of EDEMSA Class “A” shares offered by the Province of Mendoza.

1235. In other words, the Tribunal has adopted a quantum of approximately
two-thirds (2/3) of the actual price paid.
There was, therefore, no contradiction between the decision that the “but for” valuation had
to be made as of 31 December 2001 and the way in which the Tribunal made use of the price
actually paid by the Claimants in 1998, nor has the Tribunal ignored factors (other than the
emergency measures) which came into being between 1998 and the end of 2001 and affected

the valuation.

The Committee also rejects Argentina’s criticism of the Tribunal for employing the actual
price paid, rather than the official valuation, as the starting point, as well as its allegation that
the Tribunal improperly reversed the burden of proof in this regard. The Tribunal explained
(in paragraphs 1213-1214 and in paragraphs 1227 and 1232-1234) why the price paid for the
investment was relevant to the valuation. That was because the Provincial law and the terms
of the Concession provided for a reasonable rate of return on the investment, so that (as
explained in paragraphs 1232-1233) a willing buyer would have taken account of the scale of
the investment in calculating the income stream which could reasonably be expected. That in
turn raised the question whether the reasonable rate of return was to be calculated on the
actual price paid by the investor or the official valuation at the time of bidding.
Unsurprisingly, Argentina preferred the latter (which was far smaller) and the Claimants the

former.

This part of Argentina’s case before the Committee centres on paragraph 1215 of the Award:

The Tribunal is unconvinced by [Argentina’s] assertion that Claimants’ return
should be limited to the official valuation amount. This finding is supported by
the fact that several sophisticated multinational companies also bid far in
excess of the valuation amount. Moreover, [Argentina] has failed to offer any
sound explanation as to why investors would have been willing to do that if the
return on their investment would be limited to the official valuation amount. In
the Tribunal’s view, no rational investor would have been willing to agree with

141

383.

384.

385.

such restriction, which would have rendered it impossible for the investor to
earn a return on its overall investment.

That paragraph has to be read in context. The Tribunal had already (in paragraphs 1213-
1214) given an indication that it was persuaded by the Claimants’ case that the actual price
was the basis for calculation of the reasonable rate of return. In paragraphs 1216-1218, the
Tribunal went on to explain why it considered that the language of the official valuation
decree, the way in which it was described to investors and the testimony of Argentina’s own
experts (in the case of Mr Bello, in the proceedings before the EDFI Tribunal, and, in the
case of Mr Quiroga, in another arbitration) supported the Claimants’ position. In paragraph
1215 it was showing that Argentina had advanced no explanation in support of its alternative
view. There is no reversal of proof in that. Nor was the Tribunal’s approach to this issue one

which could give rise to annulment on other grounds.

Lastly, the Committee considers that the Tribunal’s calculation of the “actual value” and its
approach to mitigation is not tainted by annullable error. The Claimants had asserted that the
actual value of their investment as of 31 December 2001 was US$ 2 million, the figure for
which they sold that investment to IADESA in March 2005. The Tribunal considered that
“in the absence of any tariff revision, perhaps the Tribunal might find that figure a reasonable
measure of the fair market value of EDEMSA in 2005”.4? However, the Tribunal considered
that, as the sale was made between shareholders in EDEMSA in the middle of a tariff
renegotiation procedure, each party to that transaction should have been aware of what was
going on and of the prospect of a tariff revision.*#° Moreover, it held that “it would be
patently unfair to allow Claimants to recover damages for loss that could have been avoided
by taking reasonable steps” and that “the injured party must be held responsible for its own

contribution to the loss”.4!

The Tribunal noted that IADESA sold the shareholding in EDEMSA which it had purchased
from the Claimants, together with its own 6.12% shareholding, in 2007 for US$ 60 million.44?

89 Award, para. 1287.
40 Award, para. 1298.
“41 Award, para. 1301.
“22 Award, para. 1300.

142

386.

387.

388.

On that basis, the Claimants’ shareholding was valued at US$ 52.8 million 443 in 2007 after
the tariff revision had taken place. The Tribunal determined that the actual value of the

Claimants’ investment as at March 2005 had to be greater than US$ 2 million. It held:

In determining the extent to which the share price should be deemed adjusted
(and thus damages should be reduced) the Tribunal looks to the background of
the renegotiation in course over the concession. A reasonable seller would try
to retain some of the possible benefits and, therefore, in arm’s-length
transactions a seller and a buyer would accept to partake any substantial
benefit. Absent any special circumstances, the Tribunal considers equitable to
impute to each of the parties an equal share of 50% in those potential benefits.
The buyer would still have enough incentives to buy and the seller would have
taken a reasonable step to minimize its losses.*+

In short, far from the 50% reduction being unexplained, as Argentina suggests, it was based
upon the Tribunal’s calculation of how, in an arm’s length transaction, a buyer and seller
might have approached the value of the shareholding knowing that a tariff increase was
possible but far from certain. Of course, one can argue over whether 50% is too large (or too
small) a reduction but it cannot be said to fall outside the scope of the Tribunal’s discretion to
calculate damages. Nor is the Tribunal’s figure one which is unexplained. In addition, the
Tribunal naturally discounted the price to arrive at a 2001 figure, something which was both
necessary and inevitable as the object of this part of the valuation was to determine what the

investment was actually worth at the critical date of 31 December 2001.

The Committee therefore rejects Argentina’s application to annul the Award under any or all
of Articles 52(1)(b), (d) and (e) in relation to the treatment of the damages and causation

issues.

X. Costs

The Committee turns, finally, to the question of costs. In accordance with Administrative
and Financial Regulation 14(3)(e), Argentina, as the Party seeking the annulment of the

Award, has been responsible to date for all of the advance payments required to cover the

“8 The Claimants’ shareholding in EDEMSA (44.88% of the total) had been 88% of the 51% shareholding
which IADESA owned after March 2005 and sold in 2007. 88% of US$ 60 million yields a figure of US$ 52.8
million.

“44 Award, para. 1311.

143

389.

390.

391.

costs of the Committee and the Centre. The Committee, however, has discretion, under
Article 61(2) of the Convention and the Rule 28 of the Arbitration Rules to apportion these
costs between the Parties. The Committee also has discretion to order that one Party bear all,

or part, of the costs incurred by the other Party in respect of its legal representation.

There is no general rule in ICSID proceedings that the losing party should pay the successful
party’s costs, nor is there even a presumption in favour of such an outcome. The decisions
of past ad hoc committees cannot be said to have given rise to a jurisprudence constante,
although they do suggest that committees have sometimes drawn a distinction between the
costs of the committee and of the Centre, on the one hand, and the costs of representation of
the parties on the other, with the unsuccessful party more frequently being required to pay the
whole of the former than to reimburse all or part of the latter. Some committees have also
suggested that a relevant consideration is whether or not the application for annulment was
made in good faith and whether it was so “fundamentally lacking in merit” that it was “to any

reasonable and impartial observer, most unlikely to succeed”.““®

The Committee has no hesitation in saying that it regards the request for annulment in the
present case as having been advanced in good faith and having been based on arguments that
were generally plausible. This is not a case in which the annulment application was
“fundamentally lacking in merit” and the fact that the Committee has dealt with Argentina’s
arguments at such length is an indication that it does not consider that they were doomed to

failure from the outset.

In these circumstances, but taking account of the fact that Argentina has been unsuccessful in
respect of all of the grounds on which it has sought annulment, the Committee considers that
it would be equitable to order that Argentina should bear the entire costs of the Committee

and the Centre but to leave each Party to meet its own costs of representation.

#5 Tn contrast to the position under Article 40 of the UNCITRAL Rules, under which the starting point is a
presumption that the unsuccessful party must bear the whole costs of the tribunal.

46 CDC, note 156, above, para. 89.

144

XI. Dispositif

392. For the reasons set forth in the foregoing paragraphs of this Decision, the Committee
unanimously decides:-

qd) to dismiss in its entirety the Application for Annulment of the Award of 11 June
2012 submitted by the Argentine Republic;

(2)

that the Argentine Republic shall bear the costs of the proceedings, comprising the

fees and expenses of the Members of the Committee, and the costs of the Centre; and

(3) that each Party shall bear its own legal costs and expenses.

145

[Signed] [Signed]

Prof. Teresa Cheng Prof. Yasuhei Taniguchi
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee
Date: 12/01/2016 Date: 15/01/2016
[Signed]

Sir Christopher Greenwood
President of the ad hoc Committee

Date: 08/01/2016

146

