INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp.
v.

Republic of Armenia

(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 2
DECISION ON THE RESPONDENT’S
APPLICATION FOR THE REMOVAL OF DR. TUMANOV

Members of the Tribunal
Ms. Melanie Van Leeuwen, President of the Tribunal
Ms. Ank Santens, Arbitrator
Professor Zachary Douglas QC, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Laura Bergamini

 

December 5, 2018

Table of Contents

I Introduction

 

Il. Procedural History

 

III. The Position of the Parties

 

A. — The Respondent’s Position
(1) Legal standard
(2) Application of the standard.

B. — The Claimants’ Position
(1) Legal standard
(2) Application of the standard.

IV. The Tribunal’s Analysis

 

A. Introduction

 

B. Legal Standard
(1) | The Hague Principles

 

(2) _ Principles established by the Fraport Committee

 

Cc. Analysis

V. Decision

 

 

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

Procedural Order No. 2

INTRODUCTION

This case concerns a dispute filed with the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID”) pursuant to the Treaty between the United States of America and the Republic
of Armenia concerning the reciprocal encouragement and protection of investment signed on
September 23, 1992, and the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States
and Nationals of Other States (the “ICSID Convention’).

The Claimants are Mr. Edmond Khudyan, a national of the United States of America (“US”), and
Arin Capital & Investment Corp., a corporation established under the laws of the State of California
in the US (collectively, the “Claimants”).

The Claimants are represented in these proceedings by Mr. James H. Boykin and Mr. Alexander
Bedrosyan of Hughes Hubbard & Reed LLP, in Washington D.C., US, and Dr. Gevorg Tumanov
of ELL Partnership, in Yerevan, Armenia.

The Respondent is the Republic of Armenia (the “Respondent” or “Armenia’”).

The Respondent is represented in this arbitration by Ms. Susanne Schwalb of CMS Hasche Sigle,
in Munich, Germany; Dr. Nicolas Wiegand, Dr. Mariel Dimsey, and Ms. Sanjna Pramod of CMS
Hasche Sigle in Hong Kong; and Dr. Aram Orbelyan, Ms. Lilit Karapetyan and Ms. Ani
Varderesyan of Concern Dialog Law Firm, in Yerevan, Armenia.

The Claimants and the Respondent are collectively referred to as the “Parties.”

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On September 18, 2017, ICSID received a Request for Arbitration, together with Exhibits CE-O1
through CE-19, from the Claimants initiating arbitration against the Respondent.

On September 27, 2017, the Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Request for Arbitration
pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention.

On March 15, 2018, the Tribunal was constituted in accordance with the method of constitution
agreed to by the Parties. Its members are: Ms. Melanie Van Leeuwen (Dutch), President, appointed
by the Parties; Ms. Ank Santens (Belgian), appointed by the Claimants; and Professor Zachary
Douglas QC (Australian), appointed by the Respondent.

On April 7, 2018, the Secretary of the Tribunal transmitted to the Parties a draft Procedural Order
No. | and a draft agenda in advance of the first session.

On April 19, 2018, the Parties jointly submitted their comments on the draft Procedural Order No.
1. In the revised draft the Claimants identified their representatives as follows: Mr. James H.

Boykin and Mr. Alexander Bedrosyan.

On April 22, 2018, the Parties jointly submitted a proposed timetable for the proceedings.

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

20.

Procedural Order No. 2

On April 24, 2018, the first session was held by telephone conference. The following persons
participated in the conference on behalf of the Parties:

Participating on behalf of the Claimants:
Mr. James H. Boykin, Hughes Hubbard & Reed LLP
Mr. Alexander Bedrosyan, Hughes Hubbard & Reed LLP

Participating on behalf of the Respondent:

Ms. Susanne Schwalb, CMS Hasche Sigle

Dr. Nicolas Wiegand, CMS Hasche Sigle, Hong Kong LLP
Dr. Mariel Dimsey, CMS Hasche Sigle, Hong Kong LLP
Ms. Sanjna Pramod, CMS Hasche Sigle, Hong Kong LLP

Dr. Aram Orbelyan, Concern Dialog Law Firm
Ms. Lilit Karapetyan, Concern Dialog Law Firm

By email of May 30, 2018, the Claimants updated the list of their representatives pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 18 and requested that Dr. Gevorg Tumanov of ELL Partnership be added as
counsel of record.

On May 31, 2018, the Secretary of the Tribunal transmitted to the Parties a revised draft Procedural
Order No. | including an updated list of the Parties’ representatives, along with draft timetables for
the proceedings.

On June 6, 2018, the Parties confirmed their agreement with the timetables annexed to the revised
draft Procedural Order No. 1.

On June 7, 2018, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. | providing inter alia directions on the
subsequent conduct of the arbitration.

By letter of June 27, 2018, the Respondent objected to the addition of Dr. Tumanov as counsel of
record for the Claimants, alleging that he had worked on the case while in the employment of the
Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Armenia. The Respondent further indicated that it had
approached the Claimants’ representatives to resolve the matter, and that Dr. Tumanov had denied
the existence of a conflict of interest. The Respondent requested that the Tribunal take the necessary
steps to resolve the matter and reserved the right to request Dr. Tumanov’s removal as counsel of
record.

On July 3, 2018, the Claimants responded to the Respondent’s letter of June 27, 2018. The
Claimants denied the existence of a conflict of interest and described Dr. Tumanov’s previous
involvement in the case, inter alia, by reference to a letter that had been dispatched to the
Respondent on June 13, 2018.

On July 12, 2018, the Respondent formally requested that the Tribunal proceed to the removal of
Dr. Tumanov as counsel of record and submitted Exhibit R-0001 as well as Legal Authorities
RL-0001 and RL-0002 (“Respondent’s Application”).

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

Til.

26.

27.

28.

Procedural Order No. 2

On July 20, 2018, the Claimants submitted the Memorial on Jurisdiction and the Merits, along with
the witness statements of Mr. Edmond Khudyan, Mr. Lernik Hovhannisyan, and Mr. Nikolay
Baghdasaryan, as well as Exhibits C-0001 through C-0131 and Legal Authorities CL-0001 through
CL-0081.

On July 27, 2018, the Claimants submitted their response to the Respondent’s Application, along
with a letter dated July 25, 2018 from Dr. Tumanov to the Tribunal and Legal Authority
CL-0082 (“Claimants’ Response”). The Claimants requested that the Tribunal deny the
Respondent’s Application.

On August 10, 2018, the Respondent responded to the Claimants’ Response and submitted Legal
Authorities RL-0003 through RL-0008 (““Respondent’s Reply”).

On August 17, 2018, the Claimants replied to the Respondent’s Reply and submitted a letter dated
August 15, 2018 from Dr. Tumanov to the Tribunal (““Claimants’ Rejoinder”).

This Decision sets out the Tribunal’s decision on the Respondent’s Application for the removal of
Dr. Tumanov as counsel of record for the Respondent.

THE POSITION OF THE PARTIES
The Respondent’s Position

The Respondent requests that the Tribunal order the removal of Dr. Gevorg Tumanov as counsel
of record in these proceedings.' It is the Respondent’s case that “Dr. Tumanov’s present
involvement as counsel for Claimants [...] constitutes a conflict of interest and makes a misuse of
the confidential information he obtained while being employed by the Armenian Government highly
likely.”?

The Respondent submits that Article 44 of the ICSID Convention confers upon the Tribunal the
power to rule on its Application, as part of the Tribunal’s duty to ensure the fair conduct of the
proceedings.*

(1) Legal standard

As to the standard to be applied, the Respondent accepts that the Tribunal be guided by the
principles established by the ad hoc Committee in the Fraport v. Philippines annulment
proceedings (“Fraport”).‘ In addition, the Respondent submits that the Tribunal may be guided by
the common general principles reflected in theRepublic of Armenia Law on Advocacy (the “Law
on Advocacy”), the Code of Attorney’s Ethics (the “Ethics Code”) and The Hague Principles on

Respondent’s Application, p. 3; Respondent's Reply, p. 10.
Respondent's Application, p. 3.

Respondent's Reply, p. 2 with reference to the decision in Fraport AG Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide
v. Republic of Philippines, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25 (Annulment Proceedings), Decision on Application
for Disqualification of Counsel, (September 18, 2008 (CL-0082), paras. 36-37.

Respondent's Reply, p. 2.

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

29.

30.

31.

Procedural Order No. 2

Ethical Standards for Counsel Appearing before International Courts and Tribunals, developed by
the International Law Society Study Group on the Practice and Procedure of International Tribunals
(the “Hague Principles”).° Although the Respondent recognizes that Dr. Tumanov is not registered
as an attorney with any bar association and that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to police
compliance with any specific set of deontological or ethical rules, the Respondent submits that the
Tribunal should take guidance from those regulations as they reflect “common general principles”
for conduct of counsel.° The Respondent further emphasizes that the Hague Principles “are the
only international principles prescribing an internationally accepted standard on the issue of
disqualification of counsel due to conflicts of interest in international courts or tribunals.”

The Respondent argues that under the Armenian Law on Advocacy and Ethics Code, as well as
under the Hague Principles, conflicts of interest preclude counsel from representing a new client in
proceedings to which a former client is a party, or in proceedings that are closely related.’ On that
basis, the Respondent submits that there is a common general principle that prevents counsel from
acting in case of conflicting interests, which principle — it contends — is “indispensable for the fair
conduct of the proceedings.” It is the Respondent’s case that this principle has been violated and
that therefore, the removal of Dr. Tumanov as counsel of record is imperative.?

The Respondent further notes that the standard for the disqualification set out by the ad hoc
Committee in Fraport was based on the existence of a “real risk” of disclosure of confidential
information obtained by the challenged lawyer during his/her representation of the former client,
and points out that the standard of “material risk” is similarly reflected in Article 4.2 of the Hague
Principles.'° Accordingly, the Respondent submits that the standard to be applied by the Tribunal
when deciding its Application to remove Dr. Tumanov is the following:

Whether there is a real risk that the lawyer representing a party against his/her
former client could have received confidential information from that client, which
may be of significance in the present proceedings, and which may accordingly
prejudice the fair conduct of the present proceedings.''

(2) Application of the standard

Applying this principle to the case at hand, the Respondent claims that there is a “real” or
“material” risk that Dr. Tumanov had access or was privy to the Respondent’s confidential
information, which is borne out by the following facts:

RL-0001, RL-0002 and RL-0008.

Respondent's Reply, pp. 2-3. See also, Fraport, paras. 40-41; Claimant’s Response, p. 3.
Respondent's Reply, pp. 3-4. See also, RL-0004, RL-0008.

Respondent’s Reply, p. 4.

Respondent's Reply, p. 4, quoting Fraport, para. 41.

Respondent's Reply, p. 5. See also, Fraport, para. 42.

Respondent's Reply, p. 5.

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

32.

33.

34.

Procedural Order No. 2

a. Dr. Tumanov held the position of Deputy Head of the Department of International Mutual
Legal Assistance and Foreign Relations of the Armenian Ministry of Justice throughout 2014
and remained in this position until September 2015;'?

b. Dr. Tumanov was a high ranking official within the Respondent’s Ministry of Justice for at
least one year, during which the present dispute was ongoing (from August 2014, when the
Ministry of Justice received the Claimants’ Notice of Dispute (also referred to as “Statement
of Claim’), until September 2015);

c. Dr. Tumanov prepared an internal memorandum in July 2015 in which, according to the
Respondent, Dr. Tumanov provided “a detailed overview of the alleged facts of the case, the
alleged ‘violations’ committed by State bodies and officials of Respondent, the purported
legal grounds for the treaty claim and a preliminary calculation of alleged damages.
Notably, the memorandum also includes a paragraph containing Dr. Tumanov’s tentative
views on the merits of the case.”'+ The Respondent did not submit a copy of the memorandum
(and neither did the Claimants).

The Respondent denies Dr. Tumanov’s statement that the memorandum was general in nature and
based solely upon the contents of the documents that the Claimants had sent to Armenia and
publicly available information. The Respondent insists that Dr. Tumanov, in his capacity of Deputy
Head of the Department of International Mutual Legal Assistance and Foreign Relations of the
Armenian Ministry of Justice has had access to all privileged information and potentially relevant
evidence that may be used by the Respondent in this arbitration. According to the Respondent, “it
is reasonable to assume” that Dr. Tumanov “would have further looked into the matter, discussed
it with other employees and engaged in fact-finding on Respondent's side.”'* It further argues that
it is implausible that Dr. Tumanov prepared the memorandum, which included Dr. Tumanov’s
tentative views on the merits of the case, without being privy to confidential information. As such
information “may be of significance” in the present proceedings, the Respondent claims that the
fair conduct of the proceedings is prejudiced.'°

The Respondent takes the position that it is not required to demonstrate that Dr. Tumanov actually
had access to confidential information and refutes Claimants’ criticism in this respect. Armenia
reiterates that the applicable standard merely requires a “real” or “material” risk that Dr. Tumanov
had access to confidential information, which — it argues — is in line with an attorney’s professional
obligations, pursuant to which “even the appearance of any conflict of interest should be actively
avoided.” "’ The Respondent submits that the standard is satisfied in the present case.

In addition, the Respondent contends that the Claimants’ invocation of the refusal of the ad hoc
Committee in Fraport to rely on a presumption of access to confidential information of the
challenged counsel as a basis for his disqualification, is inapposite because the facts of the Fraport

Respondent's letter to the Tribunal, dated June 27, 2018, p. 2.
Respondent's Reply, p. 7.

Respondent’s Application, p. 2. See also, Respondent’s Reply, p. 7.
Respondent's Application, p. 2.

Respondent's Reply, p. 8.

Respondent's Reply, pp. 6 and 8.

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

35.

36.

37.

38.

Procedural Order No. 2

must be distinguished from the facts of the present case.'* The Respondent emphasizes that in
Fraport the challenged counsel’s relationship with the former client did not extend beyond seven
days, the challenged counsel represented the allegedly opposite interests in two separate
arbitrations, and the challenged counsel did not receive any information other than case documents
from the ICC, which were common to both parties. By contrast, in the present case Dr. Tumanov
was a high-ranking employee of the Ministry of Justice during one year following the notification
of the claim to the State, he prepared an internal memorandum on the case and had internal
correspondence with the First Deputy Minister of Justice regarding that memorandum." The
Respondent claims that given his position within the Ministry of Justice, Dr. Tumanov’s
involvement in the case was “comparable to, if not more onerous than, a lawyer who is actively
engaged in the course of the retainer” because he would have had easier access to confidential
information than an external lawyer.”

Finally, the Respondent refutes the Claimants’ criticism to the effect that the Respondent failed to
address Dr. Tumanov’s representation of the Claimants in this dispute earlier. In that respect,
Armenia argues that the present arbitration only started in September 2017 and that Dr. Tumanov’s
role was only formalized on May 31, 2018, when the ICSID Secretariat was notified in accordance
with ICSID Arbitration Rule 18 that Dr. Tumanov should be added to the list of counsel,
representing the Claimants.”! The Respondent argues that prior to the Rule 18 designation it had
no avenue to challenge Dr. Tumanov’s involvement in the case, as the Tribunal does not have
jurisdiction to hear challenges to representatives of the Parties who are not counsel of record.”?

On the basis of the foregoing, the Respondent requests that the Tribunal order the removal of Dr.
Tumanov as Claimants’ counsel of record in these arbitral proceedings.

The Claimants’ Position

The Claimants do not contest that the Tribunal has the authority to rule on the challenge to Dr.
Tumanov and expressly accept to abide by the Tribunal’s decision.”*

(1) Legal standard

In respect of the applicable legal standard, the Claimants submit that the Tribunal should be guided
by the reasoning of the ad hoc Committee in Fraport, which is “the only publicly available decision
of an international tribunal ruling on a challenge to counsel based on that counsel’s prior
representation of the party raising the challenge.”* While the Respondent relies on the Fraport
decision in conjunction with the Armenian Law on Advocacy and Ethics Code, the Claimants
emphasize that the ad hoc Committee in Fraport found that it was not bound by any particular
national code of ethics and therefore did not apply any such deontological rules in its assessment.

Respondent's Reply, pp. 6-7.

Respondent's Reply, pp. 6-7.

Respondent's Reply, pp. 7-8.

Respondent's Reply, p. 9.

Respondent's Reply, pp. 9-10.

Claimants’ Response, fn. 4.

Claimants’ Response, p. 2; Claimants’ Rejoinder, p. 1.

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

Procedural Order No. 2

Similarly, the Tribunal does not have any authority to assess and sanction the compliance of Dr.
Tumanov against any set of deontological rules.

In addition, the Claimants agree with the Respondent that the Tribunal may also take guidance from
the general principles laid down in the Hague Principles.”

Essentially, the Claimants accept the Respondent’s formulation of the applicable legal standard,
which they formulate as:

Whether there is a real risk that the lawyer could have received confidential
information from its former client, which may be of significance in the present
proceedings, and which may accordingly prejudice the fair conduct of the present
proceedings.”®

The Claimants emphasize that this standard must be applied in line with the reasoning of the ad
hoc Committee in Fraport, which refused to rely “simply on mere appearances since to prevent a
party from having access to its chosen counsel cannot depend upon a nebulous foundation, but
rather from clear evidence of prejudice.””" The Claimants’ position in this respect is at odds with
that of the Respondent, which claims that “even the appearance of any conflict of interest should
be actively avoided.”**

(2) Application of the standard

The Claimants submit that, during his employment at the Ministry of Justice of Armenia, Dr.
Tumanov neither had access to confidential information about the case, nor participated in or
contributed towards Armenia’s defense against the Claimants’ claims.” The Claimants’ position
in this respect is substantiated by reference to two letters of Dr. Tumanov to the members of the
Tribunal, dated July 25, 2018, and August 15, 2018.

In those letters, Dr. Tumanov describes his involvement during his employment at the Ministry of
Justice as follows:

a. Up to August 28, 2015, Dr. Tumanov was the Acting Head of the Department of International
Mutual Legal Assistance and Foreign Relations of the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of
Armenia;*”

b. In early July 2015, Dr. Tumanov submitted his letter of resignation, as a result of which his
service with the Ministry of Justice ended as of August 28, 2015;*!

Claimants’ Rejoinder, pp. 1-2.
Claimants’ Rejoinder, p. 2. See also, Respondent’s Reply, p. 5.

Claimants’ Rejoinder, p. 3.

Respondent's Reply, p. 6.

Claimants’ Response, pp. 6-7; Claimants’ Rejoinder, pp. 5-7.

Dr. Tumanov’s First Letter to the Tribunal, dated July 25, 2018 (“Tumanoy First Letter”), p. 2.

Dr. Tumanov’s Second Letter to the Tribunal, dated August 15, 2018 (“Tumanoy Second Letter”), p. 1.

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

40

Tumanov Second Letter,

Procedural Order No. 2

c. Until July 17, 2015, neither Dr. Tumanov, nor the Department of International Mutual Legal
Assistance and Foreign Relations, had any involvement in addressing the Claimants’
claims;*?

d. On Friday, July 17, 2015, Dr. Tumanov received from the Deputy Minister of Justice a hard
copy of the Claimants’ Notice of Dispute and the supporting documents that had been filed
on August 28, 2014, along with instructions to prepare a memorandum summarizing the
Claimants’ claims;*>

e. That same day, Dr. Tumanov instructed his team to prepare the translation into Armenian of
the received documents while he drafted the section of the memorandum describing the
Washington Convention, ICSID as an institution, the Armenian treaties that contain
provisions for arbitration of disputes before ICSID (including the U.S. — Armenia BIT™),
and ICSID arbitration.** The sections of the memorandum summarizing the content of the
documents submitted by the Claimants were based on the translations prepared by the
Department's staff;>¢

f. On July 18, 2015, Dr. Tumanov submitted the memorandum to the Deputy Minister of
Justice, Mr. Mkrtchyan, and to the Director of the Ministry of Justice’s Office of
Implementation of Legal Projects, Mr. Khachatryan. In response, Mr. Khachatryan asked Dr.
Tumanov to include a legal analysis in the memorandum, stating that a surface-level legal
analysis would be sufficient;*”

g. Pursuant to the instructions of Mr. Khachatryan, Dr. Tumanov added a paragraph at the end
of the memorandum, containing: 1) a sentence stating that, if the facts alleged by the
Claimants were true, the Claimants’ claims would likely be satisfied in whole or in part; 2) a
reproduction of Article 53 of the ICSID Convention; and 3) a sentence stating that the
expenses of an ICSID proceedings may be significant. Dr. Tumanov did not support these
statements with any further analysis;**

h. On July 22, 2015, at the request of Mr. Khachatryan, Dr. Tumanov instructed his staff to
remove typographical errors in the memorandum;*”

i. Between July 22, 2015, and his departure from the Ministry of Justice on August 28, 2015,*°
Dr. Tumanov did not perform any further work on the memorandum;*!

1.
Tumanov Second Letter, p. 2; Tumanov First Letter, p. 1.
Tumanov First Letter, p.
Tumanov First Letter, p.
Tumanov First Letter, p.
Tumanov Second Letter,
Tumanov Second Letter,
Tumanov Second Letter,
Tumanov First Letter, p.
Tumanov Second Letter,

; Tumanov Second Letter, p. 2.

; Tumanov First Letter, p. 2.

VPNVPP OAC,
RN

»

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

45.

46.

Procedural Order No. 2

Jj. Dr. Tumanov insists that throughout his service with the Armenian Ministry of Justice, he
never had access to any privileged information concerning the present case“? and that the
only documents he had access to when preparing the memorandum were documents
emanating from the Claimants, as well as information available online.*? He further claims
that he never discussed the case with anyone in the Ministry of Justice, save to the extent
described in his letters to the Tribunal."

k. Lastly, Dr. Tumanov points out that he started representing Mr. Khudyan as of November
2015, and that the officials at the Ministry of Justice became aware of his representation at
the latest in March 2017, when Dr. Tumanov met with the Ministry to explore a possible
settlement of the dispute between Mr. Khudyan and Armenia.** According to Dr. Tumanov,
the Ministry of Justice never called his representation of Mr. Khudyan into question until
after he was added to the list of the Claimants’ representatives in this arbitration.*°

The Claimants contend that the extent of Dr. Tumanov’s involvement is very similar to that of the
counsel challenged in the Fraport case and claim that, like counsel for the Philippines, Dr.
Tumanov had neither received nor had access to any confidential information.” The Claimants
point out that the Respondent failed to identify any confidential information to which Dr. Tumanov
would have had access at the Ministry of Justice or any specific opportunities during which Dr.
Tumanov can reasonably have been presumed to have had access to such information.**

More specifically, the Claimants allege that the Respondent’s Application is based on mere
speculation as it effectively asks the Tribunal to presume that Dr. Tumanov had access to
confidential information during the work he performed prior to his departure for private practice.”
According to the Claimants, this is precisely the type of presumption that the ad hoc Committee in
Fraport refused to engage in.*° The Claimants insist that the Tribunal cannot remove Dr. Tumanov
without any factual foundation on the presumption that he did have access to confidential
information potentially prejudicing the fair conduct of this arbitration.*! In this context, the
Claimants submit that, just as the ad hoc Committee in Fraport gave weight to the testimony of the
counsel whose disqualification was sought, this Tribunal should give weight to Dr. Tumanov’s
account of the work undertaken and his representation that he never had access to confidential
information concerning the present dispute.**

The Claimants conclude that they demonstrated that, during his employment by the Ministry of
Justice, Dr. Tumanov never had access to confidential information concerning this case and that

Tumanov First Letter, pp. 1-2; Tumanov Second Letter, p. 4.

 

Tumanov First Letter, p. 2; Tumanov Second Letter, p. 4.
Tumanov First Letter, p. 2.

Tumanov First Letter, p. 2.

Tumanov First Letter, p. 3; Tumanov Second Letter, p. 3.
Claimants’ Rejoinder, pp. 5-6.

Claimants’ Response, p. 5.

Claimants’ Response, pp. 5-6.

Claimants’ Response, p. 6.
Claimants’ Response, p. 6.
Claimants’ Response, p. 6.

     
 

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

47.

49.

50.

Procedural Order No. 2

his involvement in the case was very limited.** In the absence of access to confidential information
— the Claimants argue — there also is no risk of misuse, which is corroborated by the fact that prior
to June 2018 the Respondent never challenged Dr. Tumanov’s representation of the Claimants,
despite its awareness thereof since March 2017 at the latest.* The Claimants refute the
Respondent’s allegation to the effect that it had no avenue to challenge Dr. Tumanov until he was
formally designated as counsel of record in this arbitration. The Claimants submit that, had the
Respondent genuinely believed that there was a real risk of misuse of confidential information, “it
is difficult to imagine that Armenian law has no mechanisms” by means of which such misuse could
have been prevented or redressed.**

 

On a balance of interests, the Claimants conclude that “Mr. Khudyan’s fundamental right to counsel
of his choice should prevail over an alleged concern that Respondent chose not to raise [earlier]
and which it now fails to demonstrate poses a ‘real risk’ of prejudice to these proceedings.”*° They
state that it would be severely prejudicial to deprive Mr. Khudyan of his Armenian counsel, who
has been working on the case for almost three years now, and that there are no facts on the record
that show that there is any risk of prejudice to the fairness of the proceedings that could justify the
removal of Claimants’ counsel of choice.*’ Accordingly, the Claimants request that the Tribunal
dismiss the Respondent’s Application.

THE TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS
The Tribunal hereby sets out its analysis of the disputed issues.
Introduction

As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal notes that the Parties agree that the Tribunal has the authority
to rule on the Respondent’s request that Dr. Tumanov be removed as counsel of record.** It is
common ground that the Tribunal’s power to deal with the current Application is encompassed
within its general power to regulate the conduct of the proceedings, enshrined in Article 44 of the
ICSID Convention:

Any arbitration proceeding shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions
of this Section and, except as the parties otherwise agree, in accordance with the
Arbitration Rules in effect on the date on which the parties consented to
arbitration. If any question of procedure arises which is_not covered by this
Section or the Arbitration Rules or any rules agreed by the parties, the Tribunal

shall decide the question.

The Tribunal accepts that it has the authority to rule on the Respondent’s Application. The power
conferred upon the Tribunal by Article 44 is to be exercised in appropriate circumstances, which

Claimants’ Rejoinder, p. 7.
Claimants’ Response, pp. 4-5; Claimants’ Rejoinder, p. 6.
Claimants’ Rejoinder, p. 6.

Claimants’ Rejoinder, p. 6.

Claimants’ Rejoinder, p. 7.

Claimants’ Response, fn. 4; Respondent’s Reply, p. 2.
Emphasis added.

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

51.

52.

53.

54.

Procedural Order No. 2

includes cases — like the present one — where there is a risk of a violation of a fundamental rule of
procedure, the fairness of the proceedings and the equality of the parties. Judicial propriety calls
for the Tribunal to safeguard the integrity of the arbitral process and the equality of the Parties in
this arbitration.

Legal Standard

The Tribunal does not have the authority to police and sanction compliance with any particular
national law or professional ethics code that may or may not be applicable to Dr. Tumanov.”
Accordingly, the Tribunal will focus its assessment on the general principles that are indispensable
for the fair conduct of the proceedings. In establishing which are the relevant general principles,
the Tribunal will take guidance from the principles established by the ad hoc Committee in Fraport
and those laid down in the Hague Principles, although it does not consider itself bound by them.

(1) The Hague Principles
The Hague Principles strive to identify clear and transparent principles of general application with

the objective of maintaining “the highest standards of professional conduct for counsel in
proceedings before international courts and tribunals with a view to ensuring integrity, justice and

fairness of the international judicial process.”®! The Hague Principles expressly recognize that not

all persons representing parties in proceedings before international arbitral tribunals” are admitted
to a bar association or other regulated profession.

One of the core principles identified in the Hague Principles is that counsel appearing before “an
international arbitral tribunal in a proceeding in which one or more of the parties is a state” has
the duty to ensure compliance with the principle of confidentiality:

Counsel shall respect the confidential character of any information imparted to
him or her in confidence in the litigation.

Building on the principle of confidentiality, the Hague Principles also address the issue of conflicts
of interest, in the following terms:

Counsel may not represent a new client in proceedings where a former client is
party to the same or closely related proceedings and there exists a material risk

See Fraport, paras. 41 and 52.

RL-0008, Preamble, p. 1.

RL-0008, Article 1.2 (Scope): “‘International court or tribunal’ refers to a court or tribunal created under
and governed by international law, including criminal and non-criminal courts, whether standing or ad hoc,
and, as appropriate, to an international arbitral tribunal in a proceeding in which one or more of the parties
is a state.”

RL-0008, Article 1.1 (Scope): “The Principles apply to any person discharging the functions of counsel by
representing, appearing on behalf of, or providing legal advice to a party in proceedings before an
international court or tribunal, however such person may be described, and whether or not the person has
professional legal training or is admitted as a member of a bar association or other professional body.”
RL-0008, Article 1.2 (Scope).

RL-0008, Article 2.4 (General Principles) (emphasis added).

RL-0008, Article 4.2 (Conflicts of Interest).

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

Procedural Order No. 2

of breach of confidentiality, except with the express authorisation of the former
client.

According to the Hague Principles, there is a conflict of interest if (i) counsel previously represented
a party to the same or closely related proceedings; and (ii) there is a material risk that confidential
information that his or her prior client shared with him or her may be passed on to the new client.
Hence, the mere fact that counsel previously represented another party to the same or closely related
proceedings is not sufficient. In order to disqualify counsel on grounds of conflict of interest there
must be a showing of material risk that confidential information was imparted on counsel by the
first client, which may be passed on to the new client.

(2) Principles established by the Fraport Committee
The ad hoc Committee in Fraport formulated the relevant standard as follows:®

[w]here the allegation relates to the representation of a former client, the issue
for the C i is whether there is a real risk that the lawyer could have
received confidential information from that client, which may be of significance
inthe sub pr di and which may accordingly prejudice the fair trial

of the second proceedings.

The Fraport ad hoc Committee considered that the fact that counsel previously represented another
party to the same or closely related proceedings, by itself, is not enough. In order for there to be a
potential of prejudice to the fairness of the subsequent proceedings, there must be a real risk of
receipt in the first set of proceedings of confidential information which may be of significance in
the subsequent proceedings.

In light of the importance of each party’s right to be represented by the counsel of its choice, the
Fraport Committee also held that the receipt of confidential information may not be presumed
lightly. It insisted that clear evidence is required, as a party cannot be prevented from access to its
chosen counsel on the basis of mere appearances:°*

The C ittee cannot act in this regard simply on mere appearances since to
prevent a party from having access to its chosen counsel cannot depend upon a

nebulous foundation, but rather must flow from clear evidence of prejudice.
Analysis

As a preliminary matter, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent’s concern about Dr. Tumanov’s
representation of the Claimants following his resignation from the Respondent’ s Ministry of Justice
is understandable. Whilst his appearance may seem disconcerting, it does not, however, per se
constitute a conflict of interest preventing him from representing the Claimants. In order to
disqualify Dr. Tumanov, it must be demonstrated that there is a real risk that he obtained
confidential information that may be of significance to the dispute before the Tribunal.

Fraport, para. 42.
Fraport, paras. 47 and 55 (emphasis added).

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

60.

61.

62.

63.

Procedural Order No. 2

In view of the undisputed fact that Dr. Tumanov was employed by the Ministry of Justice of the
Respondent when the Ministry received the Claimants’ Notice of Dispute and worked on a
memorandum about the Claimants’ claims during his employment, the Tribunal has formulated the
question to be addressed as follows:

Is there clear evidence of a material risk that Dr. Tumanov received confidential information
from the Respondent about the dispute with the Claimants that could be of significance in the
present proceedings such that there would be prejudice to the fair disposition of the dispute in
this arbitration if the Claimants were allowed to continue being represented by Dr. Tumanov?

In Fraport, the ad hoc Committee refused to disqualify the challenged counsel merely on the basis
of his prior retainer, but rather focused on actual work performed as part of the retainer and on
whether one would assume that the work actually performed would in the ordinary course entail
access to confidential information.® The Tribunal agrees with the Fraport Committee that it cannot
act on the basis of a presumption that a prior retainer gives rise to a material risk that confidential
information was imparted by the Respondent to Dr. Tumanov. As the mere appearance of a conflict
of interest does not suffice to disqualify Dr. Tumanov, clear evidence is required of the existence
of a material risk that the Respondent imparted to Dr. Tumanov confidential information, which
may be of significance in these proceedings and accordingly may prejudice the fair disposition of
the dispute in this arbitration.

The Tribunal further notes that Dr. Tumanov is not an attorney, admitted to a bar. The Tribunal
presumes that Dr. Tumanov’s prior professional relationship with the Ministry of Justice of the
Republic of Armenia was based on terms of service, presumably recorded in an employment
contract. As the terms of service are not part of the record of this arbitration, the Tribunal is unable
to ascertain whether Dr. Tumanov was bound by any duty of confidentiality, and if so, whether
such duty extended beyond the termination of his service.

The Tribunal notes at the outset that the facts adduced in respect of Dr. Tumanov’s involvement
during his service with the Ministry of Justice are limited to the factual allegations set forth in the
Respondent’s Application, the Claimants’ Response, the Respondent’s Reply and the Claimants’
Rejoinder. Importantly, only the Claimants have attempted to substantiate their factual allegations,
by reference to two letters from Dr. Tumanov to the Tribunal.

Considering that clear evidence is required to prevent the Claimants from being represented by
their counsel of choice, the Tribunal considers that it was for the Respondent to substantiate its
Application by reference to information on the basis of which the veracity of Dr. Tumanov’s
statements could reasonably be called into question. As the Respondent did not seek to demonstrate
that Dr. Tumanov’s account is factually incorrect — be it by means of email communications or
other written records, a statement from Mr. Mkrtchyan, Mr. Khachatryan, staff members of the
Department of International Mutual Legal Assistance and Foreign Relations or any other civil
servant within the Ministry of Justice of Armenia, with whom Dr. Tumanov would have had
exchanges, or otherwise — the Tribunal has no evidence before it that could lead it to doubt the
veracity of Dr. Tumanov’s description of his involvement in the matter during his service at the
Ministry of Justice. Although the Respondent is correct to state that it is not required to prove the
actual receipt of confidential information, the difficulty is that the Respondent did not adduce any

Fraport, para. 53.

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

65.

Procedural Order No. 2

facts on the basis of which the credibility of Dr. Tumanov’s factual account could be called into
question. Considering that Dr. Tumanov’s account appears credible and coherent, and the
Respondent failed to adduce any evidence that challenges or contradicts that account, the Tribunal
will give Dr. Tumanov’s explanation the appropriate weight.

In light of the foregoing, the Tribunal has identified the following facts as relevant:

a. Dr. Tumanov served as Deputy Head of the Department of International Mutual Legal
Assistance and Foreign Relations of the Ministry of Justice of Armenia in the period between
August 28, 2014, when the Respondent received the Claimants’ “Statement of Claim’ with
supporting documentation, until the end of his service on August 28, 2015;”

b. Dr. Tumanov handed in his resignation letter in early July 2015;7!

c. The Department of International Mutual Legal Assistance and Foreign Relations of the
Ministry of Justice of Armenia had no involvement in this matter until the Deputy Minister
of Justice, Mr. Arsen Mkrtchyan, forwarded Claimants’ Notice of Dispute dated August 28,
2014 to Dr. Tumanov on July 17, 2015, and instructed him “to write a memorandum
summarizing Claimants’ claims;’”

d. On July 17, 2015, Dr. Tumanov “wrote the sections of the draft memorandum that describe
the Washington Convention, ICSID as an Institution, Armenian treaties that contain
provisions for arbitration of disputes before ICSID, and Arbitration under the ICSID Rules.”
The remainder of the memorandum, summarizing the claims as described in the Claimants’
Notice of Dispute of August 28, 2014, was drafted by members of Dr. Tumanov’s staff and
supervised by Dr. Tumanov;”*

e. On July 18, 2015, Dr. Tumanov sent the draft memorandum to the First Deputy Minister,
who instructed him that same day to add a legal analysis to the memorandum. Subsequently,
Dr. Tumanoy sent an updated version of the memorandum on July 20, 2015, that “was
identical to the previous version” but for:

1) a sentence stating that, if the facts alleged by the Claimants were true,
Claimants’ claims would likely be satisfied in whole or in part; 2) a
reproduction of Article 53 of the ICSID Convention; 3) a sentence stating
that the expenses of an ICSID proceeding could be considerable.”

f. On that same day, July 20, 2015, Dr. Tumanov received an email from the First Deputy
Minister “criticiz[ing] the memorandum’s lack of legal analysis and the conclusory nature
of that final paragraph,” which he did not follow-up on. The only further work undertaken

Tumanov First Letter, pp. 1-2.

Tumanov Second Letter, p. 1.

Tumanov Second Letter, pp. 1-2.

Tumanov First Letter, p. 1; Tumanov Second Letter, p. 2.
Tumanov Second Letter, p. 2.

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

Procedural Order No. 2

by the Department of International Mutual Legal Assistance and Foreign Relations was the
correction of correct typographical errors in the memorandum on July 22, 2015.”

There are two key differences between the Claimants’ pleaded case and that of the Respondent.
First, the Claimants allege” and the Respondent denies” that the memorandum was general in
nature and did not contain any legal analysis or advice concerning the Respondent’s potential
response or defense to the Claimants’ claims. Second, the Respondent alleges” and the Claimants
deny” that Dr. Tumanov had access to confidential information and evidence about the dispute
during his employment at the Ministry of Justice.

First, as to the question whether the memorandum did or did not include legal analysis or advice,
given that the memorandum was not produced by either Party, the Tribunal only has the benefit of
Dr. Tumanov’s explanation who insists on the general nature of the memorandum. He declared in
this respect that “Deputy Minister Mkrtchyan sent an email in which he criticized the
memorandum’s lack of legal analysis and the conclusory nature of that final paragraph”® and that
the memorandum “did not offer strategic advice about how to respond to those allegations or how
to defend against any eventual claim that might be brought in future.”*!

  

While it would have been straightforward for the Respondent to deny or to rebut the allegation that
Deputy Minister Mkrtchyan criticized the memorandum’s lack of legal analysis without divulging
any confidential information, it did not. Nor did the Respondent produce any testimony or other
evidence that Dr. Tumanov was asked to provide legal advice and, to that end, was provided with
confidential information.

On the basis of the limited factual information on record, the Tribunal finds that the one paragraph
that was reportedly added by Dr. Tumanov following Deputy Minister Mkrtchyan’s criticism is so
generic in nature that it is equivalent to having expressed no view at all. In the absence of any
evidence that the memorandum in its original version of July 18, 2015, or in the iterations of
July 20 and 22, 2015, provided some form of legal advice or analysis, the Tribunal will proceed on
the assumption that the memorandum did not contain any legal advice or analysis.

Second, turning to the assessment as to whether at any time during his employment by the Ministry
of Justice, Dr. Tumanov was privy to or had access to confidential information, the Tribunal notes
that Dr. Tumanov categorically denies that he ever had access to any confidential information about
the present dispute. Dr. Tumanov states that his involvement in the case was confined to an isolated
six-day period towards the end of his employment and that the memorandum produced under his
supervision was general in nature. It merely summarized the Claimants’ claims on the basis of the
documents provided to the Respondent by the Claimants and described how BIT claims can be
instituted in investment treaty arbitrations under the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration

Tumanov Second Letter, p. 2.
Claimants’ Rejoinder, p. 5.
Respondent's Reply, pp. 7-8.
Respondent's Reply, pp. 5-8.
Claimants’ Rejoinder, pp. 5-7.
Tumanov Second Letter, p. 2.
Tumanov First Letter, p. 2.

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

71.

72.

73.

74.

Procedural Order No. 2

Rules. More specifically, Dr. Tumanov denies having been aware of the dispute prior to
July 17, 2015 and having seen any documents in connection with this dispute during his
employment at the Ministry of Justice, apart from the Claimants’ letter of August 28, 2014, the
accompanying “Statement of Claim,” “various letters written by Mr. Khudyan to Armenian
officials” and information available online.*?

The Respondent’s Application is based on the presumption that, in his capacity as Deputy Head of
the Department of International Mutual Legal Assistance and Foreign Relations of the Armenian
Ministry of Justice, Dr. Tumanov would have had access to all privileged information and
potentially relevant evidence that may be used by the Respondent in this arbitration and that “ir is
reasonable to assume” that Dr. Tumanov “would have further looked into the matter, discussed it
with other employees and engaged in fact-finding on Respondent's side.”**

The Tribunal is not convinced by the Respondent’s iated presumption. The R
did not adduce any factual elements that challenge or contradict Dr. Tumanov’ s account of events.
Again, without divulging any confidential information, the Respondent could, for instance, have
provided the Tribunal with factual information concerning the type of systems and/or files Dr.
Tumanov had access to, whether those systems and/or files contained information relating to this
dispute, and the clearance level of a civil servant of Dr. Tumanov’s ranking or seniority. Nor did
the Respondent provide any information about the officers and departments within the Ministry of
Justice that are responsible for this file and the involvement in the matter of Dr. Tumanov or his
department. In that context, it is striking that the Respondent omitted even to identify any other
officers or departments within the Ministry with whom Dr. Tumanov would have had exchanges
on the matter or any occasion during which he would have exchanged confidences with his
colleagues.

To be clear, Dr. Tumanov’s explanation, including his description of internal correspondence about
the case, in and of itself arguably constitutes information that would be considered confidential
under the ethical rules regulating the legal profession in some jurisdictions. However, this
information is not of such a nature that it might be of significance in this arbitration or can be
misused to the detriment of the Respondent. As such, the information imparted by Dr. Tumanov is
not of such a nature that it might prejudice the fairness of these arbitral proceedings, and
accordingly the powers of the Tribunal under Article 44 of the ICSID Convention need not be
exercised.

As there are no factual elements on the basis of which Dr. Tumanov’s statements in this respect
can be called into question, the Tribunal — like the ad hoc Committee in Fraport™ — accepts Dr.
Tumanov’s factual representations as accurate and concludes that, beyond documents common to
both Parties and information available online,*° Dr. Tumanov had no access to confidential
information concerning the present dispute that could be of significance in these proceedings.

Tumanov Second Letter, p. 4.

Respondent's Application, p. 2.

Fraport, paras. 47-52.

Tumanov First Letter, p. 2: “The only documents to which I had access when that memorandum was prepared
were documents from the Claimants. These included: (i) the letter from Dentons dated 28 August 2014; (ii)

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)

 

7S.

76.

77.

Procedural Order No. 2

The Tribunal is comforted in this conclusion by the fact that, during the three-year period that Dr.
Tumanov has been representing the Claimants, the Respondent has not taken any action aimed at
preventing Dr. Tumanov from representing the Claimants or at enforcing the duty of confidentiality
that he may have been subject to under the terms of his service or employment. The Tribunal
accepts the Claimants’ argument to the effect that prior to Dr. Tumanov’s appearance as counsel
of record, there must have been legal avenues available to the Respondent within its domestic legal
system, aimed at protecting the confidentiality of information provided to Dr. Tumanov and/or
preventing him from representing the Claimants. Had the Respondent considered that there was
any real risk that confidential information would pass to the Claimants to the detriment of the
Respondent, the Respondent could have taken action to protect its interest, at the latest following
the meeting with the Ministry of Justice in March 2017 that Dr. Tumanov attended on the
Claimants’ behalf. The lack of any action whatsoever, under Dr. Tumanov’s terms of service or
otherwise, be it by email, formal correspondence or legal action, is consistent with the fact that
there was no material risk that Dr. Tumanov would divulge confidential information that may aid
the Claimants with their claims and be detrimental to the Respondent in these proceedings.

Considering that the Respondent has not adduced evidence, let alone clear evidence, of facts
demonstrating the likelihood of passing of confidential information of significance - whether by
reference to the Claimants’ communications and statements over the past three years or the
Memorial they filed in this arbitration - it is unlikely that the perceived risk will materialize
thereafter. Furthermore, assuming for the sake of argument that Dr. Tumanov was privy to or had
access to confidential information that may aid the Claimants with their claims to the detriment of
the Respondent, that information would already have passed to the Claimants many years ago. The
Respondent’s own inaction over the years prior to Dr. Tumanov’s designation as counsel of record
for the Claimants in this arbitration renders the Claimants’ application for the removal of Dr.
Tumanoy futile.

On the basis of the foregoing, the Tribunal concludes that there is no evidence that Dr. Tumanov
had access, or was privy, to confidential information that would be of significance in these
proceedings and thus threaten the fair disposition of the dispute in this arbitration. The Tribunal
accordingly rejects the Respondent’s Application for the Removal of Dr. Tumanov.

the document captioned ‘Statement of Claim’ enclosed with that letter; and (iii) various letters written by
Mr. Khudyan to officials within the Armenian government describing his ordeal and other information that
was available online.”

Mr. Edmond Khudyan and Arin Capital & Investment Corp. v. Republic of Armenia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/17/36)
Procedural Order No. 2
Vv. DECISION
78. For the above reasons, the Tribunal decides and directs as follows:

(i) REJECTS the Respondent’s Application for the Removal of Dr. Tumanov; and

(ii) RESERVES the issue of costs for a later stage of these proceedings.
Date: December 5, 2018

<= — Gap ape

Ms. Ank Santens Professor Zachary Douglas QC
Arbitrator Arbitrator

 

Ms. Melanie van Leeuwen
President of the Tribunal

