INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

In the annulment proceeding between

EL PASO ENERGY INTERNATIONAL COMPANY

and

THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

ICSID Case No. ARB/03/15

 

DECISION OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE APPLICATION FOR
ANNULMENT OF THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

 

Members of the Committee
Ms. Teresa Cheng, Member of the Committee
Prof. Dr. Rolf Knieper, Member of the Committee
Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno, President

Secretary of the Committee
Natali Sequeira

Date of dispatch to the Parties: September 22, 2014

REPRESENTATION OF THE PARTIES:

Representing the Republic of
Argentina (Applicant):

Dra. Angelina M.E. Abbona
Procuradora del Tesoro de la Nacién
Argentina

Posadas 1641

C1112ADC, Buenos Aires
Argentina

Representing El Paso Energy
International Company

Mr. John L. Shoemaker

Counsel for El Paso LLC f/k/a El Paso Corp.
Assistant General Counsel, Kinder Morgan
1001 Louisiana Street

Houston, Texas 77002

USA

Mr. James Lloyd Loftis
Mr. Mark Beeley

Vinson & Elkins R.L.L.P.
City Point 33rd Floor
One Ropemaker Street
London EC2Y 9UE
Great Britain

Mr. Timothy J. Tyler
Mr. William T. Teten
Vinson & Elkins L.L.P.
1001 Fannin Street
Houston, Texas 77002
USA

Mr. José A. Martinez de Hoz (Jr.)
Ms. Jimena Vega Olmos

Pérez, Alati, Grondona, Benites,
Arntsen & Martinez de Hoz (Jr.)
Suipacha 1111, Piso 18
C1008AAW-Buenos Aires
Argentina

I. INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES 6
Il. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

Ill. POSITION OF THE PARTIES ON THE ALLEGED ANUNULMENT OF THE
AWARD 11

A. Jurisdictional issue: 12

 

B. The causal link between the measures adopted by Argentina and the sale of El
Paso’s interest in the Argentine Companies

 

C. Measures adopted by Argentina in relation to the spot price and the capacity

 

 

 

 

 

payments 21

D. The cumulative effect of the measures adopted by the Argentine Republic ................ 23

E. The necessity defenses raised by the Argentine Republic «0.0.0.0... 31

F. Issues related to the valuation of damages............cccccceseseseece cece eeeeeeseneeeeeeetecetes 34

Iv. ANALYSIS OF THE COMMITTEE 38
A. Manifest excess of powers 39

B. Failure to state reasons 62

C. Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure ............c.cccceeesceeseeteseeteseenes 719

V. COSTS 89
VI. DECISION 91

 

GLOSSARY

Argentina

Argentinian Companies

Award

BIT

Counter-Memorial on Annulment

E] Paso
FET

GA

ICSID Arbitration Rules

ICSID Convention

ICSID Financial Regulations

ICSID or the Centre

Argentine Republic or the Applicant

Compaiifas Asociadas Petroleras; Capex
S.A.; Central Costanera S.A.; and
Gasoducto del Pacifico S.A.

Award rendered on October 31, 2011

Treaty between the Argentine Republic
and the United States of America
concerning Reciprocal Encouragement
and Protection of Investments signed on
November 14, 1991, in force since

October 20, 1994

El Paso’s  Counter-Memorial — on

Annulment dated December 21, 2012
El Paso Energy International Company
Fair and Equitable Treatment
Government of Argentina

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration

Proceedings

Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes Between States and
Nationals of Other States, dated March
18, 1965

ICSID Administrative and Financial

Regulations

International Centre for the Settlement of

ILC’s Draft Articles

Memorial on Annulment

Post-Hearing Counter-Submission

— Argentina

Post-Hearing Rejoinder — Argentina

Post-hearing Reply — El Paso

Post-Hearing Submission — El Paso

Rejoinder on Annulment

Reply on Annulment

Investment Disputes

Draft Articles on State Responsibility
prepared by the United Nations’

International Law Commission.

Argentina’s Memorial on Annulment

dated October 5, 2012

Observations of the Argentine Republic
dated November 14, 2013, in connection
with El Paso’s Post-Hearing Brief on

Annulment

The Argentine Republic’s Rejoinder
dated December 27, 2013 in response to
El Paso’s Reply of December 5, 2013

El Paso’s Reply, dated December 5,
2013, in connection with Argentina’s
Observations on El Paso’s Post-Hearing
Brief

Post-Hearing Submission of El Paso

dated October 24, 2013

El Paso’s Rejoinder dated May 10, 2013

Argentina’s Reply on Annulment dated
February 21, 2013

I. INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

1. This annulment proceeding concerns an arbitration submitted to the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”) on the
basis of the BIT and the ICSID Convention.

2. The Parties are E] Paso Energy International Company, a company incorporated
under the laws of the State of Delaware (United States of America), and the

Argentine Republic.

3. El Paso and Argentina are hereinafter collectively referred to as the “Parties.” The

Parties’ respective representatives and their addresses are listed on page (2).

4. On October 31, 2011, the Tribunal! in the original arbitration proceeding rendered
an Award, partially upholding El Paso’s claims and awarding it US$43.03 million,
plus compound interest as compensation. The Tribunal concluded that Argentina
had breached its obligation to accord fair and equitable treatment to El Paso’s

investment, under the BIT.

5. For the preparation of this decision the Committee reviewed and evaluated all the
arguments of the Parties and the documents submitted by them in this proceeding. In
making their arguments, the Parties submitted and cited numerous awards and
decisions dealing with issues relevant to this decision on annulment. The Committee
considered these documents carefully, but obviously the Committee is responsible for
deciding on the issue of annulment raised by Argentina through an independent
analysis of the ICSID Convention, the Arbitration Rules, and the particular facts of
this case, which does not prevent the Committee from taking into consideration the

findings of other annulment committees.

' Presided by Professor Lucius Caflisch (Swiss), appointed by the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council, by
Prof. Piero Bernardini (Italian), appointed by the Claimant; and Professor Brigitte Stern (French), appointed by the
Respondent.

6. In order to facilitate a better understanding of some of the issues decided by the

Tribunal, the Committee reproduces the following passages from the Award:

“the Claimant is an energy company. It alleges that, up until 2003, it owned indirect
and non-controlling shareholdings in a number of Argentinian entities: Compaiiias
Asociadas Petroleras (CAPSA) and CAPEX SA (El Paso contends that it held a 45%
indirect interest in CAPSA which, in turn, owned 60.36% of the shares of CAPEX);
Central Costanera SA (Costanera), in which El Paso claims to have acquired a
12.335% indirect interest; and Gasoducto del Pacifico SA (Pacifico), in which its
indirect interest was said to amount to approximately 13.4% (preferred shares), and
11.8% (ordinary shares) respectively. These four entities have been collectively
referred to, in the present proceedings, as the “Argentinian companies.” El Paso
further alleged an indirect controlling interest (99.92%) in SERVICIOS El Paso,
another entity incorporated in Argentina, and a 61.6% interest in the Triunion Energy
Company.””

“In April 1997, El Paso acquired, through KLT Power Inc., an indirect non-
controlling shareholding of 12.335% in Costanera. The latter, a local company
engaged in the generation and sale of electricity, with a total capacity of 2311
megawatt-hour (MWh), is the largest thermal generator in Argentina.”

“In January 1998, El Paso acquired an indirect non-controlling interest in Pacifico,
which owns and operates a natural gas pipeline linking Argentina to the Chilean city
of Cochabamba.”*

“SERVICIOS was established by El Paso as an Argentinian subsidiary in March 1998
and entered thereafter into an agreement with an Argentinian branch of the Bank of
Boston to lease a gas processing plant located on the Agua de Cajén field in Neuquén
Province. Pursuant to a ten-year gas processing agreement with CAPEX,
SERVICIOS transformed gas produced at CAPEX’s facilities into liquid petroleum
gas (LPG) by-products that were sold by CAPEX.”?

“Tt is alleged that, from 1997 to 2001, El Paso invested US$336 million in the
Argentinian companies, and that its parent company guaranteed around US$24
million of SERVICIOS’ lease obligations. El Paso sold its interest in the companies’
shares in two sales, one in June 2003 — in CAPSA (consequently in CAPEX) and in
SERVICIOS — another in October 2003 — in Costanera.”°

? Award, [ 7.
31d.,q 10.
4Wd,Q 1.
51d. 12.
id. q 13.

. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

On February 28, 2012, ICSID received from Argentina an application for annulment
and request for stay of enforcement of the Award (the “Application” and the

“Request for Stay,” respectively).

On March 7, 2012, pursuant to Rules 50(2)(a) and (b) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, the Secretary General of ICSID registered the Application and notified the
Parties of the provisional stay of enforcement of the Award, pursuant ICSID

Arbitration Rule 54(2).

On May 22, 2012, the ad hoc Committee was constituted pursuant to Article 52(3)
and Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

On May 22, 2012, the Secretary General, in accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules notified the Parties that the three members of the ad hoc
Committee had accepted their appointments and that the Committee was therefore
deemed to have been constituted on that date. The ad hoc Committee is composed of
Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno, a national of Costa Rica, President of the Committee; Ms.
Teresa Cheng, a national of China; and Prof. Dr. Rolf Knieper, a national of
Germany. Ms. Natali Sequeira, ICSID Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as

Secretary of the Committee.

On May 31, 2012, the ad hoc Committee invited the Parties to file written
observations on the Request for Stay, prior to the first session. Argentina was invited

to submit its observations by June 11, 2012 and El Paso by June 22, 2012.

On May 31, 2012, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rules Rule 54(2) and the Request
for Stay, the Committee extended the stay of enforcement of the Award until it had

heard the Parties and reached a final determination on the continuation of the stay.

On June 4, 2012, pursuant to Regulation 14(3)(e) of the ICSID Financial

Regulations, the Centre requested the Argentine Republic to make a first advance

payment of US$225,000 within thirty (30) days to cover the initial costs of the

annulment proceedings, including the first meeting of the Parties with the Committee.

As scheduled, on June 11, 2012 Argentina filed its “Observations on the
Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award.” On June 22, El Paso filed its
“Response to Observations of Argentina on the Continuation of the Stay of

Enforcement of the Award.”

On July 10, 2012, the Centre informed the Parties that as of that date the requested
payment had not been received, and therefore invited either Party to pay within 15

days.

In response to the communication referred to in the preceding paragraph, Argentina
informed the Centre that the Ministry of Economy was processing the advance
payment. In view of this information, the Committee confirmed that the first session

would be held, as scheduled, by telephone conference.

The Committee held a first session with the Parties on July 18, 2012 by telephone
conference. The Parties confirmed that the Members of the Committee had been
validly appointed. It was agreed inter alia that the applicable Arbitration Rules
would be those in effect from April 10, 2006, that the procedural languages would be
Spanish and English and that the place of the proceeding would be Washington, D.C.
The Parties further agreed on a schedule for the submissions of pleadings on the
application for annulment. The agreement of the Parties was embodied in Procedural
Order No. 1 dated August 30, 2012 signed by the President and circulated to the

Parties.

On August 13, 2012, Argentina stated that the advance payment requested by the
Centre had already been processed. The Centre received that payment on August 27,

2012.

On November 14, 2012 the Committee issued its Decision on Argentina’s Request
for Stay of Enforcement of the Award. The Committee ordered that the stay of

enforcement of the Award be maintained until there was a ruling on the merits of

9

20.

21.

22.

annulment proceedings requested by Argentina. That stay was not conditioned on the

submission of any kind of guarantee from Argentina.

On October 5, 2012 Argentina submitted its Memorial on Annulment; El Paso
submitted its Counter-Memorial on Annulment on December 21, 2012; Argentina’s
Reply on Annulment was submitted on February 21, 2013; El Paso’s Rejoinder on

Annulment was submitted on May 10, 2013.

The hearing on annulment was held at the seat of the World Bank in Washington,

D.C. on October 8 and 9, 2013.
The following persons attended the hearing:

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno
Ms. Teresa Cheng

Prof. Dr. Rolf Knieper
Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Natali Sequeira

For Vinson & Elkins LLP
Mr. James L. Loftis, Esq
Mr. Mark Beeley, Esq.

Mr. William T. Teten, Esq.
Mr. Timothy E. Tyler, Esq.

For Pérez Alati, Grondona, Benites, Arntsen & Martinez De Hoz (Jr.)

Mr. José A. Martinez De Hoz (Jr.)
Ms. Jimena Vega Olmos, Esq.

For El Paso
Mr. John L. Shoemaker

For the Argentine Republic

Dr. Horacio Pedro Diez
Dr. Gabriel Bottini

23.

24.

25.

26.

a

27.

28.

Dr. Carlos Mihanovich
Dr. Tomas Braceras
Dr. Nicolas Duhalde

Court Reporters

Mr. Dante Rinaldi (Spanish Language Reporter)
Mr. William Prewett (English Language Reporter)

El Paso filed a Post-Hearing Brief on October 24, 2013; Argentina filed
Observations on El Paso’s Post-Hearing Brief on November 14, 2013; El Paso filed a
Reply to Argentina’s Observations on December 5, 2013; and Argentina filed a

Rejoinder on December 27, 2013.

The Centre, with the authorization of the Committee, requested two advance
payments from Argentina pursuant to ICSID Administrative and Financial
Regulation 14(3)(e). The first for US$225,000, was requested on June 4, 2012 and the
second for US$250,000 was requested on June 12, 2013. Both payments were

received by the Centre.

On August 19, 2014, the Committee declared the proceeding closed pursuant Rule
38(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

The Committee will summarize the position of the Parties on each annulment
argument; it will then examine the grounds for annulment under Article 52 of the

ICSID Convention in relation to these arguments.

. POSITION OF THE PARTIES ON THE ALLEGED ANUNULMENT OF THE

AWARD

In this section the Committee will summarize the arguments for annulment of the
Award submitted by Argentina, pursuant to Article 52 of the ICSID Convention

and it will summarize the response of El Paso to each one of these arguments.

Argentina claimed that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers; that the

Award has failed to state the reasons on which it was based; and that there has been a

ll

29.

30.

31.

32.

serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure. It claimed those grounds
with regard to: (a) jurisdictional issues; (b) the causal link between the measures
adopted by Argentina and the sale of El Paso’s interest in the Argentine Companies;
(c) the measures adopted by Argentina in relation to the spot price and the capacity
payments; (d) the cumulative effect, determined by the Tribunal, of the measures
adopted by Argentina; and (e) the analysis of the defense of necessity raised by

Argentina in the arbitration proceeding.

Jurisdictional issues

As described in detail in paragraph 41, Argentina divided the issues of this claim as
regards “jurisdictional issues” and before explaining each issue outlined some general

arguments which are summarized below:

Argentina stated that El Paso’s claim was derivative or indirect, noting that the
Tribunal held in paragraph 175 of the Award that El Paso’s contentions in their
present form do not seem viable because they amount to claiming twice for damage
caused by the same events: once for the taking of the rights of the Argentine
Companies and once for the diminution in value of the shares of those companies

held by El Paso.’

Argentina argued that the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction: “The Tribunal clearly lacks
the jurisdiction to amend a claim so as to make it viable because, among other things,

this implies rendering an ultra petita decision.”*

Furthermore, Argentina argued that
the Tribunal failed to state the reasons on which its decision was based “... when it
sought to justify the exercise of its jurisdiction by stating that the Treaty grants

shareholders a right of direct action.”®

EI Paso stated that Argentina was wrong to claim that an ultra petita award was

rendered because the Tribunal did not amend the claims submitted by that company,

7 Memorial on Annulment, { 18.
S1d.,q 19.
°Id., | 26.

33.

34.

35.

36.

rather it accepted one of three heads of claim (i.e., El Paso’s claim based on its

shareholding in the Argentine Companies) while rejecting others.'°

EI Paso concluded that the “... contended amendment is related to the merits of the
dispute which exceeds the limited role of Annulment under Article 52 of ICSID

Rules.”!!

After referring to what was said by the Tribunal in paragraphs 188, 194, 195, 198
and 214 of the Award as regards what it considered to be investments protected by
the ICSID Convention and the BIT, Argentina stated that the Tribunal
contradicted itself and manifestly exceeded its powers because in defining investment
it ruled that it included the shares of El Paso in the Argentine Companies, not the
rights and licenses of these companies but, nevertheless, it adopted the damage
valuation submitted by LECG (El Paso’s damages expert) “... which implicitly

referred to the damage allegedly sustained by the Argentine Companies.”"”

El Paso answered as indicated in the preceding paragraph based on paragraph 206 of
the Award, in which the Tribunal concluded that the method employed by LECG
was the most accurate for calculating the damages Argentina owed to EI Paso “...
based on its ‘right to compensation for loss of value of stocks imputable to measures

taken by the host State”?

On the same issue, El Paso stated that the Tribunal did not contradict itself and was
acting reasonably and within its discretion when it adopted LECG’s DCF method,
after duly considering the reports and testimonies of the experts retained by each
Party as well as those provided by the Tribunal’s appointed expert. El Paso also

noted that this decision on the merits is not a ground for annulment.'*

'° Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 58.

"14.67.

2 Memorial on Annulment, [ 21; Award, | 714.

'S Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 70; Award { 206.
'4Td., 49.74 and 79.

37.

38.

39.

40.

With regard to paragraphs 687 and 509 of the Award, in which the Tribunal stated
that the measures taken by Argentina were among the reasons that contributed to the
damage sustained by El Paso in the loss of value of its investment, Argentina stated
that the Tribunal did not provide the reasons for its decision and manifestly

exceeded its powers. 1s

Argentina also argued that “... the Tribunal allowed El Paso to bring a claim for
contract breaches which, at the same time, purportedly amount to violations of the
obligations assumed by Argentina to investors under the BIT.”'° Therefore, according
to Argentina, the Tribunal allowed a double recovery by the Argentine Companies
and El Paso. In its Reply on Annulment it indicated that with the decision of the
Tribunal there had been a manifest excess of powers and failure to state the reasons

for its decision.'”

E] Paso stated that the Tribunal awarded it damages for its direct claim for the loss
in value of its shares in the Argentine Companies, an investment expressly protected
under the BIT.'* It also noted that after a comprehensive analysis, which appears in
paragraphs 178 to 214 of the Award, the Tribunal analyzed the issue and concluded
that the investment protected by the BIT, were the shares in the Argentine

«19
Companies.

After citing part of paragraph 214 of the Award, Argentina argued that the Tribunal
“... confuses the legal standing that a shareholder may have, in general terms, to bring
a claim under the BIT with the substantial rights arising from its shares.””° El Paso

answered this argument by explaining that Argentina made an_ incorrect

'S Memorial on Annulment, 22.
1a..q24.

'T Reply on Annulment, { 11.

'S Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 41.
91d... 45-57.

°° Memorial on Annulment, {{ 29.

Al.

42.

44.

interpretation of Article I of the BIT and that all jurisdictional arguments are based

on the merits of the case and not grounds for annulment.”!

As noted in paragraph 29 above, Argentina divided the claim on jurisdictional issues
into various issues: 1. Manifest excess of powers; 2. Failure to provide reasons for the
decision; 3. Risk of double recovery in indirect claims; 4. Argentine law does not
recognize these types of claims; and 5. General international law does not allow
indirect actions to be taken in this case. The Committee will describe in that same

order Argentina’s arguments and EI Paso’s response in each case.
Manifest excess of powers

Argentina argued that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in exercising
jurisdiction over claims filed by El Paso since none of the rights held by that
company was affected. The measures taken by Argentina were in relation to the
electricity and the hydrocarbons sector of which the Argentine Companies, and not El

2
Paso, were part.”

According to Argentina, the Tribunal’s decision to award damages to El Paso on
the basis of the rights of the Argentine Companies is inconsistent with the ICSID
Convention and the BIT and, with that decision, the Tribunal acted beyond the
scope of its jurisdiction as set forth in Article 25(2) of the ICSID Convention. It also
noted that the BIT does not provide for the possibility that a shareholder may bring a
claim for the rights of a local company nor does it establish mechanisms to avoid the
risk of double claims and double recovery; accordingly, the Tribunal has manifestly

acted beyond the scope of its competence.”

EI Paso responded that the position of Argentina in stating that shareholders cannot

bring claims for damages is contrary to every reported decision of arbitral tribunals

2! Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {[J[ 82-87.
» Memorial on Annulment, {{ 31.
33 14., 49 38 and 39.

2

4S.

46.

47.

3

48.

concerning this matter. It also reiterated that its claim was a direct claim for the loss

in value of its shares in the Argentine Companies.”*
Failure to state reasons

Argentina stated that: “... in direct opposition to its conclusion that contracts and
licenses are not protected investments, the Tribunal awarded damages to El Paso for
measures that only affected contracts and licenses belonging to the Argentine
Companies.”

Argentina ended this allegation with the following sentence: “Under the terms of
Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention, the Tribunal failed to state the reasons on
which the Award was based. This failure to state the reasons warrants the annulment

of the decision.”*°

El Paso answered the argument of failure to provide reasons as follows:

“In its Memorial, Argentina employs a handful of artifices to dress up merits as
process. First, it seeks to create the illusion that the Award fails “to state the reasons
on which it is based” due to the non-existent contradictions that Argentina attempts
to read into it. However, instead of a correct portrayal of the award’s reasoning,
Argentina pulls citations out of context, plucking individual phrases hundreds of
paragraphs apart, and contrasting them in an attempt to insert a contradiction where
none exists.”

The risk of double recovery in filing indirect claims
Argentina stated that one of the main problems posed by admitting this type of

indirect claim is the risk of double recovery, which must be avoided through legal

considerations that the Tribunal is required to establish for these purposes, such as

** Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {ff 40 and 41.
°5 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 40.

?6 Id. 141; Reply on Annulment, {21 and 22.

?? Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 15.

49.

4

50.

51.

5

52.

who is the subject of the rights affected, and who is entitled to compensation.

According to Argentina, the Tribunal made no such analysis.”*

EI Paso asserted that based on paragraphs 202 and 214 of the Award, the Tribunal
held that El Paso’s rights can be ascertained independently from the rights of the
Argentine Companies and also, El Paso had a direct cause of action under the BIT in
connection with its investment, according to which the Tribunal awarded damages

on the basis of a direct claim.”
This type of claims are not allowed under Argentine law

Argentina asserted that derivative or indirect actions are not provided for under
Argentine law (which is the applicable law under Article 42(1) of the ICSID
Convention). It added that the Argentine Corporations Law No. 19,550 establishes is
the mechanisms available to the board of directors of corporations to file claims on
their behalf. That Law also regulates intra-company court actions to which a
shareholder might resort to defend the corporation’s interests. These actions tend to
protect the corporations as a whole and not a single shareholder such as El Paso.*” It

follows from these provisions that El Paso was not entitled to file a claim.

EI Paso submitted that the Tribunal awarded damages not for an alleged “derivative
or indirect” claim, but instead for its direct claim for the loss of its shares in the

Argentine Companies.*!

Under general international law indirect actions are not permitted

Argentina claimed that under general international law indirect actions, such as those
filed by El Paso, are not allowed. It based its argument on what the International

Court of Justice stated on the matter and noted that the rights claimed by that

?8 Memorial on Annulment, {| 42 and 43.

2° Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 43 and 44.
*° Memorial on Annulment, {{[ 44-48.

*! Counter-Memorial on Annulment, 941.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

company are not directly vested in it, but in the Argentine Companies. It also

indicated that such derivative actions must be expressly permitted.”

In conclusion, Argentina stated that El Paso had no legal standing under the BIT to

. ae «33
bring an indirect claim.*

EI Paso answered claims 4 and 5 above together; it stated that the Tribunal found
that El Paso’s claims were direct claims and that the lex specialis was governed by
Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and Article I of the BIT. Therefore, the
requirements for admissibility of derivative claims in international law asserted by
Argentina are irrelevant. It also stated that this argument is nothing more than an

attempt to revisit the Tribunal’s decision on jurisdiction.

El Paso concluded that the jurisdictional arguments of the Memorial on Annulment
are an unending discussion of the merits of the case and exceed the limited role of

Annulment.*°
Argentina replied:

“El Paso is mistaken in attempting to show that ius standi is not a relevant
criterion for the purposes of annulment. Quite on the contrary, Article 52 of the
ICSID Convention allows the annulment of an award to be requested based on
any of the grounds provided for therein, which include the manifest excess of
powers by the Tribunal. The issue of ius standi is closely connected to
jurisdiction.”*°

El Paso reiterated its position, based on a series of arbitral awards, that its claim was

not derivative but direct.*”

The causal link between the measures adopted by Argentina and the sale of El
Paso’s interest in the Argentine Companies

> Memorial on Annulment, {| 49 and 50.

3 id.,q52.

* Counter-Memorial on Annulment, [J] 88-92.
3 14., 49 93 and 94.

*6 Reply on Annulment, { 30.

57 Rejoinder on Annulment, {Jf 9-15.

58.

59.

60.

61.

Argentina alleged that the Tribunal failed to state the reasons for the Award,
manifestly exceeded its powers and seriously departed from a rule of procedure when
referring to the causal link between the measures adopted by Argentina and the sale
of El Paso’s interest in the Argentine Companies. Argentina claimed that during the
arbitration proceedings it found out that El Paso faced a difficult financial situation
and, for that reason, it had engaged in a massive sale of assets all over the world,
including in Argentina, where the sole exception to that sale was the Gasoducto del
Pacifico, engaged in the transport of natural gas. Argentina cited paragraphs 276 and

277 of the Award in which, in its opinion, the Tribunal confirmed these claims.*®

According to Argentina “the Tribunal recognized that it did not find a causal link
between the measures adopted by Argentina and the sale by El Paso of its interest in

the Argentine Companies” (emphasis in the original).*”

EI Paso pointed out that Argentina failed to cite any evidence to support its assertion
in the previous paragraph.” El Paso also explained that the Tribunal found “two
different causation standards.” To evaluate the claim of expropriation and

discrimination it used the “sole cause” “test” or standard (paragraph 270 of the
Award), and held that no automatic causal link had been recognized by the Tribunal
between Argentina’s measures and the sale of El Paso’s shares. It also noted that the
Tribunal was careful to point out that its decision on expropriation and the “sole
cause” test did not deprive El Paso of its right to compensation under other BIT
standards. El Paso added that the other “test” was the “prevailing cause” test and,
after explaining its reasoning in paragraphs 488-509 of the Award, the Tribunal held
that Argentina’s measures were the prevailing cause of El Paso’s sale of its shares in

2003."

Argentina stated in its Reply on Annulment that in the Award there is no reference

to the “sole cause” and the “prevailing cause” “tests” and that those standards are a

*8 Memorial on Annulment, { 54-59; Reply on Annulment, {{ 34.
39
Id., 1 62.
“° Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{ 95.
411d, Gg 96-102.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

construct of El Paso with a view to justifying the Tribunal’s failure to state the

- 2
reasons for the Award.”

Argentina also criticized the fact that, as it stated in the conclusion of paragraph 506
of the Award, the Tribunal referred only to journalistic information presented by El

3
Paso.*

Argentina also noted that the conclusion in paragraph 507 of the Award is
contradictory, provides no reasons for the decision, and violates a fundamental rule of

procedure.**

EI Paso contradicted the above statements and asserted that the Tribunal provided

detailed reasoning for its decision at paragraphs 488 to 509 of the Award.”

Argentina also noted an alleged contradiction in paragraph 508 of the Award and

stated that it is so manifest that it must lead to the annulment of Award in full.“

Regarding the contradiction alleged by Argentina, El Paso stated that there was none
and that this “... again is a decision the Tribunal made based on the merits of the case
and involves a nuanced weighting of the evidence presented by both parties.” In
addition, El Paso stated that the Tribunal itself answered this claim of Argentina in
paragraphs 683 and 684 of the Award in which reference is made to the alleged
failure to find the causal link between the measures taken by Argentina and the

damage suffered by El Paso.“*

EI Paso concluded that this claim is only Argentina’s “dissatisfaction” with the

analysis and determinations of the Tribunal.”

* Reply on Annulment, { 36.

Memorial on Annulment, | 63.

41d] 64.

5 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 102.
“© Memorial on Annulment, { 65.

* Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 106.
8 Td., Gg 107 and 108.

* Rejoinder on Annulment, { 19.

20

68.

69.

70.

Measures adopted by Argentina in relation to the spot price and the capacity
payments
In order to facilitate an understanding of this argument put forward by Argentina, the

Committee reproduced the following paragraph of the Award:

“Within the Electricity Regulatory Framework, a competitive system, the Wholesale
Electricity Market (WEM), was established in order to organise the sale of energy by
its generators. The two markets established within the WEM were: (i) the term
market, where producers and buyers could freely agree on sales, conditions and
prices; and (ii) the spot market, where energy was supplied, on an hourly basis, for a
uniform price linked to the short-term marginal cost of the energy produced.”*°

Argentina argued that the “... only attempt to provide reasons in the ruling [of the
Award] is contained in paragraphs 512-514.”""! It also stated that the Tribunal
analyzed separately each measure adopted by Argentina in the electricity sector and
did not find any violation of the rights of E] Paso. The Tribunal stated that there was
no concession contract embodying a stabilization clause and no contract with the
State resulting in rights capable of being invoked by El Paso. Argentina cited the
Tribunal’s conclusions expressed in paragraphs 416 and 419 of the Award, in
relation to the measures taken by Argentina to adapt the functioning of the WEM,
noting that capacity payments were subject to regulation by the Secretary of Energy.
Argentina also stated that with regard to the setting of the spot price and the seasonal
price the Tribunal did not find that such changes were unfair and inequitable. It
referred specifically to paragraph 422 of the Award in which the Tribunal stated that
none of the measures adopted in the electricity sector “is considered, per se, as a

violation of the WEM, nor a violation of FET.”

Nevertheless, according to Argentina, these findings were contradicted with no basis
by the Tribunal itself in paragraph 512 of the Award without any reasons being
provided. “No reasons are stated and no evidence is mentioned in order to justify the

assertion that ‘the very reason’ for the capacity payments was ‘to attract

*° Award, { 61.
*! Memorial on Annulment, {{ 70.
14.480.

21

: 99953
investment.””*

Argentina also noted a contradiction between the assertions outlined
in the previous paragraph and paragraph 514 of the Award. “The Tribunal fails to
explain why a commitment allegedly made ‘towards the companies in which El Paso
invested’—which according to the Tribunal itself, are neither investors nor
investments protected under the Treaty—may be invoked by EI Paso. The failure by

the Tribunal to state the reasons on which its decision was based is self-evident.” **

71. Argentina concluded that the contradictory conclusions and unfounded statements
that it had pointed out constitute sufficient grounds for the annulment of the Award
since they amount to a failure to state reasons, a manifest excess of powers and a
serious departure from a rule of procedure.

72. EI Paso said that Argentina was only trying to re-open the findings of the Tribunal
and “disguise as a request for annulment an appeal of the Award.”*°

73. EI Paso denied that the Tribunal’s reasoning was contained only in paragraphs 512
and 514. It noted that the issue of fair and equitable treatment was analyzed by the
Tribunal from paragraph 330; first it analyzed the measures individually and then as
a whole. El Paso noted that in paragraphs 510-512 the Tribunal did not analyze
Argentina’s measures individually, but the legal framework in general.°”

74. EI Paso added that these complaints by Argentina are an attempt to discuss issues of
fact and the application of law by the Tribunal. It also stated that in making the
argument of lack of reasoning it ignores the reasoning contained in over two hundred
paragraphs in the Award.**

Sid. qs.

14.982.

S14..4q83.

* Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 141.

114.9147.

81d. 9 148.

22

75.

76.

77.

78.

Argentina did not address this issue in its Reply on Annulment and El Paso only
indicated in its Rejoinder on Annulment that it is confident that simply by reading the

Committee will conclude that Argentina’s arguments are without merit.”°

The cumulative effect of the measures adopted by the Argentine Republic

Argentina stated that:

“...the Tribunal created a new standard, as if it had the power to create law or to
modify the BIT, and applied it to the facts of the case. Indeed, according to the
Tribunal, ‘in the same way as one can speak of creeping expropriation, there can also
be creeping violations of the FET standard.’ This is unprecedented in the history of
investment arbitration and is the reason why the Tribunal could not cite even a single
international rule, arbitral decision or paper by a legal author mentioning this new
concept of creeping violation of the standard of fair and equitable treatment, which
was invented by the Tribunal. Hence, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by
seeking to create a rule referring to a new way of violating the standard of fair and
equitable treatment that was not provided for by the parties to the Treaty.(emphasis in
the original)”

Argentina further asserted that the Tribunal resorted to Article 15 of the ILC’s Draft
Articles which contains the concept of composite acts. However—according to
Argentina—for such a composite act to exist, there must be a primary rule providing
that “... an accumulation of certain (lawful or wrongful) acts entails the breach of a
new obligation,” which, according to Argentina, is not the case here.*' In its Reply
on Annulment, Argentina added that it never had the opportunity to present
arguments against the existence of an alleged “composite act” within the meaning of

Article 15 of the ILC’s Draft Articles.”

Argentina noted that the BIT “...does not contain a standard condemning the
performance of a series of lawful acts or the commission of creeping violations of the
fair and equitable treatment standard and the Tribunal lacks the legislative capacity to

create it.” It also stated that there was no evidence whatsoever that Argentina and the

* Rejoinder on Annulment, { 25.

® Memorial on Annulment, {[ 85.

°' Id., 9 87 and 88; Reply on Annulment, 149.
© Reply on Annulment, { 47.

23

79.

80.

81.

82.

United States intended to establish a type of composite fair and equitable treatment,
and therefore the Tribunal did not resort to the applicable law, but to a different law
it created by itself.

Argentina indicated that the doctrine of composite act refers to a series of conducts
and the intent to cause damage as elements thereof; however, in this case the
Tribunal found that there was no intention to cause damage and, “as a result, on the
basis of this line of reasoning, the use of the concept of composite acts is not

admissible either.”

Argentina argued that allowing a tribunal to punish a State for adopting a series of
lawful measures which, taken together, allegedly amount to a wrongful act affects
legal certainty and constitutes both a manifest excess of powers and a serious
departure from the rules of procedure. It also claimed that the Tribunal violated the
guarantee of due process and the right to defense because Argentina did not have the
opportunity to defend itself against this position (cumulative effect) at any stage of

the proceedings.

Argentina argued that when there is a wrongful application of the law, and it is
egregious (as in this case), this is considered to be a ground for annulment. It added
that “what the Tribunal did here was not to misinterpret an Article of the BIT, but to
modify its content, thus turning it into a rule that provides for composite acts, which

amounts to a manifest excess of its powers.”°°

Argentina concluded this allegation as follows:

“\.the Tribunal’s ‘judicial creation,’ which jeopardizes legal certainty—not only in
this case, but also in future proceedings if this theory starts to be followed by other
tribunals—amounts to a manifest excess of the powers of the Tribunal, a failure to
state the reasons on which the decision was based, and a serious departure from the
tules of procedure, which warrants the annulment of the Award.”

°. Memorial on Annulment, {{ 89.
 Td., 49 93-95.

© Td., {91 96 and 97.

© Reply on Annulment, 9 55.

®’ Memorial on Annulment, { 101.

24

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

According to El Paso, the Tribunal did not commit any error likely to cause the
annulment of the Award when it ruled that the cumulative effect of the measures
violated the standard of fair and equitable treatment. It cited paragraph 517 of the
Award to assert that the Tribunal explained how it viewed “...Argentina’s wholesale
dismantling of the legal framework in the electricity market, not just individual,

incremental changes in the regulatory scheme.”°*

According to El Paso, the Tribunal did not create any new standard, but made an
analogy between Argentina’s actions that supposedly violated the FET standard and
to creeping expropriation to explain its decision. It added that even if the Tribunal
had misinterpreted the FET standard it would merely have been a misapplication of
law and not been a ground for annulment.” It also stated that the BIT did not contain
a definition for the fair and equitable treatment standard because the signatory States
of that treaty did not agree on a definition; so the Tribunal had to analyze it in order

to define it and apply it to the facts of the case.”

EI Paso also argued that in all the memorials the Parties discussed the concept of fair
and equitable treatment relative to the complete regulatory framework. It denied that

Argentina did not have the opportunity to defend itself against those arguments.”!

EI Paso also stated, based on several quotes from other awards, that the Tribunal did
not elaborate a new standard.” It also criticized Argentina’s arguments in relation to
the reference made by the Tribunal to Article 15 of the ILC’s Draft Articles, since
the latter are secondary rules, cited by the Tribunal as a reference point in its

interpretation of the proper law, the BIT.”

EI Paso cited several paragraphs of the “Claimant’s Memorial,” the “Claimant’s

Reply,” the “Claimant’s Statement” submitted on the first day of the hearing and the

®§ Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 113.

 Td., 99 114 and 118.

14.9 119.

14. 99 117.

™ 14,9122.

3 Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {| 124 and 126; Post-Hearing Counter-Submission — Argentina, { 44.

25

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

“Respondent’s Rejoinder” as a basis for its claim that in the proceedings there was

indeed reference to “... the legal regime... in terms of a composite regime nt

Based on the Kléckner v. Cameroon case,”> EI Paso argued that an arbitral tribunal is
entitled to formulate its own argument so long as that argument does not go beyond
the legal framework established by the Parties; in its opinion, the Tribunal did not
exceed this framework.”° For El Paso, the Tribunal did not fail to state its reasons
nor was its reasoning contradictory concerning the cumulative effects of the measures

adopted by Argentina which violated the fair and equitable treatment standard.

Argentina referred at length to the previous issue and concluded that “... there is no
doubt that the Tribunal that ruled on this case went beyond the legal framework

established by the parties.”””

At the end of the hearing on October 8 and 9, 2013, the Committee asked the Parties

to clarify several issues. Specifically, it asked El Paso to indicate:

. why it states that Argentina was aware, from the beginning, about El Paso’s
claim that the violations caused by the measures taken by Argentina, while they did
not violate the FET standard individually, when considered cumulatively, qualify as
violations of the FET and was, thus, in a position to defend itself, during the
arbitration proceeding, from the consequences of such claim.””*

The Committee also granted Argentina time so it could discuss the response it would
provide to El Paso. Subsequently, the parties submitted additional observations in a
second round of memorials. In the following paragraphs the Committee will

summarize the positions expressed in these briefs.

El Paso stated that its claim of unfair and inequitable treatment was based on a

cumulative basis and maintained that the opinions of Argentina’s own expert

™ Counter-Memorial on Annulment, { 129.

' Klockner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH et al. v. Republic of Cameroon and Société Camerounaise des Engrais,
ICSID Case No. ARB/81/2 [hereinafter “Kléckner”], Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application
for Annulment of the Arbitral Award, May 3, 1985.

14.9131.

7” Reply on Annulment, 1 59.

”* Letter from the Secretary of the Committee dated October 11, 2013.

26

93.

94.

95.

witnesses show that they were instructed to defend the claims on a cumulative basis.”
It added that, even if Argentina did somehow fail to understand the case it had to
meet, it managed to serve the appropriate evidence it deemed necessary “and so any
different understanding would not have produced any substantially different result.”*°
EI Paso also stated that there is no “legal standard of composite acts,” that the “legal
standard” is “treatment” and the Tribunal interpreted the term “fair and equitable
treatment”.*! For El Paso, how Argentina chose to present its case was Argentina’s
advocacy choice and this Committee should not allow Argentina to re-cast such

: 82
tactical choice.*”

According to El Paso, “the Tribunal was free to interpret ‘treatment’ in Article II
(2)(a) of the BIT as comprising all measures, considered collectively or on an
individual basis.” “The BIT does not define what ‘treatment’ must be for FET, and it
in no way excludes the possibility that the primary rule may be violated by multiple

9983
acts.”*

El Paso also indicated that, based on what was said by the Annulment Committee in
the Wena v. Egypt case,™* in order for the departure from a fundamental rule of
procedure to be a ground of annulment it must be serious, and the applicant must
show that the departure substantially affected the outcome of the case. It alleges that

Argentina failed to do so.*°

El Paso cited several paragraphs of the various pleadings filed by the Parties during

the arbitration process and the reports of the experts offered by both Parties, whereby

” Post-Hearing Brief-El Paso, {f 6 and 8.

1a G9.

Sia qd.

214. 18.

83 Id., 49. 37 and 38; Post- Hearing Reply - El Paso, {{f 13 and 14.

* Wena Hotels LTD. v. Arab Republic of Egypt, 1CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, [hereinafter “Wena Hotels”)
Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Arbitral Award, February 5, 2002.

85 Post-Hearing Brief - El Paso, { 42.

27

96.

97.

98.

99.

Id,
Id.,
Sid,
* 1d,
Id.

in its opinion it is shown that from the beginning of the proceedings it filed a claim

based on the cumulative effect of the measures.*°

According to El Paso, through its submissions during the proceedings, Argentina
defended the measures it adopted, individually and collectively. It did this when it
described the context in which the measures and the electricity and hydrocarbons

regulatory frameworks in general were adopted at a time of crisis in that country.*”

EI Paso referred to other documents in which Argentina recognized that there could
not be an isolated analysis of the measures challenged in the arbitral process and
further argued that El Paso had alleged violation of the BIT because of a set of
measures taken by the Argentine government.** It also claimed that even at the

7989 when, for

hearing it was demonstrated that “the cumulative FET issue was in play
example, in the examination of experts provided by the Parties, the latter indicated
that they had analyzed all the measures as a package, and the cumulative effect of

these measures.””

Regarding the term “treatment,” Argentina stated that the Award did not relate the
meaning of that term to Article II(2)(a) of the BIT; it further argued that the Award
mentions the concept of “composite act” only in the title and at the end of paragraph

519.7!

Furthermore, Argentina contended that the “Claimant never argued, not even in the
alternative, that the measures at issue, while they did not violate the FET standard
individually, amounted to a breach of that standard when considered cumulatively”

(emphasis in the original).

1
49 71-89.
4 94 and 95.

4H 102-104.

°! Post-Hearing Rejoinder, §{f 14 and 15.
° Post-Hearing Counter-Submission — Argentina, {{ 2.

28

100.

101.

102.

103.

Argentina also referred to the terms “composite act" and “creeping violation of the
standard of fair and equitable treatment,” describing concepts “... which came as an
unpleasant surprise in the Award. Be that as it may, it should be noted that El Paso
was also unable to rely on any other reason, concept or theory it had invoked in its
submissions to the Tribunal, to try and argue that each of the measures at issue in
isolation did not breach the FET standard but should otherwise be considered a

breach of FET.” (emphasis in the original)
El Paso rejected Argentina’s contention as follows:

“*’,,.mere surprise at the Tribunal’s decision does not entitle Argentina to annulment.
Argentina has the additional burden of showing that the alleged error substantially
affected the outcome of the case.””*

For Argentina, “[t]he claim presented was about individual breaches of the

Argentina-US BIT and about an accumulation of breaches, never about an

95

accumulation of lawful acts that somehow turn[ed] into an illegal act.”’” (emphasis in

the original). Moreover, in its opinion, the problem is that El Paso never argued the

“cumulative effect’ of lawful acts.”°°

Argentina also stated:

“Suffice it to mention only some of the issues Argentina was never able to discuss or
even raise before the Award was rendered:

Which lawful acts can be considered in the “accumulation” of measures and which
cannot?

If the series in question is not just an accumulation of BIT breaches but of lawful
acts, does the “cumulative effect” of the measures suffice to conclude that there has
been a composite wrongful act, or in this case does the latter concept require some
other factor that links all the acts?

Should the fact that each and every measure, when considered individually, does not
breach the BIT have an impact on, for example, the calculation of damages?

Given that all of the measures individually considered do not breach the BIT, what
should be the date of valuation for damage calculation purposes?”

8 14..94.

°* Post-Hearing Reply, 49.

°’ Post-Hearing Rejoinder, 6.

1d. 13.

°? Post-Hearing Counter-Submission — Argentina, { 14.

29

104. Argentina argued that El Paso analyzed the measures in question one by one and

105.

106.

107.

maintains that each of them violated the standard of fair and equitable treatment.”® It
also stated that “... the Tribunal never indicated, much less “clearly,” that it had
concerns about each measure being, in isolation, consistent with the FET but in
breach of such standard when considered collectively.” It concluded that Argentina
had no opportunity to present written and oral presentations on that concept which El

Paso did not raise.'”°

According to El Paso, the Tribunal’s decision on the issue of whether the various
measures adopted by Argentina were arbitrary and discriminatory has no bearing on
the determination of the total effect of these measures as unfair and inequitable
treatment.'°' El Paso also argued that Argentina failed to demonstrate that if the
concept of the violation of the standard of fair and equitable treatment in a cumulative
manner had not been raised in the arbitration process, this fact would have affected

the final outcome.'°

Argentina insisted that the concepts of composite act and creeping violation of the
FET standard first appeared in the Award, therefore it did not have the opportunity to
challenge such arguments. '° It was not allowed to discuss whether it is possible that
the concept of composite act may be said to be contained in the BIT, the conditions
for the application of these concepts, or the consequences of their application in terms

of liability and in terms of damages.'“

Argentina also questioned paragraphs 459 and 515 of the Award, for, in its opinion,
there is a contradiction between them with reference to the effects of pesification in
the Argentine Companies. It also noted that the Award must be annulled for manifest

excess of powers because the Tribunal could not conclude that the BIT was violated

8 14.,429.

9 14.,9,43.

10 14.943.

he Post-hearing Reply, {{ 19.
eI 1.

103

++ I
Post-Hearing Rejoinder, {[ 2.

41d. 43.

30

108.

109.

110.

los

by measures that were not subject to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. It noted also
that the use of “etc.” in paragraph 515 of the Award demonstrates the failure to state
the reasons for the decision since one cannot conclude precisely which measures were

considered by the Tribunal.’

The necessity defenses raised by the Argentine Republic

Regarding the defense of necessity, Argentina stated that the Tribunal did not apply
Article XI of the BIT which contains the so-called “non-precluded measures
provision.” According to Argentina, that Article does not contain the “non-
contribution” requirement and the fact that the Tribunal considered applying it with
a view to excluding the application of this rule, constituted a failure to rely on the
applicable law.'° Argentina also stated that the Tribunal was not consistent and
extrapolated the requirements laid down in other instruments absolutely inapplicable
to this case,'°’ and furthermore the Tribunal wrongly equated the “non-contribution”

requirement to the “state of necessity” when, in fact, they are different.'°*

Argentina also argued that the Tribunal did not address the defense that it filed of
state of necessity under customary international law independently of Article XI of
the BIT, which was inconsistent with the analysis made by the Tribunal in the
Award. It indicated that there are differences between Article XI of the BIT and
Article 25 of the ILC’s Draft Articles on the sphere of application of these rules,

their nature, operation, content, and scope.'

Once Argentina explained the differences identified, it stated that it demonstrated in
the arbitral proceedings that Article XI of the BIT is a self-judging provision, i.e.,
that the BIT Contracting State has the right to interpret that rule. It referred to the
evidence it brought to the proceedings in this matter and stated that the Tribunal “...-

acting in a purely arbitrary manner and manifestly exceeding its powers - did not

Post-Hearing Counter-Submission — Argentina, {| 13; Post-Hearing Rejoinder, {[ 27 and 28.

'°6 Memorial on Annulment, {J 106 and 107.
17 14. 139.

18 Td. 4 140.

109 Memorial on Annulment, {{f 109-123.

31

111.

112.

113.

1

5

1

5.

101g
Mag
M2 Ig

'8id.,

mention, let alone take into account, such critical piece of evidence submitted in the
course of these arbitration proceedings, in unjustifiably rejecting the self-judging
nature of the provision, disregarding what had been clearly acknowledged by both

parties to the Bir.”!!° (emphasis in the original)

Argentina also argued that the Tribunal did not explain why the term “essential
security interests” in Article XI of the BIT should be limited to matters of external
security instead of including internal security issues, especially in a crisis such as the

one experienced by Argentina.' "

Argentina also argued that the Tribunal did not state reasons and manifestly
exceeded its powers when it reached its conclusion in paragraph 591 of the Award.
For Argentina, what was done by the Tribunal amounts to non-application of the

applicable law.

Argentina alleged a failure to state reasons, a serious departure from a fundamental
rule of procedure, and a manifest excess of powers in relation to the Tribunal’s
statement that, unless the contrary is specified, the provisions of the BIT are not self-
judging in nature, because according to Argentina, in the conclusion expressed in
paragraphs 590 and 610 of the Award, the Tribunal disregarded the evidence

submitted by Argentina. 2

. Regarding the same issue, Argentina stated that the Tribunal “... refers in general

terms to the alleged object and purpose of the Treaty, without even considering
critical and irrefutable evidence that demonstrates that the intention of the parties to

the BIT is wholly inconsistent with its proposition.”!!

Argentina also pointed out that the statement made by the Tribunal in paragraph

603 of the Award, in which reference was made to Argentina’s knowledge of the

127.
128.
.. (9 132 and 142.
4 135.

32

self-judging nature of Article XI of the BIT is unfounded and inconsistent with the

evidence contained in the record.''

116. In addition, according to Argentina, the Tribunal did not apply Article IV(3) of the
BIT because the Tribunal reached the conclusion that this rule would have no effect;
in addition, no reasons were given for that decision, and therefore this amounted to

the Tribunal manifestly exceeding its powers.'!°

117. Argentina further argued that there is an inconsistency in the Award because the
majority of the Tribunal held that Argentina had not met the “non-contribution”
requirement and did not indicate what legal standard it analyzed in order to demand

that requirement. Argentina ended this argument as follows:

“the majority [of the Tribunal] did not state the reasons on which that part of the
Award was based, failed to explain the legal standards applied by it —particularly,
the meaning ascribed to ‘non-contribution’ in adopting its criterion— and referred
only to economic (rather than legal) arguments).”

118. El Paso contended that Argentina did not link its arguments in this section with the
grounds for annulment under Article 52 of the ICSID Convention. It considered that
the Tribunal, by invoking the “non-contribution” requirement from Article 25 of the
ILC’s Draft Articles was interpreting the “necessity” language of Article XI of the

BIT; that its reasoning was adequate and it applied the proper law.'!7

119. Regarding customary international law, El Paso stated that tribunals have discretion

as to how to express the reasons for their decisions. In the Award, the Tribunal gave
a lengthy explanation of the scope of Article XI with respect to the requirements of
international law; it also established that the lex specialis was Article XI and, after
stating that Argentina failed to meet the “non-contribution” requirement, the

Tribunal did not analyze the other requirements of Article 25 of the ILC’s Draft

414.4 138.

Id., 9 143 and 144.

"6 Tq. 4 157.
"7Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{ 155.

33

Articles. El Paso concluded that the truth is that Argentina does not agree with the

reasoning and the conclusions of the Tribunal.'®

120. Regarding the self-judging nature of Article XI of the BIT, El Paso stated that

Argentina was claiming that the Committee should re-examine the evidence received
regarding this issue. It further argued that Argentina could not prove that at the time
of signing of the BIT, there was a bilateral understanding on the self-judging nature
of that standard. It also alleged that, although the Tribunal did not specifically refer
to the evidence presented by Argentina, it gave sufficient reasons for it to be

understood why it would not consider it relevant or decisive.'"

121. EI Paso stressed that the Award is not annullable because Argentina does not share

the Tribunal’s position on the relevance of the evidence and it reiterated that, under
Rule 34(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules the Tribunal has wide latitude with

regard to the weighing of evidence.'”°

122. Regarding Article IV(3) of the BIT, El Paso stated that the Tribunal explained the

position of the parties on this standard and, in paragraph 559 of the Award,
concluded that Argentina’s argument in this regard went against the plain meaning
of the text and explained its position. For El Paso, Argentina’s claim is nothing more

than its dissatisfaction with the Tribunal’s decision.'?!

Issues related to the valuation of damages

123. Argentina argued that the amount of compensation awarded by the Tribunal is

us
119
120
121
122

contrary to applicable law and that there was manifest excesses of powers on the part
of the Tribunal in this matter. It indicated that, in terms of causality, there was a
failure to give reasons for decisions and manifest excess of powers because the proper

law was not applied.'* According to Argentina, El Paso did not invoke the

Id., | 165-166.
Id., (9 173-177.

Id., 178.

Id., | 181-184.

Memorial on Annulment, {| 163.

34

cumulative effects of the measures and, therefore, the Tribunal must conclude that
the valuation carried out by El Paso’s experts cannot be deemed to satisfy the
causation requirement. The valuation considered by the Tribunal was done by LECG
which made the valuation of damages for each measure, not by accumulation thereof.
Argentina argued that the Tribunal did not observe the “test” of causality in relation

to El Paso’s sale of shares in the Argentine Companies.'7*

124. Argentina also claimed that the Tribunal used the information in the Chorzéw

Factory case!™*

in terms of the compensation standard, however case law is not a
source of law in international arbitration. In addition there was contradiction in
applying the findings of Chorzéw because in that case it was a dispossession of an
industrial enterprise, whereas this is not a case of expropriation; thus, the Award is

. 2
contradictory. 12s

125. Argentina also stated that the Tribunal “in blatant contradiction with this approach,
by a majority decision, and manifestly exceeding its powers, adopted a valuation
taking values projected in 2003, after the alleged breaches by Argentina, placing El
Paso in a different situation than that existing before the alleged ‘creeping
measures.””!7°

126. For Argentina, the compensation ordered by the Tribunal is disproportionate and
arbitrary. In addition, in determining the amount of damages, the Tribunal did not
take into account the sales price of El Paso’s shareholding but rather adopted a
method that assumed that El Paso continues to keep those shares. According to
Argentina, these contradictions are evidence of the Tribunal’s failure to state the

reasons on which the decision is based.'*7

127. Argentina concluded as follows:

°3Td., 49. 158-168; Reply on Annulment, {{ 117.

"4 Factory at Chorzéw (Germany v. Poland) [hereinafter “Chorzéw”], 1927 P.C.LJ. (ser. A) No. 9 (July 26)
5 Memorial on Annulment, {{f 169-170; Reply on Annulment, { 123.

26 Memorial on Annulment, { 171.

2774. 4 173-174.

35

128.

129.

130.

Sia,

“The Tribunal held Argentina liable for the violation of a standard that is not
contained in the Treaty and then awarded damages to Claimant relying on a damage
assessment that was based on alleged BIT violations that are different from those
invoked by Claimant. In deciding on issues that had not been submitted to it, the
Tribunal seriously violated Argentina’s right of defence”!

El Paso pointed out that arbitral tribunals have a discretionary power to set the
amount of damages. It also noted that the argument that the Tribunal misapplied the
law is an insufficient ground for annulment. According to El Paso, Argentina does
not challenge the application of the proper law but essentially disagrees with the
Tribunal’s findings on damages. El Paso insisted that the Tribunal analyzed the
valuation mechanisms presented by the Parties and took into account LECG’s DCF

model endorsed by the Tribunal’s independent expert.'°

Regarding the reference by the Tribunal to the Chorzéw Factory case for the
adoption of the standard of compensation, El Paso explained that since the BIT does
not specify the applicable standard, the Tribunal looked to that case to determine the
standard. El Paso also indicated that, based on the decision of Compania de Aguas
del Aconquija S.A. y Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentina’ and what was expressed
by Professor Christoph Shreuer, an arbitral tribunal need not explicitly address every
single detail of what was argued by the parties. The Tribunal is afforded discretion as
to the way in which it expresses its reasoning in fixing damages whether it is stated

succinctly or at length.'*!

El Paso acknowledged that case law is not a source of law, but noted that the
Chorzéw Factory judgment is part of customary international law and a general
principle of international law that has been considered as the cornerstone of

compensation claims.

177.

° Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {{f 188, 190-191.
0 Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal (formerly Compagnie Générale des Eaux)
v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID Case No. ARB/97/3 [hereinafter “Vivendi I], Decision on Annulment, July 3,

2002.

Sid,

Ml 197-198.

36

131. Regarding the application of the Chorzéw standard and dispossession of an industrial

undertaking, which did not happen in this case, El Paso stated that in paragraph 702
of the Award the Tribunal explained the reason why it applied that standard to a
situation such as this, which involves the breach of the standard of fair and equitable

treatment, as other Tribunals have done.!*?

132. Regarding the use of prices projected in 2003, El Paso stated that the Tribunal

explained in paragraphs 704 and 733 to 736 its reasons for applying these projected
values. It also emphasized the discretion enjoyed by the Tribunal in this matter. Here
again this is not an issue of manifest excess of powers, but of Argentina’s

dissatisfaction with the Tribunal’s findings.'*?

133. Regarding the sale price of the shares and Argentina’s contention that the Tribunal

assumed that El Paso kept those shares and that that is a contradiction so as to form a
basis for annulment of the Award, El Paso indicated, based on several annulment
decisions, that the Committees should be extremely careful when reviewing
allegations of alleged contradictions in awards. It also analyzed the cost reports
provided by the arbitration records and the analysis submitted by the Tribunal’s own

expert and denied that there was any contradiction in this case.'**

134. EI Paso alleged that Argentina is seeking to reopen the merits of this dispute and

132
133
134

wishes the Committee to be converted into an appellate tribunal. It added that
Argentina’s assertion that it was denied procedural rights is unfounded. According to
El Paso, the Award contains a proper application of the law and a thoughtful, well-
reasoned, and calculated weighing of the factual evidence. It does not involve any
excess of power by the Tribunal or serious departure from the fundamental rules of

procedure. For these reasons, it requested the rejection of the alleged grounds for

Id. (91 199- 200.
Id., {§{ 201- 202; Rejoinder on Annulment, { 83.
Counter-Memorial on Annulment, {i 204- 208.

37

annulment and application for annulment; confirmation of the Tribunal’s Award; and

an order that Argentina pay costs.!*°

IV. ANALYSIS OF THE COMMITTEE

135.

136.

The Committee carefully considered the claim for annulment brought by Argentina.
In its submissions, Argentina presented three grounds which the Committee
summarized in the previous section. If the Committee were to analyze these grounds
in the same order in which they were presented, there would be unnecessary
repetition, as Argentina split its arguments on each ground into several sections. For
this reason, in the chronology set out below, the Committee will follow the order in
which Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention provides the grounds for annulment

applicable to the case.

In order to fully understand Argentina’s claim and the position of El Paso in this
annulment proceeding, the Committee believes it is convenient to reproduce the

following rules:

Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention lists the grounds for annulment as follows:

“(1) Either party may request annulment of the award by an application in writing
addressed to the Secretary-General on one or more of the following grounds:

(a) that the Tribunal was not properly constituted;

(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers;

(c) that there was corruption on the part of a member of the Tribunal;

(d) that there has been a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure; or
(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on which it is based.”

Article IV(3) of the BIT states:

“Nationals or companies of either Party whose investments suffer losses in the
territory of the other Party owing to war or other armed conflict, revolution, state of
national emergency, insurrection, civil disturbance or other similar events shall be
accorded treatment by such other Party no less favorable than that accorded to its own
nationals or companies or to nationals or companies of any third country, whichever
is the more favorable treatment, as regards any measures it adopts in relation to such
losses.”

85 14. 4 209-211.

38

137.

138.

139.

Article XI of the BIT provides:

“This Treaty shall not preclude the application by either Party of measures necessary
for the maintenance of public order, the fulfillment of its obligations with respect to
the maintenance or restoration of international peace or security, or the Protection of
its own essential security interests”.

In the following paragraphs, the Committee will review the allegations raised by
Argentina corresponding to those which are exhaustively listed in Article 52 of the
ICSID Convention; the remaining allegations, which do not refer to the grounds for

annulment, will be rejected without any analysis.

Manifest excess of powers

The manifest excess of powers of an arbitral tribunal may take place when a Tribunal
is resolving jurisdictional issues or issues concerning the merits of the case. This can
happen when a tribunal rules on matters that the parties did not submit for its
decision; when it did not to apply the proper law; or when it did not apply the law

agreed on by the parties. In these cases, the excess of powers must be “manifest.”
The Committee considers it important to highlight the following:

“Ad hoc Committees have acknowledged the principle specifically provided by the
Convention that the Tribunal is the judge of its own competence. This means that the
Tribunal has the power to decide whether it has jurisdiction to hear the parties’
dispute based on the parties’ arbitration agreement and the jurisdictional requirements
in the ICSID Convention. In light of this principle, the drafting history suggests—and
most ad hoc Committees have reasoned—that in order to annul an award based on a
Tribunal’s determination of the scope of its own jurisdiction, the excess of powers
must be “manifest.” However, one ad hoc Committee found that an excess of
jurisdiction or failure to exercise jurisdiction is a manifest excess of powers when it is
capable of affecting the outcome of the case.”1°°

'86 Background Paper on the Annulment Mechanism for the ICSID Administrative Council, August 10, 2012,

189.

39

140.

141.

142.

143.

“Manifest excess of power” has been defined as that which is obvious, clear, or self-
evident; discernible without the need for elaborate interpretations.'*” However, for
some ad hoc committees that concept is more complex; e.g., for the committee in the
Fraport case manifest excess must be demonstrable and substantial and not lead to
doubt. That committee said: “The Committee considers that the excess of jurisdiction
should be demonstrable and substantial and not doubtful.” '* “It seems to this
Committee that a manifest excess of power implies that the excess of power should at

once be textually obvious and substantially serious”.'”

The Committee considers that not every excess of powers may result in the
annulment of an award because, in accordance with Article 52 of the ICSID

Convention, an award may be annulled only if the excess of powers is “manifest.”

Pursuant to the plain meaning of the word “manifest” in the context of Article 52 of
the ICSID Convention and considering the finality and binding nature of awards,
features set forth in Article 53 of said Convention, for this Committee, the excess of

powers should be obvious, evident, clear, self-evident and extremely serious.

Regarding the failure to apply the proper law, “[t]he drafting history of the ICSID
Convention shows that a Tribunal’s failure to apply the proper law could constitute a
manifest excess of powers, but that erroneous application of the law could not amount
to an annullable error, even if it is manifest ... there is no basis for an annulment due
to an incorrect decision by a Tribunal, a principle that has been expressly recognized

by many ad hoc Committees.”'*°

‘Wena Hotels, Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Arbitral Award, February 5, 2002 {| 25;
Azurix Corp. v. Argentina, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12, Decision on Annulment, September 1, 2009 { 68;
M.C.I. Power Group and New Turbine Inc. v. Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/03/6, [hereinafter “M.C.I”],
Decision on Annulment, October 19, 2009, 49 and Impregilo S.P.A. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No.
ARB/07/17, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment, January 24, 2014, 128.

88 Fraport Frankfurt Airport Services Worldwide v. Republic of the Philippines [hereinafter “Fraport”],
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/25, Decision on Annulment, December 23, 2010, { 43 and 44.

'° Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/7, Decision on Annulment,
June 5, 2007, 1 40.

‘40 Background Paper on the Annulment Mechanism for the ICSID Administrative Council, August 10, 2012,

q9ol

40

144. In the opinion of this Committee, it is necessary to distinguish between the failure to

145.

146.

a

apply the proper law and an error in the application of that law. The first is a ground
for annulment under Article 52, the second is not. Reviewing the substantive
reasoning by which an arbitral tribunal reached its conclusions would require
reexamining how the tribunal applied or interpreted the law, which would transform
annulment committees into appellate tribunals. Under this scenario, committees
would necessarily have to evaluate the facts and the evidence as well as the legal
principles put forward by the parties all of which were already analyzed by the
respective arbitration tribunal. This would change the very nature of the ICSID

arbitration system.

In this case, Argentina argued that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers
under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention regarding: i. jurisdictional issues; ii.
the causal link between the measures adopted by Argentina and the sale of El Paso’s
interest in the Argentine Companies; iii. the measures adopted in relation to the spot
price and the capacity payments; iv. the cumulative effect of the measures; v. the
necessity defenses raised by Argentina during the arbitration process and vi. issues
related to the valuation of damages. The Committee will examine each of these

arguments in turn.
i. Jurisdictional Issues

Argentina argued that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in relation to

jurisdictional issues:

When the Tribunal recognized in paragraph 175 of the Award that the arguments of
El Paso were not viable because they entailed claiming twice for damages caused by
the same event, the Tribunal should have rejected the claim. According to
Argentina, the Tribunal clearly lacks the jurisdiction to amend a claim so as to

make it viable because this implies rendering an ultra petita decision;'*!

'S! Memorial on Annulment, { 19.

4l

b

c

d)

e

147.

148.

149.

When the Tribunal acted in a contradictory manner by accepting the damages
valuation submitted by LECG which implicitly referred to the damage sustained by
the Argentine Companies;'*”

When the Tribunal ruled that the measures taken by Argentina were one of the
reasons that contributed to the damage sustained by El Paso and that there is a causal
link between these measures and the alleged damage suffered;'*7

When the Tribunal sought to justify its jurisdiction by stating that the BIT grants
shareholders a direct right of action;!*+ and

When the Tribunal exercised jurisdiction over El Paso’s claims for damages even
though none of the rights held by that company was affected by the measures taken
by Argentina. For Argentina, the Tribunal’s decision to award damages to El Paso
on the basis of the alleged rights of the Argentine Companies is inconsistent with the
ICSID Convention and the BIT, so the Tribunal exceeded the limits of its powers

set forth in those rules.'“°

Next, the Committee will focus on analyzing the five overriding arguments related to
the Tribunal’s manifest excess of powers in relation to jurisdictional issues

submitted by Argentina:

In its claim regarding paragraph 175 of the Award (subparagraph (a) of paragraph
146 above), Argentina stated that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to amend a claim
to make it viable and in doing so it acted ultra petita (see paragraph 31 above).
According to Argentina, the Tribunal by accepting El Paso’s claim exhibited a

manifest excess of powers.

In the Committee’s opinon that there was no amendment nor was there a situation of
ultra petita as alleged by Argentina and even less an obvious or self-evident excess of

powers discernible without the need for an elaborate interpretation.

(21.
22.

(91 26 and 27.
.. (9 31 and 38.

42

150.

151.

152.

153.

The Committee notes that paragraph 175 of the Award is linked to paragraph 174, in
which the Tribunal explained that El Paso argued that Article I of the BIT has a
very broad wording, so in its opinion , it could include the shares in the Argentine
Companies, as well as legal and contractual rights of these companies. Accordingly,
the Tribunal stated in paragraph 175 of the Award that these arguments were not
feasible because they involved claiming twice for damages arising from the same
event. In paragraphs 178 to 198 of the Award, the Tribunal examined the arguments
of El Paso and stated what in its opinion were not investments under the BIT, while
in paragraphs 199 to 214 it defined which of El Paso’s claims were indeed
investments protected by Article I of the BIT. It carefully distinguished between the
Argentine Companies’ contractual rights, which it does not consider protected
investments, and El Paso’s shares, which it does consider as such. This distinction
clarifies that the Tribunal concentrates on the claim that El Paso brought in its own

right and avoids at the same time the danger of double compensation.

Argentina did not show how, in its view, in those paragraphs or others of the Award,
the Tribunal “amended” El Paso’s claim in those paragraphs or others of the Award
and thus committed the violation of ultra petita, thereby, manifestly exceeding its

powers.

For the above reasons, the Committee will reject the ultra petita argument raised by

Argentina under the heading of manifest excess of powers.

Regarding the allegation of contradiction that caused the Tribunal to supposedly
display manifest excess of powers (subparagraph (b) of paragraph 146 above),
Argentina claimed that this contradiction occurred when the Tribunal accepted the
valuation of damages made by LECG, which implicitly referred to the damage that
the Argentine Companies would supposedly have suffered, while in paragraphs 188,
194, 195, 198 and 214 of the Award, the Tribunal stated that rights, licenses or
contractual rights were not investments protected by the BIT, and only the shares

were.

43

154.

155.

156.

157.

The Committee believes that it is necessary to point out that any incidental
contradictions in the Award is not necessarily a ground for annulment because the
Committee cannot review whether the Award is fair or not, right or wrong. Nor can it
evaluate the evidence, as claimed by Argentina on this particular issue, when it tells
the Committee that the report providing a valuation of damages and which was
considered by the Tribunal implicitly has content that is inconsistent with the view

expressed by that Tribunal in the Award.

The ICSID Convention does not empower this Committee to evaluate the evidence
referred in paragraph 153, which the Tribunal already evaluated, nor to decide
whether implicitly or explicitly, that report included damages that should not have
been included. Nor can it judge whether such damages were valued by the Tribunal
improperly or unfairly. To do so would convert the recourse of annulment into an

appeal.

As indicated above, the Committee will also reject the application for annulment filed
by Argentina for alleged manifest excess of powers by contradictions in the Award.

with respect to damages.

Another annulment argument related to jurisdictional issues refers to paragraphs 175
and 687 of the Award in which the causal link between the measures adopted by
Argentina and the damage suffered by El Paso (subparagraph (c) of paragraph 146
above) is analyzed. Argentina stated that “... the Tribunal, dogmatically and without
providing the reasons for its decision, manifestly exceeded its powers.”!4° Argentina,

7 stated “...the

after criticizing the method used for valuing the alleged damage,"
Tribunal allowed El Paso to bring a claim for contract breaches which, at the same
time, purportedly amount to violations of the obligations assumed by Argentina to
investors under the BIT, as if there was no corporate distinction between El Paso and

the Argentine Companies in which it is a shareholder and as if the Tribunal itself had

‘46 Memorial on Annulment, { 22.
71d.,9 23.

44

158.

159.

160.

M8 1g
19 1g
150 Tg
Ist tg

not expressly recognized that the contracts of the Argentine Companies are not

protected investments.”

Argentina’s arguments contained in the preceding paragraph are complaints typical
of an appeal. Clearly, Argentina disagrees with the valuation method used by the
Tribunal and further stated that the Tribunal “...allowed El Paso to bring a claim for
contract breaches which, at the same time, purportedly amount to violations of the
obligations assumed by Argentina to investors under the BIT” and allowed a
double recovery.'°° The Committee considers it important to state that an arbitral
tribunal cannot “allow” or “prevent” a party from claiming what it considers
appropriate. What is finally granted by the Tribunal may or may not be the full
amount claimed by the claimant; thus, in paragraphs 174 and 175 of the Award the
Tribunal stated that El Paso’s claims were contradictory and therefore not viable. By
stating the contradiction in the Claimant’s reasoning, the Tribunal did not incur in a
cause for annulment, as Argentina stated. The possibility of a “double recovery” is
an issue that the Tribunal, (not the Committee), should and did consider. The causal
link between the measures taken by the Government of Argentina and the damages
claimed was precisely what the Tribunal analyzed in the Award. To this end it
examined the reports of the experts of the Parties and another independent expert
appointed by the Tribunal. The Committee cannot and should not decide whether the
causal link made by the Tribunal based on the evidence received is correct or

incorrect.

For the foregoing reasons, the Committee will also reject Argentina’s argument

presented in the preceding two paragraphs.

Another allegation of Argentina on jurisdictional issues!*!

that would allegedly lead
to the annulment of the Award is founded on the Tribunal’s decision to exert its

competence (subparagraph (d) of paragraph 146 above) “... by stating that the Treaty
., (24.
., (24.

25.
., (9 26-30.

45

161.

162.

163.

w152

grants shareholders a right of direct action, . allowing a shareholder to take

advantage of the ICSID system... amounts to a manifest excess of powers by the

99153
1.275

Tribunal Immediately after Argentina made those statements it stated:

“As previously stated, the Tribunal held that the investment protected under the BIT
‘was constituted by the shares in the Argentinian companies that belonged to El Paso’
and that protection applies to ‘the shares, all the shares, but only the shares.’ This
justification confuses the legal standing that a shareholder may have, in general
terms, to bring a claim under the BIT with the substantial rights arising from its
shares. If the Argentine Republic had adopted measures with respect to El Paso’s
rights arising from its protected investment under the Treaty—i.e., the shares—(for
example, the right to transfer its shares or receive dividends) such measures would
have referred to the rights arising from the shares held by El Paso. In this case,
however, Argentina did not adopt any measures that might affect the rights of El Paso
as a shareholder in the Argentine companies.”

The above quote proves that Argentina is asking this Committee to determine that
Argentina did not take any action that affected the rights of El Paso. Obviously, such
a determination could only be made by the Tribunal, not by this ad hoc Annulment

Committee.

From paragraphs 199 to 214 of the Award the Tribunal analyzed what was the
investment of El Paso. In its summary of paragraphs 213 and 214 it stated that the
investment protected by the BIT is constituted by the shares in the Argentine
Companies that belonged to El Paso. It is obvious that said paragraph cannot be read
in isolation, as in the preceding paragraph the Tribunal stated that “... El Paso’s
shareholdings in the Argentinian companies are protected regardless of whether they
are majority or minority participations.” The Committee does not find that the
Tribunal “confuses the legal standing that shareholders may have, in general terms,
to bring a claim under the BIT with the substantial rights arising from its shares” or

that this “confusion” would bring about the cancellation of the Award.

Based on the conclusion in the preceding paragraph, the Committee also will reject

this argument for annulment founded on “jurisdictional issues.”

214.426.
‘8314.4 27.
414.429.

46

164,

165.

166.

167.

155

. The last allegation of manifest excess of powers based on jurisdictional issues is that,
supposedly, the Tribunal exercised jurisdiction over damage claims filed by El Paso
without any of the rights of that company having been affected by the actions of

Argentina (subparagraph (d) of paragraph 146 above).

This Committee believes that the Tribunal decided on its jurisdiction and decided
broadly what could constitute an investment under the BIT and what would not. The
Tribunal also considered carefully the decisions of other Tribunals in relation to that
BIT standard and summarized its conclusions on the protection of majority or
minority interests and rights of foreign shareholders in local companies.'*5 The
Committee does not consider that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in the
matters indicated; it is of the opinion that the Tribunal made an extensive analysis of
many issues before defining what applied to the case and what did not. Besides, this
Committee’s analysis cannot judge whether any of El Paso’s rights was affected, as

the damages claim has already been decided by the Tribunal.

As indicated in the previous paragraph, the Committee also will reject this last

argument based on “jurisdictional issues.”

it. The causal link between the measures adopted by Argentina and the sale of

El Paso’s interest in the Argentine Companies

Argentina argued that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers when referring
to the causal link between the measures adopted by Argentina and the sale of El
Paso’s interest in the Argentine Companies. It explained that in the arbitration
proceedings it demonstrated that it was the global situation of the company itself why
EI Paso chose to sell those shares; it criticized the evaluation made by the Tribunal
from the journalistic evidence supplied by El Paso and pointed to inconsistencies in

paragraph 508 of the Award.'*°

Award, {if 205-212.

‘56 Memorial on Annulment, {{[ 53-68.

47

168.

169.

170.

The Committee notes that although Argentina, in the paragraphs relating to this
claim, reiterated its allegation of manifest excess of powers by the Tribunal, it gave
no grounds for annulment of the Award on the basis of these facts. The evaluation
made by the Tribunal from journalistic evidence is a task for that body, not for this
Committee. That evaluation criticized by Argentina concerning the reasons why El
Paso sold the shares is a matter over which the Tribunal alone has powers. It fully
exercised them in a long explanation of the facts in paragraphs 114 to 122 of the
Award, and in a carefully reasoned argumentation, according to which the measures
were not the only but certainly the prevailing reason for El Paso’s sales (paragraph
507 of the Award). This Committee cannot and should not discuss Argentina’s
allegation of “El Paso’s serious crisis”; neither is the Committee authorized to
determine what other assets El Paso sold or did not sell in other countries during the

crisis in Argentina.

Regarding “... the inconsistency ...so manifest” claimed by Argentina,'*’ the
Committee reiterates that, even if it existed, any contradiction on its own is not
grounds for annulment. Inherent inconsistencies must be such that they are material to
the outcome and thus, amount to a ground of annulment. In theory, there might be
instances where inherent inconsistencies may amount to a lack of reasons or a
manifest excess of powers, but this is not the case here. Paragraph 508 of the Award
about which Argentina claims there is an “inconsistency” should be read in
conjunction with paragraph 509, since the former refers to the measures taken by
Argentina considered individually, while in paragraph 509 the Tribunal stated that it
would analyze the effects of those measures as a whole to determine whether there

was a violation of the standard of fair and equitable treatment.

Without judging in any way whether the measures taken by Argentina, individually
or collectively, were what led to El Paso’s sale of the shares, this Committee does not
find that paragraphs 508 and 509 are contradictory, since they refer to two kinds of

analyses made by the Tribunal. Nor does it find that there is any basis to assert that

S714. 65.

48

171.

172.

173.

174.

paragraph 508 demonstrates a manifest excess of powers because in it the Tribunal

analyzes the measures claimed by El Paso as violating its rights.
For the foregoing reasons, the Committee will reject this argument for annulment.

Argentina also stated: “In direct opposition to the analysis of the sale process of the
Argentine Companies, the Tribunal—which thus manifestly exceeded its powers—
concluded that the measures adopted by the Argentine Republic were the prevailing
reason for the sale by El Paso in 2003 and that this was a violation of the standard of

fair and equitable treatment.”!*

The way in which Argentina presented the arguments for annulment requires the
Committee to reiterate that contradictions per se are not valid grounds for annulling
an award. In addition, the Committee considers it necessary to indicate that in the
Memorial on Annulment and then in the Reply on Annulment, Argentina repeated
the reference to paragraphs 277 and 508 of the Award and reiterated that the
Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers when it decided that the main reason for the
sale of the shares held by El Paso were the measures adopted by Argentina. The
Committee has found no explanation that would lead it to conclude that the Tribunal
made a decision on matters that the Parties did not submit for its decision, or that it
did not apply the proper law on this issue. The Committee therefore does not consider
that the Tribunal by reaching its conclusion on this matter exceeded its powers.

Accordingly, it will reject this argument for annulment.
iii. Spot price and capacity payments

Regarding the measures taken by Argentina in connection with the spot price and
capacity payments, Argentina alleged a manifest excess of powers on the part of the
Tribunal by contradicting itself in the analysis of the measures adopted in the
electric power sector. The Tribunal held that there was no contract between El Paso

and Argentina embodying a stabilization clause; that the Electricity Act does not

158 1d. 67.

49

175.

176.

provide for capacity payments to be stated in dollars; and that the Tribunal did not
consider that unfair and inequitable changes were made in the setting of the spot price
and the seasonal price. According to Argentina, the conclusion in paragraph 512 of
the Award contradicts the above analysis of the Tribunal. These contradictory
conclusions and unfounded statements are, in the opinion of Argentina, a manifest
excess of powers.'°° Argentina also argued that the above statements contradict
paragraph 514 of the Award’ and that these allegedly contradictory findings are a

cause for annulment since they amount to a manifest excess of powers.

The Committee reiterates that the alleged contradictions on their own, even if they
existed, are not grounds for annulment of the Award. The Tribunal analyzed the
Argentinian measures first in the general macroeconomic context (paragraphs 390-
402) and then, more specifically, for the electricity sector (paragraphs 403-458). It
carefully analyzed caps on spot prices (paragraphs 410-416) and the changes of the
capacity payments (paragraphs 417-422). It concluded that these measures were not a
violation of the FET (paragraphs 422). It continued to analyze further measures in the
oil and gas sector (paragraphs 423-449) including pesification (paragraphs 450-458).
It concluded that none of the measures individually constitutes a violation of the FET
standard. The Committee is unable to see any contradiction nor any cause for

annulment in this reasoning.

Paragraph 512 of the Award shows that for the foreign investor the important thing
was that payments are made in dollars. That statement was supported by the
Tribunal in the opinion of El Paso’s expert reproduced in paragraph 511 of the
Award. In the second sentence of paragraph 512 the Tribunal held that Argentina
did not consider the ultimate goal of capacity payments, which was to attract foreign
investment. According to Argentina that statement is contradictory and by that
finding the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers. The Committee believes that

those issues were presented by the Parties to consider whether there had been a

159 Td. FJ 69-83.
10 Td. 482.

50

177.

178.

179.

180.

violation of the standard of fair and equitable treatment, so the Tribunal did not

exceed its powers in analyzing them.

As regards what was expressed by the Tribunal in paragraph 514 in relation to the
currency agreed on in the contracts and the possible consideration that said agreement
was a special commitment to the investor, it is important to note that the
abovementioned cannot be understood in isolation, instead it must be read at least in
conjunction with the two preceding paragraphs in which the Tribunal indicated the
matters that, in its view, the investor considered when making the investment. In the
opinion of this Committee, if there is any contradiction in the wording of paragraph
514 when compared to paragraph 458, it is not of such a magnitude as to affect the
final outcome of the Award which held Argentina liable for the cumulative effect of

the measures, not for the consequences of pesification.

Accordingly, the Committee does not consider that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded

its powers and therefore will reject this argument for annulment.
iv. Cumulative effect of the measures

Regarding the cumulative effect of the measures adopted by Argentina, the latter
argued in its Memorial on Annulment that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its
powers'*! because, in its opinion, the Tribunal created a new standard by referring in
the Award to the creeping violations of the standard of fair and equitable
treatment;! also because, according to Argentina, the Tribunal did not resort to the

applicable law, but to a different law created by itself.

The Committee carefully reviewed the above-mentioned argument and concluded that
what the Tribunal did in the Award was an interpretation of fair and equitable

treatment of the BIT in relation to the facts of the case, based on what was decided by

161 Td. 4 85-87 and 89.
10 Award, (518.

Sl

181.

182.

183.

the Tribunals in the Société Générale v. The Dominican Republic! © and the LG&E et

al. v. Argentina’ cases.

The Committee also considers that the Tribunal developed in paragraphs 515 to 517
the reasons for the conclusion that it reached in paragraph 519 concerning the
cumulative effects of the measures taken by Argentina. It argued that one must not
only look at these measures individually but in their totality and “that a combination
of all these measures completely altered the overall framework” (paragraph 515). It
added referring to Société Générale v. The Dominican Republic,'” “that acts that are
not illegal can become such by accumulation” (paragraph 516). These are the
arguments (and not the reference to the concept of creeping expropriation), that led
the Tribunal to the conclusion that a breach of the fair and equitable treatment
standard existed. The Tribunal drew the parallel in paragraph 518 and found that it
reinforced its argumentation. The Committee does not understand the Tribunal as
stating that Argentina is liable because there had been a creeping violation of the
standard of fair and equitable treatment. Although this concept was mentioned in

paragraph 518 of the Award, this was not the reason for the finding of liability.

Paragraph 518 is not the basis for the conclusion that the Tribunal reached in
paragraph 519 of the Award, in which it found that there had been a violation of fair
and equitable treatment by the cumulative effects of the measures adopted by
Argentina. Thus, there was no creation of a new standard nor was another law
applied to the case. Accordingly, the Committee considers that the Tribunal did not

manifestly exceed its powers in this matter.

The Committee is of the opinion that it is useful to consider the statement in the AES
et al v. Hungary case in which the ad hoc committee discussed a similar argument for

annulment, since the arbitral tribunal in that case stated the following in the award:

6 Société Générale v. Dominican Republic, Case LCIA No. UN 7927 [hereinafter “Société Générale”),
Award on Preliminary Objections to Jurisdiction, September 19, 2008.
'! LG&E Energy Corp. LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E International Inc, v. Argentine Republic, 1CSID

Case No. ARB/02/1 [hereinafter “LG&E”, Decision on Liabilit
Soc

165

 

October 3, 2006.
Générale, Award on Preliminary Objections to Jurisdiction, September 19, 2008.

 

52

184.

185.

186.

“Tn 2001, there was a great probability that there would be no administrative pricing
after 2004, but this does not equate to absolute certainty giving rise to internationally
protected legitimate expectations.’ The committee in that case examined the
position of the parties with respect to the claimants’ argument for annulment in that
the arbitral tribunal applied a nonexistent standard when it spoke of the “absolute

certainty standard” and stated:

“Regarding the ‘absolute certainty’ issue, the Committee is unable to find that the
Tribunal has introduced a distinct legal standard which is invented, illogical or
otherwise incorrect. As noted by Hungary, the reference only appears in the Award
after the Tribunal found that, as a matter of law, in order to be legitimate and bind
government conduct, an expectation has to be based on express governmental
assurances and representations. The Tribunal then found, as a matter of fact, that AES
failed to produce evidence of those assurances or representations.”!”

Similar to the AES case, in the present case it is not possible to consider that the

Tribunal created a new standard in the Award.

Argentina also stated that an error of law, when it is egregious, is considered to be
grounds for annulment. According to Argentina, what the Tribunal did “was not to

misinterpret the BIT, but to modify its content, thus turning it into a rule that

. - . : " P: 99168
provides for composite acts, which amounts to a manifest excess of its powers.

The Committee reiterates the following concept which it has already stated in a

different way in this decision:

“The drafting history of the ICSID Convention also demonstrates that annulment ‘is
not a procedure by way of appeal requiring consideration of the merits of the case,
but one that merely calls for an affirmative or negative ruling based upon one [of the
grounds for annulment].’ It does not provide a mechanism to appeal alleged
misapplication of law or mistake in fact. The Legal Committee confirmed by a vote

‘66 AES Summit Generation Limited and AES-Tisza Erémii KFT v. Hungary, \CSID Case ARB/O7/22
{hereinafter “AES”], Award, September 23, 2010, {[ 9.3.25.; AES, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the
Application for Annulment, June 29, 2012, {82.

'” AES, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment, June 29, 2012, 95.

‘68 Reply on Annulment, {| 55.

53

that even a ‘manifestly incorrect application of the law’ is not a ground for
annulment.”!

187. The Committee does not consider that there is a “modification” in the contents of the
BIT as Argentina claimed. As the Tribunal pointed out in paragraph 338 of the
Award, the BIT does not define what is meant by fair and equitable treatment; El
Paso made the same point in paragraph 38 of its Post-Hearing Brief. In the opinion of
the Committee, El Paso is right to indicate that the BIT does not exclude any form of
violation of that standard, whether through individual acts or through the cumulative
effects of the acts indicated as violations of that standard. The Tribunal, after giving
a detailed explanation of the content of the standard of fair and equitable treatment,

analyzed both forms of violation, based on its reasoned interpretation of the BIT.

188.

oo

For the above reasons, the Committee finds that there was no manifest excess of
powers on the part of the Tribunal, arising from the decision on the cumulative

effects of the measures taken by Argentina.
v. Defenses of necessity

189. Argentina also argued manifest excess of powers with regard to the defenses raised.

It stated that:

a) In analyzing Article XI of the BIT to determine whether or not it is a self-judging
standard the Tribunal did not even mention the evidence submitted by Argentina

in the course of the arbitration proceedings.'”°

b) The Tribunal also erred when it concluded in paragraph 591 of the Award that
Argentina could not rely on the BITs entered into after 1991 nor on the 1992
Model Treaty.'7!

'® Background Paper on the Annulment Mechanism for the ICSID Administrative Council, August 10, 2012,
473.

0 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 127.

M149 131.

54

190.

191.

19:

193.

173

S

2.

wo

c

The Tribunal also exceeded its powers when it employed a speculative exercise in

paragraph 594 of the Award.'”

d

The Tribunal failed to apply Article VI (3) of the BIT.'”

e

The Tribunal failed to examine the defense of necessity under customary

international law!”

In the following paragraphs, the Committee will consider these five arguments of

Argentina:

Regarding the alleged violation related to the evidence that Argentina submitted
about the nature of Article XI of the BIT (subparagraph (a) of paragraph 189 above),
the Committee must, once again, reiterate that it is not an appeal tribunal and
therefore cannot or should not decide whether evidence was well or ill-considered or
not considered at all by the Tribunal. Rule 34 (1) of the Arbitration Rules is clear
when it indicates that the Tribunal alone is empowered to decide on two
fundamental issues related to the allegation of Argentina: the admissibility of

evidence and its probative value.

Moreover, the Committee considers it is important to note that the Tribunal in
paragraphs 563 to 587 of the Award, analyzed evidence submitted by Argentina and
El Paso on this specific issue and referred to it when addressing the arguments of
each Party. Therefore, the Committee does not observe a manifest excess of powers
on the part of the Tribunal because the Parties requested this specific issue to be
resolved. The Tribunal had full authority to accept or reject the evidence and to assess

it.

For the above reasons, the Committee will reject this argument for annulment.

214.4 133.

Id., $f 143 and 144.
414. If 145-157.

55

194.

195.

17s

Argentina also asserted that the Tribunal demonstrated manifest excess of powers in
its statement in paragraph 591 of the Award (subparagraph (b) of paragraph 189

above). 175

It argued that “ [nJothing in the Vienna Convention or under general
international law justifies the conclusion that no instrument issued after the
conclusion of a treaty may be taken into account for the purpose of determining the
intent of the parties, particularly where those acts by the State were prior to the
execution of the treaty. The Tribunal’s assertion constitutes a failure to rely on the
applicable law.”!76

The Tribunal analyzed the position of Argentina in connection with the self-judging
nature of Article XI of the BIT in paragraphs 563 to 573 of the Award. In paragraphs
568 and 569 it referred to the evidence that Argentina filed, including documents to
show that one year after the signing of the BIT the State Department of the United
States of America introduced similar treaties and a model treaty to the Senate and in
the latter the self-judging nature of a provision similar to Article XI of the BIT was
established; it also cited a statement by the U.S. Senate in favor of the self-judging
nature of Article XI of the BIT. The Tribunal held that such evidence was
irrelevant.'”” The Committee notes that the Tribunal assessed the evidence provided

178

by Argentina to interpret the BIT in light of the Vienna Convention; later on” the

Tribunal considered other evidence. The Tribunal conducted an analysis of the

180

wording of Article XI of the BIT;!” then went on to analyze the context” of that

Article; it also considered subsequent practices (Article 31(3) of the Vienna

181

Convention) *’ and the object and purpose of the treaty. The Tribunal concluded

that Article XI is not self-judging and that said body had the power to interpret it.’

The Committee clarifies that Argentina cited footnote number 152 of the Memorial on Annulment

paragraph 590 of the Award, but this should be 591.
"%6 Memorial on Annulment, § 131.

7 Aw,
Sy

ard, 1591.

d., if 593-596.

1a,
Td,
Sig,
Iq,

4590.
4599.
4602.
4604.

.. 610.

56

196.

197.

198.

199.

From the above summary, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal analyzed,
from different points of view and with diverse methods of interpretation, the alleged
self-judging nature of Article XI of the BIT. The analysis is /ege artis and thorough.
Therefore, the Committee does not find that the Tribunal failed to apply the
applicable law nor that it manifestly exceeded its powers when it performed its
analysis. The assessment of the evidence and interpretation of the applicable law must
be performed only by the Tribunal, not by the Committee. For these reasons, the

Committee will reject this argument for annulment.

Argentina also alleged manifest excess of powers because, in its view, in paragraph
594 of the Award (subparagraph (c) of paragraph 189 above) the Tribunal
contradicted the very arguments presented by the US Department of State and made
an unfounded speculative exercise when it stated that the US did not seek to attribute

a self-judging character to Article XI of the BIT.'™*

In the following paragraph Argentina mentioned the evidence that shows that, in its
opinion, the United States of America and Argentina did have the intention of making

Article XI of the BIT self-judging in nature.'*° Argentina then stated:

“The Tribunal seems to ignore the fact that, if a State has no means of protecting its
external and internal security, there is no way of creating a stable and prosperous
investment climate. Moreover, the Tribunal refers in general terms to the alleged
object and purpose of the Treaty, without even considering critical and irrefutable
evidence that demonstrates that the intention of the parties to the BIT is wholly
inconsistent with its proposition.”'*°

The Committee concludes that, obviously, this argument of Argentina is actually an
attempt to get the Committee to assess “critical and irrefutable evidence that
demonstrates ... the intention of the parties to the BIT.” This is impossible in an

annulment proceeding, so the Committee will reject this argument.

'S4 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 133.
'85 14.4 134.
'86 14.4 135.

s7

200.

201.

202.

203.

Argentina further argued that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers when it
failed to apply Article VI (3) of the BIT (subparagraph (d) of paragraph 189
above).'*” The Committee carefully reviewed the arguments on this issue contained in
Argentina’s Memorial on Annulment and in Argentina’s Reply and found that they
were inaccurate, especially when Argentina affirmed that the interpretation given to
that Article by the Tribunal “... is the same as that deriving from the application of

other Treaty provisions... Therefore, Article VI (3) would have no useful effect.’'**

Argentina also noted that the tribunal that decided the LES. v. Algeria case!”
analyzed a bilateral investment treaty provision similar to Article VI (3) of the BIT,
interpreted it in a very different manner from the Tribunal, and concluded that “a

different interpretation would deprive the provision of any meaning and effect.”!”°

The Committee, after weighing the arguments of Argentina, reiterates that arbitration
case law is not binding so that the decision in the L.E.S.J v. Algeria case'®! was not
binding on the Tribunal. It reiterates that not following the line of reasoning of
another arbitral tribunal is not grounds for annulment just as interpreting an article of
the BIT in one sense or another is also not grounds for annulment. The Tribunal had,
indeed, analyzed Article IV (3) and concluded that it was not applicable to “the
matter at hand”.'”” This is a reasoned opinion. The fact that Argentina does not agree
with this interpretation of Article IV (3) of the BIT is not a ground for an annulment.

Consequently, the Committee will therefore reject this argument.

Argentina further contended that the Tribunal did not address separately the defense

'3 The Committee considers that the

of necessity under customary international law.
Tribunal explained its methodology in paragraphs 552-555 of the Award and came

to the conclusion that Article XI of the BIT was /ex specialis and that only if Article

'87 Tq. 49 143 and 144.

'8§ Td., 144; Reply on Annulment, § 99.

'® Consorzio Groupement L.E.S.I. - Dipenta (Italy) v. People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria, \CSID Case
No. ARB/03/8, [hereinafter “L.E.S.1.”], Award, January 10, 2005.

' Reply on Annulment, {| 100.

'l 7 ESL, Award, January 10, 2005.

'2 Award | 556-560.

193

Memorial on Annulment, {| 145.

58

204.

2

S
an

206.

XI did not apply, a further analysis would be necessary. Having found that Article XI
was applicable, any further inquiry was held to be superfluous. Argentina may
disagree with the Tribunal’s approach but that is no ground for an annulment. The

Committee therefore will reject this claim.
vi. Issues related to the valuation of damages

On the issue of the valuation of damages, Argentina argued that the Tribunal

manifestly exceeded its powers because:

a) The amount of compensation awarded is contrary to applicable law and to the

legal principles established by the Tribunal itself.!°*

b

El Paso did not claim for the cumulative effects of the measures, therefore the

valuation cannot be deemed to satisfy the causation requirement.'*°

c

The Tribunal, in paragraph 704 of the Award, adopted a valuation taking values
projected in 2003, after the alleged breaches of Argentina, for the purpose of

defining the standard of compensation.'%°

d

The Tribunal used the standard of compensation established by the Permanent
Court of International Justice in the Chorzéw case, when case law is not a source
of law, therefore the Tribunal did not specify the law applicable for that

standard.'””

. In the following paragraphs, the Committee will consider these four arguments for

annulment put forward by Argentina:

Argentina indicated that the amount of compensation awarded by the Tribunal is
contrary to applicable law and to the legal principles established by the Tribunal

itself (subparagraph (a) of paragraph 204 above). In its Reply on Annulment, it stated:

161.
. (91 163, 167 and 168.
(171.
172.

59

207.

208.

209.

210.

“The Tribunal is under a duty to decide every dispute in accordance with the law
and is only entitled to decide cases ex aequo et bono where the parties have so
agreed. In this case, the parties have not authorized the Tribunal to decide the case
ex aequo et bono. El Paso cannot seek to justify the Tribunal’s decision by relying
upon its alleged discretion, disregarding the law that the very Tribunal recognized as
applicable.” 8
The Committee believes that arbitration tribunals may proceed with some discretion
in quantifying damages. A reasoned exercise of such discretion, as performed by the
Tribunal, does not amount to a decision ex aequo et bono. The Committee did not
find convincing arguments to explain in what way the Tribunal failed to apply the

applicable law and decided ex aequo et bono and therefore will reject these assertions

by Argentina.

Regarding causation, Argentina stated that El Paso did not claim for the cumulative
effects of the measures, and that the valuation cannot be deemed to satisfy the

causation requirement (subparagraph (b) of paragraph 204 above).

“The Tribunal maintains that it examined ‘the relationship between the sale of El
Paso’s shares in the Argentinian companies and the GOA measures in the context of
determining whether such measures may be considered a violation of the FET
standard, concluding that the measures were the prevailing cause of the sale.’
Nonetheless, the result of such analysis is not conclusive as regards the causal link
between the alleged breach of the Treaty and the damage allegedly deriving from
such breach. That the measures were allegedly one of the reasons for the sale of El
Paso’s shares does not mean that any loss that might derive from such sale has a
‘sufficient causal link’ with the alleged violation of the Treaty.”!?

The Committee reiterates that it cannot decide on the matter to which Argentina

refers in the paragraph reproduced; such valuation is the exclusive responsibility of

the arbitral tribunal.

The Committee finds that the Tribunal did not manifestly exceed its powers when it
decided on damages as stated by Argentina, so it will reject this ground for

annulment.

'®8 Reply on Annulment, {| 114.
‘9 Memorial on Annulment, {168.

60

211.

212.

213.

214.

According to Argentina, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers by adopting in
paragraph 704 of the Award, for purposes of compensation, a valuation taking
“values projected in 2003, after the alleged breaches by Argentina (subparagraph (c)
of paragraph 204 above), placing El Paso in a different situation than that existing

before the alleged ‘creeping measures.””””°

Part of paragraph 704 of the Award states:

“The fair market value in the but for scenario shall be calculated considering also data
and information which became known after 1 January 2002, including after El Paso’s
sales in 2003, to the extent they are representative of financially assessable damages.
Arbitrator Stern considers that a fair market value evaluation of damage resulting
from a violation of FET should only take into account what a willing buyer and a
willing seller could foresee at the time of the interference with the investor’s rights.
However, as, for reasons explained in paragraph 736, the Tribunal finally relies on a
valuation taking into account the prices of oil as foreseen in 2003, at the time of the
sale, she does not expand on the theoretical aspects of the question of the
indemnification standard and the time of valuation.”

The decision about which values should be considered to define the amount for which
Argentina shall be liable can only be taken by the Tribunal that heard the facts and
evidence submitted by the Parties. The Committee cannot assess the facts and the
evidence submitted in the proceedings. Nor does the Committee find that there was a
manifest excess of powers because the Tribunal took into account the 2003 or other

data; it therefore will reject this argument for annulment.

Argentina argued that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers when it used the
standard of compensation established by the Permanent Court of International Justice
in the Chorzéw case (subparagraph (d) of paragraph 204 above) to set the standard of
compensation, disregarding the fact that case law is not a source of law. Therefore,
according to Argentina, the Tribunal did not specify the law it applied to determine

damages.”"!

2 1d. F171.
201 1d. 172.

61

215.

216.

217.

The Tribunal stated its views on the standard of compensation that it employed and
in paragraph 700 of the Award stated its reasoning. It referred to the silence of the
BIT in this area, to the Chorzéw case, and it considered what other tribunals had
decided on the damage caused by the violation of the standard of fair and equitable
treatment. It further pointed out the reasons why it considered that fair market value

ought to determine the compensation.?”

As stated in Article 42 (2) of the ICSID Convention, if the primary standard does not
give a solution to a matter to be resolved by an arbitral tribunal, that silence is no
excuse for the tribunal not to decide said matter. Arbitral tribunals must resort to
different methods of interpretation to decide the dispute according to the mandate
received from the parties. The fact that in this case the Tribunal looked at the
Chorz6w case to be helped in its interpretation does not imply a manifest excess of
powers. While case law is not a source of law, as Argentina has stated, this does not
prevent it being used as the basis of the reasoning for a decision taken by an arbitral

tribunal. Consequently, the Committee will reject this argument for annulment.

Failure to state reasons

Subsequently, the Committee will turn to this ground for annulment. In the opinion of
the Committee there is no ground for annulment of the award if it is based on an
alleged inaccuracy of the arbitral tribunal’s reasoning or because the reasons
underlying its decisions were not convincing to the Party requesting the annulment of
the Award. The Committee agrees with other committees which have ruled along this

203

line repeatedly” ~ because unconvincing reasons do not amount to a lack of reasons.

20 A ward, 700-703.

8 Kléckner, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment of the Arbitral Award,
May 3, 1985, 129; Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of Guinea, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/84/4, [hereinafter “MINE”], Decision on the Application for Partial Annulment of the Arbitral Award,
December 14, 1989, {ff 5.08 and 5.09; Vivendi I, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002, | 64; Wena Hotels,
Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Arbitral Award, February 5, 2002 | 79; CDC Group ple v.
Republic of the Seychelles, ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14 [hereinafter “CDC”], Decision of the ad hoc
Committee on the Application for Annulment, June 29, 2005, {{{ 70 and 75; M.C.I., Decision on Annulment,
October 19, 2009, { 82; Fraport, Decision on Annulment, December 23, 2010, | 277; and Sociedad Anénima
Eduardo Vieira v. Republic of Chile, 1CSID Case No. ARB/04/7, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the
Application for Annulment, December 10, 2010, 355.

62

Annulment committees are concerned with the existence of reasoning and not the
correctness, content or adequacy of the same. Unless the findings cannot be supported
by any reasons reflected in the award, there is no basis for annulment. Reasons need
not be detailed but they must be sufficient for a reader to follow how, from the

evidence and arguments filed by the parties, the tribunal reached its conclusions.

218. An arbitral tribunal must refer to all claims of the parties, as it is called upon to

decide what the parties involved are requesting; moreover, reasons must be given for

the Award, as stipulated in Article 48 of the ICSID Convention.

219. Itis also necessary to consider the following concerning this issue:

“The drafting history of the Convention concerning annulment based on a failure to
state reasons does not provide further guidance as to when such a failure has
occurred, nor does the Convention specify the manner in which a Tribunal’s reasons
should be stated.”

220. According to the Committee, because the history of the ICSID Convention or the

Convention itself fail to define what the lack of statement of reasons means, the
arbitration tribunal enjoys some, even though limited, freedom. As pointed out by

: 2
other committees,”°°

the requirement to state reasons is intended to ensure that the
Parties can understand the reasoning of the Tribunal, and also that a well-informed
reader can understand the facts and the law by which the tribunal reached its

conclusions.

221. Similarly, it is obvious to this Committee that it cannot annul an award because one

of the parties involved in the case disagrees with the reasons given by the arbitral
tribunal. The ground laid down in Article 52(e) of the ICSID Convention is very

clear: it is the failure to state reasons, i.e., the absence of the statement of reasons

2 Background Paper on the Annulment Mechanism for the ICSID Administrative Council, August 10, 2012,

4 103.

MINE, Decision on the Application for Partial Annulment of the Arbitral Award, December 14, 1989 {]

5.09; Vivendi I, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002 4{ 64; Wena Hotels, Decision on the Application for
Annulment of the Arbitral Award, February 5, 2002 { 81; and Compagnie de Exploitation du Chemin de Fer
Transgabonais v. Gabonese Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/04/5, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the
Application for Annulment, May 11, 2010, 88.

63

when the claims of the parties in the arbitration proceedings are being analyzed. The
statement of reasons which are contradictory to a point to neutralize each other fall

into that same category.

222. Argentina indicated that there are several manifestations of this ground: the total
absence of reasons; the total failure to state reasons on a particularly key issue; the
statement of contradictory reasons; and the reasons given are insufficient. This
Committee considers that the main manifestation of this ground is the failure to state
reasons referred to in the previous paragraph.

223. Argentina alleged the following failures to state reasons for its decisions:

a) In paragraph 175 of the Award the Tribunal failed to state the reasons for the causal
link”

b) The Tribunal “...sought to justify the exercise of its jurisdiction by stating that the
Treaty grants shareholders a right of direct action.”?°7

c) There is a contradiction between the Tribunal’s conclusion that contracts and
licenses are not investments protected by the BIT and the granting in the Award of
compensation in favor of El Paso for measures affecting only contracts and licenses
belonging to the Argentine Companies.”

d) The Tribunal did not state in paragraph 507 of the Award the reasons on which it
based the fundamental conclusion that allowed it to find Argentina liable?”
(referring to the sale by El Paso of the shares in the Argentine Companies)

e) The Tribunal clearly contradicts itself in its analysis of the measures adopted in the
electric power sector; “... the only attempt to provide reasons in the ruling is
contained in paragraphs 512-5 14.7210

f) The Tribunal’s “judicial creation”.”"!

g) The conclusions expressed in paragraph 588 of the Award.”

20 Memorial on Annulment, § 22.

27 Td. 26.

208 Td. | 40.

2 Td. | 64.

210 Td, 9] 69 and 70.
114.4 101.

64

1

n

°

h) The conclusion expressed in paragraph 591 of the Award’?

The Tribunal failed to refer to the key evidence related to the self-judging nature of

Article XI of the BIT.?!*

The Tribunal’s statement in paragraph 603 of the Award about Argentina’s

‘awareness’ of the self-judging nature of Article XI of the BIT."°

k) The Tribunal equated the “non-contribution” requirement to the “necessity”

requirement in paragraphs 555 and 613 of the Award.?'®

The Tribunal’s conclusion with respect to Article [V(3) of the BIT?”

m) The Tribunal did not state the legal standards it applied nor the meaning of “non-

contribution” and referred only to economic, rather than legal, arguments in the
analysis of this matter.?!*

The contradiction in the Tribunal adopting the valuation carried out by LECG.””

The Tribunal adopted a valuation method that assumes that El Paso retained

holdings in the Argentine Companies.”

224. The Committee will discuss below the fifteen allegations of failure to state reasons

submitted by Argentina.

225. Regarding the alleged failure to state reasons in paragraph 175 of the Award

(subparagraph (a) of paragraph 223 above), particularly in the sentence “[t]hat the
loss of share value is linked to the taking of the rights belonging to the local company

appears obvious,”””!

the Committee points to the fact that this paragraph is part of the
section in which the Tribunal defined “investment” in light of Article I(1)(a) the

BIT. The Tribunal expressly linked the sentence quoted above to paragraph 204 of

 

213

Id., | 128.
Id., (131. The Committee notes that the quote in the footnote of the Memorial on Annulment refers to

paragraph 590 but this should be 591.

Dia

21

Memorial on Annulment, 132.
Id., { 138.

Id., { 140.

Id., 144

Id., 157.

Id., 164.

Id., 174.

Award, 175.

65

the Award. It explained in the two paragraphs that double compensation for El Paso
should be avoided. The Committee understands that sentence and the one in
paragraph 204 are part of the statement of reasons for the Tribunal’s conclusion a
few paragraphs later (213 and 214 of the Award). Here, the Tribunal held that the
contracts and licenses are not part of the investment protected under the BIT, but only

the shares of E] Paso in the Argentine Companies.

226. Argentina stated that the Tribunal “... failed to state the reasons on which its
decision was based when it sought to justify the exercise of its jurisdiction by stating
that the Treaty grants shareholders a right of direct action” (subparagraph (b) of

paragraph 223 above).

227. Argentina stated in its Memorial on Annulment that “[u]nder general international

law, indirect actions such as those filed ... in this arbitration are not permitted,”
despite the quotation in the previous paragraph. This is a confusing reasoning.
Additionally, the Committee considers necessary to clarify another issue: the ICSID
Convention does not include requirements on how to plead annulment, but logic
dictates that it must be a clear and precise allegation and in this case Argentina did
not give any reference as to the paragraph in which the Tribunal “sought to justify
the exercise of its jurisdiction by stating that the Treaty grants shareholders a right of
direct action.”

228. Argentina stated that the Award does not state the reasons for its decisions

(Subparagraph (c) of paragraph 223 above). Specifically, it stated:

“the Argentine Republic has explained that, even though an investment in shares was
indeed a protected investment under the Treaty, a shareholder only had a valid claim
under the Treaty to the extent that its rights as such were affected by governmental
measures. However, in direct opposition to its conclusion that contracts and licenses
are not protected investments, the Tribunal awarded damages to El Paso for measures
that only affected contracts and licenses belonging to the Argentine Companies.”””°

°° Memorial on Annulment, { 26.
31d. 49.
24
Id., 26.
5 Td... 40.

66

229.

©

230.

231.

232.

In its Reply, Argentina added:

“Argentina explained why there is a failure to state the reasons for the Award which
warrants its annulment, with respect to the recognition of El Paso’s rights as a
shareholder in the Argentine Companies. In this regard, Argentina made it clear that
even though an investment in shares is indeed a protected investment under the
Treaty, a shareholder only has a valid claim under the Treaty to the extent that its
rights as such are affected by governmental measures. 22

In the opinion of the Committee, Argentina did not explain its allegation that the
Tribunal gave El Paso compensation for measures that affected only those contracts
and licenses of the Argentine Companies and that said conclusion was made without
the Tribunal stating the reasons which would permit an understanding of its decision

in this regard.

In addition, Argentina stated the following about the infringement of the rights of

shareholders:

“As previously stated, the Tribunal held that the investment protected under the BIT
‘was constituted by the shares in the Argentinian companies that belonged to El Paso
and that protection applies to ‘the shares, all the shares, but only the shares.’ This
justification confuses the legal standing that a shareholder may have, in general
terms, to bring a claim under the BIT with the substantial rights arising from its
shares. If the Argentine Republic had adopted measures with respect to El Paso’s
rights arising from its protected investment under the Treaty—i.e., the shares—(for
example, the right to transfer its shares or receive dividends) such measures would
have referred to the rights arising from the shares held by El Paso. In this case,
however, Argentina did not adopt any measures that might affect the rights of El Paso
as a shareholder in the Argentine companies.” 2

From a combined reading of the statement made by Argentina reproduced in
paragraphs 228, 229 and 231 above, the Committee concludes that, in fact, what
Argentina wants is for the Committee to make an analysis of the merits of the case, in
order to annul the Award. The basis of this claim would be that “Argentina did not
adopt any measures that might affect the rights of El Paso as a shareholder in the

Argentine companies,” concluding that the Tribunal awarded “damages to El Paso

6 Reply on Annulment, { 21.
7 Memorial on Annulment, { 29.

67

233.

234.

for measures that only affected contracts and licenses belonging to the Argentine
Companies.” As repeatedly stated, the Committee cannot analyze the merits of the
case nor adjudicate on the alleged errors on the merits that an arbitral tribunal may

have committed in an arbitration award.

In another of its allegations Argentina noted (subparagraph (d) of paragraph 223

above):

“Nevertheless, contrary to its previous assertions, without providing any reasons and
in violation of a fundamental rule of procedure, the Tribunal decided to rule against
the Argentine Republic for the sale by El Paso of the Argentine Companies. Thus, it
held that ‘the GOA measures were, if not the only, certainly the prevailing reason for
El Paso’s sales in 2003.’ However, the Tribunal failed to state the reasons for this
essential conclusion that led it to rule against Respondent, especially bearing in mind
that a series of documents produced by El Paso itself refer to other reasons, but not to
the measures adopted by Argentina.”””

The Committee notes with respect to the argument reproduced in the above paragraph
that the Tribunal described the measures taken by Argentina in paragraphs 98 to
104 of the Award and described the sale of the shares held by El Paso in the
Argentine Companies (paragraphs 114 to 120). In paragraph 277 it pointed out which
were the factors that, in its opinion influenced the sale: the financial situation of El
Paso in several countries as well as Argentina’s economy and the measures taken by
that State. In paragraph 279 it noted that it had not identified an automatic causal link
between the measures and the sale of the shares for purposes of an expropriation
claim, but it had to determine it in the case of a violation of other standards of the
BIT. Later on, the Tribunal analyzed each measure taken by Argentina in the
electricity and oil and gas sectors. In paragraph 459 of the Award, the Tribunal said
that it would analyze the overall role of the measures on the sale of the shares and
said it would focus on the defenses raised by Argentina on this issue: whether the
liquidity problems of El Paso since late 2001 and the principal activity of the
company were the causes that led to the sale. This analysis was made in paragraphs

489 to 503. The Tribunal considered Argentina’s arguments in defense in paragraph

28 Td. 1 64.

68

235.

236.

237.

504 of the Award, it reviewed the reports submitted by El Paso to the American
authority on securities (i.e. the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commision “SEC”);
and it referred to the sale of other companies and, based on that analysis, held in

paragraph 507 that the measures were the primary reason for the sale of the shares.

The Committee is of the opinion, based on what was said in the previous paragraph,
that the Tribunal did express reasons for its decision in a very detailed way. It has no
authority to assess whether these reasons were insufficient or inadequate because the
grounds stated in Article 52(e) of the ICSID Convention is the failure to state the

reasons, not if these were inadequate or insufficient.

The Committee concludes that the Tribunal analyzed, indeed, why it considered that

the measures were the primary reason for the sale of the shares.

Argentina also alleged a contradiction between the analysis made by the Tribunal of
the measures adopted by Argentina in the electricity sector and what it stated in
paragraphs 512 and 514 of the Award (subparagraph (e) of paragraph 223 above).
Regarding the first paragraph Argentina argued that the Tribunal, without providing
any reasons, reached the conclusion that the Argentine Government disregarded the
very reason for which capacity payments were created, that is, to attract foreign
investment and expand capacity by allowing investors to recover their capital costs in
US dollars, destroying the relationship between capacity payments and how they are
calculated in dollars. Argentina also noted that the Tribunal, contrary to its previous
assertions and without providing reasons, states in paragraph 514 that the fact that the
contracts were in US dollars could be viewed as a special commitment towards the
companies in which El Paso invested while in other paragraphs of the Award the
Tribunal states that Argentina was not a party to any agreement with El Paso and
that there were no specific commitments. Argentina further argued that the
companies in which El Paso invested were neither investors nor investments

protected under the BIT.”

229 Td. §] 81-83.

69

238.

239.

240.

241.

The Committee carefully reviewed the paragraphs to which Argentina referred to
and the analysis made by the Tribunal of the measures adopted by that State. In its
view, these paragraphs must be read in conjunction with others, in particular 84, 98
and 408. In the first, the Tribunal described the actions that Argentina took to attract
investment in the energy sector. Argentina conducted seminars and “road shows” in
which it stressed, among other things, that capacity payments would be in dollars. In
paragraph 98 of the Award the Tribunal set out in detail the measures adopted by
Argentina in the electricity sector that affected the values provided in the Wholesale
Electricity Market, and in 408 stated the main purpose of capacity payments. From
the above, the Committee concludes that in the statement by the Tribunal in
paragraphs 512 and 514 there is no contradiction that could lead it to conclude that

the Award failed to state reasons on this issue.

Argentina’s other argument for annulment is the Tribunal’s “judicial creation”

(subparagraph (f) of paragraph 223 above). Argentina stated:

“Tn conclusion, the Tribunal’s ‘judicial creation,’ which jeopardizes legal certainty—
not only in this case, but also in future proceedings if this theory starts to be followed
by other tribunals— amounts to a manifest excess of the powers of the Tribunal, a
failure to state the reasons on which the decision was based, and a serious departure
from the rules of procedure, which warrants the annulment of the Award.”?°

 

The Committee does not understand fully Argentina’s argument. Case law is created
with the repetition of judgments of tribunals over time. The essence of expressing
reasons is to explain why a tribunal decides an issue in one way and not the other.
This process is the opposite to a failure to state reasons. The award is an element of
the emergence of case law and not its creation. The conditions to annul the Award

for a failure to state reasons are obviously not met in this context.

Argentina further argued a lack of statement of reasons in Article 588 of the Award

(subparagraph (g) of paragraph 223 above):

250 Memorial on Annulment, { 101; Reply on Annulment, { 64.

70

242.

“The Tribunal merely notes that ‘the evidence presented by the Respondent relates to
a single element of Article XI, ‘essential security interests,” while Article XI
mentions two other possible justifications: the maintenance of public order and the
fulfilment of the State’s obligations regarding the maintenance or restoration of
international peace or security. In accordance with the Tribunal, ‘at first glance, the
present case does not, however, seem to concern (external) security interests but
possibly the maintenance of (internal) public order, which would not be a self-
judging matter at all under Article XI of the BIT.’ The Tribunal does not explain why
the expression ‘essential security interests’ should be limited to matters of external
security, instead of including internal security issues, as the Continental tribunal did,
particularly the gravity of the economic, social and political crisis experienced by
Argentina and acknowledged by the very Tribunal. In arriving at this arbitrary
conclusion, the Tribunal only takes a ‘first glance,’ yet it should have expressed the
reasons for its decision on this fundamental matter.”**!

In order to understand Argentina’s argument, the Committee carefully reviewed
paragraph 588 of the Award. The Committee cannot and ought not review whether
the evidence presented by Argentina concerning Article XI of the BIT relates or not
to “essential security interests.” Moreover, it considers that it was on that evidence
that the Tribunal stated that “[t]his could be taken to suggest that the self-judging
character of Article XI is, at any rate, limited to ‘essential security interests’ and
cannot extend to the other elements, in particular the maintenance of public order.”
The Tribunal in the first part of that paragraph stated that it was necessary, before
analyzing the Article in question in light of the Vienna Convention, to indicate that
the evidence on the self-judging character introduced by Argentina referred only to
one aspect of the three contained in Article XI (essential security interests, the
maintenance of public order, and the fulfilment of the State’s obligations regarding
the maintenance or restoration of international peace or security). The Tribunal also
stated at the end of that paragraph “[a]t first glance, the present case does not,
however, seem to concern (external) security interests but possibly the maintenance
of (internal) public order, which would not be a self-judging matter at all under
Article XI of the BIT.” These statements made by the Tribunal, were based on its
consideration of the evidence provided by Argentina. The Committee therefore does

not find any failure to state reasons under this issue.

°31 Memorial on Annulment, { 128.

71

243.

244.

245.

2

Argentina also alleged failure to state reasons in paragraph 591 (subparagraph (h) of
paragraph 223 above). This paragraph of the Award refers to the analysis made by
the Tribunal of the evidence presented by Argentina to define whether Article XI of
the BIT was self-judging or not. In paragraph 590 the Tribunal stated that it would
analyze the BIT in order to make a decision on that issue. In paragraph 591, it
developed its interpretation and referred to the statement made by another arbitral
tribunal in the LG&E case.” The Committee considers that the Tribunal was clear
in stating that it would use the Vienna Convention as a basis for its reasoning and
furthermore it analyzed what was said by the LG&E arbitral tribunal. The Tribunal
did indeed express the reasons for its decision and did indeed indicate the sources it

used for its interpretation.

Argentina further submitted that there was a failure to state reasons when the
Tribunal omitted critical evidence (the so-called letter from Mr. Sofaer) that
Argentina presented to demonstrate the self-judging character of Article XI of the
BIT (subparagraph (i) of paragraph 223 above). El Paso acknowledged that the
Tribunal did not specifically mention the Sofaer letter in Award, and instead

analyzed other evidence to support its conclusions on the issue.

In the opinion of the Committee, the Award is clear and as to the analysis made by
the Tribunal in paragraphs 588 to 610, where it referred to the evidence adduced by
the parties, used different methods of treaty interpretation and considered what other
arbitral tribunals had ruled on the issue. The Tribunal’s reasoning is clear, and the
conclusion of the Tribunal and the reasons for said conclusion can be clearly
understood. The Committee finds that that the absence of a specific mention of the
Sofaer letter does not affect the reasoning of the Award on this issue. Furthermore,
the fact that the Tribunal did not refer to a specific piece of evidence, which,
according to Argentina, was essential, cannot be analyzed by this Committee, which
has no authority to make any assessment of the evidence presented in the arbitral

proceedings.

“LG&E, Decision on Liability, October 3, 2006.

72

246. Argentina argued that paragraph 603 of the Award contains an unfounded statement,
which contradicts the evidence in the record (subparagraph (j) of paragraph 223
above). The Tribunal, at the end of said paragraph, stated that “[flinally, the
‘awareness’ of Argentina [in connection with the alleged self-judging character of
Article XI of the BIT] seems to be of recent origin, having made its first appearance
in the written pleadings on the substance of the present dispute.” The Committee
notes that Argentina argued that it had this awareness since CMS,** a case in which
Argentina had also claimed the same defense as in this case. The Committee
reiterates that it cannot analyze the evidence adduced by the parties in the arbitration
process, much less check whether Argentina argued this issue in another case to
determine when, in its view, it acquired the awareness of the self-judging character of
Article XI of the BIT. The Committee carefully read paragraph 603 of the Award,
and found in it that the Tribunal expressed some of its reasons for concluding that
the rule was not of that character. The deliberation of the Tribunal at the end of
paragraph 603 does not affect the reasoning in that paragraph, nor does it demonstrate
that the Award omitted the statement of the reasons on which its conclusions are

based and therefore it cannot be a ground for annulment.

247. Argentina also argued the following in relation to the analysis of Article XI of the

BIT made by the Tribunal (subparagraph (k) of paragraph 223 above):

“The ‘non-contribution’ requirement by no means precludes the application of Article
XI, as it is not contained in that provision. Such requirement may not be equated with
the ‘necessity’ requirement, as arbitrarily done by the Tribunal, since these are two
different and clearly distinguishable requirements.”

248. The Committee considers that paragraphs 555 and 613 of the Award to which
Argentina referred in the quote above cannot be analyzed separately from the rest.
The Tribunal, in paragraphs 613-624, explained why it considered the degree of
Argentina’s contribution to the situation that arose in that country, for purposes of

the concept of state of emergency, in order to determine whether in the case at hand,

233

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic [hereinafter “CMS”, ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8,
Award, May 12, 2005.
41d, 4 140.

73

249.

250.

251.

235

Article XI of the BIT (containing the non-precluded measures provision) applied. In
those paragraphs reference is made to the Vienna Convention, the purpose of the
BIT, the doctrine of State responsibility, the dicta of other arbitral tribunals in the
LG&E*** and the Continental’** cases, and the UNIDROIT Principles. The
Committee does not find that the Tribunal made that “equating” unreasonably; on
the contrary, it considers that the Tribunal explained broadly the reasons it had for
considering “non-contribution” in this issue. Therefore, there is no failure to state

reasons in the paragraphs alleged by Argentina.

According to Argentina, (subparagraph (1) of paragraph 223 above) the conclusion
reached by the Tribunal in relation to Article IV(3) of the BIT is unfounded.?*” It
also cited the conclusion of the arbitral tribunal in the L.E.S.J. v. Algeria case?**
which had a different interpretation of a provision similar to Article IV (3) of the

BIT2””

In paragraphs 557 and 558 of the Award, the Tribunal summarized the position of
the Parties on the interpretation of Article TV(3) of the BIT, and in paragraph 559 it
interpreted this rule based on its “plain meaning” and relied on dicta on the same
Article by the arbitral tribunal in the CMS case." The fact that there is a different
interpretation (L.E.S.I. case), as pointed out by Argentina, or another interpretation,
does not mean that the Award is not supported by reasoning. The decision of the
Tribunal with respect to Article IV (3) of the BIT is very clear and does not

constitute grounds for annulment based on the lack of reasons.

Argentina also claimed, based on the dissenting opinion, that the majority did not
state reasons for the conclusion expressed in paragraph 665 of the Award that

Argentina contributed substantially for the crisis to occur, so that Argentina could

LG&E, Decision on Liability, October 3, 2006.

© Continental Casualty Company v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/9, Award [hereinafter
“Continental”], September 5, 2008.

371d 4 144,

28 7 ES.1., Award, January 10, 2005.

2 Reply on Annulment, { 100.

*40 CMS, Award, May 12, 2005.

74

252.

253.

254.

not rely on Article XI of the BIT in its defense (subparagraph (m) of paragraph 223

above). Argentina specifically alleged:

“..as stated by one of the members of the Tribunal, the majority did not state the
reasons on which that part of the Award was based, failed to explain the legal
standards applied by it—particularly, the meaning ascribed to ‘non-contribution’ in
adopting its criterion— and referred only to economic (rather than legal) arguments.
The Award must therefore be annulled.””*

The Committee considers it important to clarify that the dissenting opinion in the
Award does not state exactly what Argentina indicated. On the contrary, the
Tribunal was unanimous in considering that Article XI is not self-judging. The
dissent concerns the interpretation of the evidence received in the proceedings.

Professor Stern concludes that “... the substantial contribution of the Argentine
authorities to the crisis has not been sufficiently proven by strong and uncontroverted
evidence... the evidence is insufficient to conclude that the policies adopted by the

GOA before the crisis were mainly responsible for the crisis.”

The fact that there is a dissenting opinion does not mean that the majority vote is
unfounded and that, therefore, it should be annulled. In this case, moreover, the
dissent is not on the legal standards applicable, or on the meaning of ‘non-
contribution,’ but consists of a different assessment of the evidence, an issue on

which the Committee cannot intervene in any way.

The Committee carefully studied paragraphs 613 to 626 of the Award which are
based on the uncontested statement that Article XI of the BIT has to be analyzed first,
since it is lex specialis with respect to other provisions (paragraph 550 of the
Award): in paragraph 613 the Tribunal indicated what standard it considered
appropriate for interpreting Article XI of the BIT. In paragraphs 614 and 615 the
Tribunal held that, in considering the object and purpose of the BIT, as noted by the
Vienna Convention on the Interpretation of Treaties, it was possible to determine the

role of a State’s contribution to a crisis or state of necessity. It indicated in paragraph

*41 Memorial on Annulment, {{ 157.
award, {{] 666 and 670.

75

255.

256.

257.

618, based on a part of the doctrine, what kind of State’s contribution should be
considered for this purpose. In paragraphs 619 and 620 the Tribunal considered the
decision in two other cases (LG&E and Continental) on the same Article of the BIT
that it was analyzing. In paragraphs 621 to 623 it stated what other rules of the ILC’s
Draft Articles and the Unidroit Principles provide on the exclusion of liability and
the degree of contribution to a state of necessity to conclude, in paragraph 624, that
there is a principle of international law related to the exclusion of liability and non-

contribution; accordingly it did explain what principle would apply to the case.

In paragraph 611 of the Award, the Tribunal stated that a state of emergency may be
economic in nature. In paragraphs 651 to 665 it analyzed the evidence presented in
relation to the crisis suffered by Argentina. It considered what the experts of the
Parties, the International Monetary Fund reports, the statements of Argentine
authorities, and the opinions of economists and researchers had stated. It concluded in
paragraph 665 that Argentina had contributed substantially to the crisis, and,
consequently, in the opinion of the Tribunal, it could not rely on Article XI of the

BIT in its favor.

Based on what the Committee observed in the Award, it is impossible to conclude
that the Tribunal did not define the legal standards it applied or that it did not
indicate what, in its opinion, ‘non-contribution’ meant; nor is it possible to conclude
that the Tribunal only referred to economic and not legal arguments. The Committee
therefore does not find that there is any merit to Argentina’s arguments. The
Tribunal was clear in its analysis; it stated reasons and explained amply the

decisions taken on this issue.

Argentina also alleged (subparagraph (n) of paragraph 223above):

“The contradiction arises when the Tribunal takes the valuation carried out by LECG
based merely on the fact that it was ‘satisfied that LECG has calculated the
Claimant’s damage under its DCF valuation method by considering only damage
directly attributable to the GOA measures.’ Leaving aside the fact that the Tribunal’s
interpretation of LECG’s valuation is erroneous; the Tribunal does not follow the
abovementioned premise that it should determine the existence of a sufficient causal

76

258.

259.

260.

link between the damage and the treaty violation. This constitutes a failure to state
reasons regarding the causation principle.”

In the paragraph reproduced, Argentina criticized the Tribunal’s interpretation of
the valuation carried out by LECG (El Paso’s damages expert). This issue is
obviously an assessment of the evidence which power rests entirely in the Tribunal
and cannot be grounds for annulment. In paragraphs 674 and 685 of the Award, the
Tribunal indicated that the LECG’s damages report used a methodology called
“discounted cash flow”; the calculation presented included only the damage caused
by the measures taken by Argentina and excluded damages due to macroeconomic
conditions, which, according to the Tribunal, was confirmed directly by the
Tribunal’s own appointed expert.”"* That is, the Tribunal based its decision on what
was included in the LECG’s damages report and the report of a third expert,

appointed by the Tribunal.

Regarding the causal link between the measures and the losses supposedly suffered
by EI Paso, the Tribunal evaluated the position of Argentina, in the sense that for
the causal link to exist, the international wrongful act must be the proximate cause

°45 The Tribunal concluded that in this case the

between the measures and the losses.
“proximate cause” did not exist and, based on what other tribunals ruled, used the
method of sufficient link.“ That is, the Tribunal examined two possible ways to
assess causation, concluded that El Paso had not contributed to the damages and then
referred to the conclusion reached in paragraph 507 of the Award, to the effect that
the measures adopted by Argentina were the main reason for the sale of the shares

held by EI Paso in the Argentine Companies.

The Committee does not find any failure to state reasons in this issue. The Tribunal
was clear, it analyzed the positions of the Parties, and considered what was said by

their experts and by the third expert appointed by the Tribunal itself.

°8 Memorial on Annulment, { 164.
4 Award, J 686.

45 1d. 677.

46 Td. | 682.

77

261.

262.

263.

264.

The last argument of Argentina on the failure to state reasons (subparagraph (0) of
paragraph 223 above) referred to the fact that the Tribunal considered a method of
valuation which assumes that El Paso retained holdings in the Argentine Companies.

Specifically, Argentina stated:

“The Tribunal held Argentina liable stating that: ‘taking an all-encompassing view of
consequences of the measures complained of by El Paso, including the contribution
of these measures to its decision to sell its investments in Argentina, [the Tribunal]
concludes that, by their cumulative effect, they amount to a breach of the fair and
equitable treatment standard.’ Nonetheless, in determining the amount of damages,
the Tribunal did not take into account the sales price of El Paso’s shareholding but,
rather, adopted a valuation method that ‘assumes that the Claimant continues to keep
its shareholding in said companies.’ This contradiction also evidences the Tribunal’s
failure to state the reasons on which the decision was based.”*4”

The statements made by Argentina in the previous paragraph is nothing more than a
disagreement with the decision of the Tribunal, since the valuation of the sale price
or the fact of noting that El Paso retained its shares in order to estimate the damage,
is the Tribunal’s own valuation, in which matter the Committee cannot intervene.
This is not a failure to state reasons but simply that the Tribunal chose a method that
Argentina considered “assumes that the Claimant continues to keep its shareholding

in said companies” and not “the sales price of El Paso’s shareholding.”

For the reasons set forth in paragraphs 225 to 262 above, the Committee will reject

the 15 requests for annulment filed by Argentina referred to in paragraph 223 above.

Argentina also claimed in its Memorial on Annulment on the subject of the
cumulative effect of the measures adopted by Argentina that the Award failed to
state the reasons™"* on which the decision was based; in its Reply the argument was

summarized as follows:

“In its Counter-Memorial, El Paso shows that it does not fully understand why
Argentina contends that the Tribunal failed to state the reasons for its decision when
applying the ‘new standard’ (something like a ‘creeping fair and equitable treatment’
standard). As stated by Argentina, in order for there to be a composite act in the sense

°47 Memorial on Annulment, { 174.
481d, 4 101.

78

265.

266.

of Article 15 of the ILC’s Draft Articles, a series of requirements developed by legal
authors and the ILC itself must be met. For example, the Tribunal does not explain
why Article II(2)(a) of the US-Argentina BIT—referring to ‘fair and equitable
treatment’—allegedly provides for a composite act, that is, an obligation arising from
the cumulative character of the conduct, as required by the ILC; or how many actions
or omissions are needed in order for there to be a violation of the obligation
concerned, as required as well by the ILC itself; or what part of the Article demands
‘a systematic policy’ or ‘plan,’ as that referred to by legal authors and Prof. Crawford,
one of the Special Rapporteurs of the ILC who participated in the preparation of the
Draft in question. Likewise, the Tribunal fails to specify which lawful act caused the
series of measures individually considered as lawful by the Tribunal to become
unlawful.”??

The Committee carefully reviewed paragraph 518 of the Award which refers to the

creeping violation of the FET standard and states:

“The Tribunal considers that, in the same way as one can speak of creeping
expropriation, there can also be creeping violations of the FET standard. According
to the case-law, a creeping expropriation is a process extending over time and
composed of a succession or accumulation of measures which, taken separately,
would not have the effect of dispossessing the investor but, when viewed as a whole,
do lead to that result. A creeping violation of the FET standard could thus be
described as a process extending over time and comprising a succession or an
accumulation of measures which, taken separately, would not breach that standard
but, when taken together, do lead to such a result” (emphasis in the original).

In the paragraph quoted the Tribunal used the conditional or subjunctive verb form,
“could.” That part of the paragraph is then hypothetical; it is an attempt by the
Tribunal to illustrate its standard of interpretation, developed in the previous
paragraphs. It is not the basis for the finding of liability that was the result of the
Tribunal’s interpretation of the cumulative effects of the measures (absolute change
in the legal setup). Therefore, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal did not
create a new standard and that the Award is not without a statement of reasons on

this issue.

Serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure

Reply on Annulment, { 50.

79

267. Before analyzing Argentina’s allegations about alleged serious departures from
fundamental rules of procedure it is necessary to consider the following concepts

stated by the ICSID Administrative Council:

“Tt appears from the drafting history of the ICSID Convention that the ground of a
‘serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure’ has a wide connotation
including principles of natural justice, but that it excludes the Tribunal’s failure to
observe ordinary arbitration rules.”

268. The Committee considers that there is a logical conclusion from the above quotes:
because a “serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure” is such a broad
concept, the party alleging the existence of such a ground must indicate what is the
fundamental rule affected and define clearly where the serious departure lies, so it can

be considered by the Committee.

269. It is also necessary to indicate that for this ground of annulment to exist, as clearly
established in the ICSID Convention, two basic criteria are required: there has to be a
serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, not just any rule of
procedure. Furthermore, this Committee agrees with what other committees have
stated that in order to be grounds for annulment, the departure has to have a material

. - 2
impact on the outcome of the award."

270. Argentina alleged that there was a serious departure from a fundamental rule of

procedure:

250 Background Paper on the Annulment Mechanism for the ICSID Administrative Council, August 10, 2012,
499.
*5! Amco Asia Corporation, Pan American Devleopment Limited, and P.T. AMCO Indonesia (AMCO) v.
Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on the Applications for Annulment and Partial
r and the Application for Iment of the Award, December 17, 1992, {| 9.05-
9.10; Kléckner, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment of the Arbitral Award,
May 3, 1985 i 89-92; Wena Hotels, Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Arbitral Award,
February 5, 2002 {| 58; CDC, Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment, June 29,
2005, | 49; Industria Nacional de Alimentos, $.A. and Indalsa Peri, S.A. v. Republic of Peru, 1CSID Case No.
ARB/03/4, Decision on the Application for Annulment, September 5, 2007, 71; and Fraport, ICSID Case
No. ARB/03/25, Decision on Annulment, December 23, 2010, (197.

 

80

Because there was a contradiction in the Tribunal’s conclusion on the
process of the sale of the Argentine Companies and its conclusion that the

measures taken by Argentina were the primary reason for the sale;”*”

Because of the contradictions and unfounded statements contained in
253

paragraphs 512 and 514 of the Award;
Because “allowing a tribunal to punish a State for adopting a series of lawful
measures which, taken together, allegedly amount to a wrongful act affects
legal certainty and constitutes both a manifest excess of powers and a

serious departure from the rules of procedure”;”*

Because the Tribunal did not mention the evidence consisting of the so-

called “Sofaer Letter”;?°

Because the Tribunal failed to analyze the most relevant evidence in
support of Argentina’s position regarding the self-judging nature of Article
XI of the BIT and presented contradictory arguments in referring to the

remaining pieces of evidence on that same issue;?°°

Because in determining damages, the Tribunal did not consider the

defenses raised by Argentina;?’

Because the Tribunal decided on issues that were not raised by El Paso,

ie., ultra petita?* and

Because the Tribunal held Argentina liable for the violation of a standard

that is not contained in the BIT and then awarded damages, relying on a

252 Memorial on Annulment, { 67.

Td. 83.
24 1d. 1 96.

551d. 4 132.
256 Td. J 142.
5714.4 175.
258 Id. 176.

81

271.

272.

273.

274.

damage assessment that was based on alleged BIT violations that are

different from those invoked by El Paso.”

Argentina was very concise in explaining the reasons why, in its opinion, there was a
serious departure from fundamental rules of procedure. The allegations based on
contradictions, failure to mention one piece of evidence that was considered essential
for Argentina (the Sofaer letter), and the alleged failure to analyze other evidence do
not constitute grounds for annulment of the Award for a serious departure from
fundamental rules of procedure and, accordingly, the Committee will reject the

arguments set forth in subparagraphs (a), (b), (d), and (e) above.

In analyzing the allegation referred to in subsection (f) of paragraph 270 above, the
Committee notes that Argentina did not state what were the defenses it objected to in
the arbitration process in relation to damages and that the Tribunal did not analyze,
thereby causing the alleged serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure.
In addition, Argentina did not even mention this issue in its Reply. Because of this
lack of substantiation, the Committee will reject the application for annulment based

on that reasoning.

Regarding subparagraph (g) of paragraph 270 above, in paragraphs 151 and 152
above, the Committee rejected Argentina’s argument on the alleged manifest excess
of powers of the Tribunal for having acted supposedly ultra petita. For the same

reasons, it will reject this argument based on the grounds alleged here.

The claims outlined in subparagraphs (c) and (h) of paragraph 270 above still have to
be analyzed. In the former, Argentina stated that the Tribunal affected legal

certainty and committed a serious departure from a procedural rule:

“...for adopting a series of lawful measures which, taken together, allegedly amount
to a wrongful act £77260

259 1d. 177.
2 Td. 1 96.

82

275.

276.

277.

278.

279.

The Committee notes that its specific role is to analyze whether there are grounds in
the Award or in the arbitration process to allow the Award to be partially or totally
annulled. Specifically, the duty of the Committee with regard to the ground for
annulment that it is examining here is to ensure the integrity of the arbitration
process. Argentina in this case did not explain why it considers that there was a
manifest excess of powers nor did it indicate the fundamental rule of procedure from
which the Tribunal seriously departed; for these reasons, the Committee will reject

this argument.

In subparagraph (h) of paragraph 270 above there is a summary of Argentina’s
argument that the decision must be annulled because the Tribunal held Argentina
liable for the violation of a standard that is not contained in the BIT and awarded
damages relying on a damage assessment that was based on alleged BIT violations

that are different from those invoked by El Paso.”°!

The Committee notes once again that Argentina did not state what fundamental rule
of procedure was affected by the Tribunal’s ruling, nor did it argue about the
seriousness of the departure from this rule. Additionally it is important to reiterate
what is stated in paragraphs 180 to 182 above in which the Committee concluded that
the Tribunal did not create a new standard or apply a different law; therefore it also

will reject this argument for annulment.

In its Memorial on Annulment and its Reply on Annulment?” Argentina alleged
serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure and stated that its right to due
process and to defense at trial had been adversely affected because it never had the
opportunity to present arguments against the existence of an alleged “composite act”

within the meaning of Article 15 of the ILC’s Draft Articles.

The Tribunal referred to Article 15 in paragraph 516 of the Award; paragraph 515 is

about the cumulative effect of the measures. n paragraph 517 after making an analysis

Td. 177.
°° Td., 91 96 and 97; Reply on Annulment, { 47.

83

280.

281.

282.

of each measure the Tribunal determined what was, in its opinion, the cumulative
effect and stated that it was “... a total alteration of the entire legal setup for foreign
investment.”°°

The Tribunal analyzed the electricity and hydrocarbons regulatory frameworks in
relation to fair and equitable treatment, as of paragraph 390 of the Award. In

paragraph 390 the Tribunal referred to the opinion of El Paso as follows:

“*,.El Paso indeed finds that Argentina’s measures go beyond the limits authorised by
the BIT: in its view, the decisions and regulations in issue did not result from a
normal exercise of regulatory powers but, in reality, were measures that brought a
radical alteration of key rules, effectively eviscerated the existing regulatory
frameworks, and therefore exceeded normal regulatory powers.”

The Committee notes that the Tribunal analyzed individually the measures taken by
Argentina and also referred to the “legal setup,” the “legal order,” and the “legal
framework,” and that in paragraph 519 of the Award it concluded that the
consequences of the measures, because of their cumulative effects, constituted a

violation of the standard of fair and equitable treatment.

The following quotations show that the Claimant fought the measures that affected

the “legal framework”:

“When El Paso made its investment, it had legitimate and reasonable expectations
that were created and encouraged both by the fundamental rules of the regulatory
frameworks enacted and the assurances and representations made by the GOA, its
President, its Minister of Finance and the Energy Secretariat... It reasonably expected
that the GOA would not unforeseeably change the fundamental rules of the game that
it established to attract foreign investment.”

“The aggregate effect of all these economic distortions cannot be overcome in the
short term, and the GOA’s measures are likely to last for years.”°°

“Despite the new regulatory legal environment that it had established, the
Government interfered with the Electricity and Hydrocarbons Regulatory
Frameworks and El Paso’s investment lost a substantial portion of its value due to the

263 Award, (517.
264 Claimant’s Memorial of August 20, 2004, 537.
265 Td. | 322.

84

acts and omissions of the Government and its subdivisions and instrumentalities. The
damage continued to escalate until 2003, when El Paso sold its investments in the
Argentine Companies at a price that represented a significant loss.”26

“In January 2002, Argentina abruptly and drastically changed the rules on the basis of
which the investment decisions had been made. These drastic changes to the
Electricity and Hydrocarbons Regulatory Frameworks withdrew fundamental rights
and protections previously provided to investors in the electricity and hydrocarbons
sectors.”°°7
“Argentina’s actions in dismantling the Electricity Regulatory Framework and the
Hydrocarbons Regulatory Framework and the frustration of rights contained in
concession agreements were taken through measures that only a government can take.
They involved legislation, decrees and resolutions and were clearly in the exercise of
“puissance publique.” Therefore, Argentina’s repudiation of El Paso’s contractual
rights amounts to a violation of fair and equitable treatment even under the more
restrictive of the two theories.”

“In the present case, the series of actions by the Argentinean authorities indicates that
they were acting consciously to abrogate the rights under the Electricity Regulatory
Framework and the Hydrocarbons Regulatory Framework. Bad faith would be
demonstrated if it were to be proved that some of the measures taken did not
primarily serve the purpose ostensibly relied upon but were taken to deprive the
investor of its rights. For instance, the export withholdings were introduced with the
stated purpose of compensating the banks for the asymmetrical pesification suffered
by them, but the revenue was apparently never used for that purpose. On the other
hand, even a credible assertion of good faith on the part of Argentina will not
controvert a finding of a violation of the fair and equitable treatment standard.”?°°

“In terms of previous decisions this treatment may be described as improper and
discreditable, as arbitrary, idiosyncratic, unjust and disproportionate. More
specifically, Argentina has thereby violated the principles of transparency, stability
and of protecting the investor’s legitimate and reasonable expectations. After creating
regulatory frameworks for the electricity and hydrocarbons sector that were designed
to project a stable legal and business environment, Argentina dismantled this system
thereby removing the guarantees upon which El Paso had relied. Therefore,
Argentina’s behavior lacked transparency, predictability, consistency and coherence
and failed to honor the investors’ basic expectations.”””°

266 Opinion prepared by Dr. Christoph Schreuer, dated November 3, 2006, submitted by El Paso, J 24.
267 14.25.

268 Td. | 359.

269 Td. 4377.

Td. 386.

85

“Argentina [is] ... portraying the measures taken by the GOA... as if they were
decisions and regulations resulting from an exercise of normal regulatory powers
when, in reality, the measures in question constituted a radical alteration of key rules
and effectively eviscerated the Energy Regulatory Framework...”

“What matters is the cumulative effect of the government’s measures on the
legitimate expectations of the foreign investor, expectations that may be reinforced by
contractual obligations, unilateral government statements, rights granted in regulatory
frameworks to induce investment, and, above all, the BIT itself, which establishes the

normative legal environment upon which foreign investors may justifiably rely”. 27

283. In the arbitration proceedings Argentina very clearly outlined the legal and

regulatory framework of that nation:

“*,.El Paso’s claim to prevent adapting the regulatory framework to the new context
existing as a result of the crisis and the abandonment of the currency board system
has no legal and factual background.”?”?

“The legitimate expectations of any investor entering the market had to include the
true possibility of changes and amendments to the Procedures. If these changes
occurred before El Paso entered the market and continued taking place at a similar
rate in the period prior to the crisis, the adjustment after the emergency cannot be
deemed a modification to game rules.”

“El Paso seems to claim that its investment was protected against all risks and that
Argentine Government was required to guarantee—always and under any
circumstances—certain profitability over its investment. That is incorrect and would
imply completely denaturalizing the regulatory framework applicable and the
protection granted by bilateral investment treaties.” 5

“El Paso holds that the measures adopted by the Argentine Republic in 2002 to
ensure the supply to the domestic market of oil and gas violated the applicable
regulatory framework. Such assertion is wrong.”?”6

“El Paso alleges that it was legitimate and reasonable to expect that the electricity and
hydrocarbons regulatory frameworks would not change. However, it is unreasonable
to expect a state not to amend its rules... 277

a1 7, Repl ly on the Merits, November 28, 2006, J 26.

7? W.M. Reisman, Supplemental Opinion of 5 November 2006, Claimant’s Exhibit 210, § 10.
273 Counter-Memorial on the Merits, September 1, 2006, {275 (English version); {274 (Spanish version).
274 Td,, 4 276 (English version); { 275 (Spanish version).
275 T4,, 4 314 (English version); { 313 (Spanish v .
276 Td,, 4 380 (English version); { 379 (Spanish version).
27” Rejoinder on the Merits, March12, 2007, { 368.

 

86

“In this case, the regulations challenged by El Paso are general. Furthermore, there
are no specific and direct commitments towards Claimant. Therefore, the existence of
an expectation that applicable regulations would not be amended cannot be invoked,
especially in the face of a crisis ...”~

“The analysis is focused on the measures adopted by the Argentine government
within the framework of the 2002 crisis in order to determine the extent to which
such measures constitute a deviation from industry regulatory frameworks unduly
affecting the investments in the energy industries by impinging on the investors’
legitimate expectations.”?””

“The facts on which we have to render an opinion refer to a set of legislative
measures that allegedly violate the BIT, ... and which constitute the basis of the claim
filed by El Paso Energy International Company 27280

“Within the framework of this Treaty, the company El Paso challenges the
implementation of a set of measures.””*!

“Regarding the situation of the concession, El Paso invokes the right to be

compensated for the adoption of a number of measures that affect the concessionaires

CAPSA and CAPEX. El Paso’s allegations are based on a kind of inalterability of the

situation derived from the concession. However, the alleged inalterability may only

be expected, in principle, with respect to the rights arising from the concession
regarded as a contract, never from the rules making up the regulatory framework”

(emphasis in the original).?**

284. From the transcribed citations, the Committee concludes that during the
arbitration proceedings the Parties did discuss whether Argentina’s measures
constituted a departure from the regulatory legal framework. The Tribunal
analyzed each measure separately, but in various paragraphs of the Award it
referred to the general effects on the legal framework to reach the conclusion
expressed in paragraph 519 of the Award. It seems to the Committee that the
Tribunal formed its opinion in the course of the written and oral submissions
and discussions of the Parties during the proceedings, assisted by several expert

opinions. Argentina was fully involved in these discussions, had ample

28
Id., 1 369.

2” “Analysis on the Valuation of Damages on the Value of El Paso’s Investments in Argentina”, August 29,

3906, report prepared by MacroConsulting, submitted by Argentina, J 6.

28 Report of César Garcia Novoa, March 6, 2007, submitted by Argentina, J 2

281
Id., 1 25.

78 Td. 1 69.

87

opportunity to defend itself and counter all the arguments brought by the
Claimant and its experts. The Committee has carefully studied the Parties’ post-
hearing submissions and confronted them with the submissions made during the
original proceedings. It found that the substance of the problem which finally
led to the Tribunal’s reasoning and decision had been exposed: that the
cumulative effect of a series of measures which might be inoffensive and legal
one by one may alter the global situation and the legal framework in a way that
the investor could not have legitimately expected. The Tribunal concluded
from the debate that the combined measures caused an illegal violation of the
FET standard even when any one of those measures, appraised individually,
were legal. It is not for this Committee to determine if the Tribunal’s reasoning
is correct. In the process of determining whether the Tribunal disrespected a
fundamental rule of procedure, the Committee has to appraise if the Tribunal
did not allow the Respondent to present its argument that a group of legal
measures, taken together, cannot amount to an illegal breach of the BIT. The
Committee is convinced that Argentina was not prevented from developing
this argument. The fact that the Tribunal used the term “creeping” with the
intention to summarize its line of reasoning by the use of such expression does
not change the Committee’s mind. The term was a way for the tribunal to
synthesize its reasoning, which did not add to the Tribunal’s argumentation. It
was based on material that was introduced into the proceedings and legal

considerations that were discussed in substance.

285. The Tribunal decided to enhance the expression of its considerations using, with
respect to fair and equitable treatment, a concept typical of expropriation; it did not
need to have recourse to that academic process in order to justify its reasoning but
decided to do it that way. This procedure does not harm the Respondent at all, who
defended vigorously throughout the arbitration proceedings, each of the measures it
adopted and the effects of those actions on the overall legal environment in which the
Claimant made its investment. No matter how it is looked at, the Tribunal’s idea of

the cumulative effects of the actions of the Respondent is simply a way to express the

88

286.

287.

288.

oo

289.

290.

reasoning that led to its conclusions and, as such, cannot be a ground for annulment

of the Award.

For the reasons set forth in the preceding paragraphs, the Committee considers that in
this case there was no violation of due process or the right of defense, as fundamental
rules of procedure. Argentina had the opportunity to defend itself and to express its
point of view on the effect of the measures that it adopted during the crisis, and on the
general legal framework. For this reason the Committee will reject Argentina’s

application for annulment, based on this and its other arguments.

. COSTS

Pursuant to Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention, Chapter VI of the Convention

(Articles 59 to 61) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the annulment proceedings.
Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention provides:

“In the case of arbitration proceedings the Tribunal shall, except as the parties
otherwise agree, assess the expenses incurred by the parties in connection with the
proceedings, and shall decide how and by whom these expenses, the fees and
expenses of the members of the Tribunal and the charges for the use of the facilities
of the Centre shall be paid.”

In the First Session (paragraph 4.1) held on July 18, 2012, the Parties did not agree on
a method for allocation of costs other than that provided for in Article 61(2) of the

ICSID Convention.

Although Argentina’s application will be dismissed in its entirety, the Committee
does not believe that this application was frivolous and considers that it was entirely
legitimate for Argentina to raise some of the issues in which it based its request for
annulment of the Award, in particular the question of due process. Therefore, in
exercise of the discretion given to it by Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention, in

the following section, the Committee will decide as follows:

89

(a) Argentina shall bear the costs of the proceedings, which include the fees and
expenses of the Members of the Committee, as well as the costs arising from the use

of the Centre; and

(b) Each party shall bear the costs and fees it incurred in regard to this annulment

proceeding.

90

VI. DECISION

291. For the foregoing reasons, the Committee unanimously decides as follows:

i. The Application for Annulment of the Award presented by Argentina is dismissed in its

entirety.

ii. The suspension of enforcement of the Award, ordered by decision of November 14,

2012, is terminated.

iii. Each party shall bear its own costs and fees in relation to this annulment proceeding.

iv. The Republic of Argentina shall bear the costs of this proceeding, which include the fees

and expenses of the Members of the Committee, as well as the costs arising from the use of

the Centre.

91

[Signed] [Signed]

Ms. Teresa Cheng Prof. Dr. Rolf Knieper
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee
Date: 26/08/2014 Date: 21/08/2014
[Signed]

Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno
President of the ad hoc Committee
Date: 28/8/2014

92

