(English Translation from Spanish Original)
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT

OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

EMILIO AGUSTIN MAFFEZINI
(CLAIMANT)

and

THE KINGDOM OF SPAIN
(RESPONDENT)

CASE NO. ARB/97/7

AWARD

Members of the Tribunal

Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia, President
Judge Thomas Buergenthal, Arbitrator
Mr. Maurice Wolf, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal

Mr. Gonzalo Flores

2 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Representing the Claimant

Dr. Ratil Emilio Vinuesa

Dra. Maria Cristina Brea

Dra. Silvina Gonzdlez Napolitano
Dra. Gisela Makowski

Estudio Vinuesa y Asociados
Buenos Aires

Argentina

Representing the Respondent

Mr. Rafael Andrés Leén Cavero
Abogado del Estado
Subdireccién General de los
Servicios Contenciosos del
Ministerio de Justicia
Madrid
Spain

Date of dispatch to the parties: November 13, 2000

CASES 3

THE TRIBUNAL

Composed as above,

After deliberation,

Makes the following Award:

A. Introduction

1. The Claimant, Mr. Emilio Agustin Maffezini, is a national of the
Argentine Republic (Argentina), with his domicile in Buenos Aires, Argen-
tina. He is represented in this arbitration proceeding by:

Dr. Raul Emilio Vinuesa,

Dra. Maria Cristina Brea,

Dra. Silvina Gonzdlez Napolitano, and
Dra. Gisela Makowski

Estudio Vinuesa y Asociados

Alsina 2360

San Isidro (1642)

Buenos Aires, Argentina

2. The Respondent is the Kingdom of Spain (Spain), represented in
this proceeding by:

Mr. Rafael Leén Cavero

Abogado del Estado

Subdireccién General de los Servicios Contenciosos del Ministerio
de Justicia

Ayala 5

28001, Madrid

Spain

3. This Award contains the Tribunal’s declaration of closure of the
proceeding issued pursuant to Rule 38 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for

4 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Arbitration Proceedings (Arbitration Rules) as well as the Award on the
merits in accordance with Arbitration Rule 47. The Tribunal has taken into
account all pleadings, documents and testimony in this case insofar as it
considered them relevant.

B. Summary of the Procedure
1. Procedure Leading to the Decision on Jurisdiction

4, On July 18, 1997, the International Centre for Settlement of Invest-
ment Disputes (ICSID or the Centre) received from Mr. Emilio Agustin
Maffezini a Request for Arbitration against the Kingdom of Spain. The
request concerned a dispute arising from treatment allegedly received by
Mr. Maffezini from Spanish entities, in connection with his investment in
an enterprise for the production and distribution of chemical products in
the Spanish region of Galicia. In his request the Claimant invoked the
provisions of the 1991 “Agreement for the Reciprocal Promotion and
Protection of Investments between the Kingdom of Spain and the Argen-
tine Republic” (the Argentine-Spain Bilateral Investment Treaty or BIT).!
The request also invoked, by way of a most-favored-nation (MEN) clause
in the Argentine-Spain BIT, the provisions of a 1991 bilateral investment
treaty between the Republic of Chile (Chile) and Spain.”

5. On August 8, 1997, the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of the
ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitra-
tion Proceedings (Institution Rules), acknowledged receipt of the request
and on the same day transmitted a copy to the Kingdom of Spain and to
the Spanish Embassy in Washington, D.C. At the same time, the Centre
asked Mr. Maffezini to provide (i) specific information concerning the
issues in dispute and the character of the underlying investment; (ii) infor-
mation as to the complete terms of Spain’s consent to submit the dispute
to arbitration under the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the ICSID
Convention); (iii) information as to the basis of his claim that the MFN
clause in the Argentine-Spain BIT would allow him to invoke Spain’s

' Agreement between Argentina and Spain of October 3, 1991. Hereinafter cited as the
Argentine-Spain BIT.

2 Agreement between Chile and Spain of October 2, 1991. Hereinafter cited as the Chile-
Spain BIT.

CASES 5

consent contained in the Chile-Spain BIT; and (iv) documentation
concerning the entry into force of the bilateral investment treaties invoked
in the request. Mr. Maffezini provided this information in two letters of
September 10 and September 29, 1997.

6. On October 30, 1997, the Secretary-General of the Centre registered
the request, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention. On this
same date, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Institution Rule 7,
notified the parties of the registration of the request and invited them to
proceed to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible.

7. On December 22, 1997, the Claimant proposed to the Respondent
that the Arbitral Tribunal consist of a sole arbitrator, to be appointed by
agreement of the parties. The Claimant further proposed that, if the parties
fail to agree in the name of the sole arbitrator by January 31, 1998, the sole
arbitrator shall be appointed by ICSID’s Secretary-General.

8. On March 5, 1998, Spain having failed to respond to the Claimant’s
proposal and more that 60 days having elapsed since the registration of the
request, the Claimant informed the Secretary-General that he was choosing
the formula set forth in Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. The
Tribunal, therefore, would consist of three arbitrators, one appointed by
Mr. Maffezini, one appointed by Spain, and the third, presiding arbitrator,
appointed by agreement of the parties.

9. On March 18, 1998, the Centre received a communication from the
Spanish Ministry of Economy and Finance, whereby Spain anticipated
having objections to the jurisdiction of the Centre and to the competence
of the Tribunal, providing the Centre with a summary of the grounds on
which such objections were based. The Centre promptly informed the
Respondent that a copy of this communication, as well as copies of the
request for arbitration and its accompanying documentation, of the notice
of registration and of the correspondence exchanged between the parties
and the Centre would be transmitted, in due course, to each of the
Members of the Tribunal, noting that the question of jurisdiction was one
for the Tribunal to decide.

10. On April 24, 1998, Mr. Maffezini appointed Professor Thomas
Buergenthal, a national of the United States of America, as an arbitrator.
On May 4, 1998, Spain appointed Mr. Maurice Wolf, also a national of the

6 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

United States of America, as an arbitrator. The parties, however, failed to
agree on the appointment of the third, presiding, arbitrator. In these
circumstances, by means of a further communication of May 14, 1998, the
Claimant requested that the third, presiding, arbitrator in the proceeding
be appointed by the Chairman of ICSID’s Administrative Council in
accordance with Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 4 of the
Arbitration Rules.?

11. Having consulted with the parties, the Chairman of ICSID’s Admin-
istrative Council appointed Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia, a Chilean
national, as the President of the Arbitral Tribunal. On June 24, 1998,
ICSID’s Legal Adviser, on behalf of the Centre’s Secretary-General, and in
accordance with Rule 6(1) of the Arbitration Rules, notified the parties
that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the
Tribunal was therefore deemed to have been constituted on that date. On
the same date, pursuant to ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulation
25, the parties were informed that Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Counsel, ICSID,
would serve as Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal.

12. On July 3, 1998, the Respondent filed an application for provisional
measures, requiring the Claimant to post a guaranty in the amount of the
costs expected to be incurred by Spain in defending against this action. By
further filing of August 7, 1998, the Claimant requested the Tribunal to
dismiss such application.

13. After consulting with the parties, the Tribunal scheduled a first
session for August 21, 1998. On August 20, 1998, counsel for the Respon-
dent hand-delivered a document containing Spain’s objections to the juris-
diction of the Centre. A copy of Spain’s filing was distributed by the Centre
to the Members of the Tribunal on that same date. A copy of Spain's filing
was later handed by the Secretary of the Tribunal to the Claimant's repre-
sentative in the course of the Tribunal’s first session with the parties.

3 Under Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 4 of the Arbitration Rules, if the
Tribunal is not yet constituted within 90 days after the notice of registration of the request has
been dispatched, the Chairman of ICSID’s Administrative Council shall, at the request of either
party, and after consulting both parties as far as possible, appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators
not yet appointed and designate an arbitrator to be the President of the Tribunal.

CASES 7

14. The first session of the Tribunal with the parties was held, as sched-
uled, on August 21, 1998, at the seat of ICSID in Washington, D.C. At the
session, the parties expressed their agreement that the Tribunal had been
properly constituted, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules, and that they did not have
any objections in this respect. The Tribunal hereby states that it was there-
fore established under the Convention.

15. During the course of the first session the parties agreed on a number
of procedural matters reflected in written minutes signed by the President
and the Secretary of the Tribunal. Spanish was chosen by the parties as the
procedural language and Washington, D.C., the seat of the Centre, was
selected as the formal place of proceedings. The Respondent, represented
at the session by Mr. Rafael Andrés Leén Cavero, drew the Tribunal’s atten-
tion to its objections to the jurisdiction of the Centre. The Tribunal, after
briefly ascertaining the views of the parties on this matter, fixed the
following time limits for the written phase of the proceedings: the
Claimant would file a memorial, with all of his arguments on the question
of jurisdiction and on the merits within 90 days from the date of the first
session; the Respondent would then file a counter-memorial, with all of its
arguments on the question of jurisdiction and on the merits within 90 days
from its reception of the Claimant’s memorial. The Tribunal left open the
possibility of requiring the submission of a reply and a rejoinder to the
parties. The Tribunal also left open the possibility of holding a hearing on
the issue of jurisdiction.

16. In accordance with the above-described schedule, the Claimant
submitted to the Centre his memorial on the merits and on the question
of jurisdiction on November 19, 1998. On April 9, 1999, after a request
for an extension of the time limit for the filing of its counter-memorial was
granted by the Tribunal, the Respondent submitted its written pleadings
on the merits and on the question of jurisdiction.

17. On May 14, 1999, the Tribunal invited the parties to submit any
further observations they may had on the question of jurisdiction, calling
for a hearing on jurisdiction to be held on July 7, 1999, at the seat of the
Centre in Washington, D.C. The parties filed their final observations on
the question of jurisdiction on June 3, 1999 (the Claimant) and June 18,
1999 (the Respondent). Due to consecutive requests filed first by counsel

8 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

for the Respondent, and later by counsel for the Claimant, the hearing on
jurisdiction was postponed until August 9, 1999.

18. At the August 9, 1999 hearing, Dr. Ratil Emilio Vinuesa addressed
the Tribunal on behalf of the Claimant, referring to the arguments put
forward in his written pleadings. Mr. Rafael Andrés Leén Cavero addressed
the Tribunal on behalf of the Kingdom of Spain. The Tribunal then posed
questions to the representatives of the parties, as provided in Rule 32(3) of
the Arbitration Rules.

19. Having heard the views of the parties, the Tribunal rendered, on
August 26, 1999, Procedural Order No 1, deciding that, in accordance
with Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 41(3) of the Arbi-
tration Rules, it would deal with the question of jurisdiction as a prelimi-
nary matter, therefore suspending the proceedings on the merits.

20. On October 28, 1999, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2,
addressing Spain's request for provisional measures. The Tribunal, pointing
out that the recommendation of provisional measures seeking to protect mere
expectations of success on the side of the Respondent would amount to a pre-
judgement of the Claimant’s case, unanimously dismissed Spain's request.
Certified copies of the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 2 were distributed to
the parties by the Secretary of the Tribunal. A copy of Procedural Order No.
2 is attached to the present Award as an integral part of such.

21. On January 25, 2000 the Tribunal, having deliberated by correspon-
dence, issued its unanimous Decision on the Objections to Jurisdiction
raised by the Kingdom of Spain. In its Decision, the Tribunal rejected the
Respondent’s contention that the Claimant failed to comply with an
exhaustion of local remedies requirement set forth in Article X of the
Argentine-Spain BIT. Also, in light of the application of the most favored
nation clause included in the Argentine-Spain BIT, and therefore relying
on the more favorable arrangements contained in the Chile-Spain BIT, the
Tribunal rejected Spain’s contention that the Claimant should have
submitted the case to Spanish courts before referring it to international
arbitration under Article X(2) of the BIT, and concluded that the Claimant
had the right to submit the instant dispute to arbitration without first
accessing the Spanish courts. Finally, the Tribunal, addressing the other
objections to jurisdiction raised by Spain, concluded that the Claimant had

CASES 9

made out a prima facie case that he had standing to file this case, that the
Sociedad para el Desarrollo Industrial de Galicia Sociedad Anonima
(SODIGA S.A. or SODIGA) was a State entity acting on behalf of the
Kingdom of Spain and that the dispute came into being after both the
Argentine-Spain and the Chile-Spain BITs had entered into force. On these
basis, the Tribunal concluded that the Centre had jurisdiction and that the
Tribunal was competent to consider the dispute between the parties in
accordance with the provisions of the Argentine-Spain BIT.

22. Certified copies of the Tribunal’s decision were distributed to the
parties by the Secretary of the Tribunal. A copy of the Tribunal’s Decision
on Jurisdiction is attached to the present Award as an integral part of such.

2. Procedure leading to the Award on the Merits

23. On January 25, 2000, the Tribunal, following its Decision on Juris-
diction, issued, in accordance with Rules 19 and 41(4) of the Arbitration
Rules of the Centre, Procedural Order No. 3 for the continuation of the
proceedings on the merits. In that Procedural Order the Tribunal fixed the
following schedule for the further procedures: having the parties filed their
principal written pleadings, the Claimant would file a reply on the merits
within forty five days from his receipt of the Tribunal’s Decision on Juris-
diction and the Respondent would file a rejoinder on the merits forty-five
days from its receipt of the Claimant’s reply. Once the Tribunal has
received these memorials it would fix a date for a hearing.

24. Pursuant to that schedule, the Claimant submitted to the Centre, on
March 21, 2000, his reply on the merits. On May 3, 2000, the Respondent
submitted its rejoinder on the merits.

25. By letter of May 10, 2000, the Tribunal, having previously consulted
with counsel for both parties, called for a hearing on the merits to be held
during the week of July 10, 2000, in London, England.

26. By letter of June 2, 2000, the Tribunal, in accordance with Arbitra-
tion Rule 34(2)(a), call upon the Claimant to produce the following
witnesses to be available for examination at the hearing on the merits: Mr.
Emilio Agustin Maffezini, Mr. Silverio Bouzas Pifieiro and Mr. Héctor
Rodriguez Molnar.

10 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

27. By same letter of June 2, 2000, the Tribunal, in accordance with
Arbitration Rule 34(2)(a), call upon the Respondent to produce the
following witnesses to be available for examination at the hearing on the
merits: Mr. Ricardo Méndez Rey, Mr. Manuel Mucientes Iglesias, Mr. Luis
Fernandez Garcia and Mr. Luis Soto Bafios. Additionally, the Tribunal
requested that the Respondent make available for examination the
following expert: Mr. José Ramén Alvarez Arnau.

28. In accordance with the Tribunal’s directions of June 2, 2000, the
hearing on the merits would follow this order:

The Tribunal would deliberate privately on Monday, July
10, 2000.

The Hearing on the merits would commence on Tuesday,
July 11, 2000 at 10 a.m.

Counsel for the Claimant would open with a 30-minute
oral presentation, followed by a 30-minute presentation by
counsel for the Respondent. Each party may then present, by
way of rebuttal and surrebuttal, any further remarks it may
have for 15 minutes each.

The Claimant would then be entitled to a 30-minute
examination of each of its witnesses, followed by a 30-minute
examination of each of the Claimant's witnesses by counsel for
the Respondent. The Respondent would thereafter be entitled
to a 30-minute examination of each of its witnesses and of the
expert, followed by a 30-minute examination of each of such
witnesses and expert by counsel for the Claimant.

Finally the Claimant would close with a statement of no
more than 30 minutes, followed by a 30-minute closing
statement by the Respondent.

The members of the Tribunal may put questions to the
witnesses and to the expert witness, and ask them for expla-
nations at any moment during the hearings, but such ques-
tions would not be chargeable to the parties’ time.

29. By letter of July 5, 2000, counsel for the Claimant submitted the
written deposition of the witness requested from that party, Mr. Silverio

CASES, 11

Bouzas Pifieiro, and an additional deposition made by Mr. Emilio Agustin
Maffezini.

30. The hearing on the merits was held, as scheduled, the week of July
10, 2000, in London, at the seat of the International Dispute Resolution
Centre (IDRC). Present at the hearing were:

Members of the Tribunal:
Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia, President, Judge Thomas
Buergenthal, Arbitrator and Mr. Maurice Wolf, Arbitrator

ICSID Secretariat:
Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Secretary of the Tribunal

On behalf of the Claimant:
Dr. Ratil Emilio Vinuesa, Dra. Silvina Gonzdlez Napolitano
and Dra. Gisela Makowski

On behalf of the Respondent:
Mr. Rafael Leén Cavero, Abogado del Estado

Also attending on behalf of the Respondent:

Ms. Pilar Moran Reyero, Subdirectora General de Inversiones
Exteriores del Ministerio de Econom{a del Reino de Espafia and
Mr. Félix Martinez Burgos, Consejero Comercial Jefe de la oficina
Comercial de Espafia en Gran Bretafia

31. The hearing commenced, as scheduled, on July 11, 2000 at 10 a.m.
After a brief introduction by the President of the Tribunal, Dr. Ratil Emilio
Vinuesa addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Claimant, referring to the
arguments put forward in his written pleadings. Mr. Rafael Andrés Leén
Cavero then addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Kingdom of Spain.

32. Of the witnesses requested by the Tribunal from the Claimant only
Mr. Rodriguez Molnar appeared at the hearing. As noted in paragraph 29
above, Messrs. Maffezini and Bouzas Pifieiro submitted written deposition
to the Centre on July 5, 2000. Of the witnesses requested by the Tribunal
from the Respondent, Mr. Mendez Rey, Mr. Mucientes Iglesias, Mr.
Fernandez Garcia and Mr. Soto Bafios appeared at the hearing. So did the
expert requested by the Tribunal from the Respondent, Mr. Alvarez Arnau.

12 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

33. The hearing was suspended on the afternoon of July 11, 2000,
during the Claimant’s interrogation of the expert, due to a health emer-
gency suffered by Mr. Wolf. The parties having agreed during the August
21, 1998 session of the Tribunal with the parties, that only the presence of
the majority of the members of the Tribunal would be required at its
sittings, the other members of the Tribunal, with the agreement of the
parties, decided to continue with the hearing. The hearing continued thus,
in the absence of Mr. Wolf and the Secretary of the Tribunal, who left the
hearing to help Mr. Wolf. Even though part of the witnesses’ depositions
of the afternoon of July 11, 2000 were not recorded due to a technical
mishap, which was made known to both of the parties, the recordings were
subsequently made available to Mr. Wolf and the other arbitrators, so that
all members of the Tribunal had access to most of the testimony presented
by the witnesses and the expert. All of the witnesses and the expert that
attend the hearing were examined by the presenting party, cross examined
by the other party and questioned by the Tribunal. The examination, cross-
examination and questioning of all of the witnesses took place during the
session of July 11, 2000.

34, The hearing continued on the morning of July 12, 2000. Mr. Wolf
could not attend this session due to ill health. During this session, counsel
for both parties made their closing presentations, as scheduled. The
hearing concluded with some final remarks by the President of the Tribunal
concerning the efficient and professional presentation of their cases made
by counsel for both parties.

35. On November 9, 2000, the members of the Tribunal met for the last
time at the seat of the Centre, in Washington, D.C., for final deliberations.

3. Declaration of Closure of the Proceeding

36. ICSID Arbitration Rule 38 (1) requires that when the presentation
of the case by the Parties is complete, the proceeding shall be declared
closed.

37. Having reviewed all of the presentations by the parties, the
Tribunal, came to the conclusion that there is no request by a Party or any
reason to reopen the proceeding, as is possible under ICSID Arbitration
Rule 38(2).

CASES, 13

38. Accordingly, by letter dated November 2, 2000, the Tribunal
declared the proceeding closed, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule
38(1).

C. Summary of Facts and Contentions

39. In 1989, Mr. Emilio Agustin Maffezini decided to embark on the
production of various chemical products in Galicia, Spain, by establishing
and investing in a corporation named Emilio A. Maffezini S. A. (EAMSA).
EAMSA was incorporated under the laws of Spain on November 15, 1989.
Mr. Maffezini subscribed to 70% of the capital for 35 million Spanish
Pesetas, paying 66.36% thereof at the time of incorporation, with the
balance to be paid ata later time. The Sociedad para el Desarrollo Industrial
de Galicia, a Spanish entity whose legal status will be discussed below,
subscribed to 30% of the capital or 15 million Spanish Pesetas. A third
nominal shareholder was included to comply with the legal requirements
relating to the incorporation, but that share was immediately repurchased
by Mr. Maffezini. A contract was also made for the repurchase of
SODIGA’s shares by Mr. Maffezini. This contract provided for an interest
rate of 12%. That rate was lower than the current market rate of 16.6%
and reflected a preferential arrangement. SODIGA also granted a loan of
40 million Spanish Pesetas to the newly incorporated company, at a pref-
erential interest rate, to be applicable at least for the first year. Various
subsidies were requested from and approved by the Spanish Ministry of
Finance and the Xunta de Galicia.

40. Information on prospective markets was requested from various
Spanish government agencies. At the same time, EAMSA proceeded to hire
a private consulting firm in order to identify the appropriate plot of land
to buy and to undertake a study on the costs of construction and whatever
other requirements the new company might have to begin production. On
the basis of this study the land was purchased and contracts concluded with
various firms and suppliers. SODIGA, for its part, had also undertaken an
economic evaluation of the project in order to decide whether to partici-
pate in it.

41. On June 24, 1991, an environmental impact assessment (EIA) study
was filed with the Xunta de Galicia, the government of the Autonomous
Region of Galicia. Additional information was requested and provided,

14 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

and the EIA was finally cleared on January 15, 1992. Before such clearance
was obtained, work commenced on readying the land for construction.
Construction of the plant itself was also begun.

42. While these preparations for the implementation of the project were
in progress, EAMSA began to experience financial difficulties. A capital
increase was agreed to, new loans were requested and applications for addi-
tional subsidies were made. Some of these efforts did not succeed, however.
A transfer of 30 million Spanish Pesetas was made from a personal account
of Mr. Maffezini to EAMSA, under circumstances that will be considered
below.

43. In early March 1992, Mr. Maffezini ordered the construction to stop
and the dismissal of EAMSA employees. In June 1994 an attorney working
for Mr. Maffezini approached SODIGA with an offer inviting it to cancel
all outstanding debts owed it by EAMSA and Mr. Maffezini in exchange
for EAMSA’s assets. SODIGA indicated that it would accept this offer
provided Mr. Maffezini was willing to add 2 million Spanish Pesetas. This
proposal was rejected by Mr. Maffezini. The Argentine embassy in Madrid
was then asked by Mr. Maffezini to intervene. After an exchange of more
correspondence, SODIGA indicated, on June 13, 1996, that it was willing
to accept the original proposal made by Mr. Maffezini’s attorney. Mr.
Maffezini did not follow up on SODIGA’ latest proposal. Not long there-
after he instituted the ICSID proceedings described above.

44, Based on the foregoing facts, Mr. Maffezini has submitted four main
contentions to this Tribunal. First, that because of SODIGA’s status as a
public entity, all of its acts and omissions are attributable to the Kingdom
of Spain. Second, that the project failed because of the wrong advice given
by SODIGA with regard to the costs of the project, which turned out to
be significantly higher than originally estimated. Third, that SODIGA was
also responsible for the additional costs resulting from the EIA since
EAMSA was pressured to make the investment before the EIA process was
finalized and before its implications were known. Fourth, that Mr.
Maffezini had not agreed to a loan to EAMSA for 30 million Spanish
Pesetas and that the transfer of this amount from his personal account to
EAMSA was irregular.

45. The Kingdom of Spain has contested these allegations. It considers
that SODIGA is a private company whose acts are not attributable to the

CASES, 15

State. In any event, the Kingdom contends that the one year statute of limi-
tation applicable under Spanish law to such claims against public entities
bars the instant action even if SODIGA were to be considered a public
entity. Spain also argues that Mr. Maffezini was responsible for the feasi-
bility study of the project, including availability of markets for its products
and costs, and that SODIGA’s studies and estimates were intended purely
for its own purposes in order to enable it to decide whether to participate
in the venture. The Kingdom of Spain further argues that Mr. Maffezini
was fully aware of the requirements of the EIA and that he decided to
acquire the land and proceed with the construction before receiving EIA
approval and did so against the advice of his own employees and consult-
ants. According to Spain, the transfer of funds to EAMSA was fully autho-
rized by Mr. Maffezini and was carried out by an official of SODIGA
acting in his personal capacity on instructions of Mr. Maffezini. The
Kingdom also considers that, as a matter of law, Mr. Maffezini’s 1994
settlement proposal was an offer to conclude a contract. That offer was
never withdrawn and, therefore, became a binding contract when
SODIGA accepted it in 1996.

D. Considerations
SODIGA’ status in the Kingdom of Spain.

46. The status of SODIGA in the Kingdom of Spain was considered by
the Tribunal at the jurisdictional stage of these proceedings from two
points of view. The Tribunal first considered whether or not SODIGA was
a State entity for the purpose of determining the jurisdiction of the Centre
and the competence of the Tribunal. Here the Tribunal found that the
Claimant had made out a prima facie case that SODIGA was a State entity
acting on behalf of the Kingdom of Spain. Both a structural and a func-
tional test were applied to reach this conclusion.

47. This prima facie determination can now be confirmed by the
Tribunal since no convincing evidence has been produced to rebut it. The
Kingdom of Spain has continuously relied on the structure of the Spanish
public administration to argue that SODIGA did not fall in this category
and that it is merely a financial company created as a private corporation.
Among other arguments in support of this position, the Kingdom of Spain
invoked Article 2 of Law 30/92, dated November 27, 1992, which estab-
lishes the legal regime of Public Administrations and Common Adminis-

16 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

trative Procedure.’ This provision identifies as public administrations the
General Administration of the State, the Administration of Autonomous
Communities and the entities belonging to local administrations. It further
identifies in this category the entities created under public law and that
have a legal personality associated with any of the entities mentioned. This
listing is consistent with the structural test employed by the Spanish
Administration.

48. But even if the structural test is applied, it is clear that financial
companies such as SODIGA could not at the period relevant to the present
dispute be held to fall entirely outside the overall scheme of public admin-
istration. In fact, there existed a variety of public entities that were
governed by private law but which would occasionally exercise public func-
tions that were governed by public law.? Thus, the Instituto Nacional de
Industria, established in 1941, followed in 1992 by the Group TENEO S.
A., both with close institutional and financial relations to SODIGA, as well
as the creation in 1995 of the State Corporation for Industrial Participation
(“Sociedad Estatal de Participaciones Industriales”), were all in this mixed
category of public entities with private law regimes.” Their status always
gave rise to great confusion.”

49. The enactment of Law 30/92 clarified this situation in part. It must
be noted, however, that this law is of a date subsequent to the here relevant
period—November 27, 1992. Gradually the distinction came to be made
between Public Business Entities (“Entidades puiblicas empresariales”)
which, although governed by private law, could eventually exercise some
public functions under public law,® and State commercial corporations
(“Sociedades mercantiles estatales”). The latter, although considered public
entities from an economic point of view, are as a matter of law governed by
private law, and not administrative law.? But even here some activities of

4 Law No. 30/1992, November 26, 1992, as amended, text in Luis Martin Rebollo: Leyes
Administrativas, 1999, at 369.

> Luis Martin Rebollo: “Estudio Preliminar y Esquema de la Organizacidn de la Adminis-
tracién General del Estado y de la Estructura Orgdnica Basica de los diferentes Ministerios”, in
op. cit., supra note 4, 636, 639.

6 Tbid., at 639-640.

7 Ibid., at 679.

See in particular Article 2.2 of Law No. 30/1992, and the notes to this Article by Martin

Rebollo, op. cit. supra note 4, at 385.

° Martin Rebollo, op. cit., supra note 4, at 679.

CASES, 17

these commercial corporations, such as contracting for example, were
governed by administrative law.!° Te was not until the adoption of Law 6/
1997 of April 14, 1997 that state commercial corporations were clearly
forbidden to “perform functions that imply the exercise of public
authority.”!! The regime only came to be completed recently with the
enactment of Law 1/1999, dated January 5, 1999, which governs capital
venture entities and the corporations established to manage such entities,
including “XesGALICIA S.G.E.C.R., S.A,” established in 1999, the
present corporation that now controls SODIGA.!”

50. The structural test, however, is but one element to be taken into
account. Other elements to which international law looks are, in particular,
the control of the company by the State or State entities and the objectives
and functions for which the company was created. As the Tribunal empha-
sized in its Decision on jurisdiction, many of these elements point in the
instant case to its public nature.

51. The second issue the Tribunal considered at the jurisdictional stage
was whether the actions and omissions complained of by the Claimant
were attributable to the State. In dealing with this question, the Tribunal
concluded that whether SODIGA was responsible for those acts, whether
they were wrongful, whether all these acts and omissions always were
governmental rather than commercial in nature, and, hence, whether they
can be attributed to the Spanish State, were all issues that could only be
decided at the merits stage of the case.

52. In dealing with these questions, the Tribunal must again rely on the
functional test, that is, it must establish whether specific acts or omissions
are essentially commercial rather than governmental in nature or,
conversely, whether their nature is essentially governmental rather than
commercial. Commercial acts cannot be attributed to the Spanish State,
while governmental acts should be so attributed.

10 Tbid., at 679.

1 Law No. 6/1997, April 14, 1997, in Martin Rebollo, op. cit., supra note 4, at 677,
Disposicién Adicional Duodécima, at 713.

12 José Marti Pellén: El capital inversion en Espanal999, Asociacién Espafiola de Capital
Inversién, 1999, at 24. For a description of “XesGalicia $. G. E. C. R., S. A.”, see Ibid., at 197.

18 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

53. SODIGA was incorporated in 1972 at a time when the Spanish State
pursued an active policy of industrial promotion, particularly in depressed
areas of the country. This policy was specifically designed by the public
sector to encourage the industrial development of Spain. To this end not
less than twenty-two such entities were created in different regions of the
country. Only four such entities were related to the private sector. All
others, including SODIGA, were closely related to the Jnstituto Nacional de
Industria_and to the respective Comunidades Autonomas which, in the case
of SODIGA, was the Xunta de Galicia.'°

54. Just as in the case of EAMSA, the policy pursued by these entities
was implemented by investing in newly created companies, by the grant of
loans and the conclusion of contracts for the repurchase of shares, which
in a sense also amounted to a deferred loan. Most of these ventures were
not quite successful from a financial point of view, although they contrib-
uted to the development of the industrial and business base of the region
concerned. Important shortcomings that have been identified in this policy
were the lack of a specific legal and fiscal framework, difficulties in recov-
ering the investments made and the lack of professional expertise. These
shortcomings were aggravated by political pressures to support investments

of doubtful viability.

55. Because of the problems that were encountered under the original
approach, the entities here in question embarked on a reorientation of their
functions. Beginning in the late 1980's, they started to adopt a more business-
oriented approach, particularly in order to be able to confront the growing
competition from European financial institutions that came to Spain
following its incorporation into the European Economic Community. As a
result of this new orientation, investments in newly formed companies
diminished significantly. Later the number of companies in which invest-
ments were made also diminished, and capital was invested in consolidated
companies, generally by means of leveraged buy-outs, management buy-
outs or management buy-ins.!> At the same time, small investments grad-
ually diminished. They were replaced by larger volume investments in each
operation and company.

13 Tbid., at 39-40.
14 tbid., at 40.
'S Tbid., at 45-46.

 

CASES, 19

56. The end result of this reorientation was that in the 1990’s these enti-
ties became active participants in a flourishing market economy. A number
of investment projects were discontinued and some recovery of capital took
place, either directly or by means of the sale of shares in the stock market.!®
A Spanish Association of Investment Capital, formerly the Spanish Associ-
ation of Capital-Risk Entities, was created in 1986. It and the corre-
sponding association of comparable European entities, in which SODIGA
also participated, have been instrumental in bringing about this transfor-
mation. Some of the changes and resulting developments were most help-
fully explained to the Tribunal by the President of SODIGA and now
President of “XesGALICIA S.G.E.C.R., S.A.”, Mr. Luis Fernandez Garcia,
during the oral hearings in these proceedings.

57. At the time EAMSA was established, SODIGA was in the process of
transforming itself from a State-oriented to a market-oriented entity. While
originally a number of SODIGA’s functions were closer to being govern-
mental in nature, they must today be considered commercial in nature. But
at the time of transition, there was in fact a combination of both, some to
be regarded as functions essentially governmental in nature and others
essentially commercial in character. As mentioned above, this is the
dividing line between those acts or omissions that can be attributed to the
Spanish State and those that cannot. The Tribunal must accordingly cate-
gorize the various acts or omissions giving rise to the instant dispute.

Responsibility for mistaken advice.

58. The second main contention by the Claimant, as noted above, is that
the project failed because SODIGA provided faulty advice regarding the
cost of the project, which turned out to be significantly higher than origi-
nally estimated. According to the Claimant, the first draft investment
project was based on a report by SODIGA, dated May 1989, which was
made in order to determine the viability of the project. Claimant submits
that the final cost of the investment would have been 300% higher had the
project been completed.

59. The Tribunal has already noted that Spain rejected this contention.
It argued that Mr. Maffezini was responsible for the commissioning of a

16 Tbid., at 30-31.

20 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

feasibility study for the project, and that SODIGA’s estimates were
designed solely for its own internal purposes to enable it to decide whether
to participate in the new company. Spain also submitted that the investor
was an experienced businessman and that he and his team of professionals
prepared the project. SODIGA’s advice was never requested and EAMSA
was not induced to invest. Furthermore, the technical study regarding costs
was prepared at the request of EAMSA by a consulting firm —COTECNO.
Spain contended, furthermore, that the increased cost amounted to no
more than 21% and that it was due to specification changes ordered by Mr.
Maffezini. According to Spain, once the increase in cost attributable to the
changed specifications is deducted from the original estimate, the cost per
square meter constructed does not differ significantly from the estimated

figure.

60. According to Spain, what really went wrong was that the project was
ill conceived. No market studies were undertaken, Spain’s public services
provided free information but were not supposed to provide professional
advice, the plot of land was not appropriately examined and required addi-
tional work, and the specifications were changed with regard to both the
quality and quantity of the construction that had been envisaged. Mr.
Maffezini was responsible for all these problems, and it was he who even-
tually decided to stop the work and dismiss all EAMSA’s employees.

61. The Tribunal has carefully examined all of these contentions. In
doing so, it has taken account of the fact that one of the functions of
SODIGA and her sister institutions in Spain was to provide information
to investors and businessmen in order to promote the industrialization of
the region concerned. In this connection, it is apparent that SODIGA did
more than merely provide EAMSA with information. It made available to
EAMSA a number of other services. SODIGA provided EAMSA with
office space during the start-up period and accounting services that
included assistance with the disbursement for the payment of bills and
other expenditures. There was, as a result, considerable interaction between
SODIGA’s officials and EAMSA employees, in the course of which the
project, its costs and returns, and the viability and prospects of the
proposed investment were explored by them at some length.

62. The Tribunal is satisfied, however, that SODIGA was not
discharging any public functions in providing the aforesaid information
assistance to EAMSA. This type of activity does not ordinarily go beyond

CASES, 21

the commercial assistance that many financial and commercial entities
provide to their prospective customers. Some of the other services
provided, however, do have a connection with other aspects of the claim.

63. The Tribunal is also satisfied, after hearing expert and witness testi-
mony on these issues, that the feasibility study made by SODIGA, whether
faulty or not, was intended solely for SODIGA’s internal purposes of
deciding on its own participation in the capital of EAMSA and that it was
not intended to serve as a substitute for the study the investor commis-
sioned by hiring COTECNO. Hence, SODIGA cannot be held respon-
sible for cost overruns, whatever their real amount might have been.
Moreover, SODIGA’s membership on the board of EAMSA, an aspect that
has also been raised by the claimant so as to justify an attribution of
responsibility in this connection, was also consistent with normal business
arrangements. Subsidies were granted by the Spanish State and the Xunta
de Galicia at the request of EAMSA and not by SODIGA, thus neither
providing a link to potential attribution of responsibility to the latter. Even
the preferential rates applied to SODIGA’ loans were paid for by the Xunta
de Galicia by way of reimbursement.

64. In this connection, the Tribunal must emphasize that Bilateral
Investment Treaties are not insurance policies against bad business judg-
ments. While it is probably true that there were shortcomings in the poli-
cies and practices that SODIGA and its sister entities pursued in the here
relevant period in Spain, they cannot be deemed to relieve investors of the
business risks inherent in any investment. To that extent, it is clear that
Spain cannot be held responsible for the losses Mr. Maffezini may have
sustained any more than would any private entity under similar circum-
stances.

Responsibility for Environmental Impact Assessment.

65. The Claimant also contends that SODIGA is responsible for the
additional costs resulting from the EIA because EAMSA was pressured to
go ahead with the investment before that process was finalized and its
implications were known. This pressure, according to Claimant, was exer-
cised for political reasons by the authorities of the Xunta de Galicia and the
local municipality. Claimant's decision to stop the construction work was
directly related to this additional increase in the costs of the project.

22 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

66. The Kingdom of Spain is of the view that Mr. Maffezini was fully
aware of the requirements of the EIA and decided to acquire the land and
proceed with the construction before its approval, and that he did so
against the advice of his own employees and consultants. The Claimant was
specifically informed of the applicable legal requirements in Spain and
under the European Economic Community, particularly as the project
involved the highly toxic chemical industry. The initial EIA study prepared
by EAMSA was insufficient and the Xunta de Galicia had to request
supplemental information. Once this information was submitted, the
approval of the EIA proceeded expeditiously. No pressure was applied on
EAMSA and the decision to discontinue the project was entirely unrelated
to the EIA.

67. The Tribunal has carefully examined these contentions, since the
Environmental Impact Assessment procedure is basic for the adequate
protection of the environment and the application of appropriate preven-
tive measures. This is true, not only under Spanish and EEC law, but also
increasingly so under international law.!

68. The Tribunal notes that in Spain there is a Constitutional mandate
relating to the protection of the environment, which finds expression in
Article 45 of the Constitution of 1978.18 Paragraph 2 of this Article states
that “[t]he public authorities, relying on the necessary public solidarity,
shall ensure that all natural resources are used rationally, with a view to
safeguarding and improving the quality of life and protecting and restoring
the environment.”!? This mandate applies not only to the General Admin-
istration of the State but also to the Autonomous Communities and
Municipalities.?° Specific legislation has been enacted to fulfill this

1 Sce for example the Convention on Environmental Impact Assessment in a Trans-
boundary Context, Espoo, February 25, 1991, and see generally Philippe Sands: Principles of
International Environmental Law, Vol. 1, 1995, Chapter 15: “Environmental Impact Assess-
ment”, 579-595.

18 Constitucién Espafiola, December 27, 1978, Boletin Oficial del Estado, No. 311.
December 29, 1978, Article 45.

19 As translated in European Court of Human Rights, Case Lépez Ostra v. Spain, Case No.
41/1993/436/515, December 9, 1994, paragraph 23.

20 Ramén Martin Mateo: “The Environmental Law System”, in N. S. J. Koeman: Envi-
ronmental Law in Europe, 1999, Chapter 15: “Environmental Law in Spain”, 497, at 497-499.

CASES, 23

mandate, including the Law on Toxic and Hazardous Waste”! and other
instruments.77

69. Particularly noteworthy is the legislation on EIA. Strict procedures
in this respect are provided in EEC Directive 85/337 of June 27, 19857?
and in Spain’s Royal Legislative Decree No. 1302/1986 of June 28, 1986.74
Chemical industries are specifically required under both measures to
undertake an EIA. Public information, consultation with pertinent author-
ities, licensing and other procedures are also a part thereof.?? The EEC
Directive, like the one that later came to amend it,”° requires “that an EIA
is undertaken before consent is given to certain public and private projects
considered to have significant environmental implications.”?” Suspension
of projects can be ordered under Spanish law, particularly if work thereon
is begun before the EIA is approved.78

70. There can be no doubt that EAMSA’s project required an EIA and
that both Mr. Maffezini and his employees were aware that this was so. The
record is abundantly clear with regard to the exchange of correspondence and
other communications on the issue of environmental requirements. Apart
from the general principle that ignorance of the law is no defense, there is
evidence in this case that the Claimant was informed of these requirements.
That was why COTECNO was also asked to prepare the initial EIA study as
part of its broader study on costs. It appears to the Tribunal that the investor,
as happens so often, tried to minimize this requirement so as to avoid addi-
tional costs or technical difficulties. Moreover, the Claimant has also not

21 Law No. 20, May 14, 1986, as discussed in Martin Mateo, loc. cit., supra note 20, at
504.

22 On the Spanish environmental legislation see generally Martin Mateo, loc. cit., supra
note 20, and Carlos de Miguel Perales: “Practical Questions of Environmental Law”, in
Koeman, op. cit. and chapter cit., supra note 20, 508.

23 EEC Directive 85/337, June 27, 1985, Official Journal of the European Community, No.
1175/40, July 5, 1985.

24 Real Decreto Legislative No. 1302/1986, June 28, 1986, Boletin Oficial del Estado, No.
155, June 30, 1986, 23733.

25 De Miguel Perales, loc. cit., supra note 22, at 508-511.

26 EEC Directive 97/11, Official Journal of the European Community, L73/5, 1997.

27 Laurens Jan Brinkhorst: “European Environmental Law: an Introduction”, in Koeman,
op. cit., supra note 20, 1, at 15.

8 Decree No. 1302, cit., supra note 24, Article 9. 1.

24 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

substantiated, much less proved, the costs or damages attributable to the
handling of the EIA by the Spanish authorities.

71. The Kingdom of Spain and SODIGA have done no more in this
respect than insist on the strict observance of the EEC and Spanish law
applicable to the industry in question. It follows that Spain cannot be held
responsible for the decisions taken by the Claimant with regard to the EIA.
Furthermore, the Kingdom of Spain’s action is fully consistent with Article
2(1) of the Argentine-Spain Bilateral Investment Treaty, which calls for the
promotion of investment in compliance with national legislation. The
Tribunal accordingly also dismisses this contention by the Claimant.

The transfer of funds.

72. The Claimant also contends that 30 million Spanish Pesetas were
transferred from his personal account as a loan to EAMSA, despite the fact
that he had not consented to the loan. The Claimant also complains of a
number of irregularities attributable to the private banks that managed his
accounts, and that these acts also engage the responsibility of the Banco de
Espana, Spain’s Central Bank.

73. The Kingdom of Spain denies these allegations on the grounds that
Mr. Maffezini had consented to the loan, had authorized the transfer of
funds and had mandated Mr. Luis Soto Bafios, SODIGA’ representative in
EAMSA, to undertake these operations. Since Mr. Soto Bafios was for these
purposes acting as the personal representative of Mr. Maffezini, Spain
submits that his acts cannot be attributed to SODIGA. Moreover,
according to Spain, alleged irregularities on the part of private banks are
not the responsibility of the Banco de Espafa nor of the Spanish State.
Besides, Spanish courts are open to decide on any complaints Mr.
Maffezini might have against these banks.

74, In late 1991, when EAMSA was experiencing financial difficulties,
discussions were held on how to overcome these problems. In that context,
it appears that Mr. Maffezini offered to make available the amount of 30
million pesetas. It is an established fact that on November 14, 1991, Mr.
Maffezini authorized his bank to transfer such an amount to the account
of EAMSA whenever requested to do so by Mr. Soto Bafios. While it is true
that the order was not conditioned on other events, it is clear that at that
time neither the terms of the financial arrangements nor the details relating

CASES, 25

to the eventual loan had been fully negotiated. The specific cash require-
ments of EAMSA were also not known at the time.

75. The order to transfer was given by Mr. Soto Bafios on February 4,
1992. The underlying financial commitment, however, never came to be
formalized in a contract binding on Mr. Maffezini, nor was the loan
approved by the board of EAMSA, either before or after the transfer of the
funds. In this respect the Claimant has convincingly made a distinction
between the authorization to the transfer of funds, which was indeed given
by him, and the translation of that transaction into a contract, which was
never concluded or consented by Mr. Maffezini. The transfer authorization
was apparently given on the assumption that it would be preceded by a
contract, but no such contract was concluded. Mr. Soto Bafios’ testimony
at the oral hearing confirmed that the loan was never formalized. While
this kind of financial arrangement is not uncommon in emergency situa-
tions, the lack of a prior or later legally binding contract formalizing the
transaction compels the conclusion that this de facto arrangement cannot
be opposed to the Claimant against his consent.

76. The Tribunal also finds that Mr. Soto Bafios was not acting in this
operation as the personal representative of Mr. Maffezini but as an official
of SODIGA. The oral hearings confirmed that Mr. Soto Bafios discussed
the transfer of these funds with the President of SODIGA and that the
latter authorized him to proceed as he thought best. Similar authorization
was not sought from Mr. Maffezini, even though there was time to do so.
This further authorization was necessary since, although Mr. Soto Bafios
was authorized to transfer the funds, no agreement had been reached on
the use to which the funds were to be put and on the terms of the loan. The
fact that Mr. Soto Bafios failed to consult with Mr. Maffezini, but sought
and obtained authorization to act from the President of SODIGA, compels
the conclusion that Mr. Soto Bafios’ action, whether within the terms of
the mandate or ultra vires, is attributable to SODIGA.

77. It must therefore be asked whether that action is purely commercial
in nature or whether it was performed in the exercise of SODIGA’s public
or government functions. In the latter case, it would be attributable to the
Spanish State.

78. It is here that the public functions of SODIGA, discussed above,
acquire special relevance. Because SODIGA was an entity charged with the

26 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

implementation of governmental policies relating to industrial promotion,
it performed a number of functions not normally open to ordinary
commercial companies. Handling the accounts of EAMSA as a partici-
pating company, managing its payments and finances and generally inter-
vening on its behalf before the Spanish authorities without being paid for
these services, are all elements that responded to SODIGA’ public nature
and responsibility. Moreover, the manner in which the private banks
conducted themselves in this case with regard to the loan, can be explained
in large measure only because of their recognition that SODIGA’s orders
and instructions were entitled to be honored because of the public func-
tions it performed in Galicia.

79. In addition, it must be noted that although the transfer was labeled
a loan, in fact it amounted to an increase of the investment. This explains
the inquiries made with the Ministry of Economics about whether the loan
should be registered as a part of the investment. The rejoinder by the
Kingdom of Spain also describes the investments made by the Claimant as
comprising 35 million pesetas as a capital subscription and 30 million as a
loan to EAMSA, both being submitted for registration with the Ministry
of Economy.”? A decision to increase the investment taken not by Mr.
Maffezini but by the entity entrusted by the State to promote the industri-
alization of Galicia, cannot be considered a commercial activity. Rather, it
grew out of the public functions of SODIGA.

80. While it has been argued by Spain that the transfer resulted in the
protection of the investment and thus ultimately benefited Mr. Maffezini
by strengthening the financial condition of EAMSA, this is not a tenable
proposition in view of the fact that the investor himself did not think that
these steps were appropriate. Neither the fact that a credit was entered in
favor of Mr. Maffezini on EAMSA’s accounts, nor the argument that he
could at any time recover the 30 million pesetas that had been transferred
change the situation since the funds were largely spent and, hence, not
really available to Mr. Maffezini.

81. The Kingdom of Spain has convincingly argued that neither the
Spanish State nor the Banco de Espana is responsible for the alleged irregu-

29 Memorial de Duiplica del Reino de Espafia, May 3, 2000, at 36-37.

CASES, 27

larities attributed to the private banks since the Central Bank only has
supervising authority over general financial and monetary operation of
private banks and not over their relations with clients.

82. In accordance with Article 1214 of the Spanish Civil Code the
burden of proof of the existence of an obligation rests with him who claims
its fulfillment.>° In this case, no written or other proof has been offered
regarding the existence of a loan binding on Mr. Maffezini. On the
contrary, the evidence presented to the Tribunal indicates that no legal
obligation existed with regard to the loan.

83. Because the acts of SODIGA relating to the loan cannot be consid-
ered commercial in nature and involve its public functions, responsibility
for them should be attributed to the Kingdom of Spain. In particular, these
acts amounted to a breach by Spain of its obligation to protect the invest-
ment as provided for in Article 3(1) of the Argentine-Spain Bilateral
Investment Treaty. Moreover, the lack of transparency with which this loan
transaction was conducted is incompatible with Spain’s commitment to
ensure the investor a fair and equitable treatment in accordance with
Article 4(1) of the same treaty. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that, with
regard to this contention, the Claimant has substantiated his claim and is
entitled to compensation in the manner spelled out below.

Desinvestment negotiations.

84. The Tribunal must now examine the question of the desinvestment
negotiations that took place in the period 1994-1996 and their meaning.
The Tribunal is mindful of the fact that one of the difficult issues arising
from the experience of industrial promotion in Spain relates to the desin-
vestment and recovery of the capital contributions and loans made by the
risk-capital entities to the newly created companies.

85. On June 13, 1994, a meeting was held between Mr. Héctor
Rodriguez Molnar, an attorney working for Mr. Maffezini, and officials of
SODIGA. The meeting was specifically requested by the attorney in order
to discuss a final settlement of the obligations that both EAMSA and Mr.
Maffezini had with SODIGA. As it was later summarized in a letter by

3° Cédigo Civil, Article 1214, and notes by Francisco Javier Fernéndez-Urzainqui, 1999,
at 318.

28 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

SODIGA’ President dated June 23, 1994, Mr. Rodriguez Molnar proposed
an arrangement at this meeting that would have had the effect of cancelling
all EAMSA’s and Mr. Maffezini’s obligations in exchange for the assets of
EAMSA, amounting to 23,604,168 pesetas. This discussion was confirmed
by Mr. Rodrfguez Molnar at the oral hearings of this Tribunal at which he
appeared as a witness for the Claimant.

86. It has also been demonstrated that SODIGA countered this offer by
demanding an additional 2 million pesetas from Mr. Maffezini. This
proposal was rejected by Mr. Maffezini. After the first demarches by the
Argentine embassy in Madrid, SODIGA’s President wrote to Mr. Maffezini
on June 13, 1996, stating that in the spirit of reaching an amicable solution
SODIGA was prepared to accept the settlement discussed two years earlier
with Mr. Rodriguez Molnar, that is, SODIGA waived payment of the addi-
tional 2 million pesetas. At this time, however, Mr. Maffezini was already
embarked on preparations to submit the matter to ICSID, and the settle-
ment negotiations were not pursued further.

87. The Kingdom of Spain has argued that the proposal made by Mr.
Rodriguez Molnar in 1994 constitutes an offer that was never withdrawn,
and that its acceptance by SODIGA two years later resulted in a legally
binding contract which the Claimant could not now ignore. In Spain's
view, this desinvestment settlement was the only question that could be
brought before this Tribunal.

88. The Tribunal considers that at the time these negotiations were
taking place, the parties did not believe that they were concluding a
contract. Instead, the evidence suggests that they assumed that they were
engaging in negotiations that might produce an eventual settlement. Nego-
tiation with banks and financial entities are commonly resorted to in order
to resolve questions concerning the payment of loans, capital contributions
and other aspects of a business; in essence, these are negotiations designed
to reach agreement on the amounts involved. The President of SODIGA
confirmed this understanding in his letter of June 13, 1996, when he stated
that SODIGA was prepared to settle “in terms similar to the negotiations
undertaken at its time with Mr. Rodriguez Molnar.” There is no reference
to any contract or its finalization by this acceptance.

89. The Tribunal has also examined this matter from the point of view
of Spanish law. Article 1262 of the Spanish Civil Code simply provides that

CASES, 29

“Consent is expressed by the concurrence of the offer on the object and
cause that will constitute the contract and its acceptance.”?! Article 54 of
the Spanish Commercial Code elaborates the point further by providing
that “Contracts made by correspondence shall be perfected when there is a
reply accepting the offer or the conditions with which the offer was modi-
fied.”>? These provisions assume that there was an intention to make an
offer with a view to concluding a contract, which was not true of the nego-
tiations described above. Here it is not relevant that the original “offer” was
not withdrawn.

90. Even if the offer was likely to lead to the conclusion of the contract,
its acceptance would have to be unconditional. A conditional acceptance
amounts to a counter-offer that must be accepted by the original offeror.>?
SODIGA’ acceptance was conditioned on the payment of an additional 2
million pesetas and was thus a counter-offer. It was expressly rejected by
Mr. Maffezini. From a legal point of view then the original offer lapsed and
there was no consent, no contract and no liability. Moreover, the letter
from SODIGA’ President of June 13, 1996 cannot consequently be
considered an acceptance of the original offer. It was a new offer in similar
terms that would require Mr. Maffezini’s acceptance, which he did not
give. It is well established under the Spanish Civil Code and the writing of
eminent commentators that courts may treat an offer as withdrawn or
lapsed if acceptance is not timely, that is, when it does not take place within
a reasonable period of time.°4 Hence, even if one were to assume, arguendo,

31 Cédigo Civil, Article 1262, and notes by Ferndndez-Urzainqui, cit., supra note 30, at
327. See in particular Manuel Albaladejo: Derecho Civil, II, Vol. 1, Tenth edition, 1997, at 374-
375, with reference to a judicial decision of December 14, 1964, relating the offer and accep-
tance to the intention of producing legal effects.

32 Cédigo de Comercio, Article 54.

33 Albaladejo, op. cit., supra note 31, at 385, describing the counter-offer as a second
offer that follows the rejection of the first and with reference to a judicial decision of March 14,

973.

34 See, for example, Calixto Valverde y Valverde: Tiatado de Derecho Civil Espaftol, 1926,
at 241, with reference to a judicial decision of October 2, 1867. This author comments in
particular: “Estimamos también, que de si las circunstancias se dedujere que ha transcurrido con
exceso un plazo prudencial para que el aceptante haya podido recoger la oferta, los tribunales
podrdn considerar en ese caso retirada, 0 mejor dicho, caducada la oferta”, at 241. See also
Federico Puig Pefia: Tiatado de Derecho Civil Espanol, Tomo IV, Vol. I, 1951, at 53 and
Albaladejo, op. cit., supra note 31, at 390 with reference to the circumstances of the case and
the nature of the matter.

30 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

that there had been offer, its acceptance two years later would certainly not
be timely.

91. It follows from what has been said above that no contract was
concluded regarding the desinvestment and that neither party had assumed
a legally binding commitment with regard thereto.

Limitation period.

92. The Kingdom of Spain has also argued that even if it were found to
have incurred some liability in this case, the claim against it was barred by
a one-year statute of limitation that applies to claims for compensatory
damages against the State, as provided in Article 142.2 of Law 30/92.

93. Although it is true that this statute of limitation exists, it cannot
apply to claims filed under the ICSID Convention.

Compensation and interest.

94, The Tribunal now turns to the question of compensation for the
claim that has been upheld.

95. The parties have not disputed the sum that was transferred, which
amounts to 30 million Spanish Pesetas.

96. This sum is subject to the payment of interest. Since the funds were
withdrawn from a time-deposit account of Mr. Maffezini, it is appropriate
in this case to order the payment of interest compounded on an annual
basis from February 4, 1992 until the date of the Award. The Tribunal
considers reasonable to fix as interest rate the LIBOR rate for the Spanish
peseta for each annual period since February 4, 1992 and for the propor-
tion that corresponds to the period between February 4, 2000 and the date
of the Award.*> The interests therefore amount to ESP 27,641,265.28
(twenty-seven million six hundred forty one thousand two hundred and
sixty-five Spanish pesetas and 28 cents).

35 In accordance with British Bankers Association Financial Data.

CASES 31

97. Accordingly, the Tribunal finds that the total amount of compensa-
tion, including interest, that the Kingdom of Spain is to pay the Claimant
is ESP 57,641,265.28 (fifty-seven million six hundred forty one thousand
two hundred and sixty-five Spanish pesetas and 28 cents). The Kingdom
of Spain shall make such payment within a period of 60 days as of the date
of this Award. Should the payment of this amount not be made within the
period specified above, the amount shall accrue interests at a rate of 6% per
annum, compounded monthly, as of the date of the Award to the date of
payment.

98. As for the expenses incurred in these proceedings, including the
charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre and the fees and expenses
of the Tribunal, it holds that these institutional expenses shall be borne
equally by the parties.

99. As for the expenses and legal costs of counsel for the parties, the
Tribunal decides that each party shall bear the entirety of its own expenses
and legal fees for its own counsel, considering that each party has been
successful on the key points of their respective positions.

100. The Tribunal expresses its appreciation to counsel for both parties,
distinguished Argentine and Spanish lawyers, for the outstanding profes-
sionalism and cooperation which they demonstrated in this case.

E. Decisions

For the reasons stated above the Tribunal unanimously decides that:

(1) The Kingdom of Spain shall pay the Claimant the amount of ESP
57,641,265.28 (fifty-seven million six hundred forty one thousand two

hundred and sixty-five Spanish pesetas and 28 cents).

(2) Each of the parties shall bear the entirety of its own expenses and legal
fees for its own counsel.

(3) All other claims are dismissed.

So Decided.

32 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Signed in Washington D. C. on November 9, 2000

(signature and date]
Francisco Orrego Vicufia
President of the Tribunal

[signature and date] (signature and date]
Thomas Buergenthal Maurice Wolf
Arbitrator Arbitrator

