(English Translation from Spanish Original)

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

EMILIO AGUSTIN MAFFEZINI
(CLAIMANT)

and

THE KINGDOM OF SPAIN
(RESPONDENT)

CASE NO. ARB/97/7

DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL ON OBJECTIONS
TO JURISDICTION

Members of the Tribunal

Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia, President
Judge Thomas Buergenthal, Arbitrator
Mr. Maurice Wolf, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal

Mr. Gonzalo Flores

2 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Representing the Claimant

Dr. Ratil Emilio Vinuesa

Dra. Maria Cristina Brea

Dra. Silvina Gonzdlez Napolitano
Dra. Gisela Makowski

Estudio Vinuesa y Asociados
Buenos Aires

Argentina

Date of decision: January 25, 2000

Representing the Respondent

Mr. Rafael Andrés Leén Cavero
Abogado del Estado
Subdireccién General de los
Servicios Contenciosos del
Ministerio de Justicia
Madrid
Spain

CASES 3

A. Procedure

1. On July 18, 1997, the International Centre for Settlement of Invest-
ment Disputes (ICSID or the Centre) received from Mr. Emilio Agustin
Maffezini, a national of the Argentine Republic (Argentina), a Request for
Arbitration against the Kingdom of Spain (Spain). The request concerns a
dispute arising from treatment allegedly received by Mr. Maffezini from
Spanish entities, in connection with his investment in an enterprise for the
production and distribution of chemical products in the Spanish region of
Galicia. In his request the Claimant invokes the provisions of the 1991
“Agreement for the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments
between the Kingdom of Spain and the Argentine Republic” (the Argentine-
Spain Bilateral Investment Treaty or BIT).! The request also invokes, by
way of a most-favored-nation (MFN) clause in the Argentine-Spain BIT,
the provisions of a 1991 bilateral investment treaty between the Republic

of Chile (Chile) and Spain.”

2. On August 8, 1997, the Centre, in accordance with Rule 5 of the
ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitra-
tion Proceedings (Institution Rules), acknowledged receipt of the request
and on the same day transmitted a copy to the Kingdom of Spain and to
the Spanish Embassy in Washington, D.C. At the same time, the Centre
asked Mr. Maffezini to provide (i) specific information concerning the
issues in dispute and the character of the underlying investment; (ii) infor-
mation as to the complete terms of Spain’s consent to submit the dispute
to arbitration under the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the ICSID
Convention); (iii) information as to the basis of his claim that the MFN
clause in the Argentine-Spain BIT would allow him to invoke Spain’s
consent contained in the Chile-Spain BIT; and (iv) documentation
concerning the entry into force of the bilateral investment treaties invoked
in the request. Mr. Maffezini provided this information in two letters of
September 10 and September 29, 1997.

' Agreement between Argentina and Spain of October 3, 1991. Hereinafter cited as the
Argentine-Spain BIT.

2 Agreement between Chile and Spain of October 2, 1991. Hereinafter cited as the Chile-
Spain BIT.

4 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

3. On October 30, 1997, the Secretary-General of the Centre registered
the request, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention. On this
same date, the Secretary-General, in accordance with Institution Rule 7,
notified the parties of the registration of the request and invited them to
proceed to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible.

4. On December 22, 1997, the Claimant proposed to the Respondent
that the Arbitral Tribunal consist of a sole arbitrator, to be appointed by
agreement of the parties. The Claimant further proposed that, if the parties
fail to agree in the name of the sole arbitrator by January 31, 1998, the sole
arbitrator shall be appointed by ICSID’s Secretary-General.

5. On March 5, 1998, Spain having failed to respond to the Claimant’s
proposal and more that 60 days having elapsed since the registration of the
request, the Claimant informed the Secretary-General that he was choosing
the formula set forth in Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. The
Tribunal, therefore, would consist of three arbitrators, one appointed by
Mr. Maffezini, one appointed by Spain, and the third, presiding arbitrator,
appointed by agreement of the parties.

6. On March 18, 1998, the Centre received a communication from the
Spanish Ministry of Economy and Finance, whereby Spain anticipated
having objections to the jurisdiction of the Centre and to the competence
of the Tribunal, providing the Centre with a summary of the grounds on
which such objections were based. The Centre promptly informed the
Respondent that a copy of this communication, as well as copies of the
request for arbitration and its accompanying documentation, of the notice
of registration and of the correspondence exchanged between the parties
and the Centre would be transmitted, in due course, to each of the
Members of the Tribunal, noting that the question of jurisdiction was one
for the Tribunal to decide.

7. On April 24, 1998, Mr. Maffezini appointed Professor Thomas
Buergenthal, a national of the United States of America, as an arbitrator.
On May 4, 1998, Spain appointed Mr. Maurice Wolf, also a national of the
United States of America, as an arbitrator. The parties, however, failed to
agree on the appointment of the third, presiding, arbitrator. In these
circumstances, by means of a further communication of May 14, 1998, the
Claimant requested that the third, presiding, arbitrator in the proceeding

CASES 5

be appointed by the Chairman of ICSID’s Administrative Council in
accordance with Article 38 of the ICSID Convention.?

8. Having consulted with the parties, the Chairman of ICSID’s Admin-
istrative Council appointed Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia, a Chilean
national, as the President of the Arbitral Tribunal. On June 24, 1998,
ICSID’s Legal Adviser, on behalf of the Centre’s Secretary-General, and in
accordance with Rule 6(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (Arbitration Rules), notified the parties that all three arbitra-
tors had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore
deemed to have been constituted on that date. On the same date, pursuant
to ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulation 25, the parties were
informed that Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secre-
tary of the Arbitral Tribunal.

9. On July 3, 1998, the Respondent filed an application for provisional
measures, requiring the Claimant to post a guaranty in the amount of the
costs expected to be incurred by Spain in defending against this action. By
further filing of August 7, 1998, the Claimant requested the Tribunal to
dismiss such application.

10. After consulting with the parties, the Tribunal scheduled a first
session for August 21, 1998. On August 20, 1998, counsel for the Respon-
dent hand-delivered a document containing Spain’s objections to the juris-
diction of the Centre. A copy of Spain’s filing was distributed by the Centre
to the Members of the Tribunal on that same date. A copy of Spain's filing
was later handed by the Secretary of the Tribunal to the Claimant's repre-
sentative in the course of the Tribunal’s first session with the parties.

11. The first session of the Tribunal with the parties was held, as sched-
uled, on August 21, 1998, at the seat of ICSID in Washington, D.C. At the
session the parties expressed their agreement that the Tribunal had been
properly constituted in accordance with the relevant provisions of the

3 Under Article 38 of the ICSID Convention, if the Tribunal is not yet constituted within
90 days after the notice of registration of the request has been dispatched, the Chairman of
ICSID’s Administrative Council shall, at the request of either party, and after consulting both
parties as far as possible, appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed and designate
an arbitrator to be the President of the Tribunal.

6 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules and that they did not have
any objections in this respect.

12. During the course of the first session the parties agreed on a number
of procedural matters reflected in written minutes signed by the President
and the Secretary of the Tribunal. The Respondent, represented at the
session by Mr. Rafael Andrés Leén Cavero, drew the Tribunal’s attention to
its objections to the jurisdiction of the Centre. The Tribunal, after briefly
ascertaining the views of the parties on this matter, fixed the following time
limits for the written phase of the proceedings: the Claimant would file a
memorial, with all of his arguments on the question of jurisdiction and on
the merits within 90 days from the date of the first session; the Respondent
would then file a counter-memorial, with all of its arguments on the ques-
tion of jurisdiction and on the merits within 90 days from its reception of
the Claimant’s memorial. The Tribunal left open the possibility of requiring
the submission of a reply and a rejoinder to the parties. The Tribunal also
left open the possibility of holding a hearing on the issue of jurisdiction.

13. In accordance with the above-described schedule, the Claimant
submitted to the Centre his memorial on the merits and on the question
of jurisdiction on November 19, 1998. On April 9, 1999, after a request
for an extension of the time limit for the filing of its counter-memorial was
granted by the Tribunal, the Respondent submitted its written pleadings
on the merits and on the question of jurisdiction.

14. On May 14, 1999, the Tribunal invited the parties to submit any
further observations they may had on the question of jurisdiction, calling
for a hearing on jurisdiction to be held on July 7, 1999, at the seat of the
Centre in Washington, D.C. The parties filed their final observations on
the question of jurisdiction on June 3, 1999 (the Claimant) and June 18,
1999 (the Respondent). Due to consecutive requests filed first by counsel
for the Respondent, and later by counsel for the Claimant, the hearing on
jurisdiction was postponed until August 9, 1999.

15. At the August 9, 1999 hearing, Dr. Ratil Emilio Vinuesa addressed
the Tribunal on behalf of the Claimant, referring to the arguments put
forward in his written pleadings. Mr. Rafael Andrés Leén Cavero addressed
the Tribunal on behalf of the Kingdom of Spain. The Tribunal then posed
questions to the representatives of the parties, as provided in Rule 32(3) of
the Arbitration Rules.

CASES 7

16. Having heard the views of the parties, the Tribunal rendered, on
August 26, 1999, Procedural Order No 1, deciding that, in accordance
with Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 41(3) of the Arbi-
tration Rules, it would deal with the question of jurisdiction as a prelimi-
nary matter, therefore suspending the proceedings on the merits.

17. On October 28, 1999, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 2,
addressing Spain’s request for provisional measures. The Tribunal, pointing
out that the recommendation of provisional measures seeking to protect
mere expectations of success on the side of the Respondent would amount
to a pre-judgement of the Claimant's case, unanimously dismissed Spain’s
request.

18. The Tribunal has considered thoroughly the parties’ written submis-
sions on the question of jurisdiction and the oral arguments delivered in
the course of the August 9, 1999 hearing on jurisdiction. As mentioned
above, the consideration of the merits has been postponed until the issue
of the Centre’s jurisdiction and Tribunal’s competence is decided by the
Tribunal. Having considered the basic facts of the dispute, the ICSID
Convention and the 1991 Argentine-Spain BIT, as well as the written and
oral arguments of the parties’ representatives, the Tribunal has reached the
following decision on the question of jurisdiction.

B. Considerations
Exhaustion of Domestic Remedies

19. The Kingdom of Spain first challenges the jurisdiction of the Centre
and the competence of the Tribunal on the ground that the Claimant failed
to comply with the requirements of Article X of the Bilateral Investment
Treaty between Argentina and Spain. Article X of this Treaty reads as follows:

“Article X
Settlement of Disputes Between a Contracting Party
and an Investor of the other Contracting Party

1. Disputes which arise within the terms of this Agree-
ment concerning an investment between an investor of one
Contracting Party and the other Contracting Party shall, if
possible, be settled amicably by the parties to the dispute.

ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

2. If the dispute cannot thus be settled within six
months following the date on which the dispute has been
raised by either party, it shall be submitted to the competent
tribunal of the Contracting Party in whose territory the
investment was made.

3. The dispute may be submitted to international arbi-
tration in any of the following circumstances:

a) at the request of one of the parties to the dispute, if
no decision has been rendered on the merits of the
claim after the expiration of a period of eighteen
months from the date on which the proceedings
referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article have been
initiated, or if such decision has been rendered, but
the dispute between the parties continues;

b) if both parties to the dispute agree thereto.

4. In the cases foreseen in paragraph 3, the disputes
between the parties shall be submitted, unless the parties
otherwise agree, either to international arbitration under the
March 18, 1965 Convention on the Settlement of Invest-
ment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States
or to an ad hoc arbitral tribunal established under the Arbi-
tration Rules of the United Nations Commission on Inter-
national Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

If after a period of three months following the submis-
sion of the dispute to arbitration by either party, there is no
agreement to one of the above alternative procedures, the
dispute shall be submitted to arbitration under the March
18, 1965 Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States,
provided that both Contracting Parties have become parties
to the said Convention. Otherwise, the dispute shall be
submitted to the above mentioned ad hoc tribunal.

5. The Arbitral Tribunal shall decide the dispute in
accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, the terms
of other Agreements concluded between the parties, the law
of the Contracting Party in whose territory the investment
was made, including its rules on conflict of laws, and general
principles of international law.

CASES 9

6. The Arbitral Award shall be binding on both parties
to the dispute and each Contracting Party shall execute them
in accordance with its laws.”

20. Respondent makes two interrelated arguments based on Article X.
The first is that Article X(3)(a) requires the exhaustion of certain domestic
remedies in Spain and that Claimant failed to comply with this require-
ment. The second contention is that Claimant did not submit the case to
Spanish courts before referring it to international arbitration as required by
Article X(2) of the BIT.

21. The Tribunal will first address the contention that Article X(3)(a)
requires the exhaustion of domestic remedies. The starting point for its
analysis of Respondent’s submission is Article 26 of the ICSID Conven-
tion. It permits the Contracting States to condition their consent to ICSID
arbitration on the prior exhaustion of domestic remedies. Article 26 reads
as follows:

“Consent of the parties to arbitration under this Convention
shall, unless otherwise stated, be deemed consent to such
arbitration to the exclusion of any other remedy. A Contract-
ing State may require the exhaustion of local administrative
or judicial remedies as a condition of its consent to arbitra-
tion under this Convention.”

22. The language of Article 26 makes clear that unless a Contracting
State has conditioned its consent to ICSID arbitration on the prior exhaus-
tion of domestic remedies, no such requirement will be applicable. Article
26 thus reverses the traditional international law rule, which implies the
exhaustion requirement unless it is expressly or implicitly waived.

23. In determining whether Spain conditioned its acceptance of the
Centre’s jurisdiction and the Tribunal’s competence on the prior exhaus-
tion of domestic remedies, the Tribunal notes that in ratifying the ICSID
Convention, Spain did not attach any such condition to its acceptance of
Article 26. But since Spain was free to do so in the BIT, the Tribunal must
now examine whether Article X of that treaty requires the prior exhaustion
of domestic remedies. Although Article X does not condition the reference
to ICSID arbitration expressis verbis on the prior exhaustion of domestic
remedies, it does speak of proceedings in domestic courts. It must be deter-

10 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

mined, therefore, whether that language can be interpreted to require the
exhaustion of domestic remedies and, if so, what the scope of that require-
ment is.

24, Paragraph 2 of Article X provides that, if a dispute arises between an
investor and one of the Contracting Parties to the BIT, and if that dispute
cannot be resolved amicably within a period of six months, it shall be
submitted to the competent tribunals of the Contracting Party in whose
territory the investment was made. Paragraph 3 of Article X then stipulates
that the dispute may be submitted to an international arbitral tribunal in
any of the following circumstances:

a) at the request of one of the parties to the dispute, if no
decision has been rendered on the merits of the claim
after the expiration of a period of eighteen months from
the date on which the proceedings referred to in
paragraph 2 of this Article have been initiated, or, if such
decision has been rendered, but the dispute between the
parties continues;

b) if both parties to the dispute agree thereto.

25. The Respondent reads Article X(3)(a) to mean that, if a domestic
court has rendered a decision on the merits on the issues in dispute within
the prescribed period of eighteen months, the case can no longer be
referred to international arbitration, irrespective of the holding of the
court. This conclusion follows, in Respondent’s view, because once the
decision has been rendered, the dispute cannot be said to continue. Hence,
if Claimant had referred the case to the Spanish courts and if those courts
had passed on the merits of the case within the eighteen-month period, the
dispute could no longer be submitted to the Centre under Article X. It
follows, in Respondent's view, that Claimant's failure to give Spanish courts
the opportunity to resolve the issues in dispute requires the Tribunal to rule
that it is not competent to hear the instant case.

26. Claimant admits that the dispute was not referred to a Spanish court
prior to its submission to the Centre. He contends, however, that an analy-
sis of the here relevant provisions of Article X indicates that a dispute does
not have to be referred to a domestic court before it is submitted to inter-
national arbitration as long as the dispute continues and the eighteen-

CASES, 11

month period has expired. In Claimant’s view this conclusion follows from
the fact that Article X(3)(a) permits the reference of a case to international
arbitration whether or not a domestic court decision has been rendered and
regardless of its outcome.

27. Like all other provisions of the BIT and in the absence of other spec-
ified applicable rules of interpretation, Article X must be interpreted in the
manner prescribed by Article 31 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties. It provides that a treaty is to be “interpreted in good faith in accor-
dance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in
their context and in the light of its object and purpose.” Applying this
principle, it is to be noted that Article X(3)(a) does not say that a case may
not be referred to arbitration if a domestic court has rendered a decision on
the merits of the dispute within a period of eighteen months. It provides
merely that if such a decision has been rendered and if the dispute
continues, the case may be referred to arbitration.

28. The Tribunal notes, in this connection, that Article X(3)(a) does not
require the exhaustion of domestic remedies as that concept is understood
under international law.” It speaks merely of a decision on the merits,
which Respondent admits does not even have to be a final or non-appeal-
able decision under Spanish law, and thus fails to require the exhaustion of
all available domestic remedies.

29. But even if Article X(3)(a) were to be characterized as a provision
requiring the exhaustion of domestic remedies, that requirement would not
have the effect, contrary to Respondent’s arguments, of preventing the
subsequent reference of the case to international arbitration under the BIT.
This is so because, where a treaty guarantees certain rights and provides for
the exhaustion of domestic remedies before a dispute concerning these
guarantees may be referred to an international tribunal, the parties to the
dispute retain the right to take the case to that tribunal as long as they have
exhausted the available remedies, and this regardless of the outcome of the
domestic proceeding. They retain that remedy because the international
tribunal rather than the domestic court has the final say on the meaning

4 ©. Schreuer, “Commentary on the ICSID Convention. Article 25”, Foreign Investment
Law Journal, ICSID Review, Vol. 12, 1997, 59, at 201.

12 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

and scope of the international obligations—in this case the BIT—that are
in dispute.>

30. Here it is to be noted that the requirements of the exhaustion of
domestic remedies differs depending on whether the appeal to an interna-
tional tribunal contends that the domestic tribunal was guilty of a denial
of justice, or whether the claim seeks the vindication of rights guaranteed
in a treaty, for example, which empowers the tribunal to interpret and
apply the treaty. In the former case, the right to appeal to an international
tribunal, if it exists at all, can only be based on a denial of justice by the
domestic courts. In such a case, if there was no denial of justice, the case
will have to be rejected, whether or not the domestic court committed
errors of law or fact in rendering its judgement. This is not true in a case
where, as here, the parties have a treaty right to obtain a final determina-
tion from the international tribunal on the scope of their rights under the
treaty, provided they have first exhausted all available domestic remedies.

31. The foregoing analysis is relevant in determining the soundness of
Respondent's interpretation of Article X(3)(a) and its contention that
pursuant to this provision a dispute cannot be deemed to continue if the
domestic court has rendered a decision on the merits which addressed all
issues raised by the parties. Leaving aside for a moment the wording of
paragraph 3(a), Respondent's argument is based on the assumption that a
case may be referred to international arbitration under the BIT only if
there was a denial of justice by the domestic court. This proposition, if
accepted, would have the effect of denying the party to a dispute the right
to challenge the domestic court’s interpretation of the BIT. Respondent's
interpretation can be reconciled neither with the language nor object and
purpose of the dispute resolution provisions of BITs in general and the
instant BIT in particular. This is so because these clauses are designed to
give foreign investors the right to have their disputes under a BIT decided
either exclusively or ultimately by international arbitration.®

> See International Law Commission, Draft Articles on State Responsibility, Art. 22 and
related Commentary, 1977 Yearbook of the International Law Commission, Vol. I, Part 2, 1978,
at 30 et seq. For the 1996 Draft and its referral to the 1977 Draft on this point, see International
Legal Materials, Vol. 37, 1998, 444. See also C. E. Amerasinghe: Local remedies in international
law, 1990, at 45-51.

© Schreuer, loc. cit., supra note 4, at 199-202.

CASES, 13

32. Moreover, the wording of paragraph 3(a) does not support Respon-
dent’s submission on this subject. It contains no guidelines for deciding
whether or under what circumstances a dispute may be deemed to
continue. In the Tribunal’s view, the absence of such objective criteria
leaves each party free to decide for itself whether the dispute continues,
that is, whether its claim has been vindicated by the domestic court, and
to refer the case to international arbitration if it is not satisfied with the
domestic court judgment. Had the Contracting Parties to the BIT wished
to establish a different procedure, they would have done so.

33. The Tribunal considers that Article X(3)(a) serves two important
functions, which are not affected by the above interpretation. First, it
permits either party to a dispute to seek redress from the appropriate
domestic court. Second, it ensures that a party accessing the domestic court
will not be prevented and will not be able to prevent the case from going
to international arbitration after the expiration of the eighteen-month
period. This is so whether or not the domestic court has rendered a deci-
sion and regardless of the decision it may have rendered.

34, Turning to the second part of Respondent's argument, it must now
be asked whether a party to a dispute, which has not referred the case to a
domestic court, as required by Article X(2), must be deemed to have
waived or forfeited the right to submit the matter to international arbitra-
tion. Here it is to be noted that paragraph 2 provides that the dispute “shall
be submitted” (serd sometida) to the competent tribunals of the State Party
where the investment was made, and that paragraph 3(a) then declares that
the dispute “may be submitted” (podrd ser sometida) to an international
arbitral tribunal at the request of a party to the dispute in the following
circumstances: if the domestic court has not rendered a decision on the
merits of the case within a period of eighteen months or if, notwith-
standing the existence of such a decision, the dispute continues.

35. This language suggests that the Contracting Parties to the BIT—
Argentina and Spain—wanted to give their respective courts the opportu-
nity, within the specified period of eighteen months, to resolve the dispute
before it could be taken to international arbitration. Claimant contends,
however, that this could not have been the intended meaning of Article
X(2), if only because at the end of that period either party would still be
free to take the case to international arbitration, regardless of the outcome
of the domestic court proceedings.

14 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

36. Had this been the Claimant’s sole argument on the issue, the
Tribunal would have had to conclude that because the Claimant failed to
submit the instant case to Spanish courts as required by Article X(2) of the
BIT, the Centre lacked jurisdiction and the Tribunal lacked competence to
hear the case. This is so because Claimant’s submission on this point over-
looks two important considerations. First, while it is true that the parties
would be free to seek international arbitration after the expiration of the
eighteen-month period, regardless of the outcome of the domestic court
proceeding, they are likely to do so only if they were dissatisfied with the
domestic court decision. Moreover, they would certainly not do so if they
were convinced that the international tribunal would reach the same deci-
sion. In that sense the courts of the Contracting Parties are given an oppor-
tunity to vindicate the international obligations guaranteed in the BIT.
Given the language of the treaty, this is a role which the Contracting Parties
can be presumed to have wished to retain for their courts, albeit within a
prescribed time limit. Second, Claimant's interpretation of Article X(2)
would deprive this provision of any meaning, a result that would not be
compatible with generally accepted principles of treaty interpretation,
particularly those of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.

37. As noted above, had the Claimant's contention regarding Article
X(2) stood alone, the Tribunal would have had to reject it. However, in
view of the fact that Claimant argues in the alternative that he has the right
to rely on the most favored nation clause contained in the BIT, dismissal
of the application to the Tribunal without due consideration of this other
argument would be premature. The Tribunal will accordingly now address
the Claimant's alternative argument.

Most Favored Nation Clause

38. The argument based on the most favored nation clause raises a
number of legal issues with which international tribunals are confronted
from time to time. As is true of many treaties of this kind, Article IV of the
BIT between Argentina and Spain, after guaranteeing a fair and equitable
treatment for investors, provides the following in paragraph 2:

“In all matters subject to this Agreement, this treatment shall
not be less favorable than that extended by each Party to the
investments made in its territory by investors of a third
country.”

CASES, 15

39. As noted above, the Argentine-Spain BIT provides domestic courts
with the opportunity to deal with a dispute for a period of eighteen months
before it may be submitted to arbitration. However, Article 10(2) of the
Chile-Spain Bilateral Investment Treaty, imposes no such condition. It
provides merely that the investor can opt for arbitration after the six-
month period allowed for negotiations has expired.

40. Claimant contends, consequently, that Chilean investors in Spain are
treated more favorably than Argentine investors in Spain. He argues,
accordingly, that the most favored nation clause in the Argentine-Spain
BIT gives him the option to submit the dispute to arbitration without
prior referral to domestic courts. Claimant submits, in this connection,
that although the Argentine-Spain BIT provides for exceptions to the most
favored nation treatment, none of these apply to the dispute settlement
provisions at issue in the instant case.

41. The Kingdom of Spain rejects these contentions. In its view, the trea-
ties made by Spain with third countries are in respect of Argentina res inter
alios acta and, consequently, cannot be invoked by the Claimant. Respon-
dent further argues that under the principle ejusdem generis the most
favored nation clause can only operate in respect of the same matter and
cannot be extended to matters different from those envisaged by the basic
treaty. In Spain’s view, this means that the reference in the most favored
nation clause of the Argentine-Spain BIT to “matters” can only be under-
stood to refer to substantive matters or material aspects of the treatment
granted to investors and not to procedural or jurisdictional questions.

42. In this respect, Spain has also argued that since it is the purpose of
the most favored nation clause to avoid discrimination, such discrimina-
tion can only take place in connection with material economic treatment
and not with regard to procedural matters. Only if it could be established
that resort to domestic tribunals would produce objective disadvantages for
the investor would it be possible to argue material effects on the treatment
owed. It follows, in the same line of argument, that it would have to be
proved that the submission of the dispute to Spanish jurisdiction is less
advantageous to the investor than its submission to ICSID arbitration.

43. The arguments outlined above are familiar to international lawyers
and scholars. Indeed, many of the issues mentioned have been addressed in

16 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company Case (Jurisdiction),” in the Case concerning
the rights of nationals of the United States of America in Morocco Sand in the
Ambatielos Case (merits: obligation to arbitrate),? as well as in the proceed-
ings of the Ambatielos case before a Commission of Arbitration.!°

44, In addressing these issues, it must first be determined which is the
basic treaty that governs the rights of the beneficiary of the most favored
nation clause. This question was extensively discussed in the Anglo-Iranian
Oil Company Case, where the International Court of Justice determined
that the basic treaty upon which the Claimant could rely was that
“containing the most-favored-nation clause”.!! The Court then held that:

“Tt is this treaty which establishes the juridical link between
the United Kingdom and a third-party treaty and confers
upon that State the rights enjoyed by the third party. A third
party treaty, independent of and isolated from the basic
treaty, cannot produce any legal effect as between the United
Kingdom and Iran: it is res inter alios acta”.'

45. This discussion has practical consequences for the application of the
most favored nation clause. For if, as the Tribunal believes, the right
approach is to consider that the subject matter to which the clause applies
is indeed established by the basic treaty, it follows that if these matters are
more favorably treated in a third-party treaty then, by operation of the
clause, that treatment is extended to the beneficiary under the basic treaty.

7 International Court of Justice, Reports, 1952, p. 93. See also Sir Gerald Fitzmaurice: The
Law and Procedure of the International Court of Justice, 1951-1954: Points of Substantive Law.
Part II, p. 84.

5 International Court of Justice, Reports, 1952, p. 176.

9 International Court of Justice, Reports, 1953, p. 10. See also generally, International Law
Reports, 1953, p. 547.

10 Award of the Commission of Arbitration established for the Ambatielos claim between
Greece and the United Kingdom, dated March 6, 1956, United Nations: Reports of International
Arbitral Awards, Vol. X11, 1963, p. 91.

1! International Court of Justice, Reports, 1952, at 109.

12 Tbid., at 109. For a discussion of this and other decisions relating to the most favored
nation clause, the writings of authors and the work of the International Law Commission on
the subject, see Yearbook of the International Law Commission, Vol. 11, 1970, p. 199; Vol. II,
1973, p. 97; Vol. II, Part One, 1978, p. 1; Vol. II, Part Two, 1978, p. 7.

CASES, 17

If the third-party treaty refers to a matter not dealt with in the basic treaty,
that matter is res inter alios acta in respect of the beneficiary of the clause.!>

46. The second major issue concerns the question whether the provi-
sions on dispute settlement contained in a third-party treaty can be consid-
ered to be reasonably related to the fair and equitable treatment to which
the most favored nation clause applies under basic treaties on commerce,
navigation or investments and, hence, whether they can be regarded as a
subject matter covered by the clause. This is the issue directly related to the
ejusdem generis rule.

47. The question was indirectly but not conclusively touched upon in
the Case concerning the rights of nationals of the United States of America in
Morocco. Here, the International Court of Justice was confronted with the
question of whether the clause contained in a treaty of commerce could be
understood to cover consular jurisdiction as expressed in a third-party
treaty. However, the Court did not need to answer the question posed
because its main finding was that the treaties from which the United States
purported to derive such jurisdictional rights had ceased to operate
between Morocco and the third states involved.!

48. The issue came into sharp focus in the Ambatielos case. Greece
contended before the International Court of Justice that her subject—
Ambatielos—had not been treated in the English courts according to the
standards applied to British subjects and foreigners who enjoyed a most
favored nation treatment under treaties in force. Such most favored nation
treatment was relied upon as the basis of the claim and the request that the
dispute be submitted to arbitration. The Court did not deal with the
matter of the most favored nation clause, but this task would be under-
taken by the Commission of Arbitration.

49. The Commission of Arbitration, to which the dispute was eventually
submitted, subsequently confirmed the relevance of the ejusdem generis
rule. It affirmed that “the most-favored-nation clause can only attract

13 Te was on this basis that the International Court of Justice ruled against the extension
of principles of international law envisaged in treaties between Iran and third parties to the
United Kingdom, as these principles were unrelated to the basic treaty containing the clause,
Judgment cit., supra note 11.

14 International Court of Justice, Reports, 1952, p. 191.

18 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

matters belonging to the same category of subject as that to which the
clause itself relates ”.!° However, the scope of the rule was defined in broad
terms:

“Tt is true that the ‘administration of justice’, when viewed in
isolation, is a subject-matter other than ‘commerce and navi-
gation, but this is not necessarily so when it is viewed in con-
nection with the protection of the rights of traders. Protection
of the rights of traders naturally finds a place among the mat-
ters dealt with by treaties of commerce and navigation.

Therefore it cannot be said that the administration of jus-
tice, in so far as it is concerned with the protection of these
rights, must necessarily be excluded from the field of appli-
cation of the most-favored-nation clause, when the latter
includes ‘all matters relating to commerce and navigation’.
The question can only be determined in accordance with the
intention of the Contracting Parties as deduced from a rea-

sonable interpretation of the Treaty”. 16

50. The Commission accepted the extension of the clause to questions
concerning the administration of justice and found it to be compatible
with the ejusdem generis rule. It concluded that the protection of the rights
of persons engaged in commerce and navigation by means of dispute settle-
ment provisions embraces the overall treatment of traders covered by the
clause. On the merits of the question, the Commission determined,
however, that the third-party treaties relied upon by Greece did not provide
for any “privileges, favours or immunities” more extensive than those
resulting from the basic treaty and that “accordingly the most-favored-
nation clause contained in Article X has no bearing on the present
dispute...”.

51. It is in the light of this background that the operation of the most
favored nation clause in bilateral investment treaties must now be consid-
ered by this Tribunal. In the case Asian Agricultural Products Limited v.
Republic of Sri Lanka,'® an ICSID Tribunal had the occasion to examine

'5 United Nations, Reports of International Arbitral Awards, 1963, p. 107.
16 Ibid.
1 Tid., a 109, 110.

CASES, 19

the operation of the most favored nation treatment agreed to between Sri
Lanka and the United Kingdom in light of the argument that a Sri Lanka-
Switzerland treaty contained more favorable provisions on which the
investor sought to rely. The provisions discussed, however, were not related
to dispute settlement but only to the liability standards under the treaties
in question. As in the Ambatielos decision rendered by the Commission of
Arbitration, the ICSID Tribunal held that “...it is not proven that the Sri
Lanka/Switzerland Treaty contains rules more favourable than those
provided for under the Sri Lanka/UK Treaty, and hence, Article 3 of the
latter Treaty cannot be justifiably invoked in the present case”.!?

52. A number of bilateral investment treaties have provided expressly
that the most favored nation treatment extends to the provisions on settle-
ment of disputes. This is particularly the case of investment treaties
concluded by the United Kingdom. Thus, Article 3(3) of the Agreement
between the United Kingdom and Albania, stipulates: “For the avoidance
of doubt it is confirmed that the treatment provided for in paragraphs (1)
and (2) above shall apply to the provisions of Articles 1 to 11 of this Agree-
ment”.”? Among the enumerated provisions are the clauses on dispute
settlement and the consent to submit to conciliation or arbitration under
ICSID. Here it is beyond doubt that the parties intended the most favored
nation clause to include dispute settlement in its scope, thereby meeting
the test proposed by the Ambatielos Commission of Arbitration. Further-
more, the parties included this model clause in the Agreement with the
express purpose of “the avoidance of doubt”.

53. In other treaties the most favored nation clause speaks of “all rights
contained in the present Agreement”! or, as the basic Argentine-Spain
BIT does, “all matters subject to this Agreement”. These treaties do not
provide expressly that dispute settlement as such is covered by the clause.
Hence, like in the Ambatielos Commission of Arbitration it must be estab-

18 Asian Agricultural Products Limited v. Republic of Sri Lanka, \CSID Case NoARB/87/
3, Award of June 27, 1990, ICSID Reports, Vol. 4, p. 246.

19 Tbid., at 272.

20 Agreement between the United Kingdom and Albania, March 30, 1994. Twelve other
agreements made by the United Kingdom, which the Tribunal has examined, contain the same
model clause.

21 Agreement between Chile and the Belgian-Luxembourg Economic Union, July 15,
1992, Article 3 (3).

20 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

lished whether the omission was intended by the parties or can reasonably
be inferred from the practice followed by the parties in their treatment of
foreign investors and their own investors.

54. Notwithstanding the fact that the basic treaty containing the clause
does not refer expressly to dispute settlement as covered by the most
favored nation clause, the Tribunal considers that there are good reasons to
conclude that today dispute settlement arrangements are inextricably
related to the protection of foreign investors, as they are also related to the
protection of rights of traders under treaties of commerce. Consular juris-
diction in the past, like other forms of extraterritorial jurisdiction, were
considered essential for the protection of rights of traders and, hence, were
regarded not merely as procedural devices but as arrangements designed to
better protect the rights of such persons abroad.” It follows that such
arrangements, even if not strictly a part of the material aspect of the trade
and investment policy pursued by treaties of commerce and navigation,
were essential for the adequate protection of the rights they sought to guar-
antee.

55. International arbitration and other dispute settlement arrangements
have replaced these older and frequently abusive practices of the past.
These modern developments are essential, however, to the protection of the
rights envisaged under the pertinent treaties; they are also closely linked to
the material aspects of the treatment accorded. Traders and investors, like
their States of nationality, have traditionally felt that their rights and inter-
ests are better protected by recourse to international arbitration than by
submission of disputes to domestic courts, while the host governments
have traditionally felt that the protection of domestic courts is to be
preferred. The drafting history of the ICSID Convention provides ample

22 See, for example, Magno Santovincenzo v. James F Egan, United States Supreme Court,
Decision of November 23, 1931, U.S. Reports, Vol. 284, p. 30, where it was held that “...the
provisions of Article V of the Treaty were of special importance, as they provided for extraterri-
torial jurisdiction of the United States in relation to the adjudication of disputes. It would
thwart the major purpose of the Treaty to exclude from the important protection of these provi-
sions citizens of the United States who might be domiciled in Persia”. For this and other
domestic decisions concerning the most favored nation clause see International Law Commis-
sion, Decisions of national courts relating to the most-favoured-nation clause, Digest prepared
by the Secretariat, Doc. A/CN.4/269, Yearbook of the International Law Commission, Vol. 1,
1973, p. 117.

 

CASES, 21

evidence of the conflicting views of those favoring arbitration and those
supporting policies akin to different versions of the Calvo Clause.?>

56. From the above considerations it can be concluded that if a third-
party treaty contains provisions for the settlement of disputes that are more
favorable to the protection of the investor's rights and interests than those
in the basic treaty, such provisions may be extended to the beneficiary of
the most favored nation clause as they are fully compatible with the ejusdem
generis principle. Of course, the third-party treaty has to relate to the same
subject matter as the basic treaty, be it the protection of foreign invest-
ments or the promotion of trade, since the dispute settlement provisions
will operate in the context of these matters; otherwise there would be a
contravention of that principle. This operation of the most favored nation
clause does, however, have some important limits arising from public
policy considerations that will be discussed further below.

57. The negotiations leading to the Argentine-Spain BIT evidence
similar policy conflicts between the capital exporting country and the host
country, that is, Spain and Argentina respectively, except that in the present
case the roles were later reversed, with Argentina becoming the capital
exporter and Spain the host country. The Claimant has convincingly
explained that at the time of the negotiations of the Agreement, Argentina
still sought to require some form of prior exhaustion of local remedies,
while Spain supported the policy of a direct right of submission to arbitra-
tion, which was reflected in the numerous agreements it negotiated with
other countries at that time. The eventual role the treaty envisaged for
domestic courts, involving the submission of the dispute to these courts for
a period of time, not amounting to the traditional exhaustion of local
remedies requirement as explained above, coupled with ICSID arbitration,
was an obvious compromise reached by the parties. Argentina later aban-
doned its prior policy, and like Spain and Chile, accepted treaty clauses
providing for the direct submission of disputes to arbitration following a
period of negotiations.

58. The Tribunal has also examined in detail the practice followed by
Spain in respect of bilateral investment treaties with other countries. These
treaties indicate that Spain’s preferred practice is to allow for arbitration,

23 See generally ICSID: Analysis of Documents Concerning the Origin and the Formulation
of the Convention, 1970.

22 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

following a six-months effort to reach a friendly settlement, which is what
the Chile-Spain BIT provides. In most cases there is a choice of arbitration
under ICSID, but other options are available as well. This is the situation,
for example, with regard to the treaties concluded by Spain with Algeria,24
Chile,?> Colombia, 6 Cuba,?” Czechoslovakia,2® Dominican Republic,7?
Egypt,>” EI Salvador,?! Honduras,*” Hungary, Indonesia (twelve-month
direct settlement effort),>4 Kazajstan,° Republic of Korea,*® Lithuania,*”
Malaysia,*® Nicaragua,°? Pakistan,“? Peru,*! Philippines, ? Poland’? and
Tunisia.“

59. Spain’s treaty practice also shows that in a few cases a six-month or
nine-month effort at a direct settlement is followed by arbitration between
the Contracting Parties, but not involving the choice of the investor. This
is, for example, the case of the treaties with Bolivia,*> Morocco*® and the
USSR.”7 Only one other treaty, namely that with Uruguay,“ follows the

24 Agreement of December 23, 1994.
25 Agreement of October 2, 1991.
26 Agreement of July 9, 1995.
27 Agreement of May 27, 1994.
28 Agreement of December 12, 1990.
29 Agreement of March 16, 1995.
39 Agreement of November 3, 1992.
31 Agreement of February 14, 1995.
32 Agreement of March 18, 1994.
33 Agreement of November 9, 1989.
34 Agreement of May 30, 1995.
35 Agreement of March 23, 1994.
36 Agreement of January 17, 1994.
37 Agreement of July 6, 1994.
38 Agreement of April 4, 1995.
39 Agreement of March 16, 1994.
40 Agreement of September 15, 1994.
41 Agreement of November 17, 1994.
42 Agreement of October 19, 1993.
43 Agreement of July 30, 1992.
44 Agreement of May 28, 1991.
45 Agreement of April 24, 1990.
46 Agreement of January 15, 1992.
47 Agreement of November 28, 1991.
48 Agreement of April 7, 1992.

CASES, 23

model of the Argentine-Spain BIT, probably because of the similarity of
policies pursued by the two River Plate nations.

60. The Tribunal also notes that of all the Spanish treaties it has been
able to examine, the only one that speaks of “all matters subject to this
Agreement” in its most favored nation clause, is the one with Argentina.
All other treaties, including those with Uruguay and Chile, omit this refer-
ence and merely provide that “this treatment” shall be subject to the clause,
which is of course a narrower formulation.

61. The Spanish treaty practice is also relevant in connection with
another aspect of the clause. Most treaties concluded by Spain have a
model clause to the effect that “...Each Party shall guarantee in its territory
fair and equitable treatment for the investments made by investors of
the other Party... This treatment shall not be less favourable than that
extended by each Party to the investments made in its territory by its own
investors...”.4? While this clause applies to national treatment of foreign
investors, it may also be understood to embrace the treatment required by
a Government for its investors abroad, as evidenced by the treaties made to
ensure their protection. Hence, if a Government seeks to obtain a dispute
settlement method for its investors abroad, which is more favorable than
that granted under the basic treaty to foreign investors in its territory, the
clause may be construed so as to require a similar treatment of the latter.

62. Notwithstanding the fact that the application of the most favored
nation clause to dispute settlement arrangements in the context of invest-
ment treaties might result in the harmonization and enlargement of the
scope of such arrangements, there are some important limits that ought to
be kept in mind. As a matter of principle, the beneficiary of the clause
should not be able to override public policy considerations that the
contracting parties might have envisaged as fundamental conditions for
their acceptance of the agreement in question, particularly if the benefi-
ciary is a private investor, as will often be the case. The scope of the clause
might thus be narrower than it appears at first sight.

63. Here it is possible to envisage a number of situations not present in
the instant case. First, if one contracting party has conditioned its consent

4 See, for example, the Algeria-Spain Agreement of December 23, 1994, Article 4.

24 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

to arbitration on the exhaustion of local remedies, which the ICSID
Convention allows, this requirement could not be bypassed by invoking
the most favored nation clause in relation to a third-party agreement that
does not contain this element since the stipulated condition reflects a
fundamental rule of international law.*° Second, if the parties have agreed
to a dispute settlement arrangement which includes the so-called fork in
the road, that is, a choice between submission to domestic courts or to
international arbitration, and where the choice once made becomes final
and irreversible,>! this stipulation cannot be bypassed by invoking the
clause. This conclusion is compelled by the consideration that it would
upset the finality of arrangements that many countries deem important as
a matter of public policy. Third, if the agreement provides for a particular
arbitration forum, such as ICSID, for example, this option cannot be
changed by invoking the clause, in order to refer the dispute to a different
system of arbitration. Finally, if the parties have agreed to a highly institu-
tionalized system of arbitration that incorporates precise rules of proce-
dure, which is the case, for example, with regard to the North America Free
Trade Agreement and similar arrangements, it is clear that neither of these
mechanisms could be altered by the operation of the clause because these
very specific provisions reflect the precise will of the contracting parties.
Other elements of public policy limiting the operation of the clause will no
doubt be identified by the parties or tribunals. It is clear, in any event, that
a distinction has to be made between the legitimate extension of rights and
benefits by means of the operation of the clause, on the one hand, and
disruptive treaty-shopping that would play havoc with the policy objectives
of underlying specific treaty provisions, on the other hand.

64. In light of the above considerations, the Tribunal is satisfied that the
Claimant has convincingly demonstrated that the most favored nation
clause included in the Argentine-Spain BIT embraces the dispute settle-
ment provisions of this treaty. Therefore, relying on the more favorable
arrangements contained in the Chile-Spain BIT and the legal policy
adopted by Spain with regard to the treatment of its own investors abroad,
the Tribunal concludes that Claimant had the right to submit the instant
dispute to arbitration without first accessing the Spanish courts. In the

50 The Mavrommatis Palestine Concessions (Greece v. U.K.), Permanent Court of Interna-
tional Justice, 1924, Series A. No. 2, 12; Interhandel Case (Switzerland v. United States of
America), International Court of Justice, Reports 1959, 27.

51 See, for example, the Chile-Spain BIT of October 2, 1991, Article 10(2).

CASES, 25

Tribunal’s view, the requirement for the prior resort to domestic courts
spelled out in the Argentine-Spain BIT does not reflect a fundamental
question of public policy considered in the context of the treaty, the nego-
tiations relating to it, the other legal arrangements or the subsequent prac-
tice of the parties. Accordingly, the Tribunal affirms the jurisdiction of the
Centre and its own competence in this case in respect of this aspect of the
challenge made by the Kingdom of Spain.

The Claimant’ Standing

65. The Respondent has also challenged the jurisdiction of the Centre
and the Tribunal’s competence on a different ground, namely, that the
Claimant lacks standing to file this request for arbitration because he is not
an investor within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.
Respondent points out that under Article 25(1), the Centre has jurisdic-
tion only over disputes arising directly out of an investment “between a
Contracting State and a national of another Contracting State.” Although
Claimant is an Argentine national, his claim against the Kingdom of Spain
is based, in Respondent's view, on injuries allegedly suffered by EAMSA, a
Spanish juridical entity established and largely owned by Claimant. As a
Spanish company, EAMSA has a juridical personality separate and distinct
from its shareholders. Respondent argues that as long as the company
continues to exist gua company, a shareholder in Claimant's position has
no standing to seek to lift the corporate veil and sue in his personal capacity
for damages sustained by the company. According to this view, the
Claimant would have only very limited grounds upon which to sue for
eventual wrongdoings that might affect him personally, but in any event
such acts could not be attributed to the Kingdom of Spain.

66. Claimant emphasizes that he is not bringing this case on behalf of
EAMSA. He contends, instead, that he has filed this action in his personal
capacity as a foreign (Argentine) investor in the Spanish company
(EAMSA) to protect his investment in that company. In support of his
arguments, Claimant points, inter alia, to Articles I(2) and II(2) of the BIT
and argues that these provisions define “investments” broadly in the sense
that they cover all types of property and rights to property, including
investments made or acquired in the host country.

67. The Tribunal notes that Article 25 of the Convention must be read
together with two provisions of the BIT, which are of particular relevance

26 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

in analyzing the above contentions of the parties. The first of these is
Article I(2) of the BIT, which reads, in part, as follows:

“The term ‘investment’ means every kind of asset, such as
goods and rights of whatever nature, acquired or made in
accordance with the laws of the Contracting Party in whose
territory the investment is made, and shall include, in parti-
cular though not exclusively, the following: shares in stock or
any other form of participation in a company.”

The other provision is Article II(2), which stipulates:

“The present Agreement shall apply to capital investments in
the territory of one Contracting Party, made in accordance
with its legislation prior to the entry into force of the Agree-
ment. However this Agreement shall not apply to disputes or
claims originating before its entry into force.”

68. These provisions indicate that capital investments are covered by the
BIT. They also provide that individuals having the nationality of one of the
Contracting Parties, who invest in corporations or similar legal entities
created in the territory of the other Contracting Party, are as a general
proposition entitled to claim the protection of that treaty. These provisions
complement and are consistent with the requirements of Article 25 of the
Convention. Claimants’ assertions as to his standing to file this case are
fully compatible with these stipulations.

69. The foregoing conclusion does not mean that Claimant has in fact
proved that he has made out a valid claim for damages sustained by him in
his personal capacity. He will have to do that in the proceedings on the
merits in order to win his case. At this stage of the proceedings, however,
it is enough for him to demonstrate that, if true, his allegations would give
him standing to bring this case in his personal capacity.

70. In the Tribunal’s view, Claimant has sustained that burden. He is an
Argentine investor in a Spanish company, who brings this action ostensibly
to protect his investment in that company and for losses incurred by him
due to injurious acts he attributes to Respondent. If proved, these facts
would entitle Claimant to invoke the protection of the BIT in his personal
capacity. (Convention, Art. 25; BIT, Arts. I(2) and II(2)). Accordingly,

CASES, 27

Claimant can be said to have made out a prima facie case that he has
standing to file this case.

SODIGA’ Status in the Kingdom of Spain

71. The Tribunal now turns to the Respondent’s contention that the
instant dispute is not between the Kingdom of Spain and the Claimant, as
alleged by the Claimant, but between the Claimant and the private corpo-
ration “Sociedad para el Desarrollo Industrial de Galicia” (SODIGA), with
which the Claimant made various contractual dealings.

72. The issue here can be summarized as follows. The Claimant argues
that the actions and omissions affecting his investment are attributable to
an entity owned and operated by the Kingdom of Spain. SODIGA, the
Claimant argues, is not only owned by several State entities, but it is also
under the control of the State and operated as an arm of the State for the
purposes of the economic development of the region of Galicia. Accord-
ingly, as a State entity, its wrongful acts or omission may be attributed to
the State.

73. The Respondent maintains, however, that SODIGA is a private
commercial corporation established under the commercial laws of Spain
and that, consequently, its activities are those of a private entity. Owner-
ship of part of the shares of SODIGA by State entities, the Respondent
argues, does not alter the private commercial character of the corporation
nor does it transform SODIGA into a State agency. Its acts or omissions
cannot, therefore, be attributed to the State.

74, Under the ICSID Convention, the Centre’s jurisdiction extends only
to legal disputes arising directly out of an investment between a
Contracting State and a national of another Contracting State. ? Just as the
Centre has no jurisdiction to arbitrate disputes between two States, it also
lacks jurisdiction to arbitrate disputes between two private entities. Its
main jurisdictional feature is to decide disputes between a private investor
and a State.°> However, neither the term “national of another Contracting
State” nor the term “Contracting State” are defined in the Convention.

52 ICSID Convention, Article 25(1).
53 Aron Broches: “The Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes: Some
Observations on Jurisdiction”, Columbia Journal of International Law, Vol. 5, 1966, 263, at 265.

 

28 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

Some elements outlined in the Convention in respect of the standing of a
constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State or the modalities
of consent in their respect,” neither help in this case.°> The Convention
contains no criteria dealing with the attribution to the State of acts or
omissions undertaken by such State entities, subdivisions or agencies. The
Argentine-Spanish BIT does not assist either in this determination. While
it speaks of actions of State authorities (“autoridades de una Parte”), it does
not define the phrase.°°

75. Accordingly, the Tribunal has to answer the following two questions:
first, whether or not SODIGA is a State entity for the purpose of deter-
mining the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal,
and second, whether the actions and omissions complained of by the
Claimant are imputable to the State. While the first issue is one that can
be decided at the jurisdictional stage of these proceedings, the second issue
bears on the merits of the dispute and can be finally resolved only at that
stage.

76. Since neither the Convention nor the Argentine-Spanish BIT estab-
lish guiding principles for deciding the here relevant issues, the Tribunal
may look to the applicable rules of international law in deciding whether a
particular entity is a state body. These standards have evolved and been
applied in the context of the law of State responsibility. Here, the test that
has been developed looks to various factors, such as ownership, control, the
nature, purposes and objectives of the entity whose actions are under scru-
tiny, and to the character of the actions taken.”

77. The question whether or not SODIGA is a State entity must be
examined first from a formal or structural point of view. Here a finding
that the entity is owned by the State, directly or indirectly, gives rise to a
rebuttable presumption that it is a State entity. The same result will obtain
if an entity is controlled by the State, directly or indirectly. A similar

54 ICSID Convention, Article 25(1) and 25(3). See C. Schreuer: “Commentary on the
ICSID Convention. Article 25”, Foreign Investment Law Journal—ICSID Review, Vol. 11, 1996,
318, at 380-391; Schreuer, loc. cit., supra note 4, at 140-150.

55 SODIGA is not a party to this case and no designation has been made or consent has
been given by Spain to this effect.

5© Argentine-Spain BIT, Article V.

57 Tan Brownlie: System of the Law of Nations. State Responsibility. Part I, 1983, 132 et seq.

CASES, 29

presumption arises if an entity’s purpose or objectives is the carrying out of
functions which are governmental in nature or which are otherwise
normally reserved to the State, or which by their nature are not usually
carried out by private businesses or individuals.

78. The relevance of these standards is clearer when there is a direct State
operation and control, such as by a section or division of a Ministry, but
less so when the State chooses to act through a private sector mechanism,
such as a corporation (sociedad anonima) or some other corporate structure.
In any event, a State will not necessarily escape responsibility for wrongful
acts or omissions by hiding behind a private corporate veil. 8 Paragraph 2
of Article 7 of the International Law Commission's Draft Articles on State
Responsibility, supports this position:

“2. The conduct of an organ of an entity which is not part
of the formal structure of the State or of a territorial
governmental entity, but which is empowered by the
internal law of that State to exercise elements of the
governmental authority, shall be considered as an act of
the State under international law, provided the organ
was acting in such capacity in the case in question.” °

79. Because of the many forms that State enterprises may take and thus
shape the manners of State action, the structural test by itself may not
always be a conclusive determination whether an entity is an organ of the
State or whether its acts may be attributed to the State. An additional test
has been developed, a functional test, which looks to the functions of or
role to be performed by the entity.©° Although, as noted above, neither the
ICSID Convention nor the Argentine-Spain BIT define a Contracting
State, the drafting history of the Convention does cover an analogous situ-
ation: whether mixed economy companies or government-owned corpora-
tions may be considered under the definition of a “national of a
Contracting State”. While recognizing, of course, that definitions of
different terms are not usually interchangeable and that, in this case, a
“Contracting State” is different from a “national of a Contracting State”,

°8 See generally Brownlie, op. cit, supra note 57, at 135-137.

°° International Law Commission: “Draft Articles on State Responsibility”, 1996, Inter-
national Legal Materials, Vol. 37, 1998, 444.

69 Brownlie, op. cit., supra note 57, at 136.

30 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

there are sufficient similarities which would allow us to utilize jurispru-
dence developed for one definition in the context of the other. Thus, a
determination as to the character of state-owned enterprises in the context
of whether it is a “national of a Contracting State”, may also be relevant in
determining whether a state enterprise may be subsumed within the defi-
nition of the term “Contracting Party”. In this connection, it is relevant to
note, as explained by a leading authority on the Convention, that it would
seem that “a mixed economy company or government-owned corporation
should not be disqualified as a ‘national of another Contracting State’
unless it is acting as an agent for the government or is discharging an essen-

tially governmental function”.°!

80. This functional test has been applied, in respect of the definition of
a national of a Contracting State, in the recent decision of an ICSID
Tribunal on objections to jurisdiction in the case of Ceskoslovenska
Obchodni Banka, A. S. v. the Slovak Republic: ? Here it was held that the
fact of State ownership of the shares of the corporate entity was not enough
to decide the crucial issue of whether the Claimant had standing under the
Convention as a national of a Contracting State as long as the activities
themselves were “essentially commercial rather than governmental in
nature”.°? By the same token, a private corporation operating for profit
while discharging essentially governmental functions delegated to it by the
State could, under the functional test, be considered as an organ of the
State and thus engage the State’s international responsibility for wrongful
acts.

81. It is difficult to determine, a priori, whether these various tests and
standards need necessarily be cumulative. It is likely that there are circum-
stances when they need not be. Of course, when all or most of the tests
result in a finding of State action, the result, while still merely a presump-
tion, comes closer to being conclusive.

61 Aron Broches: “The Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between
States and Nationals of Other States”, Recueil des Cours de l'Academie de Droit International,
1972, at 355.

& Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, A. S. v. the Slovak Republic, CSID Case No. ARB/97/
4, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, May 24, 1999, ICSID Review—Foreign Investment
Law Journal, Vol. 14, 1999, at 250.

63 Ibid., par. 20.

 

CASES 31

82. The Tribunal is also of the view that a domestic determination, be it
legal, judicial or administrative, as to the juridical structure of an entity
undertaking functions which may be classified as governmental, while it is
to be given considerable weight, is not necessarily binding on an interna-
tional arbitral tribunal. Whether an entity is to be regarded as an organ of
the State and whether this might ultimately engage its responsibility, is a
question of fact and law to be determined under the applicable principles
of international law.®

83. In the light of these considerations, the Tribunal notes, first, that
SODIGA was created by a decree issued by the Ministry of Industry
(Ministerio de Industria) which authorized the National Institute for
Industry (Instituto Nacional de Industria), a national State agency, to estab-
lish SODIGA. The characterization of the Ministry and the Institute as
State entities is not disputed in this case. Furthermore, in spite of the fact
that the government chose to create SODIGA in the form of a private
commercial corporation, it did so by providing that the Instituto Nacional
de Industria would own no less than 51% of the capital. In fact, as of
December 31, 1990, the percentage of governmentally owned capital of
SODIGA had increased to over 88%, including the stock holdings of the
Xunta de Galicia, also a state entity in charge of the executive power in the
Autonomous Community of Galicia, > several savings and loans associa-
tions (cajas de ahorros), other regional development agencies and the Banco
Exterior de Espafia.

84. However, the intent of the State to create still another a corporate
entity, particularly one which is intended to operate in the private sector,
even if State owned, is not sufficient to raise the presumption of an entity
being an organ of the State. More is required in terms of the functional test
discussed above.

85. In this instance, however, it is clear from the background leading to
the establishment of SODIGA that the intent of the Government of Spain
was to create an entity to carry out governmental functions. In fact, the
proposal to create SODIGA originated in the Ministerio de Industria; its

&4 Brownlie, op. cit, supra note 57, at 136. See also International Law Commission,
Draft Articles cit., supra note 59, Article 4.

© The Xunta is defined as the collegiate body of the Government of Galicia. See http://
galicia97.vieiros.com

32 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

creation was vetted and approved by the Ministry of Finance (Ministerio de
Hacienda); and its creation was discussed and approved at a meeting of the
Council of Ministers (Consejo de Ministros), one of the highest policy
organs of the Government of Spain.” The participation of these govern-
ment bodies in the creation of SODIGA points to the fact that it was estab-
lished to carry out governmental functions in the field of regional
development.

86. This intention is evidenced, for example, in the preamble to the
decree. It declares that one of the purposes for SODIGA’s creation is the
promotion of regional industrial development of the Autonomous Region
of Galicia. (“. . . [SJe considera urgente la constitucion de una Sociedad que, con

je sp de impul el desarrollo industrial de Galicia,. . .”).
Furthermore, it can be seen that it was the intent of the Government of
Spain to utilize SODIGA as an instrument of State action. Among its func-
tions was the undertaking of studies for the introduction of new industries
into Galicia, seeking and soliciting such new industries, investing in new
enterprises, processing loan applications with official sources of financing,
providing guarantees for such loans, and providing technical assistance.
Moreover, either through the Instituto Nacional de Industria or directly,
SODIGA was charged with providing subsidies and offering other induce-
ments for the development of industries. Many of these objectives and
functions are by their very nature typically governmental tasks, not usually
carried out by private entities, and, therefore, cannot normally be consid-
ered to have a commercial nature.

 

87. While it is possible that the Spanish State could have out-sourced
such development activities to a private, non-governmental, corporate
entity, this was not the case here. But, as explained above, even if it had
been the case, under the functional test this would not have necessarily
delinked the Spanish State from the entity as its functions would have been
delegated by the State and they could still be government functions in the
light of international law.

88. Many countries besides Spain have created regional development

agencies. These agencies have been created around the world and operate
as governmental entities, whether in the form of direct State agencies, terri-

6% Decreto 2182/1972, Boletin Oficial del Estado, No. 197, August 17, 1972, p. 1536.

CASES 33

torial or regional agencies or, as in the case of SODIGA, as corporations.
It is relevant to note, in this connection, that the World Bank has estab-
lished an office, the Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS), one of
whose functions is to provide technical assistance and consulting services
to governments to assist with the creation and operation of industrial and
other development organizations.

89. In view of the fact that SODIGA meets both the structural test of
State creation and capital ownership and the functional test of performing
activities of a public nature, the Tribunal concludes that the Claimant has
made out a prima facie case that SODIGA is a State entity acting on behalf
of the Kingdom of Spain. Whether SODIGA is responsible for the specific
acts and omissions complained of, whether they are wrongful, whether all
these acts or omissions always were governmental rather than commercial
in character, and, hence, whether they can be attributed to the Spanish
State, are questions to be decided during the proceedings on the merits of
the case.

Time of the Dispute

90. A last challenge of the Respondent to the jurisdiction of the Centre
and the competence of the Tribunal rests on the argument that the alleged
dispute originates in its view before the entry into force of the BIT between
Argentina and Spain. This argument is in turn connected with the issue of
the existence of a dispute and whether it qualifies as a legal dispute, but
these other aspects belong also to the merits of the claim.

91. Article II(2) of the Argentine-Spain BIT provides in part: “However,
this agreement shall not apply to disputes or claims originating before its
entry into force.”

92. The Argentine-Spain BIT entered into force on September 28, 1992,
and because of the Claimant’s argument about the relevance of the most-
favored-nation clause in respect of the Chile-Spain BIT, the Kingdom of
Spain also argues that the latter treaty only entered into force on March 29,
1994. Accordingly, Spain submits that for the Centre to have jurisdiction
the dispute should originate after this last date or, in any event, after the
date of entry into force of the Argentine-Spain BIT. Considering that the
Claimant relies on facts and events that took place as early as 1989 and

34 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

throughout 1990, 1991, and the first part of 1992, Spain contends that the
BIT does not apply to the dispute.

93. The Claimant rejects this view on the ground that a “dispute” arises
when it is formally presented as such, and this happened only after both the
Argentine-Spain and the Chile-Spain BIT had entered into force. He
contends, moreover, that before the dispute can be deemed to have arisen,
there may have been disagreements and differences of opinion between the
parties, but these events do not amount to a dispute as this concept is
understood in international and domestic law.

94, These differing views of the parties as to the meaning of a dispute
and when it becomes identified or recognized as such, are quite common
in ICSID and other arbitral or judicial proceedings.©” The International
Court of Justice has defined a dispute on various occasions by declaring
that it is “a disagreement on a point of law or fact, a conflict of legal views
or interests between parties.”°* It has been rightly commented in this
respect that the “dispute must relate to clearly identified issues between the
parties and must not be merely academic... The dispute must go beyond
general grievances and must be susceptible of being stated in terms of a
concrete claim”.

95. In the present case it is quite clear, as the Kingdom of Spain has
argued, that the events on which the parties disagreed began as early as
1989. Issues such as budget estimates, requirements of environmental
impact assessment, disinvestment, and other, were indeed discussed during
the period 1989-1992. But this does not mean that a legal dispute as
defined by the International Court of Justice can be said to have existed at
the time.

96. The Tribunal notes in this respect that there tends to be a natural
sequence of events that leads to a dispute. It begins with the expression of
a disagreement and the statement of a difference of views. In time these

67 AGIP v. Congo, 1CSID Case ARB/77/1, Award of November 30, 1979, ICSID Reports,
Vol. 1, 306.

68 International Court of Justice: Case concerning East Timor, IC] Reports 1995, 90, para.
22, with reference to earlier decisions of both the Permanent Court of International Justice and
the International Court of Justice.

© C, Schreuer, loc. cit., (1996), supra note 54, at 337.

CASES 35

events acquire a precise legal meaning through the formulation of legal
claims, their discussion and eventual rejection or lack of response by the
other party. The conflict of legal views and interests will only be present in
the latter stage, even though the underlying facts predate them. It has also
been rightly commented that the existence of the dispute presupposes a
minimum of communications between the parties, one party taking up the
matter with the other, with the latter opposing the Claimant’s position
directly or indirectly.’? This sequence of events has to be taken into
account in establishing the critical date for determining when under the
BIT a dispute qualifies as one covered by the consent necessary to establish
ICSID’s jurisdiction.

97. It should also be noted that the Kingdom of Spain has correctly
argued that there is a difference between a dispute and a claim in terms of
Article II(2) of the Argentine-Spain BIT. While a dispute may have
emerged, it does not necessarily have to coincide with the presentation of
a formal claim. The critical date will in fact separate, not the dispute from
the claim, but the dispute from prior events that do not entail a conflict of
legal views and interests. It follows that if the dispute arises after the critical
date it will qualify for its transformation into a claim, while if the dispute
has arisen before such date it will be excluded by the terms of the BIT.

98. The Tribunal is satisfied that in this case the dispute in its technical
and legal sense began to take shape in 1994, particularly in the context of
the disinvestment proposals discussed between the parties. At that point,
the conflict of legal views and interests came to be clearly established,
leading not long thereafter to the presentation of various claims that even-
tually came to this Tribunal. That is to say, this dispute came into being
after both the Argentine-Spain and the Chile-Spain BITs had entered into
force, although the critical date here is the date of entry into force of the
former, since this is the basic treaty relevant in this case. It is on this basis
that the Tribunal comes to the conclusion that the Centre has jurisdiction
and that the Tribunal is competent to consider the dispute between the
parties in accordance with the provisions of Article II(2 )of the Argentine-
Spain BIT.

79 Thid., at 337, with particular reference to AALP v. Sri Lanka, 1CSID Case NoARB/87/
3, Award of June 27, 1990, JCSID Reports, Vol. 4, 251.

36 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

C. Decision

99. For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal unanimously decides that the
present dispute is within the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence
of the Tribunal. The Tribunal has, accordingly, made the necessary Order
for the continuation of the procedure pursuant to Arbitration Rule 41(4).

[signature]
Francisco Orrego Vicufia
President of the Tribunal

(signature] (signature]
Thomas Buergenthal Maurice Wolf
Arbitrator Arbitrator

