ICSID Case No ARB/12/2

EMMIS INTERNATIONAL HOLDING, B.V.
EMMIS RADIO OPERATING, B.V.
MEM MAGYAR ELECTRONIC MEDIA KERESKEDELMI ES SZOLGALTATO KFT
Claimants

~and—

HUNGARY
Respondent

 

DECISION ON RESPONDENT’S APPLICATION FOR BIFURCATION

 

Members of the Tribunal
Hon Marc Lalonde PC OC QC, Arbitrator
Professor Campbell McLachlan QC, President
Mr J Christopher Thomas QC, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Mairée Uran Bidegain

Representing Claimants
Stephen Jagusch
Anthony Sinclair
Epaminontas Triantafilou
QUINN EMANUEL

One Fleet Place

London EC4M 7RA
UNITED KINGDOM

Dr. Andras Laszlé
Szecskay Attorneys At Law
Kossuth Sqr. 16-17. Ill.
H-1055 Budapest,
HUNGARY

Date of dispatch to the Parties: 13 June 2013

Representing Respondent
Jean E. Kalicki

ARNOLD & PORTER LLP

555 12th Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20004
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

Dmitri Evseev
Arnold & Porter (UK) LLP
Tower 42

25 Old Broad St.

London EC2N 1HQ
United Kingdom

Janos Katona

Gydrgy Molar-Bird

Dr. Gabor Puskas

KENDE, MOLNAR-BIRO, KATONA
Villanyi ut 47

1118 Budapest

HUNGARY

Vi.

Vil.

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

INTRODUCTION 4
PROCEDURAL HISTORY. 5
RELEVANT LEGAL TEXTS. 6

 

 

A. ICSID CONVENTION AND ARBITRATION RULES

 

B. THE NETHERLANDS-HUNGARY BILATERAL INVESTMENT TREATY ...

 

C. THE SWITZERLAND-HUNGARY BILATERAL INVESTMENT TREATY ..

THE PARTIES’ PLEADINGS 9

A. THE CLAIM 9

 

B. RESPONDENT'S NOTICE OF JURISDICTIONAL OBJECTIONS...

 

 

C. Claimants’ REPLY 12
ISSUES ON BIFURCATION. 12
A. COMMON GROUND. 12

 

 

B. RESPONDENT'S REQUEST FOR BIFURCATION

 

C. CLAIMANTS’ REPLY ON BIFURCATION ....

TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS 15

DECISION 19

2009 Regulatory Framework

2009 Tender

Arbitration Rules
Broadcasting Agreement
Claimants’ Reply

Contract Framework

Emmis International
Emmis Radio

GIT
ICSID Convention

ICSID/the Centre

Media Law
MEM

Memorial

Netherlands BIT

ORTT

Parties

PO No1
PO No2

Request for Arbitration

Respondent's Request

Rule 41(5) Decision

Slager/Slager Radio

Switzerland BIT

Treaties

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

GLOssAaRY OF DEFINED TERMS

Media Law, GTT and the 2009 ORTT Call for Tenders

The Tender conducted by ORTT in 2009 for the FM frequency radio licence then
held by Slager

ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings 2006
Agreement between Slager and ORTT dated 18 November 1997, Ex. C-115
Claimants’ Reply to Respondent's Request for Bifurcation dated 5 June 2013

Broadcasting Agreement, incorporating the Media Law and GTT (as alleged by
Claimants in the Memorial at [43])

Emmis International Holding, B.V., the First Claimant
Emmis Radio Operating B.V., the Second Claimant
General Terms of Tender of ORTT dated 30 August 1996, Ex. CA-4

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and
Nationals of Other States dated 18 March, 1965

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
Act | of 1996 on Radio and Television Broadcasting, Ex. CA-3

Mem Magyar Electronic Media Kereskedelmi és Szolgaltato Kft, the Third Claimant
Claimants’ Memorial on Jurisdiction and the Merits dated 24 April 2013

Bilateral Investment Treaty between the Netherlands and Hungary dated 2
September 1987

Orszdgos Rédié Es Televizié Testiilet, National Radio and Television Broadcasting
Board of Hungary

Collectively Claimants and Respondent
Procedural Order Noi dated 5 October 2012

Procedural Order No2 dated 25 March 2013

Revised Amended Request for Arbitration dated 27 December 2012, as further
amended by letter from Claimants dated 25 March 2013

Respondent's Notice of Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation dated
28 May 2013

The Tribunal’s Decision on Respondent's Objection under ICSID Arbitration
Rule41(5) dated 11 March 2013

Slager Radio Mdsorzolgaltaté Zrt

Bilateral Investment Treaty between Switzerland and Hungary dated 5 October
1988

Netherlands BIT and Switzerland BIT

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

INTRODUCTION

The present dispute is submitted to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes (ICSID or the Centre) on the basis of the Agreement between the
Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Hungarian People’s Republic for Encouragement
and Reciprocal Protection of Investments dated 2 September 1987, which entered
into force on 1 June 1988 (the Netherlands BIT), the Agreement Between the Swiss
Confederation and the Hungarian People’s Republic on the Reciprocal Promotion and
Protection of Investments dated 5 October 1988, which entered into force on 16 May
1989 (the Swiss BIT and jointly with the Netherlands BIT, the Treaties), and the
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals

of Other States, which entered into force on 14 October 1966 (the ICSID Convention).

The Claimants are Emmis International Holding, B.V. (Emmis International), Emmis
Radio Operating, B.V. (Emmis Radio), and Mem Magyar Electronic Media
Kereskedelmi és Szolgaltaté Kft (MEM). Emmis International and Emmis Radio are
both corporations organized and existing under the laws of the Netherlands. MEM is
a company organized and existing under the laws of Hungary, allegedly controlled by
Mr Jiirg Marquard, a Swiss national. These parties will be collectively referred to

hereinafter as Claimants.

The Respondent is Hungary and is referred to as Hungary or Respondent.

The dispute relates to the alleged unlawful expropriation by Respondent of Claimants’
investments in a national FM-radio frequency broadcasting licensee, Slager Radio

Misorzolgaltat6 Zrt (Slager).

This Decision concerns Respondent’s request for bifurcation of these proceedings,
made by Notice of Jurisdictional Objections and Request for Bifurcation dated 28 May
2013 (Respondent’s Request). Pursuant to ICSID Convention Article 41 and Rule 41 of
the Arbitration Rules, Respondent seeks a suspension of the proceedings on the
merits and the resolution of Hungary’s jurisdictional objections, summarised in its

Request, as a preliminary matter.

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

PROCEDURAL HISTORY

The Tribunal set forth the procedural history of this matter from the filing of the
Request for Arbitration on 28 October 2011 until 10 March 2013 in its Decision on
Respondent’s Objection under ICSID Rule 41(5) dated 11 March 2013 (Rule 41(5)

Decision).

By paragraph 85 of that Decision (the dispositif), the Tribunal decided to:

(1) Grant Respondent’s objection under Rule 41(5) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules to the extent of dismissing all Non-Expropriation Claims from these

proceedings as being outside the scope of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction;

(2) Deny Respondent’s objection under Rule 41(5) in respect of the Customary

International Law Expropriation Claim;

(3) Join any further objection to the jurisdiction of the Centre in respect of the
Customary International Law Expropriation Claim, to the extent maintained,

to the merits; and,

(4) Grant Claimants 14 days from dispatch of this Decision to the Parties within
which to file a further Revised Amended Request reflecting the terms of this

Decision.

Pursuant to paragraph 85(4), by letter dated 25 March 2013, Claimants requested the
Tribunal to treat specified passages in paragraphs [24], [27], [65] and [68] of the
Revised Amended Request as stricken. Accordingly, the Tribunal treats the Request for
Arbitration in these proceedings as the Revised Amended Request dated 27 December

2012, as further amended by this letter (together Request for Arbitration).

Following the Rule 41(5) Decision, the Parties further applied, by letters from
Claimants dated 14 March 2013 and from Respondent dated 15 March 2013, for
further directions as to the procedural calendar and for an oral hearing thereon.
Having received written submissions from the Parties, a teleconference hearing was
convened before the full Tribunal on 21/22 March 2013. Following that hearing, the
Tribunal issued Procedural Order No2 (PO No2) dated 25 March 2013.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

This Order provided, by way of amendment to paragraph 12.7 of Procedural Order
No1 (PO No1), for the Respondent to notify the Tribunal and Claimants by 22 May
2013 whether it intended to raise any jurisdictional objections under ICSID Arbitration
Rule 41(1) and request a suspension of the proceedings on the merits. In the event
that such an application were made, it further provided for Claimants to reply by 5
June 2013 and for the Tribunal to decide the question of bifurcation by 19 June 2013.
It then set forth two alternative pleading scenarios depending upon the Tribunal’s

decision.

On 24 April 2013 (in accordance with the Tribunal’s decisions of 18 April 2013 and 2
May 2013), Claimants filed their Memorial on Jurisdiction and the Merits and

accompanying documents (Memorial).

On 28 April 2013, the Parties agreed certain revisions to the procedural timetable,
including extending the time for the Respondent’s Request to 28 May 2013. The

Tribunal consented to these extensions on 2 May 2013.

The Respondent filed its Request on 28 May 2013.

The Claimants filed its Reply on 5 June 2013.

Each party subsequently wrote to the Tribunal: Respondent by letter dated 6 June

2013 and Claimants by letter dated 10 June 2013.

The Tribunal has deliberated by conference call on 10/11 June 2013 and by other

means.

RELEVANT LEGAL TEXTS

The Tribunal sets forth below the relevant portions of the legal texts germane to its

Decision.

A. ICSID Convention and Arbitration Rules

18. Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention, which is found within Chapter II headed

“Jurisdiction of the Centre”, provides:

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

The jurisdiction of the Centre shall extend to any legal dispute arising
directly out of an investment, between a Contracting State (or any
constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State designated to the
Centre by that State) and a national of another Contracting State, which the
parties to the dispute consent in writing to submit to the Centre. When the
parties have given their consent, no party may withdraw its consent
unilaterally.

19. Article 41 of the Convention, which is within Chapter IV Section 3 headed “Powers and

Functions of the Tribunal,” provides:

(1) The Tribunal shall be the judge of its own competence.

(2) Any objection by a party to the dispute that that dispute is not within the
jurisdiction of the Centre, or for other reasons is not within the competence
of the Tribunal, shall be considered by the Tribunal which shall determine
whether to deal with it as a preliminary question or to join it to the merits.

20. Arbitration Rule 41 “Preliminary Objections” provides, in relevant part:

(3) Upon the formal raising of an objection relating to the dispute, the
Tribunal may decide to suspend the proceeding on the merits. The President
of the Tribunal, after consultation with its other members, shall fix a time
limit within which the parties may file observations on the objections.

(4) The Tribunal shall decide whether or not the further procedures relating
to the objection made pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be oral. It may deal
with the objection as a preliminary objection or join it to the merits of the
dispute. If the Tribunal overrules the objection or joins it to the merits, it
shall once more fix time limits for the further procedures.

B. The Netherlands-Hungary Bilateral Investment Treaty

21. Article 4(1) of the Netherlands BIT provides:

Neither Contracting Party shall take any measure depriving, directly or
indirectly, investors of the other Contracting Party of their investments
unless the following conditions are complied with:

(a) the measures are taken in the public interest and under due process of
law;

(b) the measures are not discriminatory or contrary to any undertaking
which the former Contracting Party may have given;

(c) the measures are accompanied by provision for payment of just
compensation. Such compensation shall represent the genuine value of the
investments affected and shall, in order to be effective for the claimants, be

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

paid and made transferable, without undue delay, to the country designated
by the claimants concerned and in the currency of the country of which the
claimants are nationals or in any freely convertible currency accepted by the
claimants.

22. Article 1(1) provides:

[T]he term “investments” shall comprise every kind of asset connected with
the participation in companies and joint ventures, more particularly, though
not exclusively:

(a) movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in rem in
respect of every kind of asset;

(b) rights derived from shares, bonds or other kinds of interests in
companies and joint ventures;

(c) title to money, goodwill and other assets and to any performance having
an economic value;

(d) rights in the field of intellectual property, technical processes and know-
how;

(e) rights granted under public law, including rights to prospect, explore,
extract and win natural resources.

Cc. The Switzerland-Hungary Bilateral Investment Treaty

23. Article 6(1) of the Swiss BIT provides:

Neither of the Contracting Parties shall take, either directly or indirectly
measures of expropriation, nationalization or any other measure having the
same nature or the same effect against investments belonging to investors
of the other Contracting Party, unless the measures are taken in the public
interest, on a non-discriminatory basis, and under due process of law, and
provided that provisions be made for effective and adequate compensation.
The amount of compensation, interest included, shall be settled in the
currency of the country of origin of the investment and paid without delay
to the person entitled thereto, without regard to its residence or domicile.

24. Article 1(2) provides:

The term “investments” shall include every kind of assets and particularly:

(a) movable and immovable property as well as any other rights in rem, such
as servitudes, mortgages, liens and pledges;

(b) shares, parts or any other kinds of participation in companies;

25.

26.

27.

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

(c) claims to money or to any performance having an economic value;

(d) copyrights, industrial property rights (such as patents, utility models,
industrial designs or models, trade or service marks, trade names,
indications of origin), know-how and goodwill;

(e) concessions under public law, including concessions to search for, extract
or exploit natural resources as well as all other rights given by law, by
contract or by decision of the authority in accordance with the law.

THE PARTIES’ PLEADINGS

The Tribunal will now summarise the pleadings of the Parties to the extent relevant

and necessary to its Decision.
A. The Claim

By their Request for Arbitration (as amended, including as a result of the Tribunal’s
Rule 41(5) Decision), Claimants allege that Respondent breached the Treaties and
customary international law by indirectly expropriating Claimants’ investments in a
national FM-radio frequency broadcasting licensee, Slager.’ They allege the
Respondent did so by conducting a tender for the radio frequency then held by Slager
in 2009 (the 2009 Tender) in an unlawful manner.”

In setting forth the claimed basis for ICSID jurisdiction under Article 25 of the

Convention, Claimants allege:

The Claimants’ investments in the stock of Slager Radio evidenced their
interests in the value of the rights conferred by their broadcasting licences.
These rights included not only the right to conduct broadcast operations but
also the legal protection granted by the Media Law and the regulations or
other instruments adopted to implement the Media Law. Those rights and
protections included, inter alia, the preference that was accorded to existing
licensees in competitive tenders in which they sought renewal of their
licenses, and a legal framework guaranteeing that tenders would be
conducted lawfully and in a fair and transparent manner.

Claimants develop these points in their Memorial. They allege:*

* Request for Arbitration, [1], [5].
* Ibid, [65], [72].
* Ibid, [19].

29.

30.

31.

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

Hungary’s scheme to subvert the legal norms under which Claimants were
entitled to renewal of their licence indirectly expropriated Claimants’
investments, including the value of their shares in Slager Radio, related
assets (including rights granted by its broadcasting agreement) and
operations.
Relying upon the definition of investments contained in the Treaties, Claimants allege
that ‘[p]rincipally those investments comprise their respective shares in Slager Radio,

Claimants’ Hungarian subsidiary, and the rights derived from those shares.’® Claimants

particularise the rights derived from the shares as:°

The Broadcasting Agreement between Slager Radio and ORTT’, which is
an asset and more particularly (i) comprises rights granted under public
law (Netherlands Treaty, Article 1(1)(e)), and (ii) constitutes a concession
under public law (Switzerland Treaty, Article 1(2)(e)).

The rights, protections and guarantees conferred under the Contract
Framework, which include, inter alia, the right to broadcast, the right of
Slager as the incumbent bidder to receive a preference or advantage in
the tender for the renewal of its broadcasting right; the guarantee that
all tenders for the renewal of that broadcasting right shall be conducted
according to law in good faith, and on a fair, non-discriminatory, non-
partisan and transparent basis. Those rights, protections and guarantees
constitute investments because they are (i) rights granted under public
law (Netherlands Treaty, Article 1(1)(e)), and (ii) rights given by law, by
contract or by “decision of the authority in accordance with the law.”
(Switzerland Treaty, Article 1(2)(e)).

The Broadcasting Agreement is defined by Claimants as the Agreement between
Slager and ORTT dated 18 November 1997.° The Contract Framework is defined by
Claimants as the Broadcasting Agreement incorporating the Media Law and the

ORTT’s General Terms of Tender (GTT).°

In elaborating their claim of expropriation, Claimants allege:”°

 

* Memorial, [22].
* Ibid, [291].

* Ibid, [292] footnotes omitted.

” ORTT, Hungarian acronym for Orszdgos Radio Es Televizio Testillet, is the National Radio and
Television Broadcasting Board of Hungary.

* Ibid, [43], Ex. C-115.
° Idem, Ex. CA-4.

*° Ibid, [346] footnotes omitted.

10

32.

33.

34.

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

The unlawful measures described above rendered Claimants shares in Slager
worthless. The value of Slager was intrinsically tied to Respondent’s
observance of the rights and guarantees provided to Slager in the Contract
Framework and the expectation that Slager’s broadcasting right would be
renewed indefinitely as long as Slager provided good radio broadcasting
services, complied with the Contract Framework and offered a reasonable
broadcast fee. Respondent’s wilful failure to observe these obligations
coupled with its effective plot to foreclose any meaningful relief from
Hungarian courts annihilated the value of Slager’s shares.

Respondent’s Notice of Jurisdictional Objections

By its Request, Respondent gives notice of its jurisdictional objections and requests

bifurcation of the proceedings so that they may be further pleaded and determined by

the Tribunal.

In summary, Respondent submits that Claimants’ claim: **

.. does not “aris[e] directly out of” an investment as required by Article 25
of the ICSID Convention. Furthermore, it largely concerns non-existent rights
that fail to meet the definition of “investment” under the Treaties and the
ICSID Convention. Finally, the asserted rights are not cognizable as vested
property rights under Hungarian law and therefore cannot, at the threshold
level, be the subject of an expropriation claim, the only claim for which
Hungary has consented to arbitration. The dispute is therefore beyond the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction due to the failure to meet the requisite conditions
ratione materiae and ratione voluntatis.

Specifically, Respondent submits that:

The alleged right of incumbent preference does not exist under Hungarian
law. There being no legal right, there can be no investment capable of being

expropriated; and,

The alleged rights of fair treatment or legitimate expectation regarding the
2009 Tender do not constitute an asset or investment capable of being

expropriated.”*

* Respondent's Request, [3].

* Ibid, [6]-[8].

* Ibid, [9] - [10].

11

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

Cc. Claimants’ Reply

35. Claimants allege in Reply that Respondent has mischaracterised the nature of the

claim, including Claimants’ investments. It emphasises that these investments include:
e Their shares in Slager;

e Their contractual rights under the Broadcasting Agreement and its Contractual

Framework; and,

e Their direct rights under the Media Law, the GTT and the 2009 Call for
Tenders (together the 2009 Regulatory Framework).

They allege that these rights, taken together, would have entitled them to renewal
of their licence in 2009, with or without an incumbent advantage.* Thus, Claimants
allege, Respondent’s actions in failing to renew their licence, have deprived them of

the entire value of their investment.

V. ISSUES ON BIFURCATION

A. Common Ground

36. The Parties advance opposing submissions on the question of bifurcation.
Nevertheless, there is a measure of agreement between them as to (a) the approach
to be taken to bifurcation; and (b) the law applicable to the determination of
Claimants’ investments. The Tribunal adopts these points as the starting-point for its

analysis.
37. In approaching the question of bifurcation, the Parties are agreed that:

(1) The Tribunal has, by virtue of Article 41 of the ICSID Convention and
Arbitration Rule 41, discretion as to whether to suspend the proceedings on
the merits and determine a jurisdictional objection as a preliminary issue or

whether to join it to the merits.’®

™ Reply, [23].
* Respondent’s Request, [13]; Reply, [10].

12

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

(2) The overarching question is one of procedural efficiency. Factors that may

be relevant in this regard include:
(a) Whether the request is substantial or frivolous;

(b) Whether the request, if granted, would lead to a material

reduction in the proceedings at the next stage;

(c) Whether bifurcation is impractical in the sense that the issues are

too intertwined with the merits.”°

38. As to the determination of the Claimants’ investments, the Parties both proceed on

the basis that:

(3) (a) The existence and incidents of the rights acquired by Claimants are

to be determined by reference to Hungarian law; and,

(b) The questions whether those rights constitute investments and are
of a kind that are capable of giving rise to a claim of compensation
for expropriation are governed by international law, including the

Treaties and Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention.”

(4) In pleading as to the existence and incidents of the rights acquired by
Claimants, the Parties would both wish to adduce evidence, including expert

evidence.”

B. Respondent’s Request for Bifurcation

39. Against this background, Respondent submits that the Tribunal ought to order

bifurcation on the following grounds:

e Respondent’s jurisdictional objections are substantial not frivolous.

*© Respondent’s Request, [14]; Reply, [11], in each case citing Glamis Gold Ltd v United States of
America (UNCITRAL, Procedural Order No2 (revised), 31 May 2005), Ex. RA-33, [12].

’ Claimants’ Request for Arbitration, [19], cited supra [27]; Memorial, [291] — [292], cited supra [29];
Reply, [21], [29]; Respondent’s Request, [8].

* Reply, [31]; Respondent's letter dated 6 June 2013, 3rd para.

13

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

e If successful, they would dispose of the whole case. If not, they would
significantly ‘clarify the exact nature of the investment or rights against which

Hungary’s conduct would need to be assessed in the merits phase.’?

® There are numerous issues on the merits, the determination of which would
be lengthy and costly. These costs could be saved if Hungary were successful

on its jurisdictional challenge.

e The issues are distinct. The jurisdictional phase would focus on whether
Claimants had legally cognizable investments and rights capable of
expropriation and whether this dispute arises directly out of same. The merits
phase would focus on whether Hungary’s conduct of the 2009 Tender did
amount to expropriation and, if so, what damage was caused to Claimants as

a result.

e There would be no prejudice to Claimants other than delay that could be

compensated in costs if Claimants were successful.

Cc. Claimants’ Reply on Bifurcation

40. Claimants oppose bifurcation as causing delay and not procedural efficiency. They

submit that:

e Respondent’s proposed jurisdictional objections are ‘so unfounded in fact and
law as to be frivolous’; Claimants’ contractual and legal rights are

indisputably investments as are their shares in Slager; and,

Determination of the legal issues identified by Respondent would require
extensive evidence ‘regarding the existence of the legal rights at issue and the
manner in which they should have been implemented in the context of the 2009

Tender’,”* which questions are inextricably intertwined with the merits.

* Respondent's Request, [17].
?° Reply, [30].
** Ibid, [31].

14

Vi.

41.

42.

43.

44,

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

TRIBUNAL’S ANALYSIS

In the light of the foregoing, the Tribunal can now proceed to its analysis of the issue
of bifurcation, considering the merits of the Request, including its impact on the fair

and efficient conduct of these proceedings as a whole.

In the first place, it observes that this case is, following its Rule 41(5) Decision, solely
concerned with a claim for compensation for expropriation. To be sure, the source of
the legal right to claim for expropriation is found in two different bilateral treaties,
and the Claimants have also asserted a claim under the customary international law of
expropriation (which claim, and any jurisdictional objections thereto, the Tribunal has
joined to the merits). These differences notwithstanding, there are no other

substantive causes of action over which this Tribunal has jurisdiction.

In the second place, the essential consequence of this point is that it is of fundamental
importance that the Tribunal identify precisely whether, and if so which investments
of Claimants are capable of giving rise to their expropriation claim. This is so because,
if Respondent’s jurisdiction objection were to be upheld, the consequence would be
that the Tribunal would have no jurisdiction over the present case as a whole. Both
Article 25(1) of the ICSID Convention and the scope of the protection from
expropriation found in each of the Treaties are limited to ‘investments’ (in the latter
case as therein defined). But the same point is equally valid were the Tribunal to deny
Respondent’s objection. In that event, the Tribunal would need to determine the
nature and incidents of the rights held by Claimants that may be considered as
investments capable of enjoying the protection of international law against
expropriation before deciding whether Respondent’s conduct had in fact caused any
such expropriation. This would be so whether the proceedings were bifurcated or

joined.

In the third place, the existence and nature of any such rights must be determined in
the first instance by reference to Hungarian law, before the Tribunal proceeds to
decide whether any such rights can constitute investments capable of giving rise to a

claim for expropriation for the purpose of its jurisdiction under the Treaties and the

15

45.

46.

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

ICSID Convention. That is the basis upon which Claimants plead their case.

Respondent submits the same. The Tribunal agrees.”

In the fourth place, the nature of the claim pleaded by Claimants is that Respondent’s
conduct of the 2009 Tender resulted in the expropriation of its investment.
Respondent does not dispute that Claimants originally made an investment in
connection with the 1997 Broadcasting Agreement.” But Claimants advance no claim
about Respondent’s conduct prior to 2009. Equally, neither party disputes that
Claimants retained their rights under the Broadcasting Agreement including the
broadcasting licence until 18 November 2009.” The Claimants’ claim turns upon an
allegation that they held valuable rights, which in the circumstances entitled them to
renewal of their licence after 18 November 2009 ‘as long as Slager provided good
radio broadcasting services, complied with the Contract Framework and offered a
reasonable broadcast fee’, which rights were expropriated.*> The Claimants seek
compensation for the lost value of their investment in Slager consequent upon their
loss of the licence following the 2009 Tender. It follows that the material time at
which the Tribunal must assess the question of the rights and investments held by
Claimants is at the conduct of the 2009 Tender immediately prior to 18 November

2009.

In the fifth place, the precise nature and incidents of the rights and investments then
held by Claimants is distinct from the question as to whether such rights were
expropriated by Respondent. The first question is primarily a question of law: both
Hungarian law and international law. The second question would involve a close
consideration of the factual evidence—both documentary and witness testimony—as to
Respondent’s conduct of the 2009 Tender. In addition to the merits of the
expropriation claim, the Tribunal would also have to determine the quantum of any
compensation, if it were to decide that a right to compensation was engaged. These
aspects of the matter already occupy a substantial portion of the Memorial and its

voluminous supporting documentation, and would have to be the subject of pleading

?? Accord: Douglas International Law of Investment Claims (2009), Ex. RA-45, 52.

3 Respondent's Request, [11].
** Ibid, [5]; Reply, [19].
*5 Memorial [346], cited supra [31].

16

47.

48.

49.

50.

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

by way of Counter-Memorial and subsequent pleadings, with the possibility also of

requests for document production.

It will be apparent from the foregoing analysis that the Tribunal does not regard the
Respondent’s objection as frivolous. Rather, it raises a substantial question which

requires clarification in the interests of both the parties and the Tribunal.

The Tribunal has anxiously considered the issue of procedural efficiency. It is not
unmindful of the fact that the parties have already agreed to an alternative pleading
schedule that would enable determination of both jurisdiction and the merits in
February 2014 in the event that all issues were to be joined. An order for bifurcation,
with a hearing on jurisdiction in December 2013 will, in the event that Respondent is
unsuccessful in its jurisdictional challenge, inevitably lead to a significant delay in any

merits hearing.

On the other hand, the Tribunal must balance that factor against the consideration
that, if the Respondent were successful in its jurisdictional challenge, it would dispose
of the entire case. The Tribunal does not accept the Claimants’ submission that the
case must, on any scenario, proceed to the merits on the basis of the indirect
expropriation of Claimants’ shareholding in Slager.’° For the reasons developed in
paragraph 45 above, the Tribunal regards the issue before it on the case as presented
by Claimants as concerned with the nature of the rights held by Claimants in respect
of the award of a new broadcasting licence. In evaluating that question, the Tribunal
must consider the whole bundle of the Claimants’ rights. This includes, but is not
limited to, the shareholding. On the basis of this examination, it may then determine
whether these rights constitute an investment capable of protection from

expropriation.

The Tribunal considers that to defer the determination of that question to the merits
phase might lead to confusion and lack of clarity on a fundamental question. Indeed,
this very point is made in the Award of the Tribunal in Generation Ukraine Inc v
Ukraine, a decision cited by Claimants in their submissions.” In that case, the Tribunal

denied Respondent’s request to bifurcate.” At the conjoined hearing, the Tribunal

*° Reply, [7].
77 ICSID Case No.ARB/00/9, Award dated 16 September 2003; cited in Reply, [15] n11.
*8 Ibid, [4.24].

17

51.

52.

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

adverted to the fundamental need to identify the existence of proprietary rights giving
rise to a claim of expropriation, and the difficulties that it encountered, both as to

jurisdiction and the merits, in identifying the legal basis for the claims advanced.”

The Tribunal has also considered the practicality of determining the nature of
Claimants’ rights or investments at a preliminary stage and the risk of overlap or
duplication with any subsequent merits phase were Respondent to be unsuccessful.
Of course, in one sense, as the treatment of the issues in Generation Ukraine
illustrates, the question of the nature of the investment can go both to jurisdiction
and to the merits. It follows that, in the present case, any determination by the

Tribunal as to the question would have to be dispositive on either basis. That is to say:

(a) In the event that the Tribunal were to decide that the Claimants had, at the
material time, no rights constituting an investment which could be expropriated (or
that the dispute did not arise directly out of such investment), then the Tribunal
would be obliged to render an award deciding that the dispute is not within the
jurisdiction of the Centre or within its own competence, as required by Arbitration

Rule 41(6).

(b) In the event that the Tribunal were to decide that the Claimants had, at the
material time, rights which did constitute an investment (and that the present dispute
arises directly out of such investment), it would overrule the Respondent’s objection
and hold that the Centre and the Tribunal do have jurisdiction over the present
dispute. In that event, the Tribunal’s decision as to the nature and incidents of
Claimants’ investment would also be final for the purpose of the merits phase of the

case.

This point was well elucidated by Judge Higgins in her Separate Opinion in the

International Court of Justice in Oil Platforms, when she said:”

Where the Court has to decide, on the basis of a treaty whose application
and interpretation is contested, whether it has jurisdiction, that decision
must be definitive....lt does not suffice, in the making of this definitive
decision, for the Court to decide that it has heard claims relating to the

 

* ibid, [8.8]-[8.14], [18.1]-[18.2].
*° Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v United States of America) (Preliminary Objection) [1996] ICJ
Rep 803, Higgins Separate Opinion, [31].

18

53.

54.

55.

56.

Vil.

57.

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

various articles that are “arguable questions” or that are “bona fide
questions of interpretation”...

The same point was made in the investment arbitration context by the Tribunal in UPS

v Canada when it held:**

[A]ny ruling about the legal meaning of the jurisdictional provision, for
instance about its outer limits, is binding on the parties.

The Tribunal will be assisted in reaching such a final determination by the expert

evidence as to Hungarian law that both parties propose to adduce.

But the Tribunal does consider that this issue can and should be separated from the
questions of whether Respondent’s acts constituted expropriation, and, if so, the

consequences of that in terms of compensation.

The Claimants will not be prejudiced by bifurcation, other than in the increased costs
occasioned by the jurisdiction application and consequent delay in the event that they
are successful in opposing it. It is within the discretion of the Tribunal, as Respondent

accepts, to compensate Claimants for these costs.

DECISION

Accordingly, for these reasons, the Tribunal hereby decides that:

(1) There shall be a preliminary hearing on Respondent's jurisdictional

objection, namely as to the questions:

(a) What rights, if any, did Claimants have under Hungarian law in
2009 in respect of the renewal of their broadcasting licence for any

period after 18 November 2009;

(b) To what extent, if at all, did those rights constitute an investment
for the purpose of the jurisdiction of the Centre under Article 25 of

the ICSID Convention and an investment capable of giving rise to a

* United Parcel Service of America Inc v Canada (Award on Jurisdiction) (2002) 7 ICSID Rep 285, 297.

19

ICSID Case No ARB/12/2 Emmis v Hungary Decision on Bifurcation 13.06.13

claim for expropriation within the competence of this Tribunal

under the Treaties; and,

(c) Does the present dispute arise directly out of such investment for

the purpose of Article 25?

(2) For this purpose, the pleading and hearing schedule set forth in scenario A
provided in paragraph 8.12.1 of PO No1 as inserted by PO No2 (and as
varied by agreement between the Parties on 28 April 2013) shall apply.

(3) All proceedings on the merits shall be suspended pending the hearing and

decision on this objection.

(4) The costs of and occasioned by this application shall be reserved.

ON BEHALF OF THE TRIBUNAL

[Signed]

Professor C A McLachlan QC

(President)

Date: 13 June 2013

20

