INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

 

RECTIFICATION OF THE DECISION ON ANNULMENT
OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE

 

ICSID Case No. ARB/03/4 — Rectification Proceeding

Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. and Indalsa Perti, S.A.

 

v.

The Republic of Peru

before the ad hoc Committee composed of:
Justice Hans Danelius, President

Sir Franklin Berman, Member of the Committee
Prof. Andrea Giardina, Member of the Committee

Date of dispatch to the parties: 30 November 2007

THE AD HOC COMMITTEE

Composed as above,

After deliberation,

Makes the following decision:

1. On 24 December 2002, arbitration proceedings were instituted under the Convention on
the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States in respect to a
dispute between Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. (then known as Empresas Lucchetti, S.A.)
and Indalsa Pert, S.A. (then known as Lucchetti Pert, S.A.). The Arbitral Tribunal, constituted
on | August 2003, rendered its Award on 7 February 2005. On 1 July 2005, the Secretary-
General of ICSID registered an application for annulment of the Award submitted by the
Claimants. On 17 November 2005, the ad hoc Committee was constituted. On 5 September
2007, the ad hoc Committee rendered its Decision on Annulment by a majority of the Committee

Members; Sir Franklin Berman rendered a dissenting opinion.

2. On 11 October 2007, Judge Stephen M. Schwebel, co-counsel for the Republic of Peru,
submitted, on behalf of the Republic of Peru, a Request for rectification of the Decision of the ad
hoc Committee dated 5 September 2007 (the “Decision’’), pursuant to Article 49(2) of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 49 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

3. This Request related to a single error in the Decision. According to the Respondent, the
error consisted of the misstatement on page 3 of the Decision of the affiliation of Judge
Schwebel, co-counsel for the Respondent. The Decision refers to “The Republic of Peru,
represented by Mr. Miguel Talavera and Mr. Renzo Villa (Embassy of Peru in Washington D.C.),
and Judge Stephen Schwebel, Mr. Daniel M. Price, Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov, Mr. Nicolas
Lloreda, Ms. Sharon H. Yuan and Mr. Michael Smart (Sidley Austin).” However, Judge
Schwebel submitted that, as a representative of the Republic of Peru, he acted independently and
not as a member of the Sidley Austin legal team. Judge Schwebel thus requested that the passage
in question be corrected so as to read: “The Republic of Peru, represented by Mr. Miguel

Talavera and Mr. Renzo Villa (Embassy of Peru in Washington, D.C.).; Judge Stephen M.

Schwebel of Washington, D.C.; and Mr. Daniel M. Price, Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov, Mr.
Nicolas Lloreda, Ms. Sharon H. Yuan and Mr. Michael J. Smart (Sidley Austin).”

4. On 15 October 2007 the Secretary-General registered the Request, pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 49(2)(a). On the same date, the Secretary-General, in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 49(2)(b), notified the parties of the registration of the Request and, in accordance
with ICSID Arbitration Rule 49(2)(c) and (d), transmitted copies of the Request to the Claimants

and to the members of the ad hoc Committee.

5. By an electronic mail, dated 15 October 2007, counsel for the Claimants indicated that

the Claimants had no objection to the rectification requested by the Respondent.

6. The ad hoc Committee has taken note of Peru’s Request for Rectification and of the
Claimants’ lack of objections thereof. In accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 49(3), the
members of the ad hoc Committee have agreed that it would not be necessary for them to meet in

order to consider the Request.

7. The ad hoc Committee has taken into consideration Article 49(2) of the ICSID

Convention, in accordance with which the Request is made, which reads, in pertinent part:

“The Tribunal upon the request of a party made within 45 days after the date on which
the award was rendered may after notice to the other party decide any question which it
had omitted to decide in the award, and shall rectify any clerical, arithmetical or similar
error in the award. Its decision shall become part of the award and shall be notified to

the parties in the same manner as the award. (...)”

8. Having considered Peru’s Request and the Claimants’ lack of objections, the ad hoc
Committee unanimously decides to grant the Request for Rectification, thereby amending the
third paragraph (“Respondent”) of page 3 of the Decision on Annulment of 5 September 2007

which shall read as follows:

“Respondent: The Republic of Peru, represented by Mr. Miguel Talavera and Mr. Renzo
Villa (Embassy of Peru in Washington, D.C.); Judge Stephen M. Schwebel of

Washington, D.C.; and Mr. Daniel M. Price’, Mr. Stanimir A. Alexandrov, Mr. Nicolds
Lloreda, Ms. Sharon H. Yuan and Mr. Michael J. Smart (Sidley Austin).”

9. For the purpose of ICSID Arbitration Rule 49(4) in connection with the matters indicated
in Arbitration Rule 47(1)(a-g), and in accordance with Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention, the
present decision refers to the terms of the Decision on Annulment dated 5 September 2007 and

constitutes an integral part of it.

 

So decided.

[Signed] [Signed]
Sir Franklin Berman, Q.C. Professor Andrea Giardina
Date: [/3 November 2007] Date: [27 November 2007]

Signed

Justice Hans Danelius

Date: [3 November 2007]

? Counsel of record until 9 July 2007.

