EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

Arbitration pursuant to the
Canada-Ecuador Bilateral Investment Treaty

and the UNCITRAL Rules

EnCana Corporation

(Claimant)
versus

Republic of Ecuador
(Respondent)

Partial Award on Jurisdiction

Professor James Crawford, President
Mr. Horacio Grigera Naén
Mr. Patrick Barrera Sweeney

Secretariat

London Court of International Arbitration

27 February 2004

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

Partial Award on Jurisdiction

A. Introduction

1. By Notice of Arbitration dated 14 March 2003, EnCana Corporation (Encana)
commenced these proceedings against the Government of the Republic of Ecuador
pursuant to Article XIII(2) of the Canada-Ecuador Agreement for the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection of Investments, concluded on 29 April 1996 (the BIT).' In its
Notice, Encana alleged that Ecuador’s action in denying certain value added tax (VAT)
relief to certain of its subsidiaries violated provisions of the BIT.? It sought
declarations to that effect as well as consequential relief, including reimbursement of

tax credits already denied or which might be denied in future as a result of Ecuador’s

policy.

2. Article XIII of the BIT provides for disputes concerning covered investments to
be submitted, at the investor’s election, to arbitration under the ICSID Convention (if
both the Respondent State and the State of the investor’s nationality are parties to the
Convention), under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules (if only one is a party), or
under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. Ecuador is but Canada is not a party to the
ICSID Convention. EnCana elected UNCITRAL arbitration.

3. At an initial teleconference held on 4 September 2003 between the Members of
the Tribunal and the parties, agreement was reached on a number of issues related to
the conduct of the arbitration. These were embodied in Procedural Order No. 1 of 9
September 2003. In particular it was agreed (a) that the place of arbitration would be
London, without. prejudice to the power of the Tribunal to hold hearings and to

deliberate in any other appropriate place, in accordance with Article 16 of the Rules;

2027 UNTS 196 (in force, 6 June 1997).

The two subsidiaries are AEC Ecuador Ltd. (“AEC”) and City Oriente [.td. (“Oriente”), Both
are Bermudan corporations, described by the Claimant as “indirect wholly owned subsidiaries of
EnCana”: Notice of Arbitration, para. 7.

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

(b) that the Registrar would be the London Court of International Arbitration, (c) that
the languages of the arbitration would be English and Spanish, and (d) that the
Respondent would file a summary Statement of Defence, and a detailed statement of its
Preliminary Objections, by 27 October 2003. This was duly done. Subsequently, in
accordance with a further procedural order, the Claimant on 8 December 2003 filed its

Written Observations on the Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objections.

4, Following the filing of written pleadings on the jurisdictional objections, the
Tribunal held a hearing at the premises of the LCIA in London on 5 January 2004. The

Parties were represented as follows:

For the Claimant:

Mr Michael Barrack

Mr Riyaz Dattu

McCarthy Tétrault LLP

Box 48, Suite 4700, Toronto Dominion Bank Tower,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada MSK 1E6

Mr Barry Gilchrist, EnCana, Vice-President, Commercial Services

Mr John Keplinger, EnCanEcuador, General Manager

Mr John V Harries, QC, Senior Legal Advisor, Offshore & International
Operations, Encana Corporation

For the Respondent:

Mr Eric Ordway

Mr Charles E Roh, Jr

Weil, Gotshal & Manges, LLP
2 Rue De La Baume,

Paris 75008, France

Mr Augustin Hurtado Larrea, Bustamante & Bustamante,
Ms Elsa De Mena, Director General, Servicio de Rentas Intemas

4. Immediately after the jurisdictional hearing, certain measures were taken by the
Respondent to enforce recovery of approximately $7.5 m. in respect of VAT refunds
alleged to have been wrongly made. EnCana immediately sought provisional
measures. Written submissions were made by both parties and a telecon held on 13

January 2004 to deal with the request for provisional measures. After receiving certain

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

clarifications as to the capacity of the relevant EnCana subsidiary and of its legal
representative to contest the measures taken, the Tribunal ruled that there was no
necessity to indicate provisional measures in order to protect the rights at stake in this
arbitration from irreparable harm. In these circumstances, the Tribunal noted, it did not

need to determine whether there was an apparent basis for jurisdiction in respect of

EnCana’s claim.?

6. In light of the arguments of the parties, it is necessary to consider first the
questions concerning consent to arbitration and waiver of domestic proceedings
(Section B). The Tribunal will then tum to the question of its subject matter
jurisdiction, in particular as it concerns the exception for revenue measures in Article
XII of the BIT (Section C). Finally it will deal with certain outstanding procedural

issues (Section D).

B Issues of Consent and Waiver
7. Article XIII of the BIT provides in part as follows:

Article XI

Settlement of Disputes between an Investor and the Host Contracting
Party

1, Any dispute between one Contracting Party and an investor of
the other Contracting Party, relating to a claim by the investor that a
measure taken or not taken by the former Contracting Party is in breach
of this Agreement, and that the investor has incurred loss or damage by
reason of, or arising out of, that breach, shall, to the extent possible, be
settled amicably between them.

2. If a dispute has not been settled amicably within a period of six
months from the date on which it was initiated, it may be submitted by
the investor to arbitration in accordance with paragraph (4). For the
purposes of this paragraph, a dispute is considered to be initiated when
the investor of one Contracting Party has delivered notice in writing to
the other Contracting Party alleging that a measure taken or not taken by

 

3 Request for Interim Measures of Protection, Interim Award, 31 January 2004, paras, 19. 20.

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

the latter Contracting Party is in breach of this Agreement, and that the
investor has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that
breach,

3. An investor may submit a dispute as referred to in paragraph (1)
to arbitration in accordance with paragraph (4) only if:

(a) The investor has consented in writing thereto;

(b) The investor has waived its right to initiate or continue any other
proceedings in relation to the measure that is alleged to be in breach of
this Agreement before the courts or tribunals of the Contracting Party
concerned or in a dispute settlement procedure of any kind;

(c) If the matter involves taxation, the conditions specified in
paragraph 5 of Article XII have been fulfilled; and

(d) Not more than three years have elapsed from the date on which
the investor first acquired, or should have first acquired, knowledge of
the alleged breach and knowledge that the investor has incurred loss or
damage.

4. The dispute may, at the election of the investor concemed, be
submitted to arbitration under:

(a) The International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID), established pursuant to the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other
States, opened for signature at Washington 18 March, 19651 (ICSID
Convention), provided that both the disputing Contracting Party and the
Contracting Party of the investor are parties to the ICSID Convention;

or
(b) The Additional Facility Rules of ICSID, provided that either the
disputing Contracting Party or the Contracting Party of the investor, but
not both, is a party to the ICSID Convention;

or

(c) An international arbitrator or ad hoc arbitration tribunal
established under the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL).

5. Each Contracting Party hereby gives its unconditional consent to
the submission of a dispute to international arbitration in accordance
with the provisions of this Article.

12. (a) A claim that a Contracting Party is in breach of this
Agreement, and that an enterprise that is a juridical person incorporated
or duly constituted in accordance with applicable laws of that
Contracting Party has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising
out of, that breach, may be brought by an investor of the other
Contracting Party acting on behalf of an enterprise which the investor
owns or controls directly or indirectly. In such a case:

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

(i) Any award shall be made to the affected enterprise;
(ii) | The consent to arbitration of both the investor and the
enterprise shall be required;
(iii) Both the investor and enterprise must waive any right to
initiate or continue any other proceedings in relation to the
measure that is alleged to be in breach of this Agreement before
the courts or tribunals of the Contracting Party concerned or in a
dispute settlement procedure of any kind; and
(iv) The investor may not make a claim if more than three
years have elapsed from the date on which the enterprise first
acquired, or should have first acquired, knowledge of the alleged
breach and knowledge that it has incurred loss or damage.
(b) Notwithstanding subparagraph 12(a), where a disputing
Contracting Party has deprived a disputing investor of control of an
enterprise, the following shall not be required:
(i) | A consent to arbitration by the enterprise under 12(a)(ii);
and
(ii) | A waiver from the enterprise under 12(a)(iii).”

8 Article I sets out certain definitions:

“(b) ‘Enterprise’ means
(i) Any entity constituted or organized under applicable law,
whether or not for profit, whether privately-owned or
governmentally-owned, including any corporation, trust,
partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture or other
association; and
(ii) A branch of any such entity;

(g) ‘Investment’ means any kind of asset owned or controlled either
directly, or indirectly through an investor of a third State, by an investor
of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting Party in
accordance with the latter’s laws and, in particular, though not
exclusively, includes:
(i) Movable and immovable property and any related
property rights, such as mortgages, liens or pledges;
(ii) Shares, stock, bonds and debentures or any other form of
participation in a company, business enterprise or joint venture;
(iii) Money, claims to money, and claims to performance
under contract having a financial value;
(iv) Goodwill;
(v) Intellectual property rights;
(vi) Rights, conferred by law or under contract, to undertake
any economic and commercial activity, including any rights to
search for, cultivate, extract or exploit natural resources, but does
not mean real estate or other property, tangible or intangible, not

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

acquired in the expectation or used for the purpose of economic

benefit or other business purposes.
Any change in the form of an investment does not affect its character as

an investment.

(h) ‘Investor’ means

In the case of Canada: .
(i) Any natural person possessing the citizenship of or
permanently residing in Canada in accordance with its laws; or
(ii) Any enterprise incorporated or duly constituted in accordance
with applicable laws of Canada, who makes the investment in the
territory of the Republic of Ecuador; and

In the case of the Republic of Ecuador:
(i) Any natural person who is a national of Ecuador pursuant

to its legislation; or

(ii) Any enterprise organized in accordance with the laws and
regulations of Ecuador, with domicile in the territory of Ecuador
who makes the investment in the territory of Canada and who
does not possess the citizenship of Canada;”,

9. In its Notice of Arbitration, the Claimant asserted that “this Notice of
Arbitration and Statement of Claim constitutes EnCana’s consent to and demand for
such arbitration under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules” (para. 4); further, that
“EnCana has waived its right to initiate or continue any other proceedings” under
Article XIIJ(3)(b) of the Treaty” (para. 5). No separate instrument of waiver was

tendered.

10. The Respondent argued that the consent and waiver required by Article XIII(3)
of the BIT are effectively conditions precedent to submission to arbitration, and that
these could not be validly‘given in the Notice of Arbitration itself but must take the

form of separate documents duly executed.
11, It is necessary to deal separately with this argument as it concerns consent and
waiver.

(i) aimant’s Consent to Arbitration und icle 3a

12. Article XIII(3)(a) provides that a dispute may be submitted to arbitration “only

if’ the investor “has consented in writing thereto” (“solamente si... el inversionista ha

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

dado su consentimiento por escrito a dicho tramite”). The question is whether consent
can be given in the Notice of Arbitration itself or whether it is a distinct condition
precedent to the filing of such a Notice. Article XIII does not provide a direct answer
to that question, The use of the past tense (“has consented’/“ha dado su
consentimiento”) might suggest that consent must be given prior to submission. On the
other hand the investor must authorize the filing of the Notice, and thus any temporal

implication of the term “has consented” would be fulfilled in any event.

13. In the Tribunal’s view the decisive consideration is that consent to arbitrate
under Article XIII of the BIT is given vis-a-vis the Tribunal itself, by an instrument
which (assuming it has been properly authorised, proof of which can be required in
case of doubt) is by definition opposable to the Claimant for the purposes of the
proceedings. The Tribunal has authority to determine its jurisdiction under the
UNCITRAL Rules,* something it would have in any event under general international
law. Unless otherwise specifically provided in the BIT, one would normally look for a
statement of consent to arbitrate in the Notice of Arbitration itself, the document by

which the arbitration is commenced.

14. It may be noted that Chapter 11 of NAFTA has a specific provision dealing with
the procedure by which consent to arbitration is to be given. In accordance with Article
1121(3) the consent “shall be in writing, shall be delivered to the disputing Party and
shall be included in the submission of the claim to arbitration”. Yet even under Article
1121, which specifies that consent is one of the “conditions precedent” to submission
of a claim to arbitration and which requires a separate delivery of the consent to the
disputing party, it has been held that expression of consent to arbitrate contained in the
Notice of Arbitration is sufficient. As the Tribunal said in the Ethyl case:
“Tt is clear that Ethyl has consented to this arbitration by the very act of

commencing it. Normally such act is taken as consent to the arbitration
thereby initiated.”

‘ UNCITRAL Rules, Art. 21(1) & (2).
‘ Cf. Article XIII(7) of the BIT.
° Ethyl Corporation v Government of Canada (Award on Jurisdiction) (1999) 38 ILM 708, 734

(para 59) citing Schreuer..,

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

15. _ It is significant that there is no equivalent to Article 1121(3) in the BIT, which
in other respects draws rather extensively on the language of Chapter 11, In the
absence of any provision to the contrary in the governing instrument, consent to
arbitration given in the Notice of Arbitration is binding on the Claimant. The Tribunal
concludes that Article XIII(3)(a) is satisfied in this case.

(ii) Claimant’s Waiver of Further Proceedings under Article XIII(3)(b'

16. At the time it commenced this arbitration the Claimant decided to waive further
proceedings before Ecuadorian courts, both with respect to itself and its two
subsidiaries, AEC and Oriente. Once again, this waiver was expressed only in the
Notice of Arbitration, not in a separately executed instrument, although subsequently
the Claimant took steps to withdraw pending proceedings of the subsidiaries acting on
the basis of its decision to waive. Again the Respondent objects that the waiver by the
Claimant was not in conformity with Article XIIJ(3)(b) of the BIT.

17. There is no relevant difference between the language of sub-paragraphs (a) and
(b) of Article XIII(3): in both the past tense is used (“has consented in writing
thereto...”; “has waived its right to initiate or continue any other proceedings”/“‘ha
dado su consentimiento por escrito a dicho tramite”; “ha renunciado a su derecho a
iniciar o continuar cualquier otro procedimiento”). But there is an important difference
between the two requirements in terms of their context. In the case of arbitration under
the BIT the Notice of Arbitration is integral to the proceedings of the Tribunal. In the
case of waiver of altemative remedies, the waiver has to be effective vis-a-vis the other
court or tribunal concerned, and the case for a distinct, formally-executed document is
stronger. Furthermore the waiver will continue to have effect even after the

international arbitration is concluded. It is not temporary.

18. Thus it is arguable that the waiver required by Article XIII(3)(b) should take the
form of a separate legal instrument. It is true that (as the Tribunal in Waste

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision
Management (No. 1) noted’) what use the parties make of the waiver and the effect
given to it are not this Tribunal’s business. But as a condition for the commencement
of the present arbitration the waiver must be in a form which is capable of being given
effect to in other tribunals. The Respondent thus has good grounds for seeking a
separate formal instrument duly attested by the Claimant and not merely a statement in

pleadings signed by counsel retained in the arbitration.

19. But the Respondent does not argue that the absence of a separate instrument
affects the jurisdiction of this Tribunal and it is therefore unnecessary to ask the
question which arose in Waste Management (No. 1)—a case which was anyway very
different on the facts—whether a defective waiver invalidates the Request for
Arbitration.® The Respondent merely asks that if the matter is to proceed to the merits,
a separate formal instrument be required. In the Tribunal’s view this is a reasonable

stipulation,

20. In the course of oral argument the Claimant clarified that the present arbitration
is not brought by it on behalf of its two subsidiaries under Article XIII(12)(a). The
reason is obvious enough: the subsidiaries are Bermudan, not Ecuadorian corporations.
Article XIII(12) only applies to claims for loss to “an enterprise that is a juridical
person incorporated or duly constituted in accordance with applicable laws of” the
Respondent State. The Claimant brings these proceedings in its own right as an
investor, on the basis that it holds assets in Ecuador “indirectly through an investor of a
third State”, i.e. through its Bermudan subsidiaries (see the definition of “investment”
in Article I(g)). It might be thought anomalous that subsidiaries incorporated in the
host State must waive local remedies while subsidiaries incorporated in a third State
need not do so. This may have been why the subsidiaries have themselves acted in
accordance with the waiver by terminating local proceedings. But the contrast between
the language of Article XIII(12)(a) and Article I(g) is clear and must be respected. The

waiver or discontinuance of further proceedings by AEC and Oriente was not necessary

7 Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States, Award of 2 June 2000, 5 ICSID Reports
442, 453 (para. 15).

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

in terms of the BIT, and it has no relevance so far as concems the ‘Tribunal’s

jurisdiction over these proceedings.
on The Tribunal’s Subject Matter Jurisdiction over the Present Dispute

21. The Tribunal turns to the considerably more difficult group of questions

concerning its subject-matter jurisdiction over the present dispute.

22. The principles to be applied in determining whether a claim brought under a
treaty fall within the jurisdiction of a tribunal established by the treaty are well known

and do not seem to be disputed between the parties.

23. In the first place, the Treaty itself must be applied in accordance with normal
principles of treaty interpretation, since it is by reference to the treaty that the consent

of the parties to arbitrate must have been given, if jurisdiction exists at all.

24. Secondly, at the jurisdictional stage the Tribunal should in principle take the
Claimant’s case as pleaded, although it is entitled to take into account other facts not in

dispute which bear on any question of characterisation of the dispute.

25. — Thirdly, the test for jurisdiction is in principle objective and does not depend on
the disputed assertion of the Claimant that an issue under one or another provision of

the BIT is raised. As an ICSID Tribunal recently put it:

“Tt is not enough that the Claimant raises an issue under one or more
provisions of the BIT which the Respondent disputes. To adapt the
words of the International Court in the Oil Platforms case, the Tribunal
‘must ascertain whether the violations of the [BIT] pleaded by [the
Claimant] do or do not fall within the provisions of the Treaty and

 

 

s See the discussion in Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States (No. 2), Decision on
Preliminary Objection, 26 June 2002, 6 ICSID Reports 549, 552-3 (paras. 12-14).

-ll-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

whether, as a consequence, the dispute is one which the [reibunal] has
jurisdiction ratione materiae to entertain’ pursuant to... the B
In performing this task the tribunal is entitled to give a definitive interpretation of the

treaty if doing so will resolve the question of jurisdiction one way or another.

26. Fourthly, the tribunal should definitively resolve jurisdictional issues if it is
possible to do so at the preliminary stage. In the words of Article 21(4) of the
UNCITRAL Rules:
“In general, the arbitral tribunal should rule on a plea concerning its
jurisdiction as a preliminary question. However, the arbitral tribunal
may proceed with the arbitration and rule on such a plea in their final
award.”
Reasons for joining jurisdiction to the merits may include the existence of factual
disputes relevant to issues of legal characterisation and thus to jurisdiction. But a
respondent should only be required to go to the cost and expense of defending the
merits of a claim (in a case where jurisdiction has not yet been established) if there is a
reasonable prospect that jurisdiction will be held to exist. In this regard the injunction
as to costs in Article 40(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules takes on additional significance.

(1) The Claimant’s case

27. The Claimant through its subsidiaries is a party to a series of oil contracts with
the Ecuadorian State Petroleum Company, Petroecuador. These entitle the subsidiaries
to a share of oil produced from each field covered by the contracts. The amount of this
share depends on the amount of oil produced and is determined on the basis of a
negotiated formula, with higher shares associated with higher production. But in
relation to several fields no share was negotiated for production above 15,000 barrels
per day (bpd). At the time the contracts were concluded these fields were producing

much less than that, Subsequently, however, production increased dramatically and

° SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines (ARB 02/06), decision
of 31 January 2004, para. 26, citing Case concerning Oil Platforms. Islamic Republic of Iran v. United
States of America, 1CJ Reports 1996 p. 803 at 810 (para. 16).

-12-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

now exceeds 42,000 bpd. In 1999 and 2001, respectively, two of the contracts were

renegotiated to include a participation factor based on this higher production.

28. The nub of the Claimant’s grievance is that, shortly after the contracts were so
amended, the Ecuadorian tax service (IRS) changed the way in which it allows VAT
rebates for goods and services used in connection with the production of oil for export.
The effect was to disentitle the subsidiaries and other foreign oil companies from
reclaiming VAT on purchases as they had formerly done.!? According to the Claimant
the change amounts to the imposition of a new tax on the inputs of oil companies (but
not on the producers of other goods for export) and has the effect of negating the
advantages reasonably expected to derive from the newly negotiated participation
factors in the contracts. In substance the Claimants allege that the Government, having
with one hand granted a benefit related to the fruits of their substantial investment in
the Ecuadorian oil industry, then acted with another hand to withdraw much or all of

the benefit granted, and that doing so is a breach of the BIT.

29, In addition to denying VAT rebates on future acquisitions, IRS has also acted to
reclaim VAT refunds in its view wrongly paid. Certain enforcement action taken in
this respect was the subject of the provisional measures application dealt with in the
Tribunal’s decision of 31 January 2004.'! However the Claimant does not take any
separate point as to the substance of the refund issue, the merits of which appear to

stand or fall with its general case on treatment.

30. The Respondent rejects the claim on a variety of grounds and disputes its factual
basis. In particular, it denies that the participation factor under the contracts has any
relevance to liability to VAT or entitlement to VAT refunds. This is in its view a pure
question of internal tax law, and it stresses that this Tribunal is not a court of appeal

from the decisions of the tax courts of Ecuador.

e The only domestic Ecuadorian oil company is Petroecuador, which as a public sector entity is
not liable to VAT.
" See paragraph 5 above.

-13-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

31. | Moreover Ecuador says that the dispute concems taxation measures and as such
is exempted from the scope of the BIT by Article XII(1) unless it involves either the
breach of an agreement with a central government authority of the host State (Article
XII(3)) or conduct tantamount to expropriation (Article XII(4)). The Claimant does not
allege breach of an agreement covered by Article XII(3), and although it does allege an
expropriation, in the Respondent’s view the latter claim is unsustainable on the facts
and should be dismissed forthwith. The Respondent concludes that the Tribunal lacks

subject matter jurisdiction over the Claimant’s case in its entirety.

(2) Relevant provisions of the BIT

32. Before addressing these issues it is necessary to set out the relevant provisions

of the BIT, which are as follows:
“Article I. Definitions

For the purpose of this Agreement:

(i) ‘Measure’ includes any law, regulation, procedure, requirement,
or practice; ...

Article II. Establishment, Acquisition and Protection of Investments

2. Each Contracting Party shall accord investments or returns of
investors of the other Contracting Party:

(a) Fair and equitable treatment in accordance with principles of
international law, and

(b) Full protection and security.
Article VIII. Expropriation

1. Investments or returns of investors of either Contracting Party
shall not be nationalized, expropriated or subjected to measures having
an effect equivalent to nationalization or expropriation (hereinafter
referred to as ‘expropriation’) in the territory of the other Contracting
Party, except for a public purpose, under due process of law, in a non-
discriminatory manner and against prompt, adequate and effective
compensation. Such compensation shall be based on the genuine value
of the investment or returns expropriated immediately before the
expropriation or at the time the proposed expropriation became public

-i4-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

knowledge, whichever is the earlier, shall be payable from the date of
expropriation at a normal commercial rate of interest, shall be paid
without delay and shall be effectively realizable and freely transferable.

Article XII. Taxation Measures

1 Except as set out in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall
apply to taxation measures.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations
of the Contracting Parties under any tax convention. In the event of any
inconsistency between the provisions of this Agreement and any such
convention, the provisions of that convention apply to the extent of the
inconsistency.

3. Subject to paragraph (2), a claim by an investor that a tax
measure of a Contracting Party is in breach of an agreement between the
central government authorities of a Contracting Party and the investor
concerning an investment shall be considered a claim for breach of this
Agreement unless the taxation authorities of the Contracting Parties, no
later than six months after being notified of the claim by the investor,
jointly determine that the measure does not contravene such agreement.

4. Article VIII may be applied to a taxation measure unless the
taxation authorities of the Contracting Parties, no later than six months
after being notified by an investor that he disputes a taxation measure,
jointly determine that the measure is not an expropriation.

5. If the taxation authorities of the Contracting Parties fail to reach
the joint determinations specified in paragraphs (3) and (4) within six
months after being notified, the investor may submit its claim for
resolution under Article XIII.”

33. Before commencing this arbitration the Claimant gave notice to the taxation
authorities of the Contracting Parties and no joint determination was made by them
within 6 months under Article XTI(4). This is a simple fact from which the Tribunal
draws no conclusion, one way or another, as to its jurisdiction. An investor's referral
of a matter to the taxation authorities may be made out of an abundance of caution.
Those authorities may refrain from making a joint determination, whether because the
issue is best left to the Tribunal or for some other reason. The only point is that in the
present case the procedural requirements of Articles XII(5) and XIII(3)(c) have been

satisfied.

-15-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

(3) The issues for the Tribunal

34. | Turing to the issues before the Tribunal, the positions of the parties as to the
characterisation of the present claim are sharply opposed. According to the Claimant,
the ial dispute the meaning of the participation factors agreed under the
oil contracts; in particular, whether they were concluded on the assumption of a certain
fiscal balance conceming the existing practice of VAT recovery. At most, in the
Claimant’s view, the dispute concerns the relationship between the participation factors
and VAT liability, and therefore falls partly within and partly outside the scope of
Article XII(1): “the measures in issue involve conduct on the part of Ecuador which is
both inside and outside the VAT regime... The conduct outside the VAT regime
constitutes measures and those measures are not taxation measures.”'? The Claimant
makes what is perhaps the same point in another way: it argues that there is agreement
at the level of principle “that EnCana is entitled to be reimbursed in respect of VAT
paid in respect of inputs to exports”, and the only disagreement concerns whether the
participation factors already allow for these costs.'? A dispute as to the content and
meaning of the oil contracts is not a dispute, or at least not exclusively a dispute, as to a

taxation measure within the meaning of the BIT.

35. By contrast the Respondent denies that the participation factors have any
relevance whatever to VAT liability, which depends on nothing but the interpretation of
the tax laws of Ecuador. Accordingly the dispute falls squarely within the exemption

for taxation measures in Article XTII(1).

36. At the stage of jurisdiction this Tribunal would have to be clear that the
characterisation offered by the Respondent is plainly correct. Subject to what is said in
paragraphs 23-26 above, a claimant is entitled to a decision on the merits of its claim if
its characterisation of the dispute—being a characterisation relevant to jurisdiction—is
reasonably arguable, whether or not it is the preferable characterisation and whether or

not the tribunal (if it had to make an immediate decision on the point) would be

2 Transcript, 5 January 2004, 48.
" Ibid., 48-9,

-16-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

inclined to accept it. In this respect the Tribunal would note that it does not have
before it expert evidence of Ecuadorian law, and that the meaning of relevant terms in
the Ecuadorian tax laws, to which reference has been made, would appear to be at least

arguable.

37. But however that may be, it emerges that the Supreme Court of Ecuador (Tax
Chamber) has left open the relationship between VAT liability and the participation
factors. In a decision of 13 November 2003 in proceedings brought by a United States
oil company, Bellwhether International Inc., the Court decided to set aside a decision
dated 18 November 2002 from the First Tax Court, which had upheld a Ruling from the
Ecuadorean General Director of the IRS denying a VAT tax refund to the claimant.
The reason why the Supreme Court set aside the decision was that the First Tax Court
failed to properly take into account the claimant’s argument that, contrary to the IRS’s
understanding, the VAT payments made by the claimant had not been refunded through
the reimbursement of costs and expenses the claimant was entitled to through its share
in the hydrocarbons extracted as a result of its oil operations in Ecuador. Accordingly,
the Ecuadorean Supreme Court remitted the case to the First Tax Court for it to revisit
the merits of its decision by properly taking into account this issue and any facts related
thereto and to render a new decision on the claimant’s VAT refund claims. It emerges
from this decision that, also from the perspective of Ecuador’s highest court, the
questions whether oil and gas operators exporting hydrocarbons from Ecuador are
entitled to be compensated for VAT tax refunds through their share in extracted
hydrocarbons, whether such 'share fully covers such tax refunds, and whether Ecuador
is bound by undertakings within or without the tax system to maintain oil and gas
operators exporting hydrocarbons whole in respect of VAT tax payments, are issues
that still remain open. It follows that the Respondent’s characterisation of the present
dispute as one related exclusively to taxation measures cannot be upheld, at this stage
of the procedure, as clearly correct. In the absence of clearer evidence and fuller
argument on the point, it remains open for the issues to be considered by this Arbitral
Tribunal according to the provisions of the BIT and applicable rules of international

law (Article XIII(7) of the BIT).

-17-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

38. For these reasons the Tribunal is not satisfied that it has sufficient material
before it to enable it to definitively decide the disputed issue of characterisation on
which its jurisdiction depends. To put it another way, it is arguable that at least certain
aspects of the claim are not exempted from the scope of the BIT by Article XII(1), yet
on the material available to it the Tribunal is not able to determine whether or to what
extent this is so. In these circumstances the Tribunal does not think it desirable to
discuss the meaning of the relevant provisions in detail, and in particular the meaning
of the term “taxation measures” in Article XII(1), These must be a matter for

subsequent briefing and argument.

39. Nor does the Tribunal think that it should express any view on the Claimant’s
alternative argument, which is that even if the dispute falls entirely within the scope of
Article XII(1), the conduct of the Respondent is tantamount to expropriation and thus
falls within the scope of the BIT by reason of Article XII(4). It notes that according to
at least one definition of indirect expropriation, there is a close connection between that
concept and the “reasonably-to-be-expected economic benefit” which would flow from
an investment in given circumstances." It notes farther that VAT in Ecuador, although
charged at a rate which is well within the normal range for that tax internationally, is
charged on inputs not profits, and that within the context of a VAT system a refusal to
allow VAT rebates on inputs is capable of having a disproportionate effect on an
enterprise. Whether or not that is true in the present case may be doubted, as the
Respondent notes. But the impact of a measure as discriminatory or as tantamount to
expropriation does not necessarily depend on the overall profitability of the enterprise
in question—and certainly not for jurisdictional purposes. In a case where the
fundamental issue of characterisation must anyway be dealt with as part of the merits, it
is appropriate in the Tribunal’s view to deal with all issues of combined jurisdiction

and merits at the same time and as part of the same process.'°

" Metaiclad Corporation v. United Mexican States, Award of 30 August 2000, 5 ICSID Reports
209, 230 (para. 103).

-18-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

40. For these reasons, pursuant to Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Rules the
Tribunal decides to proceed with the arbitration and to rule on the Respondent’s

jurisdictional plea in its final award.
D. ' Other Matters

41, It is not appropriate to deal with costs separately from the outcome of this
arbitration as a whole. The costs and expenses of the Tribunal in relation to this phase
of the proceedings are accordingly reserved, and will be dealt with at the merits stage in

light of Article 40 of the UNCITRAL Rules.

42. As to the further procedure in this arbitration, the Tribunal requests the Parties
to discuss with a view to agreeing on an expeditious pleading schedule covering the
remaining issues, and to report to the Tribunal, jointly or separately, not later than

Friday 12 March 2004. If no schedule is agreed the Tribunal will decide.

43. As to the question of the confidentiality of pleadings in the parallel arbitration
under the United States-Ecuador Treaty, the Tribunal notes that the Respondent has
chosen the same arbitrator in the two proceedings, as it was entitled to do under Article
7(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules, Furthermore the fact of holding a joint appointment in
related disputes would not, in and of itself, be grounds for challenge under Article
10(1). The Respondent is also represented by the same legal firm, again something
which is a matter for it to decide. Evidently the Respondent and its legal advisers have
a synoptic view of the various disputes related to the oil industry in Ecuador which may
be denied to the Claimant and its legal advisers. But that is a natural inequality as
between private companies and a host State, one which arises from their respective

status and roles and which cannot be reversed en tant que tel.

44. A problem of procedural equality could nonetheless arise. In this respect the
Tribunal notes the requirements of Article 15(1) and (3) of the UNCITRAL Rules.

 

8 The Respondent did not argue that, even if the Claimant is right on the issue of characterisation,

-19-

EnCana Corporation _v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

Under Article 15(1) the tribunal must treat the parties with equality; under Article 15(3)
all documents or information supplied to the arbitral tribunal by one party shall at the
same time be communicated to the other party. The Tribunal accepts that the supply by
Ecuador of documents or information to the members of the Tribunal in the United
States-Ecuador arbitration, including the member common to the two Tribunals, does
not fall literally within the scope of Article 15(3). Pleadings or information provided
by Ecuador to Dr. Barrera in his capacity as a member of the other Tribunal are not
thereby provided to this Tribunal. Moreover this Tribunal has no authority over the
documents and information tendered to another Tribunal; it can only decide the present

case in the light of the information tendered to it.

45. On the other hand, as soon as Dr. Barrera uses information gained from the
other Tribunal in relation to the present arbitration, a problem arises with respect to the
equality of the parties. Furthermore Dr. Barrera cannot reasonably be asked to
maintain a “Chinese wall” in his own mind: his understanding of the situation may well
be affected by information acquired in the other arbitration. The most he can be asked
to do is to disclose facts so derived whenever they appear to be relevant to any issue

before this Tribunal.

46. The Tribunal does not propose to deal with this question in a categorical way by
ordering full advance disclosure to the Claimant of the pleadings in the other
arbitration. Even assuming it has authority to do so, it is not persuaded that such an
order is necessary. In particular it notes that the joined issues of jurisdiction and merits
in the other arbitration have recently been the subject of an oral hearing, and that the
decision of that Tribunal may be expected to become available before the pleadings in
the present case are closed. It does however believe that the award of the other
Tribunal should be made available to the Claimant as soon as may be after it is issued,
and it calls on the Respondent to do what it can to ensure that this happens.'° If extra
time is needed for the Claimant to respond to such award, it may request this,

 

nontheleas No issue is raised as to the application of Article II(2) of the BIT,
The final award in the present arbitration will not be confidential; the Tribunal understands that
the same rule is being applied in the United States-Ecuador arbitration.

_EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

DECISION

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal unanimously DECIDES:

(a) | The Respondent's objection that the Claimant did not consent to the present
proceedings pursuant to Article 13(3)(a) of the BIT is rejected;

(b) | The Claimant shall serve on the Respondent within 30 days of this decision a
waiver duly executed by the appropriate corporate officer of EnCana Cororation
which complies with Article 13(3)(b) of the BIT;

(c) Pursuant to Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the remaining Jurisdietional

issues ere joined to the merits.
Done at London in English and Spanish, both versions being equally authoritative.

Dee Gone

Professor James Crawford
President of the Tribunal

   

tio Grigera Naén
Member

    
 
  

 

27 February 2004

-21-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Jurisdictional Decision

DECISION

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal unanimously DECIDES:

(a) The Respondent's objection that the Claimant did not consent to the present
proceedings pursuant to Article 13(3)(a) of the BIT is rejected;

(b) | The Claimant shall serve on the Respondent within 30 days of this decision a
waiver duly executed by the appropriate corporate officer of EnCana Cororation
which complies with Article 13(3)(b) of the BIT;

(c) Pursuant to Article 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Rules, the remaining jurisdictional

issues are joined to the merits.
Done at London in English and Spanish, both versions being equally authoritative.

en Camb

Professor James Crawford
President of the Tribunal

  

Dr /Patrl weeney
ber

. Horatio Grigera Naén

   

-2-

