Arbitration pursuant to the
Canada-Ecuador Bilateral Investment Treaty
and the UNCITRAL Rules

EnCana Corporation

(Claimant)

versus

Republic of Ecuador

(Respondent)

AWARD

Professor James Crawford, President
Mr. Horacio Grigera Naén

Mr. Christopher Thomas

Secretariat
London Court of International Arbitration

3 February 2006

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Procedural History
The Factual Background
(1) EnCana’s acquisition of AEC and COL
(2) The Participation Contracts
(3) Development of VAT law and administration in Ecuador
(4) Treatment of oil companies for the purposes of VAT
(5) Disputes over VAT refunds: Ecuadorian court proceedings
(6) Interpretative Law No. 2004-41 (2004)
(7) Attempts to renegotiate participation factors with Petroecuador
(8) Dismissal of Supreme Court justices and related events
EnCana’s Claims of Breaches of the BIT
Jurisdictional Issues
() Standing to claim for treatment of third-State subsidiaries
(2) —_EnCana’s sale of its interest in COL
(3) The exclusion of taxation measures: Article XII(1) of the BIT
(a) The scope of the exemption for “taxation measures”
(b) — SRI’s reliance on the participation factor
(c) The position of Petroecuador
(d) Internal developments in Ecuador
(4) Conclusion on jurisdiction
Merits of the Expropriation Claim
(1) The indirect expropriation claim
(2) The direct expropriation claim
Costs

Award

Appendix 1 Chronology of the Dispute
Appendix 2 Relevant Provisions of the Canada-Ecuador BIT

paragraph

1-19
20-106
21-22
23-40
41-57
58-86
87-94
95-97
98-99
100-106
107-111
112-168
115-122
123-132
133-140
141-149
150-153
154-161
162-165
166-168
169-196
171-174
175-196

197

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

EnCana Corporation
(Claimant)

versus

Republic of Ecuador
(Respondent)

AWARD

A. PROCEDURAL HISTORY

1. By Notice of Arbitration dated 14 March 2003, EnCana Corporation (“EnCana”) a
Canadian corporation, commenced the present proceedings against the Government of the
Republic of Ecuador pursuant to Article XIII(2) of the Canada-Ecuador Agreement for the
Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments of 29 April 1996 (the BIT).! The claim
concerned measures taken by Ecuador in respect of two wholly-owned EnCana subsidiaries,
AEC Ecuador Ltd (previously named City Investing Co Ltd) (AEC) and City Oriente Limited
(COL), both incorporated in Barbados. In its Notice EnCana alleged that Ecuador’s action
(in particular, through resolutions of the tax authorities, the Servicio de Rentas Internas
(SRI) in denying to its subsidiaries refunds of value added tax (VAT) violated provisions of
the BIT. It sought declarations to that effect as well as consequential relief, including
reimbursement of tax credits denied and which might be denied in future. The value of tax
credits already denied was put at approximately US$80m.

2. Article XIII of the BIT provides for disputes concerning covered investments to be
submitted, at the investor’s election, to arbitration under the ICSID Convention (if both the
Respondent State and the State of the investor’s nationality are parties to the Convention),
under the ICSID Additional Facility Rules (if only one is a party), or under the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules. Ecuador is, but Canada is not, a party to the ICSID Convention. EnCana
elected for UNCITRAL arbitration, nominating as its arbitrator, pursuant to Article 7(1) of
the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules (the Rules), Dr Horacio Grigera Naén, an Argentine
national. Pursuant to the same Article, Ecuador nominated Dr Alfonso Barrera Valverde, an
Ecuadorian national. The two arbitrators subsequently appointed Professor James Crawford
SC, an Australian national, as presiding arbitrator.

3. On 1 July 2003 the resignation of Dr Alfonso Barrera Valverde was notified to the
Tribunal. Subsequently Ecuador appointed Mr Patrick Barrera Sweeney, an Ecuadorian
national. On 18 August 2004, Mr. Barrera resigned and was replaced by Mr J Christopher
Thomas QC, a Canadian national.

2027 UNTS 196 (in force: 6 June 1997). Relevant provisions are set out in Appendix 2.

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

4. At an initial teleconference held on 4 September 2003, agreement was reached on a
number of issues related to the conduct of the arbitration. These were embodied in a
procedural order of 9 September 2003. In particular it was agreed (a) that the place of the
arbitration would be London, without prejudice to the power of the Tribunal to hold hearings
and to deliberate in any other appropriate place, in accordance with Article 16 of the Rules;
(b) that the Registrar would be the London Court of International Arbitration,” (c) that the
languages of the arbitration would be English and Spanish, and (d) that the Respondent
would file a summary Statement of Defence, and a detailed statement of its Preliminary
Objections, by 27 October 2003. This was duly done. Subsequently, in accordance with a
further procedural order, the Claimant on 8 December 2003 filed its Written Observations on
the Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objections.

5. As to confidentiality of proceedings, with the agreement of the parties the Tribunal
stipulated in its procedural order of 9 September 2003 that:

“(a) | While the arbitration is pending, the confidentiality of pleadings, witness
statements and other documents submitted in the arbitration, as well as minutes of
meetings and transcripts of hearings, shall be maintained.

(b) Hearings of the Tribunal shall be in private unless otherwise decided by the
Tribunal with the consent of the parties.

(c) Decisions and awards of the Tribunal are public documents.”

6. This left unresolved one issue of confidentiality on which the parties were not agreed,
viz. the treatment of pleadings and witness statements in the Occidental arbitration, a parallel
arbitration between a United States company and the Respondent involving similar issues.*
The Respondent had retained the same law firm to represent it in the two arbitrations, and,
following the resignation of Dr Barrera Valverde, had appointed the same arbitrator (Mr
Patrick Barrera Sweeney). There was thus at that time one arbitrator common to the two

2 Tn addition Mr Simon Olleson, Barrister of Lincoln’s Inn, acted as Clerk to the Tribunal. The Tribunal
puts on record its thanks to Mr Olleson for his considerable assistance.

Procedural Order No. 1, 9 September 2003.

In these proceedings a US company, Occidental, challenged equivalent VAT treatment under the
United States of America-Ecuador, Treaty ing the and Reci | Protection of
Investments, Washington, 27 August 1993. The Final Award of the Tribunal was rendered in London on | July
2004: Occidental Exploration and Petroleum Company v Republic of Ecuador, LCIA Case No. UN3467
(hereafter Occidental Award). The Tribunal held that refund of VAT paid on account of importation or local
acquisition of goods and services used in the production of oil for export was not included in the X Factor in the
Occidental Participation Agreement and that the refusal of VAT refunds by SRI was a violation of the national
treatment standard under Article II(1) of the US-Ecuador BIT, of the fair and equitable treatment standard under
Article II(3)(a) and “to an extent” of the guarantee against arbitrariness under Article I1(3)(b) (see para. 200, and
the operative paragraph of the award, paras. 4 and 5, and in relation to the final point, see also paras. 163). It
held that Occidental was entitled to retain VAT reimbursed and not yet recovered back by SRI, and that it was
also entitled to damages in the sum of $71,533,649 on account of VAT refunds refused in breach of the BIT,
together with interest. The Occidental Award has been challenged by Ecuador before the English courts, and
Occidental has issued a cross-application challenging the Tribunal’s approach to the question of expropriation.
At the date of the present award, the Court of Appeal had rejected an appeal against a preliminary judgment
dismissing an objection based on the justiciability of the jurisdictional challenge: see Republic of Ecuador v.
Occidental Exploration and Production Company [2005] EWCA Civ 1116 (CA), on appeal from [2005] EWHC
774 (Comm.) (Aikens J). Pending final determination of that issue, the proceedings on the substance of the
challenge are in abeyance.

 

 

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

panels; in the Claimant’s view, this raised a serious question of how confidentiality could be
maintained as between the two arbitrations. Furthermore the Claimant argued that it was
disadvantaged in the preparation and presentation of its case by alone not having access to
information which was available to the Respondent and the Tribunal. At the hearing on 5
January 2004, it was agreed that this issue would be addressed by a further decision of the
Tribunal, subject to the outcome of the Respondent’s Jurisdictional Objections.

7. A hearing on the jurisdictional objections was held on 5 January 2004. The
Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction was rendered on 27 February 2004. As concerns the
Respondent’s objection to the sufficiency of the waiver given under Article XIII(3) of the
BIT, the Tribunal distinguished between consent to jurisdiction under Article XIII(3)(a) and
waiver of other proceedings under Article XIII(3)(b). In relation to the former, what was
important was that consent be given vis-a-vis the Tribunal itself; the consent recorded in the
Statement of Claim was sufficient for this purpose, and Article XIII(3)(a) was thus satisfied.”
As to the latter, EnCana was required to provide a separate instrument complying with the
requirements of Article XIII(3)(b). There was no requirement under the BIT going to
jurisdiction for a separate waiver by the subsidiaries where, as here, the subsidiaries were
incorporated in a third State and not in the host State.

8. The Tribunal joined certain other jurisdictional objections to the merits. In particular
these concerned the Respondent’s objections (a) that the claim concerned “taxation
measures” exempted from the BIT by Article XII, and (b) that there was no prima facie
evidence of expropriation of any investment or return of EnCana. It did so on the ground that
without a clearer understanding both of the Ecuadorian legal situation and of the facts relating
to EnCana’s claim, it was not possible to say which if any aspects of the claim fell outside the
scope of Article XIL® A similar approach was taken in relation to the question whether the
changing tax position could amount to an expropriation; this too was joined to the merits.’

9. Immediately following the hearing on the jurisdictional objections, the Claimant made
a Request for Interim Measures of Protection in relation to certain enforcement measures
taken by the Respondent against the Claimant’s subsidiary AEC and counsel for AEC, Dr
Roque Bustamante. Having heard the parties, the Tribunal rejected the request by an Interim
Award dated 31 January 2004.

10. As to the outstanding confidentiality issue, the Tribunal decided that for the time
being no further order was required. The matter was rendered moot when Mr Barrera
Sweeney resigned from the present Tribunal. Subsequently Ecuador sought from the
Occidental tribunal a lifting of the confidentiality restrictions on the record in that arbitration.
By a notification of 10 September 2004 the President of the tribunal communicated to the
parties the tribunal’s conclusion that it was functus officio.

11. On 26 April 2004, EnCana submitted its Memorial on the merits and accompanying
witness statements, expert reports and documents.

Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 February 2004, $§13-15.
Ibid., §38.
Ibid., §39.

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

12. On 25 June 2004, the Respondent filed its Counter-Memorial on the Merits, by which
it also raised a number of further jurisdictional objections in addition to those which the
Tribunal had joined to the merits by its decision of 27 February 2004.°

13. On 10 August 2004, EnCana served a Response to Ecuador’s Counter-Memorial on
the Merits, accompanied, inter alia, by additional witness statements.

14. On 24 September 2004 EnCana filed certain additional materials. Following an
exchange of correspondence, the Tribunal granted EnCana additional time to file its
Rejoinder.

15. Ecuador filed a Rejoinder on 8 October 2004, accompanied by exhibits and additional
witness statements.

16. A hearing on the merits was held in London from 8-13 November 2004 involving
legal argument and the presentation of factual testimony and expert evidence by both parties.

17. Both parties presented post-hearing briefs, as scheduled, on 23 December 2004
accompanied by certain additional documents.

18. Following the filing of the post-hearing briefs, the Respondent wrote objecting that
the Claimant had introduced new claims concerning, inter alia, the dismissal of most of the
judges of the Constitutional Court and the Supreme Court and referring to statements made
by the President of Ecuador in that regard. The Tribunal noted that the information was
capable of being relevant to issues pleaded in the arbitration and gave the Respondent an
opportunity to reply to the allegations. This the Respondent did by letter of 11 February 2005
(leading to a further exchange of 17 and 18 February 2005).

19. Following deliberations on a draft Award, the Tribunal on 4 April 2005 put a number
of further questions to the Parties and asked the parties to respond by 25 April 2005. On 22
April 2005 the Respondent, noting that the President of Ecuador had been removed by
Congress, sought a 21-day extension to respond to these questions. Both parties subsequently
filed statements and responses, on 16 and 27 May 2005. The content of these further filings,
as far as relevant to the present case, is described below.

B. THE FACTUAL BACKGROUND
20. The aim of this section is to give a brief account of the factual underpinning of the
dispute. In general there are no crucial differences between the parties as to the sequence of

events (see the chronology set out in Appendix 1). By contrast there are wide differences of
views as to the legal consequences of the actions taken and not taken.

Ecuador’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, §69.

EnCana Corporation v, Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

(1) EnCana’s Acquisition of AEC and COL

21, EnCana acquired Pacalta Resources Limited (“Pacalta”) in May 1999. Pacalta was a
Canadian corporation which owned AEC (at that time called City Investing Company Ltd).’
AEC in turn was the indirect owner of COL. At the time of filing of the Notice of Arbitration
on 14 March 2003, both AEC and COL were indirect wholly-owned subsidiaries of
EnCana.®

22. On 28 November 2003 EnCana sold its interest in COL to Condor Petroleum Ltd, a
United States company (“Condor”)."! Furthermore, on 13 September 2005 EnCana
announced its intention to sell the rest of its Ecuadorian assets to a Chinese joint venture with
closure expected before the end of 2005.7 The implications of these sales of the EnCana
subsidiaries are dealt with later in this Award.

(2) The Contracts

23. The present claims concern claims for VAT refunds arising out of the performance of
four Contracts providing for rights of exploration and exploitation of oil and gas reserves in
Ecuador, entered into by AEC and COL before and after their acquisition by EnCana.
Specifically EnCana alleges that “measures taken by Ecuador, including the issuance of SRI
Resolutions 233, 669, 670, 736 and 3191, the past and ongoing denial of tax credits and
refunds, and the amendments to regulations which seek to deny the right of VAT credits and
refunds to oil companies, violate its obligations contained in the Treaty and international law
and have caused and continue to cause the Claimant significant loss and damage”. It goes
on to specify, inter alia, that Ecuador through SRI grounded the denial of VAT credits and
refunds on the incorrect conclusion that the Ecuadorian State oil company, Petroecuador, had
recognised and granted these amounts through the negotiation of the Tarapoa X Factor and
the execution of the contract related thereto, despite information from Petroecuador to the
contrary. It also alleged discriminatory treatment of foreign oil companies as compared
with other exporters in extractive industries such as mining and agriculture, and the
expropriation of investments or returns of investors through the denial of VAT refunds.

24. Historically, there have been three types of contracts for the exploitation of petroleum
resources in Ecuador. Initially, oil companies entered into “association contracts”, under
which the initial burden of investment lay on the oil company, and thereafter both the
company and the State could have an obligation to provide further investment. The company
had to pay a royalty in respect of its production, plus an additional participation percentage as

° City Investing Company Limited changed its name to AEC Ecuador on 21 May 2002: see Claimant’s

Memorial, 26 April 2004, §26.

For the corporate structure, see Keplinger 2"! Witness Statement, 5 August 2004, Response W/S, vol.
Il, Tab 2, Annex A. Cf Exhibit 89 to the Respondent’s Rejoinder, Exhibits, vol. I, Tab 89.
u The Sale Agreement is at Respondent, Exhibits to Rejoinder, vol. I, Tab 88; the sale was in fact of City
Oriente Holding Company Ltd, also a Barbadian corporation, the direct owner of all the shares in COL.
Claimant’s Letter to the Tribunal of 19 September 2005 with attached press release.
Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, 14 March 2003, para 36.
“ Ibid, para 41 (iv) & (v).

B

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

well as income tax. Contracts of this type were concluded in the 1970s, including by AEC in
1973.

25. Ina second period, oil companies were able to enter into “service contracts”, under
which the oil produced was owned by Petroecuador and the oil company was paid a fee to
extract the oil. All costs incurred were reimbursed. Under these contracts, the oil companies
bore no risk, except in the case that no oil was discovered during the exploration period.

26. The current regime for exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons derives from the
amendment of the Hydrocarbons Law in 1993 which permitted the conclusion of
“participation contracts”. Those contracts are defined in an unnumbered article inserted in
Chapter III after Article 12 as contracts

“entered into by the State, through PETROECUADOR, by which it delegates to the
contractor, subject to the provisions of number one, Article 46 of the Political
Constitution of the Republic, the power to explore and exploit hydrocarbons in the
contract area, affecting on its account and risk all the investments, costs and expenses
required for exploration, development and production. The contractor has the right to
a share in the production of the contract area, which shall be computed based on the
percentages tendered and agreed in the contract, depending on the volume of
produced hydrocarbons.

Once production has started, the contractor has the right to a share in the production of
the contract area, which shall be calculated on the basis of the percentages tendered
and agreed in the same contract, depending on the volume of produced
hydrocarbons.”

Under this form of contract the oil company bears all of the risk of exploration and
exploitation, including all the costs and expenses involved. In return, the oil company
receives a percentage of the oil extracted under the “participation factors”. Under the
standard form of such contracts, there are typically three participation factors, each
corresponding to different levels or bands of the total output.

27. On 29 March 1995, COL entered into the “Block 27 Participation Contract” with
Petroecuador.'°

28. On 25 July 1995, AEC entered into the “Tarapoa Participation Contract”, which
modified (and in effect, replaced) the association contract which it had concluded with
Petroecuador on 23 October 1973.'

29. On 27 October 1995, AEC entered into the “18B Fanny Unitization Agreement” with
Petroproduccién (the Ecuadorian State Company for Exploration and Exploitation of
Petroleum, an affiliate of Petroecuador).!”

6 See Bustamente 1, vol. I, 26 April 2004, Exhibit A (English Translation at Al). COL was originally

co-contractant with Consolidated Ramrod Gold Corporation; the rights and obligations of Consolidated Ramrod
Gold were assigned to COL on 30 April 1997.
‘6 See Bustamante 1, vol. II, 26 April 2004, Exhibit B (English Translation at B1).

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

30. On 25 November 1999, AEC entered into the “Mariann 4A Unitization Agreement”
with Petroproduccién.'®

31. Under each of these contracts, the companies were entitled to retain shares of the oil
extracted. The share to which each company was entitled varied according to the average
daily oil production levels. The percentage shares of production agreed upon with
Petroecuador were referred to as “X Factors”.

32. At the time of conclusion of the four contracts, oil production was predicted to reach
only a relatively low level and accordingly the X Factors were set only up to low levels of
output. Production subsequently increased for two of the concessions (the 18B Fanny
unitized field (AEC) and the adjacent Tarapoa field (AEC)), and a new round of negotiations
was commenced in order to fix the “X3” Factor for the increased production.

33. Outline agreement for both the Fanny 18B and Tarapoa agreements was reached on
12 December 1997. However, completion was subject to approval by various state bodies."
In the event the amendment in relation to X3 factor for the 18B Fanny Participation Contract
was concluded on 14 July 1999-79 the amendment in relation to the X3 factor under the
Tarapoa Participation Contract was concluded on 2 August 2001.7!

34. Both the Block 27 and Tarapoa Participation Contracts contain a provision for
renegotiation of the X Factors in the event that the economic balance of the contract is
affected by some unforeseen change. For example, the Tarapoa Participation contract
provides, in relevant part:

“Eleven.Nine (11.9) Tax Regime Amendment.- In case of any amendment to the tax
regime or labor participation effective at the date of execution of this Contract as
described in this Clause, or its interpretation, or creation of new taxes or liens not
provided for in this Contract, which may affect this Contract’s economy, a correction
factor in the participation percentages shall be included to absorb the increase or
decrease of a tax charge or labor participation aforementioned.”

35. | The preceding sub-clauses of clause 11 make reference to income tax and labor
participation payments (11.1 and 11.2), a contribution for use of water and use of natural
construction materials (11.3), a contribution to the Superintendency of Companies (11.4), a
tax on total assets (11.5), contributions to the “Fund for the Amazon Region Ecodevelopment
and Strengthening of its Sectional Organizations” (11.6); and notarial fees in connection with
the execution of the contract as a public deed (11.7). The equivalent clause in the Block 27
Participation Contract is in broadly similar terms, although there is some divergence in the
recitals of the relevant taxes and charges. Neither of the Participation Contracts made any
express reference to value added tax.

 

v See Bustamante 1, vol. III, 26 April 2004, Exhibit C.

8 See Bustamante 1, vol. III, 26 April 2004, Exhibit D.

» Claimant’s Memorial, 26 April 2004, §75.

2 See Bustamante 1, vol. UI, 26 April 2004, Exhibit E.

a See Bustamante 1, vol. IV, 26 April 2004, Exhibit F (English translation at F1).

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

36. Further, Clause 6.12.8 of the Block 27 Participation Contract and Clause 6.3 of the
Tarapoa Participation Contract envisaged the conclusion between the parties of an operating
agreement for the exploitation of unitized fields in the case of “common deposits”, i.e.
deposits extending outside the conceded area. Clauses 6.12.8(d) and 6.3.8(d), respectively,
envisaged that those operating agreements would include “procedures for adjustments of the
participation share percentages, investments, costs, and expenses in recognition of the
periodic updating” of proven reserves and other conditions for operation of the common
deposit.

37. Under each of the Unitization Agreements, a Unified Operations Committee was
provided for, which had power to revise or modify the terms of the agreements or their
annexes prior to submitting them to the Ministry of Energy and Mines for approval.

38. Each of the Participation Contracts contained as Clause 20 a provision providing for
arbitration, following consultations between the parties, in accordance with Article 10 of the
Ecuadorian Law on Hydrocarbons. Those clauses also foresaw the possibility of ICSID
arbitration (once Ecuador become a party to the Washington Convention) (Clause 20.3), and
other systems of international arbitration recognised by Ecuadorian law (Clause 20.4).
Further, Clause 22.1.3 in each of the two Participation Contracts provided:

“In compliance with the provisions of Article Three (3), Law number forty four (44),
the Parties have agreed to submit the controversies that may arise from the
interpretation or execution of this Contract, to arbitration, pursuant to the provisions of
Clause twenty.”

39. The two Unitization Agreements each contained a different form of arbitration clause.
The Mariann 4A Unitization Agreement, Clause 21, provided for arbitration to be carried out
in accordance with the relevant Ecuadorian legislation on arbitration and the Rules of the
Arbitration and Mediation Centre of the Quito Chamber of Commerce and excluded recourse
to the ordinary courts except to challenge an arbitral award on the basis of nullity. The 18B
Fanny Unitization Agreement provided simply for arbitration in accordance with the relevant
portions of the Code of Civil Procedure (Clause 19).

40. As the Fanny 18B and Tarapoa X3 Agreements constituted modifications of,
respectively, the Fanny 18B Unitization Agreement and the Tarapoa Participation Contract,
they contained no arbitration clauses.

(3) Development of VAT law and administration in Ecuador

41. The present dispute is rendered more complex by the numerous amendments and
modifications made to the tax regime in general and the VAT regime in particular during the
relevant period. The basic scheme of the tax system in Ecuador is contained in the Internal
Tax Regime Law (ITRL). The ITRL is implemented by the Regulations to the Internal Tax
Regime Law (the Regulations).

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

42. At the time of conclusion of the Block 27 Participation Contract on 29 March 1995
and the Tarapoa Participation Contract on 25 July 1995, Article 65 ITRL provided in relevant
part as follows:

“Tax Credit. VAT payers shall have a right to a tax credit equal to the tax paid on
the local acquisition or importation of goods or on the use of services levied with
VAT, that are itemized in the respective invoices or analogous documents, so long as
they are marketed in the country or employed in the production of a new good or in
the provision of a service assessed with this tax.

The amount of this tax paid when acquiring assets that become part of the purchaser’s
fixed assets is also a tax credit.

There shall also be a tax credit for VAT paid on the acquisition or importation of
goods or supplies destined for the production and marketing of goods transferred to
entities of the public sector, even if said transfers are exempt from payment of this
tax...”

43. Article 65 was amended on 22 August 1995 by the insertion of extra paragraphs, the
relevant part providing that “Tax credits returned to VAT payers and to exporters will not
bear interest.” As amended, Article 65 remained in force until 30 April 1999 when it was
replaced.

44. Article 68 ITRL provided that if the declaration revealed a difference in favour of the
taxpayer between inputs and outputs that sum was to be considered a tax credit, effective in
the declaration for the following month.

45. Prior to the conclusion of the Participation Contracts, Article 36 of the ITRL provided
for tax credits in relation to VAT paid on the acquisition of any input or raw material used in
the manufacture (fabricacidn) of export products.

46. On 30 December 1994 Article 36 was repealed and replaced by Article 163. That
provision (as subsequently amended on 21 November 1995) remained in force until 29 June
1999 and provided in relevant part as follows:

“General rule: As a general principle, natural persons and companies who are VAT
payers and have paid VAT on the importation or local acquisition of goods or the use
of taxable services, are entitled to a tax credit. The credit is equal to the tax paid on the
local acquisition or importation of goods or in the use of services taxed with VAT,
itemized in an invoice or analogous document. Pursuant to the provisions of the
[ITRL] and this Regulation, such goods or services must have been exported,
marketed in the country or employed in the production of a new product or in the
provision of a service levied with this tax [in accordance with the ITRL and this
Regulation].

In order for VAT paid on the local acquisition of goods or services to be used as a tax
credit by the purchaser of the goods or recipients of the services, as the case may be,
the purchaser or recipient must credit VAT in sales contracts, invoices, notes or tickets
or similar original documents [...]

-10-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

VAT paid on purchases, imports and services for the production or marketing of goods
and services taxed at the zero rate shall be entered into books as production costs and
shall not produce a tax credit.

When due to the nature of the transactions made or to any other circumstance, a
taxpayer or whoever is subject to the tax assumes that it cannot compensate the tax
credit within six months after being created, the taxpayer or whoever is subject to the
tax can request a refund [...] in accordance with Art. 149 of this Regulation and
Article 65 of the [ITRL]...”

47. Article 169 of the Regulations, enacted on 30 December 1994, provided in relevant
part:

“Tax Credit for sales of export goods: Natural persons and companies that have paid
VAT on the acquisition of any input or raw material employed in the manufacture
[fabricacién] of export products are entitled to a tax credit for such payment once the
exportation is made...

Agricultural, livestock or like production for foreign markets is also understood as
fabricacién...”

Article 169 was repealed on 29 June 1999.

48. In the periods immediately prior to and following the conclusion of the Participation
Contracts, according to the literal text of the legislation it was not clear whether all exporters
were entitled to a VAT tax credit in relation to input VAT associated with acquisition or
importation of raw materials under Article 65 of the ITRL. Although Article 163 of the
Regulations appeared to envisage entitlement to a credit as a matter of general principle,
Article 169 of the Regulations only expressly granted the right to a credit to exporters
involved in manufacture (fabricacién). It was also not entirely clear under what
circumstances there was an entitlement to a refund under Article 163 of the Regulations,
rather than merely the setting off of a tax credit against future liabilities.

49. | The new version of Article 65 ITRL, which came into force on 30 April 1999, as
amended on 14 May 2001, provided:

“The use of a tax credit shall be subject to the following rules.

1. VAT payers engaged in: the production or marketing of goods for the domestic
market taxed at a rate of twelve percent (12%), the provision of services taxed at a rate
of twelve percent (12%), or the exportation of goods and services, shall have a right to
a tax credit for all of the VAT paid on local acquisition or the importation of goods
that become part of their fixed assets; of goods, raw materials or supplies and of
services necessary for the production [produccidn] and marketing of said goods and
services.

2. VAT payers engaged in the production, marketing of goods or provision of
services, part of which are taxed at a rate of zero percent (0%) and part at a rate of ten
percent (10%), shall have a right to a tax credit...”

-ll-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

The change from 10% to 12% in the VAT rate was part of a wider reform which took place in
order to broaden the activities subject to VAT.

50. Article 69A ITRL was also enacted on 30 April 1999. As originally enacted, it
provided:

“VAT paid on export activities: Natural persons and companies that have paid value-
added tax on local acquisitions or on the importation of goods, employed in the
manufacture [fabricacién] of exported products, are entitled to a refund for said tax,
without interest. The refund shall be made in a term not to exceed ninety (90) days
and shall be in form of a note of credit, cheque or other means of payment. Interest
shall be paid when the said term expires and the VAT claimed has not been refunded.
The SRI must refund payment when the taxpayer’s legal representative formally files
a declaration attaching certified copies of the invoices documenting VAT payment.

[.P
Subsequent amendments made Article 69A applicable also to the providers of services.

51. On 18 November 1999, an unnumbered Article was inserted after Article 55 ITRL
(hereafter “Article 55A”). That Article provided:

“Tax credit for the exportation of goods: Natural and juridical persons who export and
have paid VAT on the acquisition of the goods they export, have a right to a tax credit
for said payments. They shall have this same right for the tax paid on the acquisition
of raw materials, inputs and services used in the products produced and exported by
the manufacturer [fabricante]. Once the exportation is made, the taxpayer shall
request from the SRI the corresponding refund, attaching a copy of the appropriate
exportation documents.

The oil business shall be governed by its specific laws.”

It was not disputed that no laws were in force relating specifically to the oil business at the
relevant time.

52. The new Article 169 of the Regulations, enacted on 29 June 1999 and repealed on 31
December 2001, provided:

“Refund of value-added tax to State institutions, exporters of goods and the disabled:
In order for exporters of goods to obtain a refund of the value-added tax paid on the
importation or local purchases of inputs, raw materials and services used in products
made and exported by the manufacturer [fabricante] or producer [productor], as the
case may be, once the exportation is made, they shall file with SRI an application...”

53. Accordingly, although Article 65 ITRL as enacted in April 1999 (and as subsequently
amended) appeared to envisage an entitlement to tax credits for various categories of tax-
payers, including exporters engaged in production (produccidn) in relation to input VAT paid
on acquisitions or imports, Article 55A seemed to provide for a right to tax-credit and

-12-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

envisaged a refund only in relation to exporters who were manufacturers (fabricantes).
Similarly, Article 69A ITRL provided for the right to a refund to exporters involved in
manufacture (fabricacién). On the other hand, from 29 June 1999 until 31 December 2001,
Article 169 of the Regulations appeared to envisage the possibility of refunds in relation to
both fabricantes and productors.

54. Upon repeal of Article 169 of the Regulations from 31 December 2001, a new Article
147 of the Regulations was inserted which provided in its paragraph 3 as follows:

“Cases in which there is no right to a tax credit. There shall be no right to a tax credit
in the following circumstances:

3. when VAT paid by a purchaser has been reimbursed to it in any manner”

55. Article 148 of the Regulations (also enacted on 31 December, and as amended on 4
December 2002) provided:

“Refund of value-added tax to the exporters of goods: In order for exporters of
goods to obtain a refund for the value-added tax paid on the importation or local
acquisition of goods and services used in the manufacture [fabricacidn] of export
goods, that has not been used as a tax credit or reimbursed in any manner whatsoever,
they shall, once the exportation has been made, file with the SRI an application...”

56. The legal position was thus, on any view, complex and obscure. It must be said
however that nothing was put before the Tribunal which indicated that the legislator intended
by these provisions to draw a sharp distinction between extractive and other industries, or
what purpose such a distinction might serve in terms of the rationale for a VAT-type tax.
Nor, given that many industries (e.g. agriculture) combine elements of production and
manufacture, was any criterion laid down for determining the degree of ‘fabrication’ required
to qualify for VAT recovery.”

57. That said, the application of the tax legislation to the contracts entered into by AEC
and COL (and the other oil companies) gave rise to a number of issues of legal interpretation
in relation to the question of whether they were entitled to a refund, including:

(a) Whether only manufacturers (fabricantes) were entitled to a tax refund;
(b) | Whether the extraction of oil constituted “fabricacién” within the meaning of
Article 69A ITRL, given the various processes to which hydrocarbons pumped out of
the ground must be subjected prior to export;
(c) Whether the participation factors in the Participation Contracts entered into by
the oil companies were calculated so as to include VAT in the costs and expenses of
the oil companies;
2 Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, 14 March 2003, §34. See EM, Witness Statements, vol.
1, Tab. 6, David Paredes, 23 April 2004, §5.22.
3 The original version of Art. 169, which was repealed in June 1999, stipulated that “agricultural,
livestock or like production for foreign markets is also understood as fabricacion of export products” It appears.
that no equivalent provision was subsequently re-enacted.

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

(d) If so, whether it was possible for VAT refunds to be made through such a
contractual mechanism;

(e) If VAT refunds were included in the participation factors and could validly be
refunded through a contractual mechanism, whether this was to be taken as including
the difference resulting from the change from 10% VAT on goods to 12% VAT on
both goods and services which occurred in April 1999.

Various responses to these questions were given by the different levels of Ecuadorian courts
in cases involving both AEC and COL, and other oil companies.

(4) Treatment of oil companies for the purposes of VAT

58. According to the Claimant, the Government of Ecuador changed its interpretation of
Article 87 of the Law on Hydrocarbons, relating to exemption from various taxes imposed on
imports; this is said to have occurred three years after the execution of the Participation
Contracts.* It appears that the change in interpretation occurred in about November 1997.75
Prior to this time, Article 87 of the Law on Hydrocarbons was interpreted as meaning that no
input VAT was chargeable on imports.

59. The Claimant does not rely upon this change in interpretation as a breach of the BIT
but rather as helping to explain why VAT refunds were not claimed by AEC and COL prior
to March 2000.

60. However that may be, in the period between March 2000 and March 2001 AEC
applied for, and by a series of resolutions SRI granted, refunds in respect of VAT paid in
connection with the production of oil for export between May 1999 and August 2000 (“the
Original Resolutions” ”). In order to grant these refunds, SRI issued credit notes amounting to
$7,567,091.87.°

61. | Subsequently, both AEC and COL made applications for refunds to SRI, in relation to
VAT paid between January 1998 and April 1999 and September 2000 and May 2001 i in the
case of AEC, and for the period January 1999 to December 2000 in the case of COL” The
applications for refunds for VAT paid prior to March 2000 were based on a restatement of the
accounts of AEC and COL, with VAT being included in the accounts as a tax credit and
account receivable. Prior to EnCana’s acquisition of the companies in May 1999 and the
restatement of the accounts, VAT payments had been recorded in the accounts as an
operating expense,

62. As with many national VAT schemes, Ecuador’s VAT regime operates on the basis
that if a VAT payer has a claim for a tax credit or a refund of VAT, an appropriately

24
25

Claimant’s Memorial, 26 April 2004, §§105-107.

See Claimant, Witness Statements accompanying Memorial, vol. 1, Tab. 1, Pablo Buenafio, 26 April
2004, $15; Claimant, Witness Statements accompanying Memorial, vol. 1, Tab. 6, David Paredes, 23 April 2004
(English translation in Claimant, Witness Statements accompanying Response to Counter-Memorial, vol. 1, Tab
1), §§4.4-4.5

Resolution 736 appears to relate at least in part to VAT paid by AEC prior to its acquisition by EnCana.

” See the table in the Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, §27.

-14-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

documented application to the tax authorities must be made. Any refund paid would be
subject to subsequent audit and verification by the tax authorities.

63. It was the evidence of Dr de Mena, the Director General of SRI during the relevant
period, that once the VAT refund mechanism was put in place, SRI received a large number
of applications for refunds. These claims were on the whole paid.”

64. In mid-2001, SRI assembled a team of auditors to look at the refunds which were
being granted following the change in the law, and in particular as regards refunds being
made to oil companies.

65. Apparently as part of this process, the Northern Regional Director of the IRS wrote to
Dr Rodolfo Barniol, the President of Petroecuador, on 14 June 2001 requesting information
related to the Participation Contracts and their amendments.” Although this letter was not
produced to the Tribunal, it seems clear from the reply that its purpose was to discover
whether VAT was included among the costs of the contractors in the calculation of the
participation factors.

66. Dr Barniol replied on 11 July 2001,°! attaching a memorandum dated 9 July 2001
from the Chief of the Contracts Administration Unit of Petroecuador, Mr Francisco Rendon.”
The attached memorandum provided in relevant part as follows:

“This Unit considered that for points 2, 3 and 4 of the official letter of the reference it
was necessary to personally explain to the officers of the Northern Regional Office of
the [SRI], the reason why it was not possible to favourably attend to the request [...]:

- In accordance with the Regulation of the Special Bidding system, Petroecuador
produces all of the documents inherent in the bid.

- Based upon internal working papers, the technical and economic conditions and
parameters of responsibility to rate tenders are established in order for there to exist a
balance between possible expenditures and income the project produces, under
reasonable return conditions for the Parties and keeping a concordant logic in the cost-
benefit investment this kind of project requires.

- The parties interested in participating in the bid prepare their tenders based upon the
principle mentioned above, and it is not a requirement to submit a detail of their
economic, financial and technical studies in order to participate in the called bid.

- Obviously, the bidder is cognizant of all national legislation applicable to
hydrocarbon matters, including tax legislation, and could discern which taxes directly
increase the cost of the project and which have an indirect effect since they are
reimbursable, as in the case of VAT.”

28
29

1* Witness Statement of Dr de Mena, para 16.
1* Witness Statement of Dr de Mena, para 17; Transcript, Day 4: p. 83, line 22, p. 84, line 12. Cf. the
closing submissions of Mr Barrack, Day 5: pp. 28-9.
Official Letter No 002098, 14 June 2001.
2 Official Letter No. 0378-PEP-2001 2866.
2 Memorandum No. 392-ACP-2001, 9 July 2001.

-15-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

67. Despite its apparently negative tone in relation to the question whether the VAT
factors were included in the Participation Factors, the memorandum of Mr Rendén was
subsequently relied upon by the SRI in issuing some of the resolutions denying AEC’s and
COL’s requests for refunds.

68. Subsequently, on 12 September 2001, Dr de Mena wrote to Dr Barniol, following a
meeting which apparently took place on 5 September 2001, requesting a consulta on the
question of the inclusion of VAT within the participation factors under the Participation
contracts.>? Having referred to the changes in the law in 1999, in particular Article 69A
ITRL and Article 169 of the Regulations, Dr de Mena continued:

“Pursuant to these amendment to the Law and its regulation, exporters may request a
VAT refund for sales made abroad and for which a tax credit has been generated but
cannot be compensated because there are no domestic sales and also because they
export their entire production, as indicated by the oil companies exporting
hydrocarbons. Consequently, oil companies that have executed upstream
[participation] contracts with the State, through Petroecuador, have requested a refund
of the VAT on their hydrocarbon exports.”

69. There followed an analysis of the tax situation in relation to participation contracts,
relying on the Article inserted after Article 12 in the Hydrocarbons Law (above para. 26); the
conclusion put forward was that “[t]herefore, investments, costs and expenses are considered
in bids for the awarding of participation contracts”. Reference was further made to Article 16
of the Hydrocarbons Law relating to economic stability, which provided for adjustment of the
participation percentages “when the tax system applicable to the contract has been modified,
in order to restore the economy of the contract in effect prior to the tax modification”; the
conclusion was again that “taxes were deemed to have been incorporated into the
participation of the parties, and, consequently, included in the costs and expenses influencing
the economy of the contract.” The analysis continued:

“On the basis of the analysis of said rules, it is understood that under this form of
contract, the contractor, on its own account and risk, agrees to make all investments,
costs and expenses required for exploration, development and production. In
exchange, the State delivers to the contractor a participation in audited production.
Then in order to arrive at the calculation of said participation as a form of payment
and, pursuant to the legislation mentioned up to this point, the participation that the
contractor receives included the contractor’s investments, costs and expenses for
obtaining crude petroleum, plus the taxes that such activity would generate as value-
added tax (VAT).”

70. In the light of those considerations, the consulta requested by Dr de Mena was as
follows:

“Under participation contracts, when the State of Ecuador, through Petroecuador,
reimburses the contractor for its investments, costs and expenses through the

3 Official Letter No. 000567, 12 September 2001.

-16-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

participation percentage, does such reimbursement include the value-added tax (VAT)
and other taxes affecting the contractor’s activities?”

Evidently SRI continued to assume at this stage that, but for the participation contracts, there
was an entitlement to a tax credit or refund.

71.

Dr Barniol replied on 20 November 2001;** having set out the background to the

consulta requested (including meetings with officials of the Northern Directorate of the SRI),
he referred to various relevant provisions. His analysis first of all emphasised that
participation contracts do not involve “reimbursement” by the State of the contractor’s
investments, costs and expenses. After referring to several other points, the analysis
continues:

72.

“. Before participating, companies interested in the bid have complete knowledge of
the Contract Bases. Based on that knowledge, they draw up their bids and
subsequently submit them in accordance with pre-established requirements for bid
participation. It is not mandatory to submit a description of their economic, financial,
technical, market studies, etc. For this reason, PETROECUADOR cannot certify
whether the bids of interested companies consider VAT as a cost.

- Bidding companies are cognizant of all of the Ecuadorian legislation applicable to
the contracts, as expressly cited in their bids, and in every executed contract.
Consequently, they are aware of the economic and tax obligations they must satisfy
once their contracts are executed. To state otherwise would be to covertly affirm that
the STATE OF ECUADOR has not acted in good faith.

Petroecuador has considered the above exposition, the fact that the Participation
Contracts [...] do not contemplate reimbursements of investments, costs and expenses
but rather a share in production in accordance with the tenders of the bidders, now
Contractors, and the fact that PETROECUADOR does not have the capacity to
document whether Contractors have included VAT as a cost in their tenders.
Therefore, I believe that because of the fact that the legal rule, thoroughly expounded
in this letter exists, it must be applied. If, nevertheless, there is a dispute, it must be
resolved by the appropriate authorities, in this case the [SRI], in the first instance, and
the District Tax Court, in the case of an appeal.

It is important to note that, if the case, PETROECUADOR will await a ruling by the
appropriate authorities to determine whether or not the participation factors should be
renegotiated in order to maintain the economic balance of the Contract and to be
faithful to its policy to respect the legal framework in effect.”

In her oral evidence, Dr de Mena stated that she had found the letter from Dr Barniol,

which was received after three of the denying resolutions had been issued, surprising:

Mr Barrack. So in fact in their response Petroecuador could not tell you or did not
tell you that VAT was included in the participation factors, did they?

Dr de Mena. [| wrote that letter because Mr Barniol said that, on the basis of his
analysis of the situation he had discovered that Occidental had clearly included the

Official Letter No. 1274-ACP-2001-4744, 20 November 2001.

-17-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

VAT paid for and entered in — their costs had been included in their contract. We just
about drafted the letter together. And the reply is something that surprised me,
because he had confirmed to me that it could not be clearer in any other company than
this that VAT was included in the contract as a cost, and the reply of Mr Barniol, you
can understand what you like from that really.

Mr Barrack. By the time you had received this letter, in fact you had issued another
denying resolution, and that denying resolution was 24th September 2001. So that by
the time you had received this letter you had issued three of the denying resolutions;
correct?

Dr de Mena. Yes. Could I clarify? I did this because I was convinced, after talking
to him, that he would confirm what we said when we discussed the matter and that he
would confirm then what we had discussed, and that he was quite clear in his mind as
to what was happening with the different oil companies as per what we had
discussed. But the only authorities that can act as regards the tax matters is the tax
authority.

Mr Thomas. I am just reflecting on the comment that you made earlier. Did I
understand it to be the case that you had consulted Petroecuador on the question of
whether the participation contracts included VAT and this letter from the president of
Petroecuador surprised you; in other words, did you see this as a change in position
from what you had previously understood from Petroecuador?

Dr de Mena. Yes, that is it. It was a change of position in respect to what we had
discussed.

Mr Thomas. Prior to this letter, it was your understanding from your discussions
with Petroecuador that VAT was included in the participation contracts?

Dr de Mena. The participation contracts covered all expenses and costs, including,
obviously, VAT, which is an intrinsic part of costs and expenses.° 5

73. Starting on 28 August 2001, SRI issued resolutions denying the applications of AEC
and COL (“the Denying Resolutions”). 36 According to the Claimant, this was done on the
basis that VAT refunds were included in the X Factors under the Participation Contracts.

74. It appears that all but Resolution 3191 (COL) were dealt with personally by Dr de
Mena. Resolution 3191 was issued by the Regional Director for the Northern Region.

75. Resolution 00669 and Resolution 00670, were issued by SRI on 28 August 2001, in
relation to AEC and COL respectively. In justifying the decision to refuse a large number of
applications for refunds, covering October 2000 to May 2001 in the case of AEC, and
September to December 2000 in the case of COL, the Denying Resolutions relied on a
number of arguments.

76. Taking by way of example Resolution 00669, first, in the considerations of fact, the
resolutions referred to and quoted the letter from the Northern Directorate of the SRI of 14

8 Day 4, p. 89, lines 11-24; p. 90, line 8 - p. 92, line II.
36 See the table in the Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, 14 March 2003, §27, and
see Exhibits 4, 5, 6 and 7.

-18-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

June 2001 and the reply dated 9 July 2001, enclosing the memorandum dated 11 July 2001,
quoted above at paragraph 66.

771. Second, in the considerations of law the resolutions referred to the unnumbered article
inserted following Article 12 of the Law on Hydrocarbons in 1993 making provision for
participation contracts (quoted above at paragraph 26) and other pieces of legislation relating
to the contents of bids to be included in the bidding process, concluding:

“e) Based on the foregoing, it is understood that under this form of contract the
contractor is committed to carry out on its account and risk all of the investments,
costs and expenses required for exploration, development and production. In
exchange, the State gives the contractor a share in audited production. Then to arrive
at the calculation of the said share as a form of payment and in conformity to the
legislation noted up to now, the contractor’s share must have considered in its
investments, costs and expenses for obtaining crude, the taxes such activity would
generate. And, as one of the taxes with the greatest presence in the tax spectrum of any
economic activity is the value-added tax, it would be unusual for it not to have been
included...”

Reference was then made to the memorandum of 11 July 2001 in support of that conclusion.
The considerations of law continued:

“f) Therefore the provision of Article 69A of the Internal Tax Regime Law is not
applicable because when the State of Ecuador reimbursed the contractor for its
investment, costs and expenses through the participation percentage, said
reimbursements included the value-added tax — VAT — and other taxes affecting the
activity.”

At this point in time, there was no mention of any argument based on the fact that the
extraction of oil does not fall within the concept of “fabricacién’” contained in Art. 69A
ITRL.

78. The next of the denying resolutions was Resolution No. 00736, dated 24 September
2001, which was the ruling by Dr de Mena on an appeal brought by COL against Resolution
No. 001730 of 31 August 1999 issued by the Northern Regional Director of SRI denying a
request for a refund.

79. Resolution No. 00736 adopted language which was in essentials the same as that used
in Resolutions 00669 and 00670, and upheld the resolution under appeal. The decision of the
Northern Regional Director under appeal had recited the cost accounting rules laid down for
participation contracts, which required “all the costs and expenses incurred in the different
stages of Exploration, Development, Production, Transport, Commercialisation, etc.” to be
registered as such; this precluded the right to a tax credit including for VAT paid.

“... the amount paid by the VAT [payer] in the importation and local purchases

carried out by [AEC] shall be registered as part of the cost of goods, as foreseen by the
[Cost Accounting Rule]; ...

-19-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

... in accordance with Article 65 of the [ITRL] the VAT paid in such acquisitions does
not grant the right to a tax credit. Therefore Article 169 of the [Regulations] is
inapplicable.”

80. On 12 November 2001, prior to receipt of the letter dated 20 November 2001 from Dr
Barniol, a response was filed on behalf of SRI in relation to challenges to Resolutions 00669
and 00670 by AEC and COL respectively. This response relied on both the argument that the
VAT was to be treated as being refunded under the participation factors, and the argument
that extraction of oil did not constitute “fabricacién” >

81. Resolution No. UR-0003191 was issued on 20 December 2001 by the Northern
Regional Director of the SRI in relation to a claim for VAT refunds made by COL. It
contained language similar to the previous denying resolutions, referring to the nature of
participation contracts, and the fact that VAT was to be treated as having been compensated
in the participation factor (para. 3(f)), although there was no reference to the memorandum
from Petroecuador dated 11 July 2001, nor to the letter from Dr Barniol dated 20 November
2001. At this point, there was still no reliance on the argument that the extraction of oil did
not constitute “fabricacién” within the meaning of Article 69A ITRL.

82. On 1 April 2002 the Director-General of SRI issued Resolution 233 purporting to
annul each of the Original Resolutions under which refunds had been paid to AEC and
ordering the commencement of proceedings to collect the sum of $7,567,091.87 previously
granted as a VAT refund. The proceedings were brought by way of an appeal initiated by the
Northern Regional Director of the SRI on 7 September 2001 against resolutions granting
refunds to various oil companies. The alleged grounds for the annulment was the VAT
refunds had been mistakenly paid as the sums had already been compensated under the
Participation Contracts; additionally, it was said that there was no right to a refund as the
right to a refund only applied to input VAT in respect of exported goods where the materials
and services acquired were used in the manufacture (“fabricacién”) of the exported
product.

83. Resolution 233, in the paragraph containing the reasoning of SRI, as with the earlier
resolutions, made reference to the article providing for participation contracts in the
Hydrocarbons law. It then set out the “fabricacién” argument:

“e) Article 69A... is clear when stating the following: ‘Natural persons and
companies that have paid Value-Added Tax in local acquisition or importation of
goods employed in the manufacture [fabricacidn] of exported products, are entitled to
a refund’ [...] (emphasis added).

f) Petroleum is not a good that is manufactured or that undergoes a process;
simply it is extracted from reservoirs owned by the State of Ecuador. According to the
Diccionario de la Lengua Espafiola, manufacture [fabricar] means ‘to produce objects
in series, generally through mechanical means’. In the case of extraction of petroleum,

Compendium of Materials Prepared by EnCana, vol. 1, tab 4, p. 11.
See Exhibit 8 to the Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, 14 March 2003.

-20-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

a product is not made or produced, it is extracted and exported, without undergoing
any transformation whatsoever.”

It continued, in language reminiscent of the early resolutions:

“k) _...whoever invests in a risky activity such as oil, always considers that all of
its investments costs and expenses are recoverable in whole or its percentage of risk is
covered with a high return. In petroleum activities, this is contemplated in the
participation percentage granted by the State of Ecuador and determined at the time of
contract negotiation. This is a generally accepted practice in hydrocarbon matters
throughout the world and was considered by the company in the negotiation of the
participation percentage. The tax rules in effect on the date of contract execution, in
which VAT refunds were not contemplated, were also taken into account.

1) Because the contractor’s participation percentages already recognized payment
of all taxes, the State of Ecuador duplicates said recognition by accepting the VAT
refund application the contractor, as exporter, filed with the SRI. Such recognition was
made in due time by Petroecuador, which acts on behalf of the State, and the same
State has governmental authority to create taxes.

p) [...] neither the legal framework applicable on the date of execution of the
Amendment of the Contract into a Participation Contract (July 25, 1995), nor the
current rules, contemplate that crude oil extraction and exportation activities give a
right to a tax credit, and even less to a refund of VAT. The reason is that the VAT
paid by the Contractor was already considered in the contractor’s participation
percentage at the time of contract negotiation. So were the other taxes, encumbrances,
contributions and charges affecting the Contractor’s business and which are paid as
established in the Law [...]

r) [...] As with the legal rule contained in Art. 69A of the [ITRL], the current
Art. 169 of [the Regulations] only provides refunds for VAT paid in the importation or
local acquisition of supplies, raw materials and services manufactured and exported by
the manufacturer or producer. In other words, the regulation is also inapplicable to
activities concerning the exploitation of non-renewable natural resources owned by the
State of Ecuador. Furthermore, the State of Ecuador already has reimbursed this tax to
the contractor by having accepted the contractor’s proposed participation percentage,
which contained that cost...”

Although the memorandum of 11 July 2001 was referred to in the application brought by the
Northern Regional Director of the SRI to quash the various granting resolutions, it was not
referred to in the reasoning of Dr de Mena. There was also no reference to the letter from Dr
Barniol of 20 November 2001.

84. It will be seen that Resolution 233 gave two distinct reasons for denying the right to a
VAT refund (and consequently demanding repayment of VAT refunds already paid): first,
that “the VAT paid by the Contractor was already considered in the contractor’s participation
percentage at the time of contract negotiation”; secondly, that Article 69A ITRL is applicable
only to goods which are manufactured and has no application to “activities concerning the
exploitation of non-renewable natural resources owned by the State of Ecuador”. The latter
argument, apparently first employed by the Northern Regional Director of the SRI on 7

-21-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

September 2001 in bringing the appeal against the previous resolutions granting refunds, was
now taken up as an additional ground by the Director-General of SRI?

85. Thus as concerns the justification for denying refunds and for revoking the previous
resolutions granting refunds, the position of SRI changed significantly between Resolutions
00669 and 00670, adopted on 28 August 2001 and Resolution 233, adopted on 1 April 2002.
Dr de Mena in her oral evidence freely admitted as much:

Mr Ordway. The subject of this arbitration is five resolutions issued by the SRI with
respect to VAT refunds concerning those companies, City Investing and City Oriente.
Those resolutions, however, do not focus on Article 69A. They discuss the contract,
for example. Has your position on this issue evolved over time?

Dr de Mena. The SRI -- yes, their thinking of course has evolved and as one point of
justification of the reasoning behind the resolutions is that it does not affect the
legality of the , provisions of 69A which do not allow refund to goods that are not
manufactured.“

She also freely admitted that there was a policy of providing refunds to exporters of
agricultural products (even if at all times the law was not entirely clear in that regard), and of
not granting refunds to oil companies exporting oil, although she maintained the position that
after the passing of Article 69A, refunds were not permitted to oil companies as a matter of
the law:

Mr Ordway. With respect to their position that they had an entitlement, was there any
policy with respect to oil companies that you believe is pertinent?

Dr de Mena. The law does not allow it, or did not allow it. But Ecuador had been
consistent in their policy of not refunding VAT to oil companies. We had been
consistent since the time when the ministry of finance was in charge of tax
administration, and then it was the national internal revenue system and then the SRI
when there was the most recent restructuring of tax administration in Ecuador. The
consistency remained.

We had always been consistent then through the different restructuring in our policy
with regards to that sector and the agricultural sector, for instance, we treated it as a
policy to promote exports there. This policy to promote exports was very well known,
well known and familiar to companies that embarked on the process of negotiation to
invest in Ecuador, with the Ecuadorian Government. So there could not have been
any expectations, because of this policy that we had applied consistently and because
of the law and the legal provisions in force at the time there was no law that permitted
a refund, legally anyway or through 694A, for i instance.*

Mr Ordway. You testified earlier that you agreed with Ecuador's position as stated in
its papers, submissions, that the oil companies were not entitled to VAT refunds under
69A because they were not manufacturers. Yet you also issued refunds to cut flower
* As noted above, it had been relied upon by the SRI in its response filed in November 2001 in relation to
the challenge to Resolutions 00669 and 00670 brought by AEC and COL.
Day 4: p. 63, line 22 — p. 64, line 7. Cfalso Mr Venegas, Day 3, p. 94, lines 18-19.
“ Day 4: p. 65, line 10 —p. 66, line 8.

-22-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

exporters, banana exporters and other exporters of goods that also were not
manufactured. How can you explain that?

Dr de Mena. Under a regulation there was something that said that under
manufacturers, that that concept would also cover economic agents in the agricultural
sector, and that had been Ecuador's policy since the tax authorities had begun to
administer matters, or tax matters had been administered by the Ministry of Finances,
that had always been the policy, it was a policy aimed at promoting exports, around
the Ministry of Finances could abide by that authority, as did the tax authorities and
the SRI after various processes of restructuring. The legal norms perhaps do not
necessarily cover the agricultural sector, but the fact is that we had this policy in our
country which we applied consistently, and perhaps we should make that more
specific.

Mr Ordway. Do you think, given the language of 69A, that the granting of VAT
refunds to those companies is something that perhaps should have been reconsidered
or should be reconsidered?

Dr de Mena. I do not think so, because that was based on a policy that had been
traditionally followed in our country. However, if Ecuador finds it appropriate,
perhaps they could -- I do not know, we could enact a law, that might be a good
idea.”~

Mr Barrack: Ms de Mena, one of the things you testified this morning was that prior
to Article 69A becoming part of the law, that oil companies did not have the right to a
refund. What was your understanding of the basis for that?

Dr de Mena. They did not have a right before, nor do they now, is what I said.
Before, Article 69A, the regulation, the regulatory norm did not have the same
prerequisites as now. Ecuador's policy was to reimburse all, and there had been no
refunds for oil companies.

Mr Barrack. But there were refunds for other exporters?

Dr de Mena, There were refunds for agricultural exporters particularly.

Mr Barrack. Even when there was nothing in the regulation which spoke about
agriculture, there were refunds to exporters, prior to that regulation as well; correct?
Dr de Mena. There were refunds. The norm said that you can interpret products of
the agricultural sector as manufactured products.

Mr Barrack. Even before that was in the regulation, the specific provision that you
are referring to, there was a time when that did not exist in the regulations; correct?
Dr de Mena. I am not a lawyer, and I have not really looked at prior regulations. But
I know -- all I can say anyway is that there were refunds always to the agricultural
sector following this policy of promoting the exports of our country, and this is a very
well known policy, well known to investors who came to negotiate the contracts with
the Ecuadorian state.

Mr Barrack. As far as you are concerned, there has always been a policy, at least
from the SRI's point of view, of not granting refunds to oil companies?

Dr de Mena. As far as the SRI is concerned, we were complying with the law,
namely Article 69A.

Day 4: p. 69: 12—p. 70: 9.

-23-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

Mr Barrack. But even before 69A, the policy of not granting refunds to oil
companies existed?

Dr de Mena. SRI was set up pursuant to law 41 in 1997, and before that it was the
Ministry of Finance and the national tax administration that governed tax affairs, and
the policy was to refund VAT to those that exported agricultural goods. There were
never any refunds to the oil companies.

Mr Barrack. So the answer is yes, it was always the policy not to refund VAT to the
oil companies, throughout the entire history of the SRI; correct?

Dr de Mena. There is a nuance here, that policy did exist, but now it is a legal
prerequisite. You cannot do it according to law because of Article 69A, it is not
allowed now legally, so we are complying with the law.®

86. It is not disputed that, if VAT refunds should not have been granted before August
2001, SRI had the right to recover them back.

(5) Disputes over VAT refunds: Ecuadorian court proceedings

87. This change in policy on the part of the SRI gave rise to disputes not only on the part
of AEC and COL but also on the part of other foreign oil companies in Ecuador.

88. For their part AEC and COL brought proceedings in the Ecuadorian District Tax
Court within the 20 day period prescribed by Ecuadorian law, challenging each of the
Denying Resolutions and Resolution 233. The District Tax Court rendered its decisions on 8
November 2002 and 19 November 2002; the District Tax Court held that the tax laws
(including Art. 69A ITRL) were not applicable in relation to 10% of the VAT as the matter
was to be resolved in the context of the economic adjustment provisions of the Participation
Contracts, and thus fell outside the province of the tax system. In relation to the difference
between VAT at 10% and VAT at 12%, which resulted from amendment to the tax legislation
which entered into force after the conclusion of the Participation Contracts, and thus could
not have been included in the Participation Contracts, or be subject to the economic
adjustment clauses in those contracts, the District Tax Court held that AEC and COL were
entitled to the refund of the difference. This decision was reached on the basis that although
Art. 69A was not applicable to oil companies as crude oil was not “fabricated” or
manufactured, a provision of the tax legislation (Art. 16(2) ITRL) permitted the courts to
grant refunds to tax payers subjected to taxes which caused a modification fo the economic
relationship between the parties.

89. | AEC and COL filed appeals against these decisions before the Ecuadorian Supreme
Court. These appeals were subsequently discontinued at the same time as EnCana
commenced the present arbitration proceedings, although Article XII[(12) of the BIT only
requires the discontinuance or waiving of claims before the courts of the host State in the case
of locally-incorporated subsidiaries.

* Day 4: p. 81, line 23 — p. 83, line 21.
See the Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 February 2004, §20.

-24-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

90. Despite the discontinuance by the two companies, SRI nevertheless continued in its
cross-appeal against the decisions of the District Tax Court. SRI’s argument was essentially
on the narrow point that since the 2% difference ordered to be refunded concerned the
Participation Contracts, the District Tax Court had erred in ordering SRI to provide the
refund, rather than leaving the matter to be dealt with by Petroecuador. The Supreme Court
affirmed the entitlement to a refund in relation to the difference between a 10% and a 12%
VAT rate on the basis relied upon by the District Tax Court (which was not expressly
challenged by SRI), and rejected SRI’s argument that its should not be made liable for the
refund of the 2% difference on the basis that VAT can only be refunded via the mechanisms
created by the relevant law, and that the obligation of SRI in this respect cannot be over-
ridden by contractual provisions.

91. By contrast, the Supreme Court in the Bellwether case*® rejected the argument based
on “fabricacién” under Article 69A ITRL, and held that the oil producer was entitled to a
refund.

92. Notwithstanding the Bellwether decision, the District Tax Courts have continued to
issue rulings in the line of their earlier decisions, reinforced by the Interpretative Law; in
particular, a further decision at first instance of the District Tax Court in the Repsol case
confirmed the interpretation relied upon by SRI in relation to “fabricacidn”, relying on the
legislative history of Article 69.7

93. Apparently the lower courts may do so under Ecuadorian law because Supreme Court
decisions do not constitute binding jurisprudence until the Supreme Court has ruled the same
way three times. Whether the Supreme Court has ruled three times on the issue in question
here was strongly disputed between the parties. However, pending the resolution of the
dispute over the composition of the Supreme Court, the legal system is unable to bring all
pending cases to final resolution at this stage.

94. Accordingly, the parties take opposing positions as to whether Ecuadorian law granted
a right to a VAT refund to AEC and COL at the relevant time. A substantial amount of
expert opinion has been provided, as well as views from several of the witnesses of fact, as to
the applicable Ecuadorian law. The Tribunal will return to this issue at a later stage.

(6) Interpretative Law No. 2004-41 (2004

95. On 2 August 2004, the Ecuadorian National Congress passed law No. 2004-41, an
Interpretative Law concerning Article 69A of the ITRL.** The Interpretative Law was

6 City Oriente Lid. v. Director-General of the SRI, Supreme Court of Justice, Case 42-2003, 14 January

2004 (Exhibit R-27, Ecuador’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, Exhibits, vol. 1); and City Investing Ltd. v. —
Director-General of the SRI, Supreme Court of Justice, Case 48-2003, 12 February 2004 (Exhibit R-28,
Ecuador’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, Exhibits, vol. 1).
“ Bellwether International v. Director General of the SRI, Case No. 4-2003-12-4, 12 November 2003
(Exhibit R-30, Ecuador’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, Exhibits, vol. | (corrected version)).

Repsol ¥PF v. Director-General of the SRI, District Tax Court, First Chamber, Case No. 19803-2288-
B, 19 March 2004 (Exhibit R-29, Ecuador’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, Exhibits, vol. 1 (corrected
version)); cf. Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, 25 June 2004, §§37-38;

See Exhibits to Respondent’s Rejoinder, vol. 1, R-83.

-25-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

published in the Official Journal on 11 August 2004. The operative paragraph provides that
Article 69A ITRL “is interpreted to mean that the refund of the Value Added Tax (VAT) is
not applicable to petroleum activity as it refers to extraction, transportation and marketing of
crude petroleum, since petroleum is not manufactured, but is extracted from the respective
deposits”.

96. The recitals to the Interpretative Law provided as follows:

“Whereas, Art. 69A incorporated into the Internal Tax Regime Law by Law No. 99-
24, published in the Supplement of Official Gazette No. 181 of April 30, 1999,
establishes the reimbursement of Value-Added Tax paid in the purchases of goods
used in the fabrication of export goods in order to promote the exportation of goods
with the greatest national value added;

Whereas, petroleum is not a good that is fabricated but rather is extracted from
petroleum reservoirs and, therefore, in the International Standard Industrial
Classification of All Economic Activities (ISIC), the activity of extracting petroleum
falls under Section C, Division 12, Group 120 while fabrication or manufacturing
activities fall under Section D of said International Classification;

Whereas the article after Art. 55 of the Internal Tax Regime Law added by Law 99-41,
published in the Supplement of Official Gazette No. 321 of November 18, 1999,
expressly excludes petroleum activities from the treatment established in said norm;
Whereas, in accordance with the norms established in the Law on Hydrocarbons, the
participation percentages of petroleum companies are established so as to enable them
to recover the costs, expenses, contributions and other taxes affecting petroleum
activities, in addition to a reasonable profit;

Whereas, the same Law on Hydrocarbons and its Regulations establish that in the case
of tax amendments or any other legal norm affecting the economy of contracts, such
economy shall be restored through an adjustment to the participation percentages;
Whereas, despite the clear and explicit provisions contained in the Ecuadorian
legislation with respect to this matter, multinational companies that are dedicated to
the exploitation of hydrocarbons have been claiming, before Ecuadorian Courts and
other international courts, the refund of the Value Added Tax, invoking illegitimate
arguments,

Whereas, overriding the jurisdiction of Ecuadorian Tribunals, the analysis and
resolution of this matter has been taken abroad, where it is possible to confuse the
content and scope of our legislation;

Whereas, the incorrect application of Article 69-A of the Internal Tax Regime Law
has caused grave economic damages to the Ecuadorian State;

Whereas, in accordance with number 5 of Art. 130 of the Political Constitution of the
Republic of Ecuador, it is the duty of the National Congress to interpret laws of a
generally mandatory nature;

In use of its constitutional and legal powers...”

97. There was some discussion before the Tribunal as to the constitutionality and legal
effect of the Interpretative Law. Nonetheless as far as the Tribunal is aware no action has
been taken to challenge its validity. The question whether it was purely prospective in effect
was also debated.

-26-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

(7) Attempts to renegotiate the participation factor with Petroecuador

98. Thus by a combination of executive acts, judicial decisions and eventually (after the
adverse decision in the Occidental case) an Interpretative Law, Ecuador took the position that
VAT payable by oil companies was not to be refunded because the companies were not
engaged in manufacture (“fabricacién”) for the purposes of Article 69A ITRL, and that any
remedy was to be sought under by changes in the participation factor under the adjustment
clause in the Petroecuador contracts.

99, But this position was not arrived at immediately or unequivocally. When some of the
affected companies sought an adjustment to the Participation Contracts, Petroecuador
rejected such claims on the ground that VAT refunds were a matter for SRI.” The position
of SRI, by contrast ~ and eventually that of the President of Ecuador’ — was that any
adjustment was to be achieved under the contracts, and in terms of Ecuadorian tax law and
practice this position must be taken to have prevailed, at the latest, at the time of the
Interpretative Law.

(8) Dismissal of Supreme Court justices and related events

100. In December 2004 almost all of the judges of the Supreme Court and the
Constitutional Court were dismissed by resolution of the Congress. These events gave rise to
considerable criticism in Ecuador and elsewhere?’ According to the Claimant’s Post-
Hearing Brief, the President of Ecuador said in a television interview that “two or three days
before the Court was changed, the judges apparently ruled against the interests of the State
and admitted the claims for oil-related reimbursements brought by various foreign
companies”.

101. The Respondent reacted by a letter of 11 February 2005, to which it attached a
Statement of the President of Ecuador, HE Lucio Gutiérrez Borba, addressed to the
Tribunal. The President noted (a) that the judges, appointed for a 4-year term in 1998, had
been extended in office on a temporary basis, and that Congress had decided by majority to
reorganise the Supreme Court, appointing 31 new members; (b) that at the time of the
reorganization, neither EnCana nor any present or former EnCana subsidiary had any cases
pending before the Supreme Court. President Gutiérrez referred to the television interview
but stated:

“In my capacity as Constitutional President of the Republic, I emphatically deny any
presumption that could lead the Tribunal to conclude that my Government interfered

49

° See Occidental Award, para. 35.

See the letter of 27 October 2003 (DPR-2003-229) from the President Gutiérrez to Dr de Mena, which
instructed her to resolve the disputes with the oil companies through the application of the economic stability
provisions of the Hydrocarbons Law. Dr de Mena subsequently communicated these instructions to the
Executive President of PetroEcuador: see the letter of 21 July 2004 (No. 0240).

See e.g., E/CN.4/2005/60/Add.4 (29 March 2005).

Television interview by President Gutiérrez, 14 December 2004, EnCana Post-hearing Brief, 23
December 2004, Exhibit 2.

32

-27-

EnCana Corporation v, Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

in the reorganization of the Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, and that said
reorganization had any relation to the lawsuits filed by the oil companies before the
Ecuadorian Courts.”

He went on to affirm the independence of the judiciary in Ecuador and Ecuador’s
commitment to comply with arbitration proceedings as provided in treaties to which Ecuador
is a party.

102. It is true that there were no proceedings by EnCana subsidiaries at this time; these had
been withdrawn when the present proceedings were commenced. On the other hand certain
proceedings brought by other oil companies were pending before the Supreme Court.

103. Following deliberations on a draft Award, the Tribunal on 4 April 2005 addressed
certain questions to the parties. Specifically it asked:

1. In relation to the letter from the President of Ecuador dated 27 October 2003 to
Dr de Mena, in the period from October 2003 to July 2004, what was done by
Ecuador, including PetroEcuador, to give effect to the terms of that letter?
2. For the period after July 2004, what concrete steps, if any, were taken by
Ecuador, including PetroEcuador, to give effect to the matters set out in the recitals to
the Interpretative Law of 11 August 2004?
3. Did EnCana, or any EnCana subsidiary, or any other affected oil company,
request PetroEcuador:

a. to give effect to the terms of the President’s letter of 27 October 2003;

b. to act to resolve outstanding questions in the light of the matters set out in the

recitals to the Interpretative Law?

104. On 20 April 2005, President Gutiérrez was removed by a vote of Congress and
subsequently left the country, being granted asylum in Brazil.

105. The responses of the parties to the Tribunal’s questions of 4 April 2005 were filed on
16 May 2005, with replies on 27 May 2005. These statements revealed a number of
discrepancies on points of fact. According to Ecuador, considerable efforts had been made to
renegotiate contracts through the economic stability clauses, with success in some cases.
Moreover the Attorney-General stated that he had on several occasions invited EnCana to
engage in these negotiations, something which Mr. Keplinger, the General Manager of AEC,
declined to do. According to EnCana, while there was a meeting between Mr Keplinger and
the Attorney-General on 5 August 2004, that meeting did not involve any concrete offer to
negotiate, nor did the Attorney General’s communications with the Canadian Ambassador
and other officials at the Canadian Embassy lead to a concrete proposal: apart from that there
was “no other indication that Ecuador, either through the SRI or Petroecuador, is prepared to
take any step to provide any additional amount owing to AEC or COL in respect of input
VAT receivables”.*? EnCana also denied that the renegotiated agreements reached by two
marginal producers were comparable to the Participation Contracts with the EnCana
subsidiaries.

Witness Statement of John Keplinger, 16 May 2005, para 33.

-28-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

106. It is not necessary for the Tribunal to resolve the factual discrepancies between the
parties revealed by the responses of 16 and 27 May 2005. It seems clear (a) that there was
one unproductive meeting between EnCana and the Attorney-General; (b) that the Attorney
General did on more than one occasion raise the issue of the Participation Agreements with
Canadian Embassy officials; (c) that EnCana’s general attitude, as it had been from the
beginning, was that it was entitled to VAT refunds and that it was pursuing its claim in that
regard before the present tribunal, and (d) that statements from the Ecuadorian side, as well
as, at a later date, the political turmoil surrounding the action taken against the courts and the
removal of the President, made renegotiation an unsatisfactory option. In Mr Keplinger’s
words the oil companies including EnCana subsidiaries “are therefore very reluctant to
reopen any of their agreements with the Government of Ecuador”.™4

Cc. ENCANA’S CLAIMS OF BREACHES OF THE BIT

107. As a result of the actions of SRI in denying VAT credits/refunds and seeking
collection of credits/refunds previously granted to its subsidiaries, EnCana alleges a number
of violations of the BIT. Specifically EnCana alleges Ecuador’s violation of the following
Articles:

° Article II(1), by taking action inconsistent with its obligation to “encourage the
creation of favourable conditions for investors of the other Contracting Party
to make investments in its territory”;

e Article I1(2)(a), by failing to accord EnCana’s investments and returns fair and
equitable treatment in accordance with the principles of international law;

e Article [V(1), in that Ecuador has failed to accord EnCana national
treatment;

° Article VIII, in that the measures taken constitute expropriation or measures of
equivalent effect to expropriation.

108. Relevant provisions of the BIT are set out in Appendix 2. Of particular significance
in the present case is Article XII, dealing with taxation measures. This provides as follows;

“1, Except as set out in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to
taxation measures.

3. Subject to paragraph (2), a claim by an investor that a tax measure of a
Contracting Party is in breach of an agreement between the central government
authorities of a Contracting Party and the investor concerning an investment shall be
considered a claim for breach of this Agreement unless the taxation authorities of the

54

Witness Statement of John Keplinger, 27 May 2005, para 23.
55

Although a claim based on Article XVI and estoppel was originally put forward (Claimant, Memorial,
26 April 2004, §§179, 223-226), this is now effectively subsumed in EnCana’s Article II claim: see Claimant,
Response, 10 August 2004, §293; Post Hearing Brief, §§414-416.

In the Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, 14 March 2003, there was also an
allegation of violation of Article III by failing to provide most-favoured nation treatment. The claim based on
Article III does not appear in the Claimant’s, Memorial, 26 April 2004 and subsequent pleadings.

~29-

EnCana Corporation v, Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

Contracting Parties, no later than six months after being notified of the claim by the
investor, jointly determine that the measure does not contravene such agreement.

4. Article VIII may be applied to a taxation measure unless the taxation
authorities of the Contracting Parties, no later than six months after being notified by
an investor that he disputes a taxation measure, jointly determine that the measure is
not an expropriation.

5. If the taxation authorities of the Contracting Parties fail to reach the joint
determinations specified in paragraphs (3) and (4) within six months after being
notified, the investor may submit its claim for resolution under Article XII.”

109. In the present case, notice was given by EnCana under Article XII(4), but there was
no determination by the tax authorities of Canada and Ecuador in terms of that provision
within six months. Accordingly, even if the measures complained of are taxation measures
under Article XII(1), it is open to EnCana to challenge them as an expropriation under Article
VIII. On the other hand, there is no relevant agreement between EnCana and the central
government authorities of Ecuador since (whether or not Petroecuador qualifies as such an
authority) the Participation Contracts were made by EnCana subsidiaries which do not
qualify as “investors” under Article I(h) of the BIT. For these reasons, unless and to the
extent that the measures fall outside the scope of the exclusion of taxation measures in Article
XII, it is not open to EnCana to complain of breaches of other provisions of the BIT than
Article VIII.

110. Indeed, in that event the jurisdictional provision of the BIT lacks application also,
since subject to the enumerated exceptions, nothing in the BIT applies to taxation measures,
and this includes Article XIII.

111. By its Decision on Jurisdiction of 27 February 2004, the Tribunal joined this aspect of
the Respondent's jurisdictional objections to the merits, as noted above.

D. THE JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES

112. As noted in paragraphs 7-8 above, the Respondent raised a number of jurisdictional
objections in its pleading of 27 October 2003. In its decision of 31 January 2004 the Tribunal
rejected part of those submissions and joined the remainder to the merits. The Respondent
raised further jurisdictional issues in its Counter-Memorial “in the light of the arguments and
information contained in EnCana’s Memorial”.*’ At this stage of the case, the Respondent
maintains the following jurisdictional objections:

(1) — EnCana cannot claim with respect to loss suffered by subsidiary companies
having the nationality of a third State;

(2) Even if a claim were maintainable on behalf of AEC, no claim can be brought
in relation to COL given EnCana’s sale of its interests in COL on 28
November 2003;

Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 25 June 2004, §69.

-30-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

(3) The right to a VAT refund concerns a “taxation matter” and, unless it
constitutes an expropriation, is excluded from BIT protection under Article
XII(1).

113. Further, at the jurisdictional phase, the Respondent argued that the denial of a
subsidiary’s right to a VAT refund was not the expropriation either of an “investment” or a
“return”, and does not even prima facie fall within the scope of Article VIII. Subsequently
this argument appears to have been pursued as one concerning the merits rather than as a
jurisdictional objection. In the circumstances the Tribunal will deal with this aspect of
EnCana’s claim as a matter of the merits.

114. The Tribunal will discuss the three remaining objections in turn, dealing with any
factual disputes so far as necessary in order to dispose of them.

(1) EnCana’s standing to claim for treatment of third-State subsidiaries

115. The Respondent argues that the BIT envisages a distinction between, on the one hand,
claims brought by the investor in respect of damage and loss which it itself has suffered under
Article XTII(1), and on the other, claims brought on behalf of an enterprise which the investor
“owns or controls directly or indirectly” under Article XII[(12). In the latter case it is only
where the enterprise is “a juridical person incorporated or duly constituted in accordance with
applicable laws” of the host State that a claim can be maintained. Neither AEC nor COL are
Ecuadorian corporations. Accordingly there is no mechanism under the BIT whereby an
investor can bring a claim on behalf of an enterprise not incorporated in the host State for loss
and damage suffered by that enterprise; rather the investor can only claim for damage which
it has suffered itself.°* According to the Respondent, EnCana is not claiming in relation to its
own loss but rather in relation to loss suffered by AEC and COL insofar as the relief sought is
the reimbursement of sums of money to these subsidiaries. In particular, having regard to
Article XIII(12) the parties to the BIT could not have intended claims to be brought in respect
of damage done to a subsidiary incorporated in a third State, otherwise Article XIII(12)
would have been unnecessary.”” The alleged “coverage gap” relied upon by the Claimant
arises because of the general international law as to the nationality of claims, which has not
been modified by the BIT.“!

116. For its part EnCana argues that there is nothing in the language of Article XIII(1)
which limits it to claims for direct or independent injury.” In EnCana’s view Article
XIII(12) does not limit the application of Article XII(1). Rather Article XIM(12) is a
special provision allowing an investor to bring proceedings on behalf of a subsidiary
incorporated in the host State which has suffered loss or damage there. In this respect Article

58 5

Ibid., §74.
° Ibid., §77, referring to Claimant’s Memorial, 26 April 2004, §290(ii) and (iii); see also, ibid., §290(v)
& (vii). See also the prayer for relief in Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, §60(b), (c),
2) & (f).
§ Respondent’s Rejoinder,,8 October 2004, §§60, 64.

ot Ibid., §65.
° Claimant’s Response, 10 August 2004, §142.
s Ibid., §§145-146.

-31-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

XIII(12) is an exception to the international law rule excluding claims against a State by its
own nationals.” In the present case, by contrast, EnCana insists that it is claiming for its own
loss and not on behalf of subsidiaries. In this regard, EnCana submits that the evidence
shows that the cash funding requirements of both subsidiaries were provided by EnCana; that
the denial of the VAT refunds/credits are a “direct loss in cash value in the subsidiaries”, and
that any recovery of such funds could be passed directly to EnCana without any deduction, or
would increase the value of the investment by the increase in the liquid assets of the
subsidiaries. In any event, the power of the Tribunal to award restitution of property or
damages in lieu under Article XIII(9) is not limited; it would be appropriate for the Tribunal
to order restitution of property to the subsidiary if it finds that there has been a taking.

117. The Tribunal would first observe that in accordance with general principle it is
necessary to interpret the provisions of the BIT so as to give due effect to each of them
having regard to the object and purpose of the treaty as a whole. In this respect the following
provisions of the BIT are relevant:

° Article I(g) defines an investment to include “any kind of asset owned or
controlled either directly, or indirectly through an investor of a third State”. In
accordance with this definition, interests of Canadian investors in Ecuador can
be held through third State corporations provided that the latter are owned or
controlled by the investor. At the time of the events which EnCana complains
of,” and at the time the present arbitration was commenced, AEC and COL
were wholly owned and controlled by EnCana, which therefore had an
investment in Ecuador covered by the BIT.

° Article I(h) defines an investor to include an enterprise incorporated in Canada
“who makes the investment in the territory of the Republic of Ecuador”. Read
in conjunction with the definitions of “investment” and “enterprise”, there is
no doubt that EnCana qualifies as an investor for the purposes of the BIT.

° Article Ij) defines “returns” as “all amounts yielded by an investment”, and
goes on to list, non-exhaustively, various forms of returns including “other
current income”.

° The substantive provisions of the BIT (e.g., Articles I, [V and VIII) provide
certain guarantees in relation to “investments or returns of investors of the
other Contracting Party” without further specification. In other words,
provided that the entity affected by treatment contravening these provisions is
an “investment” of a Canadian investor as defined in Article I, there is no
further specification that the investment vehicle should have either Canadian
or Ecuadorian nationality.

. Against this background Article XIII(1) covers “any dispute between one
Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting Party, relating to a
claim by the investor that a measure taken or not taken by the former
Contracting Party is in breach of this Agreement, and that the investor has

“ Ibid., $150.

Claimant’s Response, 10 August 2004, §§165-166.

6 Tbid., §163.

The Tribunal leaves to one side for the moment VAT claims concerning periods of time when the
subsidiary in question was not owned or controlled by EnCana.

~32-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach” (emphasis
added): such disputes, if not settled within 6 months, may be submitted to
arbitration in accordance with the remaining provisions of Article XIII. The
generality of these words is clear enough. In order to bring a claim to investor-
State arbitration, i.e. to attract the jurisdiction of a Tribunal under Article
XII(4), a qualified investor does not need to prove that it has suffered loss; it
is sufficient that it alleges loss to a covered investment, which EnCana has
done, and credibly done.

° Article XIII(12) goes on to make special provision for the case where a local
enterprise in the host State which is directly or indirectly owned or controlled
by an investor has suffered loss or damage by reason of or arising out of a
breach of the BIT. In such a case the investor may bring a claim under Article
XIII on behalf of the enterprise; in effect the investor is acting as an agent for
the enterprise in bringing the claim, and any award is to be paid to the affected
enterprise.

118. The Tribunal does not interpret Article XIII(12) as limiting the clear words of Articles
I and XIII(1) which allow an investor to maintain a claim for loss suffered to itself arising
from a breach of the BIT. Evidently the BIT proceeds on the basis that the separate identity
of corporations incorporated in different States and territories is to be respected. Nonetheless
it expressly allows investments to be held through third State corporations, and claims to be
made for breaches involving such investments, provided the investor has suffered loss or
damage as a result. True, it does distinguish between loss or damage suffered by a locally
incorporated enterprise and loss or damage suffered directly or indirectly by the investor
itself. Circumstances can be envisaged where a breach of the BIT affecting a locally
incorporated subsidiary would have caused no loss or damage to the parent — e.g., where no
consequence flowed from the breach either to the returns to the parent or to the share value of
the subsidiary. In such a case, the investor could only recover by bringing proceedings in
accordance with Article XIII(12). Alternatively the measure of loss to the foreign investor
might be different from that to the locally incorporated enterprise, e.g. in case of a majority-
owned enterprise or an enterprise required contractually to indemnify its parent for any loss.
But an investor which alleges that it has suffered loss or damage, directly or indirectly,
through a breach of the BIT is entitled to bring proceedings under Articles XIII(1) and (2). If
it cannot prove compensable loss or damage, it will fail on the merits; that does not affect the
Jurisdiction of a tribunal constituted in accordance with Article XIII(4) to entertain its
claim.

119. The Tribunal notes that to some extent the Respondent’s complaint was provoked by
the way in which the Claimant’s prayer for relief was formulated in its Application, insofar as
it included claims for reimbursement and/or damages to be paid to COL and AEC. EnCana
argues that “derivative” loss and damage are actionable on behalf of the subsidiary but its
reliance on SD Myers® and Pope & Talbot” in this respect is misplaced. Both of these
oe Articles I(g) and XIII do not allow shareholders in general to represent third-State enterprises; it is
necessary that the enterprise be owned or controlled by an investor having the nationality of one of the two
States.
° SD Myers Inc. v Government of Canada (2000) 8 ICSID Reports 18, 51 (para. 231).

7 Pope & Talbot Inc. v Government of Canada (2002) 7 ICSID Reports 148, 166 (para. 80).

-33-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

claims involved claims for loss and damage caused to the parent (the investor) arising from
measures taken in relation to their subsidiaries (the investment) rather than claims made on
behalf of the subsidiary under NAFTA Article 1117 for the subsidiary’s loss and damage. (In
any event, both claims involved subsidiaries incorporated in the host State.)

120. The BIT does not envisage that damages will be paid to enterprises which are not
themselves investors as defined in Article I, except by way of the special provision under
Article XIII(12) for curative proceedings on behalf of an enterprise incorporated in the host
State. To the extent that it sought damages to be paid to AEC and COL as such, EnCana’s
request clearly went beyond what the BIT allows. But this does not affect the Tribunal’s
jurisdiction over EnCana’s concurrent claim for loss or damage to itself.”

121. It is not necessary for the Tribunal to decide whether an investor could, pursuant to
Article XIII(9)(b), seek restitution of property taken from a subsidiary incorporated in a third
State. Even if it could do so, Article XIII(9)(b) makes it clear that the Respondent State is
entitled to “pay monetary damages and any applicable interest in lieu of restitution”, and for
the reasons stated such a payment would have to be made either to the investor itself in
respect of its own loss or damage (under Article XIII(1)) or, in proceedings brought under
Article XIII(12), direct to a locally-incorporated enterprise. In the present case EnCana seeks
an award of damages directly to itself, and no question of restitution arises.

122. To conclude, in the present case EnCana claims on its own behalf for loss or damage
incurred by reason of or arising out of alleged breaches of the BIT affecting its investment.
Such a claim falls within the express terms of Articles I and XIII(1) of the BIT and the
Tribunal has jurisdiction over it.

(2)  EnCana’s progressive sale of its Ecuadorian interests

123. A further objection to jurisdiction related in the first place to the claim relating to
COL. On 28 November 2003, while the present proceedings were pending, EnCana sold its
interest in COL for US$15 million to Condor. According to EnCana, pursuant to the sale
agreement it is entitled on a “flow-through basis”, i.e., without any deduction, to 70% of any
amounts which may be awarded in respect of VAT refunds which should have been paid in
the period when COL belonged to EnCana.” As noted above, in September 2005 EnCana
announced the sale of its remaining Ecuadorian assets to a Chinese joint venture; in response
the Respondent indicated that its objection to the claim as regards EnCana’s interest in COL
now extended to EnCana’s interests overall.”
124. Ecuador argues that, even if EnCana would otherwise be entitled to maintain the claim
in respect of COL, the effect of the sale of COL is to preclude any recovery by EnCana in
relation to COL in the present proceedings,” This argument is based on a number of
grounds.
n Claimant’s Response, 10 August 2004, §§165-6. See also Claimant’s Memorial, 26 April 2004,
§290(iv) & (v); cf. Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim, §60(d) & (e).

Claimant’s Memorial, 26 April 2004, §§128, 133.
2 Respondent, letter of 22 December 2004.
™ Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 25 June 2004, §§79-88.

-34-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

(a) Under Article XIII(1), only an “investor” as defined in Article I(h) may make a
claim. Insofar as EnCana no longer holds any interest in COL it is no longer
the corporation “who makes the investment” in Ecuador, and accordingly is no
longer an “investor”.

(b) | Under Article XIII(12)(a), a claimant must be an “investor” through to the
issuance of the award; in this respect the Respondent relies on the decision in
Loewen.”

(c) Finally, it is said, again relying on Loewen, that EnCana’s claim is an attempt
to avoid the continuous nationality rule of international law.’

125. EnCana responds that once it has made an investment in Ecuador, it is an “investor”
within the meaning of Article I{h) of the BIT; as it had already suffered loss and damage in
relation to the measures taken in relation to COL at the time of the service of the Notice of
Arbitration, it had standing to bring the claim to arbitration.” EnCana further notes that the
Treaty does not expressly require continuity of ownership of an investment during the
pendency of a claim, and that the Respondent had not cited any authority in support of its
interpretation of the Treaty.” In relation to the argument as to continuity of nationality,
EnCana stresses that it has at all times been a Canadian corporation, and that the sale of COL
has not affected its nationality. EnCana further distinguishes Loewen on the basis that it was
the claimant in that case which had changed nationality during the pendency of the
proceedings. It relies on the decision in Mondev* to support the proposition that the fact that
the Claimant no longer owns the investment at the time of the Award is not a bar to recovery.
It is submitted in this context that a broad approach to interpretation of the notions of
“investor” and “investment” in the BIT is appropriate, analogous to that taken by the Tribunal
in Mondev in relation to Article 1139 of NAFTA.*!

126. In the Tribunal’s view, the Respondent’s argument misconceives the basis on which a
claim such as the present is brought. EnCana is not acting “on behalf of an enterprise which
the investor owns or controls directly or indirectly” (cf Article XII(12)(a)); the BIT makes no
provision for curative proceedings of this kind in respect of third-State subsidiaries. Rather it
is bringing a claim on its own behalf, alleging loss or damage to itself arising out of the
Respondent’s measures. The sale of COL did not affect that claim as to loss or damage
which had accrued up to the time of the sale. Condor did not through the terms of sale agree
to indemnify EnCana in any event for losses suffered as a result of Ecuador’s tax measures
and no question of subrogation arises. The fact that EnCana may be contractually obliged to

* Ibid., §83.
* The Loewen Group Inc. v. United States of America, Award, Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3, 26 June 2003, 7
ICSID Reports 442, 485 (para. 225).

7 Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the Merits, 25 June 2004, §83.

Claimant’s Response, 10 August 2004, §§171-4.
» Ibid., §§175-7.
#0 Mondev International Limited v. United States of America, \CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2, Award, 11
October 2002, 6 ICSID Reports 192, 214-5 (para. 91).

Claimant’s Response, 10 August 2004, §§181-187.

B

-35-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

pay to Condor 30% of any amount recovered on account of COL® is irrelevant to EnCana’s
standing in the present arbitration.

127. It is true that in its Notice of Arbitration EnCana sought continuing relief by way of
reimbursement to AEC and COL of “the amounts that may become payable by the
Companies after the date of the Tribunal’s award and for which no corresponding VAT
credits and refunds would have been granted to the SRI by the Companies”.* At that time
COL was still owned by EnCana, and continuing losses by COL on account of the measures
complained of fell within the scope of Article XIII(1). Once COL was sold the position
changed; no further losses could be incurred by EnCana in that regard and recognising this,
EnCana abandoned the claim for future losses in respect of COL. But this development
affected merely the scope of relief which EnCana could plausibly seek; it had no effect on the
Tribunal’s jurisdiction as to loss or damage previously suffered by EnCana.

128. As demonstrated by the reliance on the same passage from Loewen in respect of both
arguments, the arguments as to continuous nationality and as to continuity of investment
during the pendency of the claims are really two ways of making the same point. The
response to each is likewise the same: the present claim is maintained by EnCana in its own
right and not on behalf of the subsidiaries. EnCana’s nationality has not changed and there
has been no subrogation of claims into the ownership of any third State national. It is
accordingly unnecessary to deal with the question whether and how far international law
rules in the field of diplomatic protection such as the rule of continuous nationality apply to
direct claims by investors under BITs, and if they do, to identify the terminus ad quem for the
purposes of that rule.’ The Tribunal notes that NAFTA’s apparent co-mingling of
diplomatic protection concepts with investor-State claims (see, for example, Article 1136(5))
is not reflected in the BIT applicable to this arbitration. In any event, whether or not
continuous ownership is required in relation to a claim under Article XIII(12) brought on
behalf of a subsidiary incorporated in the host State, that provision is not relevant to a claim
in relation to damage to the investor under Article XIII(1), provided that the investor has
already suffered the loss or damage at that time (which is a requirement under Article XIII in
any event).

129. The Respondent’s principal argument is based on the interpretation of the words
“investment” and “investor” in Article I(g) and (h) respectively. As a preliminary matter it is
undisputed that EnCana satisfies the requirements of the first limb of Article I(h) insofar as it
is a “enterprise [as defined in Article I(b)] incorporated or duly constituted in accordance
with the applicable laws of Canada”. The central issue is whether the words “makes the
investment in the territory of the Republic of Ecuador” impose a requirement that the relevant
interest of the Claimant in the investment must continue up to the time of a final award on the
Claim, or whether it is enough that the Claimant is able to show that at the time of their

® Claimant’s Memorial, 26 April 2004, §§133, 135; see also the Respondent’s Counter-Memorial on the

Merits, 25 June 2004, §82. For the Sale Agreement see Respondent, Exhibits to Rejoinder, vol. I, Tab 88.

8 Notice of Arbitration, 14 March 2003, para 60(c).

According to the ILC’s Draft Articles on Diplomatic Protection (as adopted on first reading), art 5, the
critical date in relation to the espousal of a claim by way of diplomatic protection by the national State is the
“date of the official presentation of the claim”: see ILC, Report on the work of its 56"" Session (3 May to 4 June
and 5 July to 6 August 2004), A/59/10, 34-37 esp 36.

84

-36-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador Z LCIA Case UN3481

adoption the measures complained of in relation to its “investment” caused the Claimant as
an investor loss or damage.

130. The relevant provisions of Article XIII(1)-(4) are in rather general terms and do not
support a restrictive approach. Article XTII(1) refers to

“Any dispute between one Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting
Party, relating to a claim by the investor that a measure taken or not taken by the
former Contracting Party is in breach of this Agreement, and that the investor has
incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach.” (emphasis
added)

The rest of the provision refers merely to the “dispute”, and takes matters no further.

131. The Claimant argues that a “dispute” arises upon the taking of measures in breach of
the Treaty which cause loss and damage to an investor, and that this is sufficient to found
jurisdiction. The Tribunal agrees, both on the basis of the actual language of the BIT and its
object and purpose. Provided loss or damage is caused to an investor by a breach of the
Treaty, the cause of action is complete at that point; retention of the subsidiary (assuming it is
within the investor’s power to retain it) serves no purpose as a jurisdictional requirement,
though it may be relevant to questions of quantum.

132. In the Tribunal’s view, the reasoning adopted by the Tribunal in Mondev in relation to
Article 1139 is applicable in the present case, even though Mondev was concerned with
repossession of property following default on a mortgage rather than the voluntary sale of a
subsidiary. To adapt what the Mondev Tribunal said to the provisions of the present BIT:

“Article [II], and even more so Article [VIII], will frequently have to be applied after
the investment in question has failed. In most cases, the dispute submitted to
arbitration will concern precisely the question of responsibility for that failure. To
require the claimant to maintain a continuing status as an investor under the law of the
host State at the time the arbitration is commenced would tend to frustrate the very
purpose of [the BIT], which is to provide protection to investors against wrongful
conduct including uncompensated expropriation of their investment and to do so
throughout the lifetime of an investment... On that basis, the Tribunal concludes that
[the BIT] should be interpreted broadly to cover any legal claims arising out of the
treatment of an investment as defined in Article [I].. 8s

In this regard, disposal of a subsidiary pending resolution of a dispute may make
quantification of the loss and damage suffered more difficult, and if the investor sells at an
under-value it takes the risk that it has made a bad bargain if the Tribunal subsequently finds
that the actual loss caused to the investment is less than the discount reflected in the price
paid. But these considerations concern the extent and proof of loss, not jurisdiction to
entertain the claim.

8s (2002) 6 ICSID Reports 182, 214 (para 91).

-37-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

(3) The exclusion of taxation measures: Article XII(1) of the BIT

133. The Respondent’s third and main jurisdictional objection is that the present claim is
inextricably associated with a “taxation measure” and therefore excluded from the scope of
the BIT by Article XII(1) except in so far as it concerns the expropriation claim under Article
VIII. The terms of Article XII were set out in paragraph 108 above.

134. The Claimant’s position at the jurisdictional phase, as summarised by the Tribunal in
its Jurisdictional Award, was that:

“the essential dispute concerns the meaning of the participation factors agreed under
the oil contracts; in particular, whether they were concluded on the assumption of a
certain fiscal balance concerning the existing practice of VAT recovery. At most, in
the Claimant’s view, the dispute concerns the relationship between the participation
factors and VAT liability, and therefore falls partly within and partly outside the scope
of Article XII... A dispute as to the content and meaning of the oil contracts is not a
dispute, or at least not exclusively a dispute, as to a taxation measure within the
meaning of the Bir.

By contrast, the Respondent took the position that the participation factors had no relevance
whatsoever to VAT liability “which depends on nothing but the tax laws of Ecuador”.®”

135. In its pleadings in the present phase, the Respondent argued once more that all of
EnCana’s claims concern simply the issue of tax refunds, and they have no validity
independent of the denial of VAT. It took issue with the Claimant’s assertion that there is
agreement at the level of principle that EnCana is entitled to be reimbursed in respect of VAT
paid in respect of inputs to exports and that the only disagreement concerns whether the
participation factors already allow for these costs. According to Ecuador, EnCana is not
entitled to any refund of VAT as a matter of Ecuadorian law, both in terms of the original
meaning of the law and in the light of Interpretative Law No. 2004-41 (2004). It expressly
denies the position attributed to it by EnCana “that EnCana is entitled to a refund and that the
refund was granted through a contract.”**

136. As to the issue of the Participation Contracts, the Respondent argues that these do not
entitle COL and AEC to a tax refund; this is a matter for the ITRL. Rather, it argues that the
calculation of the X factors under the Contracts were intended to take account of all taxes and
other costs, and it is in this sense that the companies are in effect compensated by the
participation factors.®

137. As regards the Denying Resolutions, the Respondent admits (as is plainly the case)

that SRI did initially justify its position on the basis that VAT costs were covered by the
Participation Factor. But the significance of this fact is said to be eliminated by the fact that

Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction, 27 February 2004, §34.

" Ibid., §35.
8 Respondent’s Rejoinder, 25 June 2004, §93.
» Ibid., $§99-101.

-38-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

in later resolutions and in the court proceedings, SRI justified the decisions on the basis that
the companies were not entitled to refunds as a matter of Ecuadorian law in any case.

138. In response EnCana stresses that SRI in the initial Denying Resolutions had claimed
that the relevant provisions of the tax legislation was not applicable because of
reimbursement through the Participation Contracts.”! It notes that the Tribunal in the
Occidental award characterised the dispute as one about whether the refund was secured
under the X factors.” It submits that, despite Ecuador’s efforts to frame the actions taken by
SRI as “taxation measures”, SRI’s actions were based on a conclusion as to the scope of the
Participation Contracts, and accordingly the claim does not relate solely to “taxation
measures” within the meaning of Article XII.”

139. In addition, EnCana argues that:

(1) the sums claimed were not taxes but rather “refunds and credits of amounts
collected by [COL and AEC] in respect of which they are to act as collection
agents only”, since according to the “destination” principle universally adopted
in VAT systems, exporters are not subject to taxation via VAT in respect of
business-to-business transactions;

(2) the “idiosyncratic” application of VAT refund rules to exports of oil (in
distinction with other like products such as cut flowers) amounts to
discrimination; “taxation measures” are by definition measures of a general
character, not ad personam exactions.

(3) that Article XII(1) should not be read as permitting measures of SRI adopted
in clear disregard of the applicable provisions of domestic law, contrary to
Andean Community Law and in violation of almost universal practice in
relation to the granting of VAT credits and refunds.”

140. The Tribunal will consider, first, the extent to which matters concerning VAT liability
fall in principle within the scope of the exemption for taxation measures in Article XII(1);
secondly, whether SRI’s initial reliance on the Participation Contracts takes EnCana’s claim
outside the scope of that exemption; thirdly, the position of Petroecuador; fourthly, the
internal developments in Ecuador, including domestic decisions and the dismissal of the
justices of the Supreme Court, apparently on grounds related to the dispute with the oil
companies.

0 Ibid., §102.

” Claimant’s Response, 10 August 2004, §§190, 194.

” Claimant’s Response, 10 August 2004, §200, referring to Occidental Award, §74: “the parties do not
dispute the existence of the tax or its percentage. What the parties really discuss is whether its refund has been
secured under Factor X of the Contract, as claimed by the Respondent, or if that is not the case, whether, as
argued by the Claimant, it should be recognized as a right under Ecuadorian Tax Law.”

8 Claimant’s Response, 10 August 2004, §§201-202.

“ Ibid., §§203-4.

°s Ibid., §§205-6.

%6 Tbid., §§210-20.

-39-

(a)
141.

142.

0

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

The scope of the exemption for “taxation measures”

The term “taxation measures” is not defined in the BIT, although Article I(i) of the
Treaty defines the term “measure” to include “any law, regulation, procedure, requirement or
practice”.

In the Tribunal’s view, the term “taxation measures” should be given its normal
meaning in the context of the Treaty. In particular, the Tribunal would make the following
observations as to the meaning of the term.

103)

2)

(3)

@

It is in the nature of a tax that it is imposed by law. Tax authorities are not
robber barons writ large, and an arbitrary demand unsupported by any
provision of the law of the host State would not qualify for exemption under
Article XII. On the other hand, as the Respondent stressed, the Tribunal is not
a court of appeal in Ecuadorian tax matters, and provided a matter is
sufficiently clearly connected to a taxation law or regulation (or to a
procedure, requirement or practice of the taxation authorities in apparent
reliance on such a law or regulation), then its legality is a matter for the courts
of the host State.

There is no reason to limit the term “taxation” to direct taxation, nor did the
Claimant suggest it should be so limited.”” Thus indirect taxes such as VAT
are included.

Having regard to the breadth of the defined term “measure”, there is no reason
to limit Article XII(1) to the actual provisions of the law which impose a tax.
All those aspects of the tax regime which go to determine how much tax is
payable or refundable are part of the notion of “taxation measures”. Thus tax
deductions, allowances or rebates are caught by the term.

The question whether something is a tax measure is primarily a question of its
legal operation, not its economic effect. A taxation law is one which imposes
a liability on classes of persons to pay money to the State for public purposes.
The economic impacts or effects of tax measures may be unclear and
debatable; nonetheless a measure is a taxation measure if it is part of the
regime for the imposition of a tax. A measure providing relief from taxation is
a taxation measure just as much as a measure imposing the tax in the first
place. In the case of VAT, the Tribunal does not accept that the system of
collection and recovery of VAT, even if it may be revenue-neutral for the
intermediate manufacturer or producer, is any less a taxation measure at each
stage of the process. A law imposing an obligation on a supplier to charge
VAT is a taxation measure; likewise a law imposing an obligation to account
for VAT received, a law entitling the supplier to offset VAT paid to those from
whom it has purchased goods and services, as well as a law regulating the
availability of refunds of VAT resulting from an imbalance between an
individual’s input and output VAT.

In the Occidental arbitration, the claimant argued that the somewhat differently worded US provision
was limited to direct taxation — an argument rejected by the Tribunal: Occidental Award, §69.

-40-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

143. Thus even if it were the case that the position of an intermediate producer was in
substance that of a tax collector or a tax conduit (the actual incidence of the tax being on the
ultimate consumer), nonetheless the legal provisions dealing with the position of the
intermediate producer and its rights and obligations in relation to the process of VAT
accountability, including an entitlement to refunds, would still be “taxation measures” within
Article XII(1). And if a law is a taxation measure, then any executive act apparently (and not
merely colourably) implementing that law is equally a taxation measure.

144. Claimant argues that Ecuador is acting inconsistently: on the one hand SRI is refusing
to allow a VAT rebate on the basis that all the costs of oil operations are covered by the
participation factor in the Participation Contract; on the other hand, it is not the case that the
participation factor does so. VAT recovery was never an issue at the time the participation
factors were negotiated, and (despite the direction given by the President of Ecuador in his
letter of 27 October 2003) Petroecuador has declined to renegotiate under the “economic
balance” clause of the participation agreements on the basis that VAT refunds are a matter for
SRI. The Tribunal will turn in due course to the question of renegotiation of the participation
factors. For present purposes, however, the point is that even if the Claimant is right in its
characterisation of the situation, the dispute about VAT refunds is still one concerning
“taxation measures”.

145. The same conclusion applies to the Respondent’s characterisation of the issue. In the
Respondent’s view, whether oil companies can reclaim VAT has nothing to do with the
participation factor; the question is whether they are engaged in “fabricacién” within the
meaning of the Ecuadorian law. That is self-evidently a matter covered by the phrase
“taxation measures”; and this Tribunal is not a court of appeal in, and (subject to the two
exceptions set out in Article XI) has no jurisdiction over taxation matters. It does not matter
whether Ecuador is right or wrong about the “fabricacidn” argument. It is a question to be
settled by the taxation courts of Ecuador in accordance with the law of Ecuador.

146. As noted above, EnCana argues that the SRI has been inconsistent in its application of
the law, denying that oil producers are engaged in “fabricacién” or manufacture while
allowing VAT refunds to traders such as exporters of cut flowers or mineral exporters who do
not alter the character or quality of their product through the process of extraction and
transport. The Tribunal notes that at least one of the Ecuadorian tax officials who gave
evidence admitted that it might well be necessary for SRI to examine such cases in the light
of the interpretation now adopted. But even if (as the Tribunal is inclined to conclude) SRI
has not been consistent in its interpretation of Article 69A the essential point is that the
obligations not to discriminate and to act in an equitable manner as between different classes
of investors — obligations that may be derived from Articles II and IV of the BIT — do not
apply to taxation measures. Even if SRI has applied the VAT rules in an “idiosyncratic”
manner, this does not lead to the conclusion that its conduct falls outside the scope of the
exclusion for taxation measures. The demands were made by authorised tax officials in
purported compliance with the relevant law; they were subject to review by the tax courts and
eventually by the Taxation Chamber of the Supreme Court. They bear all the marks of a

Mr Venegas, Day 3: p. 5, lines 5-16; cf. Dr de Mena, Day 4, p. 70, lines 1-9.

-41-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

taxation measure — whether a lawful one under Ecuadorian law it is not for the Tribunal to
decide.

147. Similar considerations apply to EnCana’s argument that SRI’s denial of VAT refunds
constitutes a breach of applicable Andean Community Law, or even of generally accepted
international standards for the application of the destination principle in VAT laws. In
Occidental the tribunal accepted the argument that Andean Community law at the relevant
time required the adoption of a thorough-going version of the destination principle.” Even if
this is so (the matter was earnestly re-debated before the present Tribunal), nonetheless a
VAT law maintained in violation of Andean Community law would not cease to be a taxation
measure for the purposes of Article XII(1). As to the argument about commonly accepted
international standards (also extensively debated before it), the Tribunal has doubts as to the
extent to which even widespread common practice in applying the destination principle
would go to form a rule of customary international law in the absence of some articulated
common sense of obligation to that effect (of which there is no evidence). But again the
Tribunal need not decide the point: its jurisdiction does not extend beyond applying the BIT,
and a taxation measure does not cease to qualify as such because it is arguably in breach of
commonly accepted substantive standards for such measures.

148. In reaching this conclusion the Tribunal has not taken into consideration the
Interpretative Law but has relied only on the legal situation as it existed previously. It notes
but does not need to resolve the controversy as to the constitutional validity of the
Interpretative Law published on 11 August 2004 and as to whether it has been given
retrospective effect, e.g. by the decision of the District Tax Court of 26 April 2005.' ° In
other contexts a retrospective change in the law, deeming some demand to be covered by a
taxation law which was not so covered at the time, might well not attract immunity from
scrutiny under Article XII(1). Thus conduct not involving a taxation measure which violated
Article II of the BIT at the time it was committed would not acquire the character of a
taxation measure for the purposes of the BIT by being retrospectively labelled as such.'?! But
the Tribunal does not understand how an existing measure, in principle covered by the Article
XII(1) exclusion, could cease to be so covered by reason of the passage of the Interpretative
Law. Either the Interpretative Law is valid under the Constitution of Ecuador, in which case
it partakes of the same character as the law it interprets; or it is not, in which case the
previous law remains in place and has the same legal character in terms of the BIT.

149. For these reasons, the Tribunal concludes the EnCana’s claim so far as it relates to the
entitlement of the subsidiaries to VAT refunds is excluded from the scope of the BIT by
Article XII as a “taxation measure”, subject to the exception for expropriation.

99
100

Occidental Award, §§145-152.

See Peirdleos Colombianos Ltd y. Director General of SRI (No. 20115-2660 S-I-S-V), provided as an
attachment to the letter sent by Counsel for the Respondent dated 16 May 2005 in response to the Tribunal’s
Questions of 4 April 2005.

‘| The breach of the BIT having occurred could not be retrospectively excused, or responsibility for it
excluded, by a provision of internal law: cf ILC Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally
Wrongful Acts, annexed to GA resolution 56/83, 12 December 2001, Articles 4, 32.

-42-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

(b) — SRI’s reliance on the participation factor

150. As a matter of fact it is clear that one of the grounds, initially at least the principal
ground, given by SRI for rejecting AEC’s and COL’s VAT refund claims, and for requiring
repayment of refunds actually paid, was that VAT was a cost of doing business which was in.
principle covered by the participation factors.'°? The Tribunal also finds as a matter of fact
that the participation factors in the various contracts did not take VAT payments into account
as costs.'®? This was the evidence of Mr Keplinger, EnCana’s chief officer in Ecuador and a
direct participant in the negotiations; it was not contradicted by any first-hand evidence
produced by the Respondent.'“ In particular, no witness from Petroecuador was tendered by
the Respondent. The Tribunal notes that Dr de Mena’s statements to the contrary effect were
not based on evidence but on assumption (see paragraph 69 above), and were subsequently
contradicted by Dr Barniol, the President of Petroecuador, in his letter to Dr de Mena of 20
November 2001. It is true that Ecuadorian officials, including Dr de Mena, subsequently
urged EnCana and other oil companies to seek to resolve the VAT refund issue without
litigation through an adjustment to the participation factor. But they could consistently do so
without taking any position on the original intention of the parties to the participation
contracts.

151. Several issues are however raised in this regard. One is whether SRI’s conduct in
denying entitlement to VAT refunds in part at least on a mistaken assumption about the scope
and coverage of the participation factors still benefits from the Article XII exception for
taxation measures. Another is whether any conduct of Petroecuador in this regard might fall
within that exception.

152. As to the former question, the Tribunal would note the following:

(a) From a fairly early stage the alternative argument based on the term
“fabricacién” was also being used. Whatever the merits of that
interpretation may be, to impose a tax or to deny a refund by reference to a
term contained in a taxation law is itself a taxation measure.

(b) Although one—chronologically the first—ground given for the SRI’s position
(viz., the inclusion of VAT among the participation factors) was wrong as a
matter of fact in AEC and COL’s case, SRI’s decisions were reviewable by the
tax courts of Ecuador, whose rulings (whether or not Dr de Mena approved of
them) were complied with. A decision by a taxation authority, reviewable by
the taxation courts, remains a taxation measure even if it is based in whole or
part on a mistake of fact as to the intent of some other entity.

i See above, paragraphs 77-81. Although Mr Venegas said (Day 3, p. 95, lines 2-3) that SRI relied on

Art. 69A from the beginning, this is not reflected by the record.

108 ‘The same conclusion was reached in relation to the conclusion of the participation agreement between
Petrocuador and Occidental: see Occidental Award, paras. 98-113.

ma Keplinger First Witness Statement, 26 April 2004, paras 10-11. Mr. Keplinger’s testimony to this
effect was not affected by cross-examination: Day | p. 35, line 13-p. 36, line 16 (examination in chief), .p. 56,
line 14-p. 57 line 6.

tos See above, paragraphs 80-83.

-43-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

153. For these reasons, in the Tribunal’s view, the fact that the decisions of SRI and the
Ecuadorian courts were based on a wrong factual premiss did not take them outside the scope
of the exclusion for “taxation measures” in Article XIII of the BIT.

(c) The position of Petroecuador

154. The Tribunal turns to the third issue identified in paragraph 140 above, viz., the
application of the taxation exemption to conduct of Petroecuador. The Respondent did not
deny that in entering into Participation Contracts with foreign companies to exploit the
natural resources of Ecuador, the conduct of Petroecuador as a State-owned and State-
controlled instrumentality is attributable to Ecuador for the purposes of the BIT. In this
respect it is relevant that Petroecuador was, in common with the SRI, subject to instructions
from the President and others, and that the Attorney-General pursuant to the law had and
exercised authority “to supervise the performance of... contracts and to propose or adopt for
this purpose the judicial actions necessary for the defence of the national assets and public
interest”.'°° According to the evidence this power extended to supervision and control of
Petroecuador’s performance of the participation contracts and to their potential renegotiation.
Thus the conduct of Petroecuador in entering into, performing and renegotiating the
participation contracts (or declining to do so) is attributable to Ecuador. It does not matter for
this purpose whether this result flows from the principle stated in Article 5 of the ILC’s
Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts or that stated in Article
8.!° The result is the same.

155. Furthermore, to the extent that EnCana asserts a violation of the BIT by conduct of
Petroecuador, the Article XII exemption for taxation measures can have no application.
Whatever Petroecuador may or may not have done in relation to the participation contracts,
those acts could not have amounted to a taxation measure.

156. The difficulty however is the extent to which EnCana’s case can be treated as
involving a claim under the BIT concerning the conduct of Petroecuador (cf the Tribunal’s
questions of 4 April 2005, set out in paragraph 103 above). In principle a BIT claim is to be
judged in the terms in which it has been made. It is not the function of the Tribunal to recast

{08 Codification of the Organic Law of the State Attorney-General’s Office, 2004, Art. 3 (g); Registro

Oficial No. 312, 13 April 2004,
Article 5 of the ILC’s Articles provides:
“The conduct of a person or entity which is not an organ of the State under article 4 but which is
empowered by the law of that State to exercise elements of the governmental authority shall be
considered an act of the State under international law, provided the person or entity is acting in that
capacity in the particular instance.”
Article 8 provides:
“The conduct of a person or group of persons shall be considered an act of a State under international
law if the person or group of persons is in fact acting on the instructions of, or under the direction or
control of, that State in carrying out the conduct.”
In his Witness Statements of 16 May and 27 May 2005, the Attorney-General claimed to be acting as
the person responsible for renegotiating the participation contracts and treats the Attorney-General’s Office as
“a controlling entity” in relation to the contracts. See e.g., Witness Statement of José Marfa Borja Gallegos, 27
May 2005, para 6.

108

-44-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

the claim in an attempt to bring some aspect of the factual situation within its jurisdiction and
thereby to raise a case under the BIT.

157. As to the conduct of Petroecuador and a possible claim for a breach of the BIT arising
from that conduct, the Tribunal would make the following points:

(a) In EnCana’s Notice of Arbitration, the measures complained of as violations of
the BIT are all acts of central organs of the Ecuadorian State, including the
legislature and SRI.'” Although the conclusion of the participation contracts
is said to have been based on a shared understanding as to how EnCana
subsidiaries would be taxed, the crux of EnCana’s claim is that this
understanding reflected the true legal position and that the SRI and the tax
courts acted inconsistently with it, thereby frustrating the legitimate
expectations of the EnCana subsidiaries and unjustly enriching Ecuador to the
extent of the tax refunds wrongly denied.

(b) Although it is disputed to what extent Ecuador in general and Petroecuador in
particular actively pursued the possibility of renegotiation of the participation
factors (see paragraphs 105-106 above), the evidence is that Ecuador did raise
the prospect of renegotiation with various oil companies, including EnCana,
and it takes two to renegotiate. It is clear that from a relatively early stage
EnCana elected to seek recovery from this Tribunal based on the position that
its subsidiaries were entitled to VAT refunds. At no stage did it argue that
they were entitled to renegotiate the participation factors on the ground that
they were innocently misled as to the tax position.

(c) | Mr Keplinger admitted as much in his Witness Statement of 16 May 2005,
when he stated:

“None of AEC, COL or EnCana has requested Petroecuador to give
effect to the terms of the President’s letter of 27 October 2003, or to act
to resolve outstanding questions in the light of the matters set out in the
recitals to the Interpretive Law, although AEC has participated in the
informal discussions with the Attorney-General which are referred to
above.”

158. In the Tribunal’s view it could well be a breach of Article II of the BIT for a State
entity such as Petroecuador, having negotiated the terms of an investment agreement on a
certain basis, subsequently to deny the other party the right to renegotiate in accordance with
the agreement in the event that the basis for it has been changed as a result of decisions of
other State organs. Under standards such as those in Article II of the BIT the State must act
with reasonable consistency and without arbitrariness in its treatment of investments. One
arm of the State cannot finally affirm what another arm denies to the detriment of a foreign
investor.!'! But this claim is not made by EnCana, which never requested renegotiation.
Whatever the position with respect to meetings and invitations to meetings between the

109
10

See Notice of Arbitration, 14 March 2003, paras 10, 27-31, 36-44.

Witness Statement of John Keplinger, 16 May 2005, para 39. Se also his testimony, Day 1, p. 48, line
22-p.49 line 14 (examination in chief), p. 61 line 13-p. 65 line 10 (cross-examination).

' See e.g. Occidental Award, para. 114.

-45-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

Attorney-General and EnCana representatives (see paragraph 106 above), it is not a claim
which is sustainable on the facts presented to the Tribunal.

159. To summarise, though conduct of Petroecuador could be attributed to Ecuador in
accordance with the principles of State responsibility, EnCana’s claim for a breach of the BIT
is not made on this basis.'

160. The Tribunal would add only two comments in this regard. First, its finding as to the
basis of EnCana’s claim in no way implies any criticism of EnCana or of its legal
representatives. Evidently in any renegotiation there was a risk that other factors might be
raised, including for example increases in oil prices or other actual or alleged changes in
circumstances. Given the volatile political situation in Ecuador, this was very much a matter
for EnCana to decide, having regard to its own strategic plans.''? Secondly, although the
Respondent argues that the only issue for renegotiation would have been the actual changes
in the VAT regime since the conclusion of the participation contracts (viz, the extension of
VAT to most services and the increase in the VAT rate from 10% to 12%),!!4 this does not
reflect the basis on which the participation factors were set. The economic stability clauses in
the participation contracts apply in case of any amendment (modificacién) to the tax regime
or to its interpretation: see paragraph 34 above. At the time the X3 factor was set for the
Tarapoa field, on 2 August 2001, VAT refunds were currently being allowed to AEC. In the
Tribunal’s view subsequent developments, including the Interpretative Law, produced a
modification to the tax regime or to its interpretation as compared with the situation as at 2
August 2001.

161. Finally, the Tribunal notes that the renegotiation process is expressly contemplated by
the Participation Agreements and in the event of a dispute between the parties to the contracts
would be subject to the Agreements’ dispute settlement procedures.

(d) Internal developments in Ecuador

162. The political difficulties in Ecuador in the period from December 2004 were referred
to by EnCana in its Post-hearing Submissions not — evidently — in order to form a new basis
of claim but in order to shed light on the situation with respect to the tax claims pending
before the Ecuadorian courts. As noted already, the EnCana subsidiaries’ tax claims were
withdrawn by them at the time of the commencement of the present arbitration.'!°

ne In its Notice of Arbitration, para 62 EnCana reserved the right “to supplement or amend this Notice of

Arbitration... including the right to submit further claims... and any additional claims of loss and damage by
reason of, or arising out of, any breaches of the Treaty”. Having regard inter alia to Article XIII(1), such a
reservation probably cannot allow amendment so as to bring within the scope of the proceedings entirely new
and distinct claims: cf Certain Phosphate Lands in Nauru, 1CJ Reports 1992 p. 240, at 264-7 (paras. 62-71);
LaGrand case (Germany v United States of America), 1C) Reports 2001 p. 466 at 483-4 (paras. 44-5). But in
any event EnCana has maintained the claim identified in the Notice of Arbitration and in its correspondence
with the States parties to the BIT.

us According to the Attorney-General of Ecuador, COL under its new ownership has agreed to discussions
on the participation factors: Witness Statement of José Maria Borja Gallegos, 27 May 2005, paras 11, 16.

See Respondent’s letter of 27 May 2005, 3-4.

There was no legal requirement for it to do so. AEC and COL are not investors as defined in Art. I(h)
of the BIT but third State enterprises: see above, paragraphs 115-122. The requirement of waiver of other

115

- 46 -

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

163. In principle investor-State arbitration under a provision such as Article XIII of the
BIT must relate to a measure in breach of the BIT which has caused loss to the Claimant by
the time of the commencement of the arbitration. In terms of Article XIII(1) of the BIT, the
investor must state a “claim... that a measure taken or not taken by the former Contracting
Party is in breach of this Agreement, and that the investor has incurred loss or damage by
reason of, or arising out of, the breach” (emphasis added). This does not mean that a claim
cannot be made for losses incurred after the commencement of the arbitration. Similarly, it
does not mean that factual developments subsequent to the commencement of proceedings
are irrelevant or cannot be taken into consideration. For instance, such events subsequent to
the commencement of the claim may relate to a continuing breach and serve to confirm
earlier evidence of that breach, or they may constitute clear evidence of a breach of a BIT
whereas earlier events which had occurred at the time of the commencement of the claim
were equivocal and/or on the borderline of constituting a breach;''® similarly subsequent
events may affect the quantum of a breach of a claim which is raised and can be made out on
facts existing at the time of commencement of the arbitration.

164. In sum, a balance must be struck between, on the one hand, unreasonably requiring
that new proceedings be commenced where the substance of a claim of breach of the BIT
may arguably have been made out or very nearly made out, and subsequent events put the
question of breach beyond doubt, and on the other, allowing what are in essence new claims
or new causes of action, which in reality have no real relation to the events initially relied
upon, to be added on to existing proceedings on the basis of events subsequent to the
commencement of proceedings.'

165. As already indicated, the Tribunal is of the view that the events between December
2004-April 2005 in Ecuador, were relied upon by EnCana not for the purpose of introducing
a new claim or cause of action, but in order to inform the Tribunal of matters which might be
of relevance in relation to the claims which had already been identified when the arbitration
proceedings were commenced.

(4) — Conclusion on jurisdiction
166. To conclude, EnCana’s claim before the Tribunal does not relate to the events of

December 2004-April 2005 and has not changed its character or scope since the
commencement of the arbitration. It was stated with clarity in EnCana’s last filing: “it is the

 

procedures under Art. XI1I(3)(b) applies only to the investor which brings the claim, or, when a claim is being
made on behalf of a subsidiary incorporated in the host State, that subsidiary: Art. XIII(12)(a)(iii).
ne See e.g, the finding of the Tribunal in Metalclad v. Mexico (Case No. ARB(AFY/91/1), Award of 30
August 2000, JCSID Reports, vol. 5, p. 209 at p. 231 (paras. 109-112) in relation to the effect of the “Ecological
Decree”, passed subsequent to commencement of proceedings, as a further measure constituting expropriation.
See also the decision of the Supreme Court of British Columbia (Tysoe J), 2 May 2001 ICSID Reports, vol. 5, p.
236, especially at pp. 255-260 for the unsuccessful challenge to that part of the Award.

Cf. the decision of the International Court of Justice in Certain Phosphate Lands in Nauru, IC} Reports
1992 p. 240, at p. 267 (para. 70) which declared claims not included in the original application inadmissible
insofars as they constituted “both in form and in substance, a new claim, and the subject of the dispute originally
submitted to the Court would be transformed if it entertained that claim”; see also the discussion ibid., at pp.
264-267 (paras, 62-69),

-47-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

position of EnCana that no portion of the input VAT receivables has ever been refunded
through the participation factors and that according to the ITRL and the Andean law, such
amounts must be refunded by the SRI”.''* That is a claim concerning a taxation measure, and
it falls within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction only if one of two conditions is satisfied: first, if the
tax treatment of EnCana subsidiaries is “in breach of an agreement between the central
government authorities [of Ecuador] and [EnCana] concerning an investment” (Article
XII(3)) or second, if there has been an expropriation of EnCana’s rights (Article XII(4)).

167. As to the first alternative, it is not alleged in the present case that there has been a
breach of any agreement between the central governmental authorities of Ecuador and
EnCana. Indeed it is not clear that there has been any breach of the participation agreements
at all. The fact that SRI misconceived the basis for those agreements does not amount to a
breach of contract and has not been pleaded as such. Further the participation contracts were
not concluded with SRI but with Petroecuador, and they were not concluded by the investor
in these proceedings, EnCana, but by its third-State-incorporated subsidiaries. There is thus
no basis under Article XIII(3) for this Tribunal to assume jurisdiction over the claim.!"

168. Accordingly the Tribunal has no jurisdiction over EnCana’s claim except in relation to
the issue of expropriation, which in the end the Respondent argued on the basis that it fell
within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction and to which the Tribunal now turns.

E. MERITS OF THE EXPROPRIATION CLAIM
169. Article VIII of the BIT deals with expropriation. It provides as follows:

“1. Investments or returns of investors of either Contracting Party shall not be
nationalized, expropriated or subjected to measures having an effect equivalent to
nationalization or expropriation (hereinafter referred to as ‘expropriation’) in the
territory of the other Contracting Party, except for a public purpose, under due process
of law, in a non-discriminatory manner and against prompt, adequate and effective
compensation. Such compensation shall be based on the genuine value of the
investment or returns expropriated immediately before the expropriation or at the time
the proposed expropriation became public knowledge, whichever is the earlier, shall

me Claimant’s letter of 27 May 2005, 2.

19 In this respect there are significant differences between the BIT applicable in the present case and that
which fell to be applied by the Tribunal in Occidental. The United States-Ecuador BIT, Art. X also contains a
taxation exemption but it is in different terms to Art. XII of the Canada-Ecuador BIT; in particular, Art. X(2)(c)
of the United States-Ecuador BIT allows claims relating to taxation provided they are claims with respect to “the
observance and enforcement of terms of an investment Agreement”. Moreover under Art. V1(1) of the US-
Ecuador BIT, jurisdiction is conferred on arbitral tribunals in relation to “investment disputes between a Party
and a national or company of the other Party” which arise out of or relate, infer alia, to “an investment
agreement between that Party and such national or company”. In Occidental, although the claimant had not
invoked any claims of breach of contract or relied on contract-based rights as such (Occidental Award, §§46,
72) the Tribunal held that “because of the relationship of the dispute with the observance and enforcement of the
investment Contract involved in this case, it has jurisdiction to consider the dispute in connection with the
merits insofar as a tax matter covered by Article X may be concerned”: ibid, §77. For the characterisation of the
participation contract as an investment agreement see ibid, §§44, 72.

-48-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

be payable from the date of expropriation at a normal commercial rate of interest,
shall be paid without delay and shall be effectively realizable and freely transferable.”

Article XII(4) provides that:

“Article VIII may be applied to a taxation measure unless the taxation authorities of
the Contracting Parties, no later than six months after being notified by an investor
that he disputes a taxation measure, jointly determine that the measure is not an
expropriation.”

170. EnCana gave notice to the taxation authorities of the two States, who made no joint
determination on the matter of expropriation. Thus from a procedural point of view it was
open to EnCana to make an expropriation claim regarding “investments or returns of
investors”.

171. Inthe Notice of Arbitration, the expropriation claim was put in the following terms.

“47, The effect of Ecuador’s actions, including the issuance of SRI Resolutions
233, 669, 670, 736, and 3191, the continuing denial of VAT Credits and refunds to the
Companies, and the amendment to regulations intended to prevent the granting of
VAT credits and refunds to the Companies, has been to deprive the Companies, and
through the Companies, the Claimant, of their rights to such amounts under
Ecuadorian law. Since, inter alia, the Claimant has not been compensated for this
taking of monies owing to the Companies, Ecuador has failed to comply with its
obligations under Article VIII of the Treaty.

48. Furthermore, and regardless of whether the Companies had a right to VAT
credits and refunds under Ecuadorian law, these measures have had and continue to
have an effect equivalent to expropriation. The sudden denial of VAT credits and
refunds beginning in August of 2001, followed by a retroactive denial of previously
granted VAT credits and refunds to foreign owned oil companies, constitute creeping
expropriation and unreasonable interference with the ability of the Claimant and the
Companies to make use of and benefit from their economic entitlements.”

The claim is thus put in two ways. Either Ecuador has wrongfully denied rights to refunds
owing to EnCana subsidiaries under Ecuadorian law, or, irrespective of the legality of its
measures, it has engaged in conduct having an equivalent effect to the expropriation of the
investment.

(1) The indirect expropriation claim
172. It is convenient to deal first with the issue of indirect expropriation. Here the claim is
that, even assuming the subsidiaries had no right to a tax refund under Ecuadorian law, yet
the denial of the refunds had such a significant impact on the subsidiaries as to be equivalent

to expropriation of the investment.

173. This way of putting the claim faces a double difficulty. In the first place, foreign
investments like other activities are subject to the taxes and charges imposed by the host

-49-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

State. In the absence of a specific commitment from the host State, the foreign investor has
neither the right nor any legitimate expectation that the tax regime will not change, perhaps to
its disadvantage, during the period of the investment.'?° Of its nature all taxation reduces the
economic benefits an enterprise would otherwise derive from the investment; it will only be
in an extreme case that a tax which is general in its incidence could be judged as equivalent in
its effect to an expropriation of the enterprise which is taxed.!”!

174. In the second place, although the EnCana subsidiaries suffered financially from the
denial of VAT and the recovery of VAT refunds wrongly made, they were nonetheless able
to continue to function profitably and to engage in the normal range of activities, extracting
and exporting oil (the price of which increased during the period under consideration). There
is nothing in the record which suggests that the change in VAT laws or their interpretation
brought the companies to a standstill or rendered the value to be derived from their activities
so marginal or unprofitable as effectively to deprive them of their character as investments.

175. The facts of the present case may be compared with those in Revere Copper & Brass,
Inc v. Overseas Private Investment Corporation, which involved a claim under the United
States foreign investment program. A domestic arbitration tribunal held by majority that a
combination of acts of the Jamaican Government and Parliament, including but not limited to
new taxation measures, amounted to a repudiation of an investment agreement between
Revere and Jamaica which prevented Revere “from exercising effective control over the use
of disposition of a substantial portion of its property”.' The reasoning of the majority is
reflected in the following passage:

“the effects of the Jamaican Government’s actions in repudiating its long term
commitments to [Revere] have substantially the same impact on effective control over
use and operation as if the properties were themselves conceded by a concession
contract that was repudiated. In reaching this conclusion we are mindful that
Government action impact [sic] must be on the exercise of control, and that the
control referred to must be ‘effective’; that is, it must be practical and not merely
theoretical control. This is not a legalistic but a practical problem. OPIC argues that
RJA still has all the rights and property that it had before the events of 1974: it is in
possession of the plant and other facilities; it has its Mining Lease; it can operate as it
did before. This may be true in a formal sense but for the reasons stated below, we do
not regard [Revere’ s] ‘control’ of the use and operation of its properties as any longer
‘effective’ in view of the destruction by Government actions of its contract rights.”

0 Even if there were such a commitment (e.g. to a tax freeze or ‘tax holiday’), this would not convert a

breach of contract or the denial of a legitimate expectation into an expropriation. Such conduct might violate
other provisions of a BIT but under the Canadian-Ecuador BIT these do not apply to taxation measures.

See e.g. the discussion in Feldman v United Mexican States (2002) 7 1CSID Reports 318, 367-70 (paras
101-11), citing inter alia the Restatement Third, Foreign Relations Law of the United States (1987) vol 2, 200-1
§712, comment (g) (“A state is not responsible for loss of property or for other economic disadvantage resulting
from bona fide general taxation, regulation, forfeiture for crime, or other action of the kind that is commonly
accepted as within the police power of states, if it is not discriminatory”).

12 (1978) 56 ILR 258.
123 Ibid, 291-2 (emphasis in original).

-50-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

176. It is true that the dissenting arbitrator stressed that “[nJeither the actual amount of the
Bauxite Levy nor the manner of its imposition is unreasonable by normal standards of tax
enactments in the international community”.'* But the contrary proposition—the
unreasonableness of the tax per se—was not the basis for the majority’s decision. In the
Revere case the Levy was imposed in breach of an express tax stabilisation clause in the
investment agreement and it involved a tax ranging from 15%-35% on gross receipts; it was
not an income tax.'° Revere Copper does not support the proposition that a refusal of VAT
refunds amounts to an expropriation of the enterprise which has had to pay the VAT and is
denied a refund. Nor did any other authority cited by EnCana support a holding that a
general tax measure in itself amounted to expropriation.’

177. Under this aspect of its claim, EnCana also alleges “unreasonable interference with
the ability of the Claimant and the Companies to make use of and benefit from their
economic entitlements”. In this respect it relies on the dictum of the Tribunal in the
Metalclad case, which treated as expropriation for the purposes of Article 1110 of NAFTA
“not only open, deliberate and acknowledged takings of property... but also covert or
incidental interference with the use of property which has the effect of depriving the owner,
in whole or significant part, of the use or reasonably-to-be expected economic benefit of
property even if not necessarily to the obvious benefit of the host State”.!?7 It is true that the
width of this dictum has been criticised,!2* but it must be read in the context of the facts of
that case as found by the tribunal. Moreover Metalclad had nothing to do with taxation.
From the perspective of expropriation, taxation is in a special category. In principle a tax law
creates a new legal liability on a class of persons to pay money to the State in respect of some
defined class of transactions, the money to be used for public purposes. In itself such a law is
not a taking of property; if it were, a universal State prerogative would be denied by a
guarantee against expropriation, which cannot be the case. Only if a tax law is extraordinary,
punitive in amount or arbitrary in its incidence would issues of indirect expropriation be
raised. In the present case, in any event, the denial of VAT refunds in the amount of 10% of
transactions associated with oil production and export did not deny EnCana “in whole or
significant part” the benefits of its investment.

178. For these reasons the claim that the subsidiaries were victims of indirect expropriation.
must be rejected.

(2) The direct expropriation claim

179. Turning to the direct expropriation claim, here EnCana argues that Ecuador has
wrongfully denied rights to refunds owing to EnCana’s subsidiaries under Ecuadorian law.

a Ibid, 322 (Arbitrator Bergan), citing Gudmundsson v Iceland (1960) 30 ILR 253, 266-7, applying

Article 1 of the Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights, which preserves “the right
of a State... to secure the payment of taxes or other contributions or penalties”.

2s For the Jamaican proceedings see Revere Jamaica Alumina, Ltd v Attorney-General (1977) 74 ILR 219.
26 Earlier cases in point (distinguishing taxation from expropriation) include Kiigele v Polish State (1932)
6 ILR 69 (Upper Silesian Arbitral Tribunal).

Rr Metalclad Corporation v United Mexican States, (2000) 5 ICSID Reports 209, 230 (para 103).

128 E.g., United Mexican States v. Metalclad Corporation, 2001 BCSC 664, 5 ICSID Reports 236, 259
(para 97), where Tysoe J noted that the definition was “sufficiently broad to include a legitimate re-zoning of
property by a municipality or other zoning authority”.

-51-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

This is a claim to rights under the law of Ecuador which the SRI denies exists and which the
Congress through the Interpretative Law has also denied. This raises two preliminary
questions, one concerning the scope of the BIT, the other concerning the applicable law.

180. As to the former point, Ecuador does not dispute that legal rights as well as physical
assets can be protected by Article VIII. But it argues that the “investment” which is protected
under the BIT is the physical assets of the subsidiaries in Ecuador, including their right to
explore and export crude oil, and that the alleged right to a tax refund or credit does not
constitute either an “investment” or “returns” as defined by Article I.

181. The relevant definitions were referred to in paragraph 117 above. There is apparently
a secondary market in VAT refund certificates in Ecuador which are sold at a slight discount
on their market value. But there is no indication that EnCana subsidiaries were engaged in
that market, and the Tribunal accepts that EnCana did not, as such, invest in certificates
entitling it to VAT refunds.

182. But this is not an end of the matter. An investment is widely defined to include
“claims to money” (Article I(g)(iii)), and extends to assets owned or controlled “either
directly, or indirectly through an investor of a third State”. Thus claims to money held
through a third State investor can constitute an investment. Moreover the protection of
Article VIII also extends to “returns” which are widely defined as...

“all amounts yielded by an investment and in particular, though not exclusively,
includes profits, interest, capital gains, dividends, royalties, fees or other current
income.” (Article I(j))

It is hard to imagine a broader definition, and its breadth is enhanced by the words “in
particular, though not exclusively, includes” which says not once but three times that the
examples given are not exhaustive and clearly implies that they are not intended to form a
restrictive genus.

183. In the Tribunal’s opinion, a law which cancels a liability the State already has to an
investor, including an investor of a third State which is owned or controlled by an investor of
a State Party, is capable of amounting to expropriation. The right under the law of the host
State to refunds of VAT in respect of the past acquisition of goods and services is a material
benefit, and it does not matter whether refunds take the form of tax credits or rights to actual
payment of the amount due. There is an important distinction here between a law which
changes the incidence of taxation in respect of future transactions and one which seeks to do
so retrospectively. If the State wishes to provide by law that in respect of future transactions
there is liability to VAT and no right to a refund, then prima facie at least that falls within the
scope of its normal prerogative to determine and vary the incidence of a tax. But once a right
to a refund has accrued in respect of past transactions (so that all that remains is the question
of accounting for receipts and payments) the corresponding right to be paid is capable of
falling within the broad scope of “amounts yielded by an investment”, and it does not matter
that the right arises under the public law of the State concerned. On that basis the right itself
would be covered by Article VIII of the BIT and a claim concerning the retrospective

~52-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

cancellation of the State’s liability to pay money on account of tax refunds due would fall
within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction by virtue of Articles XII(4) and XII(1) of the BIT.

184. The second preliminary question concerns the applicable law. The relevant clause,
Article XIII(7) of the BIT, provides only a tribunal exercising jurisdiction under the BIT
“shall decide the issues in dispute in accordance with this Agreement and applicable rules of
international law”. Unlike many BITs there is no express reference to the law of the host
State. However for there to have been an expropriation of an investment or return (in a
situation involving legal rights or claims as distinct from the seizure of physical assets) the
tights affected must exist under the law which creates them, in this case, the law of Ecuador.
The effect of the opening words of Article XII(4) is to permit this Tribunal to determine and
apply the taxation law of Ecuador to the extent that it is necessary to do so in order to deal
with a claim under Article VIII.

185. The right to tax refunds under Ecuadorian law has to be considered in relation to the
period before and after the Interpretative Law of 2004. Although the Denying Resolutions
related to trading periods well before 2004, the remedies sought by EnCana in its Statement
of Claim covered VAT refunds in respect of periods after the Law was enacted, at least so far
as AEC is concerned.

186. It is convenient to deal first with VAT refunds relating to transactions occurring after
the adoption of the Interpretative Law—and leaving aside for the moment the circumstances
of the effective closure of the courts (see above, paragraphs 100-106). The Claimant adduced
some evidence that the Interpretative Law is unconstitutional, but no steps have been taken to
contest its constitutionality in the manner provided for under the Political Constitution of
Ecuador, and at least it must be presumed to be constitutional. It has been treated as valid
and applied by at least one Ecuadorian court.

187. For the reasons given in paragraphs 177 and 183, it is for Ecuador to determine for the
future the regime of its tax law, taking into account its international obligations including
under Andean Community Law. From the Tribunal’s perspective, unless and until action is
successfully taken to annul the Interpretative Law on constitutional grounds or to bring it into
line with what are said to be the obligations of Ecuador within the Andean Community, that
Law must be taken to define the extent to which oil companies are entitled to VAT refunds in
respect of the acquisition of goods and services. As things stand no question of expropriation
can arise in respect of the period after the passage of the Interpretative Law.

188. The position is different with respect to the period before 2004, and in particular for
the periods covered by the Denying Resolutions. Here there are two questions: (a) did the
EnCana subsidiaries have a right under Ecuadorian law to VAT refunds in respect of
purchases of goods and services during these periods? And if so: (b) was that right
expropriated by Ecuador?

189. As to the first question, the Occidental tribunal held that such a right did exist,
following analysis of the relevant legislation and cases.’ Although this decision is not

29 Occidental Award, §§75, 77.

-53-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

binding on the present Tribunal, the Tribunal will proceed on the assumption that it is correct.
The question is whether that right was expropriated by action of the Respondent, contrary to
Article VIII.

190. The Tribunal will also assume—again arguendo—that a policy decision was made at
some stage within SRI to do everything within its power to deny refunds to the oil
companies.

191. On these two assumptions, the question is whether the policy manifested in the
Denying Resolutions and similar action taken by SRI amounted to expropriation or conduct
equivalent to expropriation of accrued rights to tax refunds, within the meaning of Article
VIII of the BIT.

192. A NAFTA Tribunal in the Waste Management case analysed in some detail the test
for expropriation of incorporeal rights by executive action.2° After referring to earlier
decisions and doctrine,'*' the Waste Management tribunal concluded as follows:

“The mere non-performance of a contractual obligation is not to be equated with a
taking of property, nor (unless accompanied by other elements) is it tantamount to
expropriation... [T]he normal response by an investor faced with a breach of contract
by its governmental counter-party (the breach not taking the form of an exercise of
governmental prerogative, such as a legislative decree) is to sue in the appropriate
court to remedy the breach. It is only where such access is practically or legally
foreclosed that the breach could amount to an outright denial of the right, and the
protection of Article 1110 would be called into play.”!"

Subsequently it expressed the test for executive expropriation in the following terms: “an
effective repudiation of the right, unredressed by any remedies available to the Claimant,
which has the effect of preventing its exercise entirely or to a substantial extent, thereby
frustrating or negating the enterprise as a whole”.’ In other words (and more succinctly)
was there a “final refusal to pay (combined with effective obstruction of legal remedies)"?"*

193. That case concerned breach of contractual rights by local government bodies, not
rights under tax legislation. There are differences between alleged governmental non-
performance of contractual obligations and governmental refusal to make payments allegedly

130

bt Waste Management, Inc v United Mexican States (2004) 43 ILM 967.

The tribunal in Waste Management examined the following cases on expropriation of intangible rights
by repudiation: Azinian, Davitian & Baca v. United Mexican States, (1998) 5 ICSID Reports 269; George W.
Cook v. Mexico (1928) 22 AJIL 189; Singer Sewing Machine Co. v. The Republic of Turkey in F.K. Neilsen, ed.,
The American-Turkish Claims Commission. Opinion and Report (Washington, Government Printing Office,
1937), 490; Rudloff case, (1905) 9 RIAA 255; Libyan American Oil Company v. Government of the Libyan Arab
Republic, (1977) 61 ILR 141; Revere Copper & Brass, Inc. v. Overseas Private Investment Corporation (1978)
56 ILR 258; Starrett Housing Corporation v. Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran (1987) 16 lran-US
CTR 112; Shufeldt Claim, (1930) 2 RIAA 1083. See Waste Management Inc v United Mexican States, (2004) 43
ILM 967, 996-8 (paras 146-155).

2 Ibid, 1002 (para 174),

3 Ibid (para 175).

4 Ibid (para 176).

-54-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

required by statute, in particular tax refunds. Evidently only a government can engage in the
latter conduct, and the determined exercise of executive authority by a host State may
influence the situation decisively, notwithstanding such separation of powers as may exist
under the constitutional practice of that State. As the tribunal said in Revere Copper, it is
necessary to look at the substance and not only the form.

194. All this is true. But there is nonetheless a difference between a questionable position
taken by the executive in relation to a matter governed by the local law and a definitive
determination contrary to law. In terms of the BIT the executive is entitled to take a position
in relation to claims put forward by individuals, even if that position may turn out to be
wrong in law, provided it does so in good faith and stands ready to defend its position before
the courts. Like private parties, governments do not repudiate obligations merely by
contesting their existence. An executive agency does not expropriate the value represented
by a statutory obligation to make a payment or refund by mere refusal to pay, provided at
least that (a) the refusal is not merely wilful, (b) the courts are open to the aggrieved private
party, (c) the courts’ decisions are not themselves overridden or repudiated by the State.

195. This principle applies equally to tax authorities as to other executive agencies. In the
Tribunal’s view, the policy of a tax authority such as SRI is not reviewable under Article VIII
of the BIT (having regard in particular to its Article XII) unless that policy in itself amounts
to an actual and effective repudiation of legal rights.

196. Turning to the facts of the present case, even if SRI may have been looking for
reasons to deny VAT recovery to oil companies, in the Tribunal’s view this was tempered in
anumber of ways. In particular:

(a) _ the oil companies could (and did) challenge SRI’s rulings in the courts, on occasions
with success;

(b) when it lost, SRI complied promptly with the court decisions;

(c) EnCana itself did not challenge Dr de Mena’s good faith,'°> and the Tribunal, having
heard Dr de Mena, accepts that she was indeed acting in good faith in a matter where
the legal issues were unclear and unsettled;

(d) there is no evidence, prior to the events of 2004-5, that the court decisions were
partisan, biased against the oil companies or otherwise non-independent. Indeed the
differences of opinion between the Tax Court and the Supreme Court suggest the
contrary.

197. For these reasons in the period prior to November 2004, SRI’s policy on oil refunds
never rose to the level of the repudiation of an Ecuadorian legal right; it did not therefore
amount to a violation of Article VIII.'°

198. The position may well have been different so far as concerns claims to tax refunds
still pending before the Ecuadorian courts at the time of the passage of the Interpretative Law.

Bs.

136 Transcript, Day 4, p. 29, line 13; p. 30, line 15.

The Occidental Tribunal agreed, striking out the expropriation claim in that case as inadmissible:
Occidental Award, §§80-92.

~55-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

Subsequent acts, such as the President’s media statement following the first dismissal of
judges, not to mention the dismissals themselves, reinforce this conclusion. It is difficult to
see how any oil company litigant with a case pending at that time could have received
impartial justice. Indeed, it appears that no attempt was made to adjudicate on pending cases
during this period. According to the Respondent, the position as of 18 February 2005 was
that the Ecuadorian Government was “considering now which process will be used to replace
the current Supreme Court justices, who were temporarily appointed. We understand that the
interim judges intend to refrain from deciding any pending cases”.!37 But it is not necessary
for the Tribunal to deal further with this period, since the EnCana subsidiaries had already
withdrawn their claims well before.

199. For these reasons the Tribunal by majority rejects EnCana’s claim based on Article
VIII of the BIT.

200. Dr. Horacio Grigera Naén appends to this award a statement of his dissenting opinion
on the question of expropriation. '*

137
138

Letter from Counsel for Ecuador to the Tribunal, 18 February 2005, 3.

The majority has carefully considered the partial dissenting opinion. In response to the dissent, the
majority of the Tribunal would make only a few points. First, it notes that at paragraph 190, the Tribunal made
clear that its analysis was based on the assumption that the SRI took the policy decision to do everything within
its power to deny refunds to the oil industry. This was an assumption arguendo and it is tempered by the
finding of fact at paragraph 196(c) that the head of the SRI, Ms. de Mena, acted in good faith, a point that
EnCana itself noted it did not contest. This finding is crucial to the Tribunal’s analysis. Had it been found that
the authorities acted in bad faith the analysis would have led to a finding of State responsibility. Second, it
should be stressed that the right which is alleged to have been expropriated is the right of a subsidiary to claim
VAT refunds. There is no question that such denial did not amount to an indirect expropriation of the
enterprises themselves; they continued to be controlled by EnCana and to operate profitably. Nor is there any
question of the denial of a legiti ion as to tax ; at the time the i were made, no
claim to VAT refunds was being asserted or allowed. Thus the question is the narrow one, whether the denial of
an incidental public law right (in an unclear, nascent domestic taxation regime) by an executive organ acting in
good faith amounts to the expropriation of that right. In our view it does not, in the circumstances of the present
case and in relation to the relevant period. Under a bilateral investment treaty executive agencies must be able
to take positions on disputable questions of local law, provided that they act in good faith, the courts are
available to resolve the resulting dispute, and judicial decisions adverse to the executive are complied with.
Consistent with well-established international principle and doctrine, Article VIII of the BIT does not convert
this tribunal into an Ecuadorian tax court, in particular having regard to its Article XII. The Tribunal cannot
pick and choose between different and conflicting national court rulings in order to arrive at a view as to what
the local law should be. Third, the Tribunal’s holding on this narrow point does not, in our view, amount to
reimposing a requirement of the exhaustion of local remedies which the BIT does not as a general matter
require. The question is not whether the claim is admissible but whether the relevant rights have been
expropriated as a matter of substance. Neither the taxpayer nor the tax collector can determine definitively
whether certain rights exist, and in the circumstances set out in paragraph 196 of the Award, it cannot be said
that the mere position of an executive agency, whether it is right or wrong at local law (and provided it is
unaccompanied by any collateral abuse of authority or exercise of undue prerogative) perfects an expropriation.
Fourth, we note that we have considered this question on the assumption (without deciding) that EnCana is
correct on the substantive issues of Ecuadorian law. Even on that footing, for the reasons stated, the direct
expropriation claim fails. Finally, we note that the attempts by Ecuador to resolve the dispute by offering to
enter into negotiations on the participation factor cannot be dismissed out of hand. The foreign investor is of
course free to reject such an offer and to prefer litigation or arbitration. But whatever the relevance and
materiality of an untested offer to resolve a dispute with a foreign investor is, it cannot, in the majority’s view,
be taken as evidence of an expropriation,

-56-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

F. Costs

201. Article XIII(9) of the BIT permits the Tribunal to award costs in accordance with the
applicable arbitral rules. Article 40 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules states:

“1, Except as provided in paragraph 2, the costs of arbitration shall in
principle be borne by the unsuccessful party. However, the arbitral tribunal
may apportion each of such costs between the parties if it determines that
apportionment is reasonable, taking into account the circumstances of the case.

2. With respect to the costs of legal representation and assistance referred
to in article 38, paragraph (e), the arbitral tribunal, taking into account the
circumstances of the case, shall be free to determine which party shall bear
such costs or may apportion such costs between the parties if it determines that
apportionment is reasonable...”

According to the general principle expressed in article 40(1), as the prevailing party Ecuador
is in principle entitled to the costs of the arbitration. However, this is not an inflexible rule
and the Tribunal has a discretion to order otherwise.

202. In view of the events giving rise to this proceeding, the Tribunal considers that it
would not be equitable to require EnCana to pay Ecuador’s costs of arbitration. Indeed, the
Tribunal has considered whether Ecuador should be required to meet EnCana’s costs, despite
the fact that the limitations on its jurisdiction under the Treaty prevent the Tribunal from
addressing most of EnCana’s complaints and despite its having found that no expropriation
was effected by the Respondent. In the circumstances, the Tribunal considers that it would
be just and equitable for Ecuador to bear the costs of the arbitration. Accordingly, Ecuador
shall be responsible for reimbursing EnCana for all sums that it has deposited with the LCIA
as deposit-holder in connection with the costs of the arbitration.

203. In fact the costs of the arbitration are as follows:

Professor Crawford’s fees US$147,786.07
Professor Crawford’s expenses US$5,798.51
Dr Grigera Naon’s fees US$175,404.30

Dr Grigera Naon’s expenses US$34,996.78
Christopher Thomas QC’s fees US$162,910.65
Christopher Thomas QC’s expenses US$16,345.90
Dr Barrera Sweeney’s fees US$46,481.40

Dr Barrera Sweeney’s expenses US $4,459.08
Hearing room costs US$24,395.34

Court reporting costs US$2,010.71

Translation costs US$12,746.14

Secretary to the Tribunal’s fees US$ 4,110.93
Secretary to the Tribunal’s expenses US$69.27
LCIA’s charges US$48,272.96

Total: US$685,788.04

-57-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

EnCana has lodged deposits and registration fee of US$355,544.61, including interest
accrued. Ecuador has lodged deposits of US$355,520.60, including interest accrued. Total
deposits lodged by the parties amount, therefore, to US$711,065.21, of which US$685,788.04
has been applied to the costs of the arbitration, as above. The US$25,277.17 held by the
LCIA, being the residue of the funds deposited, is to be refunded by the LCIA to EnCana.
Accordingly, the Tribunal decides that Ecuador shall reimburse EnCana in the amount of
US$330,267.44.

204. Having regard to article 38 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal
concludes that each party must bear its own costs of representation and assistance.

- 58 -

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

AWARD

For the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal:

(1) unanimously holds that the Claimant’s claims, except as they relate to Article VIII of
the BIT, are outside its jurisdiction by reason of Article XII of the BIT;
(2) by majority rejects EnCana’s claim based on Article VIII of the BIT;

(3) unanimously holds that Ecuador shall be responsible for reimbursing EnCana the
sums it has deposited with the LCIA as deposit-holder in connection with the costs of
the arbitration, in the amount of $330,267.44, and that otherwise each party shall bear

its own costs of representation in these proceedings.

Done at London in English and Spanish, both versions being equally authoritative.

ts

 

. ‘ \
Proféssor James Crawford
President of the Tribunal

a,

—

» nae
Dy. Horacio Grigera N in a Christopher Thomas
ember a Member

go (ebren? aoe
3 February 2006

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

 

APPENDIX 1

SELECT CHRONOLOGY

 

1993

 

Hydrocarbon Law amended to allow for participation

29 November 1993
contracts

 

1995

 

29 March 1995 City Oriente/Petroecuador, Block 27 Participation Contract

 

25 July 1995 AEC/Petroecuador, Tarapoa Participation Contract

 

27 October 1995 AEC/Petroecuador, 18b Fanny Unitization Agreement

 

1996

29 April 1996 Ecuador/Canada BIT concluded (in force 6 June 1997)

 

 

Publication in Official Journal of Decision 388 of the
23 August 1996 Cartagena Commission of the Andean Community of Nations
(2 July 1996)

 

1997

 

Opening of negotiations for X3 factor on Tarapoa and Fanny

April 1997 18B with AEC

 

6 June 1997 Ecuador/Canada BIT published in Official Gazette

 

Outline agreement for X3 factors for Fanny 18B (70%) and

 

 

 

 

 

12 December 1997 Tarapoa (73%)
1998
1999
1 May 1999 Art 69A, ITRL applies VAT to most services
4 May 1999 EnCana acquires Pacalta Resources Ltd, indirect owner of

AEC, itself owner of City Oriente.

 

 

14 July 1999 Amendment of AEC/Petroecuador Fanny 18b Unitization

 

 

 

-60-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

 

Contract (“Fanny X3 Contract”) (following ratification of
level of 70% by Comando Conjunto de Ecuador)

 

Resolution No. 1730 denying AEC’s claim for VAT paid
December 1998 and January to November 1998 (Northern
Regional Directorate) (upheld by Resolution 00736 of 24
September 2001)

31 August 1999

 

25 November 1999 | AEC/Petroecuador, 1999 Mariann 4A Unitization Agreement.

 

1 December 1999 | VAT rate increased from 10 to 12%

 

2000

 

8 March 2000 SRI Resolution 47 approving refund to AEC of VAT paid
May-July 1999 (Original Resolution)

 

SRI Resolution UR, denying AEC VAT refund claim for
30 March 2000 January to April 1999. (Northern Regional Directorate)

 

5 April 2000 SRI Resolution 119 approving refund to AEC of VAT paid for
July 1999 (Original Resolution)

 

12 April 2000 SRI Resolution 00129 annulling in part resolution 00047, and
approving refund to AEC of VAT paid in relation to May
1999 (Original Resolution)

 

26 June 2000 SRI Resolution 00316 approving refund to AEC of VAT paid
August-September 1999 (Original Resolution)

 

29 August 2000 SRI Resolution 700 approving refund to AEC of VAT paid
October-December 1999 (Original Resolution)

 

13 December 2000 | SRI Resolution 00929 approving refund to AEC of VAT paid
for June 2000 (Original Resolution)

 

14 December 2000 | SRI Resolution 00949 approving refund to AEC of VAT paid
in relation to February, May & August 2000 (Original
Resolution)

 

2001

 

10 January 2001 SRI Resolution 00039 approving refund to AEC of VAT paid
in relation to January, March & July 2000 (Original
Resolution)

 

 

6 March 2001 SRI Resolution 00202 approving refund to AEC of VAT paid
in relation to February, April & June 2000 (Original
Resolution)

 

 

 

-61-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

 

11 July 2001 Petroecuador tells SRI that it is unable to confirm whether or
not VAT was included among the costs contemplated by the
contractors when drawing up bids and agreeing the
Participation Factors.

 

2 August 2001 Reduction of X3 factor under AEC/Petroecuador 1995
Tarapoa Participation Contract from 73% to 70% (following
ratification by Comando Conjunto de Ecuador)

 

28 August 2001 SRI Resolution 00669 denying VAT credit/refund to AEC for
VAT paid September 2000-May 2001

 

28 August 2001 SRI Resolution 00670 denying VAT credit/refund to COL
September-December 2000

 

24 September 2001 | SRI Resolution 00736 upholding resolution 001730 (31
August 1999) (Northern Regional Directorate) denying VAT
credit and refund to AEC for VAT paid in relation to January
to December 1998

 

20 November 2001 | Letter from President of Petroecuador to SRI, stating that the
Participation Factors do not contemplate “reimbursements” of
investments, costs and expenses, but rather provide a share of
the production to the Contractor; Petroecuador “will await a
ruling by the appropriate authorities to determine whether or
not the participation factors should be renegotiated” having
regard to eventual VAT liabilities

 

20 December 2001 | SRI Resolution UR-0003191 denying VAT credit/refund to
COL for VAT in relation to August 2000 (Northern Regional
Directorate)

 

2002

 

1 January 2002 Amendment to Regulation of the Internal Tax Regime Law,
denying right to a credit where “VAT paid by a purchaser has
been reimbursed to it in any manner.”

 

1 April 2002 SRI Resolution 00233 revoking the Original Resolutions, and
requiring collection of sums refunded/credited in sum of
$7,567,091.87 plus interest against AEC.

 

21 May 2002 City Investing Company Ltd changes name to AEC.

 

11 July 2002 EnCana’s Notice of dispute under the BIT

 

 

8 November 2002 | Decision of First Chamber of Ecuadorian District Tax Court in
City Investing Lid v. Director General of the SRI (AEC’s

 

 

 

-62-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

 

challenge to Resolution 00669). Appeal to Supreme Court
filed within 5 days (later withdrawn)

 

19 November 2002 | Decision of First Chamber of Ecuadorian District Tax Court in
City Oriente Ltd v. Director General of the SRI (City
Oriente’s challenge to Resolution 00670). Appeal to Supreme
Court filed within 5 days (later withdrawn)

 

2003

 

Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration and Statement of Claim
pursuant to Article XIII of the BIT; simultaneously AEC and
COL discontinue proceedings in the Tax Court challenging
SRI Resolution 233

14 March 2003

 

27 October 2003 President of Ecuador writes to SRI instructing it to solve the
refund issue by way of the participation factors

 

13 November 2003 | Decision of Supreme Court in Bellwether International v.
General Director of SRI (Case 4-2003)

 

28 November 2003 | EnCana sells interest in City Oriente.

 

2004

 

14 January 2004 Decision of Supreme Court on SRI’s appeal in City Oriente
Ltd v. General Director of SRI (Case 42-2003) (affirming
refund of 2%)

 

12 February 2004 | Decision of Supreme Court on SRI’s appeal in City Investing
Ltd v. General Director of SRI (Case 48-2003) (affirming

 

 

refund of 2%)
19 March 2004 Decision of Ecuadorian District Tax Court in Repsol YPF v.
General Director of SRI
1 July 2004 Final Award of UNCITRAL Tribunal (Orrego Vicufia,

Brower, Barrera Sweeney) in Occidental Exploration and
Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador

 

16 July 2004 Cartagena Commission Decision 599

 

21 July 2004 D-G SRI writes to Petroecuador stating (with reference to
President’s letter of 27 October 2003) that VAT input
receivables are to be dealt with under the contracts

 

 

 

 

11 August 2004 Interpretative Law published in Official Journal

 

-63-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

 

25 November/8
December 2004

Congress removes 27 Supreme Court judges (out of 31) and 7
Constitutional Court judges (out of 9)

 

2005

 

15 April 2005

President Gutiérrez by decree removes entire Supreme Court;
decree retracted within 24 hours.

 

17 April 2005

National Congress votes to dismiss Supreme Court

 

20 April 2005

National Congress removes President Gutierrez

 

 

26 April 2005

 

District Tax Court rejects Petréleos Colombianos Ltd’s VAT
refund claim in relation to March-April 2001 relying
substantially on Interpretative Law

 

 

-64-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

Appendix 2

Agreement between the Government of Canada and the Government of the Republic of
Ecuador for the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection of Investments
Quito, 29 April 1996

Article I — Definitions
For the purpose of this Agreement:

(b) “enterprise” means
(i) any entity constituted or organized under applicable law...; and
(ii) a branch of any such entity;

(g) “investment” means any kind of asset owned or controlled either directly, or indirectly
through an investor of a third State, by an investor of one Contracting Party in the territory of
the other particular, though not exclusively, includes:
(iii) money, claims to money, and claims to performance under contract having a
financial value;
(iv) rights, conferred by law or under contract, to undertake any economic and
commercial activity, including any rights to search for, cultivate, extract or exploit
natural resources.

(h) “investor” means
in the case of Canada:
@ any natural person possessing the citizenship of or permanently residing in
Canada in accordance with its laws; or
(ii) any enterprise incorporated or duly constituted in accordance with applicable
laws of Canada,
who makes the investment in the territory of the Republic of Ecuador; ...
(i) “measure” includes any law, regulation, procedure, requirement or practice;
0) “returns” means all amounts yielded by an investment and in particular, though not
exclusively, includes profits, interest, capital gains, dividends, royalties, fees or other current
income;

 

Article II: Establist it, Acquisition and Pr ion of I it:
1. Each Contracting Party shall encourage the creation of favourable conditions for
investors of the other Contracting Party to make investments in its territory.
2. Each Contracting Party shall accord investments or returns of investors of the other
Contracting Party:
(a) fair and equitable treatment in accordance with principles of international law,
and

(b) full protection and security.

-65-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

Article IV: National Treatment after Establishment
and Exceptions to National Treatment

1, Each Contracting Party shall grant to investments or returns of investors of the other
Contracting Party treatment no less favourable than that which, in like circumstances, it
grants to investments or returns of its own investors with respect to the expansion,
management, conduct, operation and sale or disposition of investments.

Article VIE: Expropriation

1. Investments or returns of investors of either Contracting Party shall not be
nationalized, expropriated or subjected to measures having an effect equivalent to
nationalization or expropriation (hereinafter referred to as “expropriation”) in the territory of
the other Contracting Party, except for a public purpose, under due process of law, in a non-
discriminatory manner and against prompt, adequate and effective compensation. Such
compensation shall be based on the genuine value of the investment or returns expropriated
immediately before the expropriation or at the time the proposed expropriation became public
knowledge, whichever is the earlier, shall be payable from the date of expropriation at a
normal commercial rate of interest, shall be paid without delay and shall be effectively
realizable and freely transferable.

Article XII: Taxation Measures

1, Except as set out in this Article, nothing in this Agreement shall apply to taxation
measures.

2. Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the rights and obligations of the Contracting
Parties under any tax convention. In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of
this Agreement and any such convention, the provisions of that convention apply to the
extent of the inconsistency.

3. Subject to paragraph (2), a claim by an investor that a tax measure of a Contracting
Party is in breach of an agreement between the central government authorities of a
Contracting Party and the investor concerning an investment shall be considered a claim for
breach of this Agreement unless the taxation authorities of the Contracting Parties, no later
than six months after being notified of the claim by the investor, jointly determine that the
measure does not contravene such agreement.

4, Article VIII may be applied to a taxation measure unless the taxation authorities of the
Contracting Parties, no later than six months after being notified by an investor that he
disputes a taxation measure, jointly determine that the measure is not an expropriation.

5. If the taxation authorities of the Contracting Parties fail to reach the joint
determinations specified in paragraphs (3) and (4) within six months after being notified, the
investor may submit its claim for resolution under Article XIII.

- 66 -

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

Article XIII: Settlement of Disputes between an Investor
and the Host Contracting Party

1. Any dispute between one Contracting Party and an investor of the other Contracting
Party, relating to a claim by the investor that a measure taken or not taken by the former
Contracting Party is in breach of this Agreement, and that the investor has incurred loss or
damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach, shall, to the extent possible, be settled
amicably between them.
2. If a dispute has not been settled amicably within a period of six months from the date
on which it was initiated, it may be submitted by the investor to arbitration in accordance
with paragraph (4). For the purposes of this paragraph, a dispute is considered to be initiated
when the investor of one Contracting Party has delivered notice in writing to the other
Contracting Party alleging that a measure taken or not taken by the latter Contracting Party is
in breach of this Agreement, and that the investor has incurred loss or damage by reason of,
or arising out of, that breach.
3. An investor may submit a dispute as referred to in paragraph (1) to arbitration in
accordance with paragraph (4) only if:
(a) _ the investor has consented in writing thereto;
(b) the investor has waived its right to initiate or continue any other proceedings in
relation to the measure that is alleged to be in breach of this Agreement before the
courts or tribunals of the Contracting Party concerned or in a dispute settlement
procedure of any kind;
(c) if the matter involves taxation, the conditions specified in paragraph 5 of
Article XII have been fulfilled; and
(d) not more than three years have elapsed from the date on which the investor
first acquired, or should have first acquired, knowledge of the alleged breach and
knowledge that the investor has incurred loss or damage.
4. The dispute may, at the election of the investor concerned, be submitted to arbitration
under:
(a) The International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID),
established pursuant to the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of other States, opened for signature at Washington 18
March, 1965 (ICSID Convention), provided that both the disputing Contracting Party
and the Contracting Party of the investor are parties to the ICSID Convention; or
(b) | The Additional Facility Rules of ICSID, provided that either the disputing
Contracting Party or the Contracting Party of the investor, but not both, is a party to
the ICSID Convention; or
(c) an international arbitrator or ad hoc arbitration tribunal established under the
Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
(UNCITRAL).
5. Each Contracting Party hereby gives its unconditional consent to the submission of a
dispute to international arbitration in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

7. A tribunal established under this Article shall decide the issues in dispute in
accordance with this Agreement and applicable rules of international law.

9. A tribunal may award, separately or in combination, only:

-67-

EnCana Corporation v. Republic of Ecuador LCIA Case UN3481

(a) monetary damages and any applicable interest;
(b) restitution of property, in which case the award shall provide that the disputing
Contracting Party may pay monetary damages and any applicable interest in lieu of
restitution.
A tribunal may also award costs in accordance with the applicable arbitration rules
10. An award of arbitration shall be final and binding and shall be enforceable in the
territory of each of the Contracting Parties.

12. (a) =A claim that a Contracting Party is in breach of this Agreement, and that an
enterprise that is a juridical person incorporated or duly constituted in accordance with
applicable laws of that Contracting Party has incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising
out of, that breach, may be brought by an investor of the other Contracting Party acting on
behalf of an enterprise which the investor owns or controls directly or indirectly. In such a
case:

@ any award shall be made to the affected enterprise;

(ii) the consent to arbitration of both the investor and the enterprise shall be

required;

(iii) both the investor and enterprise must waive any right to initiate or continue

any other proceedings in relation to the measure that is alleged to be in breach of this

Agreement before the courts or tribunals of the Contracting Party concerned or in a

dispute settlement procedure of any kind; and

(iv) _ the investor may not make a claim if more than three years have elapsed from

the date on which the enterprise first acquired, or should have first acquired,

knowledge of the alleged breach and knowledge that it has incurred loss or damage.
(b) Notwithstanding subparagraph 12(a), where a disputing Contracting Party has
deprived a disputing investor of control of an enterprise, the following shall not be required:

@ a consent to arbitration by the enterprise under 12(a)(ii); and

(ii) a waiver from the enterprise under 12(a)(iii).

-68-

