INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

WASHINGTON, D.C.

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

(ANCILLARY CLAIM)

ICSID CASE No. ARB/01/3

ENRON CORPORATION AND PONDEROSA ASSETS, L.P.
Claimants
v.
THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

Respondent

Before the Arbitral Tribunal composed of:

Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia (President)
Dr. Héctor Gros Espiell (Arbitrator)
Mr. Pierre-Yves Tschanz (Arbitrator)

Secretary of the Tribunal

Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson

Washington, D.C., August 2, 2004

Procedural History

1. On March 25, 2003, Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. (“Claimants”)
submitted before the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”
or “Centre”) a request for arbitration against the Argentine Republic (“Argentine Republic”
or “Argentina”) for alleged violations of the provisions of the 1991 Treaty between the
United States of America and the Argentine Republic Concerning the Reciprocal
Encouragement and Protection of Investments (“Treaty”). The request concerns the
adoption by the Government of Argentina of certain measures that allegedly affect the
Claimants’ investment in a gas transportation company.

2. The Claimants had previously submitted a request for arbitration against the
Argentine Republic, also for alleged violations of the Treaty. However, at that time the
Claimants disputed the assessment of Stamp Taxes that certain Argentinean provinces
applied to the gas transportation company where the Claimants have their investment (“first
dispute”). This request was registered by the Centre on April 11, 2001.

3. After requesting observations from the Argentine Republic with respect to the
Claimants’ request for arbitration of March 25, 2003, the Tribunal decided, in accordance
with Article 46 of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States
and Nationals of other States (“Convention”), to accept such request as a claim ancillary to
the one already registered by the Centre (“ancillary claim”).

4. In its decision, the Tribunal proposed to handle both disputes independently until it
decided on the exceptions to jurisdiction in both cases. In addition, the Tribunal also

proposed an expeditious schedule in order for the parties to file their written submissions on

jurisdiction in connection with the ancillary claim. Based on this schedule, Argentina filed
its memorial on jurisdiction on August 20, 2003, while the Claimants filed their counter-
memorial on jurisdiction on October 17, 2003. Then, on November 19, 2003, Argentina
filed its reply and on December 22, 2003, the Claimants filed their rejoinder.

5. The exceptions to jurisdiction regarding the first dispute were resolved by the
Tribunal on January 14, 2004. In its decision, the Tribunal declared that it has jurisdiction
over the first dispute.

6. Subsequently, a hearing on jurisdiction regarding the ancillary claim was held in
Paris, on April 1 and 2, 2004. At the hearing the Claimants were represented by Messrs. R.
Doak Bishop and Craig S. Miles from the law firm of King & Spalding, Houston, United
States, as well as by Messrs. Guido Santiago Tawil, Alix M. Martinez and Ms. Silvia M.
Marchili from the law firm of M. & M. Bomchil, Buenos Aires, Argentina. Messrs. Bishop
and Tawil addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Claimants. The Argentine Republic was
represented by Ms. Cintia Yaryura, Ms. Ana Badillos, and Mr. Ignacio Pérez Cortés from
the office of the Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina. All of them addressed the
Tribunal on behalf of the Argentine Republic.

7. During the hearing, the Tribunal also put questions to the parties in accordance with
the Rule 32(2) of the Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings of the Centre
(“Arbitration Rules”).

The Dispute between the Parties

8. As noted above, this is the second dispute between Enron Corporation and
Ponderosa Assets L. P and the Argentine Republic brought before this Tribunal. The first

dispute concerned the assessment of Stamp Taxes by the Argentine Provinces and the

jurisdiction of the Tribunal was affirmed by its decision of January 14, 2004 (Enron
Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic) (“Stamp Tax Decision’).
This dispute is an ancillary claim arising from the refusal of the Argentine Government to
allow tariff adjustments in accordance with the United States Producer Price Index (“PPI”)
and the enactment of Law No. 25.561 which nullified PPI adjustments and the calculation
of tariffs in dollars of the United States of America. In the Claimants’ argument, these
various measures violate the commitment made to the investor under the Treaty.

9. The extent of the participation by the Claimants in the privatization of the gas
industry in Argentina has been explained in the Stamp Tax Decision, and shall not be
repeated here. The same holds true of the various shareholding arrangements and
companies set up to this end. The Tribunal notes, however, that the parties have continued
to argue about the shareholding arrangements connected with the participation of Enron in
Transportadora de Gas del Sur Sociedad Anénima (“TGS”) and related companies.

10. The Argentine Republic has requested that Enron explain these arrangements and
the Claimants have provided the Tribunal and Argentina with a number of documents to
this effect. The Tribunal is satisfied that the shareholding arrangements have not changed,
or not in any significant manner, since the Stamp Tax Decision. Should these arrangements
change, evidently the Tribunal will take any developments into account. The Claimants
have undertaken the commitment of informing the Tribunal promptly of any changes in this

matter.

Argentina’s Economic Emergency

11. An extensive portion of the pleadings of the Argentine Republic and the documents
submitted in this dispute concern explanations about the economic and social emergency
affecting that country.

12. Although most of these aspects belong to the merits of the dispute, the Tribunal is
nonetheless aware of this emergency and takes due note of it. At this stage, it is only
appropriate to conclude, as in CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic
(“CMS”),! that the Tribunal is not here to examine measures of general economic policy or
to judge whether they are right or wrong. Its duty is only to examine in due course
“whether specific measures affecting the Claimant’s investment or measures of general
economic policy having a direct bearing on such investment have been adopted in violation
of legally binding commitments made to the investor in treaties, legislation or contracts”.
13. The Tribunal also notes that while for Argentina there are two different disputes
involved in this claim, one relating to the PPI and the other to legislative emergency
measures, in the Claimants’ view the dispute is just one evolving set of measures that have
ended up affecting the investor’s rights.

Argentina’s Objections to Jurisdiction

14. Like in the Stamp Tax dispute, the Argentine Republic has raised five objections to
the jurisdiction of the Center and the competence of the Tribunal. These are first that the
Claimants lacks ius standi because the dispute concerns contractual rights that appertain to
TGS and not the Claimants. Second, an indirect claim such as that asserted by the
Claimants is in violation of Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention. Third, the dispute does not

arise directly out of an investment as required by Article 25(1) of the Convention. Fourth,

the existence of a forum selection clause in the License Contract prevails over any other
forum. And fifth, the dispute has already been submitted to the local courts of Argentina.
15. Since these arguments have already been discussed in the Stamp Tax Decision, and
the situation in respect of this dispute is not different, the Tribunal will address them briefly
and devote more attention to certain aspects that the Argentine Republic has emphasized in
respect of this particular dispute.

Jurisdictional Objection Based on the Lack of Jus Standi and Related Questions

16. | The Argentine Republic first objects to the competence of the Tribunal on the
ground that the Claimants lack ius standi because only TGS is entitled to bring claims as a
corporation. The point has been raised as one of admissibility.

17. In Argentina’s view shareholders cannot claim separately from the corporation, not
even in proportion to their interest, as they would have only an indirect claim. Under both
Argentine legislation and international law, Argentina argues, corporate personality does
not allow for indirect claims by shareholders. To the extent that this has been allowed it
has always been under express provisions of an exceptional nature. While an investment in
shares might qualify for protection under the Treaty, this is only when the shares have been
affected as such by measures of the host Government.

18. In the Claimants’ view, however, the Treaty specifically allows investors to bring
action in relation to their investments, and there is nothing in international law that
precludes the exercise of this right. Their claim is independent of any claim that TGS
might have as the holder of the License.

19. Again in this case, the parties have discussed the meaning of the Barcelona

Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited (“Barcelona Traction”? and the Elettronica

Sicula, S.p.4. (“ELSI”) cases in so far as these decisions reflect customary international
law. Argentine legislation has also been discussed in this context. In particular, the
Claimants argue that the Treaty does not require the Claimants’ control of TGS and that a
number of ICSID cases have upheld the right of investors to claim on their own right.*

20. As was also discussed in the Stamp Tax Decision, Argentina is rightly concerned
about the fact that successive claims by minority shareholders that invest in companies that
in turn invest in other companies, could end up with claims that are only remotely
connected to the measures questioned. However, as explained by the Tribunal in that case,
there is a clear limit to this chain in so far as the consent to the arbitration clause is only
related to specific investors.”

21. The parties also have different views about the second and third jurisdictional
objections raised by Argentina. The question of indirect claims is inseparable from the
conclusion on ius standi: to the extent that minority shareholders are allowed to claim this
situation by definition will include investors that could be described as having an indirect
participation. The connection of this matter to Article 25(2)(b) of the Convention will be
discussed further below.

22. Whether the dispute arises directly out of an investment is related to the same issue
as that of which are precisely the rights of the investor under the Treaty. If both majority
and minority shareholders are allowed to claim it is because they are protected investors
under the Treaty. This element will govern the conclusion as to whether the dispute arises

directly out of an investment.

Jurisdictional Objection Concerning the Existence of a Contractual Forum Selection Clause
and the Submission of the Dispute to Local Jurisdiction

23. Two other objections raised by the Argentine Republic concern the issue of the
existence of a forum selection clause in the License Contract and the related question of
whether the dispute was submitted to the local courts. Argentina believes that the forum
selection clause of the Contract, assigning exclusive jurisdiction to the Administrative
Courts of Buenos Aires, prevails. The Claimants, it is argued, are a third party to that
Contract without a right of action of their own. Moreover, it is argued that TGS appealed
the PPI measures and submitted to administrative courts other aspects of the dispute.

24. — The Claimants oppose such conclusions and are of the view that contractual choice
of forum provisions do not impede ICSID jurisdiction when a Treaty-based claim is
involved. In addition, the Claimants argue that they have not resorted to any local court in
Argentina and that eventual actions by TGS do not preclude resort to ICSID arbitration by
the Claimants, as held in Alex Genin and others v. Republic of Estonia (“Genin”) and
cus.

The Tribunal’s Findings in Respect of Jurisdiction

25. The Tribunal agrees with the view expressed by the Argentine Republic in the
hearing on jurisdiction held in respect of this dispute, to the effect that the decisions of
ICSID tribunals are not binding precedents and that every case must be examined in the
light of its own circumstances. This was also the conclusion expressed by the Tribunal in
the Stamp Tax Claim Decision.’ The key issues raised by the parties in connection with
jurisdiction in this case, however, are not really different from those raised in earlier cases.

This being the case, the conclusions of the Tribunal follow the same line of reasoning, not

because there might be a compulsory precedent but because the circumstances of the
various cases are comparable, and in some respects identical.

26. Because the present claim is an ancillary one to that in the Stamp Tax Claim, the
Tribunal could have relied on the jurisdictional findings made in that Decision and extend
them to this additional dispute. However, the Tribunal has wished to examine anew the
jurisdictional arguments made by the Argentine Republic and the views of the Claimants on
this matter. The parties have not really made any new argument in this respect and,
therefore, the Tribunal sees no basis for changing any of the conclusions already reached in
the Stamp Tax Claim.

27. It follows that the Tribunal is persuaded that again in this case the Claimants have
ius standi to claim in their own right as they are protected investors under the Treaty.'° The
Claimants’ right to bring an action on their own has been firmly established in the Treaty
and there are no reasons to hold otherwise in connection with this dispute. Neither is this
situation contrary to international law or to ICSID practice and decisions.

28. Foreign investors, such as the Claimants, were specifically invited to participate in
the privatization process, various companies were set up in Argentina to this effect and
investments were channeled into TGS through this network of corporate arrangements. It is
simply not tenable to try now to dissociate TGS from those other companies and the
investors and argue that the Claimants do not have ius standi. This is one of the essential
features of the Treaty and the protection it extends to foreign investors.

29. The Treaty language and intent is specific in extending this protection to minority or

indirect shareholders. The Tribunal must also emphasize that the definition of investment

under Article I(1)(a) of the Treaty has been expressly related to the direct or indirect
ownership or control by the foreign national:
(a) “investment” means every kind of investment in the territory of one
Party owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or companies
of the other Party, such as equity, debt, and service and investment

contracts; and includes without limitation:

“ (ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a company or
interests in the assets thereof;

30. This definition is the one that controls the whole discussion. It evidently includes
the channeling of investments through locally incorporated companies, particularly when
this is mandated by the very legal arrangements governing the privatization process in
Argentina. Not only was it required that TGS be an Argentine company but also that the
holding companies should be incorporated in Argentina.

31. Faced with this very explicit provision, the Tribunal can only conclude that indirect
investments are specifically protected under the Treaty.

32. The Tribunal’s interpretation is, in addition, fully consistent with the rules on the
interpretation of treaties laid down in the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
Article 31.1 of this Convention provides that “A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context
and in the light of its object and purpose”. Also Article 32 indicates the recourse to
supplementary means of interpretation, including the “preparatory work of the treaty and
the circumstances of its conclusion...”. That the Treaty was made with the specific
purpose of guaranteeing the rights of the foreign investors and encouraging their
participation in the privatization process, is beyond doubt. In view of the explicit text of

the Treaty and its object and purpose, it is not even necessary to resort to supplementary

means of interpretation, such as the preparatory work, a step that would be required only in
case of insufficient elements of interpretation in connection with the rule laid down in
Article 31 of the Convention.
The Mondev Case Distinguished
33. The Argentine Republic has relied, however, on some recent and earlier cases with a
view to request that tribunals should be consistent in their decisions. The Tribunal will
examine these cases so as to appreciate their real meaning and extent.
34. The first case on which the Argentine Republic relies is Mondev International Ltd.
v. United States of America (“Mondev’).'' Here, it is correctly argued, the United States
adopted the view that shareholders cannot assert claims under the North American Free
Trade Agreement (“NAFTA”) for damages suffered by the company in which they own
shares. Also NAFTA Article 1139 refers to both direct and indirect ownership or control of
investments. This same interpretation, it is argued, should be adopted by this Tribunal
particularly because the United States is a party to the Treaty.
35. | However, the Tribunal in Mondeyv reached a different conclusion. After explaining
Mondev’s argument to the effect that the phrase “owned or controlled directly or
indirectly” was adopted specifically to avoid the difficulties relating to the standing of
shareholders raised by the Barcelona Traction decision, the Tribunal concluded:

“In the Tribunal’s view, it is certainly open to Mondev to show that it has

suffered loss or damage by reason of the decisions it complains of, even if

loss or damage was also suffered by the enterprise itself... For these reasons,

the Tribunal concludes that Mondev has standing to bring its claim...”.!
36. | A similar argument is made by the Argentine Republic in connection with the view
expressed to the same effect by the United States in GAMI Investments Inc. v. United

Mexican States, a case that at this date has not been yet decided.

37. The Tribunal must note, however, as also indicated in the Stamp Tax Claim
Decision,'* that the greatest innovation of ICSID and other systems directed at the
protection of foreign investments is precisely that the rights of the investors are not any
longer subject to the political and other considerations by their governments, as was the
case under the old system of diplomatic protection, often resulting in an interference with
those rights. Investors may today claim independently from the view of their governments.
38. The Tribunal also notes that the United States Supreme Court has recently held, in
the context of the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act, that if direct ownership of shares is
envisaged in legislation this should be understood as referring to the ownership of a
majority of shares and the requirements of formal corporate structure, but when legislation
refers to indirect ownership this means that minority shareholders are entitled to certain
rights as well and that the formal corporate structure is no longer controlling. Referring to
the expression “direct and indirect ownership” used in other statutes, the Court held:

“Where Congress intends to refer to ownership in other than the formal

a

sense, it knows how to do so”.
39. The definition of investment adopted in bilateral investment treaties is a clear
example of protection of minority shareholders and most certainly this was not ignored by
the United States Senate. This decision of the United States Supreme Court should
probably have more weight for the purpose of the United States’ views on indirect
ownership than that expressed in arbitrations by counsel for that government.
The Vacuum Salt Case Distinguished
40. | The Argentine Republic has also urged this Tribunal to be consistent with what was
decided in the earlier ICSID case Vacuum Salt Products Ltd. v. Republic of Ghana

(“Vacuum Salt”).'° The Tribunal has examined this case with the greatest interest in order

to see whether in fact there would be anything in it suggesting the need for this Tribunal to
adopt a conclusion different from that in the Stamp Tax Claim Decision.

41. In that case, the tribunal dealt with the interpretation of Article 25(2)(b) of the
Convention in connection with the meaning of “foreign control”. This Article provides for
juridical persons which have the nationality of the Contracting State party to the dispute to
be able to qualify for ICSID jurisdiction when “...because of foreign control, the parties
have agreed should be treated as a national of another Contracting State for the purposes of
this Convention”. The decision held that because there was no such agreement, the
Claimant was precluded from acceding to ICSID jurisdiction.

42. The Argentine Republic believes that this is also the case here, as there has been no
agreement to treat any of the Argentine companies involved as nationals of another
Contracting State because of foreign control.

43. The Tribunal is not persuaded by these arguments for two reasons. The first one is
that Vacuum Salt had been at all material times a corporation organized under the 1963
Companies Code of Ghana. There was no foreign investment contract nor any connection
to a foreign investment law. There was only a minority Greek shareholder in that company.
44. The situation here is entirely different. There are specific foreign investors, who
were invited by the Argentine Government to participate in the privatization process and
required to organize locally incorporated companies to channel their investments. At all
times this was a foreign investment operation.

45. But there is a second and still more powerful reason that convinces the Tribunal

about the fact that Vacuum Salt was an entirely different case not comparable in any way to

this one. There was no bilateral investment treaty and hence there was no specific
definition of investment available.
46. The provision of Article 25(2)(b) allows for locally incorporated companies to claim
in ICSID arbitration to the extent that there is an agreement to this effect. Such an
agreement would be normally the outcome of the Treaty. This is what the tribunal
explained in CMS when holding that:
“The reference that Article 25(2)(b) makes to foreign control in terms of
treating a company of the nationality of the Contracting State party as a
national of another Contracting State is precisely meant to facilitate
agreement between the parties, so as not to have the corporate personality
interfering with the protection of the real interests associated with the

investment. The same result can be achieved by means of the provisions of

the BIT, where the consent may include non-controlling or minority

shareholders”.'”

Contract Claims and Treaty Claims

47. A number of questions raised by the jurisdictional objections of the Argentine
Republic concern the discussion about Contract claims and Treaty claims, in so far it is
argued that the forum selection clause of the License Contract and the alleged submission
of claims to Argentine courts are separate and distinct from Treaty claims, which are
precluded because of the lack of ius standi and connected arguments.

48. | Many tribunals have had to deal with the difference between contract-based claims
and treaty-based claims, as evidenced by Lauder,'* Genin,'? Compania de Aguas del
Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic (“Aguas del Aconquija”),”°
CMS"! and Azurix” as well as the Annulment Committees in Compaitia de Aguas del
Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic (Annulment Proceeding)
(“Vivendi”)* and Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (“Wena”).4 SGS

Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (“SGS v. Pakistan”)

and SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines (“SGS v.
Philippines”)”° are two other recent instances of this discussion.

49. The distinction between these different types of claims has relied in part on the test
of the triple identity. To the extent that a dispute might involve the same parties, object and
cause of action?’ it might be considered as a dispute where it is virtually impossible to
separate the contract issues from the treaty issues and drawing from that distinction any
jurisdictional conclusions.

50. However, as the Annulment Committee held in Vivendi, “A treaty cause of action is
not the same as a contractual cause of action; it requires a clear showing of conduct which
is in the circumstances contrary to the relevant treaty standard”.”* The tribunal also held in
CMS, referring to this line of decisions, that “as contractual claims are different from treaty
claims, even if there had been or there currently was a recourse to the local courts for
breach of contract, this would not have prevented submission of the treaty claims to
arbitration”.”?

51. In this case, although there are no doubt questions concerning the Contract between
the parties, the essence of the claims, like in the Stamp Tax Claim, relates to alleged
violations of the Treaty rights. Having the Tribunal concluded that there are no reasons to
change the conclusions on jurisdiction reached in the Stamp Tax Claim Decision, the
distinction between contract-based claims and treaty-based claims looses to a great extent

its significance in the present phase of the case.

Decision
52. For the reasons stated above the Tribunal decides that the present dispute is within
the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal. The Order necessary for

the continuation of the procedure pursuant to Arbitration Rule 41(4) has accordingly been

made.
So decided.
Francisco Orrego Vicufia
President of the Tribunal
Héctor Gros Espiell Pierre-Yves Tschanz

Arbitrator Arbitrator

 

' CMS Gas Transmission Company y. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8), Decision on
Jurisdiction of July 17, 2003, par. 33; see also Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3), Decision on Jurisdiction of January 14, 2004, pars. 29-30.

 

> International Court of Justice, “Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited’, (New
Application: 1962) (Belgium v. Spain) (1962-1970).

> International Court of Justice, “Elettronica Sicula, S.p.4.” (ELSI), United States of America v. Italy (1987-
1989).

* Lanco International, Inc. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/6), Decision of December 8,
1998; Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal y. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case
No. ARB/97/3), Award of November 21, 2000; Antoine Goetz and others v. Republic of Burundi (ICSID
Case No. ARB/95/3), Award of February 10, 1999; Compania de Aguas del Aconquija 8.A. and Vivendi
Universal v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment Proceeding of July
3, 2002; and CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8),
Decision on Jurisdiction of July 17, 2003.

5 Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic (\CSID Case No. ARB/01/3),
Decision on Jurisdiction of January 14, 2004, pars. 50-53.

® Lanco International, Inc. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/6), Decision of December 8,
1998; Compaitia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal y. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case
No. ARB/97/3), Award of November 21, 2000; Salini Construttori S.p.A. and Italstrade S.p.A. v. Kingdom
of Morocco (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/4); Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v.
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment Proceeding of July 3, 2002;
Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision on Annulment
Proceeding of February 5, 2002; and CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case
No. ARB/O1/8), Decision on Jurisdiction of July 17, 2003.

7 Alex Genin and others v. Republic of Estonia (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/2), Award of June 25, 2001.

8 CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8), Decision on
Jurisdiction of July 17, 2003.

° Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic (\CSID Case No. ARB/O1/3),
Decision on Jurisdiction of January 14, 2004, par. 40.

‘© Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/12), Decision on Jurisdiction of December 8,
2003, pars. 62-63.

'! Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2), Award of
October 11, 2002.

2 Td. pars. 82-83.

‘3 GAMI Investments Inc. v. United Mexican States (NAFTA/UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules Proceeding),
Submission of the United States of America of June 30, 2003.

 

4 Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3),
Decision on Jurisdiction of January 14, 2004, par. 48.

'S Dole Food Co. v. Patrickson, U. S. Supreme Court, 123 S. Ct. 1655 (2003).

'© Vacuum Salt Products Ltd. vy. Republic of Ghana (ICSID Case No. ARB/92/1), Decision on Jurisdiction of
February 16, 1994.

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8), Decision on
Jurisdiction of July 17, 2003, par. 51.

'§ Ronald S. Lauder v. Czech Republic, Uncitral Final Award, September 3, 2001.
'° Alex Genin and others v. Republic of Estonia (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/2), Award of June 25, 2001.

2° Compahia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3), Award of November 21, 2000.

2! CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8), Decision on
Jurisdiction of July 17, 2003.

» Acurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12), Decision on Jurisdiction of December 8,
2003.

> Compahia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment Proceeding of July 3, 2002.

** Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision on Annulment
Proceeding of February 5, 2002.

*°$GS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan ((CSID Case No. ARB/O1/13),
Decision on Jurisdiction of August 6, 2003.

© SGS Société Générale de Surveillance $.A. v. Republic of the Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6),
Decision on Jurisdiction of January 29, 2004.

>” Ronald S. Lauder v. Czech Republic, Uncitral Final Award, September 3, 2001, paras. 161, 163.

8 Compahia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/97/3), Decision on Annulment Proceeding of July 3, 2002, para. 113.

2° CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8), Decision on
Jurisdiction of July 17, 2003, para. 80. See also Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No.
ARB/01/12), Decision on Jurisdiction of December 8, 2003, para. 89.

