Enron Creditors Recovery Corp.
Ponderosa Assets, L.P.
(Claimants)

v.
The Argentine Republic
(Respondent)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3)
(Annulment Proceeding)

 

Decision on the Application for Annulment

of the Argentine Republic

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee

Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C., President
Judge Patrick L. Robinson
Judge Per Tresselt

Secretary of the ad hoc Committee: Mr Gonzalo Flores

Counsel assisting the ad hoc Committee: Dr Christopher Staker

Representing the Claimants: Representing the Respondent:
Mr R. Doak Bishop Until 26 January 2010:

Mr Craig S. Miles Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino
King & Spalding Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
1100 Louisiana, Suite 4000 Argentina

Houston, Texas 77002
United States of America

From 27 January 2010:

and

Dr. Joaquin Pedro da Rocha

Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién

Dr Guido Santiago Tawil Argentina
M &M Bomchil Abogados

Suipacha 268, Piso 12

C1008AAF Buenos Aires

Argentina

Date of dispatch to the parties: 30 July 2010

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE OF CONTENTS 2

TABLE OF ABBREVIATED REFERENCES 4

 

Introduction
The dis
The grounds for ar
(a) Introduction
(b) The role of an ad hoc annulment committee...
(c) Manifest excess of powers (Article 52(1)(b)).....
(d) Serious departure from fundamental rule of procedure (Article 52(1)(d)) ..
(e) Failure to state reasons (Article 52(1)(e))..

Indirect claims
(a) Background
(b) Arguments of the parties
(c) Failure of the award to state the reasons on which it is based as a ground of annulment
under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention: the Committee’s views ....
(d) Manifest excess of powers as a ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention: the Committee’s views...
(e) Conclusion
Forum clause
(a) Background
(b) Arguments of the parties
(c) The Committee’s views
Procedural issues
(a) Introduction
(b) Admission of the evidence of Mr. Perkins
(i) Background
(ii) Arguments of the parties
(iii) The Committee’s views
(c) Admission of the expert report of Mr Bianchi...
(i) Background
(ii) Arguments of the parties
(iii) The Committee’s views
(d) Closure of the proceedings...
(i) Background
(ii) Arguments of the parties
(iii) The Committee’s views
Appli law

(a) Introduction
(b) Arguments of the parties
(c) The Committee’s views
(d) Conclusion

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

H. The Tribunal’s finding of a breach of the fair and equitable treatment

clause 119
(a) Background
(b) Arguments of the parties
(c) The Committee’s views

 

 

 

|. The Tribunal’s finding of a breach of the umbrella clause ..
(a) Background
(b) Arguments of the parties
(c) Failure of the award to state the reasons on which it is based as a ground of annulment
under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention: the Committee’s views .. 132
(d) Manifest excess of powers as a ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention: the Committee’s views... +139

J. Emergency situation 139
(a) Introduction 139
(b) Arguments of the parties 142

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(c) The Committee’s views 147

K. Conclusions 162
L. Costs and stay of pr di 166
Decision 169

 

TABLE OF ABBREVIATED REFERENCES

AES Jurisdiction Decision

Amco | Annulment Decision

Amco II Annulment Decision

AMT Award

Azurix Annulment Decision

Azurix Jurisdiction Decision

Barcelona Traction case

BG Group Award

Camuzzi Jurisdiction
Decision

CDC Annulment Decision

CME Partial Award

CMS Annulment Decision

CMS Award

Case Law

AES Corporation v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/02/17, Decision on Jurisdiction, April 26, 2005

Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia,
ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Annulment, May 16,
1986

Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia,
ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Annulment,
December 17, 1992

American Manufacturing and Trading, Inc. v. Republic of
Zaire, |CSID Case No. ARB/93/1, Award, February 21, 1997

Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, |\CSID Case No
ARB/01/12 (Annulment Proceeding), Decision on the
Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic,
September 1, 2009

Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/01/12, Decision on Jurisdiction, December 8, 2003

Case concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power
Company, Limited (Belgium v. Spain), Second Phase,
Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1970, p. 3

BG Group plc v. Republic of Argentina,
arbitration, Final Award, December 24, 2007

UNCITRAL

Camuzzi International S.A. v. Argentine Republic, |CSID
Case No. ARB/03/2, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction,
May 11, 2005

CDC Group plc v. Republic of Seychelles, |CSID Case No.
ARB/02/14, Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005

CME Czech Republic B.V. (The Netherlands) v. Czech
Republic, UNCITRAL arbitration proceedings, Partial Award,
September 13, 2001

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Decision on Annulment,
September 25, 2007

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Award, May 12, 2005

CMS Jurisdiction Decision

Continental Casualty Award

Continental Casualty
Jurisdiction Decision

El Paso Jurisdiction Decision

Eureko Partial Award

Genin Award

Goetz Award

Kléckner Annulment
Decision

Lanco Jurisdiction Decision

LG&E Award

LG&E Decision on Liability

LG&E Jurisdiction Decision

Lucchetti Annulment
Decision

MCI Annulment Decision

Metalpar Award

MINE Annulment Decision

CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentine Republic, |\CSID
Case No ARB/01/8, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction,
July 17, 2003

Continental Casualty Company v. Argentine Republic, |\CSID
Case No. ARB/03/9, Award, September 5, 2008

Continental Casualty Company v. Argentine Republic, |\CSID
Case No. ARB/03/9, Decision on Jurisdiction, February 22,
2006

El Paso Energy International Company v. Argentine
Republic, |CSID Case No. ARB/03/15, Decision on
Jurisdiction, April 27, 2006

Eureko B.V. v. Republic of Poland, ad hoc arbitration, Partial
Award, August 19, 2005

Alex Genin et al. v. Republic of Estonia, \CSID Case No.
ARB/99/2, Award, June 25, 2001

Goetz v. Republic of Burundi, \CSID Case No. ARB/95/3,
Award, February 10, 1999

Kléckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH et al v. United Republic of
Cameroon & Société Camerounaise des Engrais, Decision
on Annulment, May 3, 1985

Lanco International, Inc. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case
No. ARB/97/6, Preliminary Decision on Jurisdiction,
December 8, 1998

LG&E Energy Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/02/1, Award, July 25, 2007

LG&E Energy Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/02/1, Decision on Liability, October 3, 2006

LG&E Energy Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/02/1, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, April 30,
2004

Industria Nacional de Alimentos, S.A. & Indalsa Pert, S.A. v.
Republic of Peru, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/4, Decision on
Annulment, September 5, 2007

M.C.1. Power Group L.C. and New Turbine Inc. v. Republic
of Ecuador, ICSID Case No ARB/03/6 (Annulment
Proceeding), Decision on Annulment, October 19, 2009

Metalpar S.A. and Buen Aire S.A. v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/03/5, Award, June 6, 2008

Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic

5

Mitchell Annulment Decision

MTD Annulment Decision

OEPC Award

Sempra Award

Sempra Jurisdiction Decision

SGS v. Pakistan Jurisdiction
Decision

SGS v. Philippines
Jurisdiction Decision

Siemens Jurisdiction
Decision

Soufraki Annulment Decision

Tecmed Award

Thunderbird Award

Total Jurisdiction Decision

TSA Award

Vivendi Annulment Decision

of Guinea, ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4, Decision on
Annulment, December 22, 1989

Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, |CSID
Case No. ARB/99/7, Decision on Annulment, November 1,
2006

MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of
Chile, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/7, Decision on Annulment,
March 21, 2007

Occidental Exploration and Production Company (OEPC) v.
Republic of Ecuador, London Court of International
Arbitration Administered Case No. UN 3467, Final Award of
July 1, 2004

Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/02/16, Award, September 28, 2007

Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/02/16, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction,
May 11, 2005

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic
Republic of Pakistan, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/13, Decision
on Jurisdiction, August 6, 2003

SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of
the Philippines, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/6, Decision on
Jurisdiction, January 29, 2004

Siemens A.G. v. Argentina, |CSID Case No. ARB/02/8,
Decision on Jurisdiction, August 3, 2004

Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, |\CSID
Case No. ARB/02/7, Decision on Annulment, June 5, 2007

Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican
States, ICSID Case No. ARB (AF)/00/2, Award, May 29,
2003

International Thunderbird Gaming Corporation v. United
Mexican States, NAFTA Chapter 11/UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules, Arbitral Award, January 26, 2006

Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic, |\CSID Case No.
ARB/04/01, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, August
26, 2006

TSA Spectrum de Argentina S.A. v. Argentine Republic,
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/5, Award, December 19, 2008

Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi
Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002

6

Vivendi II Jurisdiction
Decision

Wena Hotels Annulment
Decision

Wintershall Award

Ancillary claim

Application for Annulment

Argentina

Award

BIT

Centre
CIESA

Claimants

Committee

Edwards Report
Emergency Law

the fair and equitable

treatment clause

First Jurisdiction Decision

Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi
Universal v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/97/3,
Decision on Jurisdiction, November 14, 2005

Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, \CSID Case
No. ARB/98/4, Decision on Annulment, February 5, 2002

Wintershall Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic, |\CSID
Case No. ARB/04/14, Award, December 8, 2008

Other references

See paragraph 80 of this Decision

The application for annulment initiating the present
annulment proceedings, filed by Argentina on February 21,
2008

The Argentine Republic (the Respondent)

The Award to which the Application for Annulment in the
present proceedings relates: Enron Corporation and
Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case
No. ARB/01/3, Award, May 22, 2007

Treaty between the United States of America and the
Argentine Republic Concerning the Reciprocal
Encouragement and Protection of Investment, signed
November 14, 1991; entered into force October 20, 1994
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
See paragraph 42 of this Decision

The Claimants in the present proceedings: see paragraphs
1, 23 and 25 of this Decision

See paragraph 8 of this Decision

See paragraph 364 of this Decision

See paragraphs 48-50 of this Decision

The provision in the BIT (q.v.) that investments shall at all
times be accorded fair and equitable treatment (Article
II(2)(a) of the BIT)

Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets L.P. v. Argentine

Republic, |ICSID Case No ARB/01/3, Decision on
Jurisdiction, January 14, 2004

ICSID
ICSID Arbitration Rules

ICSID Convention

ILC Articles

Information Memorandum
PPI

Schreuer Commentary

Second Jurisdiction Decision

Stamp Tax Claim

TGS

Treaty

Tribunal

the umbrella clause

US PPI

Vienna Convention

YPF

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
Between States and Nationals of Other States, March 18,
1965, 575 U.N.T.S. 159

International Law Commission, Draft articles on
Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts,
Yearbook of the International Law Commission, 2001, vol. II
(Part Two); annex to General Assembly resolution 56/83 of
12 December 2001, and corrected by document A/56/49(Vol.
|)/Corr.4

See paragraph 40 of this Decision
See paragraph 41 of this Decision

Christoph Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary
(2001)

Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets L.P. v. Argentine
Republic, \CSID Case No ARB/01/3, Decision on Jurisdiction
(Ancillary Claim), August 2, 2004

See paragraph 78 of this Decision

Transportadora de Gas del Sur: see paragraphs 38-42 of
this Decision

The BIT (q.v.)

The tribunal which rendered the Award (q.v.) to which the
Application for Annulment (q.v.) in the present annulment
proceedings relates

The provision in the BIT (q.v.) that each Party shall observe
any obligation it may have entered into with regard to
investments (Article II(2)(c) of the BIT)

See paragraph 41 of this Decision

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Vienna, May 23,
1969; 1155 U.N.T.S. 331

Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales: see paragraph 157 of this
Decision

A. Introduction

1. On 21 February 2008, the Argentine Republic (“Argentina”) filed with the
Secretary-General of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (the “Centre” or “ICSID”) an application in writing (the “Application for
Annulment’) requesting the annulment of the Award of May 22, 2007 (the
“Award”),'! rendered by the tribunal (the “Tribunal”) in the arbitration
proceeding between Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. (the

“Claimants”) and Argentina.

2. The Application for Annulment was made within the time period provided in
Article 52(2) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States (‘the ICSID Convention’),
having regard to Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention and considering that
on 25 October 2007, the Tribunal rendered its decision on a request by the
Claimants under that provision for rectification and/or a supplementary

decision of the Award.

3. The Application for Annulment sought annulment of the Award on three of the
five grounds in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention, specifically claiming
that:

(a) _ the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers;

(b) there was a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure;

and
(c) the Award failed to state the reasons on which it was based.

4. The Application for Annulment also contained a request, under Article 52(5) of
the ICSID Convention and Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (the “ICSID Arbitration Rules”), for a stay of

enforcement of the Award until the Application for Annulment is decided.

‘Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v. Argentine Republic, |\CSID Case No.

ARB/01/3, Award, May 22, 2007 (“Award”).

On 26 February 2008, the Centre acknowledged receipt of the Request for

Annulment and sent a copy to the Claimants.

On 7 March 2008, the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID registered the
Application, and on the same date, in accordance with Rule 50(2) of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules, transmitted a Notice of Registration to the parties.
The parties were also notified that, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(2),

the enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed.

On 9 May 2008, the Centre informed the parties of the ensuing
recommendation to the Chairman of the Administrative Council of the
appointment of Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C., from Australia, Judge Patrick Lipton
Robinson from Jamaica and Judge Per Tresselt from Norway, to the ad hoc
Committee, each of whom was designated to the ICSID Panel of Arbitrators

by their respective countries.

By letter of 22 May 2008, in accordance with Rule 52(2) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, the parties were notified by the Centre that an ad hoc
Committee (“the Committee”) had been constituted, composed of Dr. Griffith
Q.C., Judge Robinson and Judge Tresselt. On the same date the parties were
informed that Dr. Claudia Frutos-Peterson, Counsel, ICSID, would serve as

Secretary of the Committee.

On 29 May 2008, the Centre informed the parties of the designation of Dr.
Griffith Q.C. as President of the Committee.

On 18 June 2008, the Claimants filed a request to lift the provisional stay of
enforcement of the Award, or alternatively, to condition a continuation of the

stay on Argentina’s posting adequate security (the “Claimants’ Request’).

By letter of 20 June 2008, the Committee invited Argentina to submit its
written observations on the Claimants’ Request no later than 7 July 2008. By
the same letter, the Committee confirmed that the oral arguments on this
matter would take place during the first session and informed the parties that
the Committee would make a decision on the continuation of the stay of
enforcement of the Award in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 54.

10

20.

By a letter dated 30 June 2008, the Committee asked the parties whether they
would agree to retain the services of an assistant, Dr. Christopher Staker, in
addition to the Secretary of the Committee. Argentina and the Claimants
agreed to Dr. Staker’s appointment by letters dated 2 and 8 July 2008,

respectively.

In compliance with the Committee’s instructions, on 7 July 2008, Argentina
filed its observations on the continuation of the stay of enforcement of the
Award.

On 14 July 2008, the first session of the Committee was held at the premises
of the World Bank in Paris. Prior to the start of the session, the Secretariat
distributed to the parties copies of the declarations, signed by each Member
of the Committee, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 52(2).

On 7 October 2008, the Committee issued its “Decision on the Argentine

Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award”.
On 11 November 2008, Argentina filed a Memorial on Annulment.

By letter of December 17, 2008, the Claimants requested the Committee to
end the stay of enforcement of the Award, or in the alternative, to condition
such a stay on Argentina’s provision of adequate financial security in the form

of a bank guarantee or its monetary equivalent.

By a letter of December 30, 2008, with attachments, Argentina requested
leave of the Committee to develop its position on evidence and arguments
which were not originally before the Committee, and requested that a hearing
be held to discuss new reasons that should dispel doubts that Argentina will

comply with its obligations under the ICSID Convention.
On 19 February 2009, the Claimants filed a Counter-Memorial on Annulment.

On 9 March 2009, the Committee held a hearing in Paris on the stay of

enforcement of the Award.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

On 11 March 2009, Argentina requested an extension to file its Reply on
Annulment due to the religious holidays. The Committee granted the
requested extension and decided that the Reply on Annulment would be due
on April 17, 2009.

On March 27, 2009, in accordance with ICSID Administrative and Financial
Regulation 25, the Committee and the parties were informed that due to a
redistribution of the Centre’s workload Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu, Senior

Counsel, ICSID, would be appointed as Secretary of the Committee.

On March 30, 2009, the Claimants confirmed a change of name of the first
Claimant from Enron Corporation to Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation.
On April 7, 2009 Argentina requested the Secretariat that the case name be
changed to reflect the Claimant's name change. On April 13, 2009 the

Claimants confirmed that they did not oppose the requested name change.
On April 17, 2009, Argentina filed a Reply on Annulment.

On May 8, 2009, the Centre proceeded to change the name of the case to
Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. v.
Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3)-Annulment Proceeding.

On May 20, 2009, the Committee issued its “Decision on the Claimant's
Second Request to Lift the Provisional Stay of Enforcement of the Award’.

On June 16, 2009, the Claimants filed a Rejoinder on Annulment.

On June 19, 2009, in accordance with ICSID Administrative and Financial
Regulation 25, the Committee and the parties were informed that due to a
redistribution of the Centre’s workload Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Senior Counsel,

ICSID, would be appointed as Secretary of the Committee.

In response to the Chairman’s request that each party file a skeleton list of its
arguments and issues, Argentina filed a document dated July 20, 2009, and
the Claimants filed a document dated July 24, 2009.

30.

31.

32.

33.

On July 29-31, 2009, the hearing on the Application for Annulment (the
“hearing”) was held at the seat of the Centre in Washington D.C. Present at

the hearing were:

— the members of the Committee: Dr Gavan Griffith Q.C., President;

Judge Patrick Lipton Robinson and Judge Per Tresselt;

_ the representatives of the Claimants: Mr R. Doak Bishop,
Mr Craig S. Miles, Ms Kerrie Nanni and Mr David Weiss of
King & Spalding; and Dr Guido Santiago Tawil, Dr Hector Maria Huici
and Dr Federico Campolieti of M. & M. Bomchil, Abogados;

_ the representatives of the Argentine Republic: Sub-Procurador del
Tesoro de la Nacién Dr Adolfo Gustavo Scrinzi, Dr Gabriel Bottini, Dr
Ignacio Pérez Cortés, Dr Verdnica Lavista, Dr Tomas Braceras,
Dr Rodrigo Ruiz Esquide, Dr Maria Alejandra Etchegorry and

Dr Ignacio Torterola of the Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién;
— the Secretary to the Committee: Mr Gonzalo Flores;

— counsel to the Committee: Ms Anneliese Fleckenstein;

the legal assistant of the Committee: Dr Christopher Staker.

By a communication dated August 4, 2009, in accordance with a direction
given by the Committee at the hearing, Argentina provided the Committee
with references to the record of the proceedings before the Tribunal dealing

with the issue of public order.

On August 6, 2009, in accordance with a direction given by the Committee at
the hearing, Argentina provided a CD-ROM entitled “Video on the Argentine
Crisis”, which was distributed to the Committee.

By letter of August 21, 2009, in accordance with the request made by the
President of the Committee at the hearing, Argentina submitted a statement of
costs incurred by Argentina in connection with the annulment proceedings,
amounting to USD 1,001,603.58, as detailed in an attachment to that letter.

13

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

By letter of August 24, 2009, in accordance with the same request made by
the President, the Claimants reiterated their request that the Committee
require Argentina to pay all costs and fees associated with this proceeding,
including the Claimants’ reasonably incurred legal expenses, which were
detailed in an attachment to that letter, totalling USD 1,219,073.44.

In accordance with leave granted by the Committee to the parties at the
hearing, both parties filed written post-hearing briefs dated October 1, 2009,
after the ad hoc annulment committee in the Azurix case had rendered its

decision on annulment on September 1, 2009.7
The Committee declared the proceeding closed on June 21, 2010.

During the course of the proceedings, the Members of the Committee
deliberated by various means of communication and have taken into account

all pleadings, documents and testimony before them.

The dispute

The background facts relating to the dispute between the Claimants and
Argentina that were the subject of the Award, as found by the Tribunal, are in

summary as follows.

From 1989, the Government of Argentina undertook a program of privatization
of State-owned companies, including in the gas transportation and distribution
sectors. With a view to restructuring the Argentine economy, currency
convertibility was introduced in 1991 and the Argentine peso was fixed at par
with the United States dollar.

New rules governing gas transportation and distribution were introduced in
1992 by the Gas Law and the implementing regulations embodied in the Gas
Decree. Two major transportation companies were created, one of which was
Transportadora de Gas del Sur (“TGS”).

Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No ARB/01/12 (Annulment Proceeding),

Decision on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic, September 1, 2009 (“Azurix
Annulment Decision”).

14

40.

41.

42.

In order to facilitate the process of privatisation, a Standard Gas
Transportation License or “Model Licence” was approved by Decree 2255/92
including the applicable Basic Rules; all such rules were embodied in the
License actually signed by TGS and the Government of Argentina and
approved by Decree 2458/92. An “Information Memorandum” concerning the
privatization of Gas del Estado, the former State-owned transportation and
distribution company, together with a “Pliego” explaining the bidding rules and
the legal and contractual arrangements, were provided to prospective

investors so as to organize the bidding process.

The Claimants’ position was that in making the decision to invest in TGS upon
its privatisation, they relied specifically on the conditions offered by these
legislative and regulatory enactments, including the conditions that tariffs
would be calculated in US dollars, that tariffs would be subject to semi-annual
adjustment according to changes in the US Producer Price Index (“PPI” or
“US PPI”), that there would be no price freeze applicable to the tariff system
or that if one was imposed the licensee had a right to compensation, that the
license would not be amended by the Government in full or part except with
the prior consent of the licensee, that the licence would be for 35 years with
the possibility of a 10-year extension, and that the license would not be

withdrawn except in case of specific breaches.

The Claimants’ investment in TGS following its privatisation evolved over
time. Originally, in 1992, EPCA, an indirectly wholly-owned subsidiary of
Enron, was a member of a consortium of four companies that was awarded
70% of the shares in TGS. In order to comply with the requirement that an
Argentine company should hold the shares in TGS, the consortium
incorporated an Argentine company (“CIESA”) to hold this 70% shareholding
in TGS. Each of the four members of the consortium acquired a 25% interest
in CIESA, and consequently, through CIESA, an indirect 17.5% interest in
TGS. Through a number of subsequent transactions involving the Claimants
and related companies, there were changes in the percentage of TGS that
represented the Claimants’ investment and in the structure of that investment,

and there was some disagreement between the parties in this respect.

15

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

Throughout the 1990s the regulatory system for the gas transportation sector
operated without difficulties, with periodic modification of tariffs to reflect
changes in the cost of natural gas and the adjustment of tariffs, both up and
down, following the variations in the US PPI. A quinquiennial tariff revision
was approved by ENARGAS, the government regulatory agency for the gas
sector, for the period 1997-2002.

In late 1999, however, an economic, social and political crisis in Argentina
evidenced its early symptoms. Following meetings between Government
officials and industry representatives in late 1999 and early 2000, an
agreement was signed in January 2000, postponing the PPI adjustment due
on January 1, 2000, for six months, and providing that the deferred increase

would be recovered with interest in the period 1 July 2000- 30 April 2001.

However, in July 2000, a second agreement suspended PPI adjustments for a
further two years, from 1 July 2000 to 30 June 2002. This agreement
provided that the differences would be placed in an_ interesting-bearing
stabilization fund and that tariff increases would resume at the end of the
suspension period, including recovery of the deficits originating in these

arrangements.

Argentina’s position was that these agreements were the outcome of genuine
consent by the parties, while the Claimants asserted that licensees were

pressured by the Government into giving their consent.

In August 2000, the Argentine Ombudsman (“Defensor de! Pueblo de la
Naci6n”) obtained a judicial injunction suspending the second of these
agreements. On the basis of this injunction, ENARGAS directed the licensees
to suspend all PPI adjustments and rejected all requests for adjustment made
thereafter. As a result, no PPI adjustments were made after 1999.

The economic crisis in Argentina continued to expand thereafter. On January
6, 2002, Argentina enacted Law No. 25.561, or the “Emergency Law”, which

has featured in many claims brought by foreign investors against Argentina.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

The Emergency Law eliminated the right to calculate tariffs in US dollars,
converting tariffs to pesos at the fixed rate of exchange of one dollar to one
peso. In addition, the Emergency Law authorised the Government to devalue
the peso, which a few days later was fixed at a new rate of exchange of 1.40
pesos per dollar for certain transactions (mainly banking transactions) and the
free market rate for all other transactions. A month later, the free market rate

applied to all transactions and PPI adjustments were definitely abolished.

The Emergency Law also directed the Government of Argentina to begin a
renegotiation process of public utility contracts affected by these measures.
Gradually the Government conditioned the right of participation in this process
on the abandonment of all claims (by the Licensees or their shareholders),
either totally or partially according to the nature of the claim, before local
courts or arbitral tribunals. Various bodies in charge of renegotiation were set

up over time and the deadlines established were regularly extended.

While the renegotiation process succeeded in respect of a number of public
utility contracts and sectors, it made little progress in the gas transportation

and distribution industry, and there was no negotiated settlement with TGS.

The Claimants’ position was that these measures led to TGS being unable to
secure international financing and led to a loss of revenue and decreased the
value of the “regulated” business of TGS. The business of TGS consisted of
both the “regulated” sector of gas transportation and the “non-regulated”
sector of production of liquified natural gas (LNG). Argentina’s position was
that TGS must be considered as a business as a whole, that the revenues of
the non-regulated sector in fact significantly increased in US dollars in the
period 1993-2004, and that TGS benefited from the devaluation, since its
costs were pesified while international prices increased at a time when TGS

was the principal exporter of LNG in Argentina.

The Claimants maintained that the various measures complained of resulted
in the violation of specific commitments made to the investors referred to in
paragraph 41 above, which commitments had been determinative of the

decision to invest in TGS. The Claimants maintained that the measures

17

54.

55.

56.

complained of amounted to breaches of the guarantees provided under the
Treaty between the United States of America and the Argentine Republic
Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investment? (the

“BIT”), namely the guarantees that:

(a) each Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered into with
regard to investments (Article II(2)(c) of the BIT);

(b) investments shall not be expropriated or nationalized either directly or
indirectly through measures tantamount to expropriation or
nationalization (Article IV(1) of the BIT);

(c) investments shall at all times be accorded fair and equitable treatment
(Article II(2)(a) of the BIT);

(d) investments shall enjoy full protection and security (Article II(2)(a) of the
BIT) (Article 1I(2)(b) of the BIT);

(e) neither Party shall in any way impair by arbitrary or discriminatory
measures the management, operation, maintenance, use, enjoyment,

acquisition, expansion, or disposal of investments.

The position of Argentina was principally based on the argument that the legal
and regulatory framework governing the privatisation provided only for the
right of the licensee to a fair and reasonable tariff and that the right to the
calculation of the tariffs in US dollars was a feature that could last only as long
as the Convertibility Law was in force, but not if this law was abandoned at

some point in time.

Argentina also argued that if investors relied on the information conveyed by
private consulting firms, such as that contained in the Information
Memorandum, this could not be attributed to the Government which expressly

disclaimed any responsibility for such information.

Argentina further argued that the Government had the duty to take into

account the interests of the consumers in regulating a national public service

3 Signed November 14, 1991; entered into force October 20, 1994.

18

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

such as the transportation of gas, a function which is within the ambit of

discretionary Government powers.

Argentina additionally maintained that the Government's responsibility is
excluded both under the Argentine legislation and jurisprudence on
emergency, and under the rules of customary international law and BIT

provisions governing the state of necessity.

The Tribunal ultimately found that Argentina had breached its obligations to
accord the Claimants the fair and equitable treatment guaranteed in Article
11(2)(a) of the BIT and to observe the obligations entered into with regard to
the investment guaranteed in Article II(2)(c) of the BIT. The Tribunal awarded

the Claimants compensation in the sum of USD 106.2 million.

Argentina now asks the Committee to annul this Award.

The grounds for annulment

(a) Introduction

Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention provides as follows:

(1) Either party may request annulment of the award by an
application in writing addressed to the Secretary-
General on one or more of the following grounds:

(a) that the Tribunal was not properly constituted;
(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its
powers;

that there was corruption on the part of a member

of the Tribunal;

(d) that there has been a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure; or

(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on
which it is based.

(c)

2

Argentina identifies a number of matters which it claims are grounds for
annulment, relating to the Tribunal’s jurisdictional findings, to its findings
relating to the applicable law, to its consideration of evidence, as well as to
the Tribunal’s calculation of the damages. Argentina relies on three of the five
grounds of annulment provided for in the ICSID Convention, namely those

19

62.

63.

64.

under sub-paragraphs (b), (d) and (e) of Article 52(1). Before addressing
Argentina’s grounds specific to the present case, the Committee first
considers generally the role of an ad hoc committee in annulment
proceedings and the scope of the grounds of annulment in the sub-

paragraphs of Article 52(1) that are relied on by Argentina.

Applications for annulment have become an increasingly common feature in
ICSID arbitration proceedings, and there is now a considerable body of case
law on ICSID annulment proceedings. Two of the most recent annulment
decisions are those given in the MC/ case’ and the Azurix case.° At the time
of the oral hearing on Argentina’s application for annulment in the present
case, the decision on annulment in the Azurix case, in which Argentina was
also the applicant for annulment, had not yet been given but was anticipated
imminently. In the circumstances, both parties were given leave to file
subsequent post-hearing written submissions on the Azurix Annulment
Decision once it was given, and both parties filed such written submissions
dated 1 October 2009.

(b) The role of an ad hoc annulment committee

An ICSID award is not subject to any appeal or to any other remedy except
those provided for in the ICSID Convention.® In annulment proceedings under
Article 52 of the ICSID Convention, an ad hoc committee is thus not a court of
appeal, and cannot consider the substance of the dispute, but can only
determine whether the award should be annulled on one of the grounds in
Article 52(1).”

As was for instance stated in the MTD Annulment Decision, annulment has a

limited function since a committee:

M.C.I. Power Group L.C. and New Turbine Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, |\CSID Case No

ARB/03/6 (Annulment Proceeding), Decision on Annulment, October 19, 2009 (“MC/ Annulment
Decision”).

Azurix Annulment Decision.

ICSID Convention, Article 53(1).

MCI Annulment Decision {| 24; Azurix Annulment Decision {| 41.

20

65.

66.

... cannot substitute its determination on the merits for that
of the Tribunal. Nor can it direct a Tribunal on a
resubmission how it should resolve substantive issues in
dispute. All it can do is annul the decision of the tribunal: it
can extinguish a res judicata but on a question of merits it
cannot create a new one. A more interventionist approach
by committees on the merits of disputes would risk a
renewed cycle of tribunal and annulment proceedings of the
kind observed in Klockner and AMCO.®

The Committee is also in agreement with the MC/ Annulment Decision that:

. the role of an ad hoc committee is a limited one,
restricted to assessing the legitimacy of the award and not
its correctness. ... The annulment mechanism is not
designed to bring about consistency in the interpretation
and application of international investment law. The
responsibility for ensuring consistency in the jurisprudence
and for building a coherent body of law rests primarily with
the investment tribunals. They are assisted in their task by
the development of a common legal opinion and the
progressive emergence of “une jurisprudence constante”...°

Notwithstanding this, in relation to matters which fall within the competence of
an ad hoc committee to decide, it is in the Committee’s view to be expected
that the ad hoc committee will have regard to relevant previous ICSID awards
and decisions, including other annulment decisions, as well as to other
relevant persuasive authorities. Although there is no doctrine of binding
precedent in the ICSID arbitration system, the Committee considers that in the
longer term there should develop a jurisprudence constante in relation to

annulment proceedings. °

MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/7,

Decision on Annulment, March 21, 2007 (“MTD Annulment Decision”) §] 54; quoted in Azurix
Annulment Decision §] 42.

MCI Annulment Decision {| 24.

See for example SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines,
ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6, Decision on Jurisdiction, January 29, 2004 (“SGS v. Philippines
Jurisdiction Decision”) | 97; AES Corporation v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/O2/17,
Decision on Jurisdiction, April 26, 2005 (“AES Jurisdiction Decision”), {| 33; Wintershall
Aktiengesellschaft v. Argentine Republic, |CSID Case No. ARB/04/14, Award, December 8, 2008
(‘Wintershall Award"), | 178; MC/ Annulment Decision {| 24 (noting that the responsibility for
ensuring consistency in the jurisprudence and for building a coherent body of law rests primarily
with the investment tribunals rather than annulment committees).

21

67.

68.

69.

70.

"
12

(c) Manifest excess of powers (Article 52(1)(b))

This ground of annulment will exist where the Tribunal lacked jurisdiction, for
instance because the dispute is not covered by the arbitration agreement.
This ground of annulment may also exist where the tribunal disregards the
applicable law or bases the award on a law other than the applicable law
under Article 42 of the ICSID Convention."

However, there is a distinction between non-application of the applicable law
(which is a ground for annulment), and an incorrect application of the
applicable law (which is not),'? although this is a distinction that may not

always be easy to draw.

Additionally, it is an express requirement of Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention that:

the error must be “manifest”, not arguable, and a

misapprehension (still less mere disagreement) as to the

content of a particular rule is not enough.'*
The Committee agrees with the Azurix Annulment Decision that even in cases
where it is claimed that the tribunal lacked jurisdiction, the ad hoc committee
will annul the decision only where the tribunal has manifestly exceeded its
power: in cases where there is any uncertainty or doubt as to whether or not
a tribunal has jurisdiction, that question falls to be settled by the tribunal itself
in exercise of its compétence-compétence under Article 41(1) of the ICSID
Convention, and Article 52(1)(b) does not provide a mechanism for de novo
consideration of, or an appeal against, a decision of a tribunal under Article

41(1) after the tribunal has given its award."

(d) Serious departure from fundamental rule of procedure (Article
52(1)(d))

As was stated in the Vivendi Annulment Decision:

Azurix Annulment Decision {| 45-46, 136, and the earlier case law there cited.

MCI Annulment Decision {| 42 and Azurix Annulment Decision ff] 47-48, 137, and the earlier
case law there cited.

MTD Annulment Decision {| 47 quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision {| 48; also MC/ Annulment
Decision I] 49, 51, 55; Azurix Annulment Decision {| 64-69.

Azurix Annulment Decision {| 63-68.

22

71.

72.

73.

74.

18
19

... [ulnder Article 52(1)(d), the emphasis is clearly on the

term “rule of procedure,” that is, on the manner in which the

Tribunal proceeded, not on the content of its decision."®
For this ground of annulment to be established, the rule of procedure in
question must be “fundamental’."© Furthermore, the departure from that rule
of procedure must be “serious” in the sense that it “must have caused the
Tribunal to reach a result substantially different from what it would have
awarded had such a rule been observea’,"” or in the sense that it was “such
as to deprive a party of the benefit or protection which the rule was intended

to provide”. 18

(e) Failure to state reasons (Article 52(1)(e))

Failure to deal with questions submitted to the tribunal has been considered in
the case law of annulment committees to be a failure to state reasons for
purposes of this provision. On the other hand, while a tribunal has a duty to
deal with each of the questions (“pretensiones”) submitted to it, it is not
required to comment on all arguments of the parties in relation to each of

those questions. "°

Furthermore, even in cases where a tribunal has failed to deal with a question
submitted to it, the appropriate remedy may not be an application for
annulment, but rather, an application to the tribunal for a supplementary
decision, pursuant to Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention.2°

It is generally accepted that this ground of annulment only applies in a clear

case when there has been a failure by the tribunal to state any reasons for its

Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID
Case No. ARB/97/3, Decision on Annulment, July 3, 2002 (“Vivendi Annulment Decision”) {| 83,
quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision {| 49.

Azurix Annulment Decision {| 50; Maritime International Nominees Establishment v. Republic of
Guinea, |CSID Case No. ARB/84/4, Decision on Annulment, December 22, 1989 (“MINE
Annulment Decision”) | 5.05 and 5.06; MTD Annulment Decision {| 49.

Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt, |CSID Case No. ARB/98/4, Decision on
Annulment, February 5, 2002 (“Wena Hotels Annulment Decision”) {| 48; quoted in Azurix
Annulment Decision {| 51.

MINE Annulment Decision {| 5.05; quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision {| 52.

MCI Annulment Decision {J 66-67.

MCI Annulment Decision {J 68-69.

23

decision on a particular question, and not in a case where there has merely
been a failure by the tribunal to state correct or convincing reasons. In the
MINE Annulment Decision it was said that:

[T]he requirement that an award has to be motivated
implies that it must enable the reader to follow the
reasoning of the Tribunal on points of fact and law. It
implies that, and only that. The adequacy of the reasoning
is not an appropriate standard of review under paragraph

1(e)...

In the Committee's view, the requirement to state reasons is
Satisfied as long as the award enables one to follow how
the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to point B. and
eventually to its conclusion, even if it made an error of fact
or of law. This minimum requirement is in particular not
Satisfied by either contradictory or frivolous reasons.

Furthermore, the tribunal’s reasons “may be implicit in the considerations and

conclusions contained in the award, provided they can be reasonably inferred

from the terms used in the decision”.”

The Committee agrees with the ad hoc committee in the Vivendi Annulment
Decision, which stated that:

[I]t is well accepted both in the cases and the literature that
Article 52(1)(e) concerns a failure to state any reasons with
respect to all or part of an award, not the failure to state
correct or convincing reasons. ... Provided that the reasons
given by a tribunal can be followed and relate to the issues
that were before the tribunal, their correctness is beside the
point in terms of Article 52(1)(e). Moreover, reasons may be
stated succinctly or at length, and different legal traditions
differ in their modes of expressing reasons. Tribunals must
be allowed a degree of discretion as to the way in which
they express their reasoning.

In the Committee’s view, annulment under Article (52)(1)(e)
should only occur in a clear case. This entails two
conditions: first, the failure to state reasons must leave the
decision on a particular point essentially lacking in any
expressed rationale; and second, that point must itself be
necessary to the tribunal’s decision. It is frequently said that

MINE Annulment Decision ff] 5.08-5.09, quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision {| 53.

Wena Hotels Annulment Decision {| 81, quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision {| 54; also CMS
Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/8, Decision on
Annulment, September 25, 2007 (“CMS Annulment Decision”) | 127, quoted in Azurix Annulment
Decision [56.

24

77.

78.

contradictory reasons cancel each other out, and indeed, if
reasons are genuinely contradictory so they might.
However, tribunals must often struggle to balance
conflicting considerations, and an ad hoc committee should
be careful not to discern contradiction when what is actually
expressed in a tribunal’s reasons could more truly be said
to be but a reflection of such conflicting considerations.”°

The Committee further agrees with the ad hoc committee in the Wena Hotels
Annulment Decision, which considered that:

It is in the nature of this ground of annulment that in case
the award suffers from a lack of reasons which can be
challenged within the meaning and scope of Article
52(1)(e), the remedy need not be the annulment of the
award. The purpose of this particular ground for annulment
is not to have the award reversed on its merits. It is to allow
the parties to understand the Tribunal’s decision. If the
award does not meet the minimal requirement as to the
reasons given by the Tribunal, it does not necessarily need
to be resubmitted to a new Tribunal. If the ad hoc
committee so concludes, on the basis of the knowledge it
has received upon the dispute, the reasons supporting the
Tribunal’s conclusions can be explained by the ad hoc
Committee itself.

Indirect claims

(a) Background

Proceedings were originally commenced in this case by a request for
arbitration received by the Centre from the Claimants on February 26, 2001.
That request for arbitration concerned a claim different to the one addressed
in the Award, namely that the imposition of stamp taxes by certain Argentine
provinces on operations of TGS violated the BIT. This original claim is

referred to below as the “Stamp Tax claim’.

Vivendi Annulment Decision {J 64-65, quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision {] 55.

Wena Hotels Annulment Decision {| 83, quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision {| 54.

Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets L.P. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No ARB/01/3,
Decision on Jurisdiction, January 14, 2004 (“First Jurisdiction Decision”) J 1, 25; Enron
Corporation and Ponderosa Assets L.P. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No ARB/01/3,
Decision on Jurisdiction (Ancillary Claim), August 2, 2004 (“Second Jurisdiction Decision”) {| 8;
Award {| 4.

25

79.

80.

81.

82.

On January 15, 2003, Argentina raised objections to the jurisdiction of the
Centre and the competence of the Tribunal in respect of the Stamp Tax
claim.2° Argentina contended inter alia that the claim was inadmissible on the
ground that the Claimants did not have the rights upon which they based their
claim, as the measures complained of directly affected only TGS, a
corporation incorporated in Argentina, and that the Claimants were only

indirectly affected as minority shareholders in TGS.2”

On March 25, 2003, the Claimants then filed before the Centre a new request
for arbitration against Argentina.”° On April 25, 2003, the Tribunal decided to
accept this new request for arbitration as a claim ancillary to the Stamp Tax
claim and to have both cases proceed on separate tracks until the Tribunal
has decided on jurisdiction in respect of both claims. Although the new claim
was originally referred to as the “ancillary claim’, it was this claim which was

ultimately the subject of the Award.

Argentina also filed jurisdictional objections in relation to the ancillary claim.
Argentina argued inter alia that the Claimants lacked ius standi because the
dispute concerned contractual rights that appertained to TGS and not the
Claimants, that an indirect claim such as that asserted by the Claimants was
in violation of Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention and that the dispute did
not arise directly out of an investment as required by Article 25(1) of the ICSID

Convention.*°

On January 14, 2004, the Tribunal rendered a decision confirming its
jurisdiction in respect of the Stamp Tax claim (the “First Jurisdiction
Decision”).°' Subsequently, on August 2, 2004, the Tribunal gave a decision
affirming its jurisdiction in respect of the ancillary claim (the “Second

Jurisdiction Decision”).°

First Jurisdiction Decision {| 13.

First Jurisdiction Decision J] 34.

First Jurisdiction Decision {| 16; Second Jurisdiction Decision {| 1; Award If] 5-6.
First Jurisdiction Decision {| 17; Second Jurisdiction Decision {| 4; Award {| 5-6.
Second Jurisdiction Decision {| 14.

First Jurisdiction Decision.

Second Jurisdiction Decision.

26

83.

84.

(b)

85.

On December 8, 2005, the Tribunal issued a procedural order embodying the
parties’ agreement on the discontinuance of the Stamp Tax claim.*° As noted
above, the Tribunal subsequently produced the Award dealing with the

ancillary claim which Argentina now seeks to have annulled.
Argentina seeks annulment of the Award:

(a) under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention, on the ground that the
Tribunal failed to state reasons for its conclusion that the Claimants
could bring a claim in respect of alleged violations of rights which
belonged not to them, but to Tes;

(b) under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention, on the ground that the
Tribunal exceeded manifestly its powers in exercising jurisdiction over
the Claimants’ claims, all of which are grounded on alleged interference
with rights under the License, which did not confer any rights on the
Claimants and to which TGS, rather than the Claimants, was a party.°°

Arguments of the parties
Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

In relation to the ground of annulment in Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention

(a) While an investment in shares is protected under the BIT and
shareholders have an independent claim from that of the company if
events affect their rights as shareholders, and while the Claimants are
thus protected investors under the BIT and their investment in TGS is

thus a protected investment, the Claimants cannot as shareholders

Award J 32.

The Committee notes that this ground of annulment does not appear to be contained in
Argentina’s Application for Annulment. However, as the Claimants have not objected on that
basis and have made submissions in response to this ground of annulment, the Committee has
considered and decided it.

Application for Annulment [J] 24-29.

27

pursue an individual action against third parties as a result of a claimed
violation of rights that did not belong to them but to TGS.

(b) In the First Jurisdiction Decision, the Tribunal failed to analyze this

issue.

(c) The Second Jurisdiction Decision also failed to resolve the issue,
arguing that such issue had already been discussed in the First

Jurisdiction Decision.°°

(d) In the Award, the Tribunal stated that this issue had already been
solved in its decisions on jurisdiction,” when in fact this was not the
case.*® When determining Argentina’s responsibility, the Tribunal only

referred to the rights of TGS under the Licence.*°

(e) The Tribunal also did not deal with Argentina’s argument based on
Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention, and the Tribunal did not

eliminate or resolve the issue of multiple claims.

In relation to the ground of annulment in Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID

Convention

(f) A tribunal’s partial or total lack of jurisdiction is an “excess of powers”
under Article 52(1 )(b),*° and an excess of powers is always “manifest” if

it relates to matters of jurisdiction.’

Referring to Second Jurisdiction Decision {| 15.

Referring to Award Jf] 152, 211 and 241.

Referring to Second Decision on Jurisdiction {J 27-32; First Decision on Jurisdiction I] 44-46.
Referring to Award If] 88, 103, 106, 166, 265-266, 275-276, 375, 378, 389, 402, 403, 438-439.
Relying on Kiéckner Industrie-Anlagen GmbH et al v. United Republic of Cameroon & Société
Camerounaise des Engrais, Decision on Annulment, May 3, 1985 (“K/éckner Annulment
Decision”), ] 4; Hussein Nuaman Soufraki v. United Arab Emirates, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/7,
Decision on Annulment, June 5, 2007 (“Soufraki Annulment Decision”), §] 37; Industria Nacional
de Alimentos, S.A. & Indalsa Peru, S.A. v. Republic of Peru, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/4, Decision
on Annulment, September 5, 2007 (“Lucchetti Annulment Decision”), {J 99-100; Christoph
Schreuer, “Three Generations of ICSID Annulment Proceedings”, in Annulment of ICSID Awards
(Emmanuel Gaillard & Yas Banifatemi eds., 2004) at 17, 25.

Relying on Bjérn Pirrwitz, “Annulment of Arbitral Awards Under Article 52 of the Washington
Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other

28

(g) The Tribunal did not have jurisdiction over this case because the
Claimants were requesting damages for alleged violations of rights that
did not belong to them but to TGS. The legal and contractual rights of
TGS, including the rights of TGS under the Licence were not indirectly
controlled by the Claimants, and therefore neither TGS, nor its assets,
nor its legal and contractual rights, are investments of the Claimants
under Article I(1)(a) of the Treaty. The Claimants’ investment in
Argentina only consisted of their indirect non-controlling shareholding in
TGS. The Claimants were not entitled to bring ICSID proceedings in
respect of alleged violations of the rights of TGS, but only in respect of
alleged violations of the BIT in respect of their own investment, i.e. their

indirect non-controlling shareholding in TGS.

(h) Neither general international law nor the BIT defines shareholder rights,
and domestic law (the /ex societatis) must be resorted to in order to
establish which rights a shareholder has.‘? All legal systems draw a
distinction between the corporation and its shareholders, and
“corporate identity” is only disregarded when it has been used for

fraudulent purposes.*°

(i) It is wrong to reject the application of the Barcelona Traction case to

investment treaty arbitrations, since if an investment treaty is silent on

 

States”, 23 Texas International Law Journal 73, 99- 100; Vivendi Annulment Decision {| 72;
Lucchetti Annulment Decision {| 99.

Relying on Case concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, Limited
(Belgium v. Spain), Second Phase, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1970, p. 3 (the “Barcelona Traction
case”), 37.

Referring to Prudential Assurance Co v. Newman Industries [1982] Ch 204, 224; American Law
Institute, 2 Principles of Corporate Governance § 7.01 (1994); Bramelid and Malmstrém v.
Sweden, Requests No 8588/79 and 8589/79, 5 Eur. Ct. H.R. Rep. 249 (1983); Agrotexim and
others v. Greece, 1995 Eur. Ct. H.R. 42, {IJ 64-66; Samardzié and Ad Plastika v. Serbia, 2007
Eur. Ct. H.R. 830, I] 30-32; Teliga and others v. Ukraine, 2006 Eur. Ct. H.R. 1465, {| 87;
Bulinwar Ood and Hrusanov v. Bulgaria, 2007 Eur. Ct. H.R. 355, {| 27; Terem Ltd, Chechetkin
and Olius v. Ukraine, European Court of Human Rights, Judgment of 18 October 2005, I] 28-30;
‘Iza’ Ltd and Makrakhidze v. Georgia, 2005 Eur. Ct. H.R. 641, {J 28-30; Amat-G Ltd and
Mebaghishvili v. Georgia, 2005 Eur. Ct. H.R. 639, {If 32-34; Tadeusz Olczak v. Poland,
European Court of Human Rights, Decision on Admissibility of 7 November 2002, {| 59.

 

29

0)

the issue of indirect claims,“* the matter should be resolved by

reference to general principles of international law.

If shareholders were allowed to sue and to obtain compensation for the
infringement of rights of the corporation, problems would arise,
including the risk of double recovery, if the corporation filed its own
claims before the national courts of the host State or if the corporation
came to an agreement with the host State, or if the corporation had
creditors or had to pay local taxes for the amounts obtained as a result
of the litigation. The Tribunal did not resolve this issue on the basis of
legal provisions,*® as it was obliged to, but relied upon equity

considerations, which amounts to a manifest excess of its powers.*®

The Tribunal’s conclusion that a shareholder may claim directly for
measures that affected the rights of the company leaves Article
25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention with no effet utile, contrary to what

had been negotiated by the States in drafting the Convention.”

Even if the BIT allowed the filing of indirect claims, such claims would
not be admissible in ICSID proceedings as the “outer limits” of ICSID
jurisdiction are set forth in Article 25 of the ICSID Convention and “are

not subject to the parties’ disposition”.

The Claimants are in fact indirect shareholders of TGS, increasing the
risk of double recovery, since different shareholders in different
positions of the shareholding chain might make simultaneous claims.
The Tribunal’s solution to this problem, to require a claiming
shareholder to have been “invited by the Government ... to participate

9 48

in the investment’,”” is not supported by domestic, international, or any

Argentina argues that the BIT and ICSID Convention can be contrasted with certain other treaties
which do expressly provide such claims by shareholders in respect of rights of the company,
referring to North American Free Trade Agreement, 17 November 1992, Art. 1117; US—Chile
Free Trade Agreement, 6 June 2003, Art. 10.25(2).

Referring to Award J] 212.

Referring Patrick Mitchell v. Democratic Republic of the Congo, ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7,
Decision on Annulment, November 1, 2006 (“Mitchell Annulment Decision”), {| 46.

Referring to Christoph Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary (2001) (“Schreuer
Commentary”) at 290-291.

Referring to First Jurisdiction Decision | 54.

30

86.

49

other law, and is uncertain. The Tribunal invented a rule that is not part
of the applicable law and that does not resolve the problem of multiple
claims.*® The Azurix case is distinguishable since the Claimants in the
present case did not and do not have a controlling shareholding in the

local company.

If the Tribunal considered that the Claimants could claim for the
damage to their indirect shareholding in TGS, it could not
simultaneously distinguish between TGS’s regulated and unregulated
activities. The Tribunal failed to provide any grounds for its decision to

consider only regulated activities.

Argentina has successfully renegotiated public utility contracts in a
number of sectors, and TGS is renegotiating the terms of its License
with the Argentine Government, but decisions such as the Award have
increased transaction costs and are impeding the renegotiation

process.

Any future increase of TGS’s tariffs would necessarily entail a double

recovery.

The Claimants argue, inter alia, that:

In relation to the ground of annulment in Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention

(a)

In the First Jurisdiction Decision, the Tribunal specifically adopted the
reasoning of other tribunals when evaluating whether a shareholder
could assert claims independently of the local company, rather than
regurgitating the same words that numerous other tribunals had

already used.®° The Tribunal never treated those decisions as binding,

Referring to Hrvatska Elektroprivreda, d.d. v. Republic of Slovenia, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/24,
Individual Opinion of Jan Paulsson attached to the Decision on the Treaty Interpretation Issue,
June 8, 2009; Wintershall Award | 185.

Referring to First Jurisdiction Decision {| 37, citing CMS Gas Transmission Co. v. Argentine
Republic, |CSID Case No ARB/01/8, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, July 17, 2003 (“CMS
Jurisdiction Decision”), I] 42-45, 54-46, 87-88; Lanco International, Inc. v. Argentine Republic,

31

but adopted their reasoning, which the Tribunal was entitled to do. The
Tribunal also examined the language of the BIT,°' and considered and
rejected Argentina’s argument that a shareholder may only assert
claims to the extent that its rights qua shareholder were affected,‘*
Argentina’s arguments based on the Barcelona Traction case™ and

Argentina’s arguments concerning minority shareholders.©*

There was no need for the Second Decision on Jurisdiction to repeat

the reasoning included in the First Decision on Jurisdiction.

The Tribunal was not required to determine the extent to which the
Claimants could file a claim under the License instead of the BIT, but in
any event, the Tribunal did examine the difference between a BIT claim

and a contract claim.®®

Since the Claimants did not assert claims for breach of contract, it was
not necessary for the Tribunal to make such a determination. The
Tribunal’s finding that Argentina breached the BIT was not based upon
breaches of the License, although this was certainly a factor in the
Tribunal’s analysis of Argentina’s overall conduct relative to the BIT

standards.

The Tribunal was not required to address Argentina’s arguments
concerning the hypothetical risk of double recovery, but in any event,

did address this issue.°°

In relation to the ground of annulment in Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention

(f)

The dispute before the Tribunal was not for breach of contractual rights

belonging to TGS but for damages arising from Argentina’s violations of

 

ICSID Case No. ARB/97/6, Preliminary Decision on Jurisdiction, December 8, 1998 (“Lanco
Jurisdiction Decision”), {J 9-11.

Referring to First Jurisdi
Referring to First Jurisdiction Decision {| 37-40, 49.
Referring to First Jurisdiction Decision Jf] 46-47.
Referring to First Jurisdiction Decision Jf] 44, 49.
Referring to Second Jurisdiction Decision {J 49-50.
Referring to Award J] 212.

  

 

lion Decision {| 39.

32

87
58

the BIT and the resulting harm to the Claimants’ investment in TGS. It
is immaterial that TGS might have had its own claims against

Argentina.

(g) | Because Article 25 does not define “investment,” that task was “left
largely to the terms of bilateral investment treaties or other instruments
on which jurisdiction is based.” The Tribunal evaluated Claimants’
investment and determined that it satisfied the definition of “investment”
under the BIT, which the Tribunal found includes “the channelling of
investments through locally incorporated companies, particularly when

this is mandated by the very legal arrangements governing the

privatization process in Argentina”.°”

(h) The Tribunal’s decision is consistent with more than 22 other ICSID
cases, where the tribunals have unanimously found jurisdiction to exist

in the same or similar circumstances.®® Argentina cites no relevant

Referring to Second Decision on Jurisdiction {| 30.

Referring to CMS Jurisdiction Decision {J 43-65; CMS Annulment Decision {J 68-76; AES
Jurisdiction Decision {| 85-89; LG&E Energy Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/02/1, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, April 30, 2004 (“LG&E Jurisdiction Decision”),
11 50, 63; Lanco Jurisdiction Decision {| 9-10; Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, |\CSID Case
No. ARB/01/12, Decision on Jurisdiction, December 8, 2003 (“Azurix Jurisdiction Decision”), {I
65-66; Suez, Sociedad General de Aguas de Barcelona S.A., and InterAguas Servicios
Integrales del Agua S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/17, Decision on
Jurisdiction, 16 May 2006; Total S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/04/01,
Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, August 26, 2006 (“Total Jurisdiction Decision”), J] 67-76;
Second Jurisdiction Decision; First Jurisdiction Decision; Continental Casualty Company v.
Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/9. Decision on Jurisdiction, 22 February 2006
(“Continental Casualty Jurisdiction Decision”), J] 51-54, 76-89; Gas Natural SDG, S.A. v.
Argentine Republic, |\CSID Case No. ARB/03/10. Decision of the Tribunal on Preliminary
Questions on Jurisdiction, June 17, 2005 {J 32-35, 50-52; Camuzzi International S.A. v.
Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/2. Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction, May 11,
2005 (“Camuzzi Jurisdiction Decision”), | 12, 78-82, 140-145; Compafia de Aguas del
Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, |CSID Case No. ARB/97/3. Decision
on Jurisdiction, 14 November 2005 (“Vivendi // Jurisdiction Decision”), J] 46-50; Sempra Energy
International v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/16. Decision on Objections to
Jurisdiction, May 11, 2005 (“Sempra Jurisdiction Decision”), {J 90-102; Siemens A.G. v.
Argentina, |CSID Case No. ARB/02/8. Decision on Jurisdiction, August 3, 2004 (“Siemens
Jurisdiction Decision”) 9] 125, 135-44; Maffezini v. Kingdom of Spain, \CSID Case No. ARB/97/7,
Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction, January 25, 2000 {J 65-70; American
Manufacturing and Trading, Inc. v. Republic of Zaire, \CSID Case No. ARB/93/1, Award,
February 21, 1997 (“AMT Award”), f] 5.14-5.16; CME Czech Republic B.V. (The Netherlands) v.
Czech Republic, UNCITRAL arbitration proceedings, Partial Award, September 13, 2001 (“CME
Partial Award”), J] 375 et seq.; Goetz v. Republic of Burundi, |CSID Case No. ARB/95/3. Award,
February 10, 1999 (“Goetz Award”), | 35-36; Pan American Energy LLC and BP Argentina
Exploration Company v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/13, Decision on
Preliminary Objections, 27 July 2006, {I{] 209-22; Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. v. Republic of
Sri Lanka, |\CSID Case No. ARB/87/3, Award, June 27, 19909] 3, 86; Gami Investments, Inc v.

33

authority to show that the Tribunal could not accept jurisdiction in this

case.

(i) The Barcelona Traction case does not require that domestic law
regarding corporations be transplanted to cases involving indirect
claims under a BIT. The Barcelona Traction case, in which no
investment treaty was involved, itself recognized the developments
occurring in international law on investment protection, especially
investment protection treaties, which may accord direct protection to

shareholders. °°

(i) The BIT, as lex specialis, specifically allows shareholders to assert an
action for damage caused by violations of the BIT by explicitly defining
“investments” to include those “owned directly or indirectly’ and listing
“a company” and “shares in a company” as well as “rights conferred by

law or contract”.

(k) | Governments often require foreign investors to make their investment
in a project through a locally-incorporated company, at times with other
shareholders such as local nationals, and foreign investors would have
no real protection under BITs and international law if they could not

bring a BIT action for damages to their investment.*

 

Government of the United Mexican States, NAFTA Chapter 11/UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,
Final Award, November 15, 2004, If] 26-33; Alex Genin et al. v. Republic of Estonia, \CSID Case
No. ARB/99/2, Award, June 25, 2001 (“Genin Award”), {| 319-29; Waste Management, Inc. v.
United Mexican States, ICSID Case N° ARB(AF)/00/3, Award, April 30, 2004, {J 79-85; E/ Paso
Energy International Company v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/15, Decision on
Jurisdiction, April 27, 2006 (“E/ Paso Jurisdiction Decision”), J] 97-100.

Referring to Barcelona Traction case {| 90.

Referring to BIT, Article 1.

Referring to Kenneth J. Vandevelde, United States Investment Treaties: Policy and Practice
(1992) at 45-46 § 4.01; Pamela B. Gann, “The U.S. Bilateral Investment Treaty Program”, (1985)
21 Stanford J. Int'l L. 373; Scott Gudgeon, “United States Bilateral Investments Treatises:
Comments on Their Origin, Purposes, and General Treatment Standards”, (1986) 4 Int'l Tax &
Bus. Law 105, 114-15; Francisco Orrego Vicufia, “Changing Approaches to the Nationality of
Claims in the Context of Diplomatic Protection and International Dispute Settlement”, (2000) 15
ICSID Rev.—Foreign Inv. L.J. 340, 359; Rudolph Dolzer and Christoph Schreuer, Principles of
International Investment Law (2008), at 56-57; Campbell McLachlan, “Investment Treaties and
General International Law’, 57 /.C.L.Q. 361, 361-62.

34

()

It is not the case that, since neither investment treaties nor international
law regulate the rights of shareholders, rights related to shares in a

corporation must be determined by reference to domestic law.©
The Barcelona Traction case has been heavily criticised.©°

The case law of the European Court of Human Rights relied upon by
Argentina is irrelevant to this case because the BIT provides protection
for both direct and indirect rights, because the European Court
decisions are limited to the /ex specialis regime of the European Court,
and because the European Court has a pronounced policy of deferring
to municipal law. By contrast, no such rule of deference to municipal
law or harmonization is contained in either the BIT or the ICSID

Convention.

Argentina’s acts and omissions may amount to both violations of the
BIT and breaches of the License, but Claimants are not barred from
bringing their own BIT claims simply because Argentina’s acts and
omissions also breached the License.“ The claims made against
Argentina were not contractual claims relating to the License; they were
claims for Argentina’s specific violations of the BIT, and are therefore

not correctly described as “indirect claims”.©

The Tribunal did not base its decision to allow the Claimants’ claims to
proceed on the fact that Argentina invited the Claimants to invest but on
the text of the BIT.

Referring to CMS Jurisdiction Decision {| 48; Azurix Jurisdiction Decision {| 73.

Referring to Richard B. Lillich, “Two Perspectives on the Barcelona Traction Case: The Rigidity
of Barcelona”, (1971) 65 A.J./.L. 522, 523-26; Rosalyn Higgins, “Aspects of the Case Concerning
the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company, Ltd.”, (1970) 11 Va. J./.L. 327, 331, 333.
Referring to CMS Jurisdiction Decision I] 65-68; LG&E Jurisdiction Decision {J 48-63; Lanco
Jurisdiction Decision [J 10-11; Tota/ Jurisdiction Decision {| 68-69, 80; Azurix Jurisdiction
Decision §] 76; Continental Casualty Jurisdiction Decision {J 85-86; Camuzzi Jurisdiction
Decision ] 83; Vivendi II Jurisdiction Decision J] 112-113; Sempra Jurisdiction Decision {| 95;
Siemens Jurisdiction Decision J] 180-83.

Referring to Tota/ Jurisdiction Decision {| 81.

35

(c)

87.

88.

89.

90.

66

67

(q) Article 25(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention is not applicable in the current
case because TGS was not a party to the arbitration, and the Tribunal

therefore rightly concluded that Article 25(2)(b) was irrelevant.©

Failure of the award to state the reasons on which it is based as a
ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention: the
Committee’s views

As the Tribunal stated, its two decisions on objections to jurisdiction are part
of the Award,°” and the Committee considers that all three must be
considered as a whole.

At paragraph 152 of the Award, the Tribunal referred to:

. a jurisdictional argument which the Respondent has
reiterated in the pleadings on the merits to the effect that
the investors are not the licensees and, therefore, cannot
invoke the terms of a contract to which they are not parties.
The Tribunal has dealt with this question in its Decision on
Jurisdiction.
This reference to the “Decision on Jurisdiction” must be a reference to the
Second Jurisdiction Decision, which concerned jurisdiction over the “ancillary

claim’, which was the subject of the Award.

In paragraph 14 of the Second Jurisdiction Decision, the Tribunal noted that
Argentina had raised five jurisdictional objections. It is the first three of these
that are relevant to Argentina’s present ground of annulment dealing with
“indirect claims”. (The fourth jurisdictional objection, relating to the forum
selection clause in the Licence is the subject of consideration in paragraphs
128-150 below, while the fifth jurisdictional objection, that the dispute had
already been submitted to the local courts of Argentina, is not relevant to the
present annulment proceedings.)

The first jurisdictional objection of Argentina was that the Claimants lacked ius

standi because the dispute concerned contractual rights that appertained to

Referring to Second Decision on Jurisdiction | 42-46; CMS Jurisdiction Decision J 51; CMS

Annulment Decision {| 74.
Award J 3.

36

91.

92.

93.

94.

68
69

TGS and not the Claimants, and that therefore only TGS was entitled to bring
such claims.© The second jurisdictional objection was that an indirect claim
such as that asserted by the Claimants was in violation of Article 25(2)(b) of
the Convention, and the third was that the dispute did not arise directly out of

an investment as required by Article 25(1) of the Convention.®°

At paragraph 15 of the Second Jurisdiction Decision, the Tribunal said that:

Since these arguments have already been discussed in the
Stamp Tax Decision [that is, the First Jurisdiction Decision],
and the situation in respect of this dispute is not different,
the Tribunal will address them briefly and devote more
attention to certain aspects that the Argentine Republic has
emphasized in respect of this particular dispute.
The Tribunal described the parties’ positions on the first three jurisdictional
objections in paragraphs 16-22 of the Second Jurisdiction Decision, and the

Tribunal gave its decision and reasons in paragraphs 25-52.

At paragraph 25, the Tribunal said that although decisions of other ICSID
tribunals are not binding precedents, “the conclusions of the Tribunal follow
the same line of reasoning, not because there might be a compulsory
precedent but because the circumstances of the various cases are
comparable, and in some respects identical’.

Contrary to what Argentina has argued in the present annulment proceedings,
the Committee considers that there is no reason why a tribunal cannot state
sufficient reasons for its decision by referring to, and expressing agreement
with, the reasoning in a previous ICSID case, or indeed, the reasoning in any
other arbitration or judicial decision, or for that matter the reasoning in a
commentary or publication or in any other source. Where a tribunal does so,
the Committee sees no reason why the tribunal must itself repeat at length the
reasoning contained in that other source. There is nothing to prevent a
tribunal from agreeing with, and incorporating by reference as its own,
reasoning found in any other source, provided that it is ultimately sufficiently

clear what are the tribunal's reasons. The fact that a prior decision or other

Second Jurisdiction Decision ff] 14, 16 and 17.

Second Jurisdiction Decision {| 14.

37

95.

96.

97.

source is not binding on the tribunal in no way prevents the reasoning in it
from being adopted by the tribunal as its own, if the tribunal upon its own

consideration finds that reasoning to be correct.

There are no rigid or formulaic requirements as to the form or method by
which a tribunal must state its reasons. The question will always be whether,
in a given case, the tribunal’s reasons are sufficiently capable of being
discerned such as to satisfy the standard of Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention, as elaborated in paragraphs 72-77 above. In some cases, where
a tribunal says no more than that it reaches a particular conclusion for the
reasons given in a previous similar but not identical case, the basis of the
tribunal's decision may in all the circumstances be sufficiently apparent. In
other cases it may not. Provided that the tribunal’s own reasons are
sufficiently apparent, it is not necessary for a tribunal in adopting the
reasoning of the earlier decision to distinguish specifically between those
passages in the earlier decision that it adopts as its own reasoning, and those
passages in the earlier decision that it considers inapplicable to its own

decision.

At paragraph 26 of the Second Jurisdiction Decision, the Tribunal said that it
could have relied on its jurisdictional findings in the First Jurisdiction Decision,
that it nonetheless examined anew the jurisdictional arguments of the parties,
but that “The parties have not really made any new argument in this respect
and, therefore, the Tribunal sees no basis for changing any of the conclusions
already reached in the Stamp Tax Claim’. The Committee’s views in the
previous paragraph apply mutandis mutatis to the circumstance where a
tribunal adopts its own reasoning in a previous decision in the case dealing

with another matter that is similar but not identical.

At paragraph 27 of the Second Jurisdiction Decision, the Tribunal then said
that:
It follows that the Tribunal is persuaded that again in this
case the Claimants have ius standi to claim in their own
right as they are protected investors under the Treaty. The
Claimants’ right to bring an action on their own has been
firmly established in the Treaty and there are no reasons to

38

98.

99.

100.

70

hold otherwise in connection with this dispute. Neither is
this situation contrary to international law or to ICSID
practice and decisions.

At the end of the first sentence of this paragraph there is a footnote reference

to paragraphs 62-63 of the Azurix Jurisdiction Decision.

In the subsequent paragraphs of the Second Jurisdiction Decision, the
Tribunal sets out additional reasoning, considering and rejecting certain

specific arguments of Argentina.

The Committee considers it clear from paragraphs 26 and 27 of the Second
Jurisdiction Decision that the Tribunal rejected Argentina’s argument
concerning indirect claims for the same reason that similar arguments were
rejected in the First Jurisdiction Decision and in certain prior ICSID decisions.
In paragraphs 26 and 27 of the Second Jurisdiction Decision the Tribunal did
not specify what were the relevant prior ICSID decisions (other than the
Azurix Jurisdiction Decision) but it is similarly apparent that the Tribunal was
referring to prior ICSID decisions to which the First Jurisdiction Decision
referred and with which it agreed.

In the First Jurisdiction Decision, the argument of Argentina is described by
the Tribunal at paragraphs 34-37. At paragraphs 38-39 it said that “for the
sake of brevity’ it would not repeat “The reasoning supporting the ... holdings”
in other ICSID cases on a range of identified questions relevant to Argentina’s
argument. Some of the other decisions in question are cited in footnotes 7
and 8 of the decision.’”° From paragraph 24 of the decision and accompanying
footnote reference 3, it is furthermore apparent that the prior decisions relied
upon included, in addition to the Lanco Jurisdiction Decision and CMS
Jurisdiction Decision,” the Vivendi Award and Vivendi Annulment Decision.
At paragraph 40 the Tribunal noted that while those prior decisions were not

These decisions being Asian Agricultural Products Ltd. v. Republic of Sri Lanka, |\CSID Case No.

ARB/87/3, Award, June 27, 1990; AMT Award; Goetz Award; Lanco Jurisdiction Decision; Genin
Award; Compajiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/97/3, Award, November 21, 2000; Vivendi Annulment Decision. Also CME Partial Award;
CMS Jurisdiction Decision.

Which were cited in paragraph 38 of the First Jurisdiction Decision: see previous footnote.

39

101.

102.

103.

104.

binding, the Tribunal “believes that in essence the conclusions and reasons of

those decisions are correct’.

The Tribunal then stated at paragraph 39, as a general proposition, that:

It is sufficient for the purpose of the present case to
emphasize that there is nothing contrary to international law
or the ICSID Convention in upholding the concept that
shareholders may claim independently from the corporation
concerned, even if those shareholders are not in the
majority or in control of the company.
A statement of this proposition supported by reasons is contained in the CMS
Jurisdiction Decision at paragraphs 43-48. The Committee is satisfied that
those paragraphs in the CMS Jurisdiction Decision provide sufficient reasons

for that general conclusion.

The Tribunal then proceeded to consider whether the particular BIT with
which this case was concerned did in fact have this effect of permitting BIT

claims by minority shareholders.’”

The Tribunal began by noting that “As the ICS/ID Convention did not attempt
to define ‘investment’, this task was left largely to the parties to bilateral
investment treaties or other expressions of consent’, and the Tribunal turned
to the definition of “investment” in Article I(1) of the BIT as the relevant
definition for the purposes of this case.”? The Committee cannot fault the

Tribunal’s approach in this respect.”

Looking at the definition in Article 1(1) of the BIT, the Tribunal found that it
was very broad, that “this definition does not exclude claims by minority or
non-controlling shareholders”, and that there was not “anything unreasonable

in this definition that would make it incompatible with the object and purpose

See First Jurisdiction Decision | 41 (“The Tribunal will accordingly discuss with particular
attention the situation of these claims under the Bilateral Investment Treaty in view of the
existence of facts that are specific to this particular case’).

First Jurisdiction Decision {| 42.

See, for instance, Report of the Executive Directors of the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States
and Nationals of Other States, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, March
18, 1965: “No attempt was made to define the term ‘investment’ given the essential requirement
of consent by the parties, and the mechanism through which Contracting States can make known
in advance, if they so desire, the classes of disputes which they would or would not consider
submitting to the Centre (Article 25(4))”.

40

105.

106.

107.

of the ICSID Convention”.”> The Tribunal then proceeded to reject a number
of specific arguments of Argentina that were said to militate against this
conclusion.’ The Tribunal ultimately concluded that “the claim in the present
case is admissible under the Bilateral Investment Treaty or, stated in another
way, that the Claimants have jus standi under this Treaty in their capacity as
protected investors”.””

In brief, the reasoning of the Tribunal in the First Jurisdiction Decision could
be summarised as being that under customary international law and the
ICSID Convention it is possible for a BIT to confer on shareholders the right to
bring a claim of the kind brought by the Claimants in the present case, that the
plain wording of Article 1 of the BIT would allow such a claim in the present
case, and that the Tribunal did not accept any of Argentina’s arguments for
giving the BIT a more restrictive interpretation.

Similar reasoning is, in effect, stated again in the Second Jurisdiction
Decision. In this latter decision, the Tribunal found that the broad definition of
“investment” in Article I(1) of the BIT would allow the type of claim brought in
the present case,” and that such an interpretation was consistent with the
treaty interpretation rules in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties,”
and the Tribunal then went on to deal with and reject certain arguments of

Argentina for giving the BIT a more restrictive interpretation.°©°

The Committee considers that when the Second Jurisdiction Decision is read
in the light of the First Jurisdiction Decision, and in particular in the light of the
other ICSID decisions with the reasoning of which the Tribunal expresses

agreement, its reasoning is enough that it “enables one to follow how the
tribunal proceeded from Point A. to point B. and eventually to its conclusion”.®'
The specific argument raised by Argentina was materially similar to an

argument that had been raised and rejected in previous ICSID cases, with the

See First Jurisdiction Decision {J 42-44.

See First Jurisdiction Decision {J 45-56.

See First Jurisdiction Decision {| 57.

See Second Jurisdiction Decision Jf] 29-31.

Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Vienna, May 23, 1969; 1155 U.N.T.S. 331 (“Vienna
Convention”). See Second Jurisdiction Decision {| 32.

See Second Jurisdiction Decision ff] 33 et seq.

See paragraph 74 above.

  

4

108.

109.

110.

82

reasoning of which the Tribunal expressly agreed. Those previous cases
included the CMS Jurisdiction Decision and Azurix Jurisdiction Decision, both
of which involved the very same BIT (albeit in the latter case, the claimant
was a majority shareholder). Argentina has not established that the reasoning
in this body of prior ICSID case law was insufficient or contradictory. The
Committee is simply not persuaded that the Tribunal committed an annullable

error by failing to provide greater reasoning than it did.

Argentina claims that the Tribunal did not address the issue of “which rights a
shareholder may claim for’, and therefore did not address Argentina’s
argument that while a shareholder may be able to claim for alleged violations
of his or her rights qua shareholder, a shareholder cannot claim for alleged

violations of rights belonging, not to the shareholder, but to the company.

The Committee considers it clear from paragraph 34 of the First Jurisdiction
Decision, and from paragraph 17 of the Second Jurisdiction Decision, that the
Tribunal clearly understood that this was the argument of Argentina. It is also
clear from paragraph 35 of the First Jurisdiction Decision, and from paragraph
18 of the Second Jurisdiction Decision, that the Tribunal understood that the
Claimants’ answer to this argument was that they were “not claiming for or on
behalf of TGS, but in their own right as United States investors with
investments qualifying under the Treaty’. The Committee considers it
abundantly clear from the Tribunal’s findings in the First Jurisdiction Decision
at paragraphs 42, 44 and 49-65, and in the Second Jurisdiction Decision at
paragraphs 28, 30-31 and 34, that the Tribunal accepted the argument of the
Claimants in this respect, and that the Tribunal consciously rejected the
argument of Argentina that the Claimants could only claim in respect of their

rights qua minority shareholders in TGS.

In its submissions before this Committee, Argentina has argued that the
Tribunal failed to deal with various specific issues and arguments raised in
Argentina’s pleadings before the Tribunal. However, the Tribunal was not
required to comment on all arguments of the parties in relation to this issue.®?

The Committee recalls the standard of review on annulment in relation to an

See paragraph 72 above.

42

111.

(a)

112.

alleged failure by the Tribunal to state reasons for its decision.°? The
Committee finds that it cannot be said that the Tribunal’s reasoning was
frivolous, and it is not for the Committee to determine whether the Tribunal’s
reasoning was convincing or correct. It is not the role of an annulment
committee to examine meticulously the reasoning of the tribunal on a given
issue to check that every point raised by a party has been given a clear

answer.

This claim of Argentina must accordingly be rejected.

Manifest excess of powers as a ground of annulment under Article
52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention: the Committee’s views

For the reasons given in paragraphs 103-104 above, the Committee
considers it clear that the Tribunal found that the Claimants’ “investment” for
purposes of Article I(1) of the BIT was not confined to its rights qua minority
shareholder in TGS. The Committee finds it necessarily implicit that the
Tribunal considered that TGS was merely a vehicle through which the
Claimants’ investment in the privatisation of the gas industry was channelled,
and that the Claimants had ius standi to bring a BIT claim in respect of any
measure of Argentina affecting that investment. This is for instance clearly
implicit in paragraph 56 of the First Jurisdiction Decision, and in the Second

Jurisdiction Decision at paragraphs 28° and 44.°° The Committee considers

See paragraphs 72-77 above.

“The conclusion that follows is that in the present case the participation of the Claimants was
specifically sought and that they are thus included within the consent to arbitration given by the
Argentine Republic. The Claimants cannot be considered to be only remotely connected to the
legal arrangements governing the privatization, they are beyond any doubt the owners of the
investment made and their rights are protected under the Treaty as clearly established treaty-
rights and not merely contractual rights related to some intermediary. The fact that the
investment was made through CIESA and related companies does not in any way alter this
conclusion.”

“Foreign investors, such as the Claimants, were specifically invited to participate in the
privatization process, various companies were set up in Argentina to this effect and investments
were channeled into TGS through this network of corporate arrangements. It is simply not
tenable to try now to dissociate TGS from those other companies and the investors and argue
that the Claimants do not have ius standi. This is one of the essential features of the Treaty and
the protection it extends to foreign investors.”

“There are specific foreign investors, who were invited by the Argentine Government to
participate in the privatization process and required to organize locally incorporated companies to
channel their investments. At all times this was a foreign investment operation.”

43

113.

114.

that it was necessarily implicit that the Tribunal accepted the Claimants’
argument, referred to in paragraph 109 above, that were “not claiming for or
on behalf of TGS, but in their own right as United States investors with

investments qualifying under the Treaty”.

Argentina’s claim that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in allowing
the Claimants to bring an “indirect” claim as shareholders is similar to the
argument that it raised in the annulment proceedings in the Azurix case,
which was dealt with in paragraphs 57-130 of the Azurix Annulment Decision

under the heading “derivative claims’.

For the same reasons that were given in the Azurix Annulment Decision,
which the Committee considers to be correct, the Committee is of the view
that:

(a) No issue arose in the present case as to the ius standi of the Claimants
to bring a claim on TGS’s behalf or in respect of TGS’s rights. The
issue was whether the Claimants had ius standi to bring a claim
alleging a violation of the BIT in respect of their own investment and, if
so, whether, in the circumstances of the case the provisions of the BIT

had been violated in respect of the Claimants’ investment.®”

(b) It is not the Committee’s function to reach its own conclusion on the
correct interpretation of the BIT and ICSID Convention in respect of
these questions, but to determine whether the Tribunal manifestly

exceeded its powers in reaching the conclusion that it did.®

(c) In addressing this question, the Committee must itself consider the
terms of the BIT and the ICSID Convention, which fall to be interpreted
in accordance with customary international law rules of treaty
interpretation as codified in the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of

Treaties.®°

Compare Azurix Annulment Decision {| 76-80.
Azurix Annulment Decision {| 82.
Azurix Annulment Decision {| 82-84.

44

(d) |The Barcelona Traction case concerned customary international law
rules of diplomatic protection rather than investment treaty arbitration,
and except where norms of ius cogens are involved, a treaty is capable
of modifying the rules of customary international law that would
otherwise be applicable as between the States parties to the treaty.
Hence the starting point in determining the effect of the treaty is the
terms of the treaty itself, rather than the principles of customary
international law that may or may not be displaced by the treaty

provisions.°°

115. Article 1(1)(a) of the BIT relevantly provides that:

20

1. For the purposes of this Treaty,

a) "investment" means every kind of investment in
the territory of one Party owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by nationals or companies of
the other Party, such as equity, debt, and
service and investment contracts; and includes
without limitation:

(i) tangible and intangible property, including
rights, such as mortgages, liens and
pledges;

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other
interests in a company or interests in the
assets thereof;

(iii) a claim to money or a claim to
performance having economic value and
directly related to an investment;

(iv) _ intellectual property which includes, inter
alia, rights relating to: literary and artistic
works, including sound recordings,
inventions in all fields of human
endeavor, industrial designs,
semiconductor mask works, _ trade
secrets, know-how, and_ confidential
business information, and trademarks,
service marks, and trade names; and

Azurix Annulment Decision {| 86-90.

45

116.

117.

118.

119.

a1
92
93,

(v) any right conferred by law or contract,
and any licenses and permits pursuant to
law...
In Azurix, the claimant had established a company under Argentine law (ABA)
for the specific purpose of entering into a concession agreement with an
Argentine province in the context of the privatisation of the water and
wastewater services industry. The tribunal in that case had found that Azurix
had ius standi to bring a claim in respect of alleged violations of the BIT with
respect to rights under that concession. The tribunal rejected Argentina’s
argument that as rights under the concession belonged to ABA and not to
Azurix, only ABA and not Azurix could bring such a claim. In the Azurix
Annulment Decision, the ad hoc committee found that the tribunal in that case

did not manifestly exceed its powers in so deciding.®'

The ad hoc committee in Azurix found that under the broad definition of
“investment” in the BIT, ABA itself was an “investment” of Azurix, since ABA is
a company (Article I(1)(a)(iii)) owned and controlled directly or indirectly by
Azurix (Article I(1)(a), chapeau); that Azurix’s “interests in the assets” of ABA
were also an “investment” (Article I(1)(a)), and that the legal and contractual
rights of ABA, including the rights of ABA under the concession, being
indirectly controlled by Azurix through its majority shareholding in ABA
(Article 1(1)(a), chapeau), would similarly be “investments” of Azurix for the
purposes of the BIT (Article I(1)(a)(v)).°

The ad hoc committee in that case further concluded that:

In this case there was clearly a dispute between Azurix and
Argentina, and that dispute concerned an alleged breach of
rights conferred by the BIT with respect to what the Tribunal
found was, for the purposes of the BIT, an investment of
Azurix. In its ordinary meaning, here there was an
investment dispute between Azurix and Argentina.°°

The ad hoc committee in that case considered this interpretation to be

consistent with international law principles of treaty interpretation as embodied

Azurix Annulment Decision ff] 91-130.
Azurix Annulment Decision especially J] 94.
Azurix Annulment Decision especially | 97.

46

120.

121.

122.

in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, as well with Article 25 of the
ICSID Convention.* The Committee considers the legal reasoning in the
Azurix Annulment Decision on the issue of “derivative claims” to be correct,
and adopts that reasoning. The Committee does not consider it necessary to
deal specifically with each of Argentina’s legal arguments that were already

dealt with in the Azurix Annulment Decision.

The circumstances of the present case are materially similar to those in the
Azurix case with only one difference. Azurix indirectly owned 90% of ABA. In
contrast, in the present case it appears not to have been disputed that the
Claimants only ever had a minority interest in TGS, even if the precise
extent of the Claimants’ interests in TGS changed over time, and was the

subject of some disagreement.°°

The Tribunal took the view that the Claimants “owned” an “investment” for
purposes of Article | of the BIT, even if that investment may have been owned
“indirectly”, having been channelled through a corporate structure that
included TGS.°” The Committee considers it plain that the Claimants invested
in Argentina, and that in ordinary parlance it must be said that any conduct of
Argentina affecting TGS’s rights under the Licence affected the Claimants’
investment. Thus, notwithstanding that the Claimants were only minority
shareholders in TGS, the Committee does not accept that the Tribunal’s
conclusions with respect to the ius standi issue are manifestly inconsistent
with an interpretation of the BIT and the ICSID Convention in accordance with
the principle in Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention.

As to Article 32 of the Vienna Convention, the Committee does not consider
the relevant provisions of the BIT or Articles of the ICSID Convention to be
ambiguous or obscure. However, Argentina in effect argues that the
interpretation referred to above leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or

unreasonable.

Azurix Annulment Decision especially Jf] 83-129.

See First Jurisdiction Decision {| 21.

See First Jurisdiction Decision {| 47-61.

See First Jurisdiction Decision J] 56; Second Jurisdiction Decision {| 38-39.

47

123.

124.

125.

98

Argentina argues that there is a risk of double recovery if both a company and
a shareholder can bring a claim in respect of a violation of the rights of the
company. This argument was dealt with in paragraphs 113 to 128 of the
Azurix Annulment Decision. Argentina now argues additionally that the risk of
double recovery is increased if a minority shareholder could bring a BIT claim,
particularly an indirect minority shareholder that is several steps removed in
the shareholding chain, since many different shareholders in different
positions of the chain might make simultaneous claims. The Committee
considers that the reasoning in the Azurix Annulment Decision is as
applicable to claims by indirect minority shareholders as it is to claims by
majority shareholders. The Committee concludes that, even if resorted to, the
principles in Article 32 of the Vienna Convention would not require a different
interpretation of the BIT and ICSID Convention to that resulting from the

application of Article 31.

The Committee rejects Argentina’s argument that the Tribunal did not resolve
this issue of double recovery on the basis of legal provisions,°® but relied upon
equity considerations. At paragraph 212 of the Award, the Tribunal indicated
that if a situation of double recovery were potentially to arise, “able
government negotiators or regulators would make sure that no such double
recovery or effects occur’. In so stating, the Tribunal did not decide the
dispute based on equitable considerations rather than on the basis of the
applicable law. The Tribunal clearly decided the case on the basis of the
relevant provision of the BIT. In effect, the Tribunal decided that a particular
interpretation of the BIT was not absurd or unreasonable on the basis that it
gave rise to potential problems of double recovery, first, because such
problems had not in fact arisen in practice, and secondly, because even if

they were to arise, there existed pragmatic ways of dealing with them.

The Committee further rejects Argentina’s argument that the Tribunal
“invented a rule that is not part of the applicable law” when it referred to the

fact that the Claimants had been “invited by the Government ... to participate

Referring to Award J] 212.

48

126.

(e)

127.

99
100
101

in the investment”.°? The Tribunal found, as a matter of law, that on the

correct interpretation of the BIT, the Claimants had standing to bring a BIT
claim in respect of conduct affecting its investment in Argentina,
notwithstanding that the Claimants had only a minority shareholding in TGS.
The Tribunal acknowledged that while a minority shareholder might bring such
a claim, there must nonetheless be “a cut-off point beyond which claims would
not be permissible as they would have only a remote connection to the
affected company”.'° The Tribunal considered that that cut-off point had not
been reached in this case, in circumstance where “The Claimants cannot be
considered to be only remotely connected to the legal arrangements
governing the privatization”."°' The circumstances referred to in paragraphs
54-55 of the First Jurisdiction Decision are the facts on which this conclusion
of the Tribunal was based.

Argentina has also argued that if the Tribunal considered that the Claimants
could claim for the damage to their indirect shareholding in TGS, it failed to
provide any grounds for its decision to consider only regulated activities. The
Committee considers that the question of any distinction between regulated
and unregulated activities could not be relevant to the Claimants’ ius standi to
bring a claim in respect of alleged violations of the BIT in respect of their
investment. The question of any such distinction could be relevant only to the
measure of damages awarded. The issue of quantum of damages is
addressed in paragraphs 413-415 below.

Conclusion

For the above reasons, the Committee concludes that the Tribunal did not
manifestly exceed its powers in determining that the Claimants had ius standi

to bring the claim. The Committee rejects this ground of annulment.

Referring to First Jurisdiction Decision | 54.
First Jurisdiction Decision {| 52.
First Jurisdiction Decision {| 56.

49

128.

129.

(b)

130

10:

Forum clause

(a) Background

In the proceedings before the Tribunal, Argentina argued that the Tribunal
lacked jurisdiction due to the existence of a forum selection clause in the
Licence, which provided for disputes to be submitted to the exclusive

jurisdiction of the Argentine courts. The Tribunal rejected this argument.
Argentina now seeks annulment of the Award:

(a) under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention, on the ground that the
Tribunal exceeded manifestly its powers in deciding that it had
jurisdiction notwithstanding the express clauses on the election of the
forum;"°? and

(b) under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention, on the ground that the
Tribunal “seriously contradicted itself’ by allowing the Claimants to
make claims based on the License while at the same time stating that
the forum selection clause in the License did not prevent it from

exercising jurisdiction over those claims.'°

Arguments of the parties
. Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

(a) The Tribunal lacked jurisdiction due to the existence of a forum
selection clause in the Licence, which provided that “For all purposes
connected with this License as it relates to the Grantor, the Licensee
submits itself to the courts with jurisdiction over administrative law
matters of the City of Buenos Aires” and that “Federal courts shall have

jurisdiction over disputes with other parties concerning the License”.

te Application for Annulment [J] 21-23.

The Committee notes that this ground of annulment is not contained in Argentina's Application
for Annulment, and appears to have been stated for the first time in paragraph 109 of Argentina's
Memorial on Annulment. However, as the Claimants have not objected on that basis and have
made submissions in response to this argument, the Committee has considered and decided it.

50

104
105
108

107

108

(b) | The Bidding Terms and the Gas Law also provided for the jurisdiction

of local authorities.

(c) All of the Claimants’ claims for breaches of the Treaty were related to
the License between the Federal State and TGS, regardless of the fact
that the Claimants disguised them as claims under the BIT.'™ The
Tribunal itself recognised in the Award that the claims were based on

the License and the regulatory framework. ‘°°

(d) Treaty tribunals should decline their jurisdiction when the investor
brings a cause of action based on a contract before a treaty tribunal
and the contract contains a forum selection clause in favour of a
different court or tribunal.'°° Dispute settlement provisions in bilateral
investment treaties do not override forum selection clauses in
contracts.'°”

(e) | The Tribunal awarded the Claimants compensation calculated on the
basis of the income TGS would supposedly have obtained under the
License rather than on the basis of any causality theory linking the
alleged damages to the purported breaches of the BIT. It therefore
cannot be held that the claim is independent from the Licence. It was
contradictory of the Tribunal to award compensation based on the
Licence but to find that the forum selection clause in the Licence did

not prevent it from exercising jurisdiction.

(f) The Claimants could not seek to benefit from the License without being
subject to the limitations thereof, including the forum selection

clause.’ Either the Claimants were entitled to make claims based on

Referring to Second Jurisdiction Decision {| 51.

Referring to Award | 166.

Relying on Zachary Douglas, “The Hybrid Foundations of Investment Treaty Arbitration”, (2004)
74 British Yearbook of International Law 151, 245-246 (2004) (“Douglas”); Vivendi Annulment
Decision {| 98.

Relying on SGS Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, \CSID
Case No. ARB/01/13, Decision on Jurisdiction of 6 August 2003 (“SGS v. Pakistan Jurisdiction
Decision”), | 161; SGS v. Philippines Jurisdiction Decision ff] 143, 155; Douglas, 287; TSA
Spectrum de Argentina S.A. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/05/5, Award of 13
November 2008 (“7SA Award”), Concurring Opinion of arbitrator Georges Abi-Saab {| 5.

Relying on Douglas, 243; SGS v Philippines Jurisdiction Decision {| 155.

51

131.

109
110
111
112
113

the Licence and were bound by the forum selection clause, or were not
entitled to make claims based on the Licence in which case they lacked

jus standi.

(g) The fact that this matter was decided by the Tribunal does not prevent
the matter from being considered by the Committee in order to
determine whether the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its powers in
the terms of Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

The Claimants argue, inter alia, that:

(a) Argentina raised a similar jurisdictional objection in relation to the
Stamp Tax Claim which was rightly rejected by the Tribunal in the First
Jurisdiction Decision. "°°

(b) The Tribunal similarly, in its Second Jurisdiction Decision, correctly
rejected Argentina’s argument based on the forum selection clause in
the Licence on the basis that “the essence of the claims ... relates to
alleged violations of the Treaty rights”.'"°

(c) | The Claimants were not parties to the Licence and therefore could not

be bound by the forum selection clause in it.

(d) In any event, the issue is not whether the claim touches on a contract
with a forum selection clause, but rather, the fundamental basis of the
claim. If the “fundamental basis of a claim” is a treaty, a forum selection
clause in a contract cannot bar the application of a treaty standard.'"'
Other annulment committees have reached the same conclusion, ''? as

have other Tribunals including in cases involving Argentina.""°

(e) | Argentina does not point to a single decision that holds otherwise.
Neither the SGS v. Pakistan Jurisdiction Decision nor SGS v.

Referring to First Jurisdiction Decision Jf] 92-93.

Referring to Second Jurisdiction Decision {J 49-51.

Relying on Vivendi Annulment Decision {| 101.

Referring to Wena Hotels Annulment Decision {| 31; Vivendi Annulment Decision {| 113.

Referring to Lanco Jurisdiction Decision {J 26-27; Vivendi I! Jurisdiction Decision; CMS
Jurisdiction Decision { 76; AES Jurisdiction Decision 1] 92-96; Azurix Jurisdiction Decision {| 79.

52

(c)

132.

114

Philippines Jurisdiction Decision stands for the proposition that

exclusive forum clauses exclude ICSID jurisdiction over BIT claims.

There is no contradiction in the Tribunal’s reasoning: the Claimants
made claims for damage to their investments caused by Argentina’s
violation of the BIT, and thus the Claimants were not bound by the

forum selection clause in the Licence.

Argentina misinterprets the Tribunal’s words and ignores the very
concept of “investment.” It was Claimants who were targeted by
Argentina in the 1990s with a view to attracting foreign investors, and

who invested in Argentina’s privatization process.

Although the Claimants’ claim does involve Argentina’s dismantling of
the guarantees granted under the License and the Regulatory
Framework, that does not mean that the Claimants made a contractual
claim for breach of the License. The same facts may be analyzed very
differently under international law than under municipal law. The fact
that an act or omission by a State constitutes a breach of contract does
not necessarily imply that there is a breach of a BIT or of international

law.

The Committee’s views

Argentina raised a similar argument based on the forum selection clause in

relation to the Stamp Tax Claim. In respect to this argument, the Tribunal said

in the First Jurisdiction Decision that:

The Tribunal is mindful of the various ICSID decisions that
have recently discussed this very issue, particularly those in
Lanco, Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija (Award and
Annulment), Wena, CMS and Salini. In all these cases the
tribunals have upheld jurisdiction under the Convention to
address violations of contracts which, at the same time,
constitute a breach of the pertinent bilateral investment
treaty. The Tribunal will not repeat those considerations.‘

First Jurisdiction Decision {[ 91 (footnotes omitted).

53

133.

134.

135.

118

Argentina’s argument was considered and rejected by the Tribunal in the
Second Jurisdiction Decision, in which the Tribunal said that:

49. The distinction between these different types of claims
has relied in part on the test of the triple identity. To the
extent that a dispute might involve the same parties, object
and cause of action it might be considered as a dispute
where it is virtually impossible to separate the contract
issues from the treaty issues and drawing from that
distinction any jurisdictional conclusions.

50. However, as the Annulment Committee held in Vivendi,
“A treaty cause of action is not the same as a contractual
cause of action; it requires a clear showing of conduct
which is in the circumstances contrary to the relevant treaty
standard”. The tribunal also held in CMS, referring to this
line of decisions, that “as contractual claims are different
from treaty claims, even if there had been or there currently
was a recourse to the local courts for breach of contract,
this would not have prevented submission of the treaty
claims to arbitration”.

51. In this case, although there are no doubt questions
concerning the Contract between the parties, the essence
of the claims, like in the Stamp Tax Claim, relates to alleged
violations of the Treaty rights. Having the Tribunal [sic]
concluded that there are no reasons to change the
conclusions on jurisdiction reached in the Stamp Tax Claim
Decision, the distinction between contract-based claims and
treaty-based claims looses [sic] to a great extent its
Significance in the present phase of the case."
The Committee considers it to be self-evident, in the words of the Vivendi
Annulment Decision quoted by the Tribunal, that “A treaty cause of action is
not the same as a contractual cause of action”. Conduct of a host State may
simultaneously amount to a breach of a contract and a breach of a treaty, or
may amount to a breach of the former but not of the latter, or to a breach of

the latter but not the former.

The terms of a contract and the terms of a treaty are unlikely to be identical,
and in any event, even if they were, the contract would be governed by the
municipal law of one State or another while the treaty would be governed by

public international law. The contract would fall to be interpreted in

Second Jurisdiction Decision {| 49-51 (footnotes omitted), referring to Ronald S. Lauder v.
Czech Republic, UNCITRAL Final Award, September 3, 2001, {| 161, 163; Vivendi Annulment
Decision {| 113; CMS Jurisdiction Decision {| 80; Azurix Jurisdiction Decision {] 89.

54

136.

137.

138.

139.

116

accordance with municipal law rules of contract interpretation while the treaty
would fall to be interpreted in accordance with international law rules of treaty
interpretation. The principles for determining whether or not particular conduct
on the part of a party to the contract gives rise to liability for breach of contract
are the applicable municipal law rules, while the principles for determining
whether particular conduct gives rise to responsibility for breach of the treaty

are those found in public international law.

Thus, a determination of the question whether or not there has been a breach
of contract will not answer the question whether or not there has been a
breach of the treaty, and vice versa. The fact that one forum has exclusive
jurisdiction to determine one of these questions is not logically inconsistent
with another forum having jurisdiction to determine the other of these
questions. In the present case, the BIT provided expressly for ICSID
arbitration of alleged violations of the BIT. This is not logically inconsistent
with any contractual clause giving exclusive jurisdiction to the national courts

over claims for breaches of contract.

Argentina nevertheless seeks to argue that where an ICSID claim is brought
in respect of an alleged breach of a treaty which is based on rights under a
contract, the claimant cannot seek to benefit from the contract without being
subject to the limitations thereof, including any forum selection clause in the

contract.
In support of this position, Argentina relies on a number of authorities.

The first is the Vivendi Annulment Decision, which was quoted by the
Tribunal. In Vivendi, in the paragraph relied upon by Argentina, the ad hoc
committee said that “In a case where the essential basis of a claim brought
before an international tribunal is a breach of contract, the tribunal will give
effect to any valid choice of forum clause in the contract’.""° However, the ad

hoc committee then went on to cite an example of a case brought before a

Vivendi Annulment Decision {| 98.

55

mixed commission in which the claim was indeed for breach of contract.'”
The ad hoc committee then went on to say:

101. On the other hand, where “the fundamental basis of
the claim” is a treaty laying down an independent standard
by which the conduct of the parties is to be judged, the
existence of an exclusive jurisdiction clause in a contract
between the claimant and the respondent state or one of its
subdivisions cannot operate as a bar to the application of
the treaty standard. At most, it might be relevant—as
municipal law will often be relevant—in assessing whether
there has been a breach of the treaty.

102. In the Committee’s view, it is not open to an ICSID
tribunal having jurisdiction under a BIT in respect of a claim
based upon a substantive provision of that BIT, to dismiss
the claim on the ground that it could or should have been
dealt with by a national court. In such a case, the inquiry
which the ICSID tribunal is required to undertake is one
governed by the ICSID Convention, by the BIT and by
applicable international law. Such an inquiry is neither in
principle determined, nor precluded, by any issue of
municipal law, including any municipal law agreement of the
parties.

103. Moreover the Committee does not understand how, if
there had been a breach of the BIT in the present case (a
question of international law), the existence of Article 16(4)
of the Concession Contract could have prevented its
characterisation as such. A state cannot rely on an
exclusive jurisdiction clause in a contract to avoid the
characterisation of its conduct as internationally unlawful
under a treaty.

140. The Committee finds that this decision directly contradicts Argentina’s

position.

141. The next authority relied on by Argentina is the SGS v. Pakistan Jurisdiction
Decision. In the paragraph of that decision relied upon by Argentina, the
tribunal said that:

We believe that Article 11.1 of the PSI Agreement is a valid
forum selection clause so far as concerns the Claimant's

‘7 Vivendi Annulment Decision ff] 98-100, referring to Woodruff case, American-Venezuelan Mixed

Commission, 1903, Reports of International Arbitral Awards, vol. |X, p. 213.
Vivendi Annulment Decision {IJ 101-103 (footnote omitted).

56

118

142.

143.

144.

119
120
121
122
123

contract claims which do not also amount to BIT. claims, and

it is a clause that this Tribunal should respect."'
The tribunal then concluded that:

. the Tribunal has no jurisdiction with respect to claims

submitted by SGS and based on alleged breaches of the

PSI Agreement which do not also constitute or amount to

breaches of the substantive standards of the BIT.'?°
The Committee considers that the suggestion in these quotes is that a breach
of contract may also amount to a breach of the BIT, and that where this is the
case, a forum clause in the contract will not preclude an ICSID tribunal from
determining a claim for breach of the BIT. The Committee considers that this

decision therefore also directly contradicts Argentina’s position.

A further authority relied on by Argentina is the SGS v. Philippines Jurisdiction
Decision. However, the Committee notes that in that case the tribunal said
that:

Provided the facts as alleged by the Claimant and as

appearing from the initial pleadings fairly raise questions of

breach of one or more provisions of the BIT, the Tribunal

has jurisdiction to determine the claim."
The tribunal went on to say that in that particular case, the dispute was on its
face about the amount of money owed under a contract, '2 and that that case
could be distinguished from SGS v. Pakistan which was said to arguably raise
a breach of the BIT independent of a breach of contract, and the Vivendi case
where “the claim presented by the Claimant went beyond the scope of the
concession agreement and involved allegations which, if proved, were

7,123

capable of amounting to breaches of a BI The Committee does not

consider that this decision clearly supports Argentina’s position.

Argentina next relies on the concurring opinion of arbitrator Georges Abi-Saab
to the TSA Award. The Tribunal notes that this concurring opinion states that:

... Where what is contended in the treaty claim is mainly that
the contract has been violated and that this violation

SGS v. Pakistan Jurisdiction Decision {| 161 (emphasis in original).
SGS v. Pakistan Jurisdiction Decision {| 162.

SGS v. Philippines Jurisdiction Decision {| 157.

SGS v. Philippines Jurisdiction Decision {| 159.

SGS v. Philippines Jurisdiction Decision JJ] 158-159.

57

145.

146.

124
128
126

constitutes in turn and by another name (figuring in the
treaty) a treaty violation, such a nominal trick does not
suffice to transform the contract claim into a treaty claim or
to create a parallel treaty claim. To use the terminology of
Vivendi Il, “where ‘the fundamental basis of the claim’ i:
the contract, however, many more layers of claims one tops
it with, it remains a contract claim, which has to be settled
according to the terms of the contract and in the forum
chosen in that contract.'*

This quote would indeed appear to support the position of Argentina.
However, the Committee notes that this concurring opinion went on to state
that on the evidence in that case, certain statements of officials of Argentina
provided:

prima facie evidence that the termination of the
concession contract and consequent action by the
Argentinian government may have been motivated, not only
by TSA’s alleged grave breaches of the concession
contract, but also by other considerations which seem to fall
within the purview of the BIT guarantees.'”
The concurring opinion then concluded that:

These considerations, independent of the alleged violations

of the contract, are, in my view, sufficient prima facie to

constitute the subject-matter of a treaty claim, and

consequently to bring the jurisdictional clause of the BIT

into play."
Thus, even this concurring opinion would seem to acknowledge that a forum
selection clause in a contract will not deprive an ICSID tribunal of jurisdiction
to determine a claim for an alleged violation of a treaty based on a breach of
that contract, if the conduct giving rise to the breach is “independent of the
alleged violations of the contract, ... sufficient prima facie to constitute the
subject-matter of a treaty claim’. Furthermore, in the TSA Award itself, the
Tribunal found that the exclusive jurisdiction clause in that case was “not such
as to exclude recourse to a remedy under the BIT in cases where a dispute

arises about acts which might constitute breaches of both the Concession

TSA Award, Concurring Opinion of arbitrator Georges Abi-Saab {| 5.
TSA Award, Concurring Opinion of arbitrator Georges Abi-Saab {| 9.
TSA Award, Concurring Opinion of arbitrator Georges Abi-Saab {| 9.

58

147.

148.

149.

150.

151.

127

Contract and the BIT’.'27 The Committee finds that overall, the TSA case

does not provide clear support for Argentina’s position.

As explained above, even in cases where it is claimed that the tribunal lacked
jurisdiction, the ad hoc committee will annul the decision only where the
tribunal has manifestly exceeded its power.'76 The Committee finds that it
has not been established that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in
finding, for the reasons that it did, that it had jurisdiction over the alleged

breaches of the BIT, notwithstanding the forum selection clause.

The Committee also finds for the reasons above that it has not been
established that there is anything contradictory in the Tribunal’s reasoning in

this respect.

In considering this ground of annulment, the Committee has been required to
apply the standard of review under Article 52(1)(b) and (e) of the ICSID
Convention. The Committee would merely add that quite apart from this
standard, it can see no obvious error at all in the Tribunal's approach as to the
applicable principles.

The Committee concludes that this ground of annulment must therefore be

rejected.

Procedural issues

(a) Introduction
Argentina argues that three separate procedural matters in the course of the
proceedings before the Tribunal amounted to a serious departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure, justifying annulment under Article 52(1)(d) of
the ICSID Convention.

TSA Award, {| 62.

"8 See paragraph 69 above.

59

152.

153.

154.

155.

156.

129
130
131

The first concerns the Tribunal’s decision to admit, over the objections of
Argentina, a witness statement of Mr Patricio Carlos Perkins that had been

submitted by the Claimants. '°

The second concerns the Tribunal’s decision to admit, over the objections of
Argentina, the expert report of Mr. Alberto Bianchi submitted by the

Claimants. ‘°°

The third concerns the Tribunal’s decision, on 22 March 2007, to close the
proceedings, notwithstanding that, according to Argentina, certain issues

remained unresolved. '*"

(b) Admission of the evidence of Mr. Perkins
(i) Background

In a letter to the President of the Tribunal dated 1 April 2005, Argentina
requested that written witness testimony of Mr Perkins, which had been
submitted with the Claimants’ ancillary claim, be dismissed from the

arbitration.

According to this letter, Mr Perkins had in 1992 been appointed by the
Argentine Privatisation Committee as executive director of the Gas del Estado
SE privatisation project. The letter suggested that it was not legitimate or
ethical for Mr Perkins now to give testimony in favour of the recipient of a
license in the privatisation process as to what was the intention of the
Privatisation Committee that appointed him to that office. The letter added
that Mr Perkins was an engineer, and noted the duty of confidentiality under
section 2.3.1.4 of the Code of Professional Ethics in Surveying, Architecture,
and Engineering (Cédigo de Etica Profesional de la Agrimensura, la

Arquitectura y la Ingenieria).

Application for Annulment {| 66.
Application for Annulment {| 67-68.
Application for Annulment {| 69.

60

157.

158.

159.

160.

The letter further stated that a government-owned company then subject to a
privatisation process, Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales (“YPF”), had entered
into an agreement with the consulting company Patricio C. Perkins &
Asociados S.A. for the latter to provide “professional consulting services for
the management of the Argentine gas and business privatization project’.
Section 11 of this agreement was said to contain a confidentiality clause,
entitled “/ntellectual Property—Confidentiality’, which provided that “any and
all acts, information, investigations, conclusions, recommendations and
reports performed, conducted, prepared or obtained under this agreement are
exclusively owned by YPF’, and which further provided that the consulting
company agreed “to maintain the professional secrecy in connection with any
data, information, investigations, conclusion, recommendation or report
obtained by the company’s personnel in the course of execution of’ the
agreement. The letter stated that Mr Perkins’ testimony in these proceedings

violated this clause.

The letter additionally stated that a further circumstance was that the funds
used to pay Mr Perkins for these services had been obtained under a World
Bank programme to promote privatisations, and that Mr Perkins was now
testifying against the country to which he rendered those services before a
World Bank agency. The letter claimed that behaviour such as that of Mr
Perkins had adversely affected the reputation of privatised companies in
Argentina, and sought the exclusion of Mr Perkins’ testimony from the case
“[nJotwithstanding the civil or criminal actions that the Argentine Republic may

bring against Mr. Perkins”.

By a letter dated 11 April 2005, from the Secretary of the Tribunal, counsel
for the Claimants were invited to present any observations on Argentina’s
letter.

By a letter dated 11 April 2005, the Claimants presented observations
opposing Argentina’s request. That letter stated that the Tribunal did not have
jurisdiction to ascertain whether Mr Perkins’ appearance in these proceedings
violated ethical principles or alleged contractual obligations alien to the

matters under discussion, and that Argentina could submit claims to other

61

161.

162.

appropriate venues. The letter further stated that an identical challenge had
been made by Argentina in the CMS and LG&E cases, and that in the CMS
case Argentina’s challenge had been rejected and Mr Perkins was permitted
to provide testimony. The letter went on to state that the information disclosed
by Mr Perkins in his witness statement was in the public domain and that
Argentina had failed to indicate what confidential information had been
revealed by him; that the Code of Conduct for Engineers was inapplicable as
Mr Perkins had not been hired to provide engineering services and that in any
event it was not the Tribunal’s duty to enforce that Code of Conduct; that only
YPF (now a private company) could seek enforcement of the confidentiality
clause in its contract with Mr Perkins; that that confidentiality clause had not in
any event been breached as it related to intellectual property rights; and that
Mr Perkins had not provided a witness statement “against Argentina” or “in
favour of’ the Claimants but had given impartial and objective testimony. The
letter claimed that Argentina was illegitimately seeking to intimidate Mr

Perkins so as to affect the impartiality and objectiveness of his testimony.

By a letter dated 22 April 2005, the Secretary of the Tribunal informed the
parties that the Tribunal considered that there was no reason to exclude
Mr Perkins’ testimony from the proceeding. It stated that “The question
concerning confidentiality raised by the Respondent is a matter that can only
be dealt with in the context of the contract between Mr. Perkins and the
Republic of Argentina or its agencies’. \t further stated that “The above
considerations are without prejudice to the question of the value of evidence
which the Tribunal will weigh in due course”. The letter concluded with an
invitation to the parties not to discuss decisions made by tribunals in different
cases which were governed by considerations of confidentiality, and stated
that this case would be decided by the Tribunal on its own merits and

circumstances.

The Claimants subsequently addressed a letter to the Secretary of the
Tribunal dated October 24, 2005, to which was attached a letter received by
Mr Perkins from the Argentine Attorney-General’s Office. The letter from the

Claimants stated that in the letter to Mr Perkins, “the Government of Argentina

62

163.

164.

165.

attempts to bully and intimidate the witness by threatening him with civil and
criminal prosecution if he testifies at the hearing in this case”. The Claimants’
letter stated that the Government of Argentina had previously published the
names of witnesses within Argentina. The letter contended that Argentina,
having failed in its attempt to exclude the testimony of Mr Perkins, was
seeking to coerce Mr Perkins so as to improperly influence his impartiality and
objectiveness in favour of Argentina. The letter requested an order of
provisional measures pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 39, requiring
Argentina to withdraw its letter to Mr Perkins and to declare that it would not
bring civil or criminal proceedings against him for providing testimony in this
matter, and requiring Argentina not to take any actions that would further

exacerbate the dispute.

By a letter dated 31 October 2005 from the Secretary of the Tribunal,

Argentina was invited to present any observations on the Claimants’ letter.

By a letter dated 3 November 2005, Argentina requested that the Claimants’
request be dismissed. This letter stated inter alia that the Tribunal was not
competent to issue orders but only to make recommendations, that the
Claimants had failed to meet the second and third requirements of ICSID
Arbitration Rule 39, and that Argentina was not aggravating the dispute by

ensuring that the agreement entered into with Mr Perkins was honoured.

By a letter dated 10 November 2005, the Secretary of the Tribunal informed
the parties that:

The Tribunal, after considering the Claimant's letter of
October 24, 2005, and the Respondent's letter of November
3, 2005, does not consider it appropriate to issue an Order
on Provisional Measures in this matter.

The Tribunal wishes to remind the parties that this is an
issue that has already been decided upon by the Tribunal
(Tribunal's letter to the parties of April 22, 2005). In that
occasion, the Tribunal informed the parties that the question
concerning Mr. Perkins’ eventual obligations with the
Republic of Argentina is a matter that can only be dealt with
in the context of the contract between Mr. Perkins and the
Argentine Republic or its agencies and not before this
Tribunal.

63

The Tribunal decides accordingly to admit Mr. Perkins’
testimony. This is without prejudice to the question of the
evidentiary value of such testimony which the Tribunal will
weigh in due course.

The Tribunal also expects the Argentine Republic to
facilitate the participation of Mr. Perkins in this proceeding
in accordance with the Article 22 of the Convention.

166. At paragraph 141 of the Award, the Tribunal considered the written statement
of Mr Perkins on a particular point. In paragraph 142 of the Award, the
Tribunal then stated:

The Tribunal would have wished that Mr. Perkins had been
examined and cross-examined on this and other aspects of
his testimony, and also to put questions to him, but his
participation in the hearing on the merits was regrettably
prevented by an injunction issued by an Argentine judge on
November 24, 2005 at the request of the Government. The
Tribunal makes no inference of this situation, but decided in
Procedural Order No. 5, dated December 2, 2005, that the
witness’ written statement was admissible and _ that,
moreover, Mr. Perkins enjoyed and continues to enjoy the
immunities provided under Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID
Convention.

(ii) | Arguments of the parties
167. Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

(a) The Tribunal took into account the evidence of Mr Perkins as a “key

”'82 which in view of the existence of

official in the privatization process’
a confidentiality clause and the injunction of the Argentine court, was
provided illegitimately. The use of evidence that has been illegitimately
obtained has been harshly criticised.'**

(b) The Tribunal’s decision to reject the Claimants’ request acknowledged

that the injunction obtained from an Argentine court had been

‘82 Referring to Award {| 141.

138 Referring to Hugh Thirlway, “Dilemma or chimera? Admissibility of Illegally Obtained Evidence in
International Adjudication”, (1984) 78 A.J./.L. 622, 623; Michael Reisman & Eric E. Freedman,
“The Plaintiffs dilemma: Illegally Obtained Evidence and Admissibility in International
Adjudication”, (1982) 76 A.J.I.L. 737, 738.

64

168.

13

(e)

legitimate as it stated that “Mr. Perkins’ eventual obligations with the
Republic of Argentina is a matter that can only be dealt with in the
context of the contract between Mr. Perkins and the Argentine Republic

or its agencies and not before this Tribunal’.

The Tribunal thereby seriously damaged Argentina’s right to defence,

which is “an essential part of the right to a fair trial.”"*4

The Tribunal thereby also violated the principle of equality of the
parties, which constitutes one of the main characteristics of the process

in which a decision needs to be reached. '?>

The admission of this evidence “implied preventing Argentina from

exercising its right to fair treatment’.

The Claimants argue, inter alia, that:

(a)

Mr Perkins testified on exactly the same subject matter in the CMS

case, and the CMS Tribunal rejected that objection.

Since the injunction was issued by the Argentine court, in over three
years no decision has been rendered by that court on the merits of the
alleged breach of the confidentiality clause, confirming that Argentina’s
challenge was a pure litigation tactic to intimidate the witness and to

actually prevent him from testifying at the hearing.

The Tribunal exercised its authority under ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(1)
to decide the admissibility of Mr Perkins’s written testimony and its
probative value, and the Committee should not second-guess the

Tribunal’s decision on this issue.

‘4 Referring inter alia to Bricmont v. Belgium, 1989 Eur. Ct. H.R. 12, | 81; CDC Group ple v.
Republic of Seychelles, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/14, Decision on Annulment, June 29, 2005
(“CDC Annulment Decision”), {| 49; Wena Hotels Annulment Decision | 57; Application for
Review of Judgment No. 158 of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal, Advisory Opinion,
LC.J. Reports 1973, p. 16 | 92; Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia,
ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision on Annulment, December 17, 1992 (“Amco //] Annulment
Decision”), {| 9.08.

Referring to Bin Cheng, General Principles of Law (1987), at 290; Military and Paramilitary
Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America), |.C.J. Reports 1986,
p. 14, 9] 31, 59; M/NE Annulment Decision {| 5.06; MTD Annulment Decision {| 49; Wena Hotels
Annulment Decision {| 57.

65

(i)

The Tribunal had no jurisdiction to determine whether or not Mr Perkins
had breached any confidentiality obligation under an agreement with
YPF.

In making its objection in this case and promoting local proceedings
against Mr Perkins, Argentina violated Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID

Convention, which grant immunity from legal process to witnesses.

Argentina had a full opportunity to rebut Mr Perkins’s testimony in its
Counter-Memorial and Rejoinder, and it was Argentina’s own actions
that barred Mr Perkins from attending the hearing and being cross-

examined.

There is a clear difference between “evidence which is illegitimately
obtained” and the evidence submitted in this case, which was freely

given by Mr Perkins.

Mr Perkins disclosed no confidential information, and his witness
statement only ratified what had been proved by multiple sources of

evidence in the record.

Even if Mr Perkins’ witness statement was excluded the Tribunal would

have reached the same conclusion. '%°

(iii) | The Committee’s views

169. The Committee notes that Mr Perkins did not appear as a witness or give

evidence at the hearing on the merits in this case. The Committee finds that

the only issue before it concerns the admission into evidence by the Tribunal

of the witness statement of Mr Perkins.

170. ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(1) provides that “The Tribunal shall be the judge of

the admissibility of any evidence adduced and of its probative value”. Neither

the ICSID Convention nor the ICSID Arbitration Rules contains specific rules

136

Referring to Schreuer Commentary at 971.

66

171.

172.

173.

on the admissibility of evidence. Accordingly, the issue of the admissibility of
Mr Perkins’ witness statement in these proceedings was one for the Tribunal
to decide. It is not a matter for the Committee to decide in annulment
proceedings. The only basis for the Committee to intervene would be if
Argentina establishes that the Tribunal, in admitting Mr Perkins’ witness
statement, in the relevant circumstances seriously departed from a

fundamental rule of procedure.

The Committee notes that there is no suggestion that Mr Perkins’ witness
statement was not provided voluntarily and no suggestion that he did not

voluntarily agree that the statement would be used in these proceedings.

The Committee notes also that at the time that Mr Perkins gave his witness
statement and at the time that the Claimants submitted it to the Tribunal, the
injunction of the Argentine court had not been given. The submission of the
witness statement therefore cannot have been in violation of that injunction.
There has been no suggestion that the injunction purported to bind the
Tribunal, to prevent the Tribunal from considering the witness statement in its

deliberation of the case.

The Committee notes further that the agreement containing the confidentiality
clause was between “YPF SOCIEDAD ANONIMA ... acting on behalf of the
Under-Department of Fuels” and “Patricio C. Perkins y Asociados S.A.”. It
would appear from the submissions of the Claimants, that were not
contradicted by Argentina, that YPF is now a private company. There does
not appear to have been any detailed discussion before the Tribunal as to
whether the rights under that agreement now legally belong to YPF as a
private company, or to the Under-Department of Fuels on whose behalf YPF
was acting in entering into the agreement. The Claimants in their letter dated
11 April 2005, argued that only YPF could seek enforcement of the
confidentiality clause in its contract with Mr Perkins. However, the Tribunal did
not decide this issue. The Tribunal’s decision as expressed in the letter of 22
April 2005 was that “The question concerning confidentiality raised by the
Respondent is a matter that can only be dealt with in the context of the

contract between Mr. Perkins and the Republic of Argentina or its agencies”.

67

174.

175.

176.

177.

The Tribunal did not in any way indicate what attitude it would take in the
event that a court having jurisdiction over the matter did determine that
Mr Perkins’ testimony was in violation of his confidentiality obligations. There
has been no suggestion that this issue has ever been determined by a court.
Although an Argentine court subsequently issued an injunction preventing the
Claimants from testifying, this injunction was of an interlocutory nature (a
“precautionary measure”), and did not determine the merits of the claim of
breach of confidentiality. According to the Claimants, the merits of this claim

have yet to be determined.

The situation with which the Tribunal was faced was thus this. Argentina
claimed that Mr Perkins’ witness statement was made in violation of his
confidentiality obligations under the agreement with YPF, and possibly other
confidentiality obligations such as under the Code of Professional Ethics. The
Claimants denied that this was the case. The Tribunal considered that it could
not determine whether or not there was a breach of such confidentiality
obligations. The Tribunal did not state what it would have done if a competent
court were to have decided that there was a breach of confidentiality
obligations. As there was no such decision by a competent court, it is purely

speculative to consider what the Tribunal might have done.

In circumstances where there was no such decision of a competent court, the
Tribunal decided to admit the witness statement. After it had so decided, the
Argentine court issued the injunction to Mr Perkins. Mr Perkins himself
complied with that injunction and did not testify at the hearing, and as noted
above, that injunction did not purport to bind the Tribunal. The Tribunal
evidently considered that this interlocutory measure of an Argentine court
addressed to Mr Perkins did not provide any reason why the Tribunal should
not consider the witness statement of Mr Perkins that had by that time already

been submitted to it.

Argentina cites numerous authorities for the general proposition that the
principle of equality of the parties, the right to defence, and right to fair
treatment are fundamental rules of procedure. However, Argentina cites no

authority for the proposition that it would amount to a serious violation of a

68

178.

179.

180.

181.

182.

fundamental rule of procedure for a tribunal to admit the witness statement of

a witness in the circumstances described in the preceding two paragraphs.

Tribunals might reach different conclusions on whether or not evidence should
be admitted in such circumstances. Regardless of which view a tribunal may
take, its decision will not amount to an annullable error unless one of the
grounds of annulment in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention is established.
Regardless of which view a tribunal may take on the issue in the
circumstances of the present case, the Committee is not satisfied that the
decision could without more constitute a serious departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure.

The Committee is not required to reach any view on issues of admissibility of
evidence in ICSID proceedings in circumstances other than the specific

circumstances of this case, and does not do so.

(c) Admission of the expert report of Mr Bianchi
(i) Background

The minutes of the first session of the Tribunal, held at the seat of the Centre
in Washington D.C. on December 5, 2001, recorded in its paragraph 16 an
agreed timetable for the filing of the parties’ pleadings and stated at
paragraph 19.1:

It was agreed that after the submissions stipulated in
paragraph 16 above, no other documents shall be
submitted by the parties unless an extraordinary situation
arises and it is agreed by both parties or the Tribunal. The
Tribunal may request additional documents if necessary for
the conduct of the litigation.

In accordance with the applicable procedural schedule, Argentina filed its

Rejoinder on the merits on July 7, 2005.

Over three months later, by a letter dated October 20, 2005, the Claimants
stated that:

With its Rejoinder on the Merits, Argentina introduced for
the first time several new expert reports that deal with

69

183.

184.

137

issues already addressed in Claimants’ Memorial, and

which therefore should have been filed by Argentina

together with the Counter-Memorial.
The letter stated that by waiting to file these documents with its Rejoinder,
Argentina had violated ICSID Arbitration Rule 24'°’ and had tried unfairly to
restrict the Claimants’ fundamental right to due process by denying them the
ability to rebut these reports. The letter went on to say that accordingly, “in the
exercise of its fundamental rights’ the Claimants were enclosing with the letter
two new expert reports to rebut the reports filed with Argentina’s Rejoinder.

One of the two new reports submitted with that letter was by Mr Bianchi.

By letters to the Secretary of the Tribunal dated 24 and 26 October 2005
respectively, Argentina objected to the submission by the Claimants of these
new reports and accompanying documentation. In the latter letter, Argentina
stated that the submission of the new reports by the Claimant was untimely as
it was only one month prior to the hearing on the merits, that the Claimants
had had the possibility of defending themselves in their Memorial and Reply
and would have the opportunity to do so again at the hearing, that Argentina
had not introduced any new issue in its Rejoinder, that the filing of these
reports would mean that the Claimants would have three opportunities to
present evidence while Argentina would have only two, that it had taken the
Claimants over three and a half months to produce these two reports when
Argentina’s Rejoinder had been prepared in 60 days, and that exhibits to the

new reports included documents that the Claimants could have filed earlier.

By a letter to the parties dated November 10, 2005, the Secretary of the
Tribunal stated:

The Tribunal ... decides that it will consider the new
Claimants’ expert reports but only to the extent that they
refer or directly relate to the new expert reports submitted
by the Respondent with its Rejoinder. ...

The additional documentation that the Claimants have
submitted will be considered on the same conditions and
requirements referred to above. The Respondent may raise

ICSID Arbitration Rule 24 provides: “Supporting documentation shall ordinarily be filed together

with the instrument to which it relates, and in any case within the time limit fixed for the filing of
such instrument”.

70

specific objections to this documentation during the hearing.
The Tribunal will take a decision on the relevance of this
documentation at the hearing.

(ii) | Arguments of the parties

185. Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

186.

138

(a)

The Claimants waited three and a half months to produce the new
reports, until only one month before the hearing on the merits, when

Argentina had produced its Rejoinder in 60 days.

Neither the Claimants nor the Tribunal established the existence of any
“extraordinary situation” as required by paragraph 19.1 of the minutes

of the First Session of the Tribunal.

Mr Bianchi’s report was a deciding factor for the Tribunal as far as the

exercise of police power in emergency situations is concerned.'**

The Tribunal violated Argentina's right of defence and the equality of
treatment between the parties, by providing the Claimants with three

opportunities to produce evidence when Argentina only had two.

Inequitable treatment on the part of the Tribunal constitutes a serious
violation of a core rule of procedure in the terms of Article 52(1)(d) of
the ICSID Convention.

The Claimants argue, inter alia, that:

(a)

Professor Bianchi’s expert report was submitted in response to the
report of Argentina’s expert, Professor Comadira, which raised new
issues for the first time in Argentina’s Rejoinder. Professor Comadira’s
expert report should have been submitted with Argentina’s Counter-
Memorial, allowing Claimants an opportunity to properly rebut it in their
Reply, and there is no reason why Argentina could not have submitted

it at that time.

Referring to Award [ 219.

71

187.

188.

If the Tribunal had not allowed Claimants to submit Professor Bianchi’s
expert report, Claimants’ right of due process would have been
seriously affected by Argentina’s strategy of withholding evidence until
the last possible moment. Allowing submission of Professor Bianchi’s
expert report was absolutely necessary in order to treat the parties

equally and fairly.

Argentina cross-examined Professor Bianchi for an hour during the

hearing on the merits.

Under the ICSID Convention tribunals have a discretion whether or not
to allow expert reports upon request of either party, and the Tribunal’s
decision to accept Professor Bianchi’s expert report was within the

exercise of that discretion.

Even without Professor Bianchi’s expert report, the Tribunal would have
reached the same conclusion based on Argentine case law. Argentina

cannot show any material effect on the outcome of the case.

Argentina gives no indication of what fundamental rule of procedure
was breached or how such a departure from the rule was serious or
would have “caused the Tribunal to reach a result substantially different

from what it would have awarded had such a rule been observed”.

(iii) | The Committee’s views

ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(1) has been quoted above. ICSID Arbitration Rule
26(2) provides that “The Tribunal may extend any time limit that it has fixed”.

ICSID Arbitration Rule 26(3) provides that “Any step taken after expiration of

the applicable time limit shall be disregarded unless the Tribunal, in special

circumstances and after giving the other party an opportunity of stating its

views, decides”.

The Committee has no doubt that under these provisions, a tribunal has the

power to accept the filing by a party of an expert report after the deadline fixed

72

189.

190.

191.

for such filing, if the tribunal considers that there are good reasons for so
doing.

In this case, as indicated in the letter dated 10 November 2005, the Tribunal
decided to accept the filing of the new expert reports and supporting
documents of the Claimants, and it is clear that the Tribunal did so having
considered the views of the Claimants expressed in their letter dated 20
October 2005, and the views of Argentina expressed in the letters dated 24
and 26 October 2005. The reason for the late submission of the new expert
reports was that they were intended to respond to expert reports of Argentina
that had only been submitted at the stage of Argentina’s Rejoinder.
Consistently with this, the letter dated 10 November 2005 states that the
Tribunal would consider the new expert reports submitted by the Claimants
“only to the extent that they refer or directly relate to the new expert reports
submitted by the Respondent with its Rejoinder’.

Argentina maintains that the Claimants did not produce the new expert reports
until three and a half months after Argentina’s Rejoinder, by which time there
was only one month before the hearing on the merits. Argentina also
complains that the result of the Tribunal’s decision was that the Claimants had

three opportunities to produce evidence when Argentina only had two.

However, the Committee notes that Argentina raised these points in its letter
of October 26, 2005, and they were taken into account by the Tribunal. In
deciding any procedural request by one party that is opposed by the other, the
Tribunal will have to balance all of the relevant competing considerations
raised by each party and reach a decision. As was observed in the Azurix
Annulment Decision:

A decision by a tribunal whether or not to exercise a
discretionary power that it has under a rule of procedure is
an exercise of that rule of procedure, and not a departure
from that rule of procedure. It is only where the exercise of
that discretion, in all of the circumstances of the case,
amounts to a serious departure from another rule of
procedure of a fundamental nature that there will be

73

192.

193.

194.

195.

grounds for annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention.

There is no reason for thinking that the Tribunal did not, in reaching its
decision. give full consideration to all of the views that had been expressed by
both parties. The Committee does not consider it inconsistent with any
fundamental rule of procedure for a tribunal to give one party an opportunity to
present specific additional evidence on a particular point where the tribunal
finds that there are circumstances that justify this. If Argentina considered that
as a result of the Tribunal’s decision it needed more time to prepare for the
oral hearing or an opportunity to submit further evidence to respond to new
matters in Mr Bianchi’s report, it could have made an appropriate application
to the Tribunal. The decision on any such application would have been of
course a matter within the Tribunal’s discretion. It is not for an annulment
committee to second guess how a tribunal exercises its discretion, unless a
particular exercise of discretion amounts to a serious departure from a

fundamental rule of procedure.

The Committee considers that no tenable basis has been advanced by
Argentina for suggesting that the way that the Tribunal exercised its discretion
in the circumstances was inconsistent with any principle of equality of the

parties or right of defence or fair treatment.

The Committee notes that Argentina has also argued that the Tribunal’s
decision was contrary to paragraph 19.1 of the minutes of the First Session of
the Tribunal, which recorded the parties’ agreement at the First Session that
no further evidence would be submitted after conclusion of the written
pleadings except in “extraordinary circumstances’. Argentina argues that in its
letter of October 20, 2005, the Claimants did not assert the existence of any
such extraordinary circumstances, and that the Tribunal did not in its decision

make any finding of extraordinary circumstances.

Although Argentina includes this argument under the heading of breach of the
principle of equality of the parties and denial of the right of defence, the

Committee has additionally considered the argument as an alleged breach of

"8° Azurix Annulment Decision 9.210.

74

196.

197.

140

141

the principle in ICSID Arbitration Rule 20(2).*° The Committee does not doubt
that the principle of party autonomy is a fundamental rule of procedure, and
paragraph 19.1 of the minutes of the First Session records an agreement of

the parties on a procedural matter.

The Committee considers however that there is no reason for concluding that
the Tribunal did not consider the circumstances to be “extraordinary” within
the meaning of paragraph 19.1 of the minutes of the First Session. It is true
that the failure of the Claimants or the Tribunal to mention paragraph 19.1
may suggest that the Tribunal did not in fact expressly address its mind to its
terms. However, even if this were so, the Committee is satisfied that the
circumstances that were considered by the Tribunal to justify allowing
submission of the new expert reports were such as to fall within the definition
of “extraordinary” as that phrase was used in paragraph 19.1. The Committee
considers that in context, the word “extraordinary” in that paragraph means
“outside the usual course of events” such as to justify a departure from what
would otherwise be the applicable time limit. A claim by one party that new
issues have been raised in evidence in the other party’s rejoinder requiring
further evidence in rebuttal is not the usual course of events. The Committee
therefore does not consider that the Tribunal’s decision was inconsistent with

paragraph 19.1, whether or not the Tribunal expressly considered it.

In any event, even if the Tribunal’s decision were inconsistent with paragraph
19.1, for the reasons given above, the Committee does not consider that there
was any inconsistency with the principle of equality of the parties or right of
defence. Even if there may in that event have been a departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure (the principle of party autonomy), in the
Committee’s view, in all of the circumstances, it was not a serious departure
justifying annulment of the Award. A “serious” departure “must be substantial
and be such as to deprive a party of the benefit or protection which the rule

was intended to provide”.'*' The Committee is not satisfied that any departure

ICSID Arbitration Rule 20(2): “In the conduct of the proceeding the Tribunal shall apply any

agreement between the parties on procedural matters, except as otherwise provided in the
Convention or the Administrative and Financial Regulations.”
See paragraph 71 above.

75

198.

199.

200.

201.

202.

from the principle of party autonomy was serious, or that Argentina has been

deprived of the benefit that that principle was intended to provide.

It follows that this ground of annulment must be rejected.

(d) Closure of the proceedings

(i) Background

In a letter to the Secretary of the Tribunal dated 26 November 2006, the
Claimants made reference to a meeting between representatives of the
parties on 17 May 2006, and noted a disagreement between the parties as to

the discussion that occurred at that meeting.

In a letter dated 18 January 2007, Argentina referred to the disagreement
between the parties as to what had occurred at an informal meeting, stating
that Argentina had “advised the tribunal to use all the technology available to
detect who is lying and who is not’, noted that the President of the Tribunal
“states that it is not necessary to analyse the meaning of a meeting that was
held between the parties, in view of previous considerations’, said that
because of a “new situation” Argentina “want[ed] to air’ what transpired at the
meeting, and maintained that Argentina had a “right to receive a reasonable

reply on this issue”.

By a letter to the parties dated March 22, 2007, the Secretary of the Tribunal
stated:
On behalf of the Arbitral Tribunal, | write to inform you that
the proceeding is declared closed as of today’s date in
accordance with Rule 38(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.
By a letter to the Secretary of the Tribunal dated April 26, 2007, Argentina
expressed its “profound concern as regards to the circumstances in which the
proceedings were closed”. It noted that the proceedings were closed only 14

days after Argentina had challenged the President of the Tribunal in the

76

203.

204

142

Sempra and Camuzzi cases," and only 6 days after Argentina had in those
other cases presented its reasons for the challenge. The letter noted that the
effect of the closure of the proceedings in the present case was that Argentina
could no longer propose the disqualification of an arbitrator under ICSID
Arbitration Rule 9. The letter stated that Argentina objected to the closing of
the proceedings in these circumstances. The letter further stated that in
addition, the Tribunal had “not taken any decision with regard to the serious
accusation made by the Argentine Republic in its note dated January 18,

despite the fact that said note expressly requested a decision in this regard”.

By a letter dated March 22, 2007, the Secretary of the Tribunal stated:

The President of the Tribunal, after having consulted with
the Tribunal’s members, has asked me to inform you of the
following: The Tribunal, after having carefully examined the
Respondent's letter of April 26, 2007 and the Claimant’s
letter of May 4, 2007, wishes to inform the parties, as a
matter of courtesy, that the closing of the proceedings in
this case was decided only in consideration to the advanced
stage of deliberations and the fact that final translations and
editing of the award were well under way.

(ii) | Arguments of the parties
. Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

(a) There was still a request filed by Argentina on January 18, 2007
pending resolution as regards serious actions committed by ENRON
representatives, which were extremely relevant for the present

arbitration.

(b) In spite of the seriousness and importance of the requests and claims
made by Argentina, the Tribunal failed to make a decision in this regard
and closed the proceeding, thus affecting Argentina’s right to defence.
Considering and assessing evidence is a crucial aspect of the fair and

Professor Francisco Orrego-Vicufia, who was President of the Tribunal in the present case, was
also the president of the tribunal in Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic (\CSID
Case No. ARB/02/16) and is the president of the tribunal in Camuzzi International S.A. v.
Argentine Republic (I\CSID Case No. ARB/03/2).

77

205.

143
144

impartial assessment of the procedure. Failing to settle such a serious

claim filed by Argentina warrants the annulment of the Award.

Closure of the proceedings only 14 days after Argentina Republic had
proposed the disqualification of the President of the Enron tribunal in
the Sempra and Camuzzi cases, and only 6 days after Argentina had
explained in writing the grounds for such disqualification proposal, and
even though a decision on Argentina’s request was pending, made it
impossible for the Tribunal to analyze the Claimants’ attitude at the
meeting held at the Argentine Treasury Attorney General's Office, in
which the Claimants’ attorneys stated that, if they received USD 40
million they would abandon this arbitration proceeding, when they
demanded the payment of USD 453 or 639 million, depending on the
calculation method.

Failing to settle such serious requests filed by Argentina before closing
the proceedings was a serious departure from a fundamental rule of

procedure in terms of Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention."

The Claimants argue, inter alia, that:

(a)

The Tribunal’s decision to close the proceedings was adopted 6 years
after the case was filed and 15 months after the hearing on the merits

and the post-hearing briefs were submitted.

Argentina had ample time to file a challenge to one of the arbitrators
but never did so. This case had no relationship with the Sempra or
Camuzzi cases, and if Argentina considered it appropriate to challenge
the President of the Tribunal in this case, it could have done so earlier,
or even after closure of the proceedings based on Rule 38(2) of the
ICSID Arbitration Rules. Argentina’s voluntary decision not to challenge

an arbitrator cannot be used later as a valid ground for annulment. “4

Referring to Schreuer Commentary at 645.
Referring to Azurix Annulment Decision {| 230.

78

206.

207.

208.

145

(c) | There were no “pending requests” at the time that the Tribunal decided
to close the proceedings. Argentina’s letter to the Tribunal dated
January 8, 2007, merely requested the Tribunal to decide the truth of
what was said in a settlement meeting that occurred long after the
merits hearing had concluded, and it is hard to argue that there was

any other pending request in the letter.

(d) Since the parties did not settle the dispute, what occurred at settlement
discussions long after the hearing on the merits was concluded was

irrelevant to the proceeding.

(e) _ It is not a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure for a
tribunal to decline to consider an issue that it considers to be irrelevant,

merely because one of the parties considers it to be important. '*°

(iii) | The Committee’s views

The Committee finds that Argentina has not articulated clearly why the closure
of the proceedings on March 22, 2007, amounted to a serious departure from

a fundamental rule of procedure.

Argentina’s submissions appear to suggest that the closure of the
proceedings deprived Argentina of any further opportunity to challenge any of
the members of the Tribunal. However, Argentina does not clearly state that it
would have challenged any of the members of the Tribunal but for the closure
of the proceedings, or on what basis it would have brought such a challenge.
Nor does Argentina address the question of why, if it had wanted to challenge
any of the members of the Tribunal, it could not have done so earlier, before

the proceedings were closed.

There is at best a very vague implication in Argentina’s submissions that but
for the closure of the proceedings on March 22, 2007, Argentina might have
sought to challenge the President of the Tribunal on the same grounds as it

had sought to challenge him in the Sempra or Camuzzi cases two weeks

Referring to Azurix Annulment Decision {| 244.

79

209.

210.

211.

earlier. However, such a vague implication cannot be sufficient justification for
annulment of an award. In the absence of any clear statement by Argentina
that it would have challenged a member of the Tribunal, and that the closure
of the proceedings prevented it from so doing, there is simply no basis for the
Committee to consider whether closure of the proceedings prevented such a

challenge.

Even if there were such a clear statement by Argentina, it would be necessary
for the Committee to consider whether Argentina could have brought such a
challenge earlier, before the proceedings were closed. Argentina makes no
submissions on this issue. There would also be a question of whether or not,
as the Claimants argue, Argentina could have sought to reopen proceedings
under Rule 38(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules. In the absence of details from
Argentina as to the precise basis and circumstances of any challenge that it
would have wished to make, it is not possible for the Committee to consider

these questions.

On the basis of the material and arguments before it, the Committee therefore
concludes that there can be no suggestion that the closure of proceedings on
22 March 2007, amounted to a serious departure from any fundamental rule
of procedure on the basis that it prevented Argentina from challenging a

member of the Tribunal.

As regards the allegations that had been made by Argentina concerning the
meeting of representatives of the parties, the Committee notes that in order to
be a “serious” departure from a fundamental rule of procedure, the departure
from such a rule must have caused the Tribunal to reach a result substantially
different from what it would have awarded had such a rule been observed."
Argentina does not in its submissions explain how the Tribunal’s decision to
close the proceedings without expressly taking action in response to
Argentina’s letter of 18 January 2007, may have affected the outcome of the
Award. Furthermore, for a ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(e), it is
necessary for Argentina to establish the fundamental rule of procedure from

which it is claimed that the Tribunal departed. There is no fundamental rule of

“8 See paragraph 71 above.

80

212.

213.

(b)

214.

147
148

procedure requiring a tribunal to undertake enquiries into the circumstances of
a meeting between representatives of the parties whenever one party
requests this. For a tribunal to decline to do so cannot in the Committee’s
view in any sense be considered inconsistent with any principles of equality or

right of defence.

The Committee considers this ground of annulment to be manifestly

unfounded.

Applicable law

(a) Introduction

In its Application for Annulment, Argentina contends that to the extent that the
Tribunal was correct to resort to sources of law outside the BIT, Article 42(1)
of the ICSID Convention required the Tribunal to apply the law of Argentina,
which it failed to do, thereby manifestly exceeding its powers, a ground of
annulment under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention.” Argentina also
contends that the Award does not state the reasons on which it is based and
does not provide reasons for its interpretation of the Licence and failed to
analyse Argentina’s arguments, a ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(b)

of the ICSID Convention. *®

Arguments of the parties

Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

Interpretation of the Licence
Generally

(a) The Tribunal said that it had analysed the extent to which Argentina’s

obligations were fulfilled in terms of Argentine law since “the License is

Application for Annulment [J] 32-38.

Application for Annulment {| 70 et seq.

81

149
150
181
182
153
184
185
156

expressly subject to Argentine law in some key aspects”, but
groundlessly and in manifest excess of power concluded that those

obligations were not fulfilled.'4°

PPI adjustments

(b) | The Tribunal expressed no grounds for its conclusions that Argentina
guaranteed that the tariffs would be “adjusted semi-annually in
accordance with the US PPI",'©° and that “such understanding was also
the Government's view at the time and for almost a whole decade”."®'

nor analyzed the arguments put forward by Argentina.

(c) The Tribunal stated that Decree 669/2000 confirmed the existence of
the “right” to PPl-based adjustment since it referred to the adjustment
as a “legitimately acquired right’, but the Claimants could not in 1992

have had an expectation based on a decree issued in 2000.

(d) The Tribunal derived rights from the Information Memorandum'®2

153

notwithstanding it was not prepared by the Argentine State'’- and

contained an express disclaimer that the Government of Argentina

made no representation as to the accuracy, reliability or the

completeness of the information it contained:*

(e) The Tribunal made no analysis whatsoever of Argentina’s arguments

155

regarding the PPI matter,’°’ and said that it “is persuaded” by the

Claimants’ approach without explaining why.

(f) The Tribunal took in isolation one Article of the Licence (which referred
to the PPI) and did not pay any attention to other provisions that

provided context for it.

Referring to Award | 231.

Referring to Award If] 101-102, 264.
Referring to Award | 102.

Referring to Award J] 103.

Referring to Award | 103.

Referring to Award | 103.

Referring to Award {If] 97-98.
Referring to Award | 102.

82

187
158
159
160
161

(i)

0)

The Tribunal took into account the Bianchi Report, which was

presented in violation of the rules of procedure. '°”

The Tribunal had no power to grant damages for the suspension of the
PPI in 2000 and 2001 due to the Suspension Agreements, before the

Emergency Law was enacted, '®*

as they were voluntary agreements;
this finding contradicted a separate finding of the Tribunal that the
question of the Trust Fund and its operation, to which TGS had agreed,
“cannot be a matter of complaint before it’.'°°

The Tribunal incorrectly found that the licensees only agreed to the
suspension of the PPl-adjustment due to the fact that the amounts that
would not be collected as a result of the suspension would be

recovered later."°°
Tariff calculation in US dollars

The Tribunal did not give reasons for rejecting Argentina’s argument
that Article 18(2) of the Licence, which prohibited the Grantor to change
the licence except with express agreement of the Licensee, was a
prohibition applying specifically to the Executive branch as the grantor
of the Licence, and which did not apply to Legislative branch which
adopted the Emergency Law, or the Judicial branch, which issued the
injunction of 17 August 2000."°

The Tribunal failed to consider certain arguments of Argentina, gave no
reasons for rejecting certain arguments of Argentina, “counter-argued”
against alleged arguments of Argentina which Argentina in fact never
raised, discarded terms that were expressly agreed upon in the

Licence, and gave no reasons for certain factual conclusions, thereby

This argument is considered by the Committee in paragraphs 180-198 above.
Referring to Award [If] 445-448.

Referring to Award | 190.

Referring to Award {| 447.

Referring to Award | 154.

83

162
163

()

acting in an arbitrary fashion, failing to settle issues raised by the

parties, and giving merely frivolous reasons."

The Tribunal stated that “the Gas Decree and the Basic Rules of the
License unequivocally refer to the calculation of tariffs in US dollars”,
when the Gas Law makes no mention of tariffs calculations in US

dollars.

The English version of the Award does not mention the Gas Law, such

that the Spanish and English versions contradict each other.

The Tribunal did not provide reasons for rejecting the expert opinion of
Professor Comadira, and the Tribunal did not even mention his report
in Chapter IV of the Award.

The issue of TGS’s and CIESA’s financing policy

The Tribunal did not decide on this allegation of Argentina and
discarded Argentina’s arguments without analysing them, and violated
the principle of equality between the parties because it did consider the

Claimants’ arguments. '®

The Tribunal’s finding that no claim was made by ENARGAS that the
policy followed by TGS might be contrary to the regulatory framework

or the License'™ was false and contradictory.

Rejection of the theory of “imprevisién”

(a)

By applying the concept of force majeure in compliance with Article 23
of the ILC Articles in its analysis of the theory of “imprevisién” under
Argentine law, the Tribunal failed to apply the applicable law, which

was Argentine law.

The Tribunal did not analyse Professor Comadira’s report on

unforeseeability in Argentine law.

Referring to Soufraki Annulment Decision J] 126.
Referring to Award {| 373.

164 Referring to Award | 165.

84

215.

165
166
167

(s) The Tribunal did not apply the relevant domestic law, did not deal with
the point in the Comadira Report as to the distinction between ordinary
and extraordinary risk, and did not analyse the relevant point in the

Roubini Report or the case law of the Argentine Supreme Court.
Liability under Argentine law

(t) The Tribunal failed to apply the applicable law in relation to Argentina’s

liability under domestic law.'©

(u) | Professor Comadira’s evidence as to the legality of the challenged
measures under internal law were discarded for no reasons and

remained unanalysed.

(v) | The acceptance and use of Alberto Bianchi’s report to support this core
part of the Award constituted a serious violation of a rule of
procedure. '©°

(w) The Tribunal’s analysis of the consistency between the challenged
regulations and the internal law is faulty and leads to the non-

application of the applicable law. "6"
The Claimants argue, inter alia, that:
Interpretation of the Licence

Generally

(a) Argentina’s claim is a disguised appeal on the merits of the case, and

Argentina impermissibly seeks to reargue the merits of the issues.
PPI adjustments

(b)  Argentina’s claim seems to be an alleged inadequacy of reasons rather

than their absence, which is not a basis for annulment, the requirement

Referring to Award [If] 218 et seq.

Referring to the arguments dealt with in paragraphs 187-198 above.
Referring to Award [If] 218-232.

85

16
16

170
171
17;

to provide reasons not being a duty to provide reasons that convince

the losing party.

(c) In relying on a binding contractual provision (the Licence) in order to
ascertain whether there was a right to the PPI tariff adjustment, the
Tribunal satisfied the requirement of Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention, and its decision is consistent with other arbitration

awards. ©?

(d) The Tribunal further supported its decision by pointing to the provisions
of the Gas Regulatory Framework, on which the License’s provisions
were based, and provided additional reasons based on the
Government's previous practice, the terms of Decree 669/00, and the

representations made in the Information Memorandum."”°

(e) The Tribunal did not state that Claimants based their investment
decision on the terms of Decree 669/00, but simply pointed out that the
Government's own statements in the decree confirmed the Tribunal’s

reading of the Gas Regulatory Framework.'”"

(f) The Tribunal cited the Information Memorandum as an element that
also confirmed, rather than established, the Tribunal’s conclusion,‘
and whether it was legally binding is irrelevant. The Tribunal
acknowledged that the Information Memorandum was prepared by
private consultants and it contained a disclaimer regarding the
Government's liability, but stated that if an error had been made in the

statements in the Information Memorandum it would not have passed

Referring to Wena Hotels Annulment Decision | 79; CDC Annulment Decision {J 75.

Referring to CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/8,
Award, May 12, 2005 (“CMS Award”), | 144; LG&E Energy Corp. v. Argentine Republic, |CSID
Case No. ARB/02/1, Award, July 25, 2007 (“LG&E Award”), | 119.2; Sempra Energy
International v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/16, Award, September 28, 2007
(‘Sempra Award”), | 110; BG Group plc v. Republic of Argentina, UNCITRAL arbitration, Final
Award, December 24, 2007 (“BG Group Award”), {J 162(c) and 173(c).

Referring to Award If] 62, 102.

Referring to Award | 102.

Referring to Award J] 101.

86

173
174
175
176

77
178
179

(i)

0)

()

unnoticed by the Government, which had a duty to issue a
173

clarification.
The Tribunal correctly found that the Claimants were entitled to
compensation based on the terms of the 2000 and 2001 suspension
agreements as the Tribunal found that they were executed “in January
and June 2000 on the basis that the amounts not collected as a result

of the suspension would be recouped later and with interests”.'”4

Tariff calculation in US dollars

The Tribunal devoted almost 50 paragraphs to analyzing the US dollar

5

tariff issue," and its reasoning provides a coherent basis for its

decision on this issue.

The Regulatory Framework granted a right to calculate the tariff in US
dollars, and the same reasoning was followed by tribunals in other

cases.‘

The Tribunal analyzed and rejected Argentina’s position regarding

Section 18 of the License,'””

178

as did the Tribunal in the Sempra

Award

Any discrepancy between the English and Spanish versions of the
Award should have been made by Argentina the subject of the

procedure under Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention.

The Tribunal has full discretion to assess the probative value of any
evidence produced by the parties,” and the fact that the Award
contains reasons different from those argued by Argentina’s expert

demonstrates the Tribunal’s implicit rejection of the latter’s position.

Referring to Award J] 103.

Referring to Award {| 447.

Referring to Award {[f] 106-155.

Referring to CMS Award {| 133; LG&E Award {| 119.1; Sempra Award {| 141; BG Group Award I]
166, 171, 173(a).

Referring to Award [If] 128, 143-144, 154, 224.

Referring to Sempra Award {| 173.

Referring to ICSID Arbitration Rule 34(1).

87

180
181
182
183
184
185
184

187

(m) The Tribunal’s statement that in the context of a long period of
economic turmoil, investors would not have been attracted to
participate in the privatization process unless specific guarantees were
provided in respect of the stability of their agreement,’ is fully
supported by the evidence in the record, and other tribunals on the
same fact also reached the conclusion that US dollar tariffs were one of

the main features of the Regulatory Framework.'®"

Ss

The Tribunal duly dealt with Argentina’s argument related to an alleged

incompleteness of the Gas Regulatory framework. ©?

(0) | The Tribunal provided reasons for its interpretation of the Privatisation
Committee minutes'® that was identical to the conclusion reached in
the Sempra Award,'* and even if its interpretation were inaccurate,

that would not provide grounds for annulment.

=

The Tribunal did analyse Argentina’s argument regarding “country

risk”, "> and its findings are consistent with at least two other awards. ®

The issue of TGS’s and CIESA’s financing policy

s

The Tribunal dealt with the financing policy issue in two different
sections of the Award and expressly rejected Argentina’s argument, '®”

and in doing so, gave its reasons.
Rejection of the theory of “imprevisién”

(r) The Tribunal applied the BIT (which is also part of Argentina’s domestic
law) as lex specialis, complemented by customary international law

where necessary, and these sources prevail over the law of the host

Referring to Award If] 213-214.

Referring to Sempra Award | 141.

Referring to Award [If] 128-29, 136-137, 150.

Referring to Award If] 139-140.

Referring to Sempra Award Jf] 153-154.

Referring to Award If] 148-150.

Referring to LG&E Energy Corp. v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/02/1, Decision on
Liability, October 3, 2006 (“LG&E Decision on Liability’), | 133; Sempra Award If] 164-65.
Referring to CMS Award {J 133-134, 137; Sempra Award | 142.

88

188

189
190
191
192
193

State which plays a limited role in adjudicating the merits of a treaty
189

dispute.'®* Article 23 of the ILC Articles was a valid source of law.
(s) After identifying the requirements for application of the theory, the
Tribunal simply found that those conditions were not met in the present

case.'%°
Liability under Argentine law

(t) The Award includes an in-depth analysis of Claimants’ rights under
Argentine law and the subsequent impact of Argentina’s measures on
those rights, '®" followed by a determination of the applicable standards
for emergency situations established by the Argentine Supreme
Court,'® followed by a finding that those requirements had not been

met.1%2

(u) The Tribunal did not apply the Civil Code, but supported its findings
with the Gas Law, the Regulatory Framework and the License, which

are part of Argentine administrative and regulatory law.'®*

(v) Even if the Tribunal erred by applying the wrong law, which it did not,
this would not constitute a manifest excess of power, since the

outcome of the case would not have been different.

(w) | Some Argentine case law which the Tribunal is said by Argentina not to
have considered was not submitted as evidence to the Tribunal during

the merits phase and therefore have no place in annulment

Referring to Vivendi Annulment Decision {| 102; International Law Commission, Draft articles on
Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, Yearbook of the International Law
Commission, 2001, vol. || (Part Two); annex to General Assembly resolution 56/83 of 12
December 2001, and corrected by document A/56/49(Vol. 1)/Corr.4 (“ILC Articles”), Article 3.
Referring to ICSID Convention, Article 42(1).

Referring to Award If] 216-217, 311-312.

Referring to Award {[f] 95-155, 206, 209.

Referring to Award {| 218.

Referring to Award If] 218-226.

Referring to Award | 143.

89

216.

217.

218.

195

proceedings,"®° and these cases were distinguishable and did not alter

the basic principles in the case law cited by the Tribunal.

(x) It is sufficient that the Tribunal examined the parties’ submissions on
Argentine law and stated reasons since a more detailed review of the
Tribunal’s application of Argentine law is beyond the scope of this

annulment proceeding. '**

The Committee’s views
General matters

The Tribunal found that at the time that the Claimants’ investment was made,
the relevant provisions of the regulatory regime in Argentina included

‘87 and of calculation of tariffs

guarantees of semi-annual US PPI adjustments
in US dollars."®® The Tribunal also found that there was no justification under
Argentine law for the subsequent measures taken by Argentina that had the
effect of dismantling these guarantees.'® Argentina contends in effect that in
reaching this conclusion, the Tribunal in fact failed to apply Argentine law and

failed to give reasons for its decision.

The scope of the various grounds of annulment under Article 52 of the ICSID

Convention has been dealt with above.”°°

The ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(b), that the tribunal manifestly
exceeded its powers, extends to the situation where a tribunal disregards the
applicable law, or bases the award on a law other than the applicable law
under Article 42 of the ICSID Convention.2™ As the ad hoc committee said in
the Azurix Annulment Decision:

Grounds for annulment under Article 52(1)(b) will exist

where the tribunal fails to apply any law at all in determining

Referring to MTD Annulment Decision {| 31.
Referring to Amco // Annulment Decision {J 7.21.
Award §[ 95-105.

Award {| 106-150.

Award §] 210, 230, 231, 233.

See paragraphs 60-77 above.

See, for instance, Azurix Annulment Decision {| 136.

90

219.

220.

the dispute, for instance, where the tribunal decides the

dispute ex aequo et bono despite not being authorised to

do so under Article 42(3). Such grounds for annulment will

similarly exist where the tribunal purports to apply a law

other than the law applicable under Article 42, or where

while purporting to apply the law applicable under Article

42, the tribunal manifestly applies a different body of law.?°
The Committee further agrees with earlier case law to the effect that “while
non-application by the tribunal of the law applicable under Article 42 may be a
ground for annulment, the incorrect application by the tribunal of the
applicable law is not’.7° Only failure to apply the applicable law, as
distinguished from mere misconstruction of that law, would constitute a
manifest excess of power on the part of the Tribunal and a ground for nullity
under Article 51(1)(b) of the Convention.2™

The Committee additionally agrees that its task of distinguishing between, on
the one hand, “failure to apply the applicable law as a ground for annulment’,
and, on the other hand, “misinterpretation of the applicable law as a ground
for appeal’, is one that must be approached with caution.2°° The Committee
cannot accept any suggestion that where a tribunal errs in articulating or
applying the applicable law, it thereby ultimately fails to apply the applicable
law and thus manifestly exceeds its powers. Such an argument, if accepted,
and even if confined to cases where an error of law by the tribunal is manifest,
would obliterate the distinction which an annulment committee is required
carefully to maintain between non-application of the applicable law and
alleged error in applying the applicable law. An error of law, like an error of
fact, is not of itself a ground of annulment.2% This being the case, in
circumstances where it has not been established that the tribunal failed to
apply the applicable law, there will normally be no occasion for an ad hoc

committee to enquire whether or not the tribunal may have erred in its

Azurix Annulment Decision {| 136 (footnotes omitted).

Azurix Annulment Decision {| 137.

Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia, |CSID Case No. ARB/81/1, Decision
on Annulment, May 16, 1986 (“Amco / Annulment Decision”), {| 23, cited with approval in
Soufraki Annulment Decision {[ 85, quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision | 137.

Amco | Annulment Decision {| 23, cited with approval in Soufraki Annulment Decision {| 85,
quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision {| 137.

MINE Annulment Decision {[] 5.08-5.09, quoted in Azurix Annulment Decision | 53 and MC/
Annulment Decision | 84; CMS Annulment Decision {| 121.

91

221.

222.

207

articulation or application of the applicable law, or whether the tribunal may

have made an error of fact.

The scope of the ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention (failure to state reasons) has been considered above.” The
Committee reiterates that a tribunal is not required to comment on all
arguments of the parties in relation to each of the questions that it decides;
that this ground of annulment only applies in a clear case when there has
been a failure by the tribunal to state any reasons for its decision on a
particular question, and not in a case where there has merely been a failure
by the tribunal to state correct or convincing reasons; and that “the
requirement to state reasons is satisfied as long as the award enables one to
follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to Point B. and eventually to
its conclusion, even if it made an error of fact or of law”.

Article 48(3) of the ICSID Convention states that “The award shall deal with
every question submitted to the Tribunal, and shall state the reasons upon
which it is based”. Article 52(1)(e) provides for a ground of annulment in cases
where the award “has failed to state the reasons on which it is based”. As has
been noted, pursuant to these provisions, a tribunal has a duty to deal with
each of the questions (“pretensiones”) submitted to it, but is not required to
comment on all arguments of the parties in relation to each of those
questions. Similarly, the Committee considers that the tribunal is required only
to give reasons for its decision in respect of each of the questions. This
requires the tribunal to state its pertinent findings of fact, its pertinent findings
as to the applicable legal principles, and its conclusions in respect of the
application of the law to the facts. If the tribunal has done this, the award will
not be annulled on the basis that the tribunal could have given more detailed
reasons and analysis for its findings of fact or law, or that the tribunal did not
expressly state its evaluation in respect to each individual item of evidence or
each individual legal authority or legal provision relied upon by the parties, or

did not expressly state a view on every single legal and factual issue raised by

See paragraphs 72-77 above.

92

223.

224.

the parties in the course of the proceedings. The tribunal is required to state

reasons for its decision, but not necessarily reasons for its reasons.

Article 42(1) of the ICSID Convention provides that:

The Tribunal shall decide a dispute in accordance with such
rules of law as may be agreed by the parties. In the
absence of such agreement, the Tribunal shall apply the
law of the Contracting State party to the dispute (including
its rules on the conflict of laws) and such rules of
international law as may be applicable.

The claim brought by the Claimants in this case was for alleged violations of
the BIT. In the Award, the Tribunal found that there were breaches of the BIT
for which Argentina was responsible, and determined an amount of
compensation that Argentina was to pay the Claimants in respect of those
breaches of the BIT. The Committee considers that in relation to such a claim,
the applicable law is that identified in the Azurix Annulment Decision as
follows:

Each of [the] claims in this case was for an alleged breach
of the BIT. The BIT is an international treaty between
Argentina and the United States. By definition, a treaty is
governed by international law, and not by municipal law. It
is a fundamental principle that ‘[a] party may not invoke the
provisions of its internal law as justification for its failure to
perform a treaty”. In any claim for breach of an investment
treaty, the question whether or not there has been a breach
of the treaty must therefore be determined, not through the
application of the municipal law of any State, but through
the application of the terms of the treaty to the facts of the
case, in accordance with general principles of international
law, including principles of the international law of treaties.
Bearing in mind that an investment treaty, whether bilateral
or multilateral, is itself a source of international law as
between the States parties to that treaty, the applicable law
in any claim for a breach of that treaty can thus be said to
be the treaty itself specifically, and international law
generally.

Furthermore, in arbitration proceedings under the ICSID
Convention, the tribunal also must comply with the terms of
the ICSID Convention, which is also an international treaty
to be interpreted and applied in accordance with general
principles of international law, including principles of the
international law of treaties. ... [I]n a claim for breach of an
investment treaty, the application by the tribunal of the

93

terms of the investment treaty and of international law as
the applicable law is foreseen by the words “and such rules
of international law as may be applicable” in Article 42(1) of
the ICSID Convention.”°°

225. The Committee reaches the same conclusion as in the Azurix case that in the
present case, the law applicable under Article 42 of the ICSID Convention to

the Claimants’ claims of breaches of the BIT was “the ICSID Convention, ...

the BIT and ... applicable international law" 29

226. As the ad hoc committee then went on to say in the Azurix Annulment
Decision:

In some cases, it may be an express term of the investment
treaty that the host State is required to comply with
specified provisions of its own municipal law. In such cases,
a breach by the host State of municipal law may thus
amount to a breach of the treaty. Although municipal law
does not as such form part of the law applicable to a claim
for breach of a treaty, in such cases it may be necessary to
determine whether there has been a breach of municipal
law as a step in determining whether there has been a
breach of the treaty. ...

However, even in this situation, municipal law would not
thereby become part of the applicable law under Article 42
of the ICSID Convention for purposes of determining
whether there was a breach of Article II.2(c) of the BIT.
Rather, any breach of municipal law that might be
established would be a fact or element to which the terms of
the BIT and international law would be applied in order to
determine whether there was a breach of Article II.2(c).?"°

227. In the present case, the Tribunal considered the law applicable to the dispute
in paragraphs 203 to 209 of the Award. The Tribunal said, inter alia, that:

The Respondent is right in arguing that domestic law is not
confined to the determination of factual questions. It has
indeed a broader role, as it is evident in this very case from
the pleadings and arguments of the parties that have relied
heavily on the Gas Law and generally the regulatory
framework of the gas industry, just as they have relied on
many other rules of the Argentine legal system, including
the Constitution, the Civil Code, specialized legislation and

8 Azurix Annulment Decision M1 146-147 (footnotes omitted).

209 Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12, Award 14 July 2006 {| 67
(Azurix Award); approved in Azurix Annulment Decision {| 148.

210 Azurix Annulment Decision Jf] 149, 151.

94

228.

229.

230.

an

the decisions of courts. The License itself is governed by
the legal order of the Argentine Republic and it must be
interpreted in its light. ...

While on occasions writers and decisions have tended to
consider the application of domestic law or international law
as a kind of dichotomy, this is far from being the case. In
fact, both have a complementary role to perform and this
has begun to be recognized. ...

The Tribunal must also note that in examining the Argentine
law as pertinent to various issues disputed by the parties, it
finds that there is generally no inconsistency with
international law as far as the basic principles governing the
matter are concerned. The Tribunal will accordingly apply
both Argentine law and international law to the extent
pertinent and relevant to the decision of the various claims
submitted.2""

The Committee considers that it is unclear from these paragraphs precisely
what role the Tribunal considered that it was required to accord to
international law and to domestic law respectively in resolving the dispute
before it. It therefore becomes necessary to consider the Tribunal’s reasoning
in the parts of the Award where the Tribunal ultimately gives its decision on

the claimed violations of the BIT.

The Tribunal found that the conduct for which Argentina was responsible
constituted violations of two provisions of the BIT, the “fair and equitable

treatment” clause, and the “umbrella” clause.

In relation to the fair and equitable treatment clause, the key paragraphs of
the Award stating the reasons for finding a breach of this provision were
paragraphs 264 to 267, in which the Tribunal said:

264. The measures in question in this case have beyond
any doubt substantially changed the legal and business
framework under which the investment was decided and
implemented. Argentina in the early 1990s constructed a
regulatory framework for the gas sector containing specific
guarantees to attract foreign capital to an economy
historically unstable and volatile. As part of this regulatory
framework, Argentina guaranteed that tariffs would be
calculated in US dollars, converted into pesos for billing
purposes, adjusted semi-annually in accordance with the

Award ff] 206-207, 209.

95

US PPI and sufficient to cover costs and a reasonable rate
of return. It further guaranteed that tariffs would not be
subject to freezing or price controls without compensation.
Foreign investors were specifically targeted to invest in the
privatization of public utilities in the gas sector. Substantial
foreign investment was undertaken on the strength of such
guarantees, including the investment made by Enron in
TGS.

265. The Tribunal observes that it was in reliance upon the
conditions established by the Respondent in the regulatory
framework for the gas sector that Enron embarked on its
investment in TGS. Given the scope of Argentina’s
privatization process, its international marketing, and the
statutory enshrinement of the tariff regime, Enron had
reasonable grounds to rely on such conditions.

266. A decade later, however, the guarantees of the tariff
regime that had seduced so many foreign investors, were
dismantled. Where there was certainty and stability for
investors, doubt and ambiguity are the order of the day. The
long-term business outlook enabled by the tariff regime, has
been transformed into a day-to-day discussion about what
comes next. Tariffs have been frozen for almost five years.
The recomposition of the tariff regime is subject to a
protracted renegotiation process imposed on the public
utilities that has failed to provide a final and definitive
framework for the operation of business in the energy
sector.

267. The Respondent might be right in distinguishing this
case from the factual scenarios that recent decisions have
faced, but this does not mean that Argentina’s acts are
consistent with the meaning of the protection under the
Treaty. It is clear that the ‘stable legal framework’ that
induced the investment is no longer in place and that a
definitive framework has not been made available for
almost five years.

268. Even assuming that the Respondent was guided by
the best of intentions, which the Tribunal has no reason to
doubt, there is here an objective breach of the fair and
equitable treatment due under the Treaty. The Tribunal thus
holds that the standard established in Article II(2)(a) of the
Treaty has not been observed and that to the extent that it
results in a detriment to the Claimants’ rights it will give rise
to compensation.

231. These paragraphs contain no reference to any liability on the part of Argentina

under Argentine law. There is no suggestion that the finding of liability for

96

232.

breach of the fair and equitable treatment clause of the BIT was premised on
any finding that Argentina was in breach of, or liable to the Claimants or TGS
or any other person, under Argentine domestic law. Rather, the Committee
considers it clear from these paragraphs that the basis of the Tribunal’s

decision was essentially that:

(a) as a matter of fact, Argentina constructed a regulatory framework for
the gas sector containing specific guarantees to attract foreign capital

to an economy historically unstable and volatile (paragraph 264);

(b) as a matter of fact, Enron undertook investment in Argentina (by
investing in TGS) on the strength of those guarantees, and had

reasonable grounds to rely on those guarantees (paragraphs 264-265);

(c) as a matter of fact, a decade later those guarantees were dismantled
(paragraphs 266) and the “stable legal framework” that induced the

investment was no longer in place (paragraph 267);

(d) as a matter of /aw, this amounted to a violation by Argentina to a

breach of the fair and equitable treatment clause (paragraphs 267-268).

From a reading of these paragraphs, it is in the Committee’s view apparent
that on the reasoning adopted by the Tribunal, Argentine domestic law was
not relevant to the Tribunal’s decision in respect of the claimed violation of the
fair and equitable treatment clause, except in relation to the finding referred to
at (a) in the previous paragraph. That is to say, in determining whether the
Claimants were attracted to invest in Argentina by particular guarantees
provided for in the regulatory framework for the gas sector, it was necessary
to determine whether the alleged guarantees (including the semi-annual US
PPI adjustments and the calculation of tariffs in US dollars) were indeed part
of the regulatory framework at the time that the investment was made. If the
regulatory regime did include these particular guarantees, it would in the
Committee’s view follow from the Tribunal’s reasoning that any subsequent
measures taken by Argentina to dismantle those guarantees in circumstances
where the Claimants had reasonably relied on them when making their

investment (other than measures taken in accordance with the mechanisms

97

233.

212

provided for in the regulatory framework and Licence itself") would amount
to a breach of the fair and equitable treatment clause, even if those measures
were entirely lawful under Argentine domestic law, and even if those
measures gave rise to no liability on the part of Argentina under Argentine
domestic law. In those circumstances, the measures, although lawful under
Argentine law, would in international law be contrary to the protections
afforded by the BIT.

In relation to the umbrella clause, the key paragraphs of the Award stating the
reasons for finding a breach of this provision were paragraphs 274 to 276, in
which the Tribunal said:

274. Under its ordinary meaning the phrase ‘any obligation’
refers to obligations regardless of their nature. Tribunals
interpreting this expression have found it to cover both
contractual obligations such as payment as well as
obligations assumed through law or regulation. ‘Obligations’
covered by the ‘umbrella clause’ are nevertheless limited by
their object: ‘with regard to investments’.

275. Through the Gas Law and its implementing legislation,
the Respondent assumed ‘obligations with regard to
investments’: tariffs calculated in US dollars converted to
pesos for billing purposes, linked to the US PPI and
sufficient to provide a reasonable rate of return were
intended to establish a tariff regime that assured the influx
of capital into the newly privatized companies such as TGS
and ensured the value of such investment. The dismantling
of these guarantees would suffice to establish a violation of
the obligations entered into by the Respondent with regard
to the Claimants’ investment.

276. In addition, the prohibition of price controls without
indemnification and the prohibition of License amendments
without consent, although contained in the License were
also approved by decree and formed part of the
implementing legislation that established the tariff regime.
The obliteration of these commitments likewise entails a
violation of obligations entered into by the Respondent with
regard to the Claimants’ investment.

277. The Tribunal concludes accordingly that the breach of
the obligations noted undertaken both under contract and
law and regulation in respect of the investment have

See for instance Award ff] 104, 143-144, 228-230.

98

234.

235.

resulted in the breach of the protection provided under the
umbrella clause of Article II(2)(c). [Footnotes omitted.]

Again, these paragraphs contain no suggestion that the finding of liability for
breach of the umbrella clause was premised on any finding of liability under
Argentine law. Again, the Committee considers it clear enough that the basis

of the Tribunal’s decision that:

(a) as a matter of fact, through the Gas Law and its implementing
legislation, Argentina assumed obligations with regard to the Claimants’
investment (paragraph 275);

(b) as a matter of fact, Argentina subsequently dismantled those
guarantees, and this suffices to establish a violation of the umbrella
clause (paragraphs 275-276); and

(d) as a matter of /aw, this amounted to a violation by Argentina to a
breach of the umbrella clause (paragraphs 276-277).

From a reading of these paragraphs, it is once more in the Committee’s view
apparent that on the Tribunal’s reasoning, Argentine domestic law was
relevant to the Tribunal’s decision only in relation to the finding referred to at
(a) in the previous paragraph. That is to say, in determining whether Argentina
assumed particular obligations with regard to the Claimants’ investment
through the Gas Law and its implementing legislation, it was necessary to
determine whether the alleged obligations (including the semi-annual US PPI
adjustments and the calculation of tariffs in US dollars) were indeed once part
of the Gas Law and its implementing legislation. If so, it would in the
Committee’s view follow from the Tribunal’s reasoning that any subsequent
measures taken by Argentina to dismantle those obligations (other than
measures taken in accordance with the mechanisms provided for in the
regulatory framework and Licence itself*"?) would amount to a breach of the
umbrella clause, even if those measures were entirely lawful under Argentine
domestic law, and even if those measures gave rise to no liability on the part

of Argentina under Argentine domestic law. Again, in those circumstances,

213 See for instance Award If] 104, 143-144, 228-230.

99

236.

237.

238.

24
215

the measures, although lawful under Argentine law, would in international law

be contrary to the protections afforded by the BIT.

The Committee further notes that, as discussed above, in determining the
issue referred to in paragraphs 231(a) and 234(a) above, it was on the
Tribunal’s reasoning not necessary for the Tribunal to find that the Gas Law
and its implementing legislation conferred rights or guarantees specifically on
the Claimants, but only to find that guarantees had been given and obligations

undertaken with respect to the Claimants’ investment?"

It is beyond the mandate of the Committee to determine whether or not the
Tribunal’s reasoning was correct. The role of the Committee is confined to the
grounds of annulment in Article 52 of the ICSID Convention, and as noted
above, even if the Tribunal erred in law, this would not be a ground of
annulment. The Committee does however note that it is well established that
conduct for which a State is responsible may constitute a breach of
international law, including a breach of an investment protection treaty, even
where the conduct gives rise to no liability on the part of the State under

domestic law.?"°

While the Committee considers the reading of the above paragraphs of the
Award to be sufficiently clear, it notes that the Tribunal made certain
statements that could be read as inconsistent with it. At paragraph 210 of the
Award, the Tribunal said that “/t is now necessary to examine the Argentine
law governing contracts in order to determine whether liability exists under the
domestic legal order’. At paragraph 230 it said that the unilateral nature of the
measures taken by Argentina “resulted in the inconsistency of the measures
taken with the domestic legal order’. At paragraph 231 it further said that:

The inescapable conclusion for the Tribunal to reach is that
in considering the claims purely from the point of view of the
Argentine legislation as one of the laws applicable to the
dispute, the obligations which the Argentine Republic had
and the commitments it undertook under the License were
not observed. This is particularly significant in view that the
License is expressly subject to Argentine law in some key

* See paragraphs 112-117 above.

See for instance Azurix Annulment Decision ff] 143-147.

100

239.

240.

241.

216
217
218
219

respects, without prejudice to the effect that these legal
arrangements have under the Treaty and international law.
Liability is thus the consequence of such breach and there
is_no legal excuse under the Argentine legislation which
could justify the non-compliance, as the very conditions set

out by this legislation and the decisions of courts have not

been met.2"°
At paragraph 233, the Tribunal added that it “must now examine the question
of whether the breach of the License and its regulatory regime, in addition to
its assessment under Argentine legislation, amounts to a breach of the Treaty
guarantees’ ?"”
At first blush, these passages could be read as suggesting that the Tribunal,
in contradiction to the discussion above, considered that Argentina would only
be liable for a breach of the BIT if Argentina was liable under Argentine law in
respect of the measures taken. However, the Committee considers it to be

sufficiently clear on a closer reading of the Award that this is not the case.

The section of the Award dealing with liability under Argentine law
(paragraphs 211-212) begins by referring to Argentina’s argument that the
guarantees were as a matter of Argentine law owed to TGS and not the
Claimants, and that there was a risk of double recovery if both the company
and the shareholders could claim in respect of the measures adopted by
Argentina.2"® The Tribunal’s response was to say that “this question has
already been decided in the decision on jurisdiction and it shall not be
discussed again here”.”"° Argentina’s challenge to the Tribunal’s decision on
jurisdiction, including the Tribunal’s response to Argentina’s argument with
respect to double recovery, has been considered by the Committee above.””°
For the reasons there given, the Committee considers it clear that the Tribunal
found that the right of the Claimants to bring an ICSID claim was not limited to
violations of their rights qua shareholders under Argentine law, but extended
to any breach of the protections accorded by the BIT to the Claimants’
“investment” as defined in the BIT. This reference to the decision on
Emphasis added.

Emphasis added.

Award ff 211-212.

Award §[ 211.

See paragraphs 112-127 above.

101

242.

243.

244.

jurisdiction in paragraph 211 of the Award, in the section of the Award dealing
with liability under Argentine law, would thus appear to confirm again that
Argentina’s liability for a breach of the BIT did not in the Tribunal’s view

require a prior finding of liability under Argentine law.

The remainder of the section of the Award dealing with liability under
Argentine law is concerned with the principles of “imprevisién” and “state of
emergency” under Argentine law. The Tribunal found that neither of these
principles applied in the present case, without however stating clearly what
difference it would have made to the BIT claim if Argentina had been entitled
to invoke either of them. The fact that the Tribunal considered Argentina’s
arguments concerning these principles suggests that the Tribunal considered
that if they had been applicable, they might have precluded liability for breach
of the BIT.

In its Memorial on Annulment, Argentina states that in the proceedings before
the Tribunal, it argued as follows:

What Argentina ... stated is that the Licence agreed to by

TGS could not be unilaterally modified by the Executive

branch, but that nonetheless it was expressly subject to

regulation by Congress. This original agreement—this is,

the possibility that the contract and the legal framework

could be modified by a subsequent law—should have been

part of the legitimate expectations of Enron and Ponderosa

when investing in TGS. Therefore, in principle, the Licence

being modified by a law from Congress could never have

frustrated those legitimate expectations or constituted a

violation of fair and equitable treatment.
It may be that the Tribunal accepted that this argument might be valid in
relation to the principles of “imprevisién” and “state of emergency” under
Argentine law: that is to say, that at the time the investment was made, the
guarantees were given and obligations were undertaken subject to principles
of “imprevisién” and “state of emergency”, which were legal principles existing
in Argentine law at the time that the investment was made. However, it is
clear that the Tribunal rejected the argument that the guarantees were given
and obligations were undertaken subject to a possibility of unilateral

amendment at any time by Congress or the judiciary. The Tribunal said that:

102

245.

246.

153. ... The Respondent has argued that as the prohibition
of Clause 18.2 refers to the License not being modified by
the Licensor, and the Licensor is the Executive Branch of
Government, any measures or effects arising from
congressional action, such as the Emergency Law, or from
judicial decisions, such as the US PPI injunction, are not
adopted by the Licensor and hence not envisaged in the
prohibition of unilateral modification.

154. Ingenuous as this argument might be it is no more

than a play of words because the Executive Branch binds

the State in guaranteeing certain rights to foreign investors.

Furthermore, quite evidently any State action,

governmental, legislative or judicial, must respect the rights

acquired under a contract. If contract rights were at the

mercy of other branches of the State the rule of law, under

both domestic and international law, would be seriously in

jeopardy, a view which is not quite likely to be accepted in

an arbitration which, at least in part, is governed by

international law.
The Committee considers it to be clear that the Tribunal did not state here that
the Argentine State would be liable under Argentine law for any unilateral
modification of the Licence through legislation adopted by Congress or
through judicial decisions. Rather, the Tribunal was here stating that
Argentina could not escape liability under international law for a breach of the
BIT by contending, in reliance on Clause 18.2 of the Licence, that Argentina
had for purposes of its BIT obligations only guaranteed and undertaken the
obligation that there would be no unilateral modification to the Licence
conditions by the Executive branch of government (as opposed to the
Legislative or Judicial branches). The Committee considers it necessarily
implicit in what the Tribunal stated that even if as a matter of Argentine law
the Licence only bound the Executive branch of government, for purposes of
Argentina’s BIT obligations, guarantees given and obligations undertaken by
the Executive branch of government applied to future measures taken by any
branch of government. The Committee considers the reasons for rejecting

Argentina’s arguments to be sufficiently clear.

In conclusion, for these reasons, the Committee is of the view that the law
applicable to the Claimant's claims was the ICSID Convention, the BIT and

applicable international law, and that on the Tribunal’s reasoning, Argentine

103

law was relevant in determining whether Argentina had for purposes of the
BIT in fact given the claimed guarantees and undertaken the claimed
obligations in respect of the Claimants’ investment (as defined in the BIT).
The Tribunal also found it relevant to consider whether as a matter of
Argentine law the principles of “imprevision” and “state of emergency” were
applicable in the circumstances of this case. The Committee finds that in
adopting the approach that it did, the Tribunal did not fail to apply the

applicable law.

Interpretation of the Licence
PPI adjustments

247. At paragraph 43 of the Award, the Tribunal found that:

In order to facilitate the process of privatization, a Standard
Gas Transportation License or “Model Licence” was
approved by Decree 2255/92 including the applicable Basic
Rules; all such rules were embodied in the License actually
signed by TGS and the Government of Argentina and
approved by Decree 2458/92. The duration of the License is
of 35 years, leading up to 2027. An “Information
Memorandum” concerning the privatization of Gas del
Estado, the former State-owned transportation and
distribution company, together with a “Pliego” explaining the
bidding rules and the legal and contractual arrangements,
were provided to prospective investors so as to organize
the bidding process.

248. The Tribunal found, at paragraph 101 of the Award, that:

The Tribunal must first note that it is correct that Article 41
of the Gas Law, while providing for adjustment of tariffs in
accordance with a formula based on international market
indicators, also related this formula to the change in value
of goods and services. The formula, however, was not
defined under the Law. This task was left to the Basic Rules
of the License, which provided in this connection that tariffs
were to be adjusted semi-annually in accordance with the
US PPI. This was also the information conveyed to
investors by the Information Memorandum.”

221 Award 7/101.

104

249.

250.

251.

252.

253.

222
223

The Claimants’ argument was that this semi-annual US PPI adjustment was a
right and that it “was an essential feature of the tariff system devised for the
privatization, as it would prevent erosion of the US dollar value of the
tariffs”? Argentina's arguments, as referred to in paragraphs 97-98 of the
Award, were that Article 41 of the Gas Law expressly related the adjustment
to the change in value of goods and services of the industry and was only to
reflect the evolution of changes in costs and not to ensure a given value of
tariffs in US dollars. Argentina argued that the US PPI made sense at the
beginning when the US indexes were lower than those of Argentina, but that
the US PPI lost any meaning when the economy in Argentina went into
recession and deflation. Paragraph 99 of the Award refers to an additional
argument by Argentina that the suspension of the adjustment was first agreed
with the licensees before being ordered by the judicial injunction of August
2000.

The Tribunal ultimately reached the conclusion that “the licensees had a right
to the US PPI adjustment under both the regulatory framework and the

License, confirmed by the context and the practice of the privatization” 2°

The Tribunal’s reasoning that lead to this conclusion is contained in

paragraphs 101 to 104 of the Award.

Paragraph 101 of the Award has been quoted above. In that paragraph, the
Tribunal found that Article 41 of the Gas Law provided that tariffs would be in
accordance with a formula based on certain factors (international market
indicators and change in value of goods and services) but that Article 41 itself
did not define what that formula would be. The Tribunal further found in this
paragraph that the formula was defined in the Basic Rules of the Licence,

which provided for the semi-annual US PPI adjustments.

This paragraph of the Award needs to be read together with paragraph 43 of

the Award, also quoted above, in which the Tribunal finds that the Basic Rules

Award 7] 96.
Award J] 103.

105

254.

255.

256.

“were embodied in the License actually signed by TGS and the Government

of Argentina and approved by Decree 2458/92”.

The reasoning of the Tribunal might have been easier to follow if the relevant
provisions of the Gas Law, the Basic Rules, the Licence, and the relevant
Decrees had been set out in the Award. Nevertheless, the Committee
considers that it is necessarily implicit in the language of the Award that the
Tribunal reasoned as follows. The Basic Rules provided for semi-annual US
PPI adjustments. The Basic Rules were embodied in the Licence signed by
TGS and the provision in the Basic Rules providing for the PP! adjustments
thus became a term of the Licence. This provision of the Basic Rules was
consistent with Article 41 of the Gas Law and served the purpose of defining

the formula referred to in only general terms in Article 41.

In paragraph 102 of the Award, the Tribunal then went on to say that:

The Tribunal is persuaded that such understanding was

also the Government's view at the time and for almost a

whole decade. This explains that Decree 669/00, dealing

specifically with this mechanism, referred to the adjustment

under it as a “legitimately acquired right”, thus involving an

unequivocal recognition of the existence of such a right.
The first sentence of this paragraph must be read together with paragraph 62
of the Award, in which the Tribunal states that “Throughout the 1990s the
regulatory system devised for the gas transportation sector operated without
difficulties, including most significantly the periodic modification of tariffs to
reflect changes in the cost of natural gas and the adjustment of tariffs, both up
and down, following the variations in the US PPI’. The Committee considers
that it is sufficiently clear that the Tribunal was here stating, in effect, that the
practice of the parties in the first period of operation of the Licence for almost
a decade was consistent with the conclusion that the Tribunal had reached in
paragraph 101 of the Award, and that from this the Tribunal was also satisfied
that the Government of Argentina shared the understanding that the semi-
annual US PPI adjustments were in fact a term of the Licence. While it is true,
as Argentina argues, that there may have been a different explanation for the
US PPI adjustments in the initial period, the Committee finds that there is

nothing inherently absurd or illogical in the Tribunal taking into account, in

106

257.

258.

259.

determining whether a particular interpretation of the Licence was correct, that
the practice of the parties in the period immediately following the conclusion of

the Licence was consistent with that interpretation.

Similarly, although Decree 669/00 was adopted many years after the Licence
was concluded, the Committee finds nothing inherently absurd or illogical in
the Tribunal taking into account, in determining whether a particular right was
provided for in the Licence, that a decree adopted years after the event
referred to the semi-annual US PPI adjustments as a “legitimately acquired

right”.

The last sentence of paragraph 101 indicates that this interpretation was also
confirmed by the Information Memorandum. In paragraph 103, the Tribunal
addressed Argentina’s argument that the Information Memorandum was
prepared by private consultants and that it contained a disclaimer that the
Government of Argentina was not responsible for its contents. Contrary to
what Argentina argues, the Committee can find no suggestion in the Award
that the Tribunal considered that the Information Memorandum was itself in
any way a source of the right to the PPI adjustments. The Committee
considers it clear that the Tribunal was here merely stating that the fact that
the Information Memorandum was also consistent with the conclusion
reached by the Tribunal in paragraph 101 of the Award, and the fact that the
Government of Argentina never took steps to correct what was stated in for
Information Memorandum, were matters that further supported the conclusion
reached in paragraph 101.

The final sentence of paragraph 103 of the Award, which deals with the
Information Memorandum, states that “/t is thus the conclusion of the Tribunal
that the licensees had a right to the US PPI adjustment under both the
regulatory framework and the License, confirmed by the context and the
practice of the privatization’. The Committee considers it to be clear from
context that this sentence is in fact intended to be a general conclusion to
what was stated in paragraphs 101, 102 and the earlier sentences of
paragraph 103, and that the conclusion expressed in that sentence is not

based solely on the considerations elaborated in paragraph 103.

107

260.

261.

224
225

In paragraph 104 of the Award, the Tribunal then proceeded to note that this
interpretation of the licence was not inconsistent with the ability of the
Government to “change its mind later” in the light of changing economic
conditions, since adjustment mechanisms existed under the regulatory
framework, and added that any different route taken by the Government could
not be to the detriment of investors’ rights such that “any ensuing damage

must be compensated if legally justified”.

Argentina makes a number of specific complaints in respect of the Tribunal’s

reasoning in this part of the Award, such as that:

(a) The Tribunal referred to,?"* but gave no reasons for rejecting,
Argentina’s argument that the purpose of adjusting rates on the basis of
a price index was not to guarantee profits in a foreign currency but to
reflect the evolution of costs of public utility providers in the periods

between periodical tariff recalculations.

(b) The Tribunal referred to, but gave no reasons for rejecting,
Argentina’s argument that there was a specific reason to adopt the
chosen adjustment methods and that it became unreasonable to rely

on those methods in the late 1990s when that reason no longer existed.

(c) The Tribunal, when dealing with the PPl-based adjustment issue, made
no mention of relevant evidence of the expert Professor Nouriel Roubini
and the witness Charles Massano, as if that evidence had not been

presented.

(d) The Tribunal took in isolation one Article of the Licence (which referred
to the PPI) and did not pay any attention to other provisions that
provided context for it, such as the provisions to the effect that the
adjustment methodology should reflect the changes in the value of
goods and services, that the rate should guarantee the lowest cost for
consumers that is compatible with the security of the facilities, and that

the licence should be interpreted in accordance with Argentine law.

Referring to Award {|f] 69, 70 and 97.

Referring to Award {f] 238 et seq, 492-496.

108

262.

263.

264.

227
228

Moreover, the Tribunal did not take into consideration relevant
provisions of Argentina’s Constitution, even though the Tribunal
expressly acknowledged that the Licence was subject to the Argentine

law.

In this respect, the Committee refers to its discussion at paragraph 107
above. The Committee considers that the reasoning of the Award on this
particular question “enables one to follow how the tribunal proceeded from
Point A. to point B. and eventually to its conclusion, even if it made an error of
fact or of law’. To the extent that the Tribunal’s reasoning is inconsistent with
arguments of Argentina, it must be taken to have rejected those arguments.
The Committee finds nothing to indicate that the Tribunal did not consider all
of the evidence and arguments before it. The Tribunal was not required to
give its evaluation of each individual item of evidence or each individual legal

authority or legal provision relied upon by Argentina.

Argentina also argues that the Tribunal had no power to grant damages for
the suspension of the PPI in 2000 and 2001 due to the Suspension

Agreements, before the Emergency Law was enacted,”

as they were
voluntary agreements. Argentina maintains that this finding of the Tribunal
contradicted a separate finding of the Tribunal that the question of the Trust
Fund and its operation, to which TGS had agreed, “cannot be a matter of

complaint before it” ?2”

The Committee considers that the Tribunal gave reasons for this aspect of its
decision. It found that TGS agreed to the suspension of the PPI adjustments
in January and June 2000 on the basis that amounts not collected as a result
of the suspension would be recouped later and with interest,?”° and that with
the abolition of the PPI adjustments by Law 25,561 such recouping was no
longer available”? The Committee finds no inconsistency with the Tribunal’s

finding that the Claimants could not complain about the Trust Fund

Referring to Award [If] 445-448.

Referring to Award | 190.
Award [9] 64-65, 447.
Award 9] 447.

109

265.

266.

267.

268.

established in 2004, “to the extent that TGS has consented to this Trust Fund

and its operation”.

While the Tribunal’s reasoning on the issue of US PPI adjustments is brief,
the Committee is unable to conclude, bearing in mind the scope of the
standard of review under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention referred to
above, that the reasoning in the Award is insufficient to enable one “to follow
how the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to point B. and eventually to its
conclusion, even if it made an error of fact or of law’. Nor, in the light of the
discussion in paragraphs 223-246 above, does the Committee consider that

the Tribunal failed to apply the applicable law in determining this question.

Tariff calculation in US dollars

The Tribunal dealt with this issue in paragraphs 106 to 150 of the Award. At
paragraphs 106 to 126 the Tribunal sets out at some length the arguments of

the parties, and then at paragraphs 127 to 150 set out its own reasoning.

In stating its reasons, the Tribunal begins in paragraph 127 by stating that
“The Tribunal finds the Claimants’ arguments about the existence of a right to
the calculation of tariffs in US dollars persuasive”. This statement must be
read in the light of paragraphs 106 to 109 of the Award, setting out the
relevant arguments of the Claimants. It is apparent from these paragraphs
that the Claimants relied for their position particularly on the wording of Article
41 of the Gas Decree and Article 9.2 of the Basic Rules of the Licence, and
argued that their understanding was confirmed by minutes of a meeting of the
Privatisation Committee held on 2 October 1992, and the wording of Annex F
to the Pliego.

At paragraph 128 of the Award, the Tribunal notes that the Gas Decree and
Basic Rules of the Licence unequivocally referred to the calculation of tariffs in
US dollars and noted that “such feature was also explained in the same terms
by the Information Memorandum”. It considered “that there cannot be any
doubt about the fact that this is the central feature governing the tariff regime”,

110

269.

270.

271.

272.

and went on to say in the following paragraph that this was not surprising
“[g]iven the emphasis that this regulatory framework placed on the stability of

the tariff structure”.

The Committee considers that these paragraphs in turn have to be read in the
light of other paragraphs of the Award as a whole dealing with the context and
circumstances of Argentina’s programme of privatisation (referred to in
paragraphs 41-43 of the Award), including for instance paragraph 136 in
which the Tribunal said that “Precisely because these measures were
preceded by a long period of economic turmoil, investors would not be
attracted to participate in the privatization process unless specific assurances

were provided in respect of the stability of their arrangements’.

The Committee considers that paragraphs 127 to 129 of the Award contain
the Tribunal’s conclusion and essential reasoning on the issue of calculation
of tariffs in US dollars. Although the reasoning in these paragraphs is brief,
and the Tribunal does not even set out the text of the relevant provisions, the
Committee considers it to be at the very least necessarily implicit in these
paragraphs that the Tribunal found that there was a right to calculation of
tariffs in US dollars under the provisions of the Gas Decree and Basic Rules
of the Licence, given that these provisions referred “unequivocally” to the
calculation of tariffs in US dollars and given the circumstances in which those

provisions were adopted.

The Committee finds that the remainder of this section of the Award
(paragraphs 130 to 150) is then devoted to addressing specific arguments of

Argentina.

At paragraph 130 to 133 of the Award, the Tribunal refers to arguments of
Argentina to the effect that the relevant clauses providing for tariff calculation
in US dollars were linked to the Convertibility Law. These paragraphs must be
read together with paragraphs 110 to 114, setting out relevant arguments of
Argentina, in which the Tribunal noted inter alia Argentina’s argument that “the
mechanism envisaged only the possibility of a modification of the relationship

between the peso and the dollar under the Convertibility Law, but not the

111

273.

274.

275.

Situation if the Convertibility Law was altogether abandoned” (Award, para
112). At paragraphs 134 to 137, the Tribunal then proceeds to reject this
argument, essentially on the grounds that “/gjuarantees and stability are
meant precisely to operate when problems arise, not when business
continues as usual’, that “/tjhe tariff regime approved was devised as a
permanent feature of the privatization, not a transitory one” and that “/t]he
regulatory and contractual arrangements were thus not incomplete”. In short,
it is necessarily implicit that the Tribunal considered that the relevant
provisions were intended also to cover the eventuality that the Convertibility
Law was abandoned, because (in addition to the reasons given in paragraphs
127 to 129 of the Award) they would not serve their purpose if they did not
have this effect.

At paragraphs 138 to 144 of the Award, the Tribunal considered certain issues
relating to the minutes of the Privatisation Committee that were in evidence
before it. The Tribunal states that the discussion of these minutes “was on
occasion confusing”, and the first sentence of paragraph 139 of the Award
appears to indicate that the Tribunal considered these minutes to be open to
more than one interpretation. The Tribunal in these paragraphs appears to
reach the conclusion that the minutes are consistent with the conclusion
reached in paragraphs 127 to 129 of the Award, and appears to have
considered this a relevant matter, which it was entitled to do.

At paragraphs 143 to 144 the Tribunal explains why it did not consider its
conclusion to “ignore economic reality” or the possible need for adjustments to
be made as a result of changing economic circumstances. The Tribunal was
of the view that the contract itself contained mechanisms for such adjustment
and that what was not permitted in this case was the unilateral action by the

Government outside of those mechanisms.

In paragraphs 145 to 147 of the Award the Tribunal then addresses the
arguments, referred to in paragraphs 115 to 118, concerning the “historical
experience” with ENTEL, the national communications company that had
earlier been privatised. The Tribunal considered amongst other things that the

privatisation of ENTEL, which has occurred prior to the adoption of the

112

276.

277.

278.

Convertibility Law was “an entirely different situation to the present one’,
given that, following the adoption of the Convertibility Law, “the terms of the

original privatisation of ENTEL were no longer viable”.

In paragraphs 148 to 150 of the Award the Tribunal then addresses the
arguments, referred to in paragraphs 119-212, that tariffs were higher
because they included a premium for the risk that convertibility might be
abandoned at some point in the future. The Tribunal found that the country
risk premium related only to the risk of default by Argentina on its foreign debt,

and not to the risk of future devaluation of the Argentine currency.

Argentina has raised a variety of specific arguments in its challenge to this
part of the Award. Some of these arguments are to the effect that the Tribunal
left unanswered particular arguments of Argentina or ignored particular items
of evidence. However, for the reasons given above, the Tribunal was not
required to address every argument or every item of evidence. Other
arguments of Argentina were to the effect that the Tribunal made findings of
fact not supported by the evidence, or in contradiction to the evidence.
However, for the reasons given above, neither error of fact nor error of law is
in itself a ground of annulment, and it is accordingly not within the mandate of
the Committee to determine whether or not the Tribunal’s findings were

consistent with the evidence.

Argentina has also raised arguments to the effect that the Tribunal was partial
and dogmatic in accepting arguments of the Claimant that had no basis, or in
inventing counter-arguments to Argentina’s position that had not been
advanced by the Claimants. The Committee notes that lack of impartiality may
be a ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(d) of the ICSID Convention, and
leaves open the possibility that such lack of impartiality might be evidenced,
for instance, by the fact that an Award consistently and perversely makes
findings favourable to one party without any basis in the evidence. However,
Argentina has not expressly sought to rely on Article 52(1)(d) as a ground for
annulment of the portions of the Award dealing with either the US PPI
adjustments or the tariff payments in US dollars. Nor has it presented a

developed argument in this respect. Nor in the Committee’s view has it

113

279.

280.

281.

30
231

demonstrated that any findings or reasoning of the Tribunal were in the
circumstances such as to establish the existence of partiality justifying
annulment under Article 52(1)(d).

The Committee is unable to conclude, bearing in mind the scope of the
standard of review under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention referred to
above, that the reasoning in the Award is insufficient to enable one “to follow
how the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to point B. and eventually to its
conclusion, even if it made an error of fact or of law’. Nor, in the light of the
discussion in paragraphs 223-246 above, does the Committee consider that

the Tribunal failed to apply the applicable law in determining this question.

The issue of TGS’s and CIESA’s financing policy

At paragraphs 157-167 of the Award, the Tribunal dealt with what it termed
“The question of leverage policy”. In this section of the Award, the Tribunal
dealt with Argentina’s argument that the leverage policy followed by TGS had
a negative impact on its equity value, and that this was something for which

Argentina should not be held responsible.?%°

After setting out the parties’
arguments at some length (paragraphs 157-163 of the Award) the Tribunal
rejected Argentina’s argument on the basis that there had been no suggestion
by Argentina that the leverage policy followed by TGS was contrary to the
regulatory framework, and that the leverage policy followed by TGS was thus
“essentially a company decision”.2°" In effect, the Tribunal considered the
issue of TGS’s leverage policy to be irrelevant to the determination of the
claim before it. The Committee finds nothing illogical or absurd in this
conclusion, and finds that the Tribunal’s rejection of Argentina’s argument on
this basis was not subject to any annullable error.

At paragraph 166 of the Award, the Tribunal dealt with a specific argument of
Argentina, to the effect that devaluation fell within the sovereign prerogative of

the State. The Tribunal rejected this argument on the basis that the Claimants’

230 See especially Award J] 158.

Award | 165.

114

282.

283.

284.

285.

232

claim was not in respect of devaluation but in respect of the breach of various
aspects of the tariff system and the rights that the investors had in that

respect.

Despite rejecting the argument on this basis, the Tribunal also considered the
merits of Argentina’s argument to the extent of deciding that there was
nothing unreasonable about TGS’s leverage policy. At paragraph 165 of the
Award, the Tribunal gave reasons as to why it was not unreasonable for TGS
to take debt in dollars in international financial markets. At paragraph 373, the
Tribunal said that TGS’s leverage was reasonable by industry standards and
close to that advised by the regulator and that none of the debt holders
expressed any concern regarding the level of leverage before the measures
taken by Argentina were adopted. At paragraphs 374-375, the Tribunal noted
that TGS’s stock was consistently positive before the measures were
adopted, and that it was only after the pesification of tariffs that the company
defaulted on its debt.

The Committee considers that the Tribunal gave sufficient reasons for
rejecting Argentina’s arguments based on the leverage policy. The Committee

finds nothing absurd or illogical or contradictory in the Tribunal’s reasoning.

Rejection of the theory of “imprevisién”

The Tribunal found that “there is no legal excuse under the Argentine
legislation which could justify the non-compliance, as the very conditions set
out by this legislation and the decisions of courts have not been met’.”°* In the
course of its reasoning, the Tribunal considered and rejected the applicability
of two legal excuses under Argentine law that might potentially have justified
non-compliance, namely the principle of “imprevisién” and the “state of

emergency”.

The principle of “imprevision’” is dealt with in paragraphs 214-217 of the

Award. The Tribunal referred in these paragraphs to the expert opinion of

See especially Award J] 231.

115

286.

287.

Professor Comadira that was relied on by Argentina, and it is to be presumed
that the Tribunal gave full consideration to the arguments in that expert
opinion. The Committee considers it evident from paragraphs 215-216 of the
Award that the Tribunal considered that the theory of “imprevisién” applied
only in the case of events that were unforeseeable, and that in the
circumstances of the present case the events were to be regarded as having
been foreseeable. This was because “the major features of the whole
regulatory regime put in place under the privatisation were based on taking
cover against all kinds of risks inspired by the economic history of the country
and the instability of the 1980s”, that “the parties were quite aware of the
dangers ahead” and that “it would make no sense if when the dangers

materialized, as they did, the protection envisaged would not operate”.7°°

The Committee considers that although the principle of “imprevisién” is dealt
with relatively briefly, it is easy to understand the Tribunal’s reasoning, and
there is no basis for concluding that the Tribunal failed to state reasons for its
decision. For the reasons given above, it is beyond the scope of the mandate
of the Committee to consider whether the Tribunal correctly articulated and
applied the theory of “imprevisién” under Argentine law, since error of law is
not a ground of annulment. The Committee considers that in determining this
issue, the Tribunal determined (correctly or incorrectly) the application of the
principle of “imprevisién” under Argentine law and did not fail to apply the

applicable law.

In paragraph 217 of the Award, the Tribunal noted that under Article 23 of the
ILC Articles, the concept of force majeure does not include circumstances in
which performance of an obligation has become more difficult due to a
political or economic crisis. The Committee does not accept the argument that
the Tribunal thereby applied Article 23 of the ILC Articles rather than the
principle of “imprevisin” under Argentine law. The Committee considers that
the applicability of the principle of “imprevision” was rejected by the Tribunal in
paragraph 216 of the Award, not in paragraph 217 of the Award. The

Committee considers that in paragraph 217, the Tribunal merely drew an

23 See especially Award | 216.

116

288.

289.

additional comparison with Article 23 of the ILC Articles, and suggested that
this would be an additional consideration “at least as the theory of
‘imprevision’ is expressed in the concept of force majeure”. In any event, even
if the Tribunal was of the view that the content of the principle of “imprevisién”
was identical to Article 23 of the ILC Articles, and even if this were not correct,

this would be an error of law not amounting to a ground of annulment.

The second legal excuse under Argentine law considered by the Tribunal was
“state of emergency” which it addressed in paragraphs 218-225 of the Award
(and again in paragraphs 291-293). The Tribunal indicated that in reaching its
conclusion in respect of this issue, it considered the expert opinions of both
Dr Bianchi and Professor Comadira,”™* and it is again to be presumed that the

Tribunal gave full consideration to the arguments in both opinions.

It is clear from paragraphs 219-230 of the Award that the Tribunal considered
that as a matter of Argentine law, the use of extraordinary powers in
emergency situations was subject to three limitations articulated by the
Argentine Supreme Court in the San Luis case.”*° The Tribunal found that the
first of these requirements, temporality, was not met because the Emergency
Law had been extended a number of times and had “in reality been turned

into a permanent feature of the Argentine economy"”*°

notwithstanding that “in
actual fact the crisis is largely over’.”*” The Tribunal found that the second of
these requirements, “no essential mutation of rights’, at the very least
appeared not to be met on the basis that the elimination of dollar clauses and
other emergency provisions were adopted on a definitive rather than a
transitory basis.”°° The Tribunal found that the third of these requirements,
reasonableness, was not met because both parties had recognised “an
inescapable need to attend to tariff adjustments” such that “the prolongation of

emergency measures without re-establishing or rebalancing the benefits of

See especially Award J] 219.

Argentine Supreme Court, Provincia de San Luis c. P. E. N. -Ley 25,561, Dto. 1570/01 y 214/02
s/amparo, judgment of March 5, 2003, cited in Award {| 218.

Award §| 221.

Award | 222.

Award | 223.

117

290.

291.

292.

293.

the Licence cannot be regarded as satisfying the legal requirements of

reasonableness”.”°°

The Tribunal furthermore found, as a matter of Argentine law, that the
emergency measures could not be imposed unilaterally by the Argentine
State, but had either to be agreed between the parties or requested from a
judge. The Tribunal found that this requirement was not satisfied, and noted

that adjustment mechanisms did exist under the Licence.”4°

Again, the Committee considers it easy to understand the Tribunal’s
reasoning, and finds that there is no basis for concluding that the Tribunal
failed to state reasons for its decision. The Committee considers that in
determining this issue, the Tribunal applied (correctly or incorrectly) Argentine
domestic law with respect to emergency measures and therefore did not fail to

apply the applicable law.

Liability under Argentine law

For the reasons given above, the Committee finds that the Tribunal did apply
the applicable law, and that the Tribunal gave sufficient reasons for its
decision on that issue. It is beyond the scope of the mandate of the
Committee to consider whether the Tribunal articulated and applied Argentine

law correctly.

(d) Conclusion

For these reasons, this ground of annulment must be rejected.

288 Award J] 225.
240 Award Ff] 226-230.

118

294.

295.

(b)

296.

The Tribunal’s finding of a breach of the fair and equitable treatment
clause

(a) Background

Article II(2)(a) of the BIT states in part (the “fair and equitable treatment
clause”) that:
Investment shall at all times be accorded fair and equitable
treatment...
Argentina maintains that in finding that Argentina violated fair and equitable
treatment clause, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers, justifying
annulment under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention.2"*

Arguments of the parties
Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

(a) The Tribunal took the wording of the preamble to the BIT, and turned it
into a legal obligation to maintain a stable framework for investment for

the parties as a fundamental element of fair and equitable treatment.242

(b) This interpretation amounts to a manifest excess of powers, since the
preamble to the BIT does not establish such a legal obligation.”“*
Maintaining a stable legal system is substantially different from any
obligation deriving from the BIT or the applicable international law, and
by interpreting the standard of fair and equitable treatment in this way
the Tribunal sought to create obligations for Argentina that did not
derive from the BIT or the applicable international law, and did not
resort to the applicable law for interpreting the fair and equitable

treatment standard.”“*

This ground does not appear to have been stated in the Application for Annulment.

Referring to Award {f] 256, 259-260, 267-268.

Referring to Continental Casualty Company v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/9.
Award, September 5, 2008 (“Continental Casualty Award”), Jf] 258, 261.

Referring to MTD Annulment Decision {| 67.

119

297.

The Tribunal based its decision on a dictum in the Tecmed Award?4®

which was criticised in the MTD Annulment Decision.2*°

The Tribunal’s conclusion is absurd. A State has the right to enact,
modify or cancel a law and an investor knows that laws will evolve over

time.”4”

In the proceedings before the Tribunal, Argentina objected to the
Claimants’ arguments as to the scope of the fair and equitable
treatment standard, and consistently took the position that fair and

equitable treatment means the minimum international standard.

The Claimants argue, inter alia, that:

(a)

The Tribunal never determined that the preamble to the BIT establishes
a legal obligation, but rightly concluded that stability of the legal
framework is an element of the fair and equitable treatment standard.
The Tribunal interpreted Article II(2)(a) of the BIT “in good faith in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the
treaty in their context and in the light of the object and purpose” as
required by the Vienna Convention.”“° During this exercise, the Tribunal
“gave weight” to the preamble of the BIT,”“° but did not conclude that

the preamble itself established a legal obligation.

The Tribunal relied on the BIT’s language for the standard, looked to
relevant case law for persuasive authority, and then evaluated

Argentina's actions. 7°

It did not base its decision only on the Tecmed
Award, which was cited in support of the standard provided by the BIT,
not in substitution of it. The Tribunal discussed other tribunals’

interpretation of the fair and equitable treatment standard.?°'

Referring to Award {f] 262, 267.
Referring to MTD Annulment Decision {| 67.
Referring to Parkerings-Compagniet AS v. Republic of Lithuania, |CSID Case No. ARB/05/8,
Award of 11 September 2007, {J 332, 233, 238.
Referring to Award {| 259.
Referring to Award {| 259.
Referring to Award If] 264-265.
Referring to Award {f] 260, 262.

120

252

253

Throughout the merits phase, Argentina did not contest the Claimants’
arguments that the fair and equitable treatment standard encompassed
these requirements, and annulment is not the proper place for parties
to reargue the merits of the case, under the guise of arguing that the

Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.

Numerous tribunals and legal scholars have confirmed that the
protection of legitimate expectations is a key facet of the fair and

equitable treatment standard?

and Argentina cannot legitimately claim
that the Tribunal somehow manifestly exceeded its power by drawing

the same conclusion drawn by other tribunals.

The Tribunal examined Argentina’s actions and determined that they
violated the obligation to protect an investor's legitimate expectations
that Argentina undertook when it signed the BIT and enacted the

relevant legal framework applicable to Claimants’ investment.

Argentina’s arguments are merely disguised assaults on the Tribunal’s
conclusions.

The Continental Casualty Award specifically acknowledged that there
were significant factual and contextual differences in its case that
caused it to differ from other awards. The CMS case could be viewed

as a companion case to Claimants’ case?

The Parkerings-Compagniet Award contradicts Argentina’s position by
recognizing that an investor's legitimate expectations must be
protected. Unlike in that case, the present case has nothing to do with a
lack of due diligence or the unreasonableness of the investor's

expectations.

Referring inter alia to CME Partial Award {| 611; Eureko B.V. v. Republic of Poland, ad hoc
arbitration, Partial Award, August 19, 2005 (“Eureko Partial Award”), I] 232, 234; Compania de
Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic, \CSID Case No.
ARB/97/3. Award, August 20, 2007, {| 7.4.42; Saluka Investments BV (The Netherlands) v.
Czech Republic, UNCITRAL arbitration, Partial Award, March 17, 2006, {] 302.

Referring to Continental Casualty Award {| 259-260; CMS Award {| 275.

121

(c)

298.

299.

300.

301.

302.

303.

(i) The MTD Annulment Decision did not consider that the tribunal
exceeded its powers by holding that the legitimate expectations of the

investor were part of the fair and equitable treatment standard.7>*

The Committee’s views

The Tribunal’s reasons for its finding that Argentina was in breach of the fair
and equitable treatment clause are contained in paragraphs 251-268 of the
Award.

At paragraphs 251-255 of the Award, the Tribunal summarised the arguments
of the parties.

At paragraph 256, the Tribunal expressed agreement with Argentina that the
fair and equitable treatment standard “is a standard none too clear and
precise”. The Tribunal then went on to note that the international law standard
on the minimum treatment due to foreign citizens, traders and investors is
similarly “not too clear and precise”, and that the standards have “gradually
evolved over the centuries”.

At paragraph 257, the Tribunal said that the development had been
“fragmentary and gradual’, based as it was on “a case by case determination

by courts and tribunals’.

At paragraph 258, the Tribunal expressed the view that the international
minimum standard was insufficiently elaborate and clear for the fair and
equitable treatment to be equated with it, that the fair and equitable treatment
standard may be more precise than the customary international law minimum
standard, and that the fair and equitable standard, in the context of the BIT,

could require a treatment additional to, or beyond that of, customary law.

At paragraph 259, the Tribunal said that it was bound to interpret the fair and

equitable treatment clause “in good faith in accordance with the ordinary

254 Referring to MTD Annulment Decision {| 68.

122

304.

305.

306.

307.

meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light
of the object and purpose” as required by Article 31 of the Vienna Convention.

The Committee considers that to this point in its reasoning, the Tribunal in
effect said no more than that the standard of “fair and equitable treatment” in
the BIT is not necessarily the same as the customary international law
minimum standard, and that the content of the “fair and equitable treatment”
clause in Article II(2)(a) of the BIT was a question of interpretation of the BIT
in accordance with normal principles of treaty interpretation. The Committee

considers this obvious.

In paragraph 259, the Tribunal went on to say that it “gives weight to the text
of the Treaty’s Preamble, which links the standard to the goal of legal
Stability’. The Tribunal then quoted a provision of the preamble of the BIT
which states that “fair and equitable treatment of investment is desirable in
order to maintain a stable framework for the investment and maximum

effective use of economic resources”.

The Tribunal did not state in this paragraph that the preamble to the BIT
imposed a legal obligation or that the Tribunal was “applying” a provision of
the preamble. Rather, in the Committee’s view it is quite clear from context
that the Tribunal was merely taking into account, and “giving weight” to, a
provision of the preamble in interpreting the fair and equitable treatment
clause in Article II(2)(a) of the BIT. The Committee considers that there was
nothing illogical or contrary to principle in the Tribunal doing this. Article 31(2)
of the Vienna Convention expressly states that “The context for the purpose of
the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in addition to the text, including its

preamble and annexes’.

At paragraph 260, the Tribunal then concluded that “a key element of fair and
equitable treatment is the requirement of a ‘stable framework for the
investment”. The Committee considers it clear from a reading of this
paragraph as a whole, in the context of the preceding paragraphs, that the

Tribunal considered this to be a key element of Article II(2)(a) of the BIT, and

123

308.

309.

310.

that the Tribunal based this conclusion on the case law cited in that

paragraph.2%>

At paragraph 261, the Tribunal said that “the stabilization requirement does
not mean the freezing of the legal system or the disappearance of the
regulatory power of the State”, and quoted a passage from the CMS Award to
the effect that the legal framework can always evolve and be adapted to
changing circumstances, but that it cannot “be dispensed with altogether

when specific commitments to the contrary have been made” 2°

At paragraph 262, the Tribunal said that “The protection of the ‘expectations
that were taken into account by the foreign investor to make the investment’
has likewise been identified as a facet of the standard’. In a footnote
reference, the Tribunal indicated that it was quoting from paragraph 154 of the
Tecmed Award. The Tribunal said that “The Tecmed approach has been
consistently adopted by subsequent decisions”, and cited a number of
decisions.” After referring to a difference in terminology used in the Tecmed
Award and a NAFTA decision,”°® the Tribunal then concluded, with reference

to certain other awards,

that “What seems to be essential, however, is that
these expectations derived from the conditions that were offered by the State
to the investor at the time of the investment and that such conditions were
relied upon by the investor when deciding to invest’.

At paragraph 263, the Tribunal said that, as acknowledged in certain earlier

cited decisions, “the principle of good faith is not an essential element of the

Award, footnotes 59-60, referring to Occidental Exploration and Production Company (OEPC) v.

Republic of Ecuador, London Court of International Arbitration Administered Case No. UN 3467,
Final Award of July 1, 2004 (“OEPC Award”), J] 190-191; CMS Award I] 274-276; LG&E
Decision on Liability 9] 124-125.

Citing CMS Award {| 277.

Referring to MTD Award {| 114; OEPC Award {| 185; Eureko Partial Award {| 235; LG&E Award {|
127.

Referring to Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States, |CSID Case
No. ARB (AF)/00/2. Award, May 29, 2003 (“Tecmed Award”), {] 154; International Thunderbird
Gaming Corporation v. United Mexican States, NAFTA Chapter 11/UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,
Arbitral Award, January 26, 2006 (“Thunderbird Award”) {| 147.

Referring to Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited (SPP) v. Arab Republic of Egypt,
ICSID Case No. ARB/84/3, Award, May 20, 1992, {| 82; LG&E Award {| 127, 130; CME Partial
Award {| 611; Tecmed Award {| 154; Thunderbird Award {| 147.

Footnotes omitted.

124

311.

312.

313.

standard of fair and equitable treatment and therefore violation of the standard

would not require the existence of bad faith”.

The Committee considers it clear from the terms of paragraphs 260 to 263 of
the Award that the Tribunal was in these paragraphs stating what it
considered to be the correct interpretation of the fair and equitable treatment
clause contained in Article II(2)(a) of the BIT, and that the Tribunal undertook
this interpretation in accordance with the principles of treaty interpretation
embodied in the Vienna Convention, under which it gave weight to the
preamble of the BIT as well as to previous case law dealing with the same or

similar provisions.

The Committee further considers it clear that the Tribunal then proceeded to
apply the fair and equitable treatment clause in Article II(2)(a), as so
interpreted, to the facts of this case as found by the Tribunal. At paragraph
264, the Tribunal found that “The measures in question in this case have
beyond any doubt substantially changed the legal and business framework
under which the investment was decided and implemented”. At paragraph
265, the Tribunal found that “it was in reliance upon the conditions established
by [Argentina] in the regulatory framework for the gas sector that Enron
embarked on its investment in TGS” and that in the circumstances of the case
“Enron had reasonable grounds to rely on such conditions”. At paragraph 266
the Tribunal found that “A decade l/ater ... the guarantees of the tariff regime
that had seduced so many foreign investors, were dismantled” and that “The
long-term business outlook enabled by the tariff regime, has been
transformed into a day-to-day discussion about what comes next’.

At paragraphs 267 and 268, the Tribunal then concluded that:

The Respondent might be right in distinguishing this case
from the factual scenarios that recent decisions have faced,
but this does not mean that Argentina’s acts are consistent
with the meaning of the protection under the Treaty. It is
clear that the ‘stable legal framework’ that induced the
investment is no longer in place and that a definitive
framework has not been made available for almost five
years.

125

314.

315.

316.

317.

318.

261

Even assuming that the Respondent was guided by the

best of intentions, which the Tribunal has no reason to

doubt, there is here an objective breach of the fair and

equitable treatment due under the Treaty. The Tribunal thus

holds that the standard established in Article II(2)(a) of the

Treaty has not been observed and that to the extent that it

results in a detriment to the Claimants’ rights it will give rise

to compensation.
The Committee is satisfied that the Tribunal, in finding that there was a breach
of the fair and equitable treatment clause in Article II(2)(a) of the BIT,
purported to interpret that provision in accordance with general international
law treaty interpretation principles and to apply it to the facts of the case as
found. In so doing, the Tribunal applied the applicable law, whether or not it

did so correctly.

The Committee finds that no other valid basis has been advanced by
Argentina for the contention that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.
Argentina in effect argues no more than that the Tribunal’s interpretation of

the BIT was wrong, which as observed above is not a ground of annulment.

For these reasons, this ground of annulment must also be rejected.

The Tribunal’s finding of a breach of the umbrella clause
(a) Background

Article II(2)(c) of the BIT (the “umbrella clause”) states that:

Each Party shall observe any obligation it may have entered
into with regard to investments.

Argentina maintains that in finding that Argentina violated umbrella clause, the

Tribunal:

(a) failed to state reasons for its conclusion, justifying annulment under
Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention; and2*1

Application for Annulment {| 55-60, 71-74.

126

(b)

319.

262
263

(b)

manifestly exceeded its powers, justifying annulment under Article
52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention.

Arguments of the parties

Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

In relation to the ground of annulment in Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID

Convention

(a)

The Tribunal’s reasoning does not allow the reader to proceed from the
existence of the umbrella clause in the BIT to the ruling against
Argentina for alleged breaches of the provisions of the Licence to which
the Claimants were not parties, and with regard to which they had no

rights. 72

The Tribunal confined itself to making an inadequate description of
other Tribunals’ interpretations of the phrase “any obligations”
contained in the umbrella clause and gave no grounds regarding the
phrase “entered into” or the purported violation of the clause by

Argentina.

The present case is materially similar to that in the CMS Annulment
Decision in which the ad hoc committee found that the tribunal had
failed to analyse relevant issues?® and that “it is quite unclear how the

Tribunal arrived at its conclusion”?

The Tribunal did not address the arguments of Argentina, in particular
Argentina’s argument as to the inexistence of an investment agreement

or obligations with the Claimants.

Referring to CMS Annulment Decision I] 89-97.
Referring to CMS Annulment Decision {| 95(d)-(f).

204 Referring to CMS Annulment Decision {| 96-97.

127

In relation to the ground of annulment in Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention

(e) The Tribunal’s analysis*®> was based on only four decisions of arbitral
tribunals,7°° but in the cases relied on, except for the LG&E case, there
were instruments expressly linking the investor to the host State. In the
present case, Argentina never assumed any obligation vis a vis the
Claimants other than the BIT.

(f) The expression “obligations” in the umbrella clause means specific
obligations concerning the investment, and does not include general
requirements imposed by the law of the host State.7°” Contrary to what
the Tribunal found,” the Gas Law did not comprise any “specific

obligations” with respect to the Claimants.

(g) | The application of the umbrella clause is limited to commitments in
269

investment contracts.
(h) The License cannot be assimilated to an investment contract.2” There
is no investment agreement in this case, since the Claimants did not
enter into any agreement with the Argentine Government. Furthermore,

the License lacked any element to internationalise it,2”'

was regulated
by Argentine law, was subject to local courts, and was granted to an

Argentine company (TGS). Under Argentine Law and the License,

Referring to Award If] 269-277.

Referring to Award {| 274, citing Fedax N.V. v. Venezuela, ICSID Case No. ARB/96/3, Award,
March 9, 1998; SGS v Philippines Jurisdiction Decision; SGS v. Pakistan Jurisdiction Decision;
LG&E Decision on Liability.

Referring to CMS Annulment Decision {| 93-95; SGS v. Philippines Jurisdiction Decision {| 121;
F. A. Mann, “British Treaties for the Promotion and Protection of Investments”, (1981) 52 British
Yearbook of International Law 241, 246 (1981); Thomas W. Walde, George Ndi, “Stabilizing
International Investment Commitments: International Law versus Contract Interpretations”,
(1996) 31 Texas International Law Journal 215, 234.

Referring to Award {|f] 275-276.

Referring to Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania, \CSID Case No. ARB/01/11, Award, October 12,
20085, {| 53; El Paso Jurisdiction Decision {J 81-82, 84, 85; Lanco Jurisdiction Decision {| 16.
Referring to SGS v. Pakistan Jurisdiction Decision.

Referring to A.F.M. Maniruzzaman, “State Contracts in Contemporary International Law: Monist
versus Dualist Controversies”, (2001) 12 European Journal of International Law 309, 316;
Thomas W. Walde, George Ndi, “Stabilizing International Investment Commitments: International
Law versus Contract Interpretations”, (1996) 31 Texas International Law Journal 215, 234.

128

320.

272

(i)

0)

(k)

Argentina was subject to obligations only towards TGS and not the

Claimants, who had no right to enforce it.2’2

Article VIl of the BIT deals with “investment agreements”. Argentina
and the United States intended to attribute a special meaning to the
term “investment agreement”, and the special meaning should be
observed.2”° Under the BIT, in order for an investment agreement to
exist, there must be an agreement between a party and a national or
company of the other party. The definition of “investment treaty” of the
1994 US Model BIT was intended to broaden the notion of “investment

agreement’ and is inapplicable to the interpretation of the Bit2”4

It is inadmissible for the Claimants on the one hand to assert that they
are not a party to the Licence and therefore are not bound by its forum
clause, and on the other hand to claim that the Licence is an
investment agreement entitling them to invoke the umbrella clause. The

Tribunal followed the same contradictory reasoning.”’>

The position in the Azurix case”’° and CMS Annulment Decision””” was

correct.

The Claimants argue, inter alia, that:

In relation to the ground of annulment in Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID
Convention

(a)

The Tribunal set forth reasons for its decision. It rejected the notion that
the “obligation” in question had to be “entered into” with the investor

directly. The Tribunal expressly observed that “Through the Gas Law

Referring to CMS Annulment Decision {| 90.
73 Referring to Vienna Convention, Article 31; V.D. Degan, L’Interprétation des accords en droit
international (1963) at 117-119; Article 3, Paragraph 2, of the Treaty of Lausanne (Frontier
Between Turkey and Iraq), 1925, P.C.l.J., Ser. B, No. 12, p. 19; Case concerning the Factory at
Chorzow (Germany v. Poland), 1927, P.C.I.J. Ser. A, No. 9, p. 24; Conditions of Admission of a
State to Membership in the United Nations, Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1948, p. 62; Rights
of Nationals of United States of America in Morocco (France v. United States of America), |.C.J.
Reports 1952, p. 198.
Referring to Vienna Convention, Articles 31(3) and (4) and 41.
Referring to Award {| 277.
Referring to Azurix Award {| 384.
Referring to CMS Annulment Decision {] 95.

129

and its implementing legislation, the Respondent assumed “obligations
with regard to investments””® The Tribunal found that Argentina had
failed to observe those obligations, thus triggering its liability under the

Umbrella Clause.2’°

(b) | The Tribunal expressly found that the Award covered both contractual
obligations such as payment as well as obligations assumed through

law or regulation, and cited authorities.?°°

(c) It is not the case that the Tribunal failed to explain what “entered into”

means.”*"

(d) | The Award enables one to follow how the tribunal proceeded from Point
A to Point B, and eventually to its conclusion. The Tribunal clearly by

implication rejected Argentina’s arguments.

(e) It would be a rare event that the host State would enter into an
obligation directly with the foreign investor, precisely because foreign
investors are often required by local law to channel their investment

through and into local companies (as they were in this case).7°

In relation to the ground of annulment in Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention

(f) The Tribunal expressly invoked the precise wording of the umbrella
clause, finding that the Gas Law and its implementing legislation
constituted “obligations with regard to investments”®? and that the
License provisions were “obligations entered into by the Respondent

with regard to Claimants’ investments.” 284

(g) | Under the broad definition of “investment” in the BIT, the Claimants’

indirect interests in TGS, and the rights conferred on TGS by the Gas

Referring to Award [If] 275-276.

Referring to Award {|f] 273-277.

Referring to Award {| 274.

Referring to Award {|f] 275-276.

Referring to First Jurisdiction Decision | 55.
Referring to Award {| 275.

Referring to Award {| 276.

130

285

(i)

0)

Law and the License, were “investments” of the Claimants, and
Argentina’s failure to observe the obligations it entered into “with regard
to” those “investments” violated the plain text of the umbrella clause, as

the Tribunal properly and expressly found.

The umbrella clause provides that each Party shall observe any
obligation it may have entered into “with regard to investments” and not
“with regard to a particular investor’. The fact that the obligation
“entered into” in this case was the License with TGS does not mean
that the Claimants were enforcing contractual rights to which they were
not a party. Any breach of those License rights constituted an
independent violation of the BIT under the umbrella clause in respect of

an “investment” of the Claimants.

The umbrella clause uses the term “investments,” not “investment
agreements”, and it is not confined to “contracts” or “investment
agreements”, but extends to “any obligation” entered into “with regard
to” any category of “investment” within the definition of the BIT.2%&
Argentina effectively argues that the umbrella clause should be read as
stating, which it does not, that “each party shall observe any obligation
it may have entered into in an investment agreement with an investor of
the other party’.

Even if the umbrella clause did only cover investment agreements, the
License would qualify as an “investment agreement” under the BIT
because it was a written agreement between the national authorities of
Argentina and an “investment” of the Claimants (namely, TGS) granting

rights with respect to assets controlled by the national authorities on

Referring to F.A. Mann, “British Treaties for the Promotion and Protection of Investments”, (1982)
52 British Yearbook of International Law 241; Rudolf Dolzer and Margrete Stevens, Bilateral
Investment Treaties (1995) at 81-82; Kenneth J. Vandevelde, “U.S. Bilateral Investment Treaties:
The Second Wave”, (1993) 14 Michigan Journal of International Law 621; Kenneth J.
Vandevelde, United States Investment Treaties: Policy and Practice (1992) at 78 § 5.03;
UNCTAD, Bilateral Investment Treaties in the Mid-1990s (1998) at 56; SGS v. Philippines
Jurisdiction Decision {] 126; Eureko Partial Award {| 246.

131

which the Claimants relied in establishing, acquiring and continuing

their investments in Argentina.7°%

(k) Even if the Committee were to conclude that the Tribunal erred in its
interpretation of the scope of the umbrella clause, that would not rise to
the level of a manifest excess of power, as erroneous application of the
law is not grounds for annulment. Argentina’s argument amounts to
little more than a disagreement as to the proper scope and
interpretation of the umbrella clause. While some tribunals and
commentators have taken the interpretation that Argentina favours,
other awards have held (as the Tribunal did in this case) that foreign
shareholders may invoke the umbrella clause when the host State fails
to observe obligations entered into with their locally-incorporated
subsidiaries.?°”

Failure of the award to state the reasons on which it is based as a
ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention: the
Committee’s views

The Tribunal’s reasons for its finding that Argentina was in breach of the

umbrella clause are contained in paragraphs 269-277 of the Award.

At paragraphs 269-272 of the Award, the Tribunal summarised the arguments
of the parties.

At paragraph 273, the Tribunal set out the terms of the umbrella clause and
noted that it is to be interpreted “in good faith in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty’ in accordance with Article

31(1) the Vienna Convention.

Referring to the definition of “investment agreement” in the 1994 US Model Prototype BIT and
the Free Trade Agreements entered into by the United States of America and Chile, Morocco
and Singapore.

Referring to CMS Award {[f] 296-303; LG&E Decision on Liability | 175; Sempra Award {| 309-
14; Thomas W. Walde, “The “Umbrella” (or Sanctity of Contract/Pacta Sunt Servanda) Clause in
Investment Arbitration: A Comment on Original Intentions and Recent Cases”, (2003) 1(5) Oil,
Gas & Energy Law Intelligence 1, 35.

132

324.

325.

326.

327.

328.

At paragraph 274, the Tribunal said that “Under its ordinary meaning the
phrase ‘any obligation’ refers to obligations regardless of their nature”, and
that at least two other tribunals had found this expression to include
obligations assumed through law or regulation. The Tribunal said that
nonetheless, in accordance with the express wording of the umbrella clause,
to be covered by the clause, an obligation had to be one that was “with regard

to investments”.

At paragraph 275 of the Award, the Tribunal then said that “Through the Gas
Law and its implementing legislation, the Respondent assumed ‘obligations
with regard to investments”, and referred to the provisions in the legislation
for tariffs to be calculated in US dollars converted to pesos for billing

purposes, linked to the US PPI.

The Committee considers that this section of the Award must be read in the
light of the Award as a whole, including in the light of the Tribunal’s two

decisions on jurisdiction which, as noted above, form part of the Award.

For the reasons given in paragraphs 87-111 above, the Committee is satisfied
that the Tribunal gave sufficient reasons for its conclusion that the Claimants
could bring BIT proceedings, notwithstanding Argentina’s argument that the

claim concerned rights which belonged to TGS and not to the Claimants.

The Tribunal expressly found that the Claimants had invested in Tes.2%

Paragraph 241 of the Award refers back to paragraphs 29-30 of the Second
Jurisdiction Decision in which the Tribunal noted that the definition of
“investment” in the BIT included “the channeling of investments through
locally incorporated companies, particularly when this is mandated by the very
legal arrangements governing the privatization process in Argentina’. At
paragraphs 264-267 of the Award (in the section dealing with the fair and
equitable treatment clause, which precedes the treatment of the umbrella
clause) the Tribunal then went on to say:

The measures in question in this case have beyond any
doubt substantially changed the legal and business
framework under which the investment was decided and

288 Award 111 42 (final sentence), 47-61 (especially the heading to that section), 191, 193, 242.

133

implemented. Argentina in the early 1990s constructed a
regulatory framework for the gas sector containing specific
guarantees to attract foreign capital to an economy
historically unstable and volatile. As part of this regulatory
framework, Argentina guaranteed that tariffs would be
calculated in US dollars, converted into pesos for billing
purposes, adjusted semi-annually in accordance with the
US PPI and sufficient to cover costs and a reasonable rate
of return. It further guaranteed that tariffs would not be
subject to freezing or price controls without compensation.
Foreign investors were specifically targeted to invest in the
privatization of public utilities in the gas sector. Substantial
foreign investment was undertaken on the strength of such
guarantees, including the investment made by Enron in
TGS.

The Tribunal observes that it was in reliance upon the
conditions established by the Respondent in the regulatory
framework for the gas sector that Enron embarked on its
investment in TGS. Given the scope of Argentina’s
privatization process, its international marketing, and the
statutory enshrinement of the tariff regime, Enron had
reasonable grounds to rely on such conditions.

A decade later, however, the guarantees of the tariff regime
that had seduced so many foreign investors, were
dismantled. Where there was certainty and stability for
investors, doubt and ambiguity are the order of the day. The
long-term business outlook enabled by the tariff regime, has
been transformed into a day-to-day discussion about what
comes next. Tariffs have been frozen for almost five years.
The recomposition of the tariff regime is subject to a
protracted renegotiation process imposed on the public
utilities that has failed to provide a final and definitive
framework for the operation of business in the energy
sector.

The Respondent might be right in distinguishing this case
from the factual scenarios that recent decisions have faced,
but this does not mean that Argentina’s acts are consistent
with the meaning of the protection under the Treaty. It is
clear that the ‘stable legal framework’ that induced the
investment is no longer in place and that a definitive
framework has not been made available for almost five
years.

329. Returning to paragraph 275 of the Award, dealing with the umbrella clause,
the Tribunal said that:

The dismantling of these guarantees [under the Gas Law
and its implementing legislation] would suffice to establish a

134

violation of the obligations entered into by the Respondent
with regard to the Claimants’ investment.

330. At paragraph 276 of the Award, the Tribunal then said:

331.

In addition, the prohibition of price controls without

indemnification and the prohibition of License amendments

without consent, although contained in the License were

also approved by decree and formed part of the

implementing legislation that established the tariff regime.

The obliteration of these commitments likewise entails a

violation of obligations entered into by the Respondent with

regard to the Claimants’ investment.
The Committee considers it sufficiently clear from the wording of this
paragraph that the Tribunal did not consider a violation of the Licence itself to
be a breach of the umbrella clause. Rather, the Tribunal found that the terms
of the Licence formed part of the implementing legislation, such that a
violation of the provisions of the Licence referred to in this paragraph also
amounted to a violation of the guarantees contained in the legislative

framework.

The Committee considers that the reasoning of the Award as a whole is clear.
The Tribunal considered that the Claimants had invested in the privatised gas
sector in Argentina, and had, as required by Argentine law, channelled that
investment through a locally incorporated company. That investment was
found to have been made by the Claimants on the strength of guarantees
contained in a regulatory regime that had been implemented by Argentina for
the purpose of attracting such foreign investment. Pursuant to the plain
meaning of the wording of the BIT, and consistently with at least two prior
arbitration decisions, the Tribunal considered that those guarantees in the
legislative framework were therefore “obligations” entered into by Argentina
“with regard to” the investment that the Claimants had made. The guarantees
concerned included the right to tariff calculations in US dollars, converted into
pesos for billing purposes, adjusted semi-annually in accordance with the US
PPI and sufficient to cover costs and a reasonable rate of return. The
dismantling of these guarantees, as it was described in paragraphs 189, 266

and 275 of the Award, were considered by the Tribunal as a violation of the

135

332.

333.

334.

obligations entered into by Argentina with regard to the Claimants’ investment,

and hence a violation of the umbrella clause with respect to that investment.

The Committee recalls the standard of review on annulment under Article
52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention. It is not for the Committee to determine
whether the reasoning of the Tribunal was correct or convincing. It is only for
the Committee to determine whether “the award enables one to follow how
the tribunal proceeded from Point A. to point B. and eventually to its
conclusion”. The Committee is of the view that it clearly does. The Committee

finds nothing contradictory or frivolous in the Tribunal’s reasoning.

Argentina relies on the CMS Annulment Decision, in which the ad hoc
committee did annul, under Article 52(1)(e), the finding in the CMS Award that
there had been a violation of the umbrella clause.”°° However, a finding that
the tribunal in the CMS case failed to give adequate reasons for its decision in
no way necessarily leads to a conclusion that the Tribunal in the present case
failed to give adequate reasons. The reasoning of the two tribunals in the two

cases was different.

In the CMS case, the tribunal found that not all violations of a contractual
obligation will result in a breach of the BIT, and that “Purely commercial
aspects of a contract might not be protected by the treaty in some situations,
but the protection is likely to be available when there is significant interference
by governments or public agencies with the rights of the investor’.2°° The
tribunal in that case then went on to say no more than that “None of the
measures complained of in this case can be described as a commercial
question as they are all related to government decisions that have resulted in

291

the interferences and breaches noted”,~”’ and that the umbrella clause had

therefore not been observed “to the extent that legal and contractual
obligations pertinent to the investment have been breached and have resulted

in the violation of the standards of protection under the Treaty”.?°

CMS Annulment Decision {J 89-100.

CMS Award { 299.
CMS Award {| 301.
CMS Award {[ 303.

136

335.

336.

337.

338.

In the annulment proceedings in the CMS case, the claimant apparently made
it clear to the ad hoc committee that the claimant did not assert a right under
either Argentine law or international law to enforce compliance with the terms
of the licence held by the locally incorporated company of which it was a
shareholder.2°? Rather, in the words of the ad hoc committee:

... CMS relied on a literal interpretation of Article II(2)(c). It
contended that Argentina entered into legal obligations
under the License, which were obligations “with regard to
investments” under that Article. Although CMS was not
entitled as a minority shareholder to invoke those
obligations of Argentina under Argentine law (not being the
obligee), the effect of Article II(2)(c) was to give it standing
to invoke them under the BIT.2%
The ad hoc committee in the CMS case considered that it was not clear from
paragraph 303 of the CMS Award quoted above whether the Tribunal
accepted this interpretation,”°> that “In the end it is quite unclear how the
Tribunal arrived at its conclusion’*®® and that “In these circumstances there is
a significant lacuna in the Award, which makes it impossible for the reader to
follow the reasoning on this point’.2”
While the ad hoc committee in the CMS case may for these reasons have
considered the reasoning in the CMS Award to be inadequate, for the reasons
given above, the Committee considers that the reasoning of the Tribunal in

the present case is quite clear.

The Committee notes that in the CMS Annulment Decision, the ad hoc
committee said that “there are major difficulties with this broad interpretation”

288 and then proceeded to list these issues,”°° and to

taken by the claimants,
say that if the tribunal in that case had adopted such an interpretation “one

would have expected a discussion of’ these issues.°°

CMS Annulment Decision {J 90-91.

CMS Annulment Decision {| 92.
CMS Annulment Decision {J 93-94.
CMS Annulment Decision {| 96.
CMS Annulment Decision ] 97.
CMS Annulment Decision {| 95.
CMS Annulment Decision {| 95.
CMS Annulment Decision {| 96.

137

339.

340.

341.

The Committee considers that all that the CMS ad hoc committee could
properly have meant by this is that in the absence of any clearly expressed
reasoning in the CMS Award, the absence of any discussion of these
problematic issues made it impossible to conclude that the tribunal in that
case had by implication adopted this particular interpretation of the umbrella

clause.

The ad hoc committee in the CMS Annulment Decision said that “seems clear
that Article II(2)(c) is concerned with consensual obligations arising
independently of the BIT itself’,°°'

entered into erga omnes but with regard to particular persons’ > and that

that “Consensual obligations are not

“The effect of the umbrella clause is not to transform the obligation which is
relied on into something else” 2° However, it is not for an annulment
committee to express its own views on the meaning of particular provisions of
the treaty. Thus, in the Committee’s view, the CMS ad hoc committee should
not be regarded as having thereby purported, akin to an appeal court, to
pronounce on what the correct position is. Rather, this paragraph of the CMS
Annulment Decision should, in the Committee’s view, be regarded merely as
identifying lacunae that were found to have existed in the award in that
particular case, in view of the absence of any express rationale or any

discussion of certain issues from which a rationale might have been implied.

Provided that it is clear how a tribunal arrived at the conclusion that it did, it is
unnecessary for the tribunal to address every argument of the parties, let
alone every possible argument that might be raised in relation to a particular
point. Thus, when the ad hoc committee in the CMS Annulment Decision
stated that “There is no discussion in the award of the travaux of the BIT on
this point’, > this similarly in the Committee’s view should not be understood
as suggesting that an Award will contain an annullable error under Article
52(1)(e) if it does not discuss the travaux of the BIT on a particular point. In

every case, the question will be whether the standard of review on annulment

CMS Annulment Decision {| 95(a).

CMS Annulment Decision {| 95(b).
CMS Annulment Decision {| 95(c).
CMS Annulment Decision {| 95(f).

138

342.

343.

(a)

344.

345.

346.

(a)

347.

under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention has been met in the particular

circumstances of the particular award that is sought to be annulled.

In the present case, the Committee is quite satisfied for the reasons given
above that there is a very clearly stated rationale for the Tribunal’s conclusion
that there was a breach of the umbrella clause. It is not for the Committee to

determine whether or not that rationale was correct.

For these reasons, this ground of annulment must be rejected.

Manifest excess of powers as a ground of annulment under Article
52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention: the Committee’s views

The Committee is satisfied that the Tribunal, in finding that there was a breach
of the umbrella clause, purported to interpret and apply the relevant provisions
of the BIT in accordance with customary international law principles. In so

doing, it applied the applicable law, whether or not it did so correctly.

The Committee finds that no other valid basis has been advanced by
Argentina for the contention that the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers.
Argentina in effect argues no more than that the Tribunal’s interpretation of

the BIT was wrong. However, that is not a ground of annulment.

For these reasons, this ground of annulment must also be rejected.

Emergency situation
Introduction

In the proceedings before the Tribunal, Argentina argued that the gravity of
the economic crisis faced by Argentina at the material time was such that
Argentina was exempted from liability for taking the measures complained of
by the Claimant by virtue of the theory of imprevisién under Argentine law; the
principle of necessity under customary international law; Article IV(3) of the
BIT; and Article XI of the BIT.

139

348.

349.

350.

305,
306
307

The arguments concerning the theory of imprevisién under Argentine law are

considered in paragraphs 284-291 above.

As to the principle of necessity under customary international law, the Tribunal
found this customary international principle to be as stated in Article 25 of the
ILC Articles, which provides that:

1. Necessity may not be invoked by a State as a ground
for precluding the wrongfulness of an act not in
conformity with an international obligation of that State
unless the act:

(a) Is the only way for the State to safeguard an
essential interest against a grave and imminent
peril;

and

(b) Does not seriously impair an essential interest of
the State or States towards which the obligation

exists, or of the international community as a
whole.

2. In any case, necessity may not be invoked by a State
as a ground for precluding wrongfulness if:

(a) The International obligation in question excludes
the possibility of invoking necessity; or

(b) The State has contributed to the situation of
necessity °°5

The Tribunal found that the requirements of this provision were not satisfied,
in particular because the measures adopted by Argentina were not the only
way available to Argentina to achieve the result,°°° and because Argentina
had itself contributed to the state of necessity.°°”

The Tribunal further rejected Argentina’s argument based on Article IV(3) of
the BIT, which provides that:

Nationals or companies of either Party whose investments
suffer losses in the territory of the other Party owing to war
or other armed conflict, revolution, state of national

Award {| 303.
Award {ff 304-309.
Award 9] 311-312.

140

351.

352.

emergency, insurrection, civil disturbance or other similar

events shall be accorded treatment by such other Party no

less favorable than that accorded to its own nationals or

companies or to nationals or companies of any third

country, whichever is the more favorable treatment, as

regards any measures it adopts in relation to such losses.
The Tribunal found that the effect of this provision is to provide a minimum
treatment to foreign investments suffering losses in the host country, and that
this provision does not allow derogation from rights under the BIT or exclude

wrongfulness, liability and eventual compensation for a breach of the BIT.

The Tribunal additionally rejected Argentina’s argument based on Article XI of
the BIT, which provides that:
This Treaty shall not preclude the application by either Party
of measures necessary for the maintenance of public order,
the fulfilment of its obligations with respect to the
maintenance or restoration of international peace or
security, or the Protection of its own essential security
interests.
Rejecting Argentina’s arguments, the Tribunal found that Article XI of the BIT
is not self-judging and that the Tribunal’s examination was not limited to the
question whether the measures were adopted by Argentina in good faith, but
also extended to the substantive question whether the requirements of this
provision had been met such as to preclude wrongfulness.°°° The Tribunal
found that this provision was not applicable for the same reasons that it found
that Argentina could not rely on the principle of necessity under customary

international law.

Argentina seeks annulment of the Award on the basis that, in relation to these
aspects of the Award, the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in failing to
apply the applicable law to the merits of the dispute (Article 52(1)(b) of the
ICSID Convention), and failed to state sufficient reasons for its decision
(Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention).

$08 Award fff 320-321.
30° Award fff 335-340.

141

(b)

353.

310
ant

Arguments of the parties

Argentina argues, inter alia, that:

In relation to Article XI of the BIT

(a)

Article XI of the Treaty differs significantly from the “state of necessity”
under customary international law, which is substantially contained in
Article 25 of the ILC Articles, in that (1) Article XI may only be invoked
within the framework of the BIT while the state of necessity can be
invoked in any context against any international obligation; (2) Article XI
is a provision that delimits the scope of application of the Treaty such
that if it applies the substantive obligations under the BIT do not apply,
while the state of necessity is only relevant once it has been decided
that there has otherwise been a breach of substantive obligations under
the BIT; (3) Article XI does not include the stringent requirements of the
state of necessity such as the requirement that the measure at issue
be “the only way for the State to safeguard its interests” and the
requirement that the State must not itself have contributed to the state
of emergency; (4) Article 25 of the ILC Articles, in contrast to Article XI
of the BIT, has been drafted in a negative way especially to emphasize
its exceptional nature; and (5) when Article XI of the BIT is applicable
no compensation is payable, while Article 25 of the ILC Articles is
expressed by virtue of Article 27 of the ILC Articles to be without

prejudice to the question of compensation.

The Tribunal therefore made manifest errors of law in equating Article
XI of the BIT with Article 25 of the ILC Articles,°"° and in applying the
rule of Article 27 of the Articles on State Responsibility to Article XI of

the Treaty.°""

Referring to CMS Annulment Decision {J 130-131.
Referring to CMS Annulment Decision {J 146, 383-394; Jiirgen Kurtz, Adjudging the Exceptional

at International Law: Security, Public Order and Financial Crisis 24-25 (Jean Monnet Center for

International and Regional Economic Law & Justice, NYU School of Law, Jean Monnet Working
Paper 06/08, 2008).

142

(c) Although an error of law is not a ground for annulment under Article 52
of the ICSID Convention,>"? in certain circumstances, an error of law
may be serious enough to be deemed a manifest excess of powers for
failure to apply the proper law.°’° The manifest errors of law present in
the Award in this case are so serious that they amount to a manifest

excess of powers for failure to apply the proper law.°"4

(d) The Tribunal also failed to apply Article XI of the BIT as it did not

respect the self-judging nature of that provision.°">

(e) Furthermore, even if Article XI is not self-judging, the Tribunal failed to
apply Article XI of the BIT as it did not perform a substantial review but
simply replaced Article XI of the Treaty with the state of necessity under
customary international law, which differs substantially from Article XI,
contrary to the principle of effet utile or ut res magis valeat quam

pereat.

(f) For purposes of Article XI of the BIT, Argentina alleged that the
measures challenged had been taken not only to protect the essential
security interests of the State, but also to maintain public order, but the
Tribunal said nothing about the maintenance of public order.°° The
public order component does not find direct reflection in customary law,
and the absence of an analysis in the Award with respect to public

order shows that the Tribunal in fact did not apply Article XI of the BIT.

Referring to CMS Annulment Decision ff] 136, 150, 158.

Referring to Amco // Annulment Decision {J 7.12, 7.19; Kléckner Annulment Decision {J 59,
169; Mitchell Annulment Decision {| 45; CMS Annulment Decision ff] 135; MTD Annulment
Decision {| 46-47; Soufraki Annulment Decision {| 86.

Referring to Campbell McLachlan, “Investment Treaties and General International Law”, (2008)
57 International and Comparative Law Quarterly 361, 363; Théodore Christakis, “Quel reméde a
l'éclatement de la jurisprudence CIRDI sur les investissements en Argentine? La décision du
Comité ad hoc dans I’affaire CMS c. Argentine”, (2007) 111 R.G.D./.P. 879, 895.

Referring inter alia to Kenneth J. Vandevelde, “Of Politics and Markets: The Shifting Ideology of
the BITs”, (1993) 11 International Tax & Business Lawyer 159, 171 (1993); Senate Exec. Rept.
No. 100-32 (1988), at 8; 1992 US Model BIT, commentary to Art. X; Letter from James H.
Thessin, Principal Deputy Legal Adviser and Designated Agency Ethics Official, United States
Department of State, to Abraham D. Sofaer, Senior Fellow of Hoover Institution, Standford
University, at 3.

Referring to Award {| 333.

143

at
318

This is particularly disturbing as in practice the Tribunal recognised that

the Argentine crisis involved issues related to public order.>"”

The Tribunal failed to state reasons pursuant to Article 52(1)(e) of the
ICSID Convention in that it did not explain (1) why the lack of specific
guidance in the Treaty with respect to essential security interests made
it necessary to rely on the requirements of the state of necessity under
customary international law; and (2) why Article XI did not establish
conditions different from the requirements under customary law set
forth in Article 25 of the ILC Articles.

In relation to Article 1V(3) of the BIT

(h)

(i)

Article IV(3) of the BIT establishes a special solution for exceptional
situations in which general obligations arising from normal
circumstances do not apply. Otherwise, Article II(1) would have
sufficed, since it obliges each party to afford treatment no less
favourable than that accorded to its own nationals or nationals of a third
State. Under Article IV(3), in the event of “state of national emergency”
or “other similar events”, if foreign investors suffer losses, the only
obligation of the State is not to discriminate if it decides to take

measures in relation to such losses.

The Tribunal in this case did not evaluate whether there had existed a
state of national emergency or other similar events that triggered the
application of Article IV(3), but summarily rejected the relevance of that

article.°"

In relation to state of necessity under customary international law

0)

The reasons provided by the Tribunal in relation to the requirements of
the state of necessity under customary international law were
contradictory and insufficient, which warrants annulment of the Award
pursuant to Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.

7 Referring to Award {If} 306, 308.
Referring to Award {[f] 320-321; LG&E Decision on Liability | 244.

144

(k) |The Tribunal’s finding that it had not been established that the

economic crisis had compromised the very existence of the State®"? is
inconsistent with other findings in the Award.°° Furthermore, the
essential interests of the State are not limited to its existence, and the
State must be given a margin of appreciation in the protection of its

essential interests.°7'

0) The Tribunal’s finding that it had not been established that events were

322

out of control or had become unmanageable*™ is inconsistent with

223

other findings in the Awar and in any event the necessity defence

“does not require that “total collapse” of the country or a “catastrophic

situation” °*

(m) The Tribunal, having found that it is a requirement of the state of
necessity that the challenged measures be the only way for the State to
safeguard its essential interests, did not identify which were the
supposed alternatives. Furthermore, there will always be alternative
ways for dealing with an economic crisis, but this does not preclude the

application of the state of necessity to an economic crisis.°°°

(n) The Tribunal did not identify how Argentina contributed to the state of

necessity or how that contribution was substantial.°2°

The Claimants argue, inter alia, that:
In relation to Article XI of the BIT

(a) Argentina’s challenge is a flagrant appeal of the merits of the Award.

Referring to Award {| 306.
Referring to Award {[f] 306-308.

Referring to Continental Casualty Award {| 181; Metalpar S.A. and Buen Aire S.A. v. Argentine

Republic, \CSID Case No. ARB/03/5, Award, June 6, 2008 (“Metalpar Award”), J 198.
Referring to Award {| 307.

Referring to Award {[f] 306-308.

Referring to Continental Casualty Award {| 180.

Referring to LG&E Decision on Liability | 257; Continental Casualty Award {| 197.

Referring to LG&E Decision on Liability {{] 256-257; Continental Casualty Award {| 234-236;

Metalpar Award {| 200.
145

327

Argentina’s challenge is also based on new arguments and material
that post-date the Award. Argentina cannot re-plead its case and

introduce new arguments now.

The Tribunal correctly interpreted and applied Article XI and the
defense of necessity in accordance with the international rules of treaty
interpretation, as codified in Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna

Convention.

Argentina is advancing a new interpretation of Article XI in these
annulment proceedings, which it is not entitled to do. Before the
Tribunal, Argentina advanced two primary necessity arguments (1) that
Article XI is self-judging, and (2) that the defense of necessity
precluded its liability and compensation duty. The CMS Annulment
decision subsequently advanced an alternative interpretation of Article

XI that Argentina now advances in these annulment proceedings.

Argentina’s new interpretation of Article XI is unsupported by a proper
treaty analysis but merely relies on three authorities that all post-date
the underlying proceeding. The Committee would be second-guessing
what would have been the Tribunal’s decision had the new material
been available to it before rendering the Award, but the Committee’s
role is solely to evaluate whether the Tribunal exceeded its authority or
failed to state reasons.

A manifest error of law is not a ground for annulment.

Even if manifest errors of law could constitute a ground for annulment,

the Tribunal interpreted the law correctly.

The Tribunal expressly considered and rejected Argentina’s argument
that Article XI is different and separate from customary law as it is lex
specialis.°2” The Tribunal did not hold that they are one and the same,
but rather, that the conditions under which these two defences may be

invoked are the same.

Referring to Award {| 334.

146

(i) Without a provision like Article XI, a Tribunal could exclude the
necessity plea entirely. The specific purpose of Article XI is to clarify
that the necessity defense in customary international law may still be
invoked under the BIT.

(i) The Tribunal correctly analyzed the “Maintenance of Public Order”
Aspect of Article x1.5%8

(k) — Argentina’s new interpretation of Article XI is wrong.

0) The Continental Casualty Tribunal’s analysis is even more flawed than
329

Argentina’s.
(m) The Tribunal did not fail to state reasons regarding its Article XI

analysis.
(n) The Tribunal correctly interpreted and applied Article IV(3).

(0) The Tribunal did not fail to state reasons regarding the plea of

necessity under customary international law.

(c) The Committee’s views

Situation of necessity under customary international law

355. The section of the Award dealing with this issue sets out the arguments of
Argentina (Award, paragraphs 294-298) and of the Claimants (Award,
paragraphs 299-302), followed by the Tribunal’s consideration and conclusion
(Award, paragraphs 303-313).

356. The Tribunal’s reasoning begins with its finding, at paragraph 303 of the
Award, that Article 25 of the ILC Articles, although not a treaty provision or
part of customary international law, reflects the state of customary

international law on the matter. From paragraphs 294 and 299 of the Award,

328 Referring to Award {| 306.

se8 Referring to Continental Casualty Award {| 167-168, 175, 192.

147

357.

358.

it appears that this was common ground between the parties in the
proceedings before the Tribunal, and this has not been disputed in these
annulment proceedings. In the circumstances, the Committee finds that the
Tribunal did not err in proceeding on this basis. Whether or not the
Committee were to agree that Article 25 of the ILC Articles reflects customary
international law, it could not amount to an annullable error for the Tribunal to
give an applicable legal rule an interpretation on which both parties were

agreed.

At paragraph 305 of the Award, the Tribunal noted that under the terms of
Article 25(1)(a) of the ILC Articles, Argentina could only plead the defence of
necessity in relation to its conduct if that conduct was “the only way for the
State to safeguard an essential interest against a grave and imminent peril’.
The Tribunal therefore considered that in addressing Argentina’s plea of
necessity under customary international law, it had to “establish whether the
Argentine crisis qualified as affecting an essential interest of the State”. The
Committee considers that this follows logically from the conclusion referred to

in the previous paragraph.

At paragraph 306 of the Award, the Tribunal said that it did not find convincing
the argument that the economic crisis “compromised the very existence of the
State and its independence so as to qualify as involving an essential interest
of the State’. By this wording, the Tribunal rejected the argument of
Argentina, referred to in paragraph 289 of the Award, that the crisis
“threatened in its view the very existence of the State and its independence’.
The Tribunal’s reason for rejecting this argument appeared to be that
regardless of how serious the crisis may have been, “[q]Juestions of public
order and social unrest could be handled”, “questions of political stabilization
were handled”, and “there is no convincing evidence that the events were out
of control or had become unmanageable” (Award, paragraphs 306-307). In
other words, the Tribunal was not satisfied that the existence of the State was
threatened because the evidence was that the Government of Argentina

continued to exist and to function and to deal with the crisis.

148

359.

360.

361.

362.

Contrary to what Argentina suggests, the Committee considers that
paragraphs 306-307 of the Award cannot be understood as going further,
amounting to a finding that the “essential interests” of the State are limited to
its existence. The Committee considers that when paragraphs 306 to 308 of
the Award are read as a whole, it is implicit that the Tribunal, while rejecting
the argument that the existence of Argentina was threatened, nonetheless
accepted that an “essential interest” of Argentina may have been affected.
The Committee considers that this follows from the Tribunal’s findings that
“there was a severe crisis and ... in such context it was unlikely that business
could have continued as usual”, that “the government had the duty to prevent
the worsening of the situation and could not simply leave events to follow their
own course”, and that “[i]t is quite evident that measures had to be adopted to

offset the unfolding crisis” (Award, paragraphs 306-308).

Although the Tribunal made no express finding that an “essential interest” of
Argentina was affected, the Committee considers it necessarily implicit from
these statements in the Award that at the very least the Tribunal left open that
the “essential interests” requirement of Article 25(1)(a) might be satisfied, as
well as the requirement that the measures in question were taken to
safeguard that essential interest from a “grave and imminent peril’. The
Tribunal may have left this open rather than deciding the matter on the basis
that the Tribunal considered that, in any event, other requirements of Article

25 considered below were not met.

The first of these other requirements was the requirement in ILC Article
25(1)(a) that the measures of Argentina in question must have been “the only
way’ to safeguard the essential interest. The Tribunal found that this

requirement was not satisfied at paragraphs 308 to 309 of the Award.

The Tribunal’s reason for so finding was that “there are always many
approaches to address and correct such critical events, and it is difficult to
justify that none of them were available in the Argentine case”. The Tribunal
indicated at paragraph 309 that it was not the Tribunal’s role to say what
alternative Argentina should have adopted, and that the Tribunal confined

itself to finding that there were alternatives that Argentina could have adopted.

149

363.

364.

365.

366.

330

Although the Tribunal did not in this paragraph identify what any of these
alternatives might have been, this paragraph must be read in the context of
the Award as whole, and in particular in the light of paragraph 300 of the

Award, which states that:

The Claimants also argue that options other than

pesification were available and thus this measure was not

the only way to address the crisis; among the options

discussed there was the structural reforms indicated, the

agreed restructuring of its debt, dollarization and devaluation

without pesification. Such alternative plans have worked in

other countries, such as Uruguay, the expert explains.
The reference to the “expert” in the final sentence of this quote must from
context be a reference to the expert report of Professor Sebastian Edwards
dated April 27, 2005 (the “Edwards Report”),°°° which is referred to in a
footnote in paragraph 300 of the Award, as well as in the first sentence of the
following paragraph 301. The measures other than pesification that could in
the opinion of Professor Edwards have been adopted by Argentina are set out

in paragraphs 12 to 21, 83-125 and 134-137 of the Edwards Report.

The Committee notes that the Edwards Report deals separately with
alternatives that would have been available to Argentina in the 1990s and
2000 (paragraphs 13, 84-85 and 134 of the Edwards Report), in 2001
(paragraphs 14-16, 86-96 and 135-136 of the Edwards Report), and at the
time of adoption of the Emergency Law in January 2002 (paragraphs 17-21,
97-125 and 137 of the Edwards Report).

For instance, in relation to the time at which the Emergency Law was adopted
in January 2002, the only alternative to the adoption of the Emergency Law
that is identified in the Edwards Report is devaluation of the peso without
pesification of contracts denominated in US dollars, accompanied by other
measures (a non-comprehensive list of which is given in paragraphs 20 and
108 of the Edwards Report) for assisting debtors who had borrowed in dollars

and for whom devaluation would result in financial distress.

Exhibit CEX-40 to the Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Annulment.

150

367.

368.

369.

370.

The Committee considers it sufficiently implicit that the Tribunal’s reasoning
was that the Claimants (via the Edwards Report) had identified alternative
ways in which Argentina could have sought to address the economic crisis,
that the Tribunal was not satisfied that none of these alternatives would have
been available to Argentina, and that the Tribunal was therefore not satisfied
that the “only way” requirement in Article 25(1)(a) of the ILC Articles was
satisfied.

The Committee finds that this reasoning of the Tribunal does not address a
number of issues that are essential to the question of whether the “only way”

requirement was met.

The first question concerns the legal definition of the expression “only way” in
Article 25(1)(a) of the ILC Articles. The Committee notes that the expression
is capable of more than one possible interpretation. One potential
interpretation is that it has its literal meaning, such that in the present case,
the principle of necessity could be relied on by Argentina if there were
genuinely no other measures that Argentina could possibly have adopted in
order to address the economic crisis. As Argentina points out, there will
almost inevitably be more than one way for a Government to respond to any
economic crisis, and if this interpretation were correct, the principle of
necessity under customary international law could rarely if ever be invoked in
relation to measures taken by a Government to deal with an economic crisis.
However, that would not mean that it would not be open to a Tribunal to find
that this is the correct interpretation, although there are other interpretations

that would be equally open to a Tribunal.

For instance, another possible interpretation would be that there must be no
alternative measures that the State might have taken for safeguarding the
essential interest in question that did not involve a similar or graver breach of
international law. Under this interpretation, if there are three possible
alternative measures that a State might adopt, all of which would involve
violations of the State’s obligations under international law, the State will not
be prevented from invoking the principle of necessity if it adopts the measure

involving the least grave violation of international law. Under this

151

371.

372.

interpretation, the principle of necessity will only be precluded if there is an
alternative that would not involve a breach of international law or which would

involve a less grave breach of international law.

A second question not addressed by the Tribunal is whether the relative
effectiveness of alternative measures is to be taken into account. In adopting
measures to safeguard an essential interest, a State may in practice not be in
a position to know with certainty whether a given measure will prove to be
effective, and reasonable minds may judge that some measures are likely to
be more effective than others. For instance, suppose that there are two
possible measures that a State might take in order to seek to safeguard an
essential interest. One is 90 per cent probable to be 90 per cent effective to
safeguard that essential interest, while the other is 50 per cent probable to be
60 per cent effective. Suppose that the former measure would (subject to the
potential application of the principle of necessity) be inconsistent with
obligations of the State under international law, while the latter measure would
not. Would the State be precluded from invoking the principle of necessity if it
adopted the former measure, on the basis that there was an alternative
available? Or could the State claim that the measure taken was the “only

way” that stood a very high chance of being very effective?

A third question that is not specifically addressed by the Tribunal is who
makes the decision whether there is a relevant alternative, and in accordance
with what test? Does the Tribunal determine this at the date of its award,
when the Tribunal may have the benefit of knowledge and hindsight that was
not available to the State at the time that it adopted the measure in question?
Or does the Tribunal determine whether, on the basis of information
reasonably available at the time that the measure was adopted, a reasonable
and appropriately qualified decision maker would have concluded that there
was a relevant alternative open to the State? Or does customary international
law recognise that reasonable minds might differ in relation to such a
question, and give a “margin of appreciation” to the State in question? In that

event, the relevant question for the Tribunal might be whether it was

152

373.

374.

375.

376.

reasonably open to the State, in the circumstances as they pertained at the

relevant time, to form the opinion that no relevant alternative was open.

It is not for the Committee in these annulment proceedings to provide answers
to these questions. It was however necessary for the Tribunal, either
expressly or sub silentio, to decide or assume the answers in order to apply

the “only way” provision of Article 25(1)(a) to the facts of this case.

On no view could Professor Edwards be said to have expressed an expert
opinion on these questions. Professor Edwards is an economist and not a
lawyer, and his report does not purport to address the principle of necessity
under customary international law or the interpretation of Article 25 of the ILC
Articles. When Professor Edwards states that Argentina had other options for
dealing with the economic crisis, he so states as an economist, and does not
suggest that these other options would have amounted to relevant
alternatives for purposes of the “only way” requirement of Article 25 of the ILC
Articles.

The Committee notes that from the material before it, the parties in their
arguments before the Tribunal do not appear to have expressly identified and
argued the questions set out above, which would provide an explanation for
why the Tribunal did not expressly address them. A Tribunal is not required to
address expressly every argument put by a party, and a Tribunal is therefore

certainly not required to address arguments that have not been put by parties.

Having said that, the Tribunal is required to apply the applicable law, and is
required to state sufficient reasons for its decision. In this case, a reading of
the cursory reasoning of paragraphs 300 and 308-309 of the Award clearly
suggests that the Tribunal accepted the expert evidence of Professor
Edwards over the conflicting expert evidence of Professor Nouriel Roubini, to
the effect that Argentina had other options available to it for dealing with the
economic crisis. From this, without any further analysis, the Tribunal
immediately concluded, that the measures adopted by Argentina were not the

“only way”.

153

377.

378.

379.

The Tribunal was required to determine whether, on the proper construction of
Article 25(1)(a) of the ILC Articles, the “only way” requirement in that provision
was Satisfied, and not merely whether, from an economic perspective, there
were other options available for dealing with the economic crisis. The
Committee concludes that in determining that the measures adopted were not
the “only way”, the Tribunal did not in fact apply Article 25(1)(a) of the ILC
Articles (or more precisely, customary international law as reflected in that
provision), but instead applied an expert opinion on an economic issue. In all
the circumstances the Committee finds that this amounts to a failure to apply
the applicable law, as ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention.

Further, even if the Tribunal did in fact satisfy itself that the “only way”
requirement in Article 25(1)(a) was not met on the evidence before it, it is not
apparent from the reasoning in the Award how or why the Tribunal came to
that legal conclusion. Even if, contrary to all appearance, the Tribunal did
apply the “only way” requirement in Article 25(1)(a), the Committee considers
that the Tribunal failed to state reasons for its decision. This constitutes a

ground for annulment under Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.

The next issue that was considered by the Tribunal, dealt with in paragraph
310 of the Award, was whether the measures adopted by Argentina “seriously
impairfed] an essential interest of the State or States towards which the
obligation exists, or of the international community as a whole”, within the
meaning of Article 25(1)(b) of the ILC Articles. The Tribunal found in that
paragraph that “the interest of the international community does not appear to
be in any way impaired’, and said that the Tribunal would discuss
subsequently whether there was an impairment of an essential interest of the
State towards which the obligation exists. This subsequent discussion to
which the Tribunal refers is paragraphs 341 to 342 of the Award. In
paragraph 342, the Tribunal concluded that:

... in the context of investment treaties there is still the need
to take into consideration the interests of the private entities
who are the ultimate beneficiaries of those obligations, as
explained by the English court case in OEPC noted. The
essential interest of the Claimants would certainly be

154

380.

381.

382.

383.

seriously impaired by the operation of ... state of necessity in

this case.
The reference in this paragraph to the OEPC case appears to be a reference
back to paragraph 338 of the Award, which states:

As an English court has recently held in respect of a claim of

non-justiciability relating to a State challenge to the OEPC

award, the fact that a treaty is concluded between States

cannot derogate from rights that belong to private parties, in

the instance concerning dispute settlement, and as a

consequence the doctrine of non-justiciability could not

apply.
A footnote to that paragraph indicates that the reference to the OEPC case is
to Republic of Ecuador v. Occidental Exploration and Production Company
(OEPC), Queen's Bench Application of April 29, 2005, at paragraph 85. This
paragraph of that decision states:

! appreciate also that Article VIl provides the means

whereby the state Parties to the BIT can resolve a dispute

as to the interpretation or application of the BIT through an

arbitral tribunal "in accordance with the applicable rules of

international law". But there is no dispute as between the

USA and Ecuador, so far as | know. And that provision of

the BIT cannot detract from the rights given to Occidental to

have an investment dispute resolved in accordance with the

procedures laid down in Article VI. That is what it has done

and that is what Ecuador wishes to challenge. [Footnote

omitted.]
That paragraph of that decision was not concerned with the principle of
necessity under customary international law, or with Article 25 of the ILC
Articles, or indeed with the question of what are the “essential interests” of the
two contracting States to a BIT. The relevance to the quoted passage from
the OEPC case to the application of Article 25(1)(b) of the ILC Articles is

entirely obscure.

Paragraph 310 of the Award might be understood as stating implicitly that in
the context of a BIT, an essential interest of one contracting State will be
seriously impaired if the other contracting State fails to respect the rights
under the BIT of a national of the former. However, this is far from clearly
implicit. Paragraph 342 of the Award states that “The essential interest of the

Claimants would certainly be seriously impaired by the operation of ... state of

155

384.

385.

386.

387.

388.

necessity in this case”. This suggests that the Tribunal considered that the
principle of necessity would not, or might not, apply in the context of a BIT if
the application of the principle of necessity would seriously impair an essential
interest of a national of the other contracting State to the BIT. This contrasts
with the language of Article 25(1)(b) of the ILC Articles, which speaks of a
situation where the act of the State invoking the principle of necessity would

seriously impair a relevant essential interest.

The Tribunal nowhere states expressly that it finds the requirement in Article
25(1)(b) of the ILC not to be satisfied in this case. The Committee considers it
unclear whether the Tribunal ultimately did make such a finding or not. To the
extent that the Tribunal did make such a finding, the Committee considers that
it is entirely unclear on what basis that finding of law was made, and the
Committee concludes that the Tribunal therefore failed to state reasons for
that decision, within the meaning of Article 52(1)(e) of the ICSID Convention.

The next issue that was considered by the Tribunal, dealt with in paragraphs
311-313 of the Award, was whether Argentina “contributed to the situation of
necessity’ within the meaning of Article 25(2)(b) of the ILC Articles.

As in the case of the “only way” requirement, the Committee considers it self-
evident that this requirement is potentially capable of more than one
interpretation, and that the Tribunal was necessarily required, either expressly
or sub silentio, to decide or assume the correct interpretation in order to apply

the provision to the facts of the case.

On the most literal interpretation of this requirement, if there is any causal link
at all between the conduct of the State and the situation of necessity, the
principle of necessity will not apply, no matter how small a contribution the
State’s conduct made to the situation of necessity, regardless of whether or
not the State was in any way blameworthy for that conduct, and regardless of
whether or not the State could have in any way foreseen that its conduct

would contribute to a situation of necessity.

It would appear that the Tribunal did not adopt such a literal interpretation. At
paragraph 311 of the Award it said that “This [requirement in Article 25(2)(b)

156

389.

390.

391.

of the ILC Articles] is of course the expression of a general principle of law
devised to prevent a party taking legal advantage of its own fault’. The
Tribunal therefore appeared to consider that conduct of a State contributing to
a situation of necessity for purposes of Article 25(2)(b) of the ILC Articles must

be conduct constituting some sort of “fault” on the part of the State.

However, that begs the question as to what will amount to “fault” in this
context. Must the conduct of the State in question be deliberate (in the sense
of being deliberately intended to bring about the situation of necessity), or
does it suffice that the conduct was reckless or negligent, or is some even

lesser degree of fault sufficient?

The Tribunal did not address this question. The Tribunal found at paragraphs
311-312 of the Award that:

Although each party claims that the factors precipitating the
crisis were either endogenous or exogenous, the truth
seems to be somewhere in between with both kind of factors
having intervened, as in the end it has been so recognized
by both the Government of Argentina and international
organizations and foreign governments.

... This means that to an extent there has been a substantial

contribution of the State to the situation of necessity and that

it cannot be claimed that the burden falls entirely on

exogenous factors. This has not been the making of a

particular administration as it is a problem that had been

compounding its effects for a decade, but still the State must

answer as a whole.
From these paragraphs it is apparent to the Committee that the Tribunal’s
finding that Argentina made a substantial contribution to the situation of
necessity was based on the finding that the crisis was caused by both
“endogenous” factors and “exogenous” factors. From these paragraphs read
in conjunction with the first sentence of paragraph 300 of the Award, it is
apparent that the Tribunal’s finding that the crisis was caused at least in part
by endogenous factors was based on paragraphs 33-82 of the Edwards
Report. That report expresses the view that Argentina made various mistakes
in its management of its economy in the years preceding and during the

economic crisis, and states for instance at paragraph 74 that:

157

392.

393.

While external factors undoubtedly did play a role in the
slowdown of the economy after 1998, that role was minor
when compared to Argentina's own misguided policies - both
during the 1990s and during 2000-2001. Those misguided
internal policies greatly amplified the effects of external
shocks on the Argentine economy.

However, Professor Edwards was speaking as an expert economist. He was
not addressing the principle of necessity under customary international law,
or Article 25(2)(b) of the ILC Articles.

As in the case of the “only way” requirement, the Committee notes that from
the material before it, the parties in their arguments before the Tribunal do not
appear to have expressly identified and argued the issue of the legal definition
of the expression “contributed to the situation of necessity” in Article 25(2)(b)
of the ILC Articles. However, the Committee again considers that the Tribunal
is nonetheless required to apply the applicable law. The Committee considers
that a reading of the cursory reasoning of the Tribunal in paragraphs 300 and
311-312 of the Award clearly suggests that the Tribunal accepted the expert
evidence of Professor Edwards to the effect that Argentina’s own “misguided”
policies contributed to the magnitude of the economic crisis, and that from this
the Tribunal directly concluded that the measures adopted by Argentina

“contributed to the situation of necessity’.

The Committee finds that in reaching that conclusion, the Tribunal did not in
fact apply Article 25(2)(b) of the ILC Articles (or more precisely, customary
international law as reflected in that provision), but instead applied an expert
opinion on an economic issue. While an economist might regard a State’s
economic policies as misguided, and might conclude that such policies led to
or amplified the effects of an economic crisis, that would not of itself
necessarily mean that as a matter of law, the State had “contributed to the
situation of necessity’ such as to preclude reliance on the principle of
necessity under customary international law. The Tribunal’s process of
reasoning should have been as follows. First, the Tribunal should have found
the relevant facts based on all of the evidence before it, including the Edwards
Report. Secondly, the Tribunal should have applied the legal elements of the

Article 25(2)(b) to the facts as found (having if necessary made legal findings

158

394.

395.

396.

397.

398.

as to what those legal elements are). Thirdly, in the light of the first two steps,
the Tribunal should have concluded whether or not Argentina had “contributed
to the situation of necessity’ within the meaning of Article 25(2)(b). For the
Tribunal to leap from the first step to the third without undertaking the second
amounts in the Committee’s view to a failure to apply the applicable law. This
constitutes a ground of annulment under Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID
Convention.

The final issue considered by the Tribunal was whether the BIT itself
“excludes the possibility of invoking necessity’, thereby precluding reliance on
that principle in terms of Article 25(2)(a) of the ILC Articles. At paragraph 310
of the Award, the Tribunal said that it would discuss this issue subsequently.
The Committee finds that the Tribunal did not subsequently make any
determination of this question.

For these reasons, the Committee finds that the decisions of the Tribunal that
requirements of Article 25 of the ILC Articles were not met were tainted by
annullable error. The Committee accordingly finds that the Tribunal’s decision
that Argentina is precluded from relying on the principle of necessity under

customary international law must be annulled.

Article 1V(3) of the BIT

The section of the Award dealing with this issue sets out the arguments of
Argentina (Award, paragraphs 314-316) and of the Claimants (Award,
paragraphs 317-319), followed by the Tribunal’s consideration and conclusion
(Award, paragraphs 320-321).

The Tribunal ultimately found that this provision of the BIT, contrary to the
submissions of Argentina, does not have the effect of allowing the host State

to derogate from rights under the BIT in times of emergency.

It may well be that different interpretations of this provision are possible.

However, for the reasons given in paragraphs 60-77 above, it is not for the

159

399.

400.

401.

402.

403.

Committee to determine whether or not the interpretation given to this
provision by the Tribunal was correct or not. Whether it did so correctly or
not, the Tribunal applied this provision as part of the applicable law. The
Committee considers that from paragraphs 320-321 of the Award, read
together with the preceding paragraphs setting out the arguments of the
parties, the Tribunal’s reasons for adopting the interpretation that it did are

sufficiently clear. The Committee finds no annullable error.

The Committee accordingly finds no annullable error in this section of the
Award.

Article XI of the BIT

The section of the Award dealing with this issue sets out the arguments of
Argentina (Award, paragraphs 324-326) and of the Claimants (Award,
paragraphs 327-330), followed by the Tribunal’s consideration and conclusion
(Award, paragraphs 331-342).

In its reasoning in respect of this issue, the Tribunal found (at paragraphs
331-332 and 335-342) that Article XI of the BIT is not “self-judging”. This
finding is the Tribunal’s ruling on the arguments of Argentina referred to in
paragraphs 324 and 326 of the Award. The Claimants’ response to that
argument is referred to in paragraphs 327-328 and 330 of the Award.

The Committee considers that when these paragraphs are read as a whole,
the reasons for the Tribunal in reaching the conclusion that it did are quite
clear. It is not for the Committee to determine whether that interpretation was
correct or not. The Committee accordingly finds no annullable error in these

paragraphs of the Award.

At paragraphs 333-344 of the Award, the Tribunal then concluded that it is
“necessary to rely on the requirements of state of necessity under customary
international law, as outlined above in connection with their expression in

Article 25 of the Articles on State Responsibility, so as to evaluate whether

160

404.

405.

331

such requirements have been met in this case”. This was said in paragraph
333 of the Award with particular reference to the expression “security
interests” in Article Xl. The apparent meaning of these paragraphs is that the
Tribunal found that the effect of Article XI of the BIT is the same or similar to
the effect of Article 25 of the ILC Articles, or at least, that the expression
“measures necessary for ... the Protection of its own essential security
interests” in Article XI of the BIT has the same or similar meaning as the
expression “fan act that is] the only way for the State to safeguard an
essential interest against a grave and imminent peril’ in Article 25 of the ILC
Articles. The Committee finds that the reasons for the Tribunal in reaching
the conclusion are sufficiently clear, that it is not for the Committee to
determine whether or not that interpretation was correct, and the Committee

accordingly finds no annullable error in these paragraphs of the Award.

In view of this finding, the Tribunal then proceeded at paragraphs 339-341 of
the Award to note that as it had already found that Argentina could not rely on
the principle of necessity under customary international law because the
requirements of Article 25 of the ILC Articles were not satisfied, for similar

reasons Argentina could not rely on Article XI of the BIT in this case.

The Committee has concluded above that the Tribunal’s finding that the
requirements of Article 25 of the ILC Articles are not satisfied in this case
must be annulled. Because that finding formed the basis of the Tribunal’s
finding that Article XI of the BIT was inapplicable in this case, the Committee
concludes that the latter finding of the Tribunal must also be annulled.

The Committee notes that in the CMS Annulment Decision, the ad hoc
committee expressed the view that the requirements under Article XI of the
BIT are not the same as those under customary international law as codified
by Article 25 of the ILC Articles, and that the tribunal in the CMS Award had
erred on this point.°°" The ad hoc committee in that case also considered that
because the two texts have a different operation and content, it was
necessary for the tribunal to take a position on their relationship and to decide

whether they were both applicable in that case, and that the tribunal had

CMS Annulment Decision {| 130.

161

406.

407.

332

made a manifest error of law in failing to do so.°** However, the Committee
considers that the substantive operation and content of Article XI and the
customary international law principles of necessity, and the interrelationship of
the two, are issues that fall for decision by the tribunal. The role of an
annulment committee is not to reach its own conclusions on these issues, but
to determine whether the tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers in reaching
the conclusion that it did, or whether the tribunal failed to state reasons for
reaching the conclusion that it did. The Committee has concluded that both
the Tribunal’s decision that Argentina is precluded from relying on Article XI,
and the Tribunal’s decision that Argentina is precluded from relying on the
principle of necessity under customary international law, are tainted by
annullable error. It follows that both of those findings of the Tribunal and its
associated reasoning must be annulled. In the circumstances, there is no
occasion for the Committee to go further and to express any view on the
correctness or otherwise of the Tribunal’s findings with respect to the
substantive operation and content of, and interrelationship between, Article XI
and the customary international law principles of necessity, and the

Committee does not do so.

Conclusions

The Committee has found above that the Tribunal’s decision that Argentina is
precluded from relying on Article XI of the BIT and on the principle of

necessity under customary international law must be annulled.

The findings of the Tribunal that Argentina was precluded from relying on
Article XI of the BIT and on the principle of necessity under customary
international law were essential to the Tribunal’s disposition of the case. The
Committee finds it necessarily implicit in the reasoning in the Award that if the
Tribunal had found that Argentina was entitled to rely on Article XI of the BIT
or on the principle of necessity, it might have found that Argentina was not

liable for any breach of the BIT. It therefore follows that the Tribunal’s ultimate

CMS Annulment Decision {J 131-132, and see also {J 145-146.

162

408.

409.

410.

333
334

finding that Argentina breached its obligations vis-a-vis the Claimants under
the fair and equitable treatment clause and umbrella clause of the BIT must

also be annulled.

Having annulled these findings of the Tribunal, the Committee cannot go
further and make its own findings as to whether or not Argentina is entitled to
rely on the principle of necessity under customary international law or on
Article XI of the BIT, or as to whether or not Argentina is responsible for
breaches of its obligations vis-a-vis the Claimants under the fair and equitable
treatment clause and umbrella clause of the BIT. These questions could only
be determined by a tribunal, in the event that either party were to request

resubmission pursuant to Article 52(6) of the ICSID Convention.

Argentina has also sought annulment of the Tribunal’s findings and decision
with respect to the quantum of compensation awarded.*°? However, a
preliminary question arises as to whether, even if Argentina’s arguments in
this respect were rejected, the Tribunal’s decision on compensation could in

any event stand in view of the annulment of its decision on liability.

rt.334

It is clearly possible for an award to be annulled only in pa As one ad hoc

committee has stated:

. a party to annulment proceedings which successfully
pleads and sustains a ground for annulment set out in
Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention cannot limit the extent
to which an ad hoc committee may decide to annul the
impugned award as a consequence. Certain grounds of
annulment will affect the award as a whole—for example,
where it is demonstrated that the tribunal which rendered
the award was not properly constituted (Article 52(1)(a)).
Others may only affect part of the award. An ad hoc
committee is expressly authorised by the Convention to
annul an award “in whole or in part” (Article 52(3)).

Thus where a ground for annulment is established, it is for
the ad hoc committee, and not the requesting party, to
determine the extent of the annulment. In making this
determination, the committee is not bound by the
applicant's characterisation of its request, whether in the
original application or otherwise, as requiring either

Application for Annulment [| 61-64, 77-90.

ICSID Convention, Article 52(3) (final sentence); ICSID Arbitration Rule 55(3).

163

411.

412.

413.

414.

335,

complete or partial annulment of the award. This is reflected
in the difference in language between Articles 52(1) and
52(3), and it is further supported by the travaux of the ICSID
Convention.*>

As another ad hoc committee has also stated:

Generally speaking, partial annulment would seem
appropriate if the part of the Award affected by the excess
of power is identifiable and detachable from the rest, and if
so, the remaining part of the Award has an independent
basis.°°°
For this reason, the Committee considers that it would be inappropriate to
annul an entire award where the decision on annulment affects only a discrete

part of parts of an award.

Liability and quantum of compensation are two discrete issues, but a decision
on the latter must necessarily follow the decision on the former. It is
unproblematic in theory to annul the portion of an award dealing with quantum
of compensation but to leave intact the portion dealing with liability. In that
event, in any resubmission proceedings, the issue before the resubmission
tribunal would be confined to determining the quantum of damages in the light

of the findings on liability made by the original tribunal.

The position is otherwise where the finding on liability is annulled. There can
be no obligation to pay compensation in the absence of any liability. Following
annulment of the Tribunal’s finding on liability, its finding on damages can
simply no longer stand, but must fall with the finding on liability. In the event
that resubmission proceedings were requested, and in the event that a
resubmission tribunal were to make a new finding of liability, it would be for
that tribunal to also make a new finding of damages. The Committee therefore
finds that the Tribunal’s original decision with respect to damages must also
be annulled in consequence of the annulment of the Tribunal’s finding on
liability. In the circumstances, there is no need for the Committee to consider
Argentina’s contentions that the Tribunal’s findings with respect to damages

themselves contained annullable errors.

Vivendi Annulment Decision [| 68-69.

$86 Kléckner Annulment Decision 180.

164

415.

416.

417.

337
338
339

The Committee finds however that the parts of the Award other than those
referred to above are detachable from the annulled portions and have an

independent existence. These other parts are not annulled.

A further issue concerns the Tribunal’s decision with respect to the costs of
the proceedings before the Tribunal. The Tribunal decided that each party is
to bear the legal costs by it in connection with those proceedings and that the
arbitration costs were to be borne in equal shares by the parties. The Tribunal
indicated that it reached this decision as to costs “Considering ... the various

issues in this case”,°°”

which would have included the consideration that the
Claimants had succeeded in their claim. The question is whether the partial
annulment of the Award removes the basis for that decision as to costs. For
instance, as the ad hoc committee said in the M/NE Annulment Decision, in
which the award was partially annulled:

The award of costs can nevertheless not remain in

existence since its basis, viz., that Guinea was the losing

party, has disappeared as a result of the annulment of the

portion of the Award relating to damages. The award of

costs cannot survive the annulment of that portion of the

Award with which it is inextricably linked. The Committee

therefore finds that the award of costs must be annulled in

consequence of the annulment of the damages portion of

the Award.>%®
However, the present case is distinguishable in that in the MINE case, the
tribunal had awarded to the successful claimant costs towards its fees and
expenses in the ICSID arbitration.*°° In the present case, the Tribunal ordered
both parties to bear their own costs and to share equally the arbitration costs
notwithstanding that the Claimants had succeeded in their claim. The
Committee finds no reason for thinking that the Tribunal would not have made
exactly the same order, even if Argentina had been successful in defending
the claim. The Committee therefore sees no reason for annulling the

Tribunal’s decision as to the costs of the proceedings before the Tribunal.

Award {| 453.
MINE Annulment Decision {| 6.112.
MINE Annulment Decision {| 2.01.

165

418.

419.

420.

421.

340
341

342
343,

Costs and stay of proceedings

Under Article 61(2) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule
47(1)(j), read in conjunction with Article 52(4) of the ICSID Convention and
ICSID Arbitration Rule 53, the Committee has a discretion to determine how
and by whom shall be paid the expenses incurred by the parties in connection
with the proceedings, the fees and expenses of the members of the

Committee and the charges for the use of the facilities of the Centre.

The Committee notes that in the MTD Annulment Decision, it was said that:

In all but one of the concluded annulment proceedings,
Committees have made no order for the parties’ own costs
and have held that ICSID’s costs should be borne equally
by the parties. They did so not only where the application
for annulment succeeded in whole or part but also where it

failed.*°
Other annulment decisions have also adopted the same approach to costs,**"
which has been referred to a “developing practice”,°“? subject to some

flexibility, for instance in a case where the annulment application was
“fundamentally lacking in merit’ and that the respondent's case was “to any

reasonable and impartial observer, most unlikely to succeed” >“

On the other hand, in the Azurix Annulment Decision, the ad hoc committee
took a different approach. It noted that under Regulation 14(3)(e) of the ICSID
Administrative and Financial Regulations, the default rule is that an applicant
for annulment is solely responsible for making the advance payments to
ICSID on account of ICSID’s costs. It contrasted this provision with Regulation
14(3)(d) of the ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulations, which applies
to the original proceedings before a tribunal, under which the default rule is

that each party shall pay one half of each advance payment to ICSID on

MTD Annulment Decision {| 110.

Soufraki Annulment Decision {| 138; CMS Annulment Decision {[f] 161-162; Lucchetti Annulment
Decision J 131.

Soufraki Annulment Decision {| 138.

MTD Annulment Decision {| 111. See also Repso/ YPF Ecuador S.A. v. Empresa Estatal
Petréleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador), \CSID Case No. ARB/01/10, Decision on Annulment,
January 08, 2007, {| 88; Malaysian Historical Salvors, SDN, BHD v. Malaysia, \CSID Case No.
ARB/05/10, Decision on Annulment, April 16, 2009, ] 82.

166

422.

423.

424.

account of the costs of the arbitration. The ad hoc committee in Azurix
concluded that:

As to this difference in approach the Committee takes the
view that a default position is thereby established that in the
absence of other order a party who has applied for
annulment and has paid in advance all of the costs of the
Centre in relation to that application as is required by the
Regulations should bear those costs.>“*

The ad hoc committee then went on to conclude that:

The Committee considers that under the Regulations, and
as a matter of discretion, the normal course should be for a
wholly unsuccessful applicant for annulment carry the
burden of the whole of the costs of the Centre advanced by
it associated with the proceedings, including the fees and
expenses of the members of the ad hoc committee. Of
course, the Committee does not exclude the possibility that
circumstances might justify a departure from this normal
rule, but the Committee finds no such exceptional
circumstances in the present case. In particular, the fact
that there are novel and complex issues to be determined in
the annulment proceedings, as here, does not of itself
amount to such exceptional circumstances. Also, as here, it
is of the essence of annulment matters that they are original
and difficult.“

A similar approach was subsequently taken in the MC/ Annulment Decision, in
which the ad hoc committee concluded that a consequence of Regulation
14(3)(e) of the ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulations “should
normally be that the applicant, when annulment is refused, remains

responsible for these costs”.°4°

However, unlike the Azurix and MCI cases, this is not a case in which the
annulment application has been entirely unsuccessful. In the present case,
the application for annulment of Argentina has succeeded in part, but not in
whole. The Committee considers that it would be appropriate in the
circumstances and in the light of previous annulment decisions for ICSID’s

costs in these annulment proceedings to be borne equally by the parties.

4 Azurix Annulment Decision { 373.
“48 azurix Annulment Decision 9.378.
348 MCI Annulment Decision 7 88.

167

425.

426.

427.

As to each party’s own litigation costs, the Committee notes that after the oral
hearing on the merits, each of the parties submitted details of the precise
costs of their own representation in these annulment proceedings. The
Committee notes that the costs of each party were of a comparable
magnitude. In view of this, and in view of the fact that the application for
annulment of Argentina has succeeded in part but not in whole, the
Committee considers that it would also be appropriate in the circumstances
and in the light of previous annulment decisions for each party to bear its own
litigation costs and expenses incurred with respect to this annulment

proceeding, including its costs of legal representation.

During these annulment proceedings, the enforcement of the Award was
stayed pending the Committee’s decision on the Application for Annulment,
pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule
54(1) and (2). ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(3) provides that:

If a stay of enforcement has been granted pursuant to

paragraph (1) or continued pursuant to paragraph (2), the

Tribunal or Committee may at any time modify or terminate

the stay at the request of either party. All stays shall

automatically terminate on the date on which a final

decision is rendered on the application, except that a

Committee granting the partial annulment of an award may

order the temporary stay of enforcement of the unannulled

portion in order to give either party an opportunity to request

any new Tribunal constituted pursuant to Article 52(6) of the

Convention to grant a stay pursuant to Rule 55(3).
The present stay of enforcement of the Award thus terminates with the
rendering of the present decision of the Committee. Given that the Tribunal’s
decision on liability as well as its decision on damages have both been
annulled, the remaining portions of the Award that have not been annulled are
presently incapable of enforcement, and will remain so unless and until that
position is altered by a subsequent decision of a tribunal on resubmission. In
the circumstances, the Committee considers that there is no need for it to
make any order pursuant to the second sentence of ICSID Arbitration Rule

54(3).

168

Decision

For the reasons given above, the Committee:

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

pursuant to Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention, annuls the
finding of the Tribunal and associated reasoning that the
Argentine Republic is precluded from relying on Article XI of the
BIT;

pursuant to Article 52(1)(b) of the ICSID Convention, annuls the
finding of the Tribunal and associated reasoning that the
Argentine Republic is precluded from relying on the principle of
necessity under customary international law;

consequently to (1) and (2), annuls the decision of the Tribunal in
paragraph 1 of the Disposition of the Award that “The Respondent
breached its obligations to accord the investor the fair and
equitable treatment guaranteed in Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty and
to observe the obligations entered into with regard to the
Investment guaranteed in Article II(2)(c) of the Treaty”;

consequently to (1), (2) and (3), annuls the decision of the Tribunal
in paragraph 2 of the Disposition of the Award that “The
Respondent shall pay the Claimants compensation in the amount
of US$106.2 million”, and the decision of the Tribunal in paragraph
3 of the Disposition of the Award relating to the payment of
interest on such compensation;

otherwise rejects the application for annulment of the Argentine
Republic;

decides that each Party shall bear one half of the costs incurred
by the Centre in tion with this anr pr di
including the fees and expenses of the members of the
Committee;

 

decides that each Party shall bear its own litigation costs and
expenses incurred with respect to this annulment proceeding,
including its costs of legal representation.

169

     

Dr. Gavan Griffith Q)
President of the ad hoc
Ss 27.2e/0o

p— Lhe

 

Judge LL L. Robinson Judge Per Tresselt
Member of the ad hoc Committee Member of the ad hoc Committee

06/30/10 25.7. 2010

170

