INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

WASHINGTON, D.C.

DECISION ON JURISDICTION

ICSID CASE No. ARB/01/3

ENRON CORPORATION AND PONDEROSA ASSETS, L.P.
Claimants
v.
THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

Respondent

Before the Arbitral Tribunal composed of:

Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuiia (President)
Dr. Héctor Gros Espiell (Arbitrator)
Mr. Pierre-Yves Tschanz (Arbitrator)

Secretary of the Tribunal

Claudia Frutos-Peterson

Washington, D.C., January 14, 2004

A.

1.

Procedure

On February 26, 2001, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (ICSID or the Centre) received from Enron Corporation and Ponderosa
Assets L.P., a Request for Arbitration against the Argentine Republic. On
February 27, 2001, the Centre acknowledged receipt and transmitted a copy of the
Request to the Argentine Republic and to the Argentine Embassy in Washington,
D.C., in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the
Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (Institution Rules). The
Request concerns certain tax assessments allegedly imposed by some Argentinean
provinces in respect to a gas transportation company in which the Claimants
participated through investments in various corporate arrangements that will be
described below. In the Request, the Claimants invoke the provisions of the 1991
Treaty between the United States of America and the Argentine Republic
Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investments (“the
Bilateral Investment Treaty” or “Bilateral Treaty”).'

On April 5, 2001, the Centre requested the Claimants to explain how each of the
two Claimants in the present case would meet the conditions for registration of its
request. On April 6, 2003, the Claimants satisfied this request.

Pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention, on April 11, 2001, the
Secretary-General of the Centre registered the Request. On the same date, in
accordance with Institution Rule 7, the Secretary-General notified the parties of
the registration of the Request and invited them to proceed to constitute an

Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible.

4. On April 12, 2001, the Claimants submitted a proposal for the number of
arbitrators and the method of their appointment. Under the Claimants’ proposal,
the Tribunal would consist of three arbitrators, one arbitrator to be appointed by
each party and the third, who would be the President of the Tribunal, to be
appointed by agreement of the parties.

5. On April 25, 2001, the Argentine Republic notified the Centre of its agreement to
the Claimants’ proposal concerning the number of arbitrators and the method of
their appointment. In those circumstances, on April 27, 2001, the Centre
confirmed that the Arbitral Tribunal in the present case would consist of three
arbitrators, one arbitrator appointed by each party and the third, who would serve
as the President of the Tribunal, to be appointed by agreement of the parties.

6. On May 11, 2001, the Claimants appointed Mr. Pierre-Yves Tschanz, a Swiss
national. On July 10, 2001, the Argentine Republic appointed Dr. Héctor Gros
Espiell, a national of Uruguay. The parties, however, failed to agree on the
appointment of the third, presiding, arbitrator. By letter dated August 30, 2001,
the Claimants requested that the third, presiding, arbitrator be appointed pursuant
to Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 4 of the ICSID Rules of
Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules”).

7. In those circumstances, and after consulting the parties, Professor Francisco
Orrego Vicufia, a Chilean national, was appointed by the Centre as the third
presiding arbitrator. Pursuant to Rule 6(1) of the Arbitration Rules, on November
1, 2001, the Secretary-General notified the parties that all three arbitrators had

accepted their appointment and the Arbitral Tribunal was therefore deemed to

oo

©

have been constituted on that date. On the same date, in accordance with ICSID
Administrative and Financial Regulation 25, the parties were informed that Ms.
Claudia Frutos-Peterson, Counsel, ICSID, would serve as Secretary of the Arbitral

Tribunal.

. The first session of the Tribunal with the parties was held on December 5, 2001,

in Washington, D.C. During the first session, the parties agreed that the Tribunal
was properly constituted in accordance with the ICSID Convention and the
Arbitration Rules and that they did not have any objections to any members of the
Tribunal.

During the first session, the parties also agreed on several procedural issues,
which were later reproduced in the written minutes signed by the President and
the Secretary of the Tribunal. Regarding the written phase of the proceedings, the
Tribunal, after consulting with the parties in this respect, fixed the following time
limits for the presentation of the parties’ pleadings: The Claimants would file a
memorial within 90 days from the date of the first session; the Respondent would
file a counter-memorial within 90 days from its receipt of the Claimants’
memorial; the Claimants would file a reply within 60 days from their receipt of
the Respondent’s counter-memorial and the Respondent would file a rejoinder
within 60 days from its receipt of the Claimants’ reply. It was further agreed that
if the Respondent raised any objections to jurisdiction the following alternative
tentative schedule would apply: The Respondent would file a memorial on
jurisdiction within 45 days from the receipt of the Claimants’ memorial on the

merits; the Claimants would file a counter-memorial on jurisdiction within 45

10.

days from their receipt of the Respondent’s memorial on jurisdiction; the
Respondent would file a reply on jurisdiction within 30 days from its receipt of
the Claimants’ counter-memorial on jurisdiction, and the Claimants would file a
rejoinder within 30 days from their receipt of the Respondent’s reply on
jurisdiction.

On January 14, 2002, the Claimants requested a suspension of the proceedings for
six months in order to explore the possibility of settling the dispute through direct
consultations with the authorities appointed by a new government of the
Argentine Republic. By a letter dated January 30, 2002, the Argentine Republic
informed the Centre that it did not consider it necessary that the proceedings be

suspended at this stage.

. On January 31, 2002, the Claimants requested the suspension of the proceedings

for a period of six months in order to obtain certain internal authorizations to
continue with the arbitration. On February 5, 2002, the Tribunal requested the
Argentine Republic to present any observations in this respect. The Argentine
Republic presented its observations on February 18, 2002, agreeing to an
extension of only three months. On February 25, 2002, the Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 1, granting an extension of 90 days, from the date of the
procedural order, for the Claimants to obtain the relevant authorization to continue

with the proceeding.

.On May 22, 2002, the Claimants informed the Tribunal that they had been

authorized to proceed with the arbitration and requested an extension until August

1, 2002 to file their memorial on the merits. On May 29, 2002, the Tribunal

granted the extension sought by the Claimants. In its communication, the
Tribunal noted that the Argentine Republic would, if it requested, be entitled to
the same time extension granted to the Claimants to file its counter-memorial on

the merits.

.On August 1, 2002, the Claimants filed their memorial on the merits and

accompanying documentation. On December 13, 2002, the Argentine Republic
notified the Tribunal that it would be using part of the extension granted by the
Tribunal in its letter of May 29, 2002 to file its memorial on January 15, 2003.
Pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1), on January 15, 2003, the Argentine
Republic filed a memorial raising objections to the jurisdiction of the Centre and

the competence of the Tribunal.

.On January 21, 2003, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(3), the

proceedings on the merits were suspended.

. On March 5, 2003, the Claimants requested an extension of time to file their

counter-memorial on jurisdiction. On the same date, the Tribunal invited the
Argentine Republic to provide its observations to the Claimants’ request. The
Argentine Republic presented its observations on March 7, 2003. On March 11,
2003, the Tribunal granted the extension sought by the Claimants and informed
the parties that the Argentine Republic would be granted an extension on the same

terms to file its reply on jurisdiction if it so requested.

. On March 25, 2003, the Claimants filed before the Centre a new request for

arbitration against the Argentine Republic. On the same date, the Claimants

requested the Tribunal to suspend the jurisdictional proceedings in the present

case until the Tribunal renders a decision concerning their new request for
arbitration. On March 28, 2003, pursuant to Article 46 of the ICSID Convention,
the Centre forwarded the request to the Arbitral Tribunal to determine whether to
receive it as an additional claim to the present case. On the same date, the
Tribunal requested the Argentine Republic to submit any observations that it may
have in this respect and decided not to grant the suspension requested by the
Claimants, asking them to file their counter-memorial on jurisdiction on the date
previously decided. On April 15, 2003, the Argentine Republic presented its

observations concerning the Claimants’ new request for arbitration.

.On April 25, 2003, after having examined the Claimants’ new request for

arbitration and the observations submitted by both parties in this respect, the
Tribunal decided to accept the new request for arbitration as a claim ancillary to
the present case and to have both cases proceed on separate tracks until the
Tribunal has decided on jurisdiction in respect of both claims. In its
communication, the Tribunal also proposed an expeditious procedure to the
parties for filing their written submissions on the ancillary claim. According to
this proposal, there would be no memorial on the merits submitted by the
Claimants at this stage and the Argentine Republic would file a memorial on
jurisdiction within 60 days. The Claimant would file a counter-memorial on
jurisdiction within 60 days from the receipt of the Respondent’s memorial on
jurisdiction. The Argentine Republic would file a reply on jurisdiction within 30
days from the receipt of the Claimants’ counter memorial on jurisdiction and the

Claimants would file a rejoinder on jurisdiction within 60 days from the receipt of

the Respondent’s reply. The Claimants accepted the Tribunal’s proposal on April
29, 2003 and the Respondent did the same on May 6, 2003.

18. On March 31, 2003, the Claimants filed their counter-memorial on jurisdiction,
concerning the first claim here addressed by the Tribunal. Thereafter, on May 20,
2003, the Argentine Republic filed its reply on jurisdiction and on June 26, 2003
the Claimants filed their rejoinder on jurisdiction.

19. The hearing on jurisdiction took place in Paris on September 3-4, 2003. At the
hearing the Claimants were represented by Messrs. R. Doak Bishop (King &
Spalding, Houston), Guido Santiago Tawil (M. & M. Bomchil, Buenos Aires),
Craig S. Miles (King & Spalding, Houston) and Ignacio Minorini Lima (M. & M.
Bomchil, Buenos Aires); all of whom addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the
Claimants. The Respondent was represented by Mr. Carlos Ignacio Suarez
Anzorena, Mr. Jorge Barraguirre and Ms. Beatriz Pallarés, all of them from the
office of the Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacion Argentina. Mr. Suarez
addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Argentine Republic. During the hearing,
the Tribunal also put questions to the parties in accordance with ICSID

Arbitration Rule 32(3).

B. Considerations

The Claimants’ participation in Argentina's privatization program

20.The Claimants in this dispute, like other companies that have brought to ICSID

2

22.

their differences with the Government of the Argentine Republic, is a participant
in the privatization program that that government undertook beginning in 1989.
The investments the Claimants seek to protect were made in the important gas
industry of Argentina, the privatization of which was carried out under the terms
of the Gas Law and related instruments.’ The Claimants satisfy the requirements
of the Argentina-United States Bilateral Investment Treaty as to having
substantial business activities in the United States and not being controlled by
nationals of a third country, a matter in respect of which Argentina had requested

a clarification.

. Claimants’ participation concerns the privatization of Transportadora de Gas del

Sur (“TGS”), one of the major networks for the transportation and distribution of
gas produced in the provinces of the South of Argentina. The Claimants own 50%
of the shares of CIESA, an Argentine incorporated company that controls TGS by
owning 55.30% of its shares; the Claimants’ participation in CIESA is held by
two wholly-owned companies, EPCA and EACH. The Claimants, through EPCA,
EACH and ECIL, another corporation controlled by the Claimants, also own
75.93% of EDIDESCA, another Argentine corporation that owns 10% of the
shares of TGS; and they also have acquired an additional 0.02% of TGS through
EPCA. The investment as a whole, it is explained, amounts to 35.263% of TGS.

This part of the Claimants’ dispute before ICSID concerns only a question of tax
assessments by some Argentine provinces. An auxiliary claim has been

introduced for disputes concerning tariffs, devaluation and other financial

10

measures adopted by the Government of the Argentine Republic. Jurisdictional
issues as to the additional claim will be dealt with in due course by this Tribunal
in a separate decision.

23. A number of questions introduced in the context of objections to jurisdiction are
closely related to the merits of the dispute. The Tribunal at this stage will only

deal with those issues that are strictly jurisdictional.

ICSID’s case law concerning the Argentine Republic

24. A number of prior decisions adopted by other ICSID tribunals concerning disputes
between foreign investors and the Argentine Republic have dealt with a number of
relevant issues in the context of international law, the use of its sources and treaty
interpretation? This Tribunal bears in mind those decisions but will not discuss
their findings here, except insofar they are necessary for disposing of specific

issues raised in this case.

Tax assessments by Argentine provinces

25. Several Southern Argentine provinces, which will be identified further below,
have assessed stamp taxes on various operations of TGS, which together with
interest and fines amount to approximately AR$ 800 million. The contracts
underlying these operations include transportation and distribution of gas,

technical assistance, the Transfer Agreement and some other contracts. The

26.

27.

11

Claimants argue that this tax assessment is illegal under Argentine law and
tantamount to an expropriation, resulting in a violation of international law, the
Bilateral Investment Treaty and other commitments and guarantees undertaken by
the Argentine Republic in connection with the privatization process and the
investments therein.

The Argentine Republic opposes such arguments and believes that the question
cannot be submitted to this arbitration. A provisional stay for the collection of
taxes has been granted by the Argentine Supreme Court on the basis of actions
brought before it by TGS. As a result, the taxes have not been paid as of this date
and no final decision has been taken by the Argentine courts. The Federal
Government has supported before the courts TGS’s arguments in respect of the
illegality or inapplicability of the taxes assessed, including the view that some
taxes violate the Law of Federal Co-participation that governs the relationship
between the Federal Government and the Provinces, but is of the opinion that the
actions of the Provinces do not amount to a violation of the Treaty.

In the view of the Argentine Republic the taxes assessed are within the range of
1%-2% of the contracts value, and are thus not confiscatory. The additional
amounts owed by the Claimants, it is further explained, are the result of penalties
and interests and this is not to be attributed to the Respondent. In the Claimants’
view, however, the taxes are confiscatory and expropriatory as applied, including
penalties and interests, their retroactive assessment for a five-year period and the
fact that to an important extent the taxes levied by the different Provinces overlap

each other.

28.

29.

30.

12

The Argentine Republic has also made the argument that the Claimants’ petitions
to this Tribunal, if accepted, would disrupt the conditions of competition within
the Argentine market as foreign investors would be exempt from taxes assessed
on other business entities. The Claimants believe in this connection that if the
taxes are illegal they should not be paid by any economic agent, national or
foreign, and thus there is no discrimination involved in their petitions.
This Tribunal will not sit in judgement over the general tax policies pursued by
the Argentine Republic or the Provinces, nor for that matter of the arrangements
the provinces have with the Federal Government of the Argentine Republic. This
is a matter exclusively appurtenant to the sovereignty of the Argentine Republic.
The Tribunal, however, has the duty to establish in connection with the merits of
the case whether such assessments violate the rights accorded to foreign investors
under treaties, legislation, contracts and other commitments. As decided by an
ICSID Tribunal in an earlier case with reference to the role of bilateral investment
treaties,
“\..these treaties cannot entirely isolate foreign investments from the
general economic situation of a country. They do provide for standards
of fair and equitable treatment, non-discrimination, guarantees in respect
of expropriation and other matters, but they cannot prevent a country
from pursuing its own economic choices. These choices are not under
the Centre’s jurisdiction and ICSID tribunals cannot pass judgement on
whether such policies are right or wrong. Judgement can only be made

in respect of whether the rights of investors have been violated.” *

13

31. The line separating general tax measures from measures that affect the investor’s
rights is conceptually clear, but in practice what falls within or without the
Tribunal’s competence can only be established in the light of the evidence that the
parties will produce in connection with the merits of the case.

32. The Argentine Republic has expressed the view that because the taxes have been
assessed by the Argentine Provinces, and irrespective of whether this is a lawful
or unlawful action or whether it violates the federal arrangements in force, the
responsibility and liability of the Argentine Republic cannot be engaged. The
Tribunal is mindful in this respect that under international law the State incurs
international responsibility and liability for unlawful acts of its various agencies
and subdivisions.’ The same holds true under Article XIII of the Bilateral
Investment Treaty when providing that this “...Treaty shall apply to the political

subdivisions of the Parties”.

Admissibility and Jus Standi

33. The Argentine Republic submits that the Tribunal must establish whether, as a
matter separate from jurisdiction, the claim is admissible in the instant case. The
distinction between admissibility and jurisdiction does not appear to be necessary
in the context of the ICSID Convention, which deals only with jurisdiction and
competence. A successful admissibility objection would normally result in
rejecting a claim for reasons connected with the merits. In the light of the

Bilateral Investment Treaty the essential question is whether the claimant

34.

35.

36.

14

invoking the benefit of its provisions qualifies as a protected investor. The right
to claim will arise from this determination. This is the situation that specifically
needs to be discussed under the Treaty irrespective of whether it is labelled a
question of admissibility or otherwise.

The Argentine Republic has objected to the admissibility of the claim on the
ground that the Claimants do not have the rights upon which they base such claim.
The measures adopted, as the argument goes, directly affect only TGS, a
corporation incorporated in Argentina. The Claimants are only indirectly affected
as they are minority shareholders in TGS and they do not control CIESA, an entity
which as explained controls TGS. Neither TGS nor CIESA qualify in the
Respondent’s view as an investment or as an investor under the Bilateral
Investment Treaty. Indirect damages in this view are not included within the
scope of the Treaty.

The Argentine Republic accepts that an investment in shares qualifies for
protection under the Bilateral Investment Treaty, but in such a case claims can
only be made in respect of measures affecting the shares qua shares, as in the
event of expropriation of the shares or other measures affecting directly the
economic rights of the shareholders. Claims by minority shareholders concerning
measures that affect the corporation as a separate legal entity cannot be admissible
in the context of the Treaty.

The Claimants oppose such views on the ground that they are not claiming for or
on behalf of TGS, but in their own right as United States investors with

investments qualifying under the Treaty. Their claim, according to the argument,

15

is independent of any claim that TGS might have under Argentine law as it
concerns an alleged violation of the Treaty. Claims that are treaty claims can, in
the Claimants’ view, stand on their own irrespective of whether they may further
constitute a breach of TGS’s rights under municipal law. Thus, the claims are in
that opinion direct and not indirect.

37. The question of jus standi thus becomes inseparable from the determination of the
Claimant’s status as a protected investor. This determination involves, first,
whether a shareholder can claim for its rights in a foreign company independently
from the latter’s rights. If so, then the inquiry must determine whether these
rights refer only to the Claimants’ status as shareholders or also to substantive
rights connected with the legal and economic performance of the investment

made. These various questions will be addressed next.

Argentine legislation, international law and ICSID’s decisions

38. As noted above, the Tribunal does not intend to discuss again questions that have
been amply considered in recent decisions and which have been also extensively
argued by the parties in this case. These questions are mainly the following:

e The role of Argentine legislation in a determination concerning
corporate personality for the purpose of an international claim. It
has been concluded in this respect that the applicable provisions in
respect of jurisdiction and admissibility are only those of the

ICSID Convention and the Bilateral Investment Treaty. This same

16

conclusion stands for the argument that Argentine legislation
would be the applicable law under Article 42 of the Convention, as
this Article is designed to govern the applicable law in connection
with the merits but not in respect of questions of jurisdiction.

e The meaning and effect of international law in respect of the rights
of minority and  non-controlling shareholders to claim
independently of a separate corporate entity for the measures that
affect their investment. This right has been upheld both under
international law and the ICSID Convention.

¢ The meaning of the Barcelona Traction decision,° which has been
held not to be controlling in investment claims such as the present
one, as it deals with the separate question of diplomatic protection
in a particular setting.

e The meaning of a number of decisions issued by ICSID tribunals
that have upheld the right of shareholders to claim independently
from the affected corporation, but have not considered the question
of minority or non-controlling shareholders in itself,’ with few
exceptions.* This Tribunal also notes that the Argentine Republic
disagrees with the conclusions of those tribunals or with the
relevance of their decisions to the present case.

39. The reasoning supporting the above holdings will not be repeated for the sake of
brevity. It is sufficient for the purpose of the present case to emphasize that there

is nothing contrary to international law or the ICSID Convention in upholding the

17

concept that shareholders may claim independently from the corporation
concerned, even if those shareholders are not in the majority or in control of the
company.

40. The Tribunal is of course mindful that decisions of ICSID or other arbitral
tribunals are not a primary source of rules. The citations of and references to
those decisions respond to the fact that the Tribunal in examining the claim and
arguments of this case under international law, believes that in essence the
conclusions and reasons of those decisions are correct.

41. The Tribunal will accordingly discuss with particular attention the situation of
these claims under the Bilateral Investment Treaty in view of the existence of
facts that are specific to this particular case. This is mainly the case of the foreign
investment having been made in CIESA and related companies, all being separate

Argentine corporations, and only indirectly in TGS.

Shareholders’ rights under the Bilateral Investment Treaty

42. As the ICSID Convention did not attempt to define “investment”, this task was
left largely to the parties to bilateral investment treaties or other expressions of
consent. It has been aptly commented that there is, however, a limit to this
discretion of the parties because they could not validly define as investment in
connection with the Convention something absurd or entirely incompatible with
its object and purpose.” The definition of investment relevant to this case is set

out in Article I (1) of the Bilateral Investment Treaty, which provides in part:

43.

44.

45

18

“(a) ‘investment’ means every kind of investment in the territory of one

Party owned or controlled directly or indirectly by nationals or companies

of the other Party, such as equity, debt, and service and investment

contracts; and includes without limitation:

(-)

(ii) a company or shares of stock or other interests in a company or

interests in the assets thereof...”
As noted above, in the view of the Argentine Republic neither TGS nor CIESA
qualify as an investment or as investor under the Bilateral Investment Treaty.
While it is admitted that the investment made by the Claimants is protected under
the Treaty this would only allow for claims affecting their rights gua shareholders.
This view, as also noted, is contested by the Claimants.
The Tribunal notes, as did the Tribunal in Lanco and also the Committee on
Annulment in Compania de Aguas del Aconquija or Vivendi, the latter in respect
of a different but comparable bilateral investment treaty, that the definition of
investment set out above is broad indeed. It is apparent that this definition does
not exclude claims by minority or non-controlling shareholders. Neither is there
anything unreasonable in this definition that would make it incompatible with the

object and purpose of the ICSID Convention.

. The Argentine Republic has made in this context the argument that when treaties

have wished to include within their scope indirect damages of the sort claimed in
this case, they have done so expressly. The North American Free Trade

Agreement (NAFTA) and the Algiers Claims Settlement Declaration establishing

46.

47.

19

the jurisdiction of the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal have been invoked as
examples of this express reference. This, it is further explained, is also the case of
the Argentina-United Kingdom Bilateral Investment Treaty. Most treaties, in the
Respondent’s view, allow for claims of locally incorporated companies only when
controlled by foreign nationals, a situation not given in the instant case. The
silence of the Bilateral Investment Treaty on the question of claims for indirect
damage cannot be held, in the Respondent’s argument, against the principles
established in the legislation of Argentina or international law.

The fact that a treaty may have provided expressly for certain rights of
shareholders does not mean that a treaty not so providing has meant to exclude
such rights if this can be reasonably inferred from the provisions of such treaty.
Each instrument must be interpreted autonomously in the light of its own context
and in the light of its interconnections with international law. Moreover, the
United States model investment treaties are based on a rather broad interpretation
of investment that was included with the express intention of overriding the
eventual restrictive effects that could result from the Barcelona Traction decision.
The rules governing the interpretation of treaties under the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties lead to a similar conclusion in so far as the parties to the
treaties concerned are different.'° Indeed, the interpretation of a bilateral treaty
between two parties in connection with the text of another treaty between different
parties will normally be the same, unless the parties express a different intention
in accordance with international law. A similar logic is found in Article 31 of the

Vienna Convention in so far as subsequent agreement or practice between the

48

49.

20

parties to the same treaty is taken into account regarding the interpretation of the
treaty. There is no evidence in this case that the intention of the parties to the
Argentina-United States Bilateral Treaty might be different from that expressed in

other investment treaties invoked.

. The parties in this case have also discussed the meaning and extent of the Mondev

case'! where, as indicated by the Argentine Republic, the United States held the
view that shareholders cannot claim for injury to a corporation and can claim only
for direct injuries suffered in their capacity as shareholders. The Claimants have
argued that what matters is the conclusion of the tribunal in that case, which
dismissed the United States’ arguments and upheld the claimant’s standing. The
Tribunal must note in this connection that what the State of nationality of the
investor might argue in a given case to which it is a party cannot be held against
the rights of the investor in a separate case to which the investor is a party. This is
precisely the merit of the ICSID Convention in that it overcame the deficiencies of
diplomatic protection where the investor was subject to whatever political or legal
determination the State of nationality would make in respect of its claim.

This Tribunal must accordingly conclude that under the provisions of the Bilateral
Investment Treaty, broad as they are, claims made by investors that are not in the
majority or in the control of the affected corporation when claiming for violations
of their rights under such treaty are admissible. Whether the locally incorporated
company may further claim for the violation of its rights under contracts, licences

or other instruments, does not affect the direct right of action of foreign

50.

5

52.

21

shareholders under the Bilateral Investment Treaty for protecting their interests in
the qualifying investment.

But this conclusion is not the end of the matter. It was explained above that the
Claimants made their investment in various companies participating in CIESA
and only marginally in TGS. That is, they invested in a string of locally
incorporated companies that in turn made the investment in TGS. The Argentine
Republic has rightly raised a concern about the fact that if minority shareholders
can claim independently from the affected corporation, this could trigger an
endless chain of claims, as any shareholder making an investment in a company
that makes an investment in another company, and so on, could invoke a direct

right of action for measures affecting a corporation at the end of the chain.

. Counsel for the Argentine Republic have addressed this issue by describing the

case as one in which “certain investor who is the owner of the shares in certain
corporations which, in turn, own shares of an Argentine corporation, that does not
qualify either as investor or as an investment, alleges that the treaty was breached
as a consequence of certain tax claims over the latter corporation”.'

The Tribunal notes that while investors can claim in their own right under the
provisions of the treaty, there is indeed a need to establish a cut-off point beyond
which claims would not be permissible as they would have only a remote
connection to the affected company. As this is in essence a question of
admissibility of claims, the answer lies in establishing the extent of the consent to
arbitration of the host State. If consent has been given in respect of an investor

and an investment, it can be reasonably concluded that the claims brought by such

22

investor are admissible under the treaty. If the consent cannot be considered as
extending to another investor or investment, these other claims should then be
considered inadmissible as being only remotely connected with the affected

company and the scope of the legal system protecting that investment.

. This issue was discussed, but not actually decided, in the ICSID case of Gruslin v.

Malaysia,'* where the respondent government raised as an objection to

jurisdiction the question that “...the Claimant has made no investment in

Malaysia, and has no legal relationship with Malaysia that falls within the scope
of the investment treaty”.'* The Tribunal in that case ruled that it lacked
jurisdiction on another ground, namely that the investment was not made in an
approved project as required under the pertinent bilateral investment treaty, thus
making unnecessary a determination of the first issue. It is also interesting to note
that the objection raised relied on the argument that the claimant was not the

“owner” of the investment and that its rights in respect of the management

company involved were no more than rights of a contractual nature.'*

. At the hearing on jurisdiction held in the present case, the Tribunal put a question

to the parties as to whether the Claimants had been invited by the Government of
Argentina to participate in the investment connected to the privatization of TGS.

It turned out that this had been precisely the case.

.In fact, the Information Memorandum issued in 1992'° and other instruments

related to the privatization of the gas industry had specifically invited foreign
investors to participate in this process. A “road show” followed in key cities

around the world and specific meetings with the Claimants were held in this

56.

23

context. Successful bidders were required to establish an investment company in
Argentina “which will hold their interest in the licensed operating company”.
Moreover, the technical expertise of the Claimants was one of the elements
required to materialize their participation in the process. This explains why EPCA
was required to execute the Transfer Agreement and to enter into a Technical
Assistance Agreement with TGS. The requirements of the Technical Assistance
Agreement referred not only to the Technical Operator but also to the “company
participating in the same Economic Group providing the necessary technical
support”. The investors also had certain decision-making power in the
management of TGS. The pertinent officials of the Argentine Government were
kept abreast of the various corporate arrangements organized to materialize the
investment sought.

The conclusion that follows is that in the present case the participation of the
Claimants was specifically sought and that they are thus included within the
consent to arbitration given by the Argentine Republic. The Claimants cannot be
considered to be only remotely connected to the legal arrangements governing the
privatization, they are beyond any doubt the owners of the investment made and
their rights are protected under the Treaty as clearly established treaty-rights and
not merely contractual rights related to some intermediary. The fact that the
investment was made through CIESA and related companies does not in any way

alter this conclusion.

57.

24

The Tribunal accordingly decides that the claim in the present case is admissible
under the Bilateral Investment Treaty or, stated in another way, that the Claimants

have jus standi under this Treaty in their capacity as protected investors.

Jurisdictional objection concerning the lack of direct connection between the dispute and

the investment

58.

59.

As a question separate from, but related to, the discussion examined above, the
Argentine Republic has raised a jurisdictional objection on the ground that the
dispute does not arise directly out of an investment as required by the ICSID
Convention. In the Respondent’s view, as neither TGS nor CIESA qualify as
investments or investors under the Treaty, and the dispute concerns only tax
obligations of TGS, the claims in this case do not arise directly out of an
investment made by the Claimants. The investment in shares is recognized by the
Argentine Republic as an investment protected under the Treaty, but only in
respect of rights that might be invoked by the Claimants gua shareholders, a

matter discussed above.

. The Claimants have explained in this connection that they do not consider the

TGS Share Transfer Agreement as an investment agreement or as an investment
in and of itself, but that the investment they have made in shares of CIESA and
TGS does qualify as an investment under the Treaty. Their right of action, the
argument goes on, is related to the protection the Treaty gives to their investment

in those shares and, accordingly, the dispute arises directly out of an investment.

25

60. The Tribunal has noted above that the rights of the Claimants can be asserted
independently from the rights of TGS or CIESA. As the Claimants have a
separate cause of action under the Treaty in connection with the investment made,
the Tribunal concludes that the present dispute arises directly out of the
investment made and that accordingly there is no obstacle to a finding of

jurisdiction on this count.

Jurisdictional objection as to the consent to arbitration excluding tax matters

61. Article XII of the Bilateral Investment Treaty governs tax matters. Paragraph | of
this Article states the overall policy on taxation, the Parties undertaking to “strive
to accord fairness and equity in the treatment of investment of nationals and
companies of the other Party”. Paragraph 2 of the Article concerns the application
of the Treaty to tax matters in the following terms:

“Nevertheless, the provisions of this Treaty, and in particular Article VII and
VIII, shall apply to matters of taxation only with respect to the following:
(a) expropriation, pursuant to Article IV;
(b) transfers, pursuant to Article V; or
(c) the observance and enforcement of terms of an investment
agreement or authorization as referred to in Article VII (1) (a) or

(b),

62.

63

64.

26

The Argentine Republic has argued that the claim made in this case exceeds the
limits set out in Article XII, first because the Claimants complain about the
violation of the “transparency principle” in tax matters and about the lack of
effective means available in Argentina for the protection of their rights. None of
these questions, in the Respondent’s view, allow for the application of the Treaty
in accordance with Article XII. Moreover, the Respondent further argues, not
even the complaint about violation of fair and equitable treatment could be
brought in connection with tax matters as the Treaty only requires the parties to

“strive” in this respect.

.The Respondent is also of the view that the Claimants cannot invoke

expropriation or the violation of an investment agreement or authorization as these
questions are unrelated to the tax assessments affecting TGS and, furthermore,
there is no investment agreement or authorization. The Treaty, it is concluded,
does not apply to the present claim under Article XII as it concerns only tax
matters; nor are the remedies sought by the Claimants allowed for under this
Article or the Treaty.

The Claimants hold a different view. First, in their opinion fairness and equity as
invoked in paragraph 1 of the Article are not meaningless, and “to strive” involves
a commitment that cannot be ignored in the implementation of tax policies.
Second, the Claimants argue that they are specifically invoking expropriation as
part of their claim on the merits, as the tax assessed constitutes a measure

tantamount to expropriation. And third, the Claimants believe that fair and

65.

66.

27

equitable treatment and other standards set out in Article II (2) of the Treaty do
apply as they are conditions for legal expropriation under Article IV of the Treaty.
The Tribunal notes that there is no disagreement about the fact that the dispute
concerns a tax matter. However, it is also quite apparent that in the Claimants’
submissions expropriation is a prominent cause for action under the Treaty. The
Treaty builds in this connection a chain of linkages between the pertinent
provisions. First, it is quite true that to strive under paragraph 1 of Article XII is
not a meaningless reference. It is even less so in the present case, where the
Federal Government of the Argentine Republic shares the concerns of the
Claimants about the tax assessments by the Provinces. Second, if expropriation is
invoked and there is a finding upholding this allegation, then the Treaty becomes
applicable without question. This finding is of course a matter that can only be
considered on the merits.

It is also important to note that once expropriation is invoked, as indeed it has
been, then the connection between Article IV and the standards of treatment under
Article II (2) of the Treaty becomes operational, including fair and equitable
treatment, full protection and security and treatment not less than that required by
international law. In turn, this brings in the meaning of paragraph 1 of Article
XII. It is in this context, and not in isolation, that the questions of transparency
and the availability of effective remedies also become relevant. And, above all,
the whole discussion is then governed by Article VII of the Treaty on the

settlement of disputes.

28

67. The Claimants have satisfied the requirement of having a present interest to bring
action under the Treaty, particularly in view of the fact that is has been alleged
that the tax assessments resulted in the violation of specific provisions and
standards of treatment established in the Treaty. These allegations can only be
considered at the merits phase of the case, but prima facie they are sufficient to
justify the exercise of the right of action by the Claimants. Accordingly, the
Tribunal upholds jurisdiction to consider the matter on the merits as far as this

objection is concerned.

Jurisdictional objection related to the absence of investment agreement or authorization

68. The Argentine Republic has raised another jurisdictional objection related to the
question of absence of an investment agreement or authorization, another
possibility foreseen by Article XII to trigger the application of the Treaty to tax
matters and in particular the operation of the dispute settlement mechanism of
Article VII. A part of the Claimants’ complaint concerns the duty of the
Argentine Republic to indemnify the investors for taxes assessed in respect of
periods prior to the privatization of TGS as provided for under the Transfer
Agreement. In the argument of the Respondent the Transfer Agreement does not
qualify as an investment agreement or authorization because it only concerns TGS
and not the Claimants. Moreover, it is argued that the conditions for the

indemnification have not been satisfied.

29

69. The Claimants have explained, as noted above, that they consider the Transfer

70.

7

Agreement not as an investment agreement or authorization in itself, but that
certainly it is a part of the overall elements involved in the privatization and the
investment in shares which cannot now be ignored. In their view, the investment
is a process that was manifested in several instruments, not just one agreement or
authorization, and the claim concerns their rights as investors in the process as a
whole. In particular the Claimants invoke the fact that EPCA, as noted, was
required to execute the Transfer Agreement and, moreover, it executed a
Technical Assistance Agreement with TGS in its capacity as technical operator.
The Claimants have expressly stated that they have not desisted of their claim in
connection with the existence of an investment agreement thus conceived.
Accordingly, the argument continues, both Article XII and VII are applicable in
this context.

The Tribunal notes in this context that an investment is indeed a complex process
including various arrangements, such as contracts, licences and other agreements
leading to the materialization of such investment, a process in turn governed by
the Treaty. This particular aspect was explained by an ICSID tribunal as “the

17

general unity of an investment operation” ‘’ and by one other tribunal considering

an investment based on several instruments as constituting “an indivisible

whole”.'*®

. The Tribunal must examine these various aspects to reach a conclusion about the

claim and particularly about the manner in which tax measures might have

affected the protected investment. Such a determination again belongs to the

30

merits, particularly in so far there is a need to establish whether the requirements
of indemnification have or have not been met. Accordingly, jurisdiction to

consider these other aspects of the claim must also be upheld.

Jurisdictional objection concerning a hypothetical dispute

72.

73.

The parties have different views concerning the nature of the dispute. While for
the Argentine Republic the dispute is purely hypothetical, for the Claimants it is
quite actual and specific. The Respondent argues that because the taxes assessed
have not been collected and might never be, or be collected only in a small
amount, the dispute is hypothetical and not actual. As a result, according to the
argument, expropriation has not occurred and cannot be invoked in the context of
the present claim.

The Claimants believe otherwise. About AR$ 800 million have been assessed in
taxes, enough to wipe out the entire value of the investment and lead to the
Claimants’ bankruptcy, cancellation of the licence and other consequences. This
amount has not been collected only because there is an injunction ordered by the
Supreme Court suspending judicial collection of those amounts. Expropriation, it
is further argued, can occur much earlier than the actual taking of the investors’
property or funds, as many times this is also a process gradual in time. All of it,
the argument continues, results in the specific violation of the Bilateral Investment

Treaty.

31

74. The Tribunal is mindful of the fact that once the taxes have been assessed and the
payment ordered there is a liability of the investor irrespective of the actual
collection of those amounts. This means that a claim seeking protection under the
Treaty is not hypothetical but relates to a very specific dispute between the
parties. Whether there has been a violation of the terms of the Treaty and its
eventual extent is an aspect that belongs to the merits. The eventuality of an
expropriation and its conditions is still more so. The Tribunal cannot decline its
jurisdiction to examine these various points of fact and law. Jurisdiction is

accordingly affirmed on this point too.

Jurisdictional objection concerning injunctive relief and other remedies

75. The Argentine Republic has made two objections to the jurisdiction of this
Tribunal concerning the remedies requested by the Claimants. The first objection
relates to the question that any remedy would really have its effect on TGS, which
cannot benefit from the claim as not being in the Respondent’s view an
investment or an investor under the Treaty. This part of the objection has been
dealt with above in the context of the determination that the Claimants are
exercising a right in their own capacity under the Treaty which is separate from
any rights appurtenant to TGS. Whether a remedy, in addition to protecting the
investors’ rights, benefits a separate but related corporate entity is not a ground for

objection to jurisdiction.

76.

77.

78.

32

The second objection to jurisdiction made under this heading is more complex. It
concerns the power of the Tribunal to order injunctive relief. In the Respondent’s
view the Tribunal lacks such a power under the Convention and the Treaty, and it
could only either issue a declaratory statement that might satisfy the investor or
else determine the payment of compensation based on a finding that a certain
measure is wrongful. In particular it is argued that an ICSID tribunal cannot
impede an expropriation that falls exclusively within the ambit of State
sovereignty; that tribunal could only establish whether there has been an
expropriation, its legality or illegality and the corresponding compensation.

The Claimants agree on the point that a tribunal has the power to issue a
declaratory statement, but in addition they believe that it can order injunctive
relief concerning the performance or non-performance of certain acts. To this
end, an award can deal both with pecuniary and non-pecuniary determinations,
including specific performance and an injunction. In the present case the
Claimants have indeed requested that the taxes assessed be declared expropriatory
and in breach of the Treaty and unlawful, and that they be annulled and their
collection permanently enjoined.

The parties have discussed in this context the decisions of ICSID Tribunals and
other courts and tribunals. For the Claimants, the ICSID case of Goetz v.
Burundi,’? like the cases decided by other tribunals in Martini (Italy v.
Venezuela),” the Trail Smelter (United States vy. Canada),”! the La Grand
(Germany v. United States)? and the Arrest Warrant (Democratic Republic of

Congo v. Belgium),”? amply support their view about tribunals having a broad

79.

80.

33

power to order injunctive relief and other non-pecuniary measures. The
Respondent argues that these various cases are not relevant here, either because
they involve inter-State disputes or because they are based on the agreement of the
parties, concern contractual relations or the tribunals have been specifically
empowered to adopt measures of the kind requested. Neither is the subject matter
of this case, the Respondent further argues, in any way related to recent decisions
of the International Court of Justice.
An examination of the powers of international courts and tribunals to order
measures concerning performance or injunction and of the ample practice that is
available in this respect, leaves this Tribunal in no doubt about the fact that these
powers are indeed available. The Claimants have convincingly invoked the
authority of the Rainbow Warrior, where it was held:
“The authority to issue an order for the cessation or discontinuance of a
wrongful act or omission results from the inherent powers of a competent
tribunal which is confronted with the continuous breach of an international
obligation which is in force and continues to be in force. The delivery of
such an order requires, therefore, two essential conditions intimately linked,
namely that the wrongful act has a continuing character and that the violated
tule is still in force at the time in which the order is issued”.”*
The same holds true under the ICSID Convention. In Goetz v. Burundi such a
power was indeed resorted to by the Tribunal, and the fact that it was based on a

settlement agreement between the parties does not deprive the decision of the

34

Tribunal of its own legal force and standing. A scholarly opinion invoked by the
Claimants is also relevant in this context, having an author concluding that it is
“\..entirely possible that future cases will involve disputes arising from
ongoing relationships in which awards providing for specific performance or
25

injunctions become relevant”.

8

. The Tribunal accordingly concludes that, in addition to declaratory powers, it has
the power to order measures involving performance or injunction of certain acts.
Jurisdiction is therefore also affirmed on this ground. What kind of measures
might or might not be justified, whether the acts complained of meet the standards
set out in the Rainbow Warrior, and how the issue of implementation that the
parties have also discussed would be handled, if appropriate, are all matters that

belong to the merits.

Jurisdictional objection concerning the absence of notification in respect of the Provinces

of La Pampa and Chubut

82. The Argentine Republic has raised yet another jurisdictional objection on the
ground that the claims against the Provinces of La Pampa and Chubut, unlike
those concerning Neuquén and Rio Negro, were not notified to the Respondent in
accordance with the Treaty requirements and hence neither was the six-month
consultation period observed.

83. The Claimants oppose such objection arguing that there is a single continuing

dispute about the tax assessments of various Provinces of the Argentine Republic

84.

85.

35

that stems from the same factual background and involves the same causes of
action under the Treaty. Moreover, the Claimants believe that they can update the
Request for Arbitration in their Memorial and that, in any event, they are entitled
to submit such disputes as an ancillary or additional claim under Article 46 of the
Convention and ICSID Arbitration Rule 40. As in the view of the Claimants the
issues at stake relate to the same dispute, there is no need to register a second
dispute when the relevant issues arise out of the same subject matter as that of a
dispute already registered.

There can be no doubt in the present case about the fact that the dispute relates in
identical terms to various Provinces. It is the same tax that has been assessed by
the Provinces in respect of several operations of TGS, involving exactly the same
legal issues both under Argentine law and the Bilateral Investment Treaty.
Moreover, the Request for Arbitration expressly indicated that other Provinces
could seek to assess those taxes on the same type of instruments, a matter that was
spelled out in connection with La Pampa and Chubut in the Claimants’ memorial.
At some point the Province of Santa Cruz was also mentioned in the context of
this dispute, but this particular Province has not been named in the submissions
before this Tribunal.

Even more so than the situation discussed in the Metalclad,”° Pope & Talbot Inc”
and Ethyl’* cases, the filing of multiple, subsequent and related actions in this case
would lead to a superlative degree of inefficiency and inequity. This would be
particularly unjustified in view of the many efforts by ICSID to avoid the

multiplicity of proceedings concerning the Argentine Republic.

86.

36

In this context, the question that this Tribunal must answer is not even whether the
claims in respect of La Pampa and Chubut can be considered as ancillary or
additional claims. It is the much simpler question whether the action of other
Provinces further extending the same dispute already registered requires a

separate registration and procedure. It certainly does not.

. The issue concerning the observance of the six-month consultation period

becomes therefore moot. If the Argentine Republic had the opportunity to
consider negotiations with the investors on the occasion of the first claims, and the
claims that followed did not involve any new element, the observance of this
requirement is evidently fulfilled. This is particularly so in view of the fact that
the Argentine Republic did not take advantage of the possibility of defusing the

dispute during that start-up period.

. The Tribunal wishes to note in this matter, however, that the conclusion reached is

not because the six-month negotiation period could be a procedural and not a
jurisdictional requirement as has been argued by the Claimants and affirmed by
other tribunals.” Such requirement is in the view of the Tribunal very much a
jurisdictional one. A failure to comply with that requirement would result in a
determination of lack of jurisdiction. In the present case, as noted, the
requirement was complied with in view of the identical nature and scope of the
dispute with the Argentine Provinces; the same holds true if a dispute is ruled to

be ancillary or additional to an earlier claim.

37

Jurisdictional objection concerning the dispute on indemnity under the Transfer Agreement

89.

The Argentine Republic has also objected to the jurisdiction of this Tribunal in
respect of the indemnity dispute under the Transfer Agreement on the ground that
this Agreement provides for the submission of disputes to the Argentine courts.
This aspect of the dispute, it is argued, should be considered as a purely
contractual dispute and hence it is not subject to the jurisdiction of an ICSID
tribunal under the Convention. The Respondent explains that in its view this
situation is different from that relating to a contractual dispute which in turn

becomes an investment dispute under the Treaty.

. The Claimants again believe otherwise. In their view, even if the Transfer

Agreement had a choice of forum clause they still have an option under the Treaty
to resort to arbitration because the actual claim does not relate to contractual

performance but to the violation of the investors’ rights under the Treaty.

. The Tribunal is mindful of the various ICSID decisions that have recently

discussed this very issue, particularly those in Lanco, Compania de Aguas del
Aconquija (Award and Annulment), Wena,*° CMS' and Salini.*' In all these cases
the tribunals have upheld jurisdiction under the Convention to address violations
of contracts which, at the same time, constitute a breach of the pertinent bilateral

investment treaty. The Tribunal will not repeat those considerations.

. The issue for the Tribunal is then a narrower one, namely whether the indemnity

clause of the Transfer Agreement is just a contractual provision subject to the

jurisdiction of the courts of the Argentine Republic, or if it is in addition a clause

38

that concerns the rights of the investors under the Treaty. In the latter case the
Tribunal has jurisdiction in so far as those rights are concerned.

93. The indemnity clause is no doubt a contractual provision that relates to tax
indemnification of the investors, together with other parties to the Transfer
Agreement, if certain conditions are met. The present dispute concerns tax
assessments by the Provinces that in the opinion of the Claimants trigger the
operation of that clause. Should this be so, then the breach of the clause becomes
instantly a violation of the Treaty rights. This effect is independent of whether the
investors alone can benefit by resorting to ICSID jurisdiction or others might
benefit from such action as well, just as it is independent of whether TGS might
benefit from a certain action brought about by the investors. There is no practical
way in this context to separate the operation of the indemnity clause from the
treaty rights, particularly in so far as it has been noted above that Article XII of
the Treaty is intertwined with both Article VII on dispute settlement and with
Article II on the substantive treatment owed to the investors.

9:

&

. The Tribunal accordingly concludes that it also has jurisdiction to consider this

matter on the merits.

Jurisdictional objection concerning the triggering of the “fork in the road”

95. The Argentine Republic has made a jurisdictional objection in the alternative on

the ground that TGS has applied to various courts of the Argentine Republic

seeking remedies in respect of the tax measures affecting it. This, it is affirmed,

96.

97.

98.

39

amounts to the choice of local courts under the Treaty and hence the “fork in the
road” provision has been triggered. In that argument the jurisdiction of an ICSID
tribunal would thus be precluded.

The Claimants are of the view that the claimants, the respondents and the subject
matter of the actions before Argentine courts being different from those involved
in the present arbitration, there could be no triggering of the “fork in the road”.
They explain to this end that before local courts it is TGS and not the investors
who is claiming, that the Respondents are the Provinces and not the government
of the Argentine Republic, and that the subject matter concerns a violation of the
legislation of Argentina and not a violation of treaty rights.

This Tribunal is mindful of various decisions of ICSID Tribunals also discussing
this very issue, particularly Compania de Aguas del Aconquija, Genin, and
Olguin.®” In all these cases the difference between the violation of a contract and
the violation of a treaty, as well as the different effects that such violations might
entail, have been admitted, not ignoring of course that the violation of a legal rule
will always have similar negative effects irrespective of its nature. It has
accordingly been held that even if there was recourse to local courts for breach of
contract this would not prevent resorting to ICSID arbitration for violation of
treaty rights, or that in any event, as held in Benvenuti & Bonfant, any situation of
lis pendens would require identity of the parties.*> Neither will these
considerations be repeated here.

The Tribunal notes that in the present case the Claimants have not made

submissions before local courts and those made by TGS are separate and distinct.

40

Moreover, the actions by TGS itself have been mainly in the defensive so as to
oppose the tax measures imposed, and the decision to do so has been ordered by
ENARGAS, the agency entrusted with the regulation of the gas sector. The
conditions for the operation of the principle e/ecta una via or “fork in the road”
are thus simply not present. The Tribunal accordingly dismisses the objection to

jurisdiction on this other ground.

Jurisdiction affirmed

99. The fact that the Claimants have argued and demonstrated prima facie that they

100.

have been adversely affected by the tax measures complained of is sufficient for
the Tribunal to consider that the claim, as far as this matter is concerned, is within
its jurisdiction to examine such claim on the merits under the provisions of the
Bilateral Investment Treaty.

The Tribunal must note in concluding that counsel for both parties have
performed their duties with outstanding professionalism and have at all times fully

cooperated with the work of the Tribunal.

41

C. Decision

101. For the reasons stated above the Tribunal decides that the present dispute is within
the jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal. The Order
necessary for the continuation of the procedure pursuant to Arbitration Rule 41(4)

has, accordingly, been made.

So decided.

Francisco Orrego Vicufia
President of the Tribunal

Héctor Gros Espiell Pierre-Yves Tschanz
Arbitrator Arbitrator

42

' Treaty between the United States of America and the Argentine Republic Concerning the Reciprocal
Encouragement and Protection of Investment of November 14, 1991, in force from October 20, 1994.
> Law 24.076 of 1992 on the Privatisation of the Gas Sector; Decree 1738/92 of 1992 on the implementation
of the Gas Law.
5 Lanco v. Argentina, Preliminary Decision of the ICSID Tribunal of December 8, 1998; Compaitia de Aguas
del Aconquija et al. v. Argentina, \CSID Award of November 21, 2000; Vivendi v. Argentina, ICSID
Annulment Decision of July 3, 2002; CMS v. Argentina, Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of July 17,
2003.
* CMS, paragraph 29.
5 James Crawford: The ional Law Commission’s Articles on State Responsibility, 2002, Comments on
Article 4 at 94-99,
° Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Co. Ltd. (Belgium y. Spain), Judgment of February 5, 1970, ICJ
Reports 1970, 3.
7 AAPL y. Sri Lanka, (CSID Award of June 27, 1990; AMT vy. Zaire, ICSID Award of February 21, 1997;
Antoine Goetz et consorts v. République du Burundi, Sentence du CIRDI du 10 Février 1999 ; Lanco; Genin
et al .v. Estonia, (CSID Award of June 25, 2001; Compaiiia de Aguas del Aconquija; Vivendi. Also, CME v.
Czech Republic, Partial Award of September 13, 2001.
* Goetz; CMS.
° Christoph H. Schreuer: The ICSID Convention: A Commentary, 2001, paragraph 89.
‘© Convention on the Law of Treaties, May 23, 1969, Article 31.
"| Mondev International Limited v. United States of America, (CSID Award of October 11, 2002, International
Legal Materials, Vol. 42, 2003, p. 85.
" Reply on Jurisdiction by the Argentine Republic, paragraph 115.
'S Philippe Gruslin v. Malaysia, \CSID Award of November 27, 2000, ICSID Reports, Vol. 5, p. 483.
'4 Gruslin, paragraph 15.1.
'S Gruslin, paragraph 10.3.
6 Information Memorandum on the Initial Public Tender Offer, 1992.
"’ Pierre Lalive: “The First ‘World Bank’ Arbitration (Holiday Inns v. Morocco) - Some Legal Problems”,
British Year Book of International Law, Vol. 51, 1980, p. 123.
'S Klockner v. Cameroon, ICSID Award of October 21, 1983, ICSID Reports, Vol. 2, p. 3.
'° Goetz, op. cit.
2° Martini case (Italy v. Venezuela), American Journal of International Law, Vol. 25, 1931, p. 554, as cited in
Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, footnote 102.
2! Trail Smelter case (United States v. Canada), U.N.R.LA.A., Vol. 3, 1941, p. 1905, as cited in Claimants’
Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, footnote 104.
» International Court of Justice, La Grand case (Germany v. United States), June 27, 2001, as cited in
Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, footnote 105.

International Court of Justice, Arrest Warrant case (Democratic Republic of Congo v. Belgium), February
14, 2002, as cited in Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, footnote 106.
4 Rainbow Warrior, R.1.A.A., Vol. XX, 1990, p. 217, at 270, paragraph 114, as cited in James Crawford: The
International Law Commission’s Articles on State Responsibility, 2002, p. 196, note 457 and associated text,
and in Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, footnote 107.
?5 Schreuer, op. cit, at 1126, paragraph 73, as cited in Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, footnote
100.
?6 Metalclad v. Mexico, Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, Award, (August 30, 2000), International Legal Materials,
Vol. 40, 2001, at 36.
27 Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Canada (Award Concerning the Motion by the Government of Canada Respecting
the Claim Based upon the Imposition of the “Super Fee” (August 7, 2000).
?8 Ethyl Corp. v. Canada, Award on Jurisdiction of June 24, 1998, International Legal Materials, Vol. 38,
1999, at 700, as cited in Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, footnote 120.

  

 

4B

 

° Lauder v. Czech Republic, Final Award of the UNCITRAL Tribunal of September 3, 2001; Ethyl, op. cit.

* Wena Hotels Ltd. v. Egypt, (CSID Decision of the Annulment Committee, February 5, 2002.

+! Salini v. Morocco, ICSID Decision on Jurisdiction of July 23, 2001, International Legal Materials, Vol. 42,
2003, at 609.

* Olguin v. Paraguay, ICSID Decision on Jurisdiction of August 8, 2000.

* Benvenuti & Bonfant v. Congo, 1CSID Award of August 8, 1980, International Legal Materials, Vol. 21,
1982, p. 740, as cited in Claimants’ Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction, footnote 142.

