Date of dispatch to the parties: May 22, 2007

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDINGS BETWEEN

ENRON CORPORATION
PONDEROSA ASSETS, L.P

(CLAIMANTS)

AND

ARGENTINE REPUBLIC

(RESPONDENT)

ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/3

AWARD

Members of the Tribunal:

Professor Francisco Orrego-Vicuiia, President
Professor Albert Jan van den Berg, Arbitrator

Mr. Pierre-Yves Tschanz, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:

Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson

Representing the Claimants Representing the Respondent

Mr. R. Doak Bishop HE. Osvaldo César Guglielmino
King & Spalding Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Washington, D.C. Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacié6n
United States of America Buenos Aires

Argentina
and

Mr. Guido Santiago Tawil
M&M Bomchil
Buenos Aires

Argentina

A. Introduction

1. The Claimants, Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P., are companies respectively
established under the laws of the State of Oregon and the State of Delaware, United States
of America. Enron’s principal place of business is located in Houston, Texas. Enron
owns and controls Ponderosa Assets, L.P., with its principal place of business in Houston,
Texas. The Claimants are represented in this proceeding by:

Mr. R. Doak Bishop
King & Spalding

1100 Louisiana, Suite 3300
Houston, Texas 77002

Mr. Guido Santiago Tawil
M&M Bomchil
Suipacha 268, Piso 12
C1008AAF
Buenos Aires, Argentina
2. The Respondent is the Argentine Republic, represented in this proceeding by:
HE. Osvaldo César Guglielmino
Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
Procuraci6n del Tesoro de la Nacién
Posadas 1641
CP 1112 Buenos Aires, Argentina
3. By letter of March 22, 2007 the Secretary of the Tribunal informed the parties that the
Tribunal had declared the proceedings closed in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule
38 (1). This Award contains the Tribunal’s Decision on the Merits rendered in accordance
with ICSID Arbitration Rule 47, as well as the Tribunal’s Decisions on Objections to
Jurisdiction, which are part of this Award. The Award also contains a Procedural Order
issued by the Tribunal on the discontinuance of certain tax claims. In rendering its Award,
the Tribunal has taken into account all pleadings, documents and testimony produced in

this case insofar as it considered them relevant.

B. Summary of the Proceedings

1. Procedure leading to the Decisions on Jurisdiction

4. On February 26, 2001, the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
(“ICSID” or the “Centre”) received from Enron Corporation and Ponderosa Assets L.P.,
(the “Claimants”) a Request for Arbitration against the Argentine Republic (the
“Argentine Republic” or the “Respondent”). On February 27, 2001, the Centre
acknowledged receipt and transmitted a copy of the Request to the Argentine Republic
and to the Argentine Embassy in Washington, D.C., in accordance with Rule 5 of the
ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings
(“Institution Rules”). The Request concerned certain tax assessments allegedly imposed
by some Argentinean provinces in respect to a gas transportation company in which the
Claimants participated through investments in various corporate arrangements (the
“original” or “stamp tax claim”). In the Request, the Claimants invoke the provisions of
the 1991 Treaty between the United States of America and the Argentine Republic
Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investments (“the Bilateral
Investment Treaty”, “Bilateral Treaty” or “Argentina-US BIT”)!.

5. On March 25, 2003, the Claimants filed before the Centre a new Request for Arbitration
against the Argentine Republic, invoking the protections of the Bilateral Investment
Treaty. The Request concerns the refusal of the Argentine Government to allow tariff

adjustments in accordance with the United States Producer Price Index (“PPI”) and the

' Treaty between the United States of America and the Argentine Republic Concerning the Reciprocal
Encouragement and Protection of Investments, signed on November 14, 1991, which entered into force on October
20, 1994.

enactment of Law No. 25.561 which nullified PPI adjustments and the calculation of
tariffs in dollars of the United States of America (the “ancillary claim’).

On March 28, 2003, pursuant to Article 46 of the ICSID Convention, the Centre
forwarded the new Request to the Arbitral Tribunal to determine whether to receive it as
an ancillary claim to the stamp tax claim. On the same date, the Tribunal requested the
Argentine Republic to submit any observations that it may have in this respect. On April
15, 2003, the Argentine Republic presented its observations concerning the Claimants’
new Request for Arbitration. On April 25, 2003, after having examined the observations
submitted by both parties in this respect, the Tribunal decided to accept the new Request
for Arbitration as a claim ancillary to the stamp tax claim in accordance with Article 46 of
the ICSID Convention, and to have both cases proceed on separate tracks until the
Tribunal has decided on jurisdiction with respect to both claims. In its communication,
the Tribunal also proposed an expedited procedure to the parties for filing their

submissions on jurisdiction in connection with the ancillary claim.

(i) The Stamp Tax Claim

With respect to the “stamp tax claim”, after receiving the Claimants’ Request for
Arbitration, on April 5, 2001, the Centre requested the Claimants to explain how each of
the two Claimants in the present case would meet the conditions for registration of the
Request. On April 6, 2001, the Claimants satisfied this request from the Centre.

Pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention, on April 11, 2001, the Secretary-
General of the Centre registered the Request. On the same date, in accordance with
Institution Rule 7, the Secretary-General notified the parties of the registration of the

Request and invited them to proceed to constitute an arbitral tribunal as soon as possible.

On April 12, 2001, the Claimants submitted a proposal for the number of arbitrators and
the method of their appointment. Under the Claimants’ proposal, the Tribunal would
consist of three arbitrators, one arbitrator to be appointed by each party and the third, who
would be the President of the Tribunal, to be appointed by agreement of the parties.

On April 25, 2001, the Argentine Republic notified the Centre of its agreement to the
Claimants’ proposal concerning the number of arbitrators and the method of their
appointment. In those circumstances, on April 27, 2001, the Centre confirmed that the
Arbitral Tribunal in the present case would consist of three arbitrators, one arbitrator
appointed by each party and the third, who would serve as the President of the Tribunal,
to be appointed by agreement of the parties.

On May 11, 2001, the Claimants appointed Mr. Pierre-Yves Tschanz, a Swiss national. On
July 10, 2001, the Argentine Republic appointed Dr. Héctor Gros Espiell, a national of
Uruguay. The parties, however, failed to agree on the appointment of the third, presiding,
arbitrator. By letter dated August 30, 2001, the Claimants requested that the third,
presiding, arbitrator be appointed pursuant to Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and
Rule 4 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration Proceedings (“Arbitration Rules”).
In those circumstances, and after consulting the parties, Professor Francisco Orrego
Vicufia, a Chilean national, was appointed by the Centre as the third presiding arbitrator.
Pursuant to Rule 6(1) of the Arbitration Rules, on November 1, 2001, the Secretary-
General notified the parties that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointment and
the Arbitral Tribunal was therefore deemed to have been constituted on that date. On the
same date, in accordance with ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulation 25, the
parties were informed that Ms. Claudia Frutos-Peterson, ICSID Counsel, would serve as
Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal.

The first session of the Tribunal with the parties was held on December 5, 2001, in

Washington, D.C. During the first session, the parties agreed that the Tribunal was

properly constituted in accordance with the ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules
and that they did not have any objections to any members of the Tribunal.

During the first session, the parties also agreed on several procedural issues, which were
later reproduced in the written minutes signed by the President and the Secretary of the
Tribunal. Regarding the written phase of the proceedings, the Tribunal, after consulting
with the parties in this respect, fixed the following time limits for the presentation of the
parties’ pleadings: The Claimants would file a memorial within 90 days from the date of
the first session; the Respondent would file a counter-memorial within 90 days from its
receipt of the Claimants’ memorial; the Claimants would file a reply within 60 days from
their receipt of the Respondent’s counter-memorial and the Respondent would file a
rejoinder within 60 days from its receipt of the Claimants’ reply. It was further agreed
that if the Respondent raised any objections to jurisdiction the following alternative
tentative schedule would apply: The Respondent would file a memorial on jurisdiction
within 45 days from the receipt of the Claimants’ memorial on the merits; the Claimants
would file a counter-memorial on jurisdiction within 45 days from their receipt of the
Respondent’s memorial on jurisdiction; the Respondent would file a reply on jurisdiction
within 30 days from its receipt of the Claimants’ counter-memorial on jurisdiction, and
the Claimants would file a rejoinder within 30 days from their receipt of the Respondent’s
reply on jurisdiction.

On January 14, 2002, the Claimants requested a suspension of the proceedings for six
months in order to explore the possibility of settling the dispute through direct
consultations with the authorities appointed by a new government of the Argentine
Republic. By a letter dated January 30, 2002, the Argentine Republic informed the Centre
that it did not consider necessary that the proceedings be suspended at this stage.

On January 31, 2002, the Claimants requested the suspension of the proceedings for a

period of six months in order to obtain certain internal authorizations to continue with the

20.

arbitration. On February 5, 2002, the Tribunal requested the Argentine Republic to
present any observations in this respect. The Argentine Republic presented its
observations on February 18, 2002, agreeing to an extension of only three months. On
February 25, 2002, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, granting an extension of
90 days, from the date of the Procedural Order, for the Claimants to obtain the relevant
authorization to continue with the proceeding.

On May 22, 2002, the Claimants informed the Tribunal that they had been authorized to
proceed with the arbitration and requested an extension until August 1, 2002 to file their
memorial on the merits. On May 29, 2002, the Tribunal granted the extension sought by
the Claimants. In its communication, the Tribunal noted that the Argentine Republic
would, if it requested, be entitled to the same time extension granted to the Claimants to
file its counter-memorial on the merits.

On August 1, 2002, the Claimants filed their memorial on the merits and accompanying
documentation. On December 13, 2002, the Argentine Republic notified the Tribunal that
it would be using part of the extension granted by the Tribunal in its letter of May 29,
2002 to file its memorial on January 15, 2003. Pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(1),
on January 15, 2003, the Argentine Republic filed a memorial raising objections to the
jurisdiction of the Centre and the competence of the Tribunal.

On January 21, 2003, in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 41(3), the proceedings
on the merits were suspended by the Tribunal.

On March 5, 2003, the Claimants requested an extension of time to file their counter-
memorial on jurisdiction. On the same date, the Tribunal invited the Argentine Republic
to provide its observations to the Claimants’ request. The Argentine Republic presented
its observations on March 7, 2003. On March 11, 2003, the Tribunal granted the

extension sought by the Claimants and informed the parties that the Argentine Republic

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

9
would be granted an extension on the same terms to file its reply on jurisdiction if it so
requested.

On March 31, 2003, the Claimants filed their counter-memorial on jurisdiction.
Thereafter, on May 20, 2003, the Argentine Republic filed its reply on jurisdiction and on
June 26, 2003 the Claimants filed their rejoinder on jurisdiction.

The hearing on jurisdiction took place in Paris on September 3-4, 2003. At the hearing the
Claimants were represented by Messrs. R. Doak Bishop (King & Spalding, Houston),
Guido Santiago Tawil (M. & M. Bomchil, Buenos Aires), Craig S. Miles (King &
Spalding, Houston) and Ignacio Minorini Lima (M. & M. Bomchil, Buenos Aires); all of
whom addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Claimants. The Respondent was
represented by Messrs. Carlos Ignacio Sudrez Anzorena, Jorge Barraguirre and Ms.
Beatriz Pallarés, all from the office of the Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina.
Mr. Suarez addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Argentine Republic. During the
hearing, the Tribunal also put questions to the parties in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 32(3).

On January 14, 2004, the Tribunal issued its unanimous Decision on Jurisdiction
concerning the Claimants’ original claim. In its Decision, the Tribunal rejected the
Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction. On this basis, the Tribunal concluded that the
Centre had jurisdiction and that the Tribunal was competent to consider the dispute
between the parties concerning the original claim in accordance with the provisions of the
Argentina-U.S. BIT. On the same day, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 2
declaring the continuation of the proceeding on the merits, regarding the original claim.
Certified copies of the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction were distributed to the parties
by the Secretary of the Tribunal.

In accordance with Procedural Order No. 2, on May 17, 2004, the Respondent filed its

counter-memorial on the merits.

26.

27.

28.

(ii) The Discontinuance of the Stamp Tax Claim

On May 28, 2004, the Claimants requested the suspension of the proceeding concerning
the Claimants’ original claim for a period of six months in order to verify if certain
decisions currently before the courts in Argentina could have an effect in the Claimants’
original claim. On June 1, 2004, the Tribunal requested the Argentine Republic to present
its observations to Claimants’ request. On June 8, 2004, the Argentine Republic presented
its observations accepting to suspend the proceedings, but requested the suspension to be
for a period of eighteen months. On June 10, 2004, having examined the positions of both
parties, the Tribunal issued its Procedural Order No. 3, declaring the suspension of the
stamp tax claim for a period of eight months. Thereafter the parties successively agreed
and the Tribunal granted, by letters of February 25 and September 8, 2005, further
suspensions of the stamp tax claim for a period of six and four months respectively.

On December 8, 2005, at the end of the hearing on the merits for the ancillary claim, after
having heard the position of the parties, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order on
Discontinuance of the Stamp Tax Claim embodying the parties’ agreement on the
discontinuance, without prejudice to the merits of the proceeding of the stamp tax claim.
In its Procedural Order on Discontinuance the Tribunal declared, among other things, that
the discontinuance of the stamp tax claim shall in no way affect the disposition of the
ancillary claim. The Procedural Order decides as follows:

1. The proceeding of the Stamp Tax Claim is hereby discontinued without
prejudice to the Parties' claims on the merits;

2. Either Party shall be entitled to file the Stamp Tax Claim as a new
proceeding with ICSID;

3. In such new proceeding,

29.

30.

- the Parties shall remain bound by the decision on jurisdiction rendered by the
Arbitral Tribunal in the Stamp Tax Claim of January 14, 2004,

- the arbitral tribunal to be appointed shall have the same members as currently
the Arbitral Tribunal -- or if one or more arbitrators become unavailable for any

reason he shall be replaced by using the method in which he was appointed,

- the memorials, evidence and other submissions already submitted in the Stamp
Tax Claim shall become part of the record;

4. The discontinuance of the Stamp Tax Claim shall in no way affect the
disposition of the Ancillary Claim;

5. The costs incurred in the Stamp Tax Claim until its discontinuance shall

be borne in equal shares by the Parties.

(iii) The Ancillary Claim

As noted above, the Tribunal proposed an expedited schedule to the parties for filing their
submissions on jurisdiction in connection with the ancillary claim. Based on this schedule,
Argentina filed its memorial on jurisdiction on August 20, 2003, while the Claimants
filed their counter-memorial on jurisdiction on October 17, 2003. On November 19, 2003,
Argentina filed its reply and on December 22, 2003, the Claimants filed their rejoinder.

Subsequently, a hearing on jurisdiction regarding the ancillary claim was held in Paris, on
April 1 and 2, 2004. At the hearing the Claimants were represented by Messrs. R. Doak
Bishop and Craig S. Miles from the law firm of King & Spalding, Houston, United States,

as well as by Messrs. Guido Santiago Tawil, Alix M. Martinez and Ms. Silvia M.

 

Marchili from the law firm of M. & M. Bomchil, Buenos Aires, Argentina. Messrs.
Bishop and Tawil addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Claimants. The Argentine
Republic was represented by Ms. Cintia Yaryura, Ms. Ana Badillos, and Mr. Ignacio
Pérez Cortés from the office of the Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina. All of

them addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the Argentine Republic.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

N

12
During the hearing, the Tribunal also put questions to the parties in accordance with
ICSID Arbitration Rule 32(3).
On August 2, 2004, the Tribunal issued its unanimous Decision on Jurisdiction
concerning the ancillary claim rejecting the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction. In its
Decision the Tribunal concluded that the Centre had jurisdiction and that the Tribunal
was competent to consider the dispute between the parties regarding the ancillary claim in
accordance with the provisions of the Argentina-U.S. BIT. Certified copies of the
Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction were distributed to the parties by the Secretary of the
Tribunal.
On August 18, 2005, after an exchange between the parties, the Tribunal issued
Procedural Order No. 4, ordering the continuation of the proceeding concerning the
ancillary claim. The ancillary claim constitutes the object of the present Award on the

merits.

Procedure Leading to the Award on the Merits

Pursuant to the Tribunal’s Procedural Order No. 4, on November 17, 2004 the Claimants
submitted their memorial on the merits while the Respondent submitted its Counter-
memorial on March 7, 2005. On May 6, 2005, the Claimants submitted their Reply on the
merits and on July 7, 2005, the Respondent submitted its Rejoinder.

After consulting with both sides, the Tribunal by letter dated June 15, 2005 informed the
parties that the hearing on the merits would be held at the seat of the Centre in
Washington D.C. from November 28, 2005 to December 8, 2005.

The hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing the Claimants were represented by
Messrs. Doak Bishop, Craig S. Miles, Martin Gusy and Ms. Zhennia Silverman of the law

firm of King & Spalding LLP Houston, United States; Me:

 

Guido Santiago Tawil,

37.

38.

39.

40.

13
Hector M. Huici and Ms. Silvia M. Marchili of the law firm of M & M Bomchil, Buenos
Aires, Argentina. The Respondent was represented by Messrs. Osvaldo César
Guglielmino, Gustavo Scrinzi, Jorge Barraguirre, Félix Helou, Ignacio Pérez Cortéz,
Tomas Braceras, Rodolfo Alberto Garcia Bollini, Rodrigo Ruiz Ezquide, Fabian
Markaida, Carlos Winograb and Mesdames Maria Luz Moglia, Leticia Sierra Lobos and
Alicia Federico, all from the Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.
As indicated by the Tribunal, on February 28, 2006 the parties filed their post-hearing
briefs.
In the course of the hearing, the Tribunal and the parties discussed the possibility of
retaining independent expert advice to better understand the underlying assumptions and
methodology relied upon in the valuation reports offered by the parties’ experts. After a
brief exchange between the parties and the Tribunal as to the appointment of the
independent expert, the Tribunal by letter dated March 16, 2006, appointed Mr. Luis
Hernan Paul, a Chilean engineer, finance consultant and professor of economics, as its
expert.
On May 26, 2006, Mr. Héctor Gros Espiell submitted his resignation as an arbitrator. On
the same date, a vacancy on the Tribunal was announced by the Centre, and pursuant to
ICSID Arbitration Rule 10(2), the proceeding was suspended. On July 10, 2006, after
consulting the parties, the Chairman of the Administrative Council appointed Professor
Albert Jan van den Berg, a Dutch national, as arbitrator in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 11(2)(a). On July 11, 2006, the Tribunal was reconstituted and the
proceedings were resumed.
On October 30, 2006, the Claimants submitted to the Tribunal an Application for
Provisional Measures requesting the Tribunal to order the office of the Procurador del

Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina “to cease its actions (or inactions) with respect to the

41.

42.

14
ENARGAS file and exercise all deliberate dispatch to ensure the resumption of
Claimants’ right to consummate the CIESA swap and their right to manage, control and
dispose of their CIESA/TGS shares”. Subsequently, the Claimants’ request for
provisional measures was slightly modified requesting the Tribunal to order “Argentina to
exercise all deliberate dispatch to ensure approval of the second stage of the CIESA swap
and to refrain from taking any further act itself or through any of its agencies that
aggravates the present dispute.” After hearing the Respondent’s observations in this
respect, the Tribunal dismissed on December 13, 2006 the Claimants’ request for lack of
jurisdiction over the subject matter of the requests made, either in its original or in its

modified versions.

Considerations

Argentina’s Privatization Program

Beginning in 1989, the Government of Argentina undertook a vast program of
privatization of State-owned companies, including, among other key sectors of the
economy, gas transportation and distribution. With a view to restructure the Argentine
economy, the Currency Convertibility was introduced in 1991 (Law 23.928) and the
Argentine peso was fixed at par with the United States dollar (Decree 2128/91). Various
other measures were directed at opening the economy to foreign trade and investments,
including most significantly among them the policy of negotiating bilateral investment
treaties with many countries.

New rules governing gas transportation and distribution were introduced in 1992 by the
Gas Law (Law 24.076) and the implementing regulations embodied in de Gas Decree

(Decree 1738/92). Under this regulatory framework, gas transportation was separated

43.

15
from distribution. Two major transportation companies were created to this effect,
resulting in Transportadora de Gas del Sur (“TGS”) and Transportadora de Gas del Norte
(“TGN”), while eight other companies were established for gas distribution. This award
concerns the dispute arising from the Claimants’ investment in TGS.

In order to facilitate the process of privatization, a Standard Gas Transportation License
or “Model Licence” was approved by Decree 2255/92 including the applicable Basic
Rules; all such rules were embodied in the License actually signed by TGS and the
Government of Argentina and approved by Decree 2458/92. The duration of the License
is of 35 years, leading up to 2027. An “Information Memorandum” concerning the
privatization of Gas del Estado, the former State-owned transportation and distribution
company, together with a “Pliego” explaining the bidding rules and the legal and
contractual arrangements, were provided to prospective investors so as to organize the
bidding process. The parties dispute the legal significance of these information materials.
Discussions to attract investors were held with prospective foreign investors in Argentina
and abroad, while the broad program of bilateral investment treaties noted was
simultaneously undertaken with a view to provide guarantees to such investments.

The Claimants explain that in making the decision to invest in TGS, they relied
specifically on the conditions offered by these various legislative and regulatory
enactments. These conditions, the Claimants assert, included the calculation of tariffs in
US dollars; their semiannual adjustment according to changes in the US Producer Price
Index (“PPI”); the commitment that there would be no price freeze applicable to the tariff
system and, if one was imposed, the licensee had a right to compensation; the
commitment that the license would not be amended by the Government, in full or in part,
except with the prior consent of the licensee; a 35-year license, with the possibility of a
10-year extension; and the commitment not to withdraw the license except in case of

specific breaches listed.

45.

46.

16
All of the above, the Claimants maintain, was in turn related to the setting of gas tariffs at
a level that would ensure operators with sufficient revenues to cover all reasonable costs,
taxes, depreciation and a reasonable profit. In this context, the Claimants assert, the
Government of Argentina made additional representations concerning the immediate and
automatic adjustment of tariffs in case the parity between the dollar and the peso would
experience a variation, the use of the New York exchange rate for adjustments, and the
passing through to consumers of all cost variations resulting from changes in tax
provisions.
The Government of Argentina, as will be discussed further below, has a different
understanding about the meaning and extent of these various elements of the legal and

regulatory framework.

Claimants’ investment in TGS

47.

48.

The Claimants’ investment in TGS has evolved over time by means of a number of
complex transactions. It began in 1992 when Enron Pipeline Company Argentina S. A.
(“EPCA”), an indirectly wholly-owned subsidiary of Enron, formed with three other
companies a bidding consortium to submit a bid for TGS. The Consortium was awarded
70% of the shares of TGS. Ultimately, in order to comply with the requirement that an
Argentine company should hold the shares in TGS, the Consortium incorporated
Compaiifa de Inversiones de Energia S. A. (“CIESA”), which became the holder of the
70% of the shares awarded. Each of the four members of the Consortium acquired a 25%
interest in CIESA, and consequently, through CIESA, an indirect 17.5% interest in TGS.

The purchase price for the 70% of the shares of TGS is put by the Claimants at
US$561,189,000. The Consortium contributed to CIESA first US$305,000,000 (or

US$76,250,000 for each member) and later the balance of US$256,189,000 (or

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

17
US$64,047,250 for each member). In respect of the first contribution, the Claimants
explain that Enron made a direct cash contribution of US$7,625,000 to CIESA, while the
balance of US$68,625,000 was satisfied through a loan to CIESA by Chase Manhattan
Bank, which Enron guaranteed. The Tribunal must note at this point that this loan became

a crucial issue in the discussions on valuation that will be addressed further below. It is

 

further explained that in respect of the second contribution, Enron contributed its total
share by means of Argentine foreign and domestic debt securities”.

EPCA in turn qualified as a member having the technical operation expertise required by
the regulations. In this capacity it entered into a Technical Assistance Agreement with
TGS. EPCA also contributed, it is explained by the Claimants, US$21,900,000 to CIESA
in the form of a direct payment to the Chase Manhattan Bank in partial satisfaction of the
loan referred to above.

In 1996, both Enron and one other member of the Consortium purchased an additional
25% interest in CIESA from another member, each paying US$117,500,000. Enron thus
became the indirect owner of a 37.5% interest in CIESA and, through it, of a 26.25%
interest in TGS.

Also in 1996 Enron and one other member purchased the remaining 25% of the shares of
CIESA from another shareholder, for a total price of US$ 249,150,000, of which Enron
paid its share by two transfers of funds. Enron thus became the indirect owner of 50%
interest in CIESA and, through it, of 35% interest in TGS.

Other transactions made in 1999 between CIESA’s shareholders and their subsidiaries,
and the purchase of publicly traded shares of TGS by EPCA in the amount of US$
7,000,170, according to the Claimants, resulted in Enron becoming the indirect holder of

a 27.65% interest in TGS through its 50% participation in CIESA, the indirect holder of

> Witness Statement of K. George Wasaff of November 12, 2004, paras. 22-31.

53.

54.

55.

18
an additional 7.593% interest in TGS through its participation in the subsidiary company
EDIDESCA and the indirect holder of 0.02% in TGS through its participation in EPCA.
The aggregate of Enron’s interest in TGS at this stage is thus claimed to be 35.263%.

The evolving structure of ownership, however, does not end there. Enron’s participation
in TGS, while remaining the same in respect of CIESA, changed again in respect of both
the subsidiaries EDIDESCA (7.62%) and EPCA (.23%), thus totaling (through Ponderosa)
an indirect ownership of 35.5% interest in TGS, as explained by the Claimants.
Additional transactions took place in 2005 and 2006. The first of these transactions, the
Rawhide or Ponderosa Settlement and the parallel CIESA Settlement, was executed in part
on August 29, 2005 and resulted in reducing Ponderosa’s interest in TGS from 35.5% to
20.7% in the Claimants’ estimate, a figure which the Respondent puts at 19.5%. In view
of the fact that the parties have constantly referred to a 19.5% in this proceeding, the
Tribunal will use this last figure for ease of reference. This reduction involved complex
arrangements under which the Claimants and related subsidiaries, by means of an
exchange of shares through a trusteeship agreement, transferred their participation in
CIESA to Petrobras and others of its various subsidiaries, acquiring from them a direct
participation in TGS of 11.65% that together with Enron’s participation of 7.85% through
its subsidiaries totaled 19.5%. On January 27, 2006, the Claimants sold shares
representing 15.2% of TGS to D. E. Shaw Laminar Emerging Markets LL. C. for
US$114.6 million, with an option to buy the remainder of the Claimants’ shares in TGS
(ie., 4.3%) for US$33.9 million.

The Government of Argentina, while not disputing that the transactions described in the
preceding paragraphs took place, considers that their true meaning is different from that
explained by the Claimants. The Respondent asserts that Enron could only claim for a
19.5% indirect interest in TGS, not for 35.5%, because its investment was financed in part

by the loan taken by CIESA. The fact that Enron guaranteed this loan, the Respondent

56.

57.

58.

59.

19
maintains, does not mean that the cash flow received by CIESA from TGS would benefit
Enron as it would have to be applied first to CIESA’s creditors. The Respondent also
argues in this respect that the 2005 transaction noted above confirms this view in so far
the Claimants exchanged their nominal 35.5% indirect interest in TGS for a real 19.5%
direct interest.

The Respondent also objects to other aspects of the Claimants’ description of their
investment, in particular the distinction between a regulated and a non-regulated sector of
the business and the true value of the debt securities with which the purchase of the shares
in TGS was paid in part. The Respondent also explains that the technical assistance
agreement between TGS and EPCA was transferred to Petrobras in 2004, for an
undisclosed amount, thus not allowing for any claims in this respect after the transfer date.
As a result of these various differences about the meaning of the investment, the Parties
have also different views about the amounts that were actually involved, the returns
obtained on the investment and the true measure of damages.

The Claimants estimate their total investment in TGS to be in the amount of
US$343,954,134 and that TGS invested in Argentina’s gas transportation system
US$925.5 million. This, in the Claimants’ view, resulted in significant improvements in
the performance of the gas sector; financial gains for the Government of Argentina in
terms of cash revenue from the sale of Gas del Estado; transfer of indebtedness; tax
revenues; and low gas prices ranking among the lowest in the world.

The Government of Argentina has a very different view about the amounts actually
invested by Enron in the indirect purchase of TGS. In the Respondent’s estimate, Enron
would have paid US$84.8 million for the purchase of the original 17.5% interest in TGS
and an alleged US$250.4 million for the additional 18% purchased later, resulting in a

total investment of US$335.1 million for the claimed 35.5% interest.

60.

6l.

20
This, the Respondent asserts, would have resulted in benefits to the investor of US$487
million through 2004 in dividends and fees, a residual value of US$349.1 million and a
rate of return on the investment of 39.4%, all of it totaling a net result of US$500 million
in favor of Enron. In other estimates the rate of return on the investment for the period
1992-2004 is put at 64.1%, and at 35.9% for Enron’s total participation, with net gains of
US$527 million. The Claimants dispute these estimates because in their view, if a 64%
return were true, it would have resulted in a cumulative staggering figure of US$7355.10
million through 2004; it is argued that the true rate of return was not more than 8.4% with
a total income received by Enron of US$390.5 million, while the real damage suffered
amounts to US$278.7 million to August 2000 or US$323.4 million to December 2001.
The precise figures which the Claimants have requested as damages will be discussed in
the context of valuation.
As many of these views are inextricably related to valuation issues and the conclusions of

expert reports, they will be considered further below in this other context.

The measures complained of

62.

1. No adjustment for PPI since 1999

Throughout the 1990s the regulatory system devised for the gas transportation sector
operated without difficulties, including most significantly the periodic modification of
tariffs to reflect changes in the cost of natural gas and the adjustment of tariffs, both up
and down, following the variations in the US PPI. A quinquiennial tariff revision was also
approved by ENARGAS, the government regulatory agency for the gas sector, for the

period 1997-2002.

63.

65.

66.

67.

21
In late 1999, however, the situation began to change as the impending economic, social
and political crisis evidenced its early symptoms. The political and public opinion
environment was not sympathetic towards utility companies and the foreign investors
therein as a consequence of tariff increases resulting from the operation of the regulatory
framework, including the influence of higher natural gas prices and taxes.
Government officials met with industry representatives in late 1999 and early 2000 to
discuss the suspension of tariff increases. As a result, an agreement was signed on
January 6, 2000, postponing for six months the PPI adjustment due on January 1, 2000
and providing that the deferred increase would be recovered with interest in the period
July 1, 2000-April 30, 2001 (ENARGAS Resolution 1470/00).
This agreement, however, proved to be short-lived. The Government insisted a few
months later that tariffs should be frozen altogether for a two-year period. As a result, a
second suspension agreement intervened on July 17, 2000, suspending through June 30,
2002 PPI adjustments as from July 1, 2000 and providing that the differences would be
placed in an interesting-bearing stabilization fund and tariff increases would resume at the
end of the suspension period, including the recovering of the deficits originating in these
arrangements (Decree 669/00).
The Government of Argentina expressly stated in this last decree that investments
connected to the privatization process were protected by the legislation in force and, in
particular, by the bilateral investment treaties signed by the Government. It should be
noted that while the Government of Argentina considers the above-mentioned agreements

as the outcome of genuine consent by the parties, the Claimants assert that Licensees

 

were pressured by the Government into giving their consent.
Not long after the second agreement, a judicial injunction was requested by the Argentine
Ombudsman (“Defensor del Pueblo de la Naci6n”) against Decree 669/00 on the

argument that it was both unconstitutional and contrary to the law. The injunction was

68.

69.

70.

22
granted on August 18, 2000, suspending this decree pending a ruling on the legality of the
PPI adjustment mechanism, a ruling that has not been issued thus far; the Respondent has
explained, however, that the injunction would have been confirmed indirectly by the
Argentine Supreme Court in 2005. The injunction was appealed by both the ENARGAS
and the Ministry of Economy on the argument that it would upset the economic balance
of the license and alter the system of tariffs established in US dollars and their PPI
adjustment, which were the instruments chosen with “the aim of luring investors” in the
privatization process. The appeal was rejected on October 5, 2001.

On the basis of this injunction, ENARGAS directed the licensees to suspend all PPI
adjustments and has rejected all requests for adjustment made since. This includes the PPI
adjustment under the first agreement noted. As a result, no such adjustments have been
made since 1999. This is the situation that gives rise to the first claim before this Tribunal.
The Government of Argentina has a different view of the ultimate meaning of this
process. The Respondent explains that the PPI adjustment made sense at a time when
adjustments in pesos were prohibited under the Convertibility law, because of the adverse
effect that indexation had on inflation, and the US price indexes were considerably lower
than those of Argentina. This, however, it is further explained, changed dramatically in
1998-1999 when the Argentine economy entered into recession and deflation, with lower
costs and prices, and the US inflation became considerably higher than that of Argentina,
thus making the PPI an unreasonable mechanism that would only lead to tariff increases.

The Respondent also explains that a PPI adjustment of tariffs on January 1, 2000 would
have meant a 3.78% increase, while that due on July 1, 2000 would have meant a 6.18%
increase, including the increase postponed under the first agreement noted above. This is
what, in Respondent’s view, justifies the need for the agreements made with the licensees
and was also the issue considered by the judge granting the injunction, together with the

interests of consumers. In any event, it is

 

isserted, the Government is only complying

71.

72.

73.

23

with a binding judicial decision even if not agreeing with its terms. The non-adjustment

 

of tariffs for PPI increases would thus be the result of, first.

  

the consent of the parties and,

next, the order of the judiciary.

2. The Emergency Law

The crisis referred to above continued to evolve and expand until major trouble became
evident in late 2001. The Government of Argentina decided in that context to enact on
January 6, 2002, Law No. 25.561 or the “Emergency Law”, which has come to be at the
heart of this and many other claims brought by foreign investors against the Argentine
Republic.

The Emergency Law eliminated the right to calculate tariffs in U. S. dollars, converting
tariffs to pesos at the fixed rate of exchange of one dollar to one peso. In addition, the
Government was authorized under this Law to devalue the peso, which a few days later
was fixed at a new rate of exchange of 1.40 pesos per dollar for certain transactions
(mainly banking transactions) and the free market rate for all other transactions. A month
later, the free market rate applied to all transactions. PPI adjustments were definitely
abolished.

The Emergency Law also directed the Government of Argentina to begin a renegotiation
process of public utility contracts affected by the measures indicated. The second
quinquiennial review of gas tariffs that should have taken place in 2002 was paralyzed by
ENARGAS. While the rights of licensees were expressly safeguarded under the
arrangements first set up to undertake the renegotiation, gradually the Government
conditioned the right to participate in this process to the abandonment of all claims (by
the Licensees or their shareholders), either totally or partially according to the nature of

the claim, before local courts or arbitral tribunals. Various bodies in charge of

24
renegotiation have been set up over time and the deadlines established have been
regularly extended, the last extension leading to the end of 2007.

74. The renegotiation process has succeeded in respect of a number of public utility contracts
and sectors*, notably among them the gas producers, but has not made much progress in
the gas transportation and distribution industry, except for one contract with a gas
provider (GASBAN), signed in July 2005. Information about the later steps of
presidential and congressional approval is not available in the record. It was explained at
the hearing on the merits that this last renegotiation arrangement provides for a 27% tariff
increase during the transition period and it is believed to consider a 120% increase
thereafter’.

75. Exchanges of correspondence with TGS have not borne fruit in respect of a negotiated
settlement and preliminary proposals made by the Government have not met the
expectations of the licensee. Claimants explain that this is due in part to the fact that the
tariff adjustment proposed has been well below the minimum required by the industry and
in part to the fact that none of the rights existing under the license would be reestablished

and that no compensation would be paid for the losses incurred thus far. In addition,

 

Claimants are required to withdraw legal actions and make the Government whole for any
adverse decision.

76. The Claimants also explain that in spite of the fact that the Government, recognizing the
difficulties many companies are going through, has on occasion been willing to authorize
small emergency adjustments, these have been systematically blocked by court
injunctions. The Bill on National Public Utilities introduced by the Government in
Congress in 2004 has also been the cause of concern, it is maintained, because, if

approved, it would result in the final and complete abandonment of the regulatory system

3 Witness Statement of Jorge G. Simeonoff of July 5, 2005, paras. 57-66.
* Remarks of Ignacio Pérez Cortés, Hearing Transcript, Vol. 1, November 28, 2005, pp. 154-157.

77.

78.

79.

25
and conditions governing the licenses. The Claimants also argue that a trusteeship
arrangement established for the expansion of the gas transportation network, although
involving a tariff adjustment, does not benefit the licensees but only new investors in such
scheme.

The Respondent attaches an entirely different meaning to the developments outlined
above. It first explains that the crisis that erupted in full force in late 2001 has been

among the most severe in the world, with dramatic consequences in social well-being and

 

increased poverty, deep recession, deflation and unemployment, all of it leading to
political events characterized by instability and institutional collapse. In this context, it is

further explained, the Government had no other option than to enact the Emergency Law

and abandon the convertibility regime.

 

The pesification of contracts and financial obligations that followed, the Respondent
asserts, was applied to the Argentine economic system as a whole and did not target
foreign investors in utility companies in particular, and even less did it adversely
discriminate against them. In any event, it is also argued, the Emergency Law was
expressly declared by Congress as one of public order so that no individual could invoke
alleged acquired rights against its provisions, and as a consequence superseded all prior
rules that were inconsistent with the new law.

The Government of Argentina also explains that the renegotiation process is gradually
advancing and that a good number of contracts have been successfully renegotiated. It is
further asserted that international claims have been one obstacle to the more expedient
progress of negotiations. In any event, it is explained, UNIREN, the government agency
presently in charge of the renegotiations, has made various offers to TGS and this
company participates in various expansion projects, including the trusteeship arrangement
mentioned above and other partial agreements to this effect, all of which result in benefits

to the company.

80.

81.

82.

26

 

G EFFECTS CLAIMED

The Claimants sum up the damaging effects of the measures described in two major areas
of the business. The first is the inability to secure international financing as a result of
TGS having been unable to restructure its debt of over US$1 billion and the ensuing
default on the payments due. It is explained that as a consequence TGS was rated D
(default) by Standard & Poor's credit rating’.

The second area the Claimants explain has suffered major damages is that concerning the
revenues and the value of the company. According to the Claimants, the unavailability of
PPI adjustments for 2000-2001 alone led to a loss of revenue in the amount of US$15.8
million. The emergency measures, it is also maintained, have decreased the value of the
regulated business of the company in more than US$1 billion, decreasing from a value of
US$1.68 billion it had in December 2001 to US$651.3 million, less than the debt
associated with the regulated business and thus resulting in a total loss of the equity value.
It must be noted that the Claimants make a sharp distinction between the regulated part of
the business and the non-regulated part of the business, a question that will be examined
further below.

The Government of Argentina also believes differently in this regard. It is first argued
that TGS must be considered as a business as a whole, including both the regulated sector
of gas transportation and the non-regulated sector of production of Liquified Natural Gas
(LNG), as both were subject to the privatization. The LNG Plant of Complejo Cerri
(Bahia Blanca), as well as the midstream services provided in preparing gas for its

injection in the gas transportation network and the construction, operation and

* Witness Statement of Eduardo Ojea Quintana of November 16, 2004, paras. 185-216.

83.

84.

85.

27
maintenance of gas pipelines through subsidiaries, form an integrated whole and hence
must also be computed in the value of TGS.

The Respondent explains that the revenues of the non-regulated sector alone have
increased 420% in US dollars in the period 1993-2004, while its incidence in the total
income of TGS has been constantly increasing. It is thus the case, it is further asserted,
that TGS benefited from the devaluation, while its costs were pesified and international
prices increased. Moreover, it is explained, TGS is the principal exporter of LNG in
Argentina.

A second aspect that leads the Respondent to differ from the actual damages claimed is
that since the outset TGS adopted an aggressive financial policy, which by 2001 meant
that 50% of the company’s assets had been financed with debt. This is contrasted with the
tariff calculation which assumed that 33% of assets would be debt-financed, a figure that
was increased in the first quinquiennial tariff revision to 36.6%. This policy, the
Respondent argues, allowed the company to distribute generous dividends and pay
significant fees, which totaled US$ 1,354 million or 97% of the accumulated earnings.
ENARGAS duly warned, it is also explained, about the implications of this policy and
about changes in depreciation periods. The result of it was, in the Respondent’s view, that
the crisis impacted on TGS more significantly than would have been the case with a
prudent financial policy.

The Respondent concludes in this matter that TGS has today a value 40% higher than
before the emergency measured on the stock market value of its shares, or US$668.29
million. In the Respondent’s estimates, TGS earned approximately US$1.2 billion on the
amount invested or 325%. The Government of Argentina also asserts that the
indebtedness resulting from CIESA’s financial policy noted above should be taken into

account.

86.

87.

88.

89.

28

Some of the issues related to the disci

 

ion of damages have legal implications while all
of them have valuation implications. These various aspects will also be discussed further

below.

II. LEGAL CLAIMS AND DEFENSES

 

The Claimants maintain that the various measures complained of have resulted in the
violation of specific commitments made to the investors and the contractual obligations
the Government undertook under the License, all of it in a manner contrary to the
applicable legal and regulatory framework and the specific guarantees provided under the
Argentina-United States bilateral investment treaty. All such commitments and
guarantees were determinative of the decision to invest in TGS, the Claimants also argue.

These commitments, the Claimants assert, include in particular the right to calculate the
tariffs in US dollars, the semi-annual adjustment in accordance with the variation of the
US PPI and the quinquiennial review of tariffs. In addition, the Claimants also maintain,
the obligation not to freeze tariffs or subject them to price controls, or if done so to
compensate the licensee, as well as the obligation not to alter the License without the
consent of the licensee, were prominent guarantees under the License.

As all the measures complained of originate in actions of the Government of Argentina or
attributable to it, the Claimants further state, a wrongful expropriation of the investment
has ensued, both in the form of direct and of indirect or creeping expropriation. It is also
claimed that fair and equitable treatment and legitimate expectations have been violated,
arbitrariness and discrimination have characterized the measures adopted, and full
protection and security have not been provided to the investors. It follows, in the

Claimants’ view, that all the guarantees provided under the Treaty have been breached.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

29
The legal defense of the Respondent is principally based on the argument that the legal
and regulatory framework governing the privatization provided only for the right of the
licensee to a fair and reasonable tariff and that the right to the calculation of the tariffs in
US dollars was a feature that could last only as long as the Convertibility Law was in
force, but not if this law was abandoned at some point in time.
The Respondent also argues that if the investors relied on the information conveyed by
private consulting firms, such as that contained in the Information Memorandum, this
cannot be attributed to the Government which expressly disclaimed any responsibility for
such information.
In addition, the Respondent explains, the Government has the duty to take into account
the interests of the consumers in regulating a national public service such as the
transportation of gas, a function which is within the ambit of discretionary Government
powers.
In the view of the Government of Argentina, the legal and regulatory framework of
Argentina has been strictly enforced in adopting the measures in question and none of it
involves a breach of the Treaty. Moreover, it is also maintained, the Government’s
responsibility is excluded both under the Argentine legislation and jurisprudence on
emergency and under the rules of international law governing the state of necessity,
whether customary or contained in the bilateral investment treaty.
The legal claims put forth by the Claimants and the defenses opposed by the Respondent
will be examined in the necessary detail in connection with each of the specific measures

complained of.

IIL. THE PPI CLAIM

95.

96.

97.

98.

30
The first claim the Tribunal needs to consider is that concerning the semi-annual
adjustment of tariffs in accordance with the US PPI, a claim which originates in the
measures adopted in 2000-2001, continued under the Emergency Law and kept
unchanged since.
The Claimants argue in this respect that this adjustment is a right guaranteed under
Article 41 of the Gas Law, which provided for the adjustment of tariffs “in accordance

with a formula based on international market indicators”, and was further confirmed by

 

the Basic Rules, which, as explained in the Information Memorandum invoked by the
Claimants, was specifically related to the US PPI. As such, the Claimants assert, it is a
vested right and was so recognized under Decree 669/00 noted above in describing this
adjustment as a “legitimately acquired right”. This adjustment mechanism, the Claimants
maintain, was an essential feature of the tariff system devised for the privatization, as it
would prevent erosion of the US dollar value of the tariffs, and its suspension and
abandonment was related to purely political reasons, thus causing a substantial loss.

The Government of Argentina explains that the situation was different. Article 41 of the
Gas Law, it is argued, expressly related the adjustment to the change in value of goods
and services of the industry. The US PPI made sense, the argument follows, at the
beginning of the privatization process when the US indexes were lower than those of
Argentina, but lost any meaning when the situation in Argentina was reversed and the
economy went into recession, and deflation. As noted above, the Respondent explains
that any US PPI indexation would have resulted in higher tariffs at a time when the
economy was experiencing serious difficulties and later ended up in a major crisis.

The Respondent also argues in this connection that the purpose of the US PPI adjustment
was only to reflect the evolution of changes in costs and not to ensure a given value of

tariffs in US dollars. The costs considered, in the Respondent’s view, unlike what the

31
Claimants believe, include operational costs which are a part of the concept of fair and
reasonable tariffs according to the Gas Law.

99. In any event, it is also maintained by the Respondent, the suspension of the adjustment
was first agreed with the licensees and next ordered by the judicial injunction of August
2000, which came to be indirectly confirmed by the Argentine Supreme Court on May 24,
2005°. The fact that the Government appealed the injunction on arguments which were
shared by the Claimants, it is also maintained, does not mean that the Government should
at present ignore the decisions of the Argentine judiciary in dismissing the appeal and
later in indirectly confirming such injunction, as it is its duty under the Argentine
Constitution and administrative law’.

100. The parties also differ on the meaning of the ENARGAS Resolution that ordered the
observance of the judicial injunction of August 2000 (Resolution 3480/00). In the
Claimants’ view, such Resolution went beyond the judicial suspension which only
referred to the adjustments embodied in the second agreement, that is those due as from
July 1, 2000, but not to what had been agreed for the first semester in the first agreement.
On these bases, the Claimants requested the reconsideration of the ENARGAS Resolution,
but this request was denied. The Respondent explains that the Resolution in question only
informed the Licensee that the injunction should be observed and the tariffs managed
accordingly.

101. The Tribunal must first note that it is correct that Article 41 of the Gas Law, while
providing for adjustment of tariffs in accordance with a formula based on international
market indicators, also related this formula to the change in value of goods and services.
The formula, however, was not defined under the Law. This task was left to the Basic

Rules of the License, which provided in this connection that tariffs were to be adjusted

© Respondent’s Exhibit no. 225.
7 Legal Opinion of Julio Rodolfo Comadira of June 2005, para. 177.

102.

104.

32
semi-annually in accordance with the US PPI. This was also the information conveyed to
investors by the Information Memorandum.

The Tribunal is persuaded that such understanding was also the Government’s view at the
time and for almost a whole decade. This explains that Decree 669/00, dealing
specifically with this mechanism, referred to the adjustment under it as a “legitimately
acquired right”, thus involving an unequivocal recognition of the existence of such a right.

Even if the Information Memorandum was in fact prepared by private consultants and the

 

responsibility of the Government was expressly disclaimed, if it had been in error in this
respect, what is not quite likely in the case of highly prestigious consulting firms engaged
by the Government to explain the privatization plan to prospective foreign investors, such
error would not have passed unnoticed to competent government officials. In such case,
moreover, the Government would have been under the duty to issue a clarification, as
otherwise a false legitimate expectation would have been created. No such clarification
was ever issued until the US PPI was first suspended and next discontinued under the
Emergency Law. It is thus the conclusion of the Tribunal that the licensees had a right to
the US PPI adjustment under both the regulatory framework and the License, confirmed
by the context and the practice of the privatization.

This is not to say that the Government did not have the sovereign authority to change its
mind later, as in fact it did. The rationale for this change might be perfectly reasonable in
light of changing economic conditions in the country, a matter which is not for the
Tribunal to judge. But even to this end, the Government had mechanisms available under
the License and the regulatory framework, including the quinquiennial tariff revision.
One such revision had already taken place (“RQT I”) and one other was in preparation to
govern the tariffs precisely as from 2002 (“RQT II”), but this was never finalized. If the
Government decided to take a different route, this cannot be to the detriment of investors’

rights and any ensuing damage must be compensated if legally justified.

105.

106.

107.

33
The meaning of the ENARGAS Resolution adopted in connection with the judicial
injunction of PPI adjustments must be understood in the context of what such injunction
aimed at. While the Claimants are right in pointing out that the injunction did not refer to
adjustments related to the first agreement, the fact of the matter is that the injunction in
question sought to suspend the increase of tariffs in general. ENARGAS cannot be faulted
for having so understood. It must be kept in mind that the undertakings of the first
agreement would have also begun to materialize in the second semester of 2000, the

period which the injunction was considering.

IV. THE CLAIM ABOUT THE CALCULATION OF TARIFFS IN US DOLLARS

J. The Claimants’ argument

The central claim in this arbitration is that concerning the alleged right to calculate tariffs
in US dollars. The Claimants argue in this respect that under the Gas Law, the Gas Decree
and the Basic Rules of the License, key tariff-related guarantees were offered to investors,
paramount among which were the calculation of tariffs in US dollars, the US PPI
adjustment, the commitment not to freeze tariffs or subject them to price control without
compensation, and the obligation not to amend the License without the consent of the
licensees.

The Claimants maintain that such guarantees were at the heart of the protection offered
against currency fluctuations and an essential feature to attract foreign investors to the
privatization process. The Claimants further assert that their claim is not related to an
issue of devaluation, and hence also unrelated to questions arising under the

Convertibility Law as the Respondent argues, but based on the breach of guarantees made

108.

109.

110.

34
available to investors so as to keep them free from the extreme fluctuations that had
historically characterized the Argentine economy, including the period immediately
preceding the privatization. The Claimants believe that if such guarantees were not
available at the time they were needed because of renewed fluctuations, they would be
entirely futile.

In support of their views, the Claimants invoke in particular Article 41 of the Gas Decree,
which provides that “Transportation and Distribution Tariffs shall be calculated in
Dollars” (Tribunal’s English translation), just as Article 9.2 of the Basic Rules indicated
that the “tariff has been calculated in US dollars”. It would then be expressed in pesos at
the time of billing. This understanding, it is further maintained, was confirmed by the
minutes of a meeting of the Privatization Committee held on October 2, 1992, stating in
connection with Article 9.2 of the Basic Rules that it “makes sufficiently clear that the
tariffs are in dollars and that they are expressed in convertible pesos, and, therefore, in
case of an eventual amendment to the Convertibility Law, they should be automatically
re-expressed at the modified parity”; this understanding made it unnecessary to include
additional rules in respect of this guarantee.

The Claimants further invoke in confirmation of this understanding, among a number of
other provisions, the wording of Annex F of the Pliego to the effect that tariffs “shall be
adjusted immediately and automatically in the event that parity varies”, indicating to this
effect that the “quantity of Argentine currency necessary to acquire a US dollar in the

New York market shall be applied”.

2. The Respondent’s argument

The Government of Argentina holds a completely different view about the meaning of the

Gas Law and related provisions on this issue. It believes first that the essential provision

111.

112.

35
of the Law is that embodied in Article 2 to the effect that tariffs shall be fair and
reasonable, a provision that is also reflected in Article 2 (6) of the Gas Decree in terms of
the obligations which ENARGAS must ensure. The concept of a fair and reasonable tariff
is associated, the Government maintains, to the objective of covering operating costs,
taxes and depreciation and earning a reasonable income, all of which within the
framework of an efficient operation of a satisfactory service at the minimum cost and a
return similar to other activities of comparable risk.

In the context of such concept, the Respondent argues, the reference to the calculation of
tariffs in US dollars, and related PPI adjustment, could only be understood as inextricably
related to the Convertibility Law. This is confirmed, the argument follows, by the very
terms of Article 41 of the Gas Law when making express reference to the fact that tariffs
shall be expressed in pesos convertible under Law 23.928 (the Convertibility Law) and
taking into account the parity established in Article 3 of its Regulatory Decree (Decree
No. 2.128/91), which was the one to one parity between the peso and the dollar. The
Respondent finds further confirmation of this link to the Convertibility Law in Article 9.2
of the License, which also referred to Article 3 of the Regulatory Decree and its eventual
modifications.

It is thus the case, the Respondent asserts, that the mechanism envisaged only the
possibility of a modification of the relationship between the peso and the dollar under the
Convertibility Law, but not the situation if the Convertibility Law was altogether
abandoned. In the Respondent’s view, the modification of the parity under the
Convertibility Law is different from the abandonment of such Law. In this last scenario,
the calculation of tariffs in US dollars no longer made any sense, the Respondent believes.
The Respondent also explains that this was the understanding of the Privatization
Committee, which recorded in its minutes of July 17, 1992 that the parity should be

adjusted in accordance with the New York market and that “the adjustment proposed does

114.

115.

36
not consider the current exchange rate as the basis, but the currency board exchange rate”,
concluding that “as long as Argentina does not abandon the currency board system, no
tariff adjustment will be required”.

The Respondent also reads the minutes of the Privatization Committee of October 2, 1992
referred to above, as expressly conditioning the adjustment of tariffs in case of
modification of the parity to the Convertibility Law. The Respondent argues that this is so
particularly because when the Committee concluded that the License offered sufficient
coverage in this respect, a proposal that would have provided for adjustment in case of
abandonment of the convertibility was rejected. The Respondent further maintains that
the Gas Decree makes no mention at all of the possibility of abandonment of the
Convertibility Law.

Although Annex F of the Pliego, noted above, seems to convey a broader concept of tariff
adjustment in case of modification of the parity, the Respondent points out that this
Annex was held to be merely descriptive, just as the Information Memorandum, on which
Claimants also rely, is a non-binding document that was not prepared by the Government,
and any responsibility thereunder was expressly disclaimed. It is also explained that in

any event the Memorandum was prepared before the regulatory framework was enacted.

3. Discussion of historical experience

The views of the parties also differ significantly in respect of this specific claim in light of
arguments concerning the historical experience of the privatization of ENTEL, the
national telecommunications company. This privatization, the Respondent asserts,
confirms that calculation of tariffs in US dollars was inextricably related to the

Convertibility Law.

116.

117.

118.

37
ENTEL was privatized under the Law on the Reform of the State, but before the
Convertibility Law was enacted; originally tariffs were set in “Australes”, the Argentine
currency at the time, and adjusted in accordance with the Consumer Price Index of
Argentina (IPC). The Respondent explains that because the Convertibility Law froze

tariffs and adjustments in pesos, the parties agreed to express tariffs in US dollars and to

 

adjust them on the b; of the US PPI variations, but this, unlike the case of TGS, was
done without specific reference to the Convertibility Law. The Respondent concludes in
this respect that this evolving framework evidences that there was no exchange rate
assurance given and that, consequently, the devaluation risk was not eliminated or shifted
to the Government, as argued by the Claimants, and that the Respondent received no
compensation for any such currency risk.

The Claimants reach an entirely different conclusion on this historical experience. It is
first explained that the tariffs of ENTEL, even before any changes were made, included a
US dollar component to temper devaluation effects that was automatically triggered if
certain ratios were met, just as international services were set in Gold Francs. It is next
maintained that the changes introduced after the Convertibility Law was enacted were
made precisely to ensure that no adverse effects would ensue for the investors and to
provide incentives for new investments.

In addition, the fact that the tariffs calculated in US dollars were to be billed in pesos at
the exchange rate applicable at the time of billing, confirms in the Claimants’ view that
the system is not related to the Convertibility Law, as they also argue in the case of TGS.
It is also explained, lastly, that underwriting arrangements made with banks and the
placement of remaining shares in the New York and Buenos Aires markets, resulted in
additional benefits to the Government that would not have been possible had the risk of

currency fluctuation not been eliminated under the tariff system.

119.

120.

121.

122.

4. The discussion about country risk

The parties disagree also about another regulatory issue, namely whether tariffs were
higher because they included a premium for the risk that convertibility might be
abandoned at some point in the future. This the Respondent equates with country risk or
default risk, and argues that if the licensees were guaranteed that US dollar tariffs would
be converted to pesos at the prevailing exchange rate, they would be obtaining a double
benefit as the tariffs already were set higher to offset this risk.

In the Respondent’s view, the original tariffs were established taking into consideration
debt bonds of the Argentine Republic (Bonex 1989), which resulted in a higher cost of
debt of 9.50%. RQT I also considered a 6.17% country risk and RQT II had envisaged a
figure of 7.40% to this effect, all of it leading to additional return over the invested capital.

On the ba

  

is of these arguments, the Respondent concludes that the Claimants cannot
pretend to charge higher tariffs for a risk, and later, if the risk materialized, argue that
such risk should not be born by them.

The Claimants maintain that such an argument is wrong because country risk only relates
to the default on sovereign debt, which is conceptually different from the risk concerning
“pesification” and the freezing of tariffs. The latter was, in the Claimants’ view, allocated
to the Government through the License and the tariff system envisaged, for which it was

rather the investors who paid more for shares benefiting from this guarantee.

5. Discussion about an incomplete regulatory framework

Still one other regulatory issue divides the opinion of the parties in connection with the

meaning of the tariff system. In the Respondent’s view, because the regulatory framework

was incomplete and did not foresee what should be done in case the Convertibility Law

124.

125.

39
was abandoned, it falls upon the Government to adapt the licenses to the new situation.
This was done, it is explained, by means of the pesification of the whole economy, the
dollarization of export-related tariffs and the renegotiation of contracts and licenses.

This, the Respondent maintains, is the duty of the Government in respect of a public
utility service, and such regulatory powers are exercised in a discretionary manner as it is

accepted in economic theory and judicial decisions in both Argentina and other countries,

 

particularly if the need for adaptation results from a major economic crisis. In the

 

Respondent’s opinion, the exercise of this regulatory power in such a context cannot be
considered equivalent to a unilateral derogation or amendment of the tariff regime, as
argued by the Claimants.

The Claimants deny that the regulatory framework might be considered incomplete
because all the assurances given were specifically related to the possibility that the
Convertibility Law might be abandoned in the future. The only meaning of the
Emergency Law in this context, it is maintained, was to unilaterally change the tariff
system and related aspects. Moreover, the Claimants argue, none of the mechanisms
provided under the License to undertake a tariff revision were used.

The Claimants also point out that the Argentine legislation itself provides all the
necessary guarantees in terms of fundamental safeguards of acquired rights and legitimate
expectations. Even the regulatory powers recognized to governments in cases of changed
circumstances, it is also argued, are limited and subject to specific conditions, and do not
reach into questions of compensation and financial advantages, least of all alter the
economic balance of the contract. The Claimants also assert that it was precisely in order
to provide for a clear limit to these powers that the Government included in the License
the guarantee that it could only be amended with the consent of the parties and that it

could not be terminated except in very specific situations. The disci

 

ssion of the pertinent

legal arguments will be addressed by the Tribunal further below.

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

40
The Claimants also contest the Respondent’s views about the meaning of the Emergency
Law in this context as they believe it was adopted following political motivation in a
climate of hostility towards investors and that the renegotiation process that followed has
not been conducive to any solution for TGS, as discussed above. Issues relating to export

contracts and the question of the non-regulated business of TGS will be discussed

 

separately.

6. The Tribunal’s findings on the US dollar calculation of tariffs

The Tribunal is grateful to counsel for the parties for the detailed arguments with which
they have assisted the Tribunal in the examination of this claim. The Tribunal finds the
Claimants’ arguments about the existence of a right to the calculation of tariffs in US
dollars persuasive.

This conclusion is based first on the examination of the legal and regulatory framework.
If the Gas Decree and the Basic Rules of the License unequivocally refer to the
calculation of tariffs in US dollars, and such feature was also explained in the same terms
by the Information Memorandum, there cannot be any doubt about the fact that this is the
central feature governing the tariff regime.

Given the emphasis that this regulatory framework placed on the stability of the tariff
structure, it is not surprising that the calculation of tariffs in US dollars, as the PPI
adjustment, were assigned a significant role therein. Whether devaluation could at some
time intervene was not ignored, but hardly addressed in view of the fact that stability was
the principal aim and, as will be explained, the problem would be corrected by means of
the automatic adjustment of tariffs to the new level of exchange rate.

The Respondent has devoted particular attention to the link that in its view these clauses

have with the Convertibility Law. It is maintained in this respect that if tariffs were set in

41
US dollars independently from the Convertibility Law this would have resulted in an
unreasonable, unfair and unconstitutional legal regime’, unsustainable in Argentine courts
as it would be in the courts of the United States in light of the regulatory experience of
that country. Sophisticated investors and their lawyers, it is also asserted, could not have
relied solely on the information conveyed by unofficial documents, such as the
Information Memorandum or Annex F of the Pliego, and if they did their claims should
be now held inadmissible.

131. The Respondent also relies on a witness statement to the effect that if tariffs had been set
in dollars independently from the Convertibility Law, the risk of devaluation would have
been placed on the consumers, which were the less prepared to face such a risk’.

132. The Claimants have also invoked in favor of their argument decisions of the Argentine
Supreme Court holding that if for political or other reasons the Government decides to
maintain tariffs lower than the cost and a reasonable profit, compensation should be

granted, as otherwise the assets of the company or its profits would be destroyed"®.

Claimants have also distinguished the Maruba case!!

, invoked by the Respondent to show
that there was no entitlement to the original tariff but only to a reasonable rate of return,
arguing that in such case the tariff system was different, was not established by contract
and there were no provisions for its amendment.

133. It is true that the Gas Decree provides that tariffs calculated in US dollars shall be
expressed in pesos convertible under the Convertibility Law and that reference is made to

the need to take into account the parity established under Decree 2128/91, which

regulated the convertibility regime.

8 Id., paras. 97, 106.
° Witness Statement of Cristian Folgar of March 5, 2005, para. 45.
'° Compaiita de Tranvias Anglo Argentina v. Nacién Argentina, p. 569, as cited in Claimants’ Reply, no. 186.

"' Maruba Empresa de Navegacién Maritima v. Ministerio de Obras y Servicios Ptiblicos, Fallos 321:1784 of June
30, 1998, submitted as Respondent's Legal Authority no. 31.

134.

135.

136.

42
The meaning of these provisions, however, can also be read differently. Convertibility, as
the Claimants have argued, is different from the question of a given parity or exchange
rate, as convertibility simply relates to the right to buy a certain foreign currency with
local currency. It is the exchange rate that will determine how much local currency you
will need to buy a unit of the foreign one. Because the Convertibility regime was aiming
at the stabilization of the economy following a period of galloping inflation and continued
devaluation of the currency, the Government of Argentina chose to do the two things at
the same time. It first confirmed the right to the convertibility of the currency, which has
remained unaffected. Simultaneously it pegged the peso to the US dollar at the one to one
parity, while also prohibiting indexation in pesos. This fixed parity is the one no longer
available following devaluation and the adoption of a floating rate system.
This difference is reflected in the regulatory framework with which the Tribunal is
concerned. The Gas Decree indeed made a link to the first aspect in referring to pesos
convertible under the Convertibility Law, but the reference to a given parity established
under the Convertibility Decree was more qualified. In fact, Clause 9.2 of the License did
take into account that the parity and the ratio could be amended in the future, as it
expressly refers to the eventual modifications of Convertibility Decree 2128/91. Further
references of the Pliego to the New York market exchange rate must be understood in the
same context.
In reaching this conclusion the Tribunal is also mindful of the economic context in which
convertibility and the ensuing privatization were introduced. Precisely because these
measures were preceded by a long period of economic turmoil, investors would not be
attracted to participate in the privatization process unless specific assurances were
provided in respect of the stability of their arrangements. These were the specific

guarantees envisaged in the calculation of tariffs in US dollars, the conversion in pesos of

137.

138.

139.

43
the calculated amounts at the time of billing at the prevailing exchange rate and its US
PPI adjustment, together with other stabilization mechanisms of contractual arrangements.
The distinction made by the Respondent between the modification of the convertibility
regime and its abandonment is not persuasive. Guarantees and stability are meant
precisely to operate when problems arise, not when business continues as usual. The tariff
regime approved was devised as a permanent feature of the privatization, not a transitory
one, and if it was intended to be transitory it should have also been clearly advised to
prospective investors, but again nothing of the sort was done. The regulatory and
contractual arrangements were thus not incomplete, as argued, and if such were the case it
would certainly not have passed unnoticed to competent officials, businessmen and
counsel and advisors.

The Tribunal must note that the discussion of the matter in the Privatization Committee

 

was on occasions confusing. The Respondent, as noted, has invoked in favor of its
argument the minutes of the Privatization Committee meeting of July 17, 1992, where
few weeks after the enactment of the Gas Decree reference was made to adjustment of
tariffs, not at the actual exchange rate, but at the convertibility rate, and that unless
convertibility was abandoned there should be no adjustments on this basis. The minutes
further added a reference to the adjustment of parity in the New York market and to an
understanding of the Committee to the effect that if convertibility was abandoned

licensees should be

 

ured of adjustment according to a realistic exchange rate.

While these minutes could be read as allowing for adjustment under the convertibility
regime and not if it were abandoned, a different reading is also justified. In fact, the
Committee was discussing two different kinds of adjustment. It was first discussing the
thought of an automatic adjustment in accordance with the variation of cost structure
expressed in pesos, but this was ruled out as it meant an indexation forbidden under the

Convertibility Law. It is in relation to this cost adjustment that reference was made to the

140.

141.

44
convertibility exchange rate and to the view that no adjustments on these bases should
take place unless convertibility was abandoned and, if this was the case, a realistic
exchange rate should then be found for the adjustment.

At the same time, the Committee was discussing an adjustment related to the parity and
its eventual modifications, which was the one that finally the regulatory framework and
the License included in its terms. This is the kind of adjustment that would follow the
New York market exchange rate and was expressly referred to as the “adjustment for
parity”. This was what the Committee later addressed in the minutes of October 2, 1992,
invoked by the Claimants in support of their own view, where the Committee decided to
reject a proposal to the effect of expressly referring to the abandonment of the
convertibility regime on the ground that Clause 9.2 of the License embodied a sufficient
guarantee in connection with the adjustment at the modified exchange rate.
The Tribunal also wishes to consider on this point the witness statement of Mr. Patricio
Carlos Perkins, who was a key official in the privatization process and the author of the
initiative that the Committee addressed on October 2, 1992. In referring to the approach
followed by the Government officials at the time, Mr. Perkins explains:

“Although there was consensus in applying US Dollar-based tariff rates,

the manner by which such criteria would be expressed in the official

documents was a matter of some discussion.

Government officials decided that expressing tariff rates in Convertible

Pesos according to the Convertibility Act and its Regulatory Decrees was

sufficiently clear and that it was not prudent to state in the official

documents that Argentina could eventually abandon convertibility in the

future. This was the criterion argued by Government representatives on

the Committee. I wanted it stated clearly in the section of the license

where the tariff rates, service terms and conditions were addressed that the

tariff rates were established in US Dollars and invoiced in local currency

at the exchange rate prevailing at the billing date.

After much discussion, it was decided that the license would state that

tariff rates have to be calculated in US Dollars and that invoicing would be

made in Convertible Pesos [...]

Therefore, in order to attract many well-qualified bidders, the licensees

were protected from this risk. It was established in item 7.1 of Annex F to
the Pliegos, that in case of an eventual variation in the parity of the local

 

 

 

    

45

currency to the US Dollar, tariff rates would be “immediately and
automatically” adjusted."

142. The Tribunal would have wished that Mr. Perkins had been examined and cross-
examined on this and other aspects of his testimony, and also to put questions to him, but
his participation in the hearing on the merits was regrettably prevented by an injunction
issued by an Argentine judge on November 24, 2005 at the request of the Government.
The Tribunal makes no inference of this situation, but decided in Procedural Order No. 5,
dated December 2, 2005, that the witness’ written statement was admissible and that,
moreover, Mr. Perkins enjoyed and continues to enjoy the immunities provided under
Articles 21 and 22 of the ICSID Convention. Quite different was the situation concerning
the witness Mr. Roberto Kozulj, who after giving a written statement did not appear at the
hearing providing the Tribunal with a rather vague and unsatisfactory explanation; as the
witness could not be cross-examined, the Tribunal has not considered his testimony".

143. The conclusion of the Tribunal on this matter does not mean that it ignores economic
reality and the crisis which has affected Argentina in the recent past. It is perfectly
possible that economic conditions can change, as they dramatically did, and this can have
a profound effect on the economic balance of contracts and licenses. In this context, the
Respondent’s argument that the Gas Law was principally concerned with a fair and
reasonable tariff is not misconceived. To this effect, particularly if tariffs ceased to be fair
and reasonable, the regulatory framework provided for specific adjustment mechanisms,
tariff reviews on periodic basis and even the possibility of an extraordinary review. The
issue then is not whether contracts should remain frozen forever, but whether they can be

adjusted to such changing realities in an orderly manner as provided under the regulatory

° Witness Statement of Patricio Carlos Perkins of December 11, 2004, paras. 294-297.

8 Remarks of R. Doak Bishop, Hearing Transcript, Vol. 1, November 28, 2005, pp. 9-10.

144.

145.

146.

147.

46
framework and the contract itself, including the negotiated modification of the license, or
whether this will be done by unilateral action of the Government.

The real problem underlying the claims is that the unilateral action by the Government
became the predominant feature of the process of adjustment. Broad as the regulatory
authority of States and governments might be at present, it can only be exercised within
the confines of the law and duly taking into account the rights of individuals. It will be
seen further below that the Argentine legislation and the decisions of courts in that
country have carefully set out the limits of government regulatory power in light of a long
experience of economic crisis and emergency intervention.

In support of its view that the calculation of tariffs in US dollars is inextricably linked to
the Convertibility Law, the Respondent also invokes arguments concerning the historical
experience surrounding the privatization of ENTEL. The conclusions the Tribunal draws
from that experience are not quite the same as those of the Respondent.

It is first an undisputed fact that because the Convertibility Law froze indexation in pesos
and adopted other currency stabilization measures, the terms of the original privatization
of ENTEL were no longer viable and had to be adapted to the new economic policy. All
the changes introduced were done in agreement with the licensee, which is thus an
entirely different situation from the present one. The ultimate meaning of this agreement
was, as argued by the Claimants, to avoid adverse economic consequences for the
licensees arising from the changed regulatory measures, which is also a proposition
different from the instant case.

Without prejudice to the Claimants’ argument that the original tariff structure included a
US dollar component and other stable value references, the fact that the new agreement
provided for US dollar-calculated tariffs without reference to the Convertibility Law, far
from proving that those tariffs later were inseparable from that law, such as the

Respondent alleges was the case of the gas tariffs, it rather proves the contrary. If tariffs

148.

149.

150.

47
were calculated in US dollars and converted into pesos without reference to the
Convertibility Law in the case of ENTEL, it can well be read as a confirmation of the
conclusion that the reference to the Convertibility Law in later arrangements was not a
guarantee conditioned on a given parity. On the other hand, the fact that ENTEL’s tariff
was not related to the Convertibility Law did not spare this company from the
consequences of the Emergency Law and related measures.

The Tribunal is not persuaded either by the argument concerning the premium for a
country risk. That such a premium was considered in the tariff structure and RQT I is not
disputed. The issue is whether this premium and the guarantee of tariff adjustment in case
of a changed parity with the US dollar are compatible or they should be considered as a
kind of “double dipping” by the Claimants.

The Tribunal concludes in this respect that country risk or default risk is related
exclusively to the risk of default of a given country on its foreign debt and as such it
relates to the question of the financial structure of the investment, making borrowing
more costly and being compensated by means of the additional premium. The currency
devaluation is a different kind of risk and responds to a different rationale, as it concerns
the level of income and revenues of the company as reflected in the tariff system and its
eventual adjustments. While these risks may in some way interact, for example country
risk increasing as a result of currency instability, they operate independently from each
other and are subject to different safeguards.

In the end, there are two rather simple and practical considerations which the Tribunal
must also keep in mind. If a premium was provided for the country risk and this risk was
the same as the devaluation risk, why allow for an additional adjustment mechanism
under the regulatory framework? The second consideration is still more elementary. If
the meaning of the tariff structure was not to allow for adjustment in case the original

parity would be abandoned, why then bother to establish a mechanism in US dollars when

48
peso-denominated tariffs would have accomplished the same result? The only logical
answer is that if the risks considered were the same, none of these additional mechanisms

of protection would have been necessary.

Claim concerning the breach of stability clauses of the License

151.

152.

The Claimants have also argued that the measures adopted by the Respondent resulted in
other breaches of the License concerning some basic guarantees about the stability of this
instrument. This claim refers in particular to Clause 9.8, which prohibits the freezing,
administration or control of prices, and if because of controls prices would be lower that
the level resulting from the tariff, the licensee shall be entitled to compensation for the
difference. The claim also refers in particular to Clause 18.2 of the License, in the terms
of which the Licensor shall not amend the Basic Rules of the License, in whole or in part,
without the written consent of the Licensee.

Two aspects must, however, be clarified at the outset. The first is a jurisdictional
argument which the Respondent has reiterated in the pleadings on the merits to the effect
that the investors are not the licensees and, therefore, cannot invoke the terms of a
contract to which they are not parties. The Tribunal has dealt with this question in its
Decision on Jurisdiction.

The second issue is a novel one. The Respondent has argued that as the prohibition of
Clause 18.2 refers to the License not being modified by the Licensor, and the Licensor is
the Executive Branch of Government, any measures or effects arising from congressional

action, such as the Emergency Law, or from judicial decisions, such as the US PPI

154.

155.

49
injunction, are not adopted by the Licensor and hence not envisaged in the prohibition of
unilateral modification".

Ingenuous as this argument might be it is no more than a play of words because the
Executive Branch binds the State in guaranteeing certain rights to foreign investors.
Furthermore, quite evidently any State action, governmental, legislative or judicial, must
respect the rights acquired under a contract. If contract rights were at the mercy of other
branches of the State the rule of law, under both domestic and international law, would be
seriously in jeopardy, a view which is not quite likely to be accepted in an arbitration
which, at least in part, is governed by international law.

The Tribunal must also note that Clause 18.2 of the License, in prohibiting the
modification of the License makes special reference to the fact that even if an authorized
modification under the Service and Tariff Regulations results in a favorable or
unfavorable alteration of the economic and financial balance existing before the
modification, the Licensee will have the right to request the pertinent adjustment of the

tariff. It is that economic balance what the whole tariff regime purported to ensure.

Regulatory economic and financial defenses

156.

In addition to the specific arguments made by the Respondent in respect of each of the
claims explained above, it has also raised a number of important questions touching on
economic and financial aspects that are closely related to the regulatory framework
governing the investment. These defenses will be examined next, without prejudice to

what will be discussed as pertinent in connection with valuation issues further below.

' Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief, p. 10.

157.

158.

159.

160.

50

The question of leverage policy

The Respondent asserts that TGS has obtained an annual return of 33% over its
investment and that its stock market value in Buenos Aires and New York is 40% higher
in dollars than the value it had before the crisis, thus resulting in a situation that, far from
meaning a drop of 78% in the value of the company, as claimed, has actually meant that
the value has considerably increased.

The Respondent, as explained above, also maintains that the leverage policy followed by
the company has had a negative impact on its equity value, which would otherwise be
higher, and this is not something for which the Government is to be held liable, as the risk
for having taken a large debt in foreign currency belongs to the Claimants. TGS, the
Respondent believes, could have taken other more prudent options, such as debt in pesos
or even in dollars in the local market, which were later pesified at a one-to-one parity, or
could have diversified the risk of devaluation. This was not done, in the Respondent’s
view, in order to obtain higher dividends and benefit from tax advantages, an approach
which was also allegedly followed by CIESA; time depreciation of assets would also
have been modified in order to increase profits.

In this regard the Respondent argues that the tariff system envisaged under the Gas Law
was geared to satisfy reasonable costs of operation, taxes, amortization and a reasonable
return, but did not include financial costs, and required in addition an efficient service at
the minimum cost for consumers.

The Respondent further asserts that the decisions of the Argentine courts have been at one
in considering, in light of earlier devaluations, that the risk entailed in foreign currency
obligations is a market business risk that cannot be transferred to the State. The
Respondent also recalls in this respect that in accordance with Clause 2.4 of the Basic

Rules the Government does not guarantee or ensures the return on the operation of the

161.

162.

164.

Sl

business, and that more generally neither TGS nor the Claimants can exclude themselves

 

from the effects of the c:
The Claimants oppose this defense on the basis that the leverage policy adopted was
reasonable in light of the long-term optimal capital structure of the industry as a whole,
and that it was not too different from the estimates used in RQT I and proposed for RQT
II. The first envisaged a debt to capital ratio of 36.7% while TGS was at a ratio of 40.8%.

The second considered 46% compared to 49.8%, respectively. It is also explained that the

 

question of time depreciation followed the rules issued by ENARGAS, except at a point
when this entity delayed the enactment of such rules.

In addition, the Claimants explain that the leverage of CIESA is irrelevant in this
arbitration because they are claiming for their own losses and not for those of CIESA, and
that, in any event, the dividend distribution policy was reasonable as it ranged between
15% and 35% of annual revenues, an approach that was never questioned by the
Government when it was a shareholder of TGS.

The Claimants do not believe that there were relevant options to taking debt in foreign
currency abroad, particularly since the Argentine financial markets did not have sufficient
funds available, which was the very reason why the Government itself had to resort to
foreign financial markets for its needs. Lastly, the Claimants assert that the value of
TGS’s shares is not representative of the value of the company, in part because the shares
are extremely illiquid and its traded volumes are not significant, a question that will again
be examined in connection with valuation.

The first question the Tribunal must address is whether the tariff included financial costs
as part of their structure. There can be no doubt that this was the case. It must be recalled
that Article 38(a) of the Gas Law specifically relates the income obtained to the sufficient
recovery of, among other elements, depreciation (or “amortizacidn’”), just as Article 2(4)

of the Gas Decree still more specifically provides for the recovery of all costs, “including

165.

166.

167.

52
the cost of capital”. The Tribunal is also mindful of the fact that also the very elements of
RQT I and the proposed RQT II did envisage the question of leverage in calculating the
tariff, just as the original tariff structure did.

Whether the leverage was reasonable is not something the Tribunal is called to decide on.
While ENARGAS did discuss this matter with the licensees, no claim was made that the
policy followed might be contrary to the regulatory framework or the License. This was
essentially a company decision and the fact that tariff calculation was to be made in US
dollars and adjusted in accordance with the US PPI did provide for a reasonable assurance
allowing for the option of taking debt in dollars in the international financial markets. The
Tribunal is also persuaded by the argument that sufficient financing was not available in
Argentina for such a large operation, which aimed precisely at attracting foreign
investments in the country.

If the claim before the Tribunal dealt with the question of devaluation, the Respondent’s
argument to the effect that devaluation falls within the sovereign prerogative of the State
would be entirely appropriate. But this is not a claim about the devaluation and so has
been expressly disavowed by the Claimants. It is a claim concerning the breach of the
various aspects of the tariff system that have been explained above and the rights the
investors have in that respect in light of the legal, regulatory and contractual
commitments made.

The Tribunal must also conclude that the view of the Respondent to the effect that CIESA
could not claim for the interest the investors had in TGS, if these were separately
compensated, is correct, and if such eventual compensations were to be accumulated they
would result in a “double-dipping” or double recovery. To the extent that the investors are
compensated for their interest, that is the end of the matter in respect of such interest as
far as the Respondent is concerned. This issue is also related to the discussion of what is

precisely the interest the Claimants held in TGS, which will be addressed further below.

168.

169.

170.

53

A. The question of export contracts

A second defense the Respondent raises is that TGS is a major exporter of gas in
Argentina, and that Decree 689/02 expressly excluded from the pesification transportation
and other contracts related to exports. It follows, in the Respondent’s view, that the
impact of devaluation on the company is much smaller than claimed as the tariffs in this
area have been kept in US dollars and the US PPI continues to apply, with the result that
such tariffs have increased by 15.89% since 2002 and returns have increased. This, the
Respondent maintains, is a further confirmation that TGS, far from being affected by the
abandonment of Convertibility, has benefited from it.

The Claimants oppose to such a defense the argument that, first, TGS’s export-related
revenue is insignificant as it amounts only to 1% of the total revenue of the company and,
next, that the decision to exclude this activity from pesification was not taken to benefit
the company but to ensure a greater flow of foreign currency into the country. It is also
pointed out that ENARGAS, in rejecting a request by a foreign shipper to the effect that
the PPI should not apply to export contracts, invoked arguments which are coincident
with those of the Claimants, namely that transportation costs have increased as a
consequence of devaluation and that investments cannot be recovered with frozen and
pesified tariffs.

The meaning of the parties’ arguments on this matter is not quite clear. The Respondent
appears at some point to identify the export gas transportation business with the export of
LNG, but at the same time Decree 689/02 applies to a broader range of export-related
activities. On the other hand, it is not clear either whether the Claimants are addressing in

this context also the revenue originating in the non-regulated sector of their business.

 

171.

172.

54
Be that as it may, the Tribunal must note that the Respondent’s arguments about the
meaning of the emergency are not quite consistent with Decree 689/02. By its very terms,
this Decree provided that export-related tariffs would be adjusted in the manner
established in the respective licenses, which is to say calculated in US dollars and
adjusted by the US PPI. Thereby the Decree appears to confirm that such mechanisms did
in fact survive as rights under the license in spite of the fact that the Convertibility Law
had come to an end. On the other hand, if the Decree, as it is also argued, aimed at
reestablishing a right which allegedly had been abrogated by the Emergency Law, it then
appears to take up a certain legislative role. In any event, the Decree is certainly taking
up a judicial role because it orders this reestablishment of rights as from August 2000 in
spite of the fact that the judge did not so order under the injunction.
The Tribunal does accept the Respondent’s view that the revenue originating in the export
side of the business does contribute to mitigate the eventual damages arising from the
measures discussed, and to that extent it should be reflected in the valuation of the
company. But this is true only in respect of the regulated side of the business. To the
extent that this revenue relates to the non-regulated sector it is then inseparable from the

disc

 

ssion about whether non-regulated business should be included in the overall
valuation of the company, as argued by the Respondent, or kept entirely apart, as argued

by the Claimants. The Tribunal will turn to this issue next.

 

The Respondent has also raised in its defense that if the claim for compensation refers to
the Claimants’ interest in TGS, such interest relates to the company as a whole, including

all of its business, regulated or non-regulated, and that shares representing that interest

55
cannot be separated into different portions. This argument is in turn linked to the
Respondent’s view that the appropriate method of valuation is the value of shares in the
stock market, among other reasons because when an investor purchases a share in a
company it is considering the value of that share in connection with the business in its
entirety.

174. The Respondent asserts in this matter that the shares transferred by the Government to

 

TGS referred both to regulated activities, such as transportation, and to non-regulated
activities, most notably the production of LNG in the plant of General Cerri. This
decision was based, it is maintained, on the fact that technically one activity is inseparable
from the other in light of both operational and geographical considerations'®, as this was
expressly recognized by the Privatization Committee when discussing the proposal that

the plant of General Cerri should be integrated into the southern transportation busin

 

unit (“unidad de negocios de transporte del Sur’) and concluding that this

recommendation was the most appropriate because of the “operational consequences of

the geographical location of the plant of General Cerri"

. According to the Respondent’s
experts, it appears that such an integrated approach to the regulated and non-regulated
sides of the business was also present in the debt restructuring of TGS", having also been

explained that “the debt of the regulated and unregulated busines 218

 

‘s are not separable’
175. The Claimants believe differently. In their view, there are no physical or operational
reasons why the plant in question should be included in TGS’s assets and in fact neither
the Privatization Committee nor TGS considered this possibility. The accounts of the

non-regulated sector, it is further explained, are kept separately from those of the

'S Witness Statement of Charles Joseph Massano, March 2, 2005, paras. 14-21; Testimony of Charles Joseph
Massano, Hearing Transcript, Vol. 4, December 1, 2005, pp. 633-637.

'© Minutes of the Privatization Committee Meetings of October 8 and 9, 1991, Respondent’s Exhibit no. 32.

"” Expert Report of Garcia Sanchez, Casarin, and Sarria Allende (“GSCSA Expert Report”) of June 2005, paras. 19,
170.

'S Expert statement of Javier Garcfa Sanchez, Hearing Transcript, Vol. 6, December 3, 2005, pp. 915-916.

176.

177.

178.

56
regulated sector, as required by the applicable rules. In any event, it is also argued, in
spite of the fact that the non-regulated sector benefited from the devaluation and its
revenue has increased, the financial profile of TGS was significantly damaged by the
measures adopted by the Government.

The Tribunal realizes that there are two different approaches to this question. Looked at
from the point of view of the value of equity as expressed in shares, the Respondent’s
argument has merit. In fact, shares are not divisible and represent an interest in a
company as a whole. Their stock market transactions are priced considering this whole,
for better or worse. If stock market valuation is chosen as the appropriate method to
determine the value of the company and eventual compensation for losses, the integration
of regulated and non-regulated activities is the natural consequence.

There is, however, another approach. The only purpose of the claims brought to the
Tribunal is to obtain compensation for losses allegedly suffered as a consequence of
government measures. These measures refer only to a sector of activity which is subject
to regulation. It follows that if regulated tariffs were the source of the complaint, it is only
the consequence of the measures in respect of such tariffs that should be compensated.
Conversely, it is quite evident that if the non-regulated sector had been affected by
government measures, a claim to the effect that tariffs of the regulated activity should be
increased to compensate for that loss would not be admissible. Valuation methodologies
do exist so as to measure the damage on an individual sector of the business.

Which of the two approaches is more convincing is the question the Tribunal must now
address. Admittedly, the privatization process and the License were not quite clear in
providing a precise answer to this question. On the one hand, the Privatization Committee
did refer, as noted by the Respondent, to a business unit. The License, while defining the

licensed service as that concerning gas pipeline transportation (Clause 1.1), appears to

57
narrow its scope to the regulated sector, but in fact the privatization undertaken included
both sectors of activity simultaneously.

179. The intention of what was done is where the answer must then be found. The Tribunal is
persuaded by two arguments the Claimants have made. As noted, TGS was instructed
under the applicable rules to keep the accounts of the two sectors completely separate
from each other. This was so decided so that the non-regulated sector would not end-up in
any way affecting the transportation regulated sector. Annex XXVII of the Share Transfer
Agreement stated that “The Licensee shall carry out the operation of General Cerri Plant
keeping separate accounting records so that the results of said Plant operation and the
respective costs do not affect the rendering of the transportation service. For this purpose,
said Plant shall be organized as a branch, or a controlled company”””.

180. This very intention was confirmed, the Claimants also explain, by ENARGAS Resolution
1660/2000. In instructing for separate accounting, this entity stated that this measure
resulted from “the principle that cost distribution between activities and related
companies should not amount to subsidies to non-regulated activities, thus avoiding users
from being subject to higher tariffs —in benefit of other activities— than those that should
pertain to the service provided”,

181. At the time, the Government was evidently thinking that the success of the regulated tariff
system should not subsidize the non-regulated business and thus avoid that consumers
pay tariffs higher than those relating strictly to transportation. Avoidance of cross-
subsidization is the right economic principle applied by many companies that have
various sectors of activity within their overall business. This is the same principle that
applies the other way round. The success of the non-regulated business should not
subsidize the losses of the regulated business and this is to be the criteria also guiding the

° Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, p. 23, no. 101.
 Td., p. 24, no. 102.

182.

184.

185.

58
eventual determination of compensation. The Tribunal thus concludes that the regulated
and the non-regulated sectors of TGS are to be kept separate and independent for the

purpose of this claim.

Cc. The influence of renegotiation

The Tribunal has noted above the parties’ views about the meaning of renegotiations
currently before the UNIREN. The Respondent believes that following the emergency,
renegotiation is in fact the only viable alternative and much progress has been made in a
variety of sectors, including the gas transportation sector in terms of an agreed
understanding with GASBAN S. A., while some other gas companies are also very
advanced in the process of reaching an agreement.

The Respondent also asserts that in this context it is reasonable for the Government to
require the discontinuance of arbitration claims as these are interfering with the progress
of negotiations, particularly in the case of companies which have sold their interest in the
licensed companies, as the Claimants in this arbitration have.

The Claimants do not share this optimistic view as they assert that no progress has been
made in many years and that, in any event, the understandings reached are still subject to
some further form of legislative and executive approval, which has not been forthcoming.
The Claimants also explain that this question is in abeyance from another point of view,
namely that the understandings reached only provide for a provisional adjustment of
tariffs while the long-term tariff structure has not even been discussed.

The main points of disagreement, in the Claimants’ view, continue to be the limited
adjustment, the uncertainty about the long-term tariff and the question of discontinuance

of arbitration claims, which they regard as simply another form of pressure in breach of

186.

187.

59
the investors’ rights under the Treaty. Particularly troublesome, in the Claimants’
argument, is the understanding that with or without renegotiation there does not appear to
be any intention of compensating for past losses, as confirmed by Mr. Simeonoff, head of
UNIREN, at the oral hearing when stating that “I understand that there is not going to be
any compensation” for the freezing of tariffs and the elimination of PPI adjustments”.
Whatever the virtues or shortfalls of the renegotiation process, the Tribunal is not called
to pass judgment on any of its aspects as this depends exclusively on whether the parties
agree or not on new contractual terms of the license. Any process of negotiation requires
of course that the parties genuinely agree on the outcome and this cannot be imposed or
forced upon one party. There are, moreover, two aspects originating in this discussion that
are indeed the concern of the Tribunal. The Tribunal must first hold that the Claimants
positively have a right to resort to arbitration under the Treaty and this cannot be curtailed
by the terms of the renegotiation or in any other manner, except with the consent of the
Claimants.

To the extent that this discussion also implies that there are measures arising from the
emergency likely to extend beyond the temporary character that an emergency has by
definition, the Tribunal must also consider this situation. This is so because temporary or
permanent effects of a given measure have a different incidence on the legal
consequences arising from such measures, a matter that will be discussed separately

below.

D. The Trust Fund

>! Id., p. 8, with reference to Hearing Transcript, Vol. 3, November 30, 2005, p. 493.

188.

189.

190.

191.

60
As evidence that normalization is progressing, the Respondent explains that a Trust Fund
was established in 2004 to facilitate new investments in the gas transportation and
distribution with a view to the expansion and extension of the network. It is also
explained that TGS accepted to participate in this Trust and has benefited from it in terms
that licensees make their services available to a greater number of consumers and their
sales and revenues increase.
The Claimants oppose this other defense on the ground that far from proving
normalization the Trust Fund proves rather the opposite, that is that the licensee’s tariff
system has been dismantled and a new approach has been introduced in its place. The
Claimants assert that under this new approach only new investors benefit from tariff
increases related to the expansion and licensees are left in a situation which makes still
more difficult the recovery of costs connected to investments under the license, with an
evident result of adverse discrimination.
To the extent that TGS has consented to this Trust Fund and its operation, the Tribunal
considers that the question cannot be a matter of complaint before it. Whatever the
meaning and extent of the Trust Fund, it does not raise a question concerning the tariff
system under the License. At the most it provides indirect and limited evidence about the

organization of the industry after the emergency.

E. The Claimants’ interest in TGS

The Tribunal has explained above the discussion the parties have had in respect of the
interest the Claimants really held in TGS. In the Respondent’s view, this interest is only

19.5%, and in the Claimants’ view it is 35.5%. The discussion is related to the fact that

192.

194,

195.

61

Enron financed part of its investment with a loan taken by CIESA in its own name,
guaranteed by Enron.
The Respondent also maintains that the transactions made by the Claimants in 2005
resulted in the exchange of an indirect 35.5% holding in TGS for a direct 19.5% holding,
while shortly thereafter, in 2006, they sold most of their holdings to another investor,
which has a right to a further purchase of the balance, thus effectively withdrawing from
both CIESA and TGS.
A distinction is made by the Respondent to this effect between the corporate rights of
Enron in TGS, which the Respondent admits amount in fact to 35.5%, and the right to
dividends that TGS distributes, which amount only to 19.5%. The latter right, it is argued,
is the consequence of CIESA having taken a loan for financing part of Enron’s
investment, and thus having to apply such dividends first to payments to the lenders and
then to Enron in proportion to their financial contributions. Mr. Fabian Bello, expert for
the Respondent, explains this distinction in the following terms:

“Enron holds 35.5 percent corporate rights in TGS, but it has no right from

the economic viewpoint (...) to receive 35.5 of the dividends distributed

by TGS [...] when CIESA receives the dividends, it has to first pay the
interest of the debt and then distribute the dividends”.

 

The Respondent and its experts maintain that claiming compensation for 35.5% assumes
that the Claimants are taking charge of CIESA’s debt on their behalf, which is not the
case, thus resulting in depleting CIESA and impeding that creditors collect their debt”.

The Claimants have explained that these transactions do not have any influence or
consequence in respect of the damages claimed, an aspect that will be examined in the

context of valuation. A witness for the Claimants also explains that during “my ten-year

> Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 111, with reference to the testimony of Fabian Bello, Hearing Transcript,
Vol. 5, December 2, 2005, p. 877.

> Expert statement of Fabidn Bello, Hearing Transcript, Vol. 5, December 2, 2005, p. 856; Expert statement of
Javier Garcfa Sanchez, Hearing Transcript, Vol. 6, December 3, 2005, p. 904, pp. 982-983.

62
tenure with CIESA at each of the Board meetings and also in each of the statements we
had to report, we had to present to the regulatory agency on the company’s shareholders,
the participation was based on the 35 percent participation. . ve
196. There are, however, some legal issues in this regard that the Tribunal must consider now

The first is a jurisdictional question that the Respondent has suggested in correspondence
with the Tribunal, to the effect that the 2006 transaction would have decisive implications
in this arbitration, presumably because the Claimants would no longer have any interest in
CIESA or TGS.

197. The Claimants assert that this is not the case in light of ICSID Tribunal’s jurisprudence,
where it has been held that the Claimants’ jurisdictional standing “is made by reference to
the date on which such proceedings are deemed to have been instituted”” and that
“Events that take place before that date may affect jurisdiction; events that take place
after that date do not””®.

198. The Tribunal is satisfied that this last view is indeed correct and that jurisdiction is not
altered by later transactions. It should also be noted that the 2006 transaction expressly
safeguarded the Claimants’ rights in this litigation (Share Purchase Agreement, Schedule
B). A different question arises in respect of the agreements themselves, as these will not
necessarily be within the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to the extent that they might refer to

different matters or involve different parties.

» Testimony of Eduardo Ojea Quintana, Hearing Transcript, Vol. 2, November 29, 2005, p. 325.

> Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, pp. 35-37, with reference to Ceskoslovenska obchodni banka, a.s. (CSOB) v.
Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/4), Decision on Objections to Jurisdiction of May 24, 1999, 14 ICSID
Rev.-FILJ 251 (1999), para. 31.

*6 Id., with reference to Compania de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on Jurisdiction of November 14, 2005, paras. 60-62.

199.

200.

201.

202.

63
A separate issue arises from the Claimants’ assertion that damages are not affected either
by the 2005 or 2006 transactions as damages are measured as from the date of
expropriation, at which time the Claimants owned a 35.5% interest in TGS”.
While the principle that damages are specifically related under the Treaty to the date prior
to the events giving rise to the claim is correct, this is not to mean that events taking place
after that date are not relevant for a determination of compensation, as happens for

example when a given trans:

 

ction is made to minimize damages. This too will be
considered by the Tribunal in the context of valuation.

A third issue concerns the situation of CIESA’s debt on behalf of the Claimants. If the
Claimants eventually obtain compensation for the whole of the 35.5% interest they claim
to have in TGS, either they should take over the debt or otherwise make CIESA whole,
either directly or through some other transaction. The Tribunal can assume that CIESA
and its shareholders will make sure that the interest of the company is not affected by the
transactions made, as it is already evident in the 2005 swap noted above.

If such interest was in any way affected, CIESA might have a claim against the Claimants,
but not against the Respondent. On the other hand, if the Respondent reaches a negotiated
agreement with TGS it will also make sure that its terms will take into account any
compensation that might have been paid for an interest in the company; thus it cannot be
assumed here either that double payment will occur. The specific influence of these

considerations in the valuation of the claim will be discussed further below.

(a) The applicable law

” Claimants’ letter to Secretary of the Tribunal of September 1, 2005; Claimants’ letter to Secretary of the Tribunal
of February 2, 2006.

204.

205.

64
The parties have also disagreed about the law applicable to this dispute. The Claimants
hold the view that under Article 42(1) of the Convention, in the absence of agreement
between the parties, the law of Argentina applies in this case, just as international law
does in light of the second sentence of that Article. The Claimants assert, however, that

domestic law is relevant primarily to factual matters only, such as the nature of the

 

surances made to the Claimants. In the Claimants’ view, it is the Treaty that principally

applies as lex specialis between the parties, while other rules of international law not

 

incons

 

stent with the Treaty also have a role, including the rules on the interpretation of
treaties and customary rules that provide for a minimum treatment of covered investments.
The Respondent believes that Article 42 has a different meaning as to the role of the
various sources of law it enumerates. In its view, domestic law is not confined to factual
matters but has a substantive role in defining the rights of the investor, particularly when
property rights are involved in the dispute; these rights are not defined by international
law but by the local law to which the investor has voluntarily submitted. More
importantly, the Respondent also asserts, when the parties have agreed on a forum-
selection clause giving jurisdiction to a domestic court, this choice cannot be ignored later
by an international tribunal. It is further explained that this approach does not exclude the
application of either the Treaty, in defining for example which investors are covered
under its provisions, or general international law, which provides for rules on the
treatment of investments.

The Tribunal must note that on this matter the discussion of the parties is largely
theoretical. Article 42(1) of the Convention has provided for a variety of sources, none of
which excludes a certain role for another. This is particularly evident in the case of
complex disputes such as that presently before the Tribunal. As the issue of the choice of

forum was dis

  

ssed in the Decision on Jurisdiction, it shall not be considered again here.

What matters now is the law applicable to the merits of the dispute.

206.

207.

208.

65
The Respondent is right in arguing that domestic law is not confined to the determination
of factual questions. It has indeed a broader role, as it is evident in this very case from the
pleadings and arguments of the parties that have relied heavily on the Gas Law and
generally the regulatory framework of the gas industry, just as they have relied on many
other rules of the Argentine legal system, including the Constitution, the Civil Code,
specialized legislation and the decisions of courts. The License itself is governed by the
legal order of the Argentine Republic and it must be interpreted in its light”.
So too, the Claimants are right in arguing about the prominent role of international law.
Both the Treaty and international conventions have been invoked by the parties, as they
have also discussed the meaning of customary international law in a number of matters.
While on occasions writers and decisions have tended to consider the application of
domestic law or international law as a kind of dichotomy, this is far from being the case.
In fact, both have a complementary role to perform and this has begun to be recognized”.
It must be noted also that the very legal system of the Argentine Republic, like many
modern systems, provides for a prominent role of treaties under both Articles 27 and 31
of the Constitution. Treaties are constitutionally recognized among the sources considered
“the supreme law of the Nation”. It follows that in case of conflict between a treaty rule
and an inconsistent rule of domestic law, the former will prevail. This is not just the
consequence of the Constitution so providing, but also the solution dictated by Article 27
of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties in that a State “may not invoke the
provisions of its internal law as justification for its failure to perform a treaty”. Consistent
with this role of international law, regulatory instruments have also made specific

reference to the protection of investments under the Treaty (Decree 669/00).

* License, Clause 16.1.

» Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Ad Hoc Committee Decision on
Application for Annulment of February 5, 2002, 41 ILM 933 (2002), para. 941.

209.

210.

211.

212.

66

The Tribunal must also note that in examining the Argentine law as pertinent to various

 

issues disputed by the parties, it finds that there is generally no inconsistency with
international law as far as the basic principles governing the matter are concerned. The

Tribunal will accordingly apply both Argentine law and international law to the extent

 

pertinent and relevant to the decision of the various claims submitted.

V. THE STABILITY OF CONTRACTS AND THE LICENSE UNDER ARGE!

 

The Tribunal has concluded above that various rights the Claimants have under the
license are no longer observed in light of the measures complained of. It is now necessary
to examine the Argentine law governing contracts in order to determine whether liability
exists under the domestic legal order.

The Respondent has raised again the objection that such rights, to the extent they exist,
belong to TGS as the licensee and not to the Claimants. As noted, this question has
already been decided in the decision on jurisdiction and it shall not be discussed again
here. The Respondent adds on this point an argument on the merits concerning an issue of
potential double recovery. In its view, if the Tribunal grants compensation to the
Claimants and then the license is reconstituted in some way compensating TGS,
consumers will end up paying twice in terms of increased tariffs.

The Respondent contends that this is contrary to the principle held in the Chorzéw case™’,
as the parties would not be put in the same position they would be in had the contract
been observed. The Tribunal cannot provide an answer to a question which is in essence
speculative. However, as noted above in respect of another argument concerning double

recovery, it can only express the certainty that if the situation arises or its consequences

*° Case Concerning Certain German Interests in Polish Upper Silesia (Germany v. Poland) (Chorzéw Case),
Permanent Court of International Justice Proceeding, as referenced in Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, no. 34.

214.

215.

216.

67
would end up affecting the tariffs, able government negotiators or regulators would make
sure that no such double recovery or effects occur.

Article 17 of the Argentine Constitution enshrines the basic principle that “property may
not be violated and that no inhabitant of the Nation can be deprived of it except by virtue
of a sentence based on law”. The Constitution also provides in Article 28 that “the
principles, guarantees, and rights recognized in the preceding articles shall not be
modified by the laws that regulate their enforcement”. Consistent with these provisions,
Article 1197 of the Civil Code mandates that contractual rules must be observed as the
law between the parties. Stability of rights and contracts is thus a central feature of the
applicable domestic law.

This is not to say that contractual obligations must be kept unchanged forever irrespective
of the circumstances. Article 1198 of the Civil Code addresses the case of extraordinary
and unforeseeable events that could allow a party to the contract to request its termination
for having become excessively onerous, thus recognizing the theory of “imprevisién” and
seeking the rebalancing of the contractual benefits. Force majeure and unjust enrichment
are also mechanisms that would allow for renegotiation and rebalancing of contractual
obligations.

The Respondent’s legal expert, Professor Julio Rodolfo Comadira, regrettably deceased
before the hearing on the merits, explained that in his view, the theory of “imprevisién”
applied in the context of this dispute as this theory relates mainly to administrative
contracts and the events characterizing the greatest economic crisis in history could not
have been foreseen*!. The Respondent relies by reference on these legal arguments*”.

The parties discussed at various points whether the events underlying the claims had or

not been foreseeable in light of the various meanings they tend to assign to insuring

*! Legal Opinion of Julio Rodolfo Comadira of June 2005, para. 131.

* Respondent’s Rejoinder, para. 608.

217.

218.

68
against country risk and whether it includes or not the devaluation risk and the risk
concerning the freeze of tariffs, as they have discussed about who bears what risk. The
Respondent is right in stating that to consider a risk is not the same as foreseeing that the
events in question will necessarily take place. However, if the major features of the whole
regulatory regime put in place under the privatization were based on taking cover against

all kind of ris

 

‘s inspired by the economic history of the country and the instability of the
1980s, including country risk and devaluation, it is in itself indicating that the parties
were quite aware of the dangers ahead. It would then make no sense if when the dangers
materialized, as they did, the protection envisaged would not operate.

This question aside, however, it must be kept in mind that, at least as the theory of
“imprevisiOn” is expressed in the concept of force majeure, this other concept requires,
under Article 23 of the Articles on State Responsibility, that the situation should in

addition be the occurrence of an irresi:

 

ible force, beyond the control of the State, making
it materially impossible in the circumstances to perform the obligation. In the
commentary to this article it is stated that “Force majeure does not include circumstances

in which performance of an obligation has become more difficult, for example due to

5933

 

some political or economic cri
Important as this discussion is, the Respondent’s principal argument has not relied on the
theory of “imprevisién’”, but state of emergency. The courts of Argentina have on various
occasions addressed recurring situations of emergency declared by Congress,
conditioning their legal recognition to very precise terms’. The Supreme Court has held
in connection with the Emergency Law presently in force that

..it is not useless to remind, as the Tribunal has done for long, that
restrictions imposed by the State on the normal exercise of patrimonial

 

+3 James Crawford, The International Law Commission's Articles on State Responsibility: Introduction, Text and
Commentaries, p. 171, (ed., Cambridge University Press) (2002).

™ Rubén S. Stiglitz: Contratos Civiles y Comerciales (1998), paras. 28-30.

69
rights must be reasonable, limited in time, and constitute a remedy and not
a mutation in the substance or essence of the right acquired by judicial
decision or contract...”*°.

219. The Claimants have introduced an expert opinion of Dr. Alberto R. Bianchi which
together with that of Professor Comadira offers a most learned, albeit differing,
discussion of the state of Argentine law on the question of regulatory powers. In Dr.
Bianchi’s view, although “the emergency authorizes the use of extraordinary powers, it
does not allow the exercise of unlimited powers. Police power in this case is limited in

three sens

 

(i) it cannot result in a change in the substance or essence of a right acquired

under a judgment or contract; (ii) measures are subject to a reasonability judicial review;

and (iii) measures are temporary in essence”**.

220. It is against this background that the Tribunal must examine the effects of the emergency
measures enacted in 2002 on the obligations and commitments defined in the License.
The License of course is not an ordinary contract since it involves the operation of a
public service under the regulatory authority of the State, but even in this context the
licensees enjoy specific rights which are subject to protection under the Constitution, the
law and the provisions of the contract. As noted above, however strong the regulatory
powers of the State might be they are still governed by the law and the obligation to

protect the rights acquired by individuals.

First requirement: temporality

* Argentine Supreme Court, Judgment in the case Provincia de San Luis c. P. E. N. —Ley 25561, Dto. 1570/01 y
214/02 s/ amparo, March 5, 2003. (Translation by the Tribunal).

* Legal Opinion of Alberto B. Bianchi of October 11, 2005, para. 386.

221.

222.

70
The Tribunal can well understand the need to adopt emergency measures in the midst of
the major crisis that has been noted. Yet this is not enough to validate these measures in
light of the applicable law. A first question that must be examined in this respect is
whether the measures adopted are temporal or permanent, a matter on which the parties’
views also differ. The Respondent has repeatedly emphasized the temporal nature of the
emergency measures and the fact that the Emergency Law expires on precise dates, which
have been extended, it is argued, so as to ensure the orderly settlement of complex
outstanding problems. The fact is, however, that year after year the expiry date has been
extended and presently the Emergency Law is scheduled to end on December 31, 2007.
This is the situation that gives rise to the Claimants’ argument that the Emergency Law
has in reality been turned into a permanent feature of the Argentine economy.

The Tribunal finds that this is a rather disquieting situation because in actual fact the

  

crisis is largely over, although quite naturally aftershocks might still be felt for some time.
An expert witness for the Claimants believes the crisis began to improve in 2003 at the
time when the Central Bank was able to convince the public to buy its newly-issued
financial instruments”’. Another ICSID tribunal has set this date some time by the end of
2004 or beginning of 2005*%. In any event, the fact that the Argentine economy has grown
35.5% in the period 2003-2006, with an average growth of 8.8%, and that the
Government has prepaid its obligations to the International Monetary Fund, are evidence
enough that the crisis is behind’. The argument about the temporary character of the

emergency measures would thus seem not to be quite confirmed by the facts.

57 Expert statement of Sebastian Edwards, Hearing Transcript, Vol. 7, December 6, 2005, pp. 1234-1235.

58 CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/8), Award of May 12, 2005,
44 ILM 1205 (2005).

* Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, Statistics Yearbook of Latin America and the
Caribbean 2006, Economic Statistics, Table 2.1.1.1.

71

Second requirement: no essential mutation of rights

223. A second requirement the courts have set for the legal validity of the emergency measures
is that the restrictions imposed must provide a remedy and not result in the mutation of
the substance or essence of the rights acquired under a contract. A witness for the
Respondent advanced a view that appears not to be consistent with this other requirement,
namely that a good part of the emergency provisions, especially those on conversion to
pesos and elimination of dollar clauses “were taken not on a transitory basis. They were

o 40

adopted on a definitive basis”””. Such effects would mean in fact the permanent

  

elimination of the rights under the License, at least in so far as the calculation of tariffs in
US dollars and their PPI adjustment are concerned. Licensees might of course accept the

terms of a new tariff regime in the context of a renegotiated contract; in such a case, the

mutation would be validated by the agreement of the parties.

Third requirement: reasonableness

224. A third requirement the courts have indicated is that restrictions imposed under the
emergency must be reasonable. The discussion on the tariff regime outlined above reveals
profound disagreement between the parties about what is to be regarded as a just and
reasonable tariff. While for the Claimants a tariff frozen for nearly five years and kept

unadjusted for seven years cannot in any way be considered reasonable, for the

 

Respondent this was the only measure possible in the context of crisis and deflation and is

“ Witness Testimony of Eduardo Ratti, Hearing Transcript, Vol. 3, November 30, 2005, p. 555.

225.

226.

227.

72
thus eminently reasonable. Costs, leverage, devaluation, returns and other issues
examined are characterized by this same difference of opinions.

The Tribunal can only note in this respect that both the Government and the licensees of
public services have repeatedly indicated that there is an inescapable need to attend to

tariff adjustments and thereby ensure the continued operation of the companies and the

 

necessary supply of energy and other services. The very emph: the Respondent has put
on the question of renegotiation is further evidence of this recognition. It follows that the

prolongation of emergency measures without reestablishing or rebalancing the benefits of

the License cannot be regarded as satisfying the legal requirement of reasonableness.

Unilateral determinations and consented adjustment

There is

 

still one other aspect that does not help the Respondent’s argument about the
consistency of the emergency measures with the domestic legal order. If changes became
necessary, they cannot be unilaterally decided by the Government or its regulators,
competent as they may be. This is a decision that has either to be taken jointly by the
parties, as in a successful renegotiation, or requested from a judge, as in Article 1198 of
the Civil Code. In any event, even in the case of the regulatory authority entailed in a
license, this decision is subject to judicial control.

It so happens that the domestic judicial control of the emergency decisions has for the
most turned out adversely for the Respondent’s justification, as in Provincia de San Luis
noted above, but as judicial determinations are made on a case by case basis they have not
been taken to mean that the measures as a whole might not be compatible with Argentine

legislation.

228.

229.

230.

73
It must also be noted that the licenses have carefully provided for a detailed adjustment
mechanism so that tariffs would be revised periodically in order to take into account the
true conditions of the industry, thus evidencing that the question of an eventual
rebalancing of benefits was not ignored. The semi-annual adjustment under the PPI, an

effi

 

ciency-related adjustment following the first quinquennial review, and an investment-
related adjustment also applicable after the first five-year review, were some of the
mechanisms envisaged to reflect the changes in the value of goods and services for the
operator. The five-year review was another such mechanism. In addition, the possibility
of an extraordinary review to correct tariffs considered inadequate, discriminatory or
preferential was also included in the license terms; this review could be initiated either by
ENARGAS or the licensees.

All such mechanisms could have resulted in an increase of tariffs or equally in a reduction.
The interests of consumers could have been attended to and protected under these
mechanisms, particularly if the tariffs became unrealistic and excessive in the context of a
changed economic environment. Such changes would also have met the obligation under
the License not to amend it without the agreement of the licensees as the latter had
already given their consent by agreeing on the license terms. Yet, the Government chose
not to use the alternatives provided under the license and resorted instead to the unilateral
determination made under the emergency measures.

Even assuming that the implementation of any such mechanism would have taken some
time and that the Government needed to react quickly in confronting an emergency
situation, which is a perfectly understandable concern, such measures could have been
taken for a limited time span while reviews were carried out. It is this unilateral
determination, not the license corrections required, that ultimately resulted in the

inconsistency of the measures taken with the domestic legal order.

231.

232.

14

Liability under Argentine law

The inescapable conclusion for the Tribunal to reach is that in considering the claims
purely from the point of view of the Argentine legislation as one of the laws applicable to
the dispute, the obligations which the Argentine Republic had and the commitments it
undertook under the License were not observed. This is particularly significant in view
that the License is expressly subject to Argentine law in some key respects, without
prejudice to the effect that these legal arrangements have under the Treaty and
international law. Liability is thus the consequence of such breach and there is no legal
excuse under the Argentine legislation which could justify the non-compliance, as the

very conditions set out by this legislation and the decisions of courts have not been met.

 

Yet, the Tribunal bears in mind that a major cri indeed there was. While these
unfortunate events do not in themselves amount to a legal excuse, neither would it be

reasonable for the Claimants to believe they are not affected by some of the effects. The

economic balance of the license was clearly affected by the crisi

 

‘ituation, and just as it
is not reasonable for the licensees to bear the entire burden of such changed reality neither
would it be reasonable for them to believe that nothing happened in Argentina since the
License was approved. This is something the Tribunal will duly take into account in
considering the compensation that follows such finding of liability and how the crisis

period influences its determination.

The Treaty as the applicable law

75
233. The Tribunal must now examine the question of whether the breach of the License and its
regulatory regime, in addition to its assessment under Argentine legislation, amounts to a

breach of the Treaty guarantees.

J. The claim of expropriation

234. The principal claim made in this arbitration is that the measures adopted since early 2000,
and particularly those following in 2002 under the Emergency Law, have expropriated the
Claimants’ investments, both directly and indirectly, in a manner contrary to the
protection granted under Article IV of the Treaty. The Claimants argue that their
investment comprises the equity in TGS, the capital contributed to this effect, the rights
under the Technical Assistance Agreement and the specific rights related to the tariff
regime of the License. The deprivation, the Claimants maintain, has been permanent, not
merely ephemeral, and no prompt, adequate and effective compensation has been paid. In
the Claimants’ view, compensation must be paid irrespective of the purpose of the
measures".

235. The Claimants assert that the Respondent has directly expropriated the rights to tariff
adjustment and calculation they have under the License, as well as the right to be free
from a tariff freeze, as all of it was expressly derogated by the Emergency Law. A
transfer of revenues is also alleged to have taken place as a result. The Claimants also
invoke in support of their argument on expropriation an OPIC “Memorandum of
Determinations” of August 2, 2005, which concludes that expropriation in violation of
international law has taken place with regard to this investment.

*! Compaiiia del Desarrollo de Santa Elena S.A. v. Republic of Costa Rica (ICSID Case No. ARB/96/1), Award of
February 17, 2000, available at <http:/www.worldbank.org/icsid/cases/santaelena_award.pdf>, paras. 71-72.

236.

237.

238.

716
Simultaneously, the Claimants maintain, the measures in question are “tantamount to
expropriation”, thus constituting an indirect or creeping expropriation unfolding in time
and resulting in a cumulative substantial destruction of the value of the investment. This
kind of measures includes various forms of regulatory action unreasonably interfering
with the investor’s property rights, the Claimants explain, just as the measures involve
conduct inconsistent with legitimate expectation and with the assurances offered to
induce the investment or the capacity for rational decision-making in the business.
The Respondent argues at the outset that the same measures complained of cannot give

rise simultaneously to a claim of direct and indirect expropriation and that the wrong

 

justification of the claim must lead to its rejection’. It is also argued as a preliminary
point that in the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction only equity participation was held to
be an investment qualifying for protection, not other kinds of peripheral rights that the
Claimants now untimely invoke in their argument on the merits".

The Respondent opposes the claim arguing that there has been no transfer of property
rights to the benefit of the Government or the consumers and without redistribution there
is no expropriation’; in these circumstances, if compensation for expropriation were paid
there would be unjust enrichment of the service providers. The Respondent also asserts
that temporary measures, particularly emergency measures, do not qualify as
expropriation as they do not entail permanent deprivation of earnings or corporate rights
and no such effects can be shown in the present dispute; that substantial deprivation of
fundamental property rights must be established and that no such deprivation has taken

place or been proven in this case; that lo:

 

s must be significant, while the Claimants

* Generation Ukraine Inc. v. Ukraine (ICSID Case No. ARB/00/9), Award of September 16, 2003, 44 ILM 404
(2005), paras. 20, 22.

* Remarks of Jorge Alberto Barraguirre, Hearing Transcript, Vol. 1, November 28, 2005, pp. 121-124.

* Ronald S. Lauder v. The Czech Republic, UNCITRAL Arbitration Proceeding, Final Award of September 3, 2001,
available at <http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/LauderA ward.pdf>, para. 203.

239.

240.

241.

242.

77
continue to benefit from earnings or the sale of shares; that the value of the investment
would have been further reduced had the measures not been adopted; and that a mere
contract violation cannot be turned into a Treaty claim.

The Respondent also argues that the purpose of the measures is relevant to make a
determination on an expropriation claim, particularly if such measures are adopted under
the police power of the State and are proportional to the requirements of public interest.
Moreover, the Respondent maintains, the Treaty does not protect legitimate expectations
but only specific rights and in this case none of the measures questioned can be equated to
those considered in other cases as being inconsistent with the guarantees offered to induce
the investor or amounts to the destruction of the capacity for rational decision-making.
The Tribunal is again grateful to counsel for the parties for having undertaken a thorough
explanation of their views on the issue of expropriation, invoking in support of their
respective views a wealth of decisions, opinions of writers and other authorities that allow
understanding the parties’ arguments in all their meaning and differences.

The first question the Tribunal must address is that of the protected investment. The
Respondent argues that the Tribunal in the jurisdictional stage held that the dispute was
one related to investment in equity and that nothing else can now be considered in the
merits This, however, has to be understood in the context of a determination about
whether minority shareholders had a right to claim independently, as the Respondent
itself recalls. In that context, the issue was whether an investment in equity so allows. The
Tribunal must also recall that the reference paragraph 30 of the Decision on Jurisdiction
made to a definition of investment is related to the very broad definition of the Treaty as
reproduced in paragraph 29 of that Decision. Accordingly that broad definition is the one
governing this discussion.

The equity investment was the vehicle through which a complex business relationship

was developed and which can be affected in other of its elements by the measures

78
questioned. This is the case, for example, of the measures affecting the tariff regime
envisaged in the License, which is the key factor determining the success or failure of the
investment in the equity of TGS.

243. This discussion, in any event, turns out to be rather academic as the Tribunal is persuaded
by the merit of the Respondent’s argument on direct expropriation. In fact, the Tribunal
does not believe there can be a direct form of expropriation if at least some essential
component of property rights has not been transferred to a different beneficiary, in
particular the State. In this case it can be argued that economic benefits might have been
transferred to an extent from industry to consumer or from industry to another industrial
sector, but this does not amount to affecting a legal element of the property held, such as
the title to property.

244. The question of indirect or creeping expropriation is more complex to assess. The
Tribunal has no doubt about the fact that indirect or creeping expropriation can arise from
many kinds of measures and these have to be assessed in their cumulative effects. Yet, in
this case, the Tribunal is not convinced that this has happened.

245. The list of measures considered in the Pope & Talbot case as tantamount to expropriation,
which the Respondent has invoked among other authorities, is in the Tribunal’s view
representative of the legal standard required to make a finding of indirect expropriation.
Substantial deprivation results in that light from depriving the investor of the control of
the investment, managing the day-to-day operations of the company, arrest and detention
of company officials or employees, supervision of the work of officials, interfering in the
administration, impeding the distribution of dividends, interfering in the appointment of
officials and managers, or depriving the company of its property or control in total or in

part’.

* Pope & Talbot Inc. v. Canada, NAFTA (UNCITRAL) Arbitration Proceeding, Interim Award of June 26, 2000,
para. 100.

246.

247.

248.

249.

250.

79
Nothing of the sort has happened in the case of TGS or CIESA or any of the related
companies, so much so that the Claimants’ interests in these companies have been freely
sold and included in complex transactions, some involving foreign companies too, as
evidenced by the 2005 and 2006 agreements already described. The Tribunal must
accordingly conclude that the Government of Argentina in adopting the measures
complained of has not breached the standard of protection established in Article IV(1) of
the Treaty.
The Tribunal must also point out that although the OPIC “Memorandum of
Determinations” referred to above reaches a different conclusion on this matter, it
responds to a different kind of procedure and context that cannot influence or be taken
into account in this arbitration.
The question of devaluation has also been discussed by the parties in the context of its
influence on a finding of expropriation, particularly in light of the meaning each attaches
to the Himpurna case.” However, as the Tribunal has explained above, this is not a
dispute about devaluation, nor has so been claimed, but about allegedly breached rights
under a regulatory framework and the License. This discussion thus does not alter the
Tribunal’s determination about expropriation.
The Tribunal’s conclusion does not mean that the measures discussed are free from legal
consequences under other Treaty standards, as will be seen below, or free from liability
for compensation arising from the damage they may have caused.
The Respondent’s argument about the inappropriateness of claiming simultaneously a
direct and an indirect expropriation, as the Claimants have done, is also persuasive. In
fact, if a given measure qualifies as a form of direct expropriation it cannot at the same

time qualify as an indirect expropriation, as their nature and extent are different. The

“© Himpurna California Energy Ltd. v. Republic of Indonesia, UNCITRAL Arbitration Proceeding.

80

 

converse is also true. This is not to conclude, like in Generation Ukraine, that the claim
has to be rejected because the measures complained of were not described with precision

and coherently, as here they have been competently substantiated.

2. The claim concerning the standard of fair and equitable treatment

251. The Claimants have argued that in addition to expropriation the Respondent has breached
the standard of fair and equitable treatment established under Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty
on various counts: failing to act in good faith, abusing its rights, repudiating assurances
given, altering regulatory approvals and conditions, and failure to provide a stable and
predictable legal environment.

252. Originating in the obligation of good faith under international law, the Claimants explain,
this particular standard has gradually acquired a specific meaning in light of decisions and
treaties, including a treatment compatible with expectations of foreign investors,’” the
observance of arrangements on which the investor has relied to make the investment““and
the maintenance of a stable legal and business framework.”

253. The Respondent’s argument on this matter is based on the premise that fair and equitable
treatment is a standard not different from the customary international law minimum
standard and that it is not for tribunals to set out its meaning or even less to legislate on

the matter. The Respondent asserts that this view is confirmed by the NAFTA Free Trade

 

cnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2), Award of
May 29, 2003, 43 ILM 133 (2004), para. 115.

 

 

“ CME Czech Republic B.V. v. Czech Republic, UNCITRAL Arbitration Proceeding, Partial Award of September
13, 2001, available at <http:/vww. jons/CME-Czech-Partial Award-13Sept2001 pdf
para. 611.

® Occidental Exploration and Production Company (OEPC) v. Republic of Ecuador, London Court of International
Arbitration Administered Case No. UN 3467, Final Award of July 1, 2004, available at
<http://www.asil.org/ilib/OEPC-Ecuador.pdf >, para. 183.

81

Commission™ and the Chile-US Free Trade Agreement, in clarifying that fair and

equitable treatment does not entail any treatment additional to or beyond that required by

customary law,”! as well as by a number of NAFTA and ICSID decisions and the
opinions of learned writers.

254. In the Respondent’s view what has been criticized by recent decisions is a kind of

conduct that evidences inconsistency in State action,” radical and arbitrary modification

of the regulatory framework* or endless normative changes to the detriment of the

investor’s business.°* None of that, the argument follows, is present in the instant

 

 

where the measures adopted were eminently reasonable in light of the economic cri:
described and the changes in the economic conditions of the country.
255. In particular, the Respondent maintains that devaluation was the result of market

decisions and that the constant decisions of courts in other cri has reaffirmed the

 

constitutionality of measures of this kind, most notably in the context of the United
States’ great depression. The Thunderbird v. Mexico decision has also been invoked by
the Respondent in support of its view that the standard of fair and equitable treatment
does not include the protection of legitimate expectation and it is not different from the
international minimum standard”.

256. The Tribunal notes that the Respondent is right in arguing that fair and equitable
treatment is a standard none too clear and precise. This is because international law is not
too clear and precise either on the treatment due to foreign citizens, traders and investors

* BTC decision, NAFTA Free Trade Commission, Interpretation of NAFTA Article 1105(1), July 21, 2001,
available at < http://www.dfait-maeci.ge.ca/tna-nac/NAFTA-Interpr-en.asp>.

5! Chile-United States Free Trade Agreement of — June 6, 2003, available at
<http//www.ustr. /Trade, i hile FTA/Final_Texts/asset_upload_filel_4004.pdf>,
Article 10.4.2.

°° MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/7), Award of May 25,
2004, available at <http://vww.asil.org/ilib/MTDvChile.pdf>, para. 164.

* Tecmed, para. 154.
* OEPC, pars. 184-186.
* Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, p. 13.

82
or with respect to the fact that the pertinent standards have gradually evolved over the
centuries. Customary international law, treaties of friendship, commerce and navigation,
and more recently bilateral investment treaties, have all contributed to this development”.

257. The evolution that has taken place is for the most part the outcome of a case by case
determination by courts and tribunals, as evidenced among many other investment treaty
and NAFTA decisions by the TECMED, the OEPC and the Pope & Talbot cases*’. This
explains that, like with the international minimum standard, there is a fragmentary and
gradual development. Such development however partly hinges on the gradual
formulation — both in cases and legal writings — of ‘general principles of law’ (as
understood under Article 38(1)(c) of the ICJ Statute) able to guide and ‘discipline’** the
evaluation of state conduct under investment treaty standards.

258. It might well be that in some circumstances where the international minimum standard is
sufficiently elaborate and clear, fair and equitable treatment might be equated with it. But
in other more vague circumstances, the fair and equitable standard may be more precise
than its customary international law forefathers. This is why the Tribunal concludes that

the fair and equitable standard, at least in the context of the Treaty applicable to this

 

se,
can also require a treatment additional to, or beyond that of, customary law. The very fact
that recent FTC interpretations or investment treaties have purported to change the
meaning or extent of the standard only confirms that those specific instruments aside, the

standard is or might be a broader one.

* Stephen Vasciannie, The Fair and Equitable Treatment Standard in International Investment Law and Practice,
BYIL, Vol. 70, 1999, para. 100.

* Técnicas Medioambientales Tecmed, S.A. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/2), Award of
May 29, 2003; Occidental Exploration and Production Company (OEPC) v. Republic of Ecuador, London Court of
International Arbitration Administered Case No. UN 3467, Final Award of July 1, 2004; Pope & Talbot Inc. v.
Canada, NAFTA (UNCITRAL) Arbitration Proceeding, Interim Award of June 26, 2000.

°8 ADF Group Inc. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/00/1), Award of January 9, 2003, 18
ICSID Rev.—FILJ 195 (2003); 6 ICSID Rep. 470 (2004), para. 124,

259.

260.

261.

262.

83

The Tribunal is bound to interpret Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty “in good faith in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the treaty in their
context and in the light of the object and purpose” as required by Article 31 of the Vienna
Convention. The Tribunal gives weight to the text of the Treaty’s Preamble, which links
the standard to the goal of legal stability: ‘fair and equitable treatment of investment is
desirable in order to maintain a stable framework for the investment and maximum
effective use of economic resources.”
Thus, the Tribunal concludes that a key element of fair and equitable treatment is the
requirement of a ‘stable framework for the investment’, which has been prescribed by a
number of decisions*’. Indeed, this interpretation has been considered ‘an emerging
standard of fair and equitable treatment in international law’.
This Tribunal notes, however, that the stabilization requirement does not mean the
freezing of the legal system or the disappearance of the regulatory power of the State. As
noted by the tribunal in CMS:

It is not a question of whether the legal framework might need to be frozen

as it can always evolve and be adapted to changing circumstances, but

neither is it a question of whether the framework can be dispensed with

altogether when specific commitments to the contrary have been made.

The law of foreign investment and its protection has been developed with
the specific objective of avoiding such adverse legal effects”.

The protection of the ‘expectations that were taken into account by the foreign investor to

262

make the investment’™” has likewise been identified as a facet of the standard. The Tecmed

* OEPC, paras. 190-191; CMS, paras. 274-276; LG&E Energy Corp., LG&E Capital Corp. and LG&E
International Inc. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/1), Decision on Liability of October 3, 2006,
available at <http://www.worl isi pdf/ARBO21_LGE-Decision-on-Liability-en.pdf>, para, 124.

© LG&E, para. 125.
°! CMS, para. 277.

© Tecmed, para. 154.

84

63 .
ions”. Tecmed described

 

approach has been consistently adopted by subsequent des
such expectations as ‘basic’, while in the context of NAFTA, tribunals have qualified

165

them as ‘reasonable and justifiable’. What seems to be essential, however, is that these

expectations derived from the conditions that were offered by the State to the investor at

°° and that such conditions were relied upon by the investor

the time of the investment
when deciding to invest’.

263. The Tribunal observes that, as acknowledged by previous arbitral tribunals, the principle
of good faith is not an essential element of the standard of fair and equitable treatment
and therefore violation of the standard would not require the existence of bad faith’.

264. The measures in question in this case have beyond any doubt substantially changed the
legal and business framework under which the investment was decided and implemented.
Argentina in the early 1990s constructed a regulatory framework for the gas sector
containing specific guarantees to attract foreign capital to an economy historically
unstable and volatile. As part of this regulatory framework, Argentina guaranteed that
tariffs would be calculated in US dollars, converted into pesos for billing purposes,

ind a

 

adjusted semi-annually in accordance with the US PPI and sufficient to cover cos'

 

reasonable rate of return. It further guaranteed that tariffs would not be subject to freezing

or price controls without compensation. Foreign investors were specifically targeted to

MTD, para. 114.; OEPC, para. 185; Eureko B.V. v. Poland, Ad Hoc Proceeding, Partial Award of August 19,
2005, available at <http://www.i isi Poland-LiabilityAward.pdf>, para. 235;
LG&E, para. 127.

 Tecmed, para. 154.

5 International Thunderbird Gaming Corporation v. United Mexican States, NAFTA (UNCITRAL) Arbitration
Proceeding, Award of January 26, 2006, available at <http://www.iisd.org/pdf/2006/itn_award.pdf>, para. 147.

° Southern Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited (SPP) v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/84/3),
Award of May 20, 1992, 32 ILM 1470 (1993), para. 82; LG&E, para. 130.

°7 SPP, para. 82; CME, para. 611; Tecmed, para. 154; Thunderbird, para. 147; LG&E, para. 127.

® Mondev International Ltd. v. United States of America (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/2), Award of October 11,
2002, 42 ILM 85 (2003), para. 116; The Loewen Group, Inc. and Raymond L. Loewen v. United States of America
(ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/3), Award of June 26, 2003, 42 JLM 811 (2003), para. 32; OEPC, para. 186; Tecmed,
para 153; Waste Management, Inc. v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/98/2), Award of June 2,
2000, 40 ILM 56 (2001), para. 93; CMS, para. 280; LG&E, para. 129.

 

 
 

 

265.

266.

267.

268.

85
invest in the privatization of public utilities in the gas sector. Substantial foreign
investment was undertaken on the strength of such guarantees, including the investment
made by Enron in TGS.

The Tribunal observes that it was in reliance upon the conditions established by the
Respondent in the regulatory framework for the gas sector that Enron embarked on its
investment in TGS. Given the scope of Argentina’s privatization process, its international
marketing, and the statutory enshrinement of the tariff regime, Enron had reasonable
grounds to rely on such conditions.

A decade later, however, the guarantees of the tariff regime that had seduced so many
foreign investors, were dismantled. Where there was certainty and stability for investors,
doubt and ambiguity are the order of the day. The long-term business outlook enabled by
the tariff regime, has been transformed into a day-to-day discussion about what comes
next. Tariffs have been frozen for almost five years. The recomposition of the tariff
regime is subject to a protracted renegotiation process imposed on the public utilities that
has failed to provide a final and definitive framework for the operation of business in the
energy sector.

The Respondent might be right in distinguishing this case from the factual scenarios that

 

recent decisions have faced, but this does not mean that Argentina’s acts are consistent
with the meaning of the protection under the Treaty. It is clear that the ‘stable legal
framework’ that induced the investment is no longer in place and that a definitive
framework has not been made available for almost five years.

Even assuming that the Respondent was guided by the best of intentions, which the
Tribunal has no reason to doubt, there is here an objective breach of the fair and equitable
treatment due under the Treaty. The Tribunal thus holds that the standard established in

Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty has not been observed and that to the extent that it results in

a detriment to the Claimants’ rights it will give rise to compensation.

269.

270.

271.

86

3. The claim concerning the breach of the umbrella clause

The Claimants have also brought to this Tribunal a claim for an alleged breach of the
obligations the Respondent entered into with regard to the investment, in light of the
“umbrella clause” of Article II(2)(c) of the Treaty. This aspect of the claim is built on the
premise that the protection envisaged is an expression of the obligation to observe the
principle pacta sunt servanda. The Claimants cite in this context the view of Judge
Higgins to the effect that such principle and acquired rights “emphasize the protection
that the private party has been given against either a later change of mind by the State or
against the exercise of the State’s regulatory powers”.

The Claimants argue that the clause applies to obligations arising from a contract or from
broader undertakings contained in the State’s own law and that the Respondent’s
measures breached every commitment made in the Gas Law, the Gas Decree and the
License, with particular reference to the tariff regime and the commitment not to amend
the License without TGS’s consent.

The Respondent opposes this claim arguing that it did not undertake any specific
obligation with regard to the investment or Enron in the Treaty, the investment legislation
or the legislation regulating the License. In addition, it alleges that under customary law,
violations of contracts cannot be equated with a treaty breach and thus do not engage the

0

international responsibility of the State”’, and that, as held in SGS v. Pakistan, contract

© Rosalyn Higgins, The Taking of Property by the State: Recent Developments in International Law, 176 Recueil
des Cours 267, 347 (1982), as cited in Claimants’ Memorial, para. 316.

® Noble Ventures, Inc. v. Romania (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/11), Award of October 12, 2005, available at
<http://www.i i isi -Ventures-Final-Award.pdf>, para. 53.

87
claims do not qualify as BIT claims”'. Moreover, the Respondent maintains the Tribunal
in SGS v. Philippines, while disagreeing with some aspects of the Pakistan decision, still
held that the umbrella clause only comprises obligations undertaken with respect to a
specific investment and thus the clause does not extend to ordinary contractual breaches
that must be taken to the contract forum.

272. In any event, it is

 

so asserted that because the commitments were made in respect of
TGS they cannot be invoked by the Claimants and the License does not qualify as an
investment agreement. The Respondent relies upon the Noble Ventures v. Romania
decision insofar as it would limit the application of the umbrella clause to investment
contracts. Claimants oppose such an interpretation because that decision, in their view,
referred to contracts made with regard to an investment”

273. The Tribunal recalls that the text of Article II(2)(c) reads “[eJach party shall observe any
obligation it may have entered into with regard to investments”, a text which should be
interpreted “in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the
terms of the treaty” as indicated by Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention.

274. Under its ordinary meaning the phrase ‘any obligation’ refers to obligations regardless of
their nature. Tribunals interpreting this expression have found it to cover both contractual

obligations such as payment” as well as obligations assumed through law or regulation”.

 

‘Obligations’ covered by the ‘umbrella clause’ are nevertheless limited by their object:

‘with regard to investments’.

 

Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan (ICSID Case No. ARB/O1/13), Decision of
the Tribunal on Objections _—_ to Jurisdietion of August 6, 2003, available at
hutp://www.i 3S-Paki isdiction-6. 2003.pdf.
® Claimants’ Post-Hearing Brief, para. 17.
® Fedax N.V. v. Republic of Venezuela (ICSID Case No. ARB/96/3), Award of March 9, 1998, 37 ILM 1391 (1998),
para. 29; Société Générale de Surveillance S.A. v. Republic of the Philippines (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/6),
Decision of the Tribunal on Objections to Jurisdiction of January 29, 2004; 8 ICSID Rep. 518, paras. 127-128.

4 SGS y. Islamic Republic of Pakistan para. 166; LG&E, para. 175.

275.

276.

277.

278.

88
Through the Gas Law and its implementing legislation, the Respondent assumed
‘obligations with regard to investments’: tariffs calculated in US dollars converted to
pesos for billing purposes, linked to the US PPI and sufficient to provide a reasonable rate
of return were intended to establish a tariff regime that assured the influx of capital into
the newly privatized companies such as TGS and ensured the value of such investment.
The dismantling of these guarantees would suffice to establish a violation of the
obligations entered into by the Respondent with regard to the Claimants’ investment.
In addition, the prohibition of price controls without indemnification and the prohibition
of License amendments without consent, although contained in the License were also
approved by decree’ and formed part of the implementing legislation that established the
tariff regime. The obliteration of these commitments likewise entails a violation of
obligations entered into by the Respondent with regard to the Claimants’ investment.
The Tribunal concludes accordingly that the breach of the obligations noted undertaken
both under contract and law and regulation in respect of the investment have resulted in

the breach of the protection provided under the umbrella clause of Article II(2)(c).

4. The claim about arbitrariness and discrimination

The Claimants assert that there has also been a breach of Article II(2)(b) of the Treaty
because the measures adopted are both arbitrary and discriminatory. The claim of
arbitrariness is based on the argument that such measures destroyed the rights and
reasonable expectations of the Claimants, lacked proportionality and were in violation of

the law. The claim of discrimination relies on the view that the measures fell

% Obligations undertaken in the License were initially approved by Decree 2255/92 (Model License) and later
specifically ratified with regard to TGS by Decree 2458/92.

279.

280.

281.

282.

89

disproportionately on the largely foreign-owned gas sector. A long list of specific
measures is given by the Claimants in respect of each of these aspects.
The Respondent opposes this claim asserting that the measures were consistent with the
law and aimed at continuing the operational income and earnings of the companies, while
at the same time being proportionate to the purpose sought, reasonable and, in any event,
lacking in any intention to breach the rule of law or affect judicial propriety, as required
by numerous judicial and arbitral decisions.

Neither is there discrimination, the Respondent maintains, bec:

 

e the regulated gas
sector is very different from other sectors operating in a competitive market, such as
banking, and the entities involved are far from being in a similar or even comparable
situation, thus not being discriminated if treated differently in light of each individual or
sector requirement. Least of all is there any capricious, irrational or absurd differential
treatment of the Claimants, who are not even among those who have suffered the most
severe consequences of the measures adopted.

After examining the detailed arguments of the parties and their supporting authorities and
decisions, the Tribunal is not persuaded by the Claimants’ view that there is here
arbitrariness or discrimination. The measures adopted might have been good or bad, a
matter which is not for the Tribunal to judge, and as concluded they were not consistent
with the domestic and the Treaty legal framework, but they were not arbitrary in that they
were what the Government believed and understood was the best response to the
unfolding crisis. Irrespective of the question of intention, a finding of arbitrariness
requires that some important measure of impropriety is manifest, and this is not found in a
process which although far from desirable is nonetheless not entirely surprising in the
context it took place.

The Tribunal reaches a similar conclusion in respect of discrimination. There are quite

naturally important differences between the various sectors that have been affected, so it

284.

285.

286.

90
is not surprising either that different solutions might have been or are being sought for
each, but it could not be said that any such sector has been singled out, in particular either
to apply to it measures harsher than in respect of others, or conversely to provide a more
beneficial remedy to one sector to the detriment of another. The Tribunal does not find
that there has been any capricious, irrational or absurd differentiation in the treatment

accorded to the Claimants

 

compared to other entities or sectors.
The Tribunal accordingly concludes that the Respondent has not breached the protection

provided under Article II(2)(b) of the Treaty.

5. The claim about failure to give full protection and security

Lastly, the Claimants argue that there has been a failure to give full protection and
security to the Claimants’ investment, as required under Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty. The
Claimants rely to this effect on the broader interpretation of this requirement made
particularly in CME, where the standard was related not just to physical security but also
to the legal protection of the investment.

The Respondent believes differently, arguing first that the standard only relates to
physical protection and security, as evidenced in AAPL and AMT where installations were
destroyed, and asserting next that CME does not mean that the interpretation it made of
the standard is the accepted definition under international law, so much so that it was at
the same time contradicted by the opposite conclusion in Lauder.

There is no doubt that historically this particular standard has been developed in the
context of physical protection and security of the company’s officials, employees or
facilities. The Tribunal cannot exclude as a matter of principle that there might be cases

where a broader interpretation could be justified, but then it becomes difficult to

91
distinguish such situation from one resulting in the breach of fair and equitable treatment,
and even from some form of expropriation.

287. In this case no failure to give full protection and security to officials, employees or
installations has been alleged. The argument made in general about a possible lack of
protection and security in the broader ambit of the legal and political system is not in any
way proven or even adequately developed. The Tribunal accordingly rejects this claim

and finds that no breach of Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty has taken place.

The alternative plea of emergency

288. In case the Tribunal would find that a breach of the Treaty has taken place, the Argentine
Republic has pleaded in the alternative exemption from liability in light of national
emergency or state of necessity under domestic law, general international law and the
Treaty, all of it based on the severity of the crisis that affected the country as from 2000.

289. The Respondent explains in detail the severity that characterized the crisis affecting the
country, which threatened in its view the very existence of the State and its independence.
The Respondent explains in particular that the significant decrease of the Gross Domestic
Product, consumption and investment during the crisis period, together with deflation and
the reduction in value of Argentine corporations, resulted in widespread unemployment
and poverty, with dramatic consequences in health, malnutrition and social policies. In
addition, public institutions were no longer functioning.

290. With a view to overcome such difficulties there was an urgent need to resort to

 

emergency, described by the Respondent as a severe form of neces

  

ity, which

materialized in the 2002 Emergency Law. The Respondent explains in this respect that

291.

292.

92
the Emergency Law was not the cause of the unfolding economic emergency but the
normative consequence of a situation that had become manifest in world financial
markets. The measures adopted, the Respondent maintains, were the remedy
recommended by distinguished economists and led to the gradual recovery that is

noticeable at present.

J. Necessity and emergency under the Argentine Constitution

The Respondent explains that the Argentine Constitution provides for various kinds of
emergency measures, including most prominently economic emergency, which in this
case was declared by Congress, and that as a public act on emergency measure benefits
from a presumption of legality, subject to constitutional control by the judiciary. The

emergency legislation, the Respondent maintains, meets the requirements laid down by

 

a state of nece:

 

judicial decisions to the extent that there exist ry, the rules are aimed at
attending to public interest, the remedy introduced is proportional to the emergency and
its time frame is reasonable and related to the causes of the emergency. So too, the
Respondent asserts, the measures enacted by the Government acting on powers delegated
by Congress observe the legal requirements of emergency as provided under the
Constitution.

In the Claimants’ view, the Respondent has not demonstrated that the degree of threat
required to invoke the defense of necessity has been met, particularly because the
existence of the State has not been imperiled as if it had faced a military threat, nor has it
demonstrated that the derogation of the specific guarantees and obligations disputed was

justified.

294.

295.

93
The Tribunal has examined above the situation of the measures complained of in the
context of the Argentine legislation. While there can be no doubt that emergency has been
continuously invoked and recognized in Argentina, precisely because of that the courts
have been careful in stating the conditions under which emergency may be exercised and
legally validated. In the context of the present emergency, the Tribunal is mindful of the
specific requirements laid down in Provincia de San Luis, and these, as concluded, have
not been met by the emergency legislation. It follows that the very constitutional
provisions that were subject to judicial control and led to the definition of those
conditions cannot be invoked to preclude the wrongfulness of the measures adopted if

they do not comply with the conditions indicated.

2. The plea of state of necessity under customary international law

The Respondent maintains in this respect that state of necessity is consolidated under
international law as a concept precluding wrongfulness of the measures adopted in its
context and exempting the State from international responsibility. The Neptunus case and
the Gabcikovo-Nagymaros judgment, as well as Article 25 of the International Law

Commis

 

ion’s Articles on State Responsibility, are invoked in support of this conclusion.

The Respondent argues in particular that it has not contributed to the situation of
necessity as most of the intervening factors were exogenous; that the measures adopted
were the only means to safeguard an essential interest against a grave and imminent peril
because otherwise the situation would have gone out of control; that no essential interest
of other States beneficiaries of the obligation or of the international community as a
whole have been seriously impaired; and that the Claimants or TGS have not been treated

differently from other investors in this sector.

296.

297.

298.

299.

94
In answering to arguments advanced by the Claimants, the Respondent distinguishes the
Himpurna case from its own situation on the ground that in that case the State company
PLN had expressly waived in the contract the possibility of invoking force majeure in
justification of non performance and that the alleged events had not been proven, thus
explaining the decision of the Tribunal not to admit economic emergency. So too, the
Respondent distinguishes Socobelge where the financial situation of Greece never got to
be considered by the Permanent Court of International Justice.
The Respondent emphasizes in particular that in the view of experts Argentina had no
other option than to undertake the pesification of the contractual relations as every other

7 and that, as noted, Argentina did not contribute to the situation of

remedy was unviable
necessity because the main difficulties originated in external shocks, including the Asian
and Russian crises, devaluation in Brazil and strengthening of the US dollar. An expert
for Argentina concludes that “the Argentine currency board was not sustainable and had
to be abandoned given the external and other shocks that hit the economy [...] Also, the
only really feasible and desirable exchange rate regime after the collapse of the peg was a
floating exchange rate regime such as the one adopted by the local economic authorities
in Argentina; alternatives such as dollarization were undesirable and/or unfeasible.”
Following the Gould case, the Respondent concludes that in view of the existence of a
state of necessity damage caused is not attributable to the State as it originates in “social
and economic forces beyond the power of the state to control through the exercise of due
diligence.””* Compensation thus is not due, the Respondent maintains.

While the Claimants share the Respondent’s view that Article 25 of the Articles on State

Responsibility reflects customary international law in this matter, they believe the case

7 Expert Opinion of Nouriel Roubini of February 24, 2005, para. 50.
7 Idem.

*8 Gould Marketing Inc., as successor to Hoffman Export Corporation v. Ministry of National Defense of Iran, 3
Iran-US C.T.R. 147, submitted as Respondent’s Legal Authority no. 228.

300.

301.

95
has not been proven. Specifically the Claimants maintain that Argentina has not
demonstrated that it was threatened by a grave and imminent peril, that the measures
adopted were the only way to safeguard against that peril, that the obligation in question
does not exclude the defense of necessity and that it did not contribute to the situation of
necessity. The Himpurna and Socobelge cases are relied on by the Claimants in support
of their assertions.

The Claimants emphasize that, contrary to the Respondent’ s rtion, the crisis finds its

 

origins in endogenous factors which in the view of another expert are almost entirely the
result of Argentina’s own policy failures,” particularly the failure to implement structural
reforms in the 1990s ensuring fiscal discipline, labor market flexibility, open foreign trade

and the maintenance of the credibility of the currency board. The Claimants also argue

 

that options other than pesification were available and thus this measure was not the only

 

way to address the crisis; among the options discussed there was the structural reforms
indicated, the agreed restructuring of its debt, dollarization and devaluation without
pesification. Such alternative plans have worked in other countries, such as Uruguay, the
expert explains.

The expert opinion of Professor Sebastian Edwards summarizes its conclusions on the
following main points: Argentina itself primarily caused its economic crisis by making
policy mistakes prior to 2001 and a series of additional mistakes in 2001; external shocks
played a limited role in the Argentine economic crisis; and the country had a number of
options available throughout the 1990s and during 2000 and 2001, and even after

devaluation Argentina did not have to pesify.*° A rebuttal opinion by Professor Nouriel

® Expert Opinion of Sebastidn Edwards of April 27, 2005, paras. 33-82.
® Jd., paras, 126-137.

302.

96

Roubini was introduced by the Respondent in opposing the Claimants’ views and its
. «81

expert’s analysis.
The conclusion the Claimants reach, as indicated in Article 27 of the Articles on State
Responsibility, is that even in the case of state of necessity the preclusion of wrongfulness
is without prejudice to, first, the compliance with the obligation concerned and, next, the
question of compensation for any material loss caused by the measures adopted, thus not

allowing for the permanent repudiation of rights or to ignore the nec

 

sary compensation.
The Tribunal’s understanding of Article 25 of the Articles on State Responsibility to the
effect that it reflects the state of customary international law on the matter, is not different
from the view of the parties in this respect. This is not to say that the Articles are a treaty
or even a part of customary law themselves; it is simply the learned and systematic
expression of the development of the law on state of necessity by decisions of courts and
tribunals and other sources along a long period of time. Article 25 states:
1. Necessity may not be invoked by a State as a ground for precluding

the wrongfulness of an act not in conformity with an international
obligation of that State unless the act:

(a) Is the only way for the State to safeguard an
essential interest against a grave and imminent peril;
and

(b) Does not seriously impair an essential interest of the

State or States towards which the obligation exists, or
of the international community as a whole.

2. In any case, necessity may not be invoked by a State as a ground
for precluding wrongfulness if:

(a) The International obligation in question excludes
the possibility of invoking necessity; or

(b) The State has contributed to the situation of
necessity*

*! Expert Opinion of Nouriel Roubini of June 24, 2005.

® Article 25, ILC’s Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts.

304.

305.

306.

307.

308.

97
There is no disagreement either about the fact that state of necessity is a most exceptional
remedy subject to very strict conditions because otherwise it would open the door to elude
any international obligation. Article 25 accordingly begins by cautioning that the state of
necessity “may not be invoked” unless such conditions are met. Whether in fact the
invocation of state of necessity in the Respondent’s case meets those conditions is the
difficult task the Tribunal must now undertake.
The first condition Article 25 sets out is that the act in question must be the only way for
the State to safeguard an essential interest against a grave and imminent peril. The
Tribunal must accordingly establish whether the Argentine crisis qualified as affecting an
essential interest of the State. The opinions of experts are sharply divided on this issue,
ranging from those that consider the crisis had gargantuan and catastrophic proportions to

those that believe that it was not different from many other contemporary situations of

  

crisis around the world.

The Tribunal has no doubt that there was a severe crisis and that in such context it was
unlikely that business could have continued as usual. Yet, the argument that such a
situation compromised the very existence of the State and its independence so as to
qualify as involving an essential interest of the State is not convincing. Questions of
public order and social unrest could be handled as in fact they were, just as questions of
political stabilization were handled under the constitutional arrangements in force.

This issue is in turn connected with the existence of a grave and imminent peril that could
threaten that essential interest. While the government had the duty to prevent the
worsening of the situation and could not simply leave events to follow their own course,
there is no convincing evidence that the events were out of control or had become
unmanageable.

It is thus quite evident that measures had to be adopted to offset the unfolding crisis.

Whether the measures taken under the Emergency Law were the “only way” to achieve

309.

310.

311.

312.

98
this result and no other alternative was available, is also a question on which the parties
and their experts are profoundly divided, as noted above. A rather sad world comparative
experience in the handling of economic crises, shows that there are always many
approaches to address and correct such critical events, and it is difficult to justify that
none of them were available in the Argentine case.

While one or other party would like the Tribunal to point out which alternative was
recommendable, it is not the task of the Tribunal to substitute for the governmental
determination of economic choices, only to determine whether the choice made was the
only way available, and this does not appear to be the case.

Article 25 next requires that the measures in question do not seriously impair the interest
of State or States toward which the obligations exists, or of the international community
as a whole. The interest of the international community does not appear to be in any way
impaired in this context as it is rather an interest of a general kind. That of other States
will be discussed below in connection with the Treaty obligations. At that point it will
also be discussed whether the Treaty excludes necessity, which is another condition
peremptorily laid down under the Article in comment.

A further condition that Article envisages is that the State cannot invoke necessity if it has
contributed to the situation of necessity. This is of course the expression of a general
principle of law devised to prevent a party taking legal advantage of its own fault.
Although each party claims that the factors precipitating the crisis were either endogenous
or exogenous, the truth seems to be somewhere in between with both kind of factors
having intervened, as in the end it has been so recognized by both the Government of
Argentina and international organizations and foreign governments.

This means that to an extent there has been a substantial contribution of the State to the
situation of necessity and that it cannot be claimed that the burden falls entirely on

exogenous factors. This has not been the making of a particular administration as it is a

314.

315.

99
problem that had been compounding its effects for a decade, but still the State must
answer as a whole.

The Tribunal must note in addition that as held in the Gabcikovo-Nagymaros decision,
with reference to the work of the International Law Commission, the various conditions
discussed above must be cumulatively met, which brings the standard governing the

invocation of state of nece:

 

‘ity to a still higher echelon. In light of the various elements
that have been examined, the Tribunal concludes that the requirements of the state of

necessity under customary international law have not been fully met in this case.

3. The plea of necessity under Article IV(3) of the Treaty

The Respondent also justifies the invocation of necessity in the terms of Article IV(3) of
the Treaty. This Article provides:

Nationals or companies of either Party whose investments suffer losses in
the territory of the other Party owing to war or other armed conflict,
revolution, state of national emergency, insurrection, civil disturbance or
other similar events shall be accorded treatment by such other Party no
less favorable than that accorded to its own nationals or companies or to
nationals or companies of any third country, whichever is the more
favorable treatment, as regards any measures it adopts in relation to such
losses.

 

The Respondent, following the decision in Gabcikovo-Nagymaros in that it held that the
essential interest of the State cannot be reduced to questions of the existence of the State

but extends also to other matters such as a grave danger to ecological preservation,“

asserts that in the present case, with every more reason, the fact that human life was

 

endangered in the crisis context justifies the inclusion of this type of event under the

% Article IV(3) of the Argentina-U.S. BIT.

“ Gabcikovo-Nagymaros Project (Hungary/Slovakia), International Court of Justice, Judgment of September 25,
1997, para. 53.

316.

317.

318.

319.

320.

100
terms of Article IV(3), and concludes that accordingly the invocation of necessity is not
excluded by the Article in comment, thereby meeting the requirement that Article 25 of
the Articles on State Responsibility also envisages to this effect.

The Respondent also relies to this effect on the expert report of Dean Anne-Marie
Slaughter and Professor William Burke-White, where it is concluded that the measures
adopted by Argentina are fully consistent with the terms of Article IV(3). ©

The Claimants oppose this other justification on the ground that Article IV(3), far from
reducing Argentina’s obligations, adds to them by requiring national treatment and most
favored nation treatment of the investors as compared to the treatment of other companies
in light of the measures adopted to offset any losses. It is also argued that the decisions in
AMT and AAPL upheld the liability of the host State in spite of situations of war and civil
disturbance being invoked under the provisions of the respective applicable treaties.

In the Claimants’ view, Article IV(3) applies only to the measures adopted in response to
a loss, such as compensation, but not to the measures that cause the loss and, moreover,
do not apply to economic emergencies but only to “war or other armed conflict,
revolution, state of national emergency, insurrection, civil disturbance or other similar
events”. In any event, the Claimants conclude, this Article does not exempt Argentina
from liability and the duty to pay compensation.

An expert opinion of Professor José Alvarez is relied upon by the Claimants in support of
their arguments, as the expert concluded that the Article in question provides further
assurances to foreign investors and is not “a further exception permitting derogations
from the treaty.”*°

The Tribunal must note that the only meaning of Article IV(3) is to provide a minimum

treatment to foreign investments suffering losses in the host country by the simultaneous

* Legal Opinion of Anne-Marie Slaughter and William Burke-White of March 2, 2005, paras. 58-59.
*6 1 egal Opinion of José E. Alvarez of April 20, 2005, para. 70.

321.

322.

324.

101
interplay of national and most favored nation treatment, and this is only in respect of
measures the State “adopts in relation to such losses”, that is corrective or compensatory
measures.

While there is no reason to exclude from this Article economic emergency measures in
given circumstances of particular gravity, it still would not allow derogation from rights
under the Treaty as it refers to a different matter. Even less so can it be read as a general
escape clause from treaty obligations and thus does not result in excluding wrongfulness,
liability and eventual compensation. Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that state of
necessity cannot be justified under this Article in the terms that the Respondent has

invoked it.

4. The plea of necessity under Article XI of the Treaty

The discussion of Article XI of the Treaty has been particularly complex in this
proceeding given the wealth of arguments of the parties and of authorities and materials
brought to the attention of the Tribunal. The Tribunal is once more grateful to counsel for
the parties and to the experts that have written learned opinions, in particular Dean Anne-
Marie Slaughter, Professor William Burke-White and Professor José Alvarez.
Article XI of the Treaty reads as follows:
This Treaty shall not preclude the application by either Party of measures
necessary for the maintenance of public order, the fulfillment of its

obligations with respect to the maintenance or restoration of international
peace or security, or the Protection of its own essential security interests.

 

The Respondent, relying on the opinion of Dean Slaughter and Professor Burke-White,

asserts that public order and national security exceptions have to be interpreted broadly in

*” Article XI of the Argentina-U.S. BIT.

325.

326.

327.

102
the context of this Article, including economic security and political stability; moreover,
this Article was understood to be self-judging to the extent that each party will be the sole
judge of when the situation requires measures of the kind envisaged by the Article,

subject only to a determination of good faith by tribunals that might be called upon to

  

settle a dispute on this question. In the Respondent’s view, the gravity of the crisis faced
amply justifies resorting to such measures which can only be considered as adopted in
good faith.

The Respondent also explains that in application of this Article Argentina has been able
to maintain public order, has protected its essential security interests and has recomposed
with great difficulty the relations with the international economic system, all of which
while treating foreign investors like any other investor.

The Respondent assigns particular significance to the self-judging character of this
Article, which the Respondent maintains has been reaffirmed by the interpretation of the
United States in a number of bilateral investment treaties and statements before Congress,
all of which allow Argentina to benefit from the same understanding on the basis of
reciprocity®®. The experts assert that “Argentina and the United States negotiated and
signed a BIT that allowed either party to take measures otherwise inconsistent with their
obligations under the treaty if that party deemed it necessary to protect its national
security interests.”*?

The Claimants do not share the same understanding, and neither does Professor José
Alvarez. It is first argued that Article XI is not self-judging and that judicial review is not
limited to a good faith determination but has to examine the facts and whether they
qualify under the requirements of state of necessity. It is also maintained that a self-

judging clause is an extraordinary exception that has to be clearly stated, as has been done

8 Legal Opinion of Anne-Marie Slaughter and William Burke-White of July 1, 2005.
® Legal Opinion of Anne-Marie Slaughter and William Burke-White of March 2, 2005, para. 63.

328.

329.

330.

103
in Article XXI of the GATT and confirmed by the International Court of Justice in the
Nicaragua case in rejecting an argument of the United States similar to that of Argentina
here, just as it has been expressly included in some bilateral investment treaties, most
notably the U.S.-Russia BIT Protocol, but nothing of the sort was done in the Treaty here
applicable.

The expert opinion of Professor Alvarez summarized its conclusions on the meaning of
Article XI stating that this essential security/public order clause “(1) is not self-judging;
(2) does not apply to “economic emergencies’, except in the most extraordinary and so far
unprecedented circumstances; and (3) even when it does apply (for example, in the event
of war or insurrection), is not the equivalent of a ‘denial of benefits’ or termination clause
in a treaty, and so does not negate state responsibility to pay compensation for actions that
harm investors.”

The Claimants do not believe that exchanges between the U.S. Government and Congress
in different contexts and to a very limited extent could be taken to mean that a self-
judging interpretation was intended for the Treaty here applied.”! In fact it is asserted that
the opposite is true because at the time the U.S. Government explained that the Treaty
“contains an absolute right to international arbitration of investment disputes.”

The Claimants further argue that, in any event, Article XI does not apply to economic
emergencies but only to internal security, just as international peace and security were
interpreted to mean the obligations under the Charter of the United Nations, nor does it

relieve Argentina from paying compensation. A self-judging interpretation, the Claimants

°° Legal Opinion of José E. Alvarez of April 20, 2005, para. 8.
°" Id., paras. 16-17.
* Letter of Submittal of the U.S.-Argentina BIT, January 13, 1993.

331.

332.

104
conclude, would result in creating a broad and sweeping exception to the obligations
under the Treaty and would eviscerate the very purpose and object of this kind of treaty.>
In examining this discussion, the Tribunal must first note that the object and purpose of
the Treaty is, as a general proposition, to apply in situations of economic difficulty and
hardship that require the protection of the international guaranteed rights of its
beneficiaries. To this extent, any interpretation resulting in an escape route from the
obligations defined cannot be easily reconciled with that object and purpose.
Accordingly, a restrictive interpretation of any such alternative is mandatory.

While there is nothing that would prevent an interpretation allowing for the inclusion of
economic emergency in the context of Article XI, to interpret that such a determination is
self-judging would be definitely inconsistent with the object and purpose noted. In fact,
the Treaty would be deprived of any substantive meaning.

The Tribunal notes that the Treaty does not define what is to be understood by essential
security interest, just as it does not contain either a definition concerning the maintenance
of international peace and security. The specific meaning of these concepts and the
conditions for their application must be searched for elsewhere. In respect of international
peace and security this task is rendered easier by the fact that the parties themselves
agreed that its meaning is to be found in the context of the obligations under the Charter
of the United Nations, as provided in Article 6 of the Protocol to the Treaty. The
situation is more complex in respect of security interests because there is no specific
guidance to this effect under the Treaty. This is what makes necessary to rely on the
requirements of state of necessity under customary international law, as outlined above in
connection with their expression in Article 25 of the Articles on State Responsibility, so

as to evaluate whether such requirements have been met in this

 

se.

° Legal Opinion of José E. Alvarez of April 20, 2005, para. 54.

105

334. The expert opinion of Dean Slaughter and Professor Burke-White expresses the view that
the treaty regime is different and separate from customary law as it is lex specialis™. This
is no doubt correct in terms that a treaty regime specifically dealing with a given matter
will prevail over more general rules of customary law. Had this been the case here the
Tribunal would have started out its considerations on the basis of the Treaty provision and
would have resorted to the Articles on State Responsibility only as a supplementary
means. But the problem is that the Treaty itself did not deal with these elements. The
Treaty thus becomes inseparable from the customary law standard insofar as the
conditions for the operation of state of necessity are concerned. As concluded above, such
requirements and conditions have not been fully met in the instant case.

335. As explained by Dean Slaughter, the position of the United States has been gradually
evolving towards the support of self-judging clauses in respect of national security
interests and some bilateral investment treaties reflect this change, albeit not all of them.
Yet, this does not necessarily result in the conclusion that such was the intention of the
parties in respect of the Treaty here relevant. Truly exceptional and extraordinary clauses
such as a self-judging provision normally must be expressly drafted to reflect that intent,
as otherwise there can well be a presumption about it not having that meaning in view of
its exceptional nature. In the case of the Treaty nothing was said to this effect and the
elements invoked in support of a self-judging character originate for the most part in
congressional discussions in the United States concerning broader issues or indirect
interpretations.°>

336. The discussion noted about the GATT and the Nicaragua decision, just as the Oil
Platforms case, confirm that the language of a provision has to be very precise in order to
lead to a conclusion about its self-judging nature and in all those cases language

* Legal Opinion of Anne-Marie Slaughter and William Burke-White of July 1, 2005, paras. 43-47.
°5 Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief, pp. 19-20.

106
differences turned out to be crucial for the rejection of arguments favoring such
exceptional character. So too, the International Court of Justice held in the Gabcikovo-
Nagymaros case, referring to the conditions defined by the International Law
Commission, that “the State concerned is not the sole judge of whether those conditions
have been met.”°°
337. Not even if this was the interpretation given to the clause today by the United States

would this necessarily mean that such interpretation governs the Treaty. What is relevant
is the intention the parties had in signing the Treaty and this does not confirm the self-
judging interpretation. Even if this interpretation were shared today by both parties to the
Treaty, it would still not result in a change of its terms. States are of course free to amend

the Treaty by consenting to another text, but this would not affect rights acquired under

 

ies.

 

the Treaty by investors or other benefi

338. As an English court has recently held in respect of a claim of non-justiciability relating to
a State challenge to the OEPC award, the fact that a treaty is concluded between States
cannot derogate from rights that belong to private parties, in the instance concerning
dispute settlement, and as a consequence the doctrine of non-justiciability could not
apply.””

339. In light of this discussion, the Tribunal concludes that Article XI is not self-judging and
that judicial review in its respect is not limited to an examination of whether its
invocation or the measures adopted were taken in good faith. The judicial control must be
a substantive one as to whether the requirements under customary law or the Treaty have
been met and can thereby preclude wrongfulness. As the Tribunal has found above that
the crisis invoked does not meet the customary law requirements of Article 25 of the

°® Gabctkovo-Nagymaros, paras. 51-52.

°” Republic of Ecuador v. Occidental Exploration and Production Company (OEPC), Queen’s Bench Application
of April 29, 2005, available at <http:/www.investmentclaims.com/decisions/Occidental-Ecuador-

JueensBenchApplication-29Apr2005.pdf>, para. 85.

    

107
Articles on State Responsibility, thus concluding that necessity or emergency are not
conducive to the preclusion of wrongfulness, there is no need to undertake a further
judicial review under Article XI as this Article does not set out conditions different from
customary law in this respect.

340. Judicial determination of the compliance with the requirements of international law in this
matter should not be understood as if arbitral tribunals might be wishing to substitute for
the functions of the sovereign State, but simply responds to the duty that in applying
international law they cannot fail to give effect to legal commitments that are binding on
the parties and interpret the rules accordingly, unless this derogation is expressly agreed

98

to’.

341. The Tribunal explained above that it would consider the requirement of Article 25 of the

 

Articles on State Responsibility as to the act not seriously impairing an essential interest
of the State towards which the obligation exists in the context of the Treaty obligations. In
light of the discussion above about changing interpretations, it does not appear that the
invocation by Argentina of Article XI, or state of necessity generally, would be taken by
the other party to mean that such impairment does arise.

342. Be that as it may, in the context of investment treaties there is still the need to take into
consideration the interests of the private entities who are the ultimate beneficiaries of
those obligations, as explained by the English court case in OEPC noted. The essential
interest of the Claimants would certainly be seriously impaired by the operation of Article

XI or state of necessity in this case.

5. Temporality and Compensation

°§ See discussion in Charles Leben, L’état de nécessité dans le droit international de l'investissement, CAHIERS DE
L’ ARBITRAGE, 2005/3, pp. 47-52.

344.

345.

108
There are still two other aspects of state of necessity the Tribunal needs to discuss. There
is first the question that necessity is a temporal condition and, as expressed in Article 27
of the Articles on State Responsibility, its invocation is without prejudice to “(a)
compliance with the obligation in question, if and to the extent that the circumstance
precluding wrongfulness no longer exists”. Confirmed by international decisions, this
premise does not seem to be disputed by the parties, although the Respondent’s argument
to the effect that one thing is the temporal nature of the emergency and another the
permanent effects of its measures, discussed above, does not seem to be easily reconciled
with the requirement of temporality. This in turn results in uncertainty as to what will be
the legal consequences of the end of the Emergency Law.”
The second question is that Article 27 also provides that necessity is without prejudice to
“(b) the question of compensation for any material loss caused by the act in question”.
Again confirmed by international decisions, this other premise has been much debated by
the parties as noted above. The Respondent does not share this premise because, as was
also noted above, the record shows that eventually there would be no compensation for
past losses or adverse effects originating in the emergency measures in the context of
renegotiations undertaken.’
The Respondent’s view appears to be based on the understanding that Article 27 would
only require compensation for the damage that arises after the emergency is over and not
for that taking place during the emergency period. Although that Article does not specify
the circumstances in which compensation should be payable because of the range of
possible situations, it has also been considered that this is a matter to be agreed with the

101

affected party”, thereby not excluding the possibility of an eventual compensation for

® Witness Testimony of Gustavo Simeonoff, Hearing Transcript Vol. 3, November 30, 2005, pp. 481-482.
 Td., p. 493.

'! James Crawford,op. cit., p. 190.

346.

347.

348.

109
past events. In the absence of a negotiated settlement between the parties, this

determination is to be made by the Tribunal to which the dispute has been submitted.

Remedies and Compensation

1. The Parties’ Submissions

The Claimants request relief under three heads. Firstly, the Claimants submit that under
Article IV of the Treaty the expropriation they have suffered requires the payment of full
compensation in accordance with the fair market value of the expropriated investment.
The Claimants also explain that their damages experts (“LECG’) have used two dates to
this effect in their calculations: August 31, 2000, at which time the first injunction
concerning the US PPI had been just issued, and December 31, 2001, the date just before
the enactment of the Emergency Law. Full compensation is, according to Claimants, also

to be paid for the other Treaty breaches claimed, including fair and equitable treatment.

 

Secondly, the Claimants claim the management fees due under the Technical A: ance
Agreement (TAA), arguing that they constitute a “delayed compensation and should be
included in computations of historical profitability or damages.” ‘ Thirdly, the
Claimants require that compensation be paid for the loss of revenue derived from the
unavailability of US PPI adjustments for 2000-2001.

Under these three heads, the Claimants’ methods and related estimations of damage are as

follows. To calculate the fair market value of the expropriated investment, the Claimants

explain that LECG used three methods: the Discounted Cash Flow approach (DCF), book

‘© Claimants’ Reply, para. 677.

349.

350.

351.

110

. . 103
value, and unjust enrichment.

Under DCF, the experts value the equity damage of the
Claimants as of August 31, 2000 at US$243,775,916. With a valuation date of December
31, 2001, the Claimants’ damages are estimated at US$272,722,850 and updated through
November 2004 at US$382,016,802. Using the book value approach these figures are
respectively US$337,549,800 and US$472,823,217. The unjust enrichment approach
results in amounts for December 31, 2001, ranging from US $579,475,694 to US
$582,018,216, depending on whether a “purchase price” or a “wealth transfer” variant is
adopted.

Regarding damages related to management fees under the TAA, the Claimants contend
that DCF is the only valid method given that the expected future cash flow from
management fees to Enron is not reported in TGS financial statements. LECG estimates
damages to Enron under this head at US$34.8 million of December 2001, and US$48.7
million updated to November 2004.

Finally, Claimants estimate damages from outstanding PPI adjustments at US$ 15.8
million based on the sum of the adjustments denied. LECG notes that this loss — while
included in the August 2000 valuation - was written off from TGS books and is thus not
taken into account for the valuation at December 2001.

The experts evaluate the overall damages to Claimants as of August 31, 2000 at
US$278,722,689, and updated through November 2004 at US$495,217,600. With a
valuation date of December 31, 2001, damages are estimated at US$323,399,817, which
updated through November 2004 amount to US$453,002,615. Using the book value

approach these figures are US$388,226,768 and US$543,809,030, respectively.

‘The DCF and the Book Value methodologies are used to calculate what LECG identifies as ‘Damage to
Claimants as Equity Holders’ or ‘Equity Damage’ to which management fees and PPI damages are subsequently
added. The Unjust Enrichment approaches seem not to differentiate between these items.

352.

354.

355.

356.

357.

dl
The Claimants also request pre-award interest at commercially reasonable rates,
compounded quarterly, as they also request the award of all costs and expenses of the
arbitration, including legal fees.
The Respondent opposes the claim for compensation on various grounds. Firstly, it makes
the following three objections of general nature: (i) that the claim is illusory given the
towering return on investment obtained by the Claimants prior to the crisis and the current
stock market value of TGS; (ii) that the damages were the result of the aggressive
financial policy of TGS and CIESA, in particular their high leverage and TGS’
indebtedness in foreign currency; and (iii) that country risk included in the calculation of
tariffs has already compensated Claimants’ alleged losses.
Secondly, the Respondent disagrees with a number of methodological assumptions
underpinning the Claimants’ valuation. The Respondent argues that (i) Enron’s
participation in TGS is not 35.5% but should be reduced to 19.5% considering the debt
taken by CIESA on behalf of the Claimants; and (ii) that both the regulated and the non-
regulated business should be considered together for the purpose of valuation since
damages to the regulated business cannot be estimated without accounting for the return
obtained in the same period by the non-regulated business.
The Respondent objects to the use of DCF to calculate the value of equity damage as a
matter of principle and formulates specific objections to the results obtained by the
Claimants. The inputs taken into account are also discussed by the Respondent’s experts,
as will be examined further below.
The Respondent also objects to the payment of compensation for the fees of the Technical
Operator, among other reasons because the TAA was transferred to Petrobras for an
undisclosed amount in 2004.
Likewise, the Respondent opposes the claim for PPI damages arguing that this ignores the

existence of the agreements signed in January and June 2000 suspending PPI adjustments

358.

359.

360.

112

and never challenged by the Claimants. If any damage were to be awarded on this ground,
it should cover only marginal benefits derived from the July agreement.
These various submissions by the parties and their experts will be examined below in

connection with the specific issues concerning valuation and compensation.

2. The Applicable Standard of Reparation

The Treaty does not specify the damages to which the investor is entitled in case of
breach of the standards of treatment different from expropriation, i.e., fair and equitable
treatment or the breach of the umbrella clause. Absent an agreed form of restitution by
means of renegotiation of contracts or otherwise, the appropriate standard of reparation
under international law is compensation for the losses suffered by the affected party, as
was established by the Permanent Court of International Justice in the Chorzéw Case:
The essential principle contained in the actual notion of an illegal act — a
principle which seems to be established by international practice and in
particular by the decisions of arbitral tribunals — is that reparation must, as
far as possible, wipe out all the consequences of the illegal act and re-

establish the situation which would, in all probability, have existed if that
act had not been committed.

 

Various tribunals have applied this principle in deciding damages for breach of “fair and

15 As noted by SD Myers, the silence of the treaties, in that case of

equitable treatment.
NAFTA, indicates the intention of the drafters “to leave it open to tribunals to determine

- . . tnt +9106
a measure of compensation appropriate to the specific circumstances of the case. The

Tribunal added that: “whatever precise approach is taken, it should reflect the general

' Chorzéw, Judgment No. 13 (Claim for Indemnity - The Merits) of September 13, 1928, available at:
<http:/Avww.worl j ions/1928.09.13_chorzowl/>, para. 47.

1° § D. Myers, Inc. v. Canada, UNCITRAL Arbitration Proceeding, Partial Award of November 13, 2000, paras.
311-315; Metalclad Corporation v. United Mexican States, (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1), Award of August 30,
2000, para. 122; MTD, para. 238.

195 § D. Myers, para. 309.

113
principle of international law that compensation should undo the material harm inflicted
by a breach of an international obligation.”

361. The present Tribunal finds that the appropriate approach in the instant case is that of
compensation for the difference in the ‘fair market value’ of the investment resulting
from the Treaty breaches. The notion of ‘fair market value’ is generally understood as the
price at which property would change hands between a hypothetical willing and able
buyer and an hypothetical willing and able seller, absent compulsion to buy or sell, and
having the parties reasonable knowledge of the facts, all of it in an open and unrestricted
market.

362. Fair market value is indeed the applicable Treaty guideline for measuring damages in

cases of expropriation. However, and as other tribunals in the past!®*

, this Tribunal is
faced with the problem of whether a standard mainly related to expropriation, such as fair
market value, can be applied to situations not amounting to expropriation.

363. On occasions, the line separating indirect expropriation from the breach of fair and
equitable treatment can be rather thin and in those circumstances the standard of
compensation can also be similar on one or the other side of the line. Given the
cumulative nature of the breaches that have resulted in a finding of liability, the Tribunal
believes that in this case it is appropriate to apply the fair market value to the

determination of compensation.!°°

3. The Tribunal’s finding

107 Td., para. 315.
18 Marvin Feldman v. The United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/99/1), Award of December 16, 2002.

'® See also CMS, para. 410. In the absence of guidance regarding the standard of compensation for the breach of
fair and equitable treatment in the US-Argentina BIT, the tribunal in the case of Azurix Corp. v. The Argentine
Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/12), Award of July 16, 2006, para. 424 concluded that: “compensation based on
the fair market value of the Concession would be appropriate.”

364.

365.

366.

367.

114
The Tribunal wishes to express its appreciation to the expert appointed by it, Mr. Luis
Hernan Paul, who has assisted the Tribunal in understanding essential technical
information to arrive at the conclusions that follow. The Tribunal also expresses its
appreciation to LECG, Dr. Fabian Bello and the experts for GSCSA, all of whom have
provided important views and comments in support of their respective findings. The
Tribunal has also considered with particular attention the comments made by the parties
to both the preliminary and the final report of the Tribunal’s expert.
In analyzing the parties’ contentions on damages the Tribunal will proceed as follows.
Firstly, it will address the arguments of general nature raised by the Respondent —
described in paragraph 353. Secondly, it will address Claimants’ claims following the
approach proposed by the Claimants’ experts and consisting in dividing damage claims
into the following categories: (i) damages as equity holders — covering the loss in value of
the Claimants’ equity (equity damage) and the loss in value derived from the suspension
of the PPI adjustments (PPI damages); and (ii) damages as technical operator (operator
damages).
In conducting this analysis, the Tribunal will first deal with methodological issues before
proceeding to calculate the quantum of the compensation for each of the Claimants’

claims. It will conclude with the calculation of consolidated damages.

A. Respondent’s general arguments opposing liability

i) Historical return on investments

The Respondent and both Mr. Bello and GSCSA have argued against compensation being
awarded in this case because the historical return that the Claimants obtained on the
investment was allegedly significantly higher than that considered in the determination of

tariffs in connection with the cost of capital. According to the Respondent, the Claimants’

368.

369.

370.

115
actual capital contribution to TGS was minimal since most of the funds originated in the
loan made by the Chase Manhattan Bank to CIESA. In addition, GSCSA suggests that
there are numerous errors in the Claimants’ calculations relating to the rate of return on
investments, dividends and fees.

The Claimants allege that the Respondent’s estimates of Claimants’ returns on equity are
flawed because they miscalculate the initial contribution and inflate TGS’ and Claimants’
earnings. Moreover, these estimates are irrelevant for damage calculation since damages

are a direct result of the measures introduced since 2002 on a forward-looking basis.''°

 

The Tribunal must reject Respondent’s arguments. Firstly, as noted by the Claimants,
their claims refer to the impact of the measures on the value of their investments. The
calculation of such value is based on reasonable estimates of future demand, revenue and
expenditures and excludes consideration of past performance or returns. Historical return
on investment is therefore irrelevant for determining damages.

Secondly, LECG is right in observing that differences between the estimated rate of
return and the actual return are inherent to the price-cap system under which TGS
operates. Under such system recouping extra profits between tariffs reviews will depend
on the company’s efficiency. Without analyzing the calculations presented by both parties
at this stage, the Tribunal notes that even if Claimants’ actual returns were higher than
those estimated by the ENARGAS, such returns will not disallow claims for
compensation of Treaty breaches. Neither historic nor estimated returns have been

retained as a valid ground to oppose compensation under international law.

ti) The question of leverage

"° LECG Expert Report of May 2005, para. 82.

371.

372.

116
As noted above under {J 158-167, the Respondent has also raised the issue of CIESA’s
and TGS’ reliance on financial leverage as an objection to liability. The Respondent and
its experts, in particular Mr. Bello, argue that TGS’ aggressive leverage policy
considerably increased TGS vulnerability to changing economic conditions. Such
vulnerability was compounded by TGS’ “double leverage” following CIESA’s own
recourse to debt. TGS’ declaration of default and its subsequent loss in value is therefore
directly linked to financial policy decisions and cannot be attributed to Respondent’s
measures.
The Claimants note that TGS’ financial policies were reasonable and followed normal
standards for the gas transportation industry.''' In the absence of the Respondent's
measures, TGS leverage would not have represented a potential liquidity or financial
problem for the firm since historical performance and cash flows perspectives were
sufficient to cover the typical financial ratio covenants considered by lenders.'!? Finally,
Claimants observe that CIESA’s financing is irrelevant for damage computation since
damages should be computed only once by looking at Claimants’ stake in TGS.
The Tribunal agrees with the Claimants’ approach. TGS’ leverage was reasonable by
industry standards and close to that advised by the regulator. The difference between the
optimal leverage considered by ENARGAS and the actual leverage of TGS was not
significant: respectively 36.7% as compared to 40.8% in RQT I (1996), and 46% as
compared to 49.8% in RQT II (2001).''* It may also be noted that none of the debt
holders expressed any concern regarding the level of leverage before the measures were

taken.

"Td., para. 64.
"2 Idem.

"3 Id., para. 63; Expert Opinion of Fabian Bello of February 28, 2005, para. 28.

374.

375.

376.

377.

378.

117
The argument made by the Respondent as to the need to take into account the market
capitalization of TGS shows that the value of TGS’ stock was constantly and significantly
positive before the measures were adopted, thus suggesting that the stock market did not
consider such leverage as endangering the company prior to the measures.
It was only after the pesification of tariffs that the company defaulted on its debt and the
stock exchange price decreased dramatically.''4 Consequently, the decrease in value was
generated by the measures and not by the leverage.
The Tribunal notes that CIESA’s debt in this context is irrelevant. However, it will play
an important role in defining the actual investment of the Claimants in TGS, as will be

analyzed below.

tii) Country risk

The Tribunal has extensively considered in its examination of liability above under JJ
119-121; 148-150 the question of whether the country risk premium reflected in the tariff
includes the risk of devaluation or the risk of tariff freeze and pesification, which the
Respondent has raised in opposition to any claim of liability concerning such measures.
According to the Respondent, any finding to the contrary would result in granting the
Claimants double compensation for the same risk.

As mentioned, the Tribunal believes that the ‘country risk’ does not include the risk of
freeze and pesification of tariffs, which was separately and specifically protected under
the Regulatory Framework. Claimants have therefore not been compensated for these
measures. Consequently, the valuation will consider the effect of freeze and pesification

of the tariffs on the investment and this shall be reflected in the resulting compensation.

"4 See GSCSA Expert Report of June 2005, para. 138, for stock exchange price.

379.

380.

381.

us

118

B. Claimants’ claims regarding damages

i) Equity damage: methodological issues

The equity damages correspond to the loss in value of Claimants’ investment in TGS
derived from the measures, in particular from the pesification of tariffs. In estimating
these damages, the Tribunal recalls that “compensation should undo the material harm
inflicted by a breach of an international obligation.”''> In this case, as noted above, the
breach concerns the fair and equitable treatment and the umbrella clause.

To “undo the material harm’ in this case, the Tribunal considers that it needs to compare
the value of Claimants’ investment before the measures were adopted and its value at
present. To determine the value of the investment at these periods, the Tribunal will apply
the principle of fair market value, as described above.

The parties disagree, however, on the appropriate method for establishing the fair market
value. While the Claimants have relied to this effect on the DCF and other methods (i.e.,
book value and unjust enrichment), the Respondent has favored the stock exchange
valuation of the shares. The Respondent’s expert, Mr. Fabidn Bello, has also explained
that market capitalization offers an additional method with which DCF assessments can
be verified and corrected. In the instant case, shares in TGS are normally traded in both
the Buenos Aires and New York stock exchanges. Claimants have rejected the use of the
stock market value alleging principally (i) the illiquidity of TGS share; (ii) the effects of
thin markets like Buenos Aires, namely, the disconnection between stock prices and real

values and the volatility of share values due to erratic macro economic performance.

S.D. Myers, para. 315.

119

382. The Tribunal is not persuaded by the use of book value or unjust enrichment in this case
because these methodologies do not provide an adequate tool for estimating the market

value of TGS’s stake. The book value of TGS stake is by definition valid for accounting
purposes but, as noted by LECG, fails to incorporate the expected performance of the

firm in the future.''®

The unjust enrichment method does not provide a value of the
company; it computes damages by looking at the extent of unfair enrichment by the
Government. The estimation of the unfair enrichment would then be determined on the
basis of the price paid for the license or the wealth transferred to the entity benefiting
from the enrichment.

383. With regard to stock market value, the Tribunal accepts Claimants’ point that when

markets are illiquid or the volume of transactions is limited, market capitalization might

 

provide distorted valuation indications. However, it is still p

 

ible to rely on this
approach if longer periods of time are taken into consideration so as to determine relevant

averages

 

s suggested by the Tribunal’s expert.

384. In view of the fact that TGS is a “going concern”, the Tribunal believes that its fair

market value should include the measure of its future prospects.'!”

385. Since DCF reflects the companies’ capacity to generate positive returns in the future, it
appears as the appropriate method to value a “going concern” as TGS.''* Moreover, there

is convincing evidence that DCF is a sound tool used internationally to value

"6 LECG Expert Report of May 2005, para. 157.

"” This accords with established international practice. Such an approach was adopted in the following decisions:
Amco Asia Corporation and Others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1), Award in Resubmitted
Case of June 5, 1990, 1 ICSID Reports (1993); Liberian Eastern Timber Corp. (LETCO) v. Republic of Liberia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/83/2), Award of 31 March 1986, 2 ICSID Reports (1994), pp. 372-377; Metalclad
Corporation v. United Mexican States (ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1), Award of August 30, 2000 available at
http:/www.worldbank.org/icsid. Consideration of future prospects also features in the following decisions of the
US-Iran Tribunal: Starett Housing Corp. v. Islamic Republic of Iran, Award No. ITL 32-24-1 of December 19,
1983 and Phillipps Petroleum Company Iran v. Islamic Republic of Iran, Award No. 425-39-2 of June 29, 1989.
"8-The DCF method is widely endorsed, both by financial institutions and international jurists. See for example
Legal Framework for the Treatment of Foreign Investments: Volume Il: Guidelines (Washington D.C., The
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank) (1992).

386.

387.

388.

120

«119
companies

, albeit that it is to be used with caution as it can give rise to speculation. It
has also been constantly used by tribunals in establishing the fair market value of assets to

determine compensation of breaches of international law.'?
In light of these considerations, the Tribunal is persuaded that the DCF method offers a

reliable approach in this case. The Tribunal finds, in addition, that Mr. Bello’s initial

 

submission of verifying DCF results in accordance with the valuation that market
capitalization might reflect is a useful tool to which the Tribunal will have recourse.

In the present case there is yet another aspect that must be considered. Market
transactions have taken place in respect of the Claimants’ participation in TGS, both in
connection with the swap that took place with Petrobras and the later sale of shares to an
investment fund. Willing sellers and willing buyers in this case are thus no longer
hypothetical but real enough, a situation that has turned to be meaningful in the
Tribunal’s findings. In fact, these transactions and in particular the sale of the Claimants’
15.2% stake in TGS to D.E. Shaw and the option to purchase the remaining 4.3%
participation in TGS are an accurate reflection of the current market value of the company.
LECG uses DCF for establishing both the value before the measures were taken and the
current value of the Claimants’ participation in that business, the difference between one
and the other being the estimated losses, subject to some adjustments. While the Tribunal
finds nothing wrong in that approach, which is commonly used and has been applied by

other tribunals, !7!

it involves some degree of uncertainty in the assumptions taken into
account. Because there are in this case specific transactions concerning the Claimants’

participation in TGS, the Tribunal considers that the real value obtained in these

transactions better reflects the current value of such participation. This is a value which is

4° LECG Expert Report of May 2005, para. 159, no. 131.
°° See for example: Amco (Resubmitted Case), pp. 616-617; LETCO, pp. 372-377; and CMS, para. 411.
"1 CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8), Award of May 12, 2005.

389.

390.

391.

121
certain and arises from market transactions. Moreover, such transactions were specifically
made with the intention of mitigating losses.

Consequently, the Tribunal will apply DCF to estimate the value of TGS and of
Claimants’ investment (i.e., their equity participation in TGS) before the measures were
adopted, in particular, before pesification took place. To estimate the current value of
TGS and of Claimants’ investment, the Tribunal will use the sale transaction with D.E.
Shaw. Both results would then be contrasted with the stock market value. Next, the
Tribunal will establish the difference between these two values to calculate the damages
suffered by the Claimants as shareholders of TGS. Finally, the Tribunal will consider
operator damages and PPI damages (if any) to establish the overall compensation to the
Claimants’ for the Treaty breaches incurred by the Respondent.

Before moving to the quantum of equity damages, the Tribunal will address the
Respondent’s disagreements with regard to two important issues for the estimation of the
equity damage: (i) the question of the Claimants’ actual participation in TGS, including
the discussion of CIESA’s debt; and (ii) the question of regulated and non-regulated

business.

a) The question of the Claimants’ actual participation in TGS and the

incidence of CIESA’s debt

One of the most difficult questions that the Tribunal has had to address is that concerning
the true participation of the Claimants in TGS, namely whether it amounts to a 35.5%, as
the Claimants argue, or only to a 19.5%, as the Respondent believes. As noted, this
difference arises from the fact that the Claimants’ participation in TGS was in part
financed by a loan that CIESA took on their behalf. The Tribunal must note for the sake

of clarification that these figures have been used by the parties so as to simplify the

392.

394.

122
arguments made; in fact, each figure is the aggregate result of various shareholdings,
some direct and some indirect.

The Tribunal notes that the financing of the parent company’s (i.e., Enron) final
investment (i.e., TGS) through the indebtedness of the holding company (i.e., CIESA) is a
normal investment practice. Such practice will as a rule not affect the determination of the
value of the shareholding for compensation purposes. In fact, because the parent company
shall normally be liable for such debt, it would be entitled to recover the entire equity
interest. In the present case, however, the situation is different. While the parent company
at first guaranteed CIESA’s debt and was liable for it, it then became the debt of CIESA
alone. Eventually the parent company assumed and swapped its share of this debt for its
own equity in TGS thereby diluting its final investment. The approach to compensation
must therefore also be different.

Indeed, the swap executed with Petrobras in connection with CIESA’s debt restructuring
in 2005 transformed Enron’s initial indirect participation of 27.65% in TGS into a direct
participation of 11.65% in that company. '* In exchange, the Claimants’ liability for
CIESA’s debt was proportionally reduced.'”?

Upon completion of the swap Enron is to hold a direct stake of 19.5% in TGS (the initial
7.85% direct participation plus 11.65% following the swap). However, Enron sold shares
representing 15.2% of TGS to the investment fund D.E. Shaw in January 2006. Subject to
the completion of the second stage of the swap, leaving Enron an additional direct

participation of 4.3%, D.E. Shaw also has the option of purchasing this additional stake.

~ The 7.85% remaining direct interest of Claimants in TGS (through Enron’s subsidiaries other than CIESA) was

kept aside the swap transaction but was later included in the sale and option agreement entered into by Enron with
D.E. Shaw.

23 ‘The swap comprised two stages. First, EACH and EPCA, Enron’s subsidiaries, transferred to a trustee indicated
by Petrobras their 40% stake in CIESA; Petrobras in turn transferred to Enron’s subsidiaries 7,35% of its direct
stake in TGS. Second, EACH and EPCA would transfer their remaining 10% stake in CIESA to Petrobras;
Petrobras in turn, approved the transfer by CIESA of 4.3% of its stake in TGS to Enron’s subsidiaries, This second
stage is awaiting ENARGAS approval.

395.

396.

397.

398.

399.

123
While this second stage is pending Enron remains proportionally liable for CIESA’s debt.
The Tribunal assumes, however, the success of the second stage of the swap leading to
the extinction of the remaining liability. The Tribunal will accordingly consider the
effects of the swap agreement as a whole.
Before entering into the analysis of the effects of the circumstances mentioned above, the
Tribunal wishes to recall that the disposal of Enron’s participation in TGS does not affect
its jurisdiction to decide in this case. As discussed above, ICSID jurisdiction is
determined on the date the arbitration is instituted and subsequent changes in their
ownership of TGS does not affect jurisdiction.'**
How do Enron’s guarantees and assumption of CIESA’s debt affect the determination of
its participation in TGS and eventually the calculation of damages?
Firstly, following the swap operation as a whole, Enron’s initial indirect participation of
27.65% in TGS is reduced to 11.65%. Enron is further released from its obligations as
guarantor of CIESA’s debt. The 11.65% therefore represents the net asset value of
Claimants’ participation in CIESA, i.e., the book value of Enron’s assets in CIESA
(which represented 27.65% of TGS stake) less liabilities (50% of CIESA’s debt). The
pre-existing 7.85% TGS stake directly owned by Enron should be added to this value to
obtain the net asset value of Enron’s overall participation i.e., 19.5%. This stake
corresponds to the sale agreed with D.E. Shaw.
Secondly, CIESA’s original debt should be taken into account when determining the
value of Enron’s investment prior to the measures. Claimants are correct in affirming
their right to claim for their initial 35.5% participation in TGS. However, when valuing
that stake, one cannot ignore the underlying debt burden if the latter is linked to the

investor by the guarantee and subsequently serves to dilute the very same stake. As a

 CSOB, para. 31; Vivendi, paras. 60-62.

400.

401.

402.

124
matter of accounting principle therefore, comparing the current value of Enron’s
investment (as determined by the sale to D.E. Shaw) requires calculation of the net asset
value of the Claimants’ investment as of December 2001 obtained by deducting
Claimants’ participation in CIESA’s debt.

It can then be concluded that Argentina will compensate the Claimants for the full value
of their investment, which for the reasons explained does not include the portion of the
investment financed by CIESA’s indebtedness.

The Tribunal will accordingly use the 35.5% participation in TGS as the starting point of
valuation, will deduct from such amount the Claimants’ share in CIESA’s liabilities, for
which they no longer have any responsibility, and attain a net value, which is to be

compared with the net present value of the sale to D.E. Shaw.

b) The question of the regulated and non-regulated business

As noted above under J 173-181, the parties have discussed the question whether
valuation should take into account only the damages affecting the regulated business of
TGS, as argued by the Claimants, or should off-set against any such losses the positive
results of the non-regulated business, as argued by the Respondent. For the reasons
explained, the Tribunal believes that both kinds of business should be kept separate and
distinct. Accordingly, only the regulated business of TGS will be taken into account in the

considerations that follow.

ti) Equity damage: the quantum of compensation

The Tribunal turns next to estimating the quantum of compensation for equity damages.

In light of the considerations made above, only the regulated business of TGS will be

404.

405.

406.

1s

125
taken into account to this effect. As noted, pesification of tariffs beginning in 2002 is the
central factor in determining compensation as it has the higher incidence on the difference
in value in December 31, 2001, before the measures were adopted, and the net present
value.

As concluded above, the Tribunal will compare the value of the Claimants’ participation
in the regulated business of TGS before pesification and the current value of such
participation. While the first value will be established using DCF, the current value will
be based on the sale price to D-E. Shaw on January 18, 2006, taking into account only the

value attributable to the regulated business.

The DCF value at December 31, 2001

The Tribunal will start from the premise that the figures and assumptions used by LECG
in their expert valuation of damages at December 31, 2001 are correct. The Tribunal notes
that while two dates have been discussed by the Claimants as relevant to valuation
(August 31, 2000 and December 31, 2001), most of the experts’ work has dealt with the
latter date. While another ICSID tribunal has used August 17, 2000 as the appropriate
date to this effect,'? the Tribunal finds appropriate to follow in this case the experts’
approach as the most serious damages arose in connection with the Emergency Law.

There are, however, specific comments and criticism made by the Respondent and its
experts, as well as by the Tribunal’s expert, to the LECG figures, criticism that has been
taken into account by the Tribunal to reach a conclusion in this respect. The valuation

done by LECG has been tested under different scenarios so as to check for accuracy and

reasonableness. In this respect, the Tribunal finds that a number of variables require

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8), Award of May 12, 2005.

407.

408.

409.

410.

126
adjustment, with particular reference to the tariff base, the Weighted Average Cost of
Capital (“WACC”) and the period over which tariff adjustment should realistically take
place. These adjustments will be explained next.

Such adjustments reflect the reality of the crisis that took place in Argentina and the
specific influence it has in connection with valuation and compensation, a matter which,
as the Tribunal has explained, necessarily has to be reflected in this context. It is here

where the difference with a normal business scenario will become evident.

The tariff base

The tariff base used by LECG for December 31, 2001, or US$1,789 m., has been
criticized by Mr. Bello as being excessive in light of the work done by ENARGAS and
the participating consultants in preparation for the RQT II, which gave a lower end
amount. The Respondent’s expert considers that the base suggested by the Claimants
should be reduced by US$225 m.

Taking into consideration this criticism and other adjustments that had been considered
by ENARGAS, the Tribunal’s expert proposed as the appropriate tariff base an amount of
US$1,669.4 m.

The Tribunal’s expert has accepted the reductions made by the ENARGAS consultants,
with the exception of the exclusion of the working capital, which he considers must be
included in the tariff base because it is as necessary as the investment in fix assets in
order to develop the business. The Tribunal considers this to be a reasonable proposition
and will accordingly follow its expert best estimate for a tariff base in the amount of
US$1,669 m., a figure which is lower than that suggested by LECG and higher than that

suggested by the Respondent.

411.

412.

414.

127

The WACC.

The experts also disagreed about the appropriate WACC that should be applied in this
case. While LECG has used a WACC of 12.24% for December 31, 2001, GSCSA has
discussed a WACC of 14.86%. The Tribunal’s expert considers it is appropriate to use a
higher premium for risk than those used by LECG and proposes a 12.6% WACC, based
on the WACC considered by ENARGAS for RQT II (10.4%) plus an adjustment for
inflation.

The Tribunal finds that the ENARGAS figure constitutes an objective and realistic
calculation since it would have been the actual cost of capital applied by the regulator in
the calculation of tariffs if the RQT II had not been aborted. While the ENARGAS did
not reach a final determination on this matter, the figures discussed at the time reflected
the options available and its most likely outcome. The adjustment for inflation is
necessary to make it consistent with the nominal values used by LECG.

In light of these considerations the Tribunal considers that the figure proposed by the
Tribunal’s expert is reasonable and should also be retained for the calculation of

compensation.

Period of tariff adjustment

LECG applied the whole tariff adjustment beginning in 2002 in a single year, using to this
end an increase of 144%. The Tribunal believes this is not a realistic scenario in a crisis
context and has accordingly, as argued by Mr. Bello, chosen to extend the period of tariff
adjustment to six years, resulting in an increase of 20.8% for each year of such period

with a total adjustment of 211%.

415.

416.

417.

418.

128
Such change is not significant in respect of the effect on demand that could result from
one or the other choice because of the stable contractual commitments used in the gas
transportation industry, and thus its effect on compensation will not be significant either.
Yet, the Tribunal considers reasonable to allow for a longer period over which the tariff
adjustment will take place. Tariff adjustment over a period of six years allows in fact for a

better spread of the WACC indicated as the average return of the business.

Efficiency adjustment

The experts also discussed the question of the application of an efficiency factor in the

 

determination of tariffs (Factor X). While for Mr. Bello this factor should be considered
and would result in a lower tariff adjustment, LECG has explained that it is implicit in the
cash flow estimates on which the initial tariff adjustment is based.

In the Tribunal’s view, whether this factor is taken into account in an explicit or an

implicit manner, the end result will not be different. The Tribunal will accordingly retain

the figures used to this effect by LECG.

Percentage attributable to the regulated business

In determining the value of the regulated and the non-regulated business of TGS, LECG,
following the same approach as the ENARGAS, has used the percentage each business
has in the total fixed assets of the company, which results in 86% for the regulated
business and 14% for the non-regulated business in 2001. In LECG’s view, this
percentage is the same resulting from the earnings of each business before taxes. The

Respondent insists that such separation is artificial and unviable for damage calculation.

419.

420.

421.

422.

129
The Tribunal’s expert has considered more reliable to this effect the use of the operational
income for each business, as reflected in TGS’ statements, which results in 88% for the
regulated business and 12% for the non-regulated business for 2001. The Tribunal sees no

reason to depart from this approach.

Value of the regulated business in 2001

The Tribunal, as explained above, will use for establishing the value of the regulated
business of TGS at December 31, 2001, the figures given by LECG with the following
adjustments: the tariff base is reduced from US$1,789 m. to US$1,669 m.; tariff
adjustment will spread over a period of six years with an annual increase of 20.8% and a
total of 211%; WACC is increased from 12.24% to 12.6% and the participation in the
regulated business is increased from 86% to 88%.

The value resulting from the above adjustments in light of DCF is US$1,574 m., which,
after deducting the debt of the regulated business or US$934 m., yields an asset value of
US$639.7 m. The Claimants’ 35.5% participation is thus US$227.1 m.

Because of the reasons explained before, the Tribunal will take into consideration the
situation of the Claimants’ participation in CIESA’s debt. CIESA’s total debt at
December 31, 2001 amounts to US$223.3 m.; the Claimants’ participation in this debt is
50%, which if considered only in the percentage attributable to the regulated business
(88%) results in an amount of US $98.1 m.

The total net value of the Claimants’ participation in the regulated business at December
31, 2001 is, therefore, US$227.1 m. minus US$98.1 m. corresponding to their share in the

debt, or a net figure of US $129 m.

424,

425.

426.

Verification using stock exchange value

The Tribunal has noted above that the value of market capitalization is a relevant element
to verify the outcome of the DCF method so as to establish whether the variables used in
the latter reflect reasonable assumptions. The use of market capitalization is intended only
as a reference value and not as valuation tool in itself.

The Tribunal has first concluded in this respect that to use the stock value of December
2001 would result in grave distortions since at that point the unfolding crisis had led to
wide speculation. In fact, as explained by GSCSA, the stock market was used to obtain
and transfer dollars by means of the purchase of American Depository Receipts
(ADR’s). '7° Arbitrage of currencies to bypass the “corralito” by means of ADR
transactions became a common practice at the time, which badly affected the reliability of
stock market prices. It should be noted that the average stock market value of TGS for
December 2001 (US$867 m.) was paradoxically higher than that of the precedent months
November 2001 (US$749 m.) and October 2001 (US$781m.). It was also higher than the
average for the period September-November 2001 (US$835 m.). The Tribunal will
accordingly exclude the figures for the month of December.

Applying the percentages determined above, the stock value of the regulated business of
TGS ranges from US$658.1 m. for November 2001 and US$734.3 for the period
September-November 2001.These figures are not too different from those resulting from
LECG’s analysis (US$768 m.). Because the Tribunal has used a lower tariff base for the
reasons explained, the difference increases in respect of the figures used by the Tribunal
(US$639.7 m.), but it is still within an acceptable range and does not result in a

disproportionate outcome.

"6 GSCSA Expert Report of June 2005, para. 136.

427.

428.

429.

430.

431.

131
Stock exchange prices for TGS would result systematically in values higher than those
determined by the Tribunal’s expert applying DCF, not only considering the averages for
2001 but also the result of longer periods of time. If, for example, the average for 1999-
2001 is used, the value of the regulated business is US$1,094 m. The same holds true for
any average corresponding to 2001. As noted, if December 2001 is used as a reference
point, values will also be higher.
The Tribunal is accordingly satisfied that the figures resulting from DCF do not show
unreasonable differences with those resulting from the verification done in light of the

stock market value.

Current value of the regulated business

The Tribunal has found above that the transactions with respect to the sale of TGS shares
to D.E. Shaw provide an accurate and realistic base for the estimate of the current fair
market value of the company. Having a market transaction of such characteristics is then
preferable, in the instant case, to the use of DCF that implies a number of uncertainties
derived from assumptions on the future that may turn out to be true or not.

D.E. Shaw bought the Claimants’ 15.2% in TGS for US$114.6 million. It further took an
option to purchase the Claimants’ remaining 4.3% participation in TGS. Although the
approval of this transaction is still pending, for the sake of a complete calculation the
Tribunal includes the purchase price included in the ‘Option Agreement’ of US$33.9 m.
The total current value is accordingly of US$148.5 m.

The participation of the regulated and the non-regulated business in this last figure has
now to be determined. Applying the same criterion of the operational earnings used for

2001, this time for 2005, as reflected in TGS’ statement for that year, the regulated

432.

434,

132
business has a 42% participation in the total business, while the non-regulated business
has 58%.

In its comments to the final report of the Tribunal’s expert, the Claimants have argued
that the approach taken by the expert as to the allocation of 42.5% of the 2006 transaction
equity value to the regulated segment assumes that also only 42.5% of TGS’ outstanding
debt as of 2005 corresponds to that regulated segment. In the Claimants’ view, this result
does not reflect the reality because the vast majority of that debt had been contracted prior

to 2002 to finance the regulated sector busin

 

s. So as to avoid an implicit cross-subsidy
between the regulated and the non-regulated business, the Claimants assert that the same
debt allocation of 88% made in 2001 should be applied in 2005, while 42.5% is used for
the allocation in respect of the firm value.

The Tribunal has examined with great attention this argument as it also believes that the

correct principle to apply is that there should be no cross-subsidies between those

 

segments. However, the Tribunal must also note that unrealistic results would emerge
from the Claimants’ proposals noted above. In fact, if the allocation proposed by the
Claimants for 2001 is kept, only US$16.5 m. out of the equity value of US$753.9 m., that
is about 2% of the equity value implied in the D.E. Shaw transaction could be attributed
to the regulated business in 2005, while 98% would be allocated to the non-regulated
sector. In light of current valuation of other business operating in the regulated area of gas
transportation, this is not a reasonable outcome.

Moreover, the Claimants’ experts had suggested for the allocation of participation in 2001
the asset value of the regulated and non-regulated segments. This was also the approach
considered by ENARGAS for the determination of tariffs. If this same approach is
followed in 2005, not only for the debt but also for the firm value as Claimants request,
the results obtained do not seem quite reasonable. In fact, it is estimated that 85%

(percentage of assets attributable to the regulated business in light of the financial

435.

436.

437.

438.

133
statements for 2005) of the total equity value resulting from the D.E. Shaw transaction
would pertain to the regulated business under this scenario.

The Tribunal does not question that the different methodological approaches discussed
above might be conceptually valid. Given that such approaches lead to extreme results of
2% in one scenario and 85% in the other, both arising from the arguments of the same
party, the Tribunal believes that the suggestion made by the Tribunal’s expert is more
balanced and realistic. Moreover, the allocation of debt between one segment and the
other was never explicitly argued before the Tribunal.

The Tribunal concludes accordingly that it will keep the allocation suggested by the

Tribunal’s expert. It follows that of the total current value of US$148.5 m., the value of

 

the regulated business is US$62.5 m. as at January 2006. Expressing this value in 2001

currency value the Claimants’ participation amounts to US$38.6 m.

Verification of the current value using stock exchange value

Tf extrapolated, the 2006 transaction would result in a value of US$761.5 m. for the whole

of TGS’ busine:

 

. This is less than the stock exchange value of the company at the time,
which was US$855 m. The Tribunal does not believe, however, that this difference
reflects an abnormal result and may well be explained by the fact that the price of the sale
was agreed in 2004 and came to be executed in 2006.The stock market value of TGS
fluctuated in 2004 between US$589 m. and US$869 m, and thus the value of US$761.5 m.
falls well within this range.

The difference between the value of the Claimants’ participation in the regulated business
of TGS in 2001 US$129 m., prior to the measures, and the value of the 2006 transaction
expressed in 2001 currency US$38.6 m., results in an amount of US$90.4 m. in respect of

the pesification of tariffs.

439.

440.

442.

134
The Tribunal will proceed to decide on the operator and PPI damages to finally add up all

relevant concepts to estimate overall compensation for the Claimants.

i) Operator damages

The Claimants have requested the award of damages relating to the Technical Assistance
Agreement (“TAA”) between TGS and EPCA, dated 28 December 1992'2’. Under its
terms, EPCA receives compensation for its role as “Technical Operator” of TGS’ gas
transportation system, and its annual compensation is the higher of: (1) US$3 million, or
(2) 7% of TGS’ EBIT minus US$3m. The Claimants’ experts have calculated that the
after-tax value of the TAA to Enron was US$46.4 million as of December 2001.'78
According to the Claimants, the substantial reduction of TGS’ revenue stream caused by
the freeze of tariffs damaged the Technical Operator.'”? Moreover, the Claimants allege
that their returns as Technical Operator are a form of delayed return from the risks it took
under the privatization. 180

The Respondent disputes the claim concerning the TAA explaining that such fees could
not be considered a part of delayed compensation to be counted as damages because the
Agreement was devised to remunerate specific know-how made available to TGS for a
limited duration. In addition, since 2000, the operator fees are not included in the
calculation of tariffs as decided by ENARGAS."' Finally, the Respondent argues that the

TAA was transferred to Petrobras for an undisclosed amount in 2004.

"7 Claimants’ Exhibit n. 40.

"8 Claimants’ Memorial, para. 87; Claimants’ Reply, paras. 672-677.

°° Claimants’ Reply, para. 674.
1° Td., para. 677.

5! Respondent’s Counter-Memorial, paras. 40-50; Respondent’s Rejoinder, paras. 810-816.

444,

445.

446.

 

135
The Tribunal is persuaded by the Respondent’s arguments to the effect that the TAA
claim should not be admitted. The Claimants have not proven convincingly that the fees
under the TAA are a form of delayed compensation and therefore should be included in
computations of profitability or damages. While the Claimants’ damages experts have
included this claim in the losses suffered by the Claimants related companies,” the TAA
nor any other contemporaneous document show that the management fees were deferred
compensation for Claimants’ investment. To the contrary, Article 2.5 of the TAA refers to
“compensation for the performance by Enron Argentina of its obligations hereunder”
(emphasis added).
The Tribunal must also note in reaching its conclusion in respect of this claim that the
TAA was transferred to Petrobras on July 15, 2004, which transfer was approved by

~!3 but have not

Enargas in 2004. Claimants refer to a “transfer of the fee to Petrobras,
produced a copy of the transfer agreement nor have they quantified the amount that

Petrobras would have paid for the transfer.

ti) PPI Damages

The freeze of tariff adjustment in accordance with the US PPI for 2000 and 2001 also
needs to be measured in the context of valuation. While the freeze also has effects after
2001, these are included in the damage arising from pesification.

LECG has calculated the Claimants’ damage arising from this claim in the amount of
US$ 15.8 m. at December 2001. The Respondent contested this claim late in the
proceedings in its second comments to the expert report (letter of 9 November 2006) by

arguing that the existence of the agreements signed in January and June 2000 suspending

LECG Expert Report of November 2005, para. 205; and of May 2005, para. 104.

‘3 Claimants’ Reply, para. 673.

447.

449.

450.

136
PPI adjustments, although not challenged by the Claimants, was ignored. In addition,
according to the Respondent, if any damage was to be awarded on this ground, it should
only include marginal benefits derived from the July agreement.
The Tribunal finds no merit in Respondent’s arguments. TGS and other Licensees agreed
on suspension of the PPI adjustments in January and June 2000 on the basis that the
amounts not collected as a result of the suspension would be recouped later and with
interests. With the abolition of the PPI adjustments by Law 25,561 such recouping is no
longer available.
The Respondent has failed to provide an alternative calculation on the basis of its
allegations. Thus, LECG calculation as used by the Tribunal’s expert will be applied by

this Tribunal in the determination of compensation.

C. The amount of overall compensation

The amount of equity damages in respect of the pesification of tariffs calculated of
US$90.4 m. needs to be increased by the damages corresponding to the freeze of tariffs in
accordance with the US PPI, calculated at US$15.8 m.

It follows that the damage for pesification US$90.4 m. plus the damage for freeze of
tariffs US$15.8 m. results in a total amount of damages of US$106.2 m. As, for the
reasons explained above, the Tribunal will not be considering compensation for the
damages of the Technical Operator, this last figure is the total amount of damages

awarded, subject only to the application of interest as determined below.

D. Interest

451.

452.

137
The Claimants’ experts calculated the amount of damages at 31 December 2001 and then
proceeded to update such value to the date of submission of their initial Report, ie.,
November 2004, using their WACC. In addition, the Claimants expressly requested the
application of interest at “commercially reasonable rates” (i.e., compound interest on a
quarterly basis) through the date of the award so as to compensate for “the time value of
money and the lost opportunity to earn a reasonable rate of return.”!**
While the experts’ technical approach is many times used for the updating of a value, and
was also suggested by the Tribunal’s expert, the Tribunal believes that once the amount
of damage and compensation has been determined at a given date it is more appropriate
that such amount should bear interest as from such date. Moreover, any risk of double
recovery is thereby avoided. The Tribunal will therefore order the payment of interest at
the 6 month average LIBOR rate plus 2 per cent for each year, or proportion thereof, for
the period beginning on January 1, 2002 and, as requested by the Claimants, until the date
of dispatch of the Award. Interest shall be compounded semi-annually. The Tribunal

considers this to be a reasonable interest for the period envisaged.

E. Costs

Considering the decisions regarding the various issues in this case, each party shall bear

the legal costs incurred by it in connection with the present arbitration and the arbitration

costs shall be borne in equal shares by the parties.

4 Claimants’ Memorial, para. 378.

NOW THEREFORE THE ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL

DECIDES AND AWARDS AS FOLLOWS

. The Respondent breached its obligations to accord the investor the fair and equitable
treatment guaranteed in Article II(2)(a) of the Treaty and to observe the obligations
entered into with regard to the investment guaranteed in Article II(2)(c) of the Treaty.

. The Respondent shall pay the Claimants compensation in the amount of US$106.2
million.

. The Respondent shall pay the Claimants interest at the 6 month average LIBOR rate plus
2 per cent for each year, or proportion thereof, beginning on January 1, 2002 until the
date of dispatch of the Award. Interest shall be compounded semi-annually.

. Each party shall pay one half of the costs of the arbitration and bear its own legal costs.

. All other claims are hereby dismissed.

139

Made in Washington D.C., in English and Spanish, both versions equally authentic.

 

VS rnc tthan,
Profesor Albert Jan van den Berg. Sr. Pierre-Yves Tschanz
Arbitro Arbitro

Fecha: 8} wayo 200} Fecha: 09 “Mays Love

 

Profesor Francisco Orrego-Vicufla
Presidente

Fecha: ]S do bias do Zoo?

C

