Enron Creditors Recovery Corp.
Ponderosa Assets, L.P.
(Claimants)

Vv.
The Argentine Republic
(Respondent)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3)
(Annulment Proceeding)

 

Decision on the Claimants’ Second Request to Lift Provisional Stay of
Enforcement of the Award

(Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules)

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C., President
Judge Patrick L. Robinson
Judge Per Tresselt
Secretary of the ad hoc Committee: Mr. Ucheora Onwuamaegbu

Counsel assisting the ad hoc Committee: Dr. Christopher Staker

Representing the Claimant: Representing the Respondent:
Mr. R. Doak Bishop Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino

Mr. Craig S. Miles Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién
King & Spalding Procuracion del Tesoro de la Nacion
1100 Louisiana, Suite 4000 Posadas 1641

Houston, Texas 77002 CP 1112 Buenos Aires

United States of America Argentina

and

Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil
M & M Bomchil Abogados
Suipacha 268, Piso 12
C1008AAF Buenos Aires
Argentina

May 20, 2009

Introduction

On February 21, 2008, the Argentine Republic (“Argentina”) filed with the
Secretary-General of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID”) an application in writing (the “Application for Annulment”)
requesting the annulment of the Award of May 22, 2007 (the “Award”), rendered
by the tribunal (the “Tribunal”) in the arbitration proceeding between Enron
Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. (the “Claimants”) and Argentina.

The Application for Annulment contained a request, under Article 52(5) of the
ICSID Convention and Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (the “ICSID Arbitration Rules”), for a stay of
enforcement of the Award until the Application for Annulment is decided.

By letter of May 22, 2008, in accordance with Rule 52(2) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, the parties were notified by the Centre that an ad hoc Committee (“the
Committee”) had been constituted, composed of Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C., a
national of Australia, Judge Patrick L. Robinson, a national of Jamaica, and
Judge Per Tresselt, a national of Norway.

On June 18, 2008, the Claimants filed a request to lift the provisional stay of
enforcement of the award, or alternatively, to condition a continuation of the stay
on Argentina’s posting of adequate security.

Having received the parties’ written observations on the Claimants’ request and
having heard the parties on the matter at the first session of the Committee held
on July 14, 2008, on October 7, 2008, the Committee issued its “Decision on the
Argentine Republic’s Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the
Award” (the “First Stay Decision”).

In the First Stay Decision, the Committee found, inter alia:

(a) that where a stay of enforcement is requested under Article 52(5) of the
ICSID Convention, the ad hoc committee may decide not to grant the
request, or may grant the request subject to the provision of security or to

compliance with some other condition by the party requesting the stay, or
may decide to grant the request unconditionally;

(b) that in general, a stay should be granted under Article 52(5) if requested,
unless the Committee finds that there are very exceptional circumstances
why this should not occur, notwithstanding the possibility of making the
stay conditional on the provision of security;?

(c) that an award creditor has no “counterbalancing right” to security in any
case where a continuation of a stay is ordered, and that to require that
security be provided as a matter of course in all but the exceptional case
would risk compromising the important confidence-balancing function for
Contracting States served by the annulment procedure;?

(d) that in deciding an application under Article 52(5), the Committee must
consider all of the circumstances of a case as a whole;*

(e) that a relevant consideration in this respect is whether the party opposing
the stay has established circumstances of sufficient doubt as to whether
there will be compliance with ICSID Convention obligations on a final
award in the event that it is not annulled;®

(f) that Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention imposes on Argentina, in the
event that the Award is not annulled, an obligation under international law
to abide by and comply with the terms of the Award, without the need for
action on the part of the Claimants pursuant to the enforcement machinery
under Argentine law to which Article 54 of the ICSID Convention refers;°

(g) that under the Treaty between the United States of America and the
Argentine Republic Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and
Protection of Investment’ (the “BIT”), Argentina has a treaty obligation

First Stay Decision § 36.

First Stay Decision 43.

First Stay Decision § 44.

First Stay Decision § 46.

First Stay Decision § 49.

First Stay Decision 9§ 69, 78.

Signed November 14, 1991; entered into force October 20, 1994.

pursuant to the first obligation® in the second sentence of Article VII(6), in
the event that the Award is not annulled, to carry out without delay the
provisions of the Award, without the need for enforcement action by the
Claimants pursuant to the second obligation? in that sentence;'°

(h) that at the time of the first hearing in these annulment proceedings, it was
Argentina’s intention, in the event that the Award is not annulled, not to
pay the Award forthwith but to require the Claimants to bring proceedings
for the enforcement of the Award under the provisions of Argentine law
that give effect to Article 54 of the ICSID Convention, and that this would
amount to non-compliance with Argentina’s obligations under Article VII(6)
of the BIT and Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention;""

(i) that the Committee nonetheless accepted that Argentina had acted
consistently with its own good faith interpretation of the BIT and the ICSID
Convention, that the Committee did not assume that Argentina would
continue to maintain that position following the conclusions of the
Committee in the First Stay Decision, and that Argentina should be given
an opportunity to consider its position going forwards;'? and

(j) that 60 days was sufficient time for Argentina to reconsider its position. °

In the First Stay Decision, the Committee therefore decided to extend the stay
of enforcement of the Award, but further decided that at any time after 60 days
from the date of the First Stay Decision, the Claimants could apply to request a
modification or termination of the stay.

By letter of December 17, 2008, the Claimants requested the Committee to end
the stay of enforcement of the Award, or in the alternative, to condition such a
stay on Argentina’s provision of adequate financial security in the form of a bank
guarantee or its monetary equivalent. That letter maintained that although the

“Each Party undertakes to carry out without delay the provisions of any such award’.
“Each Party undertakes ... to provide in its territory for its enforcement’.

First Stay Decision § 82.

First Stay Decision 9§ 85, 101.

First Stay Decision § 102.

First Stay Decision § 103.

Committee had afforded Argentina 60 days to reconsider its position, Argentina
had failed to do so.

By letter of December 19, 2008, the parties were advised that the Committee
was minded to accept the Claimants’ letter of December 17, 2008 as an
application for alternative orders, and Argentina was invited to comment upon
this proposal. The parties were also advised that upon the Committee’s
acceptance of the proposal, the parties would be directed to exchange
submissions.

By a letter of December 30, 2008 with attachments, Argentina requested leave
of the Committee to develop its position on evidence and arguments which were
not originally before the Committee, and requested that a hearing be held to
discuss new reasons that should dispel doubts that Argentina will comply with
its obligations under the ICSID Convention. Arguments in this respect were
presented in the letter.

By a letter of January 7, 2009, the Claimants maintained that Argentina’s letter
of December 30, 2008, instead of simply commenting on the Committee’s
proposal to treat the Claimants’ request as a formal application, constituted a
“full-blown anticipatory reply submission”. The letter requested the Committee to
treat Argentina’s letter as its further contentions in support and to decline any
further exchange of submissions. The letter further opposed Argentina’s request
for leave to develop its position on additional evidence and arguments. The
letter then responded to the points raised in Argentina’s letter, and stated that
the Claimants considered a further hearing to be unwarranted.

By a letter from the Centre dated January 8, 2009 the parties were informed that
the Committee agreed to grant the requested hearing.

By a letter of February 20, 2009, Argentina provided a number of additional
documents which it stated would be used at the hearing.

Following other exchanges concerning the timing and modalities, on March 9,
2009, a hearing was held in Paris at which the parties presented oral
submissions on this second application by the Claimants to lift the stay of

enforcement of the Award, or to condition the continuation of the stay on
Argentina’s provision of adequate financial security.

At the conclusion of that hearing, the Chairman announced orally the
Committee’s decision. The Chairman recalled the terms of paragraph 103 of the
First Stay Decision, which stated:

The Committee notes that in no event would it be minded

to lift the stay of enforcement of the award or to make

security a condition of a continuation of the stay without

arrangements being put in place to ensure that any

amounts recovered by, or any security provided to, the

Claimants would be recoverable by Argentina in the event

that the Award is annulled.
The Chairman stated that the Committee had concluded that this necessary part
of the application for the stay to be lifted had not yet been satisfied. The
Chairman announced that in the circumstances the Committee had decided,
without taking any view on the other issues that had been raised, to adjourn the
matter of the lifting of the stay to give the Claimants an opportunity to bring
forward a proposal, on notice to Argentina, which would make provision to
ensure that any amounts recovered by or any security provided to the Claimants
would be recoverable by Argentina in the event that the Award is annulled. The

Chairman went on to state that such provision should:

.. eliminate the risk of third party execution or garnishee

so that Argentina would not in fact recover the monies.

The Committee takes the view that it is no function of

establishing an account for escrow to give some third

party a windfall fund to execute against ..., and ... the

possibility of third party benefit is to be eliminated.
In a letter dated March 30, 2009 with attachments, the Claimants presented
three proposals addressing the issues in paragraph 103 of the First Stay
Decision. That letter also commented on the concern expressed by Argentina
that because Enron Corp is in bankruptcy, there is a risk that any secured funds

could potentially be attached by Enron’s creditors.

By a letter dated April 7, 2009 with attachments, Argentina responded to the
matters raised in the Claimants’ letter of March 30, 2009.

20.

21.

By a letter dated April 13, 2009 with attachments, the Claimants addressed
Argentina’s letter of April 7, 2009.

By a letter dated April 21, 2009 with attachments, Argentina responded to the
Claimants’ letter of April 13, 2009.

By a letter dated April 27, 2009, the Claimants replied to Argentina’s letter of
April 21, 2009.

At the hearing on March 9, 2009, Argentina remarked that it appeared from
Enron’s website that its name had been changed to Enron Creditors Recovery
Corp., and the Committee requested Enron’s counsel to confirm this. In their
letter of March 30, 2009, counsel for the Claimants confirmed that Enron’s name
had indeed been changed to Enron Creditors Recovery Corp. in March 2007. In
its letter of April 7, 2009, Argentina requested that the name of the case be
changed to reflect Enron’s change of name. In their letter of April 13, 2009,
counsel for the Claimants said that the Claimants did not oppose the request by
Argentina for the case name to be changed.

The parties’ contentions
The Claimants argue, inter alia:

(a) In substance, Argentina contends that it has no obligation voluntarily to
pay an award rendered against it and submits that a successful claimant
in ICSID proceedings must initiate Article 54 enforcement procedures in
Argentina in order to collect an award. The First Stay Decision concluded
that this position is incorrect.

(b) The First Stay Decision gave Argentina 60 days to reconsider its stated
position as to its obligations to pay on any final award. The First Stay
Decision did not give Argentina leave to “appeal” the Committee's
decision to reject Argentina’s position, and Argentina should not be
permitted to bring further arguments on its obligations under Article 53 of
the ICSID Convention.

1

(c) | Argentina has refused to change its position and in fact has reiterated
that it considers the First Stay Decision to be incorrect.'* In the Vivendi
case, the ad hoc committee required Argentina to commit itself
unconditionally to effect payment of the Award, to the extent that it is not
annulled,'® but Argentina refused to provide this assurance and instead
has continued to erroneously assert that parties must institute

enforcement actions in Argentina in order to collect an award.'®

(d) | Given Argentina’s continued disregard of its Article 53 obligation to
voluntarily pay this and other final ICSID awards against it, there is a
serious risk of Argentina’s non-compliance in the event the Award is not
annulled.

(e)  Argentina’s concern that, because Enron is in bankruptcy, there is a risk
that any secured funds could potentially be attached by Enron’s creditors,
is unfounded. The Enron bankruptcy is nearing its conclusion. The
transactions within the bankruptcy relating to the disposition of the
proceeds of this ICSID claim and Award were settled by the bankruptcy
court several years ago.

(f) While creditors of Argentina could potentially attach such funds, this
possibility is the result of Argentina’s own malfeasance and defaulting on
its obligations, and this is not a legitimate reason to absolve Argentina of
the obligation to provide security as a condition of continuing the stay.

(g) | Just over a month before the Award was issued, Enron changed its name
to Enron Creditors Recovery Corp. As a result of the bankruptcy
transactions, managerial control of this ICSID claim vested in the

4 Referring to Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic (\CSID Case No. ARB/02/16),

Argentine Republic’s Memorial on the Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, November 7,
2008 9G 121, 127-128, 130, 132.

Referring to Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine
Republic (\CSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Decision on the Argentine Republic's Request for a
Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award rendered on 20 August 2007, 4 November 2008
(“Vivendi Stay of Enforcement Decision”) § 46.

Referring to Compafiia de Aguas del Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine
Republic (I\CSID Case No. ARB/97/3), Letter from Argentina to Claudia Frutos-Peterson, 28
November 2008 (available at http://ita.law.uvic.ca/documents/Vivendi-
ArgentinaLetter28Nov2008.pdf).

“CIESA/TGS Manager’, who has continued to engage Enron’s counsel to
tepresent the Claimants, and they are empowered to make
representations on behalf of Enron regarding this ICSID claim, including
enrolment and enforcement matters, which were obviously matters

contemplated at the time the bankruptcy settlements were approved.

In any event, it would be acceptable to the Claimants to name
Ponderosa, a solvent Delaware entity in good standing, as the sole
beneficiary of any security, which would eliminate Argentina’s concerns.
Because the amount of the Award did not exceed Ponderosa’s claimed
loss, Enron has no real financial interest in the Award.

The claimants have three proposals:

(i) The first proposal (referred to below by the Committee as
“Proposal 1”) would require Argentina, as a condition for
continuation of the stay, to open an escrow account into which it
would place escrowed funds in an amount to be directed by the
Committee. Argentina would grant to the Claimants a security
interest in all of Argentina’s right, title and interest in the escrow
account and the escrow funds. Control of the escrow funds would
remain exclusively in the hands of the escrow agent in the name of
the “Republic of Argentina”, and no other person. There would be
specific instructions as to fund distribution upon the Committee’s
final decision on the Application for Annulment.

(ii) | The second proposal (referred to below by the Committee as
“Proposal 2”) would require Argentina, as a condition for
continuation of the stay, to secure from a bank of its choice,
including Banco de la Nacién Argentina (“BNA”), an irrevocable
standby letter of credit payable to the Claimants in an amount to
be directed by the Committee, callable on in whole or in part by the
Claimants upon presentment of the outcome of the Committee's
final decision on the Application for Annulment. The Claimants
argue that there is no evidence in the record that a letter of credit

22.

(iii

would cost anything to Argentina, that BNA as the State-owned
bank would surely not charge the State itself an exorbitant fee to
issue such a letter, and would presumably not require collateral,
and that in any event, any costs payable to BNA would be charged
by a fully-owned State entity to the State itself, having no real
economic effect on the Argentine economy.

The third proposal (referred to below by the Committee as
“Proposal 3”) would involve a lifting of the stay, upon the Claimants
giving an irrevocable commitment to Argentina that any
enforcement actions that may be initiated against Argentina during
the pendency of the annulment proceeding would be brought only
in the name and on behalf of Ponderosa, and upon Ponderosa
undertaking to reimburse Argentina in full of any amounts collected
by Ponderosa from any enforcement actions initiated against
Argentina during the pendency of the annulment proceeding.

Obviously it would be impossible to remove any possibility that other
creditors could attempt attachment, and if this was the standard, no
security would ever be required of any non-compliant State in any ICSID
annulment proceeding. The possibility of attachment by other creditors
against whom Argentina has already defaulted ranks very low on the
scale of equities in determining whether and in what form security should

be required at this stage.

Argentina argues, inter alia:

(a)

There is additional support for Argentina’s position that an ICSID award
creditor may be required to follow the enforcement procedures under
Argentine law to which Article 54 of the ICSID Convention refers.'”

Referring to Arbitration (International Investment Disputes) Act 1966 (United Kingdom), section
1(8); Chile, Resolution No. 1891 of the Ministry of Justice, 9 July 2008 (ordering payment of the
award rendered against Chile in MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile
(ICSID Case No. ARB/01/7); Vivendi Stay of Enforcement Decision § 41; Compania de Aguas del
Aconquija S.A. and Vivendi Universal S.A. v. Argentine Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/3),
Letter from Stanimir A. Alexandrov and Marinn F. Carlson, counsel for claimants, to Claudia Frutos-

10

(b) The only thing that the award creditor has to do is complete the
formalities applicable to compliance with final judgments of local courts, if
any apply in the State in question, which in the case of Argentina are
essentially before administrative authorities, in this case the Ministry of
Economy, within the context of an enforcement judicial proceeding, in
which the judge restrains himself to checking compliance with the award.

(c) Article 27 of the ICSID Convention constitutes the best proof of
Argentina’s position on recognition and enforcement.

(d) In other cases, compliance by States with ICSID awards has taken six
months or a year, and lawyers for claimants have accepted that there are
procedures that States must go through to execute payments.

(e) For purposes of execution of the Award, the issue of Enron’s bankruptcy
status is not a mere formality. Creditors may attach assets that were
attached or obtained by Enron during the annulment proceeding, which
assets may never be recouped by Argentina even if it prevailed in the
annulment.

(f) Serious doubts remain as to the ability of the Claimants’ counsel, under
the arrangements within Enron’s bankruptcy proceedings regarding this
ICSID claim, to cause Enron to renounce certain rights it may have as to
the execution of the Award.

(g) | The costs of setting up the escrow arrangement or letter of credit in the
Claimants’ first two proposals would be so high as to render them
impracticable.

(h) BNA is an Argentine commercial banking institution created by the
Argentine legislature, which operates independently from and is not
controlled by Argentina. Under Article 25 of its charter, it is prohibited
from lending to the Federal Government, except when a special
guarantee is constituted that allows for the automatic reimbursement of

 

Peterson, Secretary to the ad hoc Committee, 8 December 2008; Lucy Reed, Jan Paulsson and
Nigel Blackaby, A GUIDE To ICSID ARBITRATION 103 (2004).

1

23.

24.

19

the money, which in this case would mean that Argentina would have to
constitute an escrow account for the total amount of the award.

(i) Each of Proposals 1 and 2 creates unacceptable risks of attachment. In
the event that Argentina prevails in the annulment proceeding, Argentina
will have the right to receive back the property in the escrow account, or
collateral funds returnable to it. Judgment creditors of Argentina will
accordingly argue that they have a right to attach Argentina’s right to
receive the property in the event that Argentina prevails in the annulment
proceeding.

(j) Requiring Argentina to incur such exorbitant costs in order to run the risk
of losing probably millions of dollars even if it prevailed in the annulment
is not justified. Even if Argentina’s position is not shared, at the end of the
day all that Argentina is requiring is that ICSID award creditors follow a
formal procedure almost exclusively before administrative authorities,
something that has been successfully required by other States.

The Committee’s views

The Committee found that at the time of the First Stay Decision, in the event
that the Award is not annulled, it was Argentina’s intention not to pay the Award
forthwith but to require the Claimants to bring proceedings for the enforcement
of the Award under the provisions of Argentine law that give effect to Article 54
of the ICSID Convention.'® The First Stay Decision found that this would
amount to non-compliance with Argentina’s obligations under Article VII(6) of
the BIT and Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention."

In its letter of December 30, 2008 and at the oral hearing on March 9, 2009,
Argentina presented arguments that challenged the Committee’s decision in this
respect. However, nothing in the First Stay Decision suggested that Argentina
would be given an opportunity to reopen matters decided by the Committee in

First Stay Decision 9 85, 101.
First Stay Decision § 101.

25.

21

that decision in the event that the Claimants were to make a further application
to lift the stay or to require security as a condition for continuation of the stay.
The Committee considers that it would be wrong in principle for it to reopen
matters that were dealt with in the First Stay Decision, and it declines to do so.

For completeness the Committee also notes that two more recent decisions in
ICSID annulment proceedings are, contrary to Argentina’s submissions,
consistent with the Committee’s conclusion in the First Stay Decision on this
issue.

(1) Inthe Vivendi case, the ad hoc committee stated that:

In the opinion of the Committee, it would be contrary to the
interpretation provisions of the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties to pretend that any organ of the host State
can extend an administrative certification function to
exercise any possible control over the enforcement
process of pecuniary obligations under a finally binding
ICSID award. Such activity would contradict the declared
objectives of the ICSID Convention. Any possible
intervention by a judicial authority in the host State is
unacceptable under the ICSID Convention, as it would
render the awards simply a piece of paper deprived from
any legal value and dependent on the will of state
organs.

The ad hoc committee went on in that decision to note that “Argentina’s legal
position in this respect ... does not conform entirely with the Committee’s
understanding of the interrelationship between Articles 53 and 54”.”'

(2) | Subsequently, in the Sempra case, the ad hoc committee concluded that:

.. @ State Party against which an award has been made
must (like a foreign investor party) abide by and comply
with an ICSID award without the award creditor having to
submit to any agency of the State Party to enforce the
award as envisaged by Article 54 of the ICSID
Convention. ... The very fact that the Committee has found
that Argentina is under a duty, unconditionally and in good
faith, to “abide by and comply with” the Award according to
Article 53, together with Argentina’s repeated and
uncompromising affirmation that it has no such obligation

Vivendi Stay of Enforcement Decision § 36.
Vivendi Stay of Enforcement Decision § 45.

26.

27.

28.

in the absence of the award creditor submitting the award
to a procedure within the State party’s domestic judicial
system under Article 54, must necessarily lead to the
conclusion that Argentina is not willing to comply with its
obligations under Article 53 unless Sempra first seeks
enforcement under Article 54.72

In the First Stay Decision the Committee also found that a relevant
consideration in deciding whether or not to grant a stay, or whether or not to
make any stay conditional on the provision of security, is whether the party
opposing the stay has established circumstances of sufficient doubt as to
whether there will be compliance with ICSID Convention obligations on a final
award in the event that it is not annulled.°

The First Stay Decision concluded that:

... in the absence of any indication by Argentina that it has
changed its position to accord with that which the
Committee has found as to the extent of the obligations
under the BIT and the ICSID Convention, the Committee
would be minded, again absent contrary arguments and
evidence, to consider that there is a risk of non-
compliance by Argentina with its obligations under Article
53 of the ICSID Convention if the Award is not annulled.”*

As noted above, the Committee said that it would not assume that Argentina
would continue to maintain its position following the reasons in the First Stay
Decision, and that Argentina was to be given an opportunity to reconsider its
position. In the event, upon this new application to lift the provisional stay,
Argentina has not suggested that it has changed its position in the light of the
Committee’s reasons in the First Stay Decision. At the hearing on March 9,
2009, counsel for Argentina stated that:

What we state is that, again, Article 53 establishes an
obligation to comply with ICSID awards. And we say that
they are voluntary in the sense that the debtor does not
have to be forced to comply with an ICSID award. What
we state is that the ICSID creditor as [sic] to follow the

Sempra Energy International v. Argentine Republic (\CSID Case No. ARB/02/16), Decision on the
Argentine Republic's Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, March 5, 2009
q{ 52-53 (“Sempra Stay of Enforcement Decision”).

First Stay Decision 49.

First Stay Decision § 102.

First Stay Decision § 102.

29.

30.

31.

formalities applicable under domestic law for compliance

with final judgments of local courts. This is what Article 54

requires.”°
In the letter of April 7, 2009, Argentina’s legal representatives appear to have
maintained this position, stating that:

Even if Argentina’s position regarding the way in which

ICSID awards are to be complied with were not shared,

which is the case of this ad hoc Committee, at the end of

the day all that Argentina is requiring is that ICSID

creditors follow a formal procedure almost exclusively

before administrative authorities ...
On the basis of the material before it, the Committee is satisfied that Argentina
has not changed its position that if the Award in this case is not annulled,
Argentina will not comply with the Award without requiring the Claimants to
bring proceedings for the enforcement of the Award under the provisions of
Argentine law that give effect to Article 54 of the ICSID Convention.

For these reasons, the Committee is satisfied that presently there is a high risk
of non-compliance by Argentina with its obligations under Article 53 of the ICSID
Convention if the Award is not annulled.

Argentina maintains that the cost to it of providing security would be prohibitive.
In the First Stay Decision, the Committee found that if there is a serious risk of
non-compliance with the award in the future, hardship to the award debtor in
providing security should not normally be a factor of significance, any more than
hardship could be a factor excusing non-compliance with the award itself if not
annulled.” However, the Committee left open the possibility that such hardship
may be one factor to be taken into account with other factors in exceptional
circumstances, such as where the provision of security would have
“catastrophic’, immediate and irreversible consequences” for a party’s ability to
conduct its affairs, or would severely affect the interests of the party.”°

Argentina relies on evidence of Mr Daniel Marx, a partner in a financial advisory
firm based in Argentina and former Secretary of Finance of Argentina, to the
Transcript, March 9, 2009, p. 7.

First Stay Decision § 51.
First Stay Decision § 51.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

effect that the cost to Argentina of either Proposal 1 or Proposal 2 would be
prohibitive. The Claimants have sought to dispute this.

In light of the reasons which follow, the Committee finds that it is not necessary
for it to determine what would realistically be the cost to Argentina of either
Proposal 1 or Proposal 2, or to determine whether that cost could be considered
to be so high as to constitute exceptional circumstances of the kind referred to
in paragraph 30 above.

A further argument raised by Argentina is that there is a risk, in view of Enron’s
bankruptcy, that any security provided by Argentina or any amounts recovered
by the Claimants on the award may be subject to attachment by Enron’s
creditors. The Committee is satisfied that there would be no risk of attachment
by Enron’s creditors under any of the Claimants’ proposals, in particular given
the terms of the proposed escrow agreement in Proposal 1 and given that under
Proposal 3 any enforcement of the Award would be undertaken only in the
name and on behalf of Ponderosa.

Argentina also questions the authority of the CIESA/TGS Manager and the
Claimants’ counsel to make representations on Enron’s behalf in relation to the
Claimants’ proposals. On the basis of the material before it and the submissions
of the Claimants, the Committee is satisfied as to the authority of CIESA/TGS
Manager and the Claimants’ counsel in this respect.

Argentina additionally argues that the Claimants’ proposals create unacceptable
tisks of attachment by other creditors of Argentina.

According to the Claimants, under Proposal 1, control of the escrowed funds
would remain exclusively in the hands of the escrow agent, and neither
Argentina nor any other person would have any right to withdraw any amount
from the escrow account. The Claimants say that this should resolve any
concerns regarding potential attachment by third parties. Under Proposal 3, any
funds recovered would be held in the name of Ponderosa pending the decision
on the Application for Annulment.

37. — Argentina for its part relies on a letter from the law firm of Cleary Gottlieb Steen
& Hamilton LLP, which states in relevant part as follows:

The first and third proposals by Enron/Ponderosa -- i.e.,
the creation of an escrow or the agreement by
Enron/Ponderosa to hold any seized assets in an account
pending resolution of the annulment proceeding -- each
create unacceptable risks of attachment to the [Argentine]
Republic. In the event the Republic prevails in the
annulment proceeding, the Republic will have the right to
receive back the property in the escrow and/or the
Enron/Ponderosa account. Judgment creditors of the
Republic will accordingly argue that they have a right to
attach the Republic's “right to receive” the property in the
event the Republic prevails in the annulment proceeding.

Judgment creditors have in fact relied on this theory in
obtaining attachments against the Republic. In CVI v.
Republic of Argentina, 443 F3d 214 (2d Cir. 2006) ... ., the
federal Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit held that
the judgment creditor CVI was entitled to attach the
Republic's right, in the year 2023, to receive the Brady
bond principal collateral in the event such collateral is not
collected by Brady bondholders. In 2008, CVI obtained
attachments of, inter-alia, “contractual rights [of the
Republic] to direct the release of or to receive assets
constituting unclaimed payments on debt securities held
by the Bank of New York pursuant to the Trust Indenture
and/or the Terms.” ...

Judgment creditors would invoke the above authority in
seeking to attach the escrowed property, notwithstanding
the statement in the letter that the risk of attachment is
eliminated by the fact that "[cjontrol of the escrowed funds
shall remains [sic] exclusively in the hands of the escrow
agent,” and that the Republic shall have no “control over
the use of, or any right to withdraw any amount from” the
accounts while the annulment proceedings are pending. ...
So long as the Republic has a “right to receive” the funds
in the event it succeeds in the annulment, the rationale of
the above decisions would be relied upon by judgment
creditors in seeking to attach that right. In the CVI cases,
fiscal agents and trustees controlled the subject accounts,
and the courts nevertheless authorized attachments based
on the Republic’s property interest in the accounts.

In the context of the proposed issuance of a letter of
credit, if the Republic is required (as would be likely) to
post as collateral funds returnable to it in the event the
Republic prevails in the annulment proceedings, such

17

38.

39.

40.

funds would similarly be at risk for attachment as

described above.”°
The position of Argentina suggests that under any of the proposals, amounts
paid into the escrow account by Argentina, or given as collateral by Argentina
for a bank guarantee, or obtained by Ponderosa in enforcement proceedings,
might never be recovered by Argentina if the Award is annulled.

The Claimants did not seek to deny that such attachment by third party creditors
of Argentina could be possible. Rather, in a footnote in their letter dated March
30, 2009, counsel for the Claimants stated that:

To be sure, creditors of Argentina could potentially attach

such funds, but this possibility is the result of Argentina's

own malfeasance and defaulting on its obligations, and

should not be considered by the Committee as a

legitimate reason to absolve Argentina of the obligation to

provide security here as a condition of continuing the stay.

Claimants’ proposals herein nonetheless attempt to

address this concern as well.
It appears to the Committee from the material before it that under the law in
certain jurisdictions in the United States, and possibly elsewhere as well, a third
party creditor could apply to attach Argentina’s conditional interest in sums that
would be held by the escrow agent or Ponderosa under Proposals 1 or 3, or by

a bank as collateral under Proposal 2.

Ponderosa is established under the laws of Delaware and has its principal place
of business in Texas.°° The draft escrow agreement attached to the March 30,
2009 letter from the Claimants’ representatives for purposes of Proposal 1
provides that the governing law of the escrow agreement would be that of the
State of New York. It further provides that the escrow funds would be invested
as directed by the Claimants in one or more specified types of investments,
including direct obligations of the United States of America and obligations for

This letter also cited the case of Abkco Industries Inc v. Apple Films Inc, 350 NE 2d 899, 39 NY 2d
670, 385 NYS 2d 511 (Court of Appeals of New York, 1976), in which, according to the letter, “the
New York Court of Appeals ... held that the defendant's right to receive funds pursuant to a film
licensing agreement constituted attachable ‘property’ of the defendant, even though the funds were
not in the hands of the defendant and payment depended upon the performance of a third party”.
Award § 1.

41.

42.

which the full faith and credit of the United States of America is pledged to
provide for the payment of principal and interest.

The Committee considers that the circumstances of the present case are
exceptional in that Argentina presently is party to a significant number of
investment treaty arbitration proceedings brought by various claimants, to the
extent that the Committee considers there to be a very high risk that if any of the
Claimants’ proposals were implemented, other claimants, including those with
unsatisfied ICSID awards for payment of monetary amounts, could actively seek
to execute against the funds that would be held by the escrow agent or
Ponderosa in the event that the Award is annulled. On the basis of the material
before it, the Committee is satisfied that there is a very high risk under the
Claimants’ proposals that Argentina’s conditional interest in the sums held by
the escrow agent or by Ponderosa, or by a bank providing a bank guarantee,
could be attached by third party creditors of Argentina.

The Committee does not accept the Claimants’ argument that this possibility is
not a legitimate reason for absolving Argentina from the obligation to provide
security, as “this possibility is the result of Argentina’s own malfeasance and
defaulting on its obligations”. \n arbitration proceedings, the tribunal only has
jurisdiction with respect to the specific case for which it has been constituted.
The same is true of an ad hoc committee in annulment proceedings. The
Committee considers that it would undermine confidence in the ICSID system if
an award subject to annulment proceedings might be used by strangers to the
arbitration proceedings as a procedural vehicle to secure enforcement of their
own unrelated claims against the respondent, such that amounts recovered by a
claimant on the award, or security provided as a condition of a continuation of a
stay, would be irrecoverable by the respondent in the event that the award is
annulled. While it may be impossible in all situations to remove ail risk of such
irrecoverability, the Committee considers that where that risk is very high, as it
is in this case, that fact will militate strongly against lifting the stay or against
requiring security to be provided as a condition of any continuation of the stay.
Both a stay of enforcement of an award pending annulment proceedings, as

well as a condition of security for such a stay, are interim measures in

43.

44.

45.

at
32

annulment proceedings. Like interim measures in general, they are intended to
be provisional and to have effect pending the final decision of the ad hoc
committee. It would be inconsistent with that purpose if such measures were to
have an irreversible effect for one of the parties.

Against this, the Committee has given weighty consideration to the effect that it
may have on confidence in the ICSID system if a stay of enforcement is
continued in force throughout annulment proceedings, notwithstanding that
there is a high risk of non-compliance by the respondent State with its
obligations under Article 53 of the ICSID Convention if the Award is not
annulled.

In balancing the competing considerations, the Committee has also taken into
account that in the Sempra Stay Decision, the ad hoc committee ultimately
decided to impose a condition of security, not for the full amount of the award,
but for a portion of the award as a “tangible demonstration of good faith” on the
part of Argentina.°’ However, it is not clear to the Committee what is the basis in
principle for such a condition of only partial security. Furthermore, the
Committee considers that the risk in this case of irrecoverability would apply to
partial security in the same way as it would to security for the full amount of the
Award.

The Committee must reach its decision on the basis of all the circumstances of
the case as a whole.* In addition to the matters above, the Committee takes
into account that the oral hearing in these annulment proceedings is due to be
held as early as July 2009, and that the final decision on annulment might be
expected by the end of 2009. The Committee also notes that there has been no
suggestion by the Claimants that they are aware of any immediate prospect of
enforcing the Award in a State other than Argentina under Article 54 of the
ICSID Convention that would be lost if the stay of enforcement is not lifted
before the decision on the Application for Annulment. Another consideration is
that a condition of security will often place the award creditor in a better position
than it would have been in if annulment proceedings had not been brought,

Sempra Stay of Enforcement Decision ¥§ 110-112.
First Stay Decision 46.

20

since the award creditor would not otherwise have had the benefit of such

security.*

46. In the light of all of the circumstances of this particular case as a whole, on
balance, the Committee considers that at this stage it is appropriate to continue
the stay of enforcement of the Award pending the conclusion of the annulment
proceedings without any condition of security. The Committee considers that
this case has exceptional features, and its conclusion should not be understood
as detracting in any way from the importance of the consideration referred to in
paragraph 43 above.

DECISION

The ad hoc Committee decides that pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID
Convention and Rule 54(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, the stay of
enforcement of the Award will continue in effect for the duration of these
annulment proceedings.

—

Cosy

Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C.
President on behalf of the ad hoc Committee

Melbourne, 20 May 2009

3 First Stay Decision J 52.

21

