International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
Washington, D.C.

Enron Corporation
Ponderosa Assets, L.P.
(Claimants)

v.
Argentine Republic
(Respondent)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/01/3)
(Annulment Proceeding)

 

Decision on the Argentine Republic’s Request for a
Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award
(Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules)

 

Members of the ad hoc Committee
Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C., President
Judge Patrick L. Robinson
Judge Per Tresselt
Secretary of the ad hoc Committee: Dr. Claudia Frutos-Peterson

Assistant to the ad hoc Committee: Dr. Christopher Staker

Representing the Claimants: Representing the Respondent:

Mr. R. Doak Bishop Dr. Osvaldo César Guglielmino

Mr. Craig S. Miles Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacién

King & Spalding Procuracién del Tesoro de la Nacién Argentina
1100 Louisiana, Suite 4000 Posadas 1641

Houston, Texas 77002 CP 1112 Buenos Aires

United States of America Argentina

and

Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil
M & M Bomchil Abogados
Suipacha 268, Piso 12
C1008AAF Buenos Aires

Argentina

October 7, 2008

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION 3
THE PARTIES’ CONTENTIONS 5
RELEVANT ICSID CONVENTION ARTICLES AND ICSID ARBITRATION RULES......
THE BIT
THE COMMITTEE’S VIEWS
(i) ie inci

 

mMmoOOD>

 

 

 

Princip
(a) Whether a stay may be subject to conditions .
(b) Factors to be taken into account in the exercise of the Committee’s

 

 

(ii) The circumstances of the present case.
(a) The disagreement between the parties concerning the effect of
Article VII(6) of the BIT and Article 53 of the ICSID Convention
Introduction 8
The effect of Articles 53 and 54 of the ICSID Convention.
The effect of Article VII(6) of the BIT.
The Committee's findings...
(b) Other alleged circumstances said by the Claimants to give rise to a risk
of non-compliance with the Award by Argentina...
(c) Other alleged circumstances invoked by the Parties
(iii) The Committee’s ic
DECISION

 

 

 

 

Introduction

On 21 February 2008, the Argentine Republic (“Argentina”) filed with the
Secretary-General of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment
Disputes (“ICSID”) an application in writing (the “Application for Annulment”)
requesting the annulment of the Award of 22 May 2007 (the “Award”), rendered
by the tribunal (the “Tribunal”) in the arbitration proceeding between Enron
Corporation and Ponderosa Assets, L.P. (the “Claimants”) and Argentina.

The Application for Annulment was made within the time period provided in
Article 52(2) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes
between States and Nationals of Other States (“the ICSID Convention”), having
tegard to Article 49(2) of the ICSID Convention and considering that on 25
October 2007, the Tribunal rendered its decision on a request by the Claimants
under that provision for rectification and/or a supplementary decision of the
Award.

In the Application for Annulment, Argentina seeks annulment of the Award on
three of the five grounds set forth in Article 52(1) of the ICSID Convention,
specifically claiming that:

(a) the Tribunal manifestly exceeded its powers;
(b) there was a serious departure from a fundamental rule of procedure; and
(c) the Award failed to state the reasons on which it was based.

The Application for Annulment also contained a request, under Article 52(5) of
the ICSID Convention and Rule 54(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (the “ICSID Arbitration Rules”), for a stay of
enforcement of the Award until the Application for Annulment is decided.

The Deputy Secretary-General of ICSID registered the Application on 7 March
2008, and on the same date, in accordance with Rule 50(2) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, transmitted a Notice of Registration to the parties. The parties

were also notified that, pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 54(2), the
enforcement of the Award was provisionally stayed.

By letter of 22 May 2008, in accordance with Rule 52(2) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, the parties were notified by the Centre that an ad hoc Committee (“the
Committee”) had been constituted, composed of Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C., a
national of Australia, Judge Patrick L. Robinson, a national of Jamaica, and
Judge Per Tresselt, a national of Norway. On the same date the parties were
informed that Dr. Claudia Frutos-Peterson, Counsel, ICSID, would serve as
Secretary of the Committee.

On 18 June 2008, the Claimants filed a request to lift the provisional stay of
enforcement of the award, or alternatively, to condition a continuation of the stay
on Argentina’s posting adequate security (the “Claimants’ Request’). By letter of
20 June 2008, the Committee invited Argentina to submit its written
observations on the Claimants’ Request no later than 7 July 2008. By the same
letter, the Committee confirmed that the oral arguments on this matter would
take place during the first session and informed the parties that the Committee
would make a decision on the continuation of the stay of enforcement of the
Award in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 54.

By a letter dated 30 June 2008, the Committee asked the parties whether they
would agree to retain the services of an assistant, Dr. Christopher Staker, in
addition to the Secretary of the Committee. Argentina and the Claimants agreed
to Dr. Staker’s appointment by letters dated 2 and 8 July 2008, respectively.

In compliance with the Committee’s instructions, on 7 July 2008, Argentina filed
its observations on the continuation of the stay of enforcement of the Award
(“Argentina’s Observations’).

The first session of the Committee was held, as scheduled with the agreement
of the parties, on 14 July 2008, at the premises of the World Bank in Paris. Prior
to the start of the session, the Secretariat distributed to the parties copies of the
declarations, signed by each Member of the Committee, pursuant to ICSID
Arbitration Rule 52(2). During the first session, several issues of procedure were
agreed and decided. Subsequently, the parties addressed the Committee with

their respective arguments concerning the question of the continuance of the
stay of enforcement of the Award. During the session, the Committee put
questions to the parties, and offered the parties an opportunity to file within
fourteen days certain additional materials on which they sought to rely. At the
same time, the Committee decided to continue the stay of enforcement of the
Award until it had taken a decision.

By a letter dated 25 July 2008 with attachments, Argentina presented certain
additional materials and information to the Committee.

By a letter dated 28 July 2008 with attachments, the Claimants in turn presented
certain additional materials and information to the Committee.

The Members of the Committee have deliberated by various means of
communication, and have taken into consideration the parties’ entire written and
oral arguments and submissions on the matter.

The parties’ contentions

As outlined above, the Claimants have requested that the provisional stay of
enforcement of the Award pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention be
lifted, or alternatively, that if the Committee continues the stay, it be conditioned
on Argentina’s providing financial security. The Claimants’ Request argued,
inter alia:

(a) — that prior ICSID annulment committees have determined that a primary
factor to consider when evaluating whether to continue a stay is whether
the State seeking annulment will promptly comply with the award if it is
not annulled;'

The Claimants referred to MTD Equity Sdn. Bhd. and MTD Chile S.A. v. Republic of Chile (ICSID

Case No. ARB/01/7), Decision on the Respondent's Request for a Continued Stay of Execution,
June 1, 2005 (“MTD Stay Decision”) § 29; CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic
(ICSID Case No. ARB/01/8), Decision on the Argentine Republic's Request for a Continued Stay of
Enforcement of the Award, September 1, 2006 (“CMS Stay Decision”) 4 38.

2

that there is a substantial risk that Argentina will not comply voluntarily

with the Award if its Application for Annulment is unsuccessful and that it

will use the period of the continued stay to divert assets that would
otherwise be available to the Claimants to satisfy the Award, as:

(i)

(iii

(iv)

senior executive and judicial officers and the Attorney General
have stated that Argentina will not comply voluntarily with ICSID
awards, but will challenge them before the International Court of
Justice or before the Argentine courts;

in particular, notwithstanding that Argentina has an obligation
under Article 53 of the ICSID Convention to pay voluntarily ICSID
award rendered against it, Argentina has erroneously taken the
position that an investor seeking recognition or enforcement of an
ICSID award against Argentina must, pursuant to Article 54 of the
ICSID Convention, follow the procedures under Argentine law for
the enforcement of final judgments;

despite the letter of undertaking that Argentina submitted in the
CMS annulment proceedings, Argentina had still not paid the
award in that case nine months after the decision of the ad hoc
committee, and even diverted funds away from New York after
CMS was granted a temporary restraining order by a United States
court;

there is grave doubt as to the enforceability in Argentina of ICSID
awards pursuant to Article 54 of the ICSID Convention, since while
under Argentine law international treaties are superior to local
laws, they are (save for certain human rights treaties) subordinate
to the Argentine Constitution, and a recent Argentine Supreme
Court decision? supports the doctrine that Argentine Courts may
review and vacate ICSID awards; and

Corte Suprema de Justicia, June 1, 2004, Cartellone c. Hidronor, Fallos 327-1881.

(9)

(v) despite its strong economic recovery, Argentina remains in default
of its international financial obligations and is deemed a credit risk
by major credit evaluation agencies;

that given that a stay of enforcement interferes with the investor's right to
an immediately payable and enforceable award:

(i) such a stay is an extraordinary measure not to be granted lightly,

(ii) there is a negative presumption with regard to a stay of
enforcement; and

(iii) | Argentina bears the burden of proving that a stay of enforcement
of the Award is required;

that scholarly commentary and many ICSID ad hoc committees make
clear that the posting of security when a provisional stay is continued is a
“counterbalancing right” to the negative effect of the stay on the award
creditor;°

that Argentina will not suffer irreparable harm if the stay of enforcement is
discontinued or if it is required to post security given its economic
recovery, and that Argentina clearly has the resources to post security;

that security is generally considered a remedy granted to the award
creditor during an annulment process to ensure that the creditor does not
suffer additional damages if enforcement of the award is stayed during
the course of the annulment proceeding;

that a continuance of the stay of enforcement of the Award without
security would harm the Claimants since:

The Claimants referred inter alia to C. Schreuer, The ICSID Convention: A Commentary
(Cambridge University Press, 2001) at 1058 9478, 1060 9 483-4; P.D. Friedland, “Stay of
Enforcement of the Arbitral Award Pending ICSID Annulment Proceedings”, in E. Gaillard (ed.),
Annulment of ICSID Awards (2003) 177 at 185; Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt
(ICSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Procedural Order No. 1 of the ad hoc Committee concerning the
Continuation of the Stay of Enforcement of the Award, April 5, 2001 (“Wena Stay Decision”) § 7(b);
CDC Group ple v. Republic of the Seychelles (\CSID Case No. ARB/02/14), Decision on Whether
or Not to Continue Stay and Order, July 14, 2004 (“CDC Stay Decision”) § 19; Patrick Mitchell v.
Democratic Republic of the Congo (ICSID Case No. ARB/99/7), Decision on the Stay of
Enforcement of the Award, November 30, 2004 (“Mitchell Stay Decision”) 4 33.

(i) this would prevent payment of the compensation awarded to the
Claimants, which was due on the date that the Award was
dispatched to the parties;

(ii) the Tribunal did not grant the Claimants post-award interest and
the value of the Award will therefore continue to decline for every
day that it is not paid;

(iii) | the Claimants have already initiated enforcement procedures in
the United States prior to the coming into effect of the provisional
stay, and would be prejudiced by a continued stay of those efforts
already initiated;

(h) that any argument that security would place the Claimants in a “better
position” than if annulment had not been sought is erroneous and has
been consistently rejected since it was advanced in the MINE case;* and

(i) that Argentina faces no risk of non-recoupment if the award is annulled,
given the Claimants’ proposal that if the stay is lifted any amounts
recovered be held in escrow pending a decision on the Application for
Annulment, or that if the stay is continued on condition of the provision of
security by Argentina, the security be held in escrow pending a decision
on the Application for Annulment.

Argentina opposed the Claimants’ Request and sought a continuance of the
stay of enforcement without any requirement for the provision of security by
Argentina. Argentina’s Observations inter alia argued:

(a) that no ad hoc committee in any case has failed to grant a stay of
enforcement of the award pending annulment proceedings;

(b) that requiring a guarantee to maintain the stay of enforcement of the
award is contrary to the object and purpose of the ICSID Convention, as
well as to its spirit, and that no provision of the ICSID Convention allows

The Claimants quote from the ad hoc committee’s consideration of the issue in the CDC Stay
Decision § 19, which considers Maritime International Nominees Establishment (“MINE”) v.

Republic of Guinea (ICSID Case No. ARB/84/4), Interim Order No. 1 on Guinea's Application for
Stay of Enforcement of the Award, August 12, 1988 (“MINE Stay Decision”) ¥ 22.

conditioning the stay of enforcement of the Award on the posting of a
guarantee;

that failure to stay enforcement of the award would cause harm to
Argentina, which is a developing country with high rates of poverty,
extreme poverty and social exclusion, and where despite the improved
economic situation the effects of the recent economic crisis are still
visible;

that failure to stay enforcement of the award would cause harm to the
investment arbitration system under the ICSID Convention, as it would
make an award full of irregularities enforceable;

that it would be difficult, if not impossible, for the Claimants to recover the
amount of the Award if it were annulled, given Enron’s bankruptcy;

that the Claimants cannot argue that a continuation of the stay would
cause the Claimants harm as this is a remedy specifically provided for in
the ICSID Convention;

that the Tribunal did not grant the Claimants post-award interest because
the Claimants did not request it, and that Argentina should not have to
bear the consequences of the Claimants’ failure to do so;

that in the Argentine legal system, Argentina’s international obligations,
including awards issued by ICSID tribunals, have supremacy over laws
enacted by Congress, and this is an adequate guarantee of compliance
with the Award in the event that it is not annulled;

that Argentina has historically complied with decisions of international
tribunals;

that the text of the ICSID Convention does not provide for the possibility
of requiring a party seeking annulment to post a guarantee, that the
travaux préparatoires of the ICSID Convention indicate that its
negotiators dismissed a proposal to empower an ad hoc committee to
require the posting of security as a condition for granting a stay, and that

previous ICSID cases have incorrectly imported such a possibility from

commercial arbitration practice;

that requiring a party to a dispute to provide a guarantee would impair the
effective use of the protection contained in Article 52 of the ICSID
Convention in the event of an irregular award, especially in the case of
developing countries, while there is no doubt that in the absence of an
award annulment system States would not have ratified the ICSID
Convention;

that previous ICSID cases in which security has been made a condition of
a continuation of a stay of enforcement had characteristics that this case
does not have;

that no matter how a bank guarantee is provided, its provision would be
detrimental to Argentina, since the commission that a bank would charge
for providing such a guarantee would be exorbitant, and the freezing of
the amount of the Award during the annulment proceeding would be
detrimental to Argentina;

that requiring a guarantee as a condition for continuing a stay of
enforcement would place the Claimants in a much more favourable
position than they are now, and than they were prior to the filing of the
Application for Annulment;

that the provision of a guarantee would penalise the party that applies for
annulment;

that the posting of a bank guarantee is unnecessary since the Argentine
domestic legal system already guarantees compliance with the Award;

that Argentina has not failed to comply with the award in the CMS case,
since:

(i) Article 53 of the ICSID Convention does not establish an obligation
of voluntary payment by Argentina;

18.

(iii

under Article 54 of the ICSID Convention, award creditors must
meet the formal requirements that any person should follow in
Argentina to obtain compliance with a final judgment of a local
court; and

CMS refused to follow that procedure; and

(r) that the Claimants have presented no new fact that was not previously

argued by the claimant in the Azurix Stay Decision,® in which the ad hoc

committee ordered a continuation of the stay of enforcement without any

condition of security.

As noted above, Argentina and the Claimants supplemented their written filings

with oral submissions on 14 July 2008, and both parties subsequently provided

additional materials and information.

Relevant ICSID Convention Articles and ICSID Arbitration Rules

Article 27(1) of the ICSID Convention states:

No Contracting State shall give diplomatic protection, or bring
an international claim, in respect of a dispute which one of its
nationals and another Contracting State shall have consented
to submit or shall have submitted to arbitration under this
Convention, unless such other Contracting State shall have
failed to abide by and comply with the award rendered in such
dispute.

Article 52 of the ICSID Convention provides:

(1) Either party may request annulment of the award by an
application in writing addressed to the Secretary-General
on one or more of the following grounds:

(a) _ that the Tribunal was not properly constituted;

(b) that the Tribunal has manifestly exceeded its
powers;

Azurix Corp. v. Argentine Republic (\CSID Case No. ARB/01/12), Decision on the Argentine

Republic's Request for a Continued Stay of Enforcement of the Award, December 28, 2007 (“Azurix

Stay Decision”).

(5)

(c) _ that there was corruption on the part of a member
of the Tribunal;

(dq) _ that there has been a serious departure from a
fundamental rule of procedure; or

(e) that the award has failed to state the reasons on
which it is based.

The Committee may, if it considers that the
circumstances so require, stay enforcement of the award
pending its decision. If the applicant requests a stay of
enforcement of the award in his application, enforcement
shall be stayed provisionally until the Committee rules on
such request.

19. Articles 53 to 55 of the ICSID Convention provide:

Article 53

(1)

The award shall be binding on the parties and shall not
be subject to any appeal or to any other remedy except
those provided for in this Convention. Each party shall
abide by and comply with the terms of the award except
to the extent that enforcement shall have been stayed
pursuant to the relevant provisions of this Convention.

(2) _ For the purposes of this Section, "award" shall include
any decision interpreting, revising or annulling such
award pursuant to Articles 50, 51 or 52.

Article 54

(1) Each Contracting State shall recognize an award

rendered pursuant to this Convention as binding and
enforce the pecuniary obligations imposed by that award
within its territories as if it were a final judgment of a court
in that State. A Contracting State with a federal
constitution may enforce such an award in or through its
federal courts and may provide that such courts shall
treat the award as if it were a final judgment of the courts
of a constituent state.

20.

(2) A party seeking recognition or enforcement in the
territories of a Contracting State shall furnish to a
competent court or other authority which such State shall
have designated for this purpose a copy of the award
certified by the Secretary-General. Each Contracting
State shall notify the Secretary-General of the
designation of the competent court or other authority for
this purpose and of any subsequent change in such
designation.

(3) Execution of the award shall be governed by the laws
concerning the execution of judgments in force in the
State in whose territories such execution is sought.

Article 55

Nothing in Article 54 shall be construed as derogating from the
law in force in any Contracting State relating to immunity of that
State or of any foreign State from execution.

Rule 54 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules applies to the present case and provides:

Stay of Enforcement of the Award

(1) The party applying for the interpretation, revision or
annulment of an award may in its application, and either
party may at any time before the final disposition of the
application, request a stay in the enforcement of part or
all of the award to which the application relates. The
Tribunal or Committee shall give priority to the
consideration of such a request.

(2) _ If an application for the revision or annulment of an
award contains a request for a stay of its enforcement,
the Secretary-General shall, together with the notice of
registration, inform both parties of the provisional stay of
the award. As soon as the Tribunal or Committee is
constituted it shall, if either party requests, rule within 30
days on whether such stay should be continued; unless it
decides to continue the stay, it shall automatically be
terminated.

(3) If a stay of enforcement has been granted pursuant to
paragraph (1) or continued pursuant to paragraph (2),
the Tribunal or Committee may at any time modify or
terminate the stay at the request of either party. All stays
shall automatically terminate on the date on which a final

13

decision is rendered on the application, except that a
Committee granting the partial annulment of an award
may order the temporary stay of enforcement of the
unannulled portion in order to give either party an
opportunity to request any new Tribunal constituted
pursuant to Article 52(6) of the Convention to grant a
stay pursuant to Rule 55(3).

(4) A request pursuant to paragraph (1), (2) (second
sentence) or (3) shall specify the circumstances that
require the stay or its modification or termination. A
request shall only be granted after the Tribunal or
Committee has given each party an opportunity of
presenting its observations.

(5) The Secretary-General shall promptly notify both parties
of the stay of enforcement of any award and of the
modification or termination of such a stay, which shall
become effective on the date on which he dispatches
such notification.

D. The BIT

21. Article VII of the Treaty between the United States of America and the Argentine
Republic Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of
Investment? (the “BIT”) provides, in relevant part:

ARTICLE Vil

2. In the event of an investment dispute, the parties to the
dispute should initially seek a resolution through
consultation and negotiation. If the dispute cannot be
settled amicably, the national or company concerned
may choose to submit the dispute for resolution:

(c) in accordance with the terms of paragraph 3.

3. (a) Provided that the national or company concerned
has not submitted the dispute for resolution under
paragraph 2 (a) or (b) and that six months have
elapsed from the date on which the dispute arose,
the national or company concerned may choose to

6 Signed 14 November 1991; entered into force 20 October 1994.

14

(a)
22.

23.

24,

consent in writing to the submission of the dispute
for settlement by binding arbitration:

(i) to the International Centre for Settlement of
Investment Disputes ("Centre") established
by the Convention on the Settlement of
Investment Disputes between States and
Nationals of other States, done at
Washington, March 18, 1965 ("ICSID
Convention"), provided that the Party is a
party to such convention: ...

6. Any arbitral award rendered pursuant to this Article shall
be final and binding on the parties to the dispute. Each
Party undertakes to carry out without delay the
provisions of any such award and to provide in its
territory for its enforcement.

The Committee’s views
(i) | Applicable principles

Whether a stay may be subject to conditions

The use of the word “may” in Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention makes clear
that it is a matter within the discretion of the ad hoc committee whether or not to
stay enforcement of the award pending its decision on an application for

annulment.

However, neither the ICSID Convention nor the ICSID Arbitration Rules
expressly states whether an ad hoc committee may, in the exercise of this
discretion, grant a request for a stay subject to conditions, such as a condition
that the party seeking the stay provide security for the enforcement of the award
in the event that annulment is not granted.

In previous decisions, ad hoc committees have proceeded on the basis that
they may do so, and indeed on several occasions have done so. However,
previous decisions have merely assumed that an ad hoc committee has the

25.

7

power to grant a stay subject to conditions. Given that the existence of such a
power is expressly disputed by Argentina in this case, the Committee considers
that it must carefully examine the question. Having considered the arguments
and authorities of the parties, the Committee concludes as follows.

The terms of the ICSID Convention are the source of the Committee’s power to
modify or grant a stay. The question whether the Committee can make a stay
conditional on the provision of security is therefore a matter of interpretation of
that Convention. In its interpretation of the ICSID Convention, the Committee is
guided by Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties
(the “Vienna Convention’).’ These provisions reflect the customary international
law rules of treaty interpretation as they already existed at the time that the text
of the ICSID Convention was adopted.® It is therefore immaterial to the
interpretation of the ICSID Convention whether or not a particular Contracting
State to the ICSID Convention is also a party to the Vienna Convention. Articles
31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention state:

Article 31
General rule of interpretation

1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance
with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the
treaty in their context and in the light of its object and
purpose.

2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a
treaty shall comprise, in addition to the text, including its
preamble and annexes:

(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was
made between all the parties in connection with
the conclusion of the treaty;

(b) — any instrument which was made by one or more
parties in connection with the conclusion of the
treaty and accepted by the other parties as an
instrument related to the treaty.

3. There shall be taken into account, together with the
context:

8 Vienna, May 23, 1969; 1155 U.N.T.S. 331.

E.g., Sovereignty over Pulau Ligitan and Pulau Sipadan (IndonesialMalaysia), Judgment, 1.C.J.
Reports 2002, p. 625, at pp. 645-646, para. 37.

16

26.

27.

9

(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties
regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the
application of its provisions;

(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the
treaty which establishes the agreement of the
parties regarding its interpretation;

(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in
the relations between the parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is
established that the parties so intended.

Article 32
Supplementary means of interpretation

Recourse may be had to supplementary means of
interpretation, including the preparatory work of the treaty and
the circumstances of its conclusion, in order to confirm the
meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or to
determine the meaning when the interpretation according to
article 31:

(a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or

(b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or
unreasonable.

As to Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention, the Committee notes that the text
of the ICSID Convention is silent on the question whether or not an ad hoc
committee can make a stay conditional on the provision of security. The
Committee does not view that silence as necessarily meaning that the power
does not exist. The Committee considers that a discretionary power to allow or
deny a remedy may implicitly include a power to allow the remedy subject to
conditions,° and that such an interpretation would be consistent with the objects
and purposes of Article 52(5), which is designed to enable the ad hoc
committee to balance the rights of the parties pending annulment proceedings.

As regards Article 31(3)(b) of the Vienna Convention, the Committee notes that
ad hoc committees have previously been called upon to exercise their power

Compare MTD Stay Decision § 26; CMS Stay Decision § 35: “Since a stay is not automatic, the
[Committee] could grant the request subject to conditions, including a condition that an appropriate
bond be provided”.

28.

10

under Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention on eleven known occasions. '° On
each of those occasions, a continuation of the stay was ordered. On five of
those occasions, the continuation of the stay was ordered on condition that the
State seeking the stay provided security for the payment of the award in the
event that annulment was not granted, in the form of a bank guarantee.'' On
five of those occasions, a continuation of the stay was ordered without any such
condition.'* On one of those occasions, the parties agreed that the State
seeking a stay would post a bank guarantee in exchange for a waiver of the
right by the award creditor to bring enforcement proceedings pending the
outcome of the annulment proceedings. °

Although the written and oral submissions of the parties in respect of these
previous decisions are not publicly available, in none of the previous decisions
is the existence of the power to make a stay subject to a condition of security
discussed at any length. As noted above, the existence of this power has
generally merely been assumed. In only one of the previous decisions is it

indicated that the State seeking the stay had argued that the Committee had no

14

power to include a condition of security,'* and in that instance the ad hoc

committee did not decide the question, but declined for other reasons to make
security a condition.'° From this the Committee considers it likely that in the

(1) Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1), in
which the Article 52(5) decision issued in the first annulment proceedings in that case (“Amco | Stay
Decision”) is not public but is summarised in Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of
Indonesia (ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1), Ad hoc Committee Decision on the Application for
Annulment, May 16, 1986, 25 /LM 1439 (1986); 1 Int'l Arb. Rep. 649 (1986); 12 Y.B. Com. Arb. 129
(1987); 89 1.L.R. 514 (1992); 1 ICSID Rep. 509 (1993) (“Amco | Annulment Decision”) 9{ 5-9;
(2) MINE Stay Decision; (3) Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia (\CSID
Case No. ARB/81/1), Interim Order No. 1, March 2, 1991, 9 ICSID Rep. 59 (2006) (“Amco II Stay
Decision”) (issued in relation to the second annulment proceedings in that case); (4) Southern
Pacific Properties (Middle East) Limited v. Arab Republic of Egypt (ICSID Case No. ARB/84/3), in
which the Article 52(5) decision (“SPP Stay Decision”) is not public but is summarised in Schreuer
(op. cit) at 1054, 1055, 1060 9§ 462, 468, 482 (citing W.L. Craig, “The Final Chapter in the
Pyramids Case: Discounting an ICSID Award for Annulment Risk”, 8 /CSID Rev.-Foreign Inv. L.J.
264, 268, 284-285, 290 (1993); (5) Wena Stay Decision; (6) Mitchell Stay Decision; (7) CDC Stay
Decision; (8) MTD Stay Decision; (9) Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petrdleos del
Ecuador (Petroecuador) (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/10), Procedural Order No. 1, December 22,
2005 (“Repsol Stay Decision”); (10) CMS Stay Decision; (11) Azurix Stay Decision.

Amco | Stay Decision, Amco II Stay Decision, Wena Stay Decision, CDC Stay Decision, Repsol
Stay Decision.

MINE Stay Decision, Mitchell Stay Decision, MTD Stay Decision, CMS Stay Decision, Azurix Stay
Decision.

SPP Stay Decision.

MINE Stay Decision § 20.

MINE Stay Decision §§ 22-25.

29.

30.

other ten previous decisions, the States concerned did not argue that the ad hoc
committee lacked the power to include a condition of security, or at least, did not
argue this forcefully or as a primary argument.

Additionally, of the five previous decisions in which the ad hoc committee
included a requirement of security, it appears that in three of these cases the
requisite security was in fact provided by the State concerned, '® while in two of
these cases the State did not provide the security, and the ad hoc committee
consequently terminated the stay.'? The Committee further takes into account
that although there are now eleven decisions given over a period of more than a
decade proceeding on the basis that an ad hoc committee may require security
as a condition of a stay, the Committee has not been pointed to any other
instance in which an ICSID Contracting State has expressed concern in any
forum that these decisions in this respect exceed the ad hoc committee’s power
under Article 52(5).

As for Article 32 of the Vienna Convention, Argentina argues that the
Preliminary Draft to the ICSID Convention provided for the ad hoc committee to
have a power to recommend any provisional measures necessary for the
protection of the rights of the parties in connection with a stay of enforcement, '®
but that this power did not appear in later drafts of the Convention. '° Argentina
further argues that a very important consideration is that an express provision

Compliance by Indonesia with the condition of security in the Amco | Stay Decision is noted in
Amco | Annulment Decision § 8. Compliance by Indonesia with the condition of security in the
Amco Il Stay Decision is noted in Amco Asia Corporation and others v. Republic of Indonesia
(ICSID Case No. ARB/81/1), Decision on Annulment of Award of 5 June 1990 and of Supplemental
Award of 17 October 1990, December 3, 1992, 9 ICSID Rep. 3 (2006) § 3.07. Compliance by Egypt
with the condition of security in the Wena Stay Decision is noted in Wena Hotels Limited v. Arab
Republic of Egypt (\CSID Case No. ARB/98/4), Decision on Application for Annulment, February 5,
2002, 41 ILM 933 (2002); 6 ICSID Rep. 129 (2004) 4 6.

The CDC case and the Repsol case. As to the former, see CDC Group plc v. Republic of the
Seychelles (ICSID Case No. ARB/02/14), Decision of the ad hoc Committee on the Application for
Annulment of the Republic of the Seychelles, June 29, 2005
(http:/www.investmentclaims.com/IIC_48_(2005).pdf) § 16. As to the latter, see Repsol YPF
Ecuador S.A. v. Empresa Estatal Petroleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador) (ICSID Case No.
ARB/01/10), Procedural Order No. 4, February 22, 2006; and Repsol YPF Ecuador S.A. v.
Empresa Estatal Petrdleos del Ecuador (Petroecuador) (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/10), Decision on
the Application for Annulment, January 8, 2007 4 8, 12.

According to History of the ICSID Convention, Vol. |, at 238, Article IV, Section 13(5) of the
Preliminary Draft of the ICSID Convention, which as amended became Article 52(5), read: “The
Committee shall have the power to stay enforcement of the award pending its decision and to
recommend any provisional measures necessary for the protection of the rights of the parties”.
Schreuer (op cit.) at 1058 § 478; History of the ICSID Convention, Vol. |, at 238.

19

31.

for security is contained in the 1958 Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (the “New York Convention”),”° and that
such a provision was not included in the ICSID Convention which was
negotiated several years later.

The Committee finds that it is not clear why the power to recommend
provisional measures contained in the Preliminary Draft was omitted from later
drafts. Nor is it clear why the ICSID Convention differs in this respect from the
New York Convention. The Committee notes that the power of a Tribunal to
order provisional measures, contained in Article 47 of the ICSID Convention, is
not included in the list in Article 52(4) of provisions that are applicable mutatis
mutandis in annulment proceedings. On the other hand, the Committee notes
that ICSID Arbitration Rule 53 appears to be sufficiently broadly worded to
confer on an ad hoc committee the power to recommend provisional measures,
contained in ICSID Arbitration Rule 39. On the basis of the limited material
before it, the Committee is not satisfied that the effect of the differences
between the final text of Article 52(5) on the one hand, and the Preliminary Draft
and New York Convention on the other, is to exclude the possibility of an ad hoc
committee requiring security as a condition of a stay. Even if it were the case
that an ad hoc committee lacks the power under Article 47 to recommend
provisional measures, a matter which the Committee finds that it is not called
upon to decide, this would not mean that Article 52(5) must be interpreted one
way rather than another. The Committee merely notes that, contrary to what is
suggested by Argentina, the lack of a power to recommend provisional
measures under Article 47 could arguably support the conclusion that Article
52(5) must be given a broader, rather than a narrower interpretation, since the
ad hoc committee’s power to balance the rights of the parties pending the
annulment proceedings would depend solely on Article 52(5).

New York, June 10, 1958; 330 U.N.T.S. 3. Article VI of the New York Convention states: “If an
application for the setting aside or suspension of the award has been made to a competent
authority referred to in article V(1)(e), the authority before which the award is sought to be relied
upon may, if it considers it proper, adjourn the decision on the enforcement of the award and may
also, on the application of the party claiming enforcement of the award, order the other party to give
suitable security.”

20

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

21

Under Article 32 of the Vienna Convention, in addition to the travaux
préparatoires, recourse may also be had to other supplementary means of
interpretation, as is clear from the word “including” in that provision. The
Committee considers that amongst other supplementary means of interpretation
are jurisprudence, including decisions and awards of ICSID tribunals and ad hoc
committees, and doctrine.

As regards previous ICSID decisions, as noted above, in ten out of the eleven
previous decisions under Article 52(5), the ad hoc committee proceeded on the
basis that it had the power to include a condition of security, while the other
previous decision left this question open. Although the previous decisions may
not have examined the question in any detail, and may not constitute a
subsequent practice for the purposes of Article 31(3)(b) of the Vienna
Convention, the Committee considers that weight must nonetheless be given to
the fact that there is now what amounts to a jurisprudence constante to the
effect that a stay may be made conditional on the provision of security. While
the Committee is not bound by these previous decisions, it considers that it
should take into account the possible effect on the stability and predictability of
the ICSID system if it were to depart from a consistent line of previous
decisions.

As regards doctrine, the Committee has not been referred to any publicist
expressing the view that there is no power under Article 52(5) to make a stay
conditional on security; on the contrary, the Committee has been referred to
doctrine affirming the existence of this power.”!

Having regard to all of these matters, the Committee finds that under Article
52(5) of the ICSID Convention it may make a continuation of a stay of
enforcement conditional on the provision of security by the party requesting the
stay.

The Committee therefore concludes that where a stay of enforcement is
requested under Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention, three alternative
outcomes are possible. First, the ad hoc committee could decide not to grant

Schreuer (op. cif) at 1060 9] 483-484.

21

37.

(b)

38.

2%
23

the request. Secondly, the ad hoc committee could decide to grant the request
subject to the provision of security or to compliance with some other condition
by the party requesting the stay. Thirdly, the ad hoc committee could decide to
grant the request unconditionally.

The Committee will therefore proceed to consider which of these three
outcomes is required in this case, having regard to all of the circumstances. In
contrast perhaps to ad hoc committees in previous decisions, the Committee
does not adopt the approach of considering first whether a stay should be
ordered, and only then, if that question is answered affirmatively, of considering
whether the stay should be subject to a condition of security. This is because
the question whether or not security will be provided is itself one of the
circumstances that must be taken into account with other relevant
circumstances in determining whether the stay should continue.2? The
Committee considers that for this reason, the issue of continuation of the stay
and the issue of security must inherently be considered together.

Factors to be taken into account in the exercise of the Committee’s
discretion
Article 52(5) provides no express guidance on the matters to be taken into
account in the exercise of the Committee’s discretion under that provision, or on
the relative weight that they should be given. As one ad hoc committee has
said:

No indication is given as to what kind of circumstances require

a stay; therefore the Committee is free to evaluate the

arguments of the Parties in view of the particularities of each

case.
Nevertheless, mindful that the discretion must not be exercised arbitrarily, the
Committee considers that it must first seek to identify what considerations are
relevant in the application of Article 52(5). For this purpose, the Committee has
taken into account previous decisions of ad hoc committees under Article 52(5).

2 Compare MINE Stay Decision § 26.
Mitchell Stay Decision § 23; also CDC Stay Decision 8.

22

39.

40.

4.

The Committee notes however that these previous decisions, to the extent that
they merely apply Article 52(5) to the circumstances of a particular case, are of
less assistance than a line of previous decisions which consistently affirm a
legal principle or rule.?*

Either party to an ICSID dispute has the right to request annulment of an award
pursuant to Article 52. Article 52(1) sets out the limited grounds upon which
annulment may be sought, which are directed to defined grave injustices. Article
52 of the ICSID Convention is an integral part of the ICSID dispute settlement
regime to which all Contracting States have agreed, and without this safeguard
some States parties might not have accepted the ICSID Convention.”°

While it is the case that until recently annulment proceedings have been
infrequent, they should not be regarded as per se exceptional so as to create a
presumption against a stay of enforcement, or in favour of conditioning any stay
on the provision of security.2° The systemic importance of the annulment
procedure is not obviated or reduced in its application simply because a party to
a specific case has sought annulment, or because a Contracting State has
generally stated an intention to seek annulment of other or all adverse ICSID
determinations to which it is a party.?”

Furthermore, Article 53 of the ICSID Convention provides that:

Each party shall abide by and comply with the terms of the

award except to the extent that enforcement shall have been

stayed pursuant to the relevant provisions of this Convention

[emphasis added].
As was observed in the Azurix Stay Decision, the ICSID Convention thereby
explicitly recognizes that the award creditor's rights are subject to a stay if an ad
hoc committee considers that the circumstances so require. The Committee
agrees that the award creditor’s rights are to this extent themselves qualified by
the Convention. The Committee therefore does not accept the argument that
because a stay interferes with the award creditor's right to payment of an award,

Compare Azurix Stay Decision § 24; Mitchell Stay Decision § 23.
Mitchell Stay Decision § 40.

Compare Azurix Stay Decision § 31.

Azurix Stay Decision § 31.

23

42.

43.

44.

a stay of enforcement under Article 52(5) should be regarded as exceptional or,
if ordered, should normally be counterbalanced by a condition of security.

The Committee further finds it significant that a stay of enforcement of the
award pending annulment proceedings has been granted in all cases in which it
has been requested. The Committee also notes that under some but by no
means all national laws a stay of enforcement pending an appeal from a judicial
decision is almost automatic.”°

These several considerations lead the Committee to conclude that upon an
application for annulment, in general, a requested stay should be granted under
Article 52(5) if requested, unless the Committee finds that there are very
exceptional circumstances why this should not occur, notwithstanding the
possibility of making the stay conditional on the provision of security.”

On the other hand, as there is no requirement in the Convention that security be
provided as a condition for a stay, the Committee does not accept that an award
creditor has a “counterbalancing right” to security in any case where a
continuation of a stay is ordered.°’ In this regard, the Committee also is in
agreement with the Azurix Stay Decision that to require that security be
provided as a matter of course in all but the exceptional case would risk
compromising the important confidence-balancing function for Contracting
States served by the annulment procedure.** Where a State is the applicant for
annulment, a further relevant factor for the Committee is that, because security
ordinarily would only be sought against a developing country, it would risk
introducing into the ICSID system the unacceptable suggestion of discrimination
between States, whether de jure or de facto, as to terms for security imposed on
Article 52(5) applications.°°> The absence of any presumption in favour of a
condition of security is perhaps confirmed by the fact that of the eleven known
previous decisions granting a stay under Article 52(5), a condition of security

Azurix Stay Decision § 41-42.
Compare Mitchell Stay Decision § 28.
Azurix Stay Decision § 22.
See Azurix Stay Decision 9 33-35.
Azurix Stay Decision § 31.
Azurix Stay Decision { 32; also Mitchell Stay Decision § 40.

24

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

was imposed in five and agreed by the parties in one, while in the other five a
request for such a condition was not granted.

Nor does the Committee accept the contention that a general requirement for
security in return for a stay is desirable as a means of deterring frivolous or
dilatory annulment applications,** given that any such general requirement

would penalise all applications, whether frivolous or dilatory or not.°®

In deciding an application under Article 52(5), the Committee considers that it
must consider all of the circumstances of a case as a whole, and that a number
of circumstances cumulatively may lead to a particular conclusion, even if none
of those circumstances alone would have necessarily done so.°° The
Committee is of the view that relevant considerations include the following.

The fact that an annulment application is dilatory may be a circumstance
militating against a continuation of a stay,°” as may the fact that an application
for a stay is dilatory.2° However, in the absence of particular reasons and
evidence for concluding otherwise, the Committee must assume that any
application for annulment is made in good faith, and that the application for a
stay is a justified exercise of the applicant’s procedural rights of defence.°°

Furthermore, unless there is some indication that the annulment application is
dilatory, it is not for the Committee to assess as a preliminary matter whether or
Not it is likely to succeed.*°

In the MTD Stay Decision and CMS Stay Decision it was said that a respondent
seeking a remedy under the Convention should demonstrate for its part that it
will comply with the Convention, and that if there is any doubt in that regard the
ad hoc committee may order the provision of a bank guarantee as a condition of

Compare CDC Stay Decision § 20 quoting Schreuer (op. cit) at 1060 § 484 (to the effect that

security “may ... serve as a possible deterrent to requests for annulment that are motivated
primarily by a desire to delay and, possibly, to avoid compliance”); Repsol Stay Decision § 9.
Compare Mitchell Stay Decision 4 40.

Compare MINE Stay Decision { 26, 28; Mitchell Stay Decision § 28; CDC Stay Decision § 22.
Mitchell Stay Decision § 26; MTD Stay Decision § 28.

MINE Stay Decision § 17.

Compare MINE Stay Decision § 17; MTD Stay Decision § 28; CMS Stay Decision § 37.

Mitchell Stay Decision § 26; CDC Stay Decision §§ 13-15; MTD Stay Decision § 28; CMS Stay
Decision § 37.

25

50.

51.

a stay.“' In this regard the Committee is more attracted to the approach under
which the relevant enquiry is whether in all the circumstances it may be said
that there is sufficient doubt as to whether there will be compliance with ICSID
Convention obligations on a final award in the event that it is not annulled. The
Committee also agrees with the Azurix Stay Decision that there is no positive
obligation on the applicant for the stay to establish the absence of doubt, but
rather, that it is for the party opposing the stay to establish the circumstances of
sufficient doubt.*? The Azurix Stay Decision referred to some examples of
circumstances which might suffice to establish such doubt.’ A failure by a State
seeking annulment to put in place laws implementing the obligations under
Article 54(1) may be one factor giving rise to such doubts. So might other
factors, such as a party seeking annulment making it clear in one way or
another that it will not comply with its obligations under a final award.

Difficulty, in the event that the award is annulled, of recoupment of amounts
paid under the award, or of security provided, may be a factor militating in
favour of a stay, or against the provision of security.“* However, if there are
legitimate concerns as to the risk of non-recoupment, the Committee should
also consider whether these concerns can be addressed by the inclusion of
appropriate conditions for the continuation or non-continuation of a stay, such
as a condition that any recovered moneys or security provided be held in
escrow pending the annulment proceedings.

The hardship to an award debtor of providing security, either because of the
cost of obtaining a bank guarantee or the consequences of freezing the amount
due for the duration of the annulment proceedings, is a further reason why
security should not be ordered as a matter of course.*° However, if there is a
serious risk of non-compliance with the award in the future the Committee
considers that hardship to the party seeking the stay should not normally be a
factor of significance, any more than hardship could be a factor excusing non-

MTD Stay Decision § 29; CMS Stay Decision § 38.
Azurix Stay Decision § 37.
Azurix Stay Decision 9 39, 44.
MINE Stay Decision 9 26, 28; Wena Stay Decision § 7(a); Mitchell Stay Decision 9§ 24, 28; CDC
Stay Decision § 18; MTD Stay Decision § 29; CMS Stay Decision 4 38.
Compare MINE Stay Decision § 22; Mitchell Stay Decision 9§ 33-34, 42.

26

52.

53.

compliance with the award itself if not annulled.*® Nevertheless, it may be
admitted that exceptional circumstances (such as has been suggested where

the provision of security would have “catastrophic’, immediate and irreversible
consequences” for a party’s ability to conduct its affairs,*” or would severely
affect the interests of the party*®) might be a matter that can be taken into

account with other relevant factors.

The Committee's approach is further that hardship to the award creditor should
not normally be a factor of significance where there is no established serious
tisk of non-compliance with the award by the award debtor in the future, or other
reason militating in favour of a condition of security. As noted above, because
Article 52(5) expressly provides that an award creditor's rights are subject to a
stay if an ad hoc committee considers that the circumstances so require, the
postponement of the right to payment of the award caused by a stay cannot, by
definition, per se constitute prejudice.*® Indeed, a condition of security will often
place the award creditor in a better position than it would have been in if
annulment proceedings had not been brought, since the award creditor would
not otherwise have had the benefit of such security.°° However, the Committee
does not exclude the possibility that in exceptional circumstances sufficient
prejudice to the award creditor beyond mere delay may be shown.”

Other further factors that have been considered relevant are the relatively small
amount of the guarantee, and the fact that the party seeking annulment had
already admitted liability for a substantial part of the award.®° The absence of

MINE Stay Decision § 27.

MINE Stay Decision § 27.

MINE Stay Decision § 28.

MTD Stay Decision § 36 and CMS Stay Decision § 50 (noting that delay caused by a stay is
“incidental to the Convention system of annulment”); Azurix Stay Decision {{ 41-42. Contrast MTD
Stay Decision § 30 and CMS Stay Decision § 39.

MINE Stay Decision 4 22; Mitchell Stay Decision § 40 (“There is no doubt about this improvement
[of the position of the beneficiary of the guarantee with respect to enforcement]”); MTD Stay
Decision 4 30; CMS Stay Decision 4 39; Azurix Stay Decision § 43. Contrast Mitchell Stay Decision
q{ 32-33; CDC Stay Decision 19.

Compare Azurix Stay Decision 43-44.

Mitchell Stay Decision § 42; Repsol Stay Decision § 9; Azurix Stay Decision § 43.

CDC Stay Decision § 16; Azurix Stay Decision § 43.

27

(a)

54.

55.

56.

any urgency for the award creditor to have the amount of the award at its

disposal is not a relevant consideration.

(ii) | The circumstances of the present case

The disagreement between the parties concerning the effect of Article
VII(6) of the BIT and Article 53 of the ICSID Convention

Introduction

There is a disagreement between the Claimants and Argentina concerning the
effect of Article VII(6) of the BIT, and concerning the interrelationship of Articles
53 and 54 of the ICSID Convention. None of the previous eleven decisions
under Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention has addressed this issue.

The Claimants argue that under Article 53 of the ICSID Convention and Article
VII(6) of the BIT, Argentina has an obligation to pay an award voluntarily, and
that Argentina erroneously takes the position that award creditors must initiate
procedures under Article 54 and present an award to an Argentine local court.
According to the Claimants, it is only when a State has already failed to comply
with and is already in default of its obligation under Article 53 that it may be
necessary for an award creditor to resort to enforcement proceedings under
Article 54. The Claimants contend that Article 54 provides award creditors with
the possibility of enforcing awards against recalcitrant award debtors, and that
Article 54 is not the normal means of enforcement of an award.

Argentina on the other hand takes the position that Articles 53 and 54 of the
ICSID Convention complement each other and have to be read in conjunction.
According to Argentina, Article 53 of the ICSID Convention establishes the final
and binding nature of ICSID Awards while Article 54 establishes the way in
which ICSID Awards have to be complied with. Argentina submits that Article 53
of the ICSID Convention “does not establish an obligation of voluntary payment
by the State”.®° Rather, it is said that under Article 54, Argentina is required to

54 Mitchell Stay Decision 25.

55

Argentina's Observations § 116 (emphasis in original).

28

57.

58.

treat an ICSID award as if it were a final judgment of a court in Argentina. This
means that to receive payment, an award creditor has to comply with the same
formalities applicable to final judgments of local courts.

Argentina submits that the obligation of a State under Article 54 to treat an
ICSID award as if it were a final judgment of a court of that State means that if a
State pays final judgments rendered against it without the need for further action
by the judgment creditor, it is obliged under Article 54 to do the same in respect
of ICSID awards given against it. On the other hand, if under the law of a
particular State there is a formality to be complied with by a judgment creditor in
order to enforce a judgment given against that State, then an ICSID award
creditor has to follow the same procedure to enforce an ICSID award given
against that State.°”

Argentina claims that it has appointed its administrative courts as the authority
to be appointed under Article 54(2) of the ICSID Convention, so that the
procedure would be for an award creditor of an ICSID award given against
Argentina to take the award before the appointed court. However, Argentina
maintains that the procedure would thereafter be an administrative procedure
rather than a judicial procedure, which would entail the Congress being asked to
appropriate funds in order to pay the award.®* Argentina submits that even
where a person has a final judgment of the Supreme Court of Argentina, it is
necessary to comply with the process of appropriation of funds, unless the case
is one for which funds have already been appropriated,®? and that many States
have such a process for payment of final local judgments.©° Argentina adds that
in principle Congress has a legal obligation to appropriate the necessary funds,
but that there might be situations where sufficient funds were not available
during the current budgetary term, so that an appropriation would be made for
the following term.°!

Transcript of the hearing of July 14, 2008 (“Transcript”), pp. 89-92.

Transcript, pp. 97-99.
Transcript, pp. 95-97.
Transcript, pp. 97-98.
Transcript, p. 99.

Transcript, pp. 98-99.

29

59.

60.

61.

62

The parties produced to the Committee certain correspondence from Argentina
which confirms that Argentina has taken the same position in other ICSID
cases. Thus, while the Claimants argue that Argentina has failed to pay the
award in the CMS case® ten months after the CMS Annulment Decision® was
given, Argentina denies that it failed to comply with its obligations under the
ICSID Convention in that case. According to Argentina, CMS “refused to follow
the procedure provided for in the Argentine Republic for compliance with final
judgements, and the company has simply demanded that the money be
transferred to an account abroad”.®*

In addressing this difference between the Parties, the Committee will first
consider the effect of Articles 53 and 54 of the ICSID Convention, and will then
consider the effect of Article VII(6) of the BIT, the latter treaty having been
concluded after the ICSID Convention. In addressing the disputed interpretation
to be given to these provisions, the Committee is again guided by the principles
in Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention.

The effect of Articles 53 and 54 of the ICSID Convention

The second sentence of Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention states that “Each
party shall abide by and comply with the terms of the award except to the extent
that enforcement shall have been stayed pursuant to the relevant provisions of
this Convention”. The first sentence of Article 54(1) of the ICSID Convention
states that “Each Contracting State shall recognize an award rendered pursuant
to this Convention as binding and enforce the pecuniary obligations imposed by
that award within its territories as if it were a final judgment of a court in that
State”. The Committee notes that nothing in the language of these provisions
suggests that these two obligations are related, and in particular, that there is
nothing in the language to suggest that the obligation in the second sentence of

CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (\CSID Case No. ARB/01/8), Award, May
12, 2005.
CMS Gas Transmission Company v. Argentine Republic (\CSID Case No. ARB/01/8), Decision of
the ad hoc Committee on the Application for Annulment of the Argentine Republic, September 25,
2007.
Argentina’s Observations § 119.

30

62.

Article 53(1) must be read as being subject to an award creditor invoking
enforcement mechanisms established pursuant to the obligation in the first
sentence of Article 54(1).

The Committee further notes that these two obligations are addressed to
different subjects. It is clear from its context that the word “party” in the second
sentence of Article 53(1) refers to a party to an award, who will be, on the one
hand, a Contracting State or a constituent subdivision or agency of a
Contracting State, and, on the other hand, a national of another Contracting
State. That provision therefore expressly requires each party to an award to
“comply with the terms of the award except to the extent that enforcement shall
have been stayed pursuant to the relevant provisions of this Convention”. On
the other hand, the first sentence of Article 54(1) is addressed to “each
Contracting State” to the ICSID Convention, whether or not that Contracting
State is a party to the award in question, and is not addressed to any party to an
award other than a Contracting State. The effect of the obligation imposed on
Contracting States by this provision is to ensure that any ICSID award can be
enforced by either party to the award in the territory of any ICSID Contracting
State. In other words, if an award is given against an investor in favour of a
Contracting State or a constituent subdivision or agency of a Contracting State,
Article 54(1) ensures that the Contracting State or constituent subdivision or
agency can enforce the award in the territory of any Contracting State, including
but not limited to its own territory or the territory of the investor’s national State.
Conversely, if an award is given against a Contracting State or a constituent
subdivision or agency of a Contracting State in favour of an investor, Article
54(1) ensures that the investor can enforce the award in the territory of any
Contracting State, including but not limited to the territory of the State that is, or
the State of, the award debtor. However, Article 54(1) does not state that a party
to an award must use the enforcement machinery established pursuant to this
provision as a condition of the award being complied with. Nor does it state that
a Contracting State or a constituent subdivision or agency that is an award
debtor is entitled to decline to comply with the terms of the award until the
enforcement machinery that exists under that Contracting State’s own national
law is used by the award creditor.

31

63.

64.

65.

The wording of Article 53(1) must also be considered in the light of the wording
of the ICSID Convention as a whole. Of particular significance is the wording of
Article 27(1) of the ICSID Convention, which states.

No Contracting State shall give diplomatic protection, or bring
an international claim, in respect of a dispute which one of its
nationals and another Contracting State shall have consented
to submit or shall have submitted to arbitration under this
Convention, unless such other Contracting State shall have
failed to abide by and comply with the award rendered in such
dispute.
The purpose of Article 27(1) is explained in paragraph 33 of the Report of the

Executive Directors on the Convention as follows:

When a host State consents to the submission of a dispute with

an investor to the Centre, thereby giving the investor direct

access to an international jurisdiction, the investor should not be

in a position to ask his State to espouse his case and that State

should not be permitted to do so. Accordingly, Article 27

expressly prohibits a Contracting State from giving diplomatic

protection, or bringing an international claim, in respect of a

dispute which one of its nationals and another Contracting State

have consented to submit, or have submitted, to arbitration

under the Convention, unless the State party to the dispute fails

to honor the award rendered in that dispute. [Emphasis added.]
The words “to abide by and comply with the award rendered in such dispute” in
Article 27(1) mirror the wording of the second sentence of Article 53(1). The
Committee considers that it is clear when these two provisions are examined
together that the failure of a State to abide by and comply with an award, as
required by Article 53(1), is a breach of the ICSID Convention, entitling the
national State of the award creditor to give diplomatic protection or bring an
international claim. If a Contracting State was entitled to require an award
creditor to use enforcement mechanisms established under Article 54(1) as a
precondition to compliance with the award, the Committee considers that the
final words of Article 27(1) would have reflected the language of Article 54(1),
rather than that of Article 53(1). The Committee accepts the argument of the
Claimants that to sustain that the recognition and enforcement process in Article
54 must precede compliance with an award would be as unreasonable as

32

66.

67.

68.

65

asserting that compliance is dependent on a previous exercise of diplomatic
protection under Article 27.

The Committee further notes that the first sentence of Article 54(1) of the ICSID
Convention is expressed to require Contracting States to enforce only the
pecuniary obligations imposed by an award. If the interpretation were accepted
that there is no obligation to comply with an award unless and until the judgment
creditor avails itself of enforcement mechanisms established pursuant to Article
54, the result could be that there would never be an obligation to comply with
non-pecuniary obligations in an award.

The Committee further takes into account that in legal systems generally,
judgment debtors and award debtors are under a legal obligation to pay
judgments and awards given against them. It is not generally the case that
judgment debtors and award debtors have a legal entitlement to decline to
comply with a judgment or award unless and until enforcement proceedings are
taken against them; on the contrary, enforcement procedures exist to deal with
the case of judgment debtors and award debtors who are in default of their legal
obligation to comply with the judgment or award.

The Committee further considers that it would be inconsistent with the purpose
of the ICSID Convention if an award creditor had to bring proceedings pursuant
to national law enforcement mechanisms established under Article 54(1) as a
prerequisite for compliance with the award by the award debtor. The ICSID
dispute settlement mechanism was intended to be an international method of
settlement,® and it would run counter to this intention for compliance with a final
award to be subject, ultimately, to the provisions and mechanisms of national
law. The Committee considers that it would inherently undermine confidence in
the ICSID system if a State against which an award has been given could make
its own compliance with the award subject to the award creditor availing itself of
the mechanisms under that State's national law for enforcement of final
judgments of courts.

ICSID Convention, preambular paragraphs 3-4; Report of the Executive Directors on the
Convention 9 10-11.

33

69.

70.

71.

66

The Committee therefore concludes that under a good faith interpretation of
Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention in accordance with the ordinary meaning
to be given to its terms in their context and in the light of its object and purpose,
that provision imposes on Argentina, in the event that the Award is not annulled,
an obligation under international law vis-a-vis the United States to abide by and
comply with the terms of the Award, without the need for action on the part of
the Claimants pursuant to the enforcement machinery under Argentine law to
which Article 54 of the ICSID Convention refers.

For the purposes of Article 31(3)(b) of the Vienna Convention, the Committee
finds that this interpretation appears to be confirmed by subsequent State
practice in the application of the ICSID Convention. According to material
provided by the Claimants, only four ICSID cases have reached the stage of
enforcement before local courts, and in each of these cases the courts were
those of a third State, rather than the courts of the State against which the
award had been rendered.® Argentina has not sought to contradict this
information. The Committee has not been pointed to any case in which an
award creditor has brought proceedings for recognition and enforcement of an
award in the legal system of the State against which the award was given.°”

Additionally, the Committee has not been provided with any material to
demonstrate that any State other than Argentina shares Argentina’s
interpretation of the interrelationship of Article 53(1) and Article 54(1) of the
ICSID Convention. In its letter of 25 July 2008, Argentina claims that another
State shares its interpretation and invites the Committee to request that other
State to confirm this. However, the Committee considers that it is not for the
Committee to call upon another State to express its view on a contested legal

E. Baldwin, M. Kantor, M. Nolan, “Limits to Enforcement of ICSID Awards”, Journal of International
Arbitration, Vol. 23 No. 1, pp. 1-24 (2006), indicates that enforcement proceedings were brought in
France in respect of the arbitral awards in S.A.A.L. Benvenuti & Bonfant v. People's Republic of the
Congo (ICSID Case No. ARB/77/2) and Société Ouest Africaine des Bétons Industriels v. Senegal
(ICSID Case No. ARB/82/1), that enforcement proceedings were brought in the United States of
America in respect of the arbitral award in Liberian Eastern Timber Corporation v. Republic of
Liberia (ICSID Case No. ARB/83/2), and that enforcement proceedings were brought in the United
Kingdom in respect of the arbitral award in AIG Capital Partners, Inc. and CJSC Tema Real Estate
Company v. Republic of Kazakhstan (ICSID Case No. ARB/01/6).

Counsel for the Claimants did however say that a counsel in another ICSID case had told him that
“They were at that time on an administrative internal proceeding, not before a local court, but just a
budgetary allocation of money in order to receive the money, but they never were asked to go to
local courts.” (Transcript, pp. 222-223.)

34

72.

73.

68

69

issue, and in the absence of any evidence, the Committee cannot assume that
the other State in question has a particular position on this issue. The
Committee has been provided with evidence that the United States of America
disagrees with Argentina’s interpretation, in the form of a letter submitted by the
United States in another ICSID case, but the Committee considers that little if
any weight can be attached to evidence of the view of a single ICSID
Contracting State.

For the purposes of Article 32 of the Vienna Convention, the Committee does
not consider that the meaning of Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention when
interpreted in accordance with Article 31 of the Vienna Convention is in any way
ambiguous or obscure or that it in any way leads to a result that is manifestly
absurd or unreasonable. The Committee does not therefore consider it
necessary to resort to supplementary means of interpretation to determine the
meaning of Article 53(1), although supplementary means of interpretation may
confirm the meaning resulting from the application of Article 31 of the Vienna

Convention.

The Claimants have referred the Committee to various passages in the travaux
préparatoires of the ICSID Convention, in which it is stated inter alia that:

... Article 53 [of the ICSID Convention] established the principle
that the parties were bound to abide by and should comply with
the terms of the award. Article 54 set forth the procedure for
enforcement of the awards in the courts of the Contracting

States, should a party fail to comply with Article 53 ...©

... the question of the enforcement of awards has been included
in the draft Convention mainly for the benefit of the developing

countries who were thus given a means to enforce awards in
th

their favor against foreign investors.

... for the purposes of ensuring compliance with an arbitral
award between States, section 14 [which, as amended, became
Article 53] would have been sufficient but, since one of the
parties to a dispute brought before the Center would be a
private individual, Section 15 [which, as amended, became
Article 54] was necessary to give _a State the means of

Memorandum of the Meeting of the Committee of the Whole, February 23, 1965 (Doc. SID/65-6,
February 25, 1965), in History of the ICSID Convention, Vol. Il-2, at 989 (emphasis added).
History of the ICSID Convention, Vol. \I-1, at 379 (emphasis added).

35

74.

75.

76.

enforcing an award in its favor against an individual. The Article
had been included with a view to meeting the possible needs of
developing countries in disputes with private investors.’°
The Committee notes that previous decisions of ad hoc committees have not
discussed directly the relationship between Article 53(1) and Article 54(1) of the
ICSID Convention. In the CMS and Azurix cases, the two previous Article 52(5)
decisions involving Argentina, the ad hoc committees ultimately were simply not
satisfied that Argentina had evinced an intention not to comply with the award.’

The Committee notes that the MINE Stay Decision and Amco II Stay Decision
made the point that where an ad hoc committee grants a stay of enforcement,
the obligation under Article 53 is pro tanto suspended,” and only then went on
to state, in a separate subsequent paragraph, that the obligation under Article
54 is also suspended.” The Committee finds that these decisions thereby
appear to reflect an understanding that the obligations under Articles 53 and 54
are separate and independent.

Furthermore, the M/NE Stay Decision stated that:

It should be clearly understood ... that State immunity may well
afford a legal defense to forcible execution, but it provides
neither argument nor excuse for failing to comply with an award.
In fact, the issue of State immunity from forcible execution of an
award will typically arise if the State party refuses to comply
with its treaty obligations. Non-compliance by a State
constitutes a violation by that State of its international
obligations and will attract its own sanctions.”

This passage appears to manifest an understanding that where an award
creditor has to resort to measures under Article 54, a course of action which
may give rise to issues of State immunity under Article 55, there will have been
a failure by the award debtor to comply with its obligations under Article 53.

History of the ICSID Convention, Vol. \I-1, at 424 (emphasis added).

See CMS Stay Decision {§ 47 (last sentence) and 50; Azurix Stay Decision {{ 38-39.

MINE Stay Decision § 9; AMCO II Stay Decision § 10.

MINE Stay Decision § 10; AMCO II Stay Decision § 11.

MINE Stay Decision § 25. See also CDC Stay Decision § 19: “... while the Convention preserves
sovereign immunity it expressly obligates the award-debtor nonetheless to pay the award and, in
default of meeting such obligation, subjects the defaulting state to the jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice”.

36

77.

78.

79.

At the same time, the Committee takes into account the statement in the MTD
Stay Decision and CMS Stay Decision that “final awards under the ICSID
Convention are directly enforceable, upon registration and without further
jurisdictional control, as final judgments of the courts of the host State”,”> that
“the point for the Committee is to be satisfied that the State Party has taken
appropriate steps in accordance with its constitutional arrangements to give
effect to Article 54”’° and that “Where it has done so, subsequent compliance
by that State with a final award will be a matter of legal right under its own law,
as well as under international law”.’” These passages make no mention of a
separate and independent obligation under Article 53. The Committee notes
further that these decisions state that “The effect of the stay is that the award is
not subject to enforcement proceedings under Article 54 of the Convention
pending the outcome of the annulment application”, without mentioning any
separate obligation under Article 53 that is suspended by the stay.”® However,
the Committee finds that little if any weight can be given to this aspect of these
decisions, given that these decisions do not take an express view on the
question, let alone a considered and reasoned view, and given that the
interpretation of Article 53 of the ICSID Convention in accordance with Article 31
of the Vienna Convention is not in any way ambiguous or obscure and does not
lead to a result that is manifestly absurd or unreasonable.

Thus, the Committee considers that the matters referred to in paragraphs 70 to
76 above confirm the conclusion in paragraph 69 above as to the correct
interpretation of the second sentence of Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention.

The effect of Article VII(6) of the BIT

The Committee next considers the effect of Article VII(6) of the BIT, the second
sentence of which states that “Each Party undertakes to carry out without delay
the provisions of any such award and to provide in its territory for its

MTD Stay Decision § 31; CMS Stay Decision § 40.
MTD Stay Decision § 32; CMS Stay Decision § 41.
MTD Stay Decision § 32; CMS Stay Decision § 41.
MTD Stay Decision § 26; CMS Stay Decision § 35.

37

80.

enforcement”. The Committee considers that the plain wording of Article VII(6)
makes clear that this provision imposes two separate obligations on the two
Parties to the BIT, the first being “to carry out without delay the provisions of any
such award”, and the second being “to provide in its territory for its
enforcement”. The use of the word “and” linking the wording of these two
obligations indicates that these obligations are separate and independent. The
first of these obligations is a reciprocal undertaking between the two Contracting
Parties speedily to comply with awards made by arbitral tribunals established
within the scope of Article VII of the BIT. The second obligation is likewise a
reciprocal undertaking between the two Contracting Parties, requiring each of
them to provide procedures in their domestic law for the enforcement of such
awards. However, Article VII(6) contains no specific language detailing the
requirements of enforcement, nor specifying any limitations as to the circle of
persons to which domestic enforcement procedures would apply. The
assumption must then be that it is for each of the Contracting Parties to
establish appropriate provisions in its national law, and to ascertain that the
corresponding legislation of the other Contracting Party would satisfy the
standards which it expected.

The Committee notes certain similarities between, on the one hand, the first of
the obligations imposed by this provision of the BIT and the second sentence of
Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention, and, on the other hand, the second of the
obligations imposed by this provision of the BIT and the first sentence of Article
54(1) of the ICSID Convention. The Committee finds however that the
corresponding provisions are not identical. The first obligation imposed by the
second sentence of Article VII(6) of the BIT is one that applies to the United
States and to Argentina, the Parties to the BIT (as is clear from the first
preambular paragraph of the BIT), while the second sentence of Article 53(1) of
the ICSID Convention applies to the parties to the award. Furthermore, there
are differences in the way that the respective obligations are worded. However,
in the Committee’s view, the similarities in question do confirm the conclusion
that the two obligations imposed by the second sentence of Article VII(6) of the
BIT, like the two obligations under the second sentence of Article 53(1) and the

38

81.

82.

83.

first sentence of Article 54(1) of the ICSID Convention respectively, are
separate and independent.

The Committee further considers that if the second sentence of Article VII(6) of
the BIT imposed no obligation on a State Party that is an award debtor to give
effect to the award except where enforcement proceedings are brought
pursuant to the second of the stated obligations in that provision, then the
wording of the first obligation in that provision would be otiose. On the other
hand, if the first obligation is interpreted to mean that a State Party against
which an award has been given must carry out without delay the provisions of
the award, without the need for enforcement action by the award creditor
pursuant to the second obligation, this would not make the second obligation
redundant. The second obligation would still serve the function, for instance, of
ensuring that where an award is given in favour of a State Party to the BIT and
against an investor who is a national of the other State Party, the State Party
who is the award creditor could enforce the award against the award debtor in
the territory of the other State Party.

Neither of the parties has referred the Committee to any other matters that
would be relevant to the interpretation of the second sentence of Article VII(6) of
the BIT. The Committee therefore concludes that under a good faith
interpretation of Article VII(6) of the BIT in accordance with the ordinary
meaning to be given to its terms in their context and in the light of its object and
purpose, Argentina has a treaty obligation towards the United States pursuant
to the first obligation under that provision, in the event that the Award is not
annulled, to carry out without delay the provisions of the Award without the need
for enforcement action by the Claimants pursuant to the second obligation
under that provision.

The Committee's findings

There is some disagreement between the Claimants and Argentina as to what
would be required in order for the Claimants to enforce the Award in Argentina
under the provisions of Argentine law that give effect to Article 54 of the ICSID

39

84.

85.

79

81

Convention. There was disagreement as to whether the procedure would be an
administrative or a judicial procedure, as to what it would cost and how long it
would take, and as to the possibility of the Argentine courts overturning or
revising the Award on grounds of inconsistency with Argentine law. In view of
the Committee's finding that the Claimants are entitled under Article VII(6) of the
BIT and Article 53 of the ICSID Convention to payment from Argentina without
activating enforcement procedures under Article 54 of the ICSID Convention, it
is not necessary for the Committee to make findings on these differences.

In the present case, the representative of Argentina emphasised that Argentina
would comply with its international commitments under the ICSID Convention.
However, Argentina’s Observations state clearly Argentina’s position that
“Article 53 of the Convention does not establish an obligation of voluntary
payment by the State”, and that Argentina is claiming “that all creditors of
ICSID awards meet the formal requirements that any person should follow in
Argentina to obtain compliance with a final judgment of a local court’.®° In oral
argument, Argentina confirmed its position that in accordance with Article 54
“any ... Award creditor has to comply with the formalities applicable to final
judgments of local courts”.®"

The position stated by the Procurador del Tesoro de la Nacion (Attorney-
General), speaking with the authority of the Argentine Republic at the hearing of
the stay application, appears to be that in the event that the award is not
annulled Argentina would not comply with the Award forthwith, but would
instead look to the Claimants to bring proceedings for the enforcement of the
Award under the provisions of Argentine law that give effect to Article 54 of the
ICSID Convention. For the reasons stated the Committee finds such a position
to be in apparent non-compliance with Argentina’s international law treaty
obligations owed to the United States under Article VII(6) of the BIT and under
Article 53(1) of the ICSID Convention.

Argentina's Observations § 116 (emphasis in original).
Argentina's Observations § 117 (emphasis added).
Transcript, p. 92.

40

(b)

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

Other alleged circumstances said by the Claimants to give rise to a risk of
non-compliance with the Award by Argentina

The Claimants argue that a number of other circumstances give rise to a risk of
future non-compliance with the Award by Argentina.

The Claimants argue that Argentina has sought annulment of all ICSID awards
given against it. The Committee finds that there is no indication that Argentina is
acting in a merely dilatory manner in this case, that it is not for the Committee to
assess as a preliminary matter whether or not it is likely to succeed, and that the
evidence presented does not establish that Argentina is acting other than in
good faith in bringing the Application for Annulment (see paragraphs 47-48
above).

The Claimants further argue that seven ICSID awards have been given against
Argentina, and that none has ever been paid by Argentina. The Claimants add
that Argentina has gone so far as to divert assets away from New York to avoid
their attachment pursuant to a United States court order obtained by CMS to
enforce the award in the CMS case.

The Committee notes that the reason why Argentina has so far not complied
with the CMS award appears to be because of Argentina’s position on the
interpretation and interrelationship of Articles 53 and 54 of the ICSID
Convention. The Committee therefore considers that the Claimants’ argument
concerning Argentina’s non-compliance with the CMS award adds nothing to
the arguments already considered by the Committee in paragraphs 54 to 85
above.

As regards Argentina’s alleged diversion of assets away from New York to
prevent their attachment in satisfaction of the CMS award, the Committee
further notes that the assets in question belonged to a province of Argentina
which was not alleged to be involved in the events to which the claim in the
CMS case related. The Committee is unable to conclude on the basis of the
material before it that the diversion of these assets away from New York, if this
occurred, is demonstrative of any intention on the part of Argentina, if the stay is
continued, to take steps that would frustrate or impede the future execution of

a1

91.

92.

93.

83

the award in the event that it is not annulled. Indeed, ultimately the Claimants
appear merely to argue that this incident demonstrates that Argentina would
“have the opportunity” to do so, and that the Claimants are prejudiced by this.®?
However, the fact that a party could take a course of action cannot of itself
establish that there is any real risk that it will do so.

The Claimants then argue that Argentina is in default of other international
obligations, and state that Argentina owes US$ 20 billion to unpaid bondholders.
However, the Committee is unable to make findings as to whether Argentina is
in breach of its legal obligations to others who are not parties to the present
proceedings, let alone whether the circumstances of any such breach are such
that they establish a risk of Argentina not complying with the Award in this case
if it is not annulled.

The Claimants additionally refer to certain public statements of executive and
judicial officials of Argentina to the effect that ICSID awards may be submitted
for review to national courts or the International Court of Justice. To the extent
that these public statements reflect the position of Argentina on the
interrelationship between Articles 53 and 54 of the ICSID Convention, they add
nothing to the arguments already considered by the Committee in paragraphs
54 to 85 above. In any event, the Committee notes Argentina’s submissions that
under Argentine law, only the President, the Minister for Foreign Affairs or the
Attorney-General may make statements that are binding on Argentina, and that
media reports of statements of officials are frequently inaccurate. The
Committee finds that Argentina has expressed its position to the Committee
through its duly authorised representatives, and that in the present case the
Committee has no need to resort to media reports in order to ascertain
Argentina’s intentions.

The Claimants place further reliance on the Argentine Supreme Court decision
in Cartellone v. Hidronor,®? which decided that arbitral awards may be
challenged in certain circumstances by Argentina’s judiciary, and on the fact
that this case was invoked by domestic courts as grounds for ordering the

Transcript, p. 225.
Corte Suprema de Justicia, June 1, 2004, Cartellone c. Hidronor, Fallos 327-1881.

42

94.

(c)

95.

96.

suspension of the arbitration proceedings in the National Grid case.®* The
Committee considers however that as neither the Cartellone or the National
Grid cases involved arbitrations under the |CSID Convention, the circumstances
of these cases are not indicative of Argentina’s intentions with respect to awards
rendered against it in proceedings under the ICSID Convention.

The Claimants further argue that it is doubtful whether ICSID Conventions are
enforceable under Argentine national law. For the reasons given in paragraph
83 above, the Committee finds that it is not required to consider whether
Argentina’s national law complies with Article 54, although it notes that previous
decisions appear to have considered that it does.®° For present purposes it is
sufficient that the Committee has found that Argentina has expressed the
intention to adopt a course of action which the Committee finds would be
contrary to Argentina’s obligations under Article VII(6) of the BIT and Article 53
of the ICSID Convention.

Other alleged circumstances invoked by the Parties

The Claimants argue that under the terms of the Award they are not entitled to
post-award interest, so that the present value of the award will diminish during
the period of the stay. The Claimants further argue that they initiated
enforcement procedures in the United States before the provisional stay was
issued. The Claimants contend that both of these circumstances militate in
favour of lifting the stay or requiring security as a condition of a continuation of
the stay.

The Committee does not consider either of these circumstances to be a factor
militating against a continuation of the stay or in favour of a condition of security,
given the express wording of Article 52 and given the fact that delay caused by
a stay pending annulment proceedings is “incidental to the Convention system
of annulment”.°° The Committee does not consider that the application of Article
52(5) can be affected by the question of whether or not the award creditor was

An UNCITRAL arbitration administered by ICSID.
CMS Stay Decision § 45; Azurix Stay Decision 38.
MTD Stay Decision § 36; CMS Stay Decision § 50.

43

97.

98.

99.

awarded post-award interest, or whether or not the award creditor has already
initiated enforcement proceedings under Article 54.

Argentina claims that the likelihood of the award being annulled in the present
case is high, given the similarities between the Award in this case and the
award in the CMS case, which was partially annulled. For the reasons given
above, the Committee finds that it is not for it to assess as a preliminary matter
whether or not the Application for Annulment is likely to succeed (see paragraph
48 above).

Argentina then contends that providing security would cause it hardship due to
its current economic situation. The Claimants argue that on the contrary,
Argentina’s economic crisis has now ended and that Argentina is in a position to
provide security without hardship. For the reasons given above, the Committee
considers that where there is a serious risk of non-compliance with the award,
hardship to the party seeking annulment is not normally a consideration relevant
to the exercise of the power under Article 52(5), other than in the most
exceptional cases. The Committee is not satisfied on the material before it that
such sufficiently exceptional circumstances pertain in this case.

Argentina additionally submits that there is a risk that it may not be able to
recoup any security provided in the event that the Award is annulled, even
under the Claimants’ proposal. The Committee notes that the Claimants
propose that if the stay is lifted, payment of the award may be made into an
escrow account pending the outcome of the annulment proceeding, and
alternatively, that if the stay is continued on condition that Argentina provides
security, the amount of the award should be deposited into an escrow account
as security, or an equivalent bond from an international bank should be
provided. The Claimants argue that under these proposals, Argentina would be
under no risk of non-recoupment if the Award is ultimately annulled. For obvious
reasons, the Committee would not be minded to decline to continue the stay, or
minded to continue the stay on condition that security is provided, unless
provisions were either agreed between the parties, or ordered by the Committee
in default of agreement, which secured the recoverability of any moneys paid
under the award, or of any security provided, in the event that annulment is

44

100.

101.

granted. The Committee considers that it should be possible for appropriate
provisions to be agreed or ordered that would remove any risk of non-
recoupment.

Argentina further maintains that the Claimants have sought unilaterally to
amend the terms of the Award by having post-judgment interest awarded in an
order of a United States court for recognition and enforcement of the award,
notwithstanding that post-award interest was expressly not awarded by the
Tribunal. The Claimants counter that consistently with Article 54 of the ICSID
Convention, an ICSID award is enforced in the United States as if it were a final
judgment, and that when an ICSID award is converted into a United States
judgment, it accrues post-judgment interest like any other United States
judgment. The Committee finds that Argentina has not demonstrated the
relevance of this circumstance to the exercise of the Committee’s discretion
under Article 52(5). In the circumstances, the Committee finds that it need not
determine whether the Claimants have acted inconsistently with the Award in
obtaining post-judgment interest in the order of the United States court.
However, the Committee notes that it has not been referred to any authority to
suggest that there is anything inconsistent with the ICSID Convention, or with
the Award in this case, for a party enforcing an award under Article 54 of the
Convention to avail itself of provisions under the relevant national law for post-
judgment interest, even if the award debtor would not be liable to pay interest if
it complied with an award under Article 53 without enforcement proceedings
under Article 54.

(iii) The Committee’s conclusions

For the reasons given above, the Committee is satisfied that at the time of the
first hearing in these annulment proceedings, it was Argentina's intention, in the
event that the Award is not annulled, not to pay the Award forthwith but to
require the Claimants to bring proceedings for the enforcement of the Award
under the provisions of Argentine law that give effect to Article 54 of the ICSID
Convention. The Committee is therefore satisfied that Argentina did at that time

45

102.

103.

have an intention to engage in conduct that would amount to non-compliance
with its obligations under Article VII(6) of the BIT and Article 53(1) of the ICSID
Convention, in the event that the Award is not annulled.

Although the Committee has found Argentina's stated position as to its
obligations to pay on a final award to be incorrect, the Committee accepts that
Argentina has acted consistently with its own good faith interpretation of the BIT
and the ICSID Convention. The Committee does not assume that Argentina will
continue to maintain its position following the conclusions on that issue made in
these reasons. In any event, upon these findings, Argentina must be given an
opportunity to consider its position going forwards. The Committee affords
Argentina this opportunity, whilst continuing the stay without any condition that
Argentina provide security. Argentina may be content to state that it now
accepts the position that it is obliged to make payment of the award in the event
that it is not annulled, or to the extent that it is not annulled, without the need for
any enforcement action by the Claimants. The Committee would be minded,
absent contrary arguments and evidence, to consider such a formal indication
by Argentina as sufficing to dispel doubts that Argentina will comply with its
obligations under Article 53 in the future. On the other hand, in the absence of
any indication by Argentina that it has changed its position to accord with that
which the Committee has found as to the extent of the obligations under the BIT
and the ICSID Convention, the Committee would be minded, again absent
contrary arguments and evidence, to consider that there is a risk of non-
compliance by Argentina with its obligations under Article 53 of the ICSID
Convention if the Award is not annulled.

The Committee regards 60 days as sufficient time for Argentina to reconsider its
position on the extent of its obligations to pay on the final award if annulment is
refused in this matter. However, the Committee makes no directions as the
making of any response on these matters by Argentina. The Committee merely
indicates that after 60 days from the date of this decision it would, upon the
application of the Claimants, be prepared to reconsider the issue of continuance
of the stay and the issue of security by reference to the circumstances then
existing. The Committee notes that in no event would it be minded to lift the stay

46

of enforcement of the award or to make security a condition of a continuation of
the stay without arrangements being put in place to ensure that any amounts
recovered by, or any security provided to, the Claimants would be recoverable
by Argentina in the event that the Award is annulled.

47

DECISION

Pursuant to Article 52(5) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 54(2) of the ICSID
Arbitration Rules, the ad hoc Committee extends the stay of enforcement of the
Award.

In accordance with Rule 54(3) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, at any time after 60

days from the date of this decision the Claimants may apply to request a
modification or termination of the stay.

[Signed]
Dr. Gavan Griffith Q.C.

President of the ad hoc Committee

Melbourne, 7 October 2008

48

