INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

In the arbitration proceeding between
ESKOSOL S.P.A. IN LIQUIDAZIONE

Claimant

and

ITALIAN REPUBLIC

Respondent

ICSID Case No. ARB/15/50

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 3
(Decision on Respondent’s Request for Provisional Measures)

Members of the Tribunal
Ms. Jean E. Kalicki, President of the Tribunal
Prof. Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator
Prof. Dr. Guido Santiago Tawil, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Mr. Francisco Abriani

12 April 2017

»

eRe

Ill.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Introduction and Relevant Procedural History .0.........ccccceeeeeeeseeeseee tees eeeeeeeeneneeeeeeee 1
Italy’s Request for Provisional Measures ..0......c.ccccseeceseeseeeeeeeeeseeneseeeseeesseeeseneeeeeeeneaseneees 2
The Security Application 3
Italy’s position 3
a. The power to order security fOr COStS 0.0... cece cece eee eee eeeeteeeneeeeteeeteteteeeeeeees 3
b. The granting of security for costs in the instant CaS@........... eect e tees 4
Eskosol’s position 6
a. The power to order security fOr COStS 0.0... cece cece eee eee eeeeteeeneeeeteeeteteteeeeeeees 6
b. The granting of security for costs in the instant CaS@........... eect e tees 8
The Tribunal’s analysis 10
Disclosure Application 14
Italy’s position 14
Eskosol’s position 15
The Tribunal’s analysis 15
Order 16

 

INTRODUCTION AND RELEVANT PROCEDURAL HISTORY

As noted in the Tribunal’s prior Decision on Respondent’s Application under Rule 41(5),
dated March 20, 2017, this case concerns a dispute submitted to ICSID under the Energy
Charter Treaty and the ICSID Convention, involving claims by Eskosol S.p.A. in
liquidazione (“Eskosol” or the “Claimant’”) against the Italian Republic (“Italy” or the
“Respondent”). The background information and procedural history of the dispute is not
repeated herein, except as relevant to Italy’s Request for Provisional Measures Under Rule

39(1), filed on January 18, 2017 (the “Request”).

With respect to the Request, by letter of January 23, 2017, the Tribunal invited the Parties
to suggest a briefing schedule by January 30, 2017. By letter of January 30, 2017, Eskosol
requested that the Tribunal suspend any further briefing on the Request until Italy paid its
share of the first advance deposit. Italy did not respond to the Tribunal’s January 23, 2017

invitation to suggest a briefing schedule on the Request.

On February 8, 2017, the Tribunal held a hearing to address Italy’s then-pending Rule 41(5)
application. During that hearing, the Parties agreed that the current Request would be
addressed in one round of submissions, with Eskosol’s response due on March 3, 2017.!
As potentially relevant to the Request, Eskosol also confirmed that it is pursuing this claim
with the use of external funding.” By letter of February 10, 2017, the Tribunal informed
the Parties that it agreed to fix March 3, 2017, as the deadline for Eskosol’s submission of

its response to the Request.

On February 13, 2017, ICSID confirmed that it had received Italy’s payment of its share

of the first advance deposit.

On March 3, 2017, Eskosol filed its “Response to Respondent’s Request for Provisional

Measures” (the “Response”).

' Hearing Transcript, February 8, 2017, at 145:4-14.
2 Hearing Transcript, February 8, 2017, at 125:1-7; see also Response, 8.

IL. ITALY’S REQUEST FOR PROVISIONAL MEASURES
6. In its Request, Italy asks the Tribunal to:

(a) Direct Eskosol to post an irrevocable bank guarantee or analogous
security in the amount of $250,000 [the “Security Application”];

(b) Direct Eskosol to submit Exhibits C-005 and C-006 in their integrity to
permit the Respondent and the Tribunal to get confirmation whether a
funding third party did commit itself to cover Eskosol[’s] costs of these
proceedings [the “Disclosure Application”].

(c) In the event third party funding is confirmed, and as an alternative to
(a), direct Eskosol to procure from such third party — proved to have
demonstrably adequate assets — a legally binding undertaking to pay any
costs order entered against Eskosol.*

7. Eskosol, in turn, argues that Italy’s Request should be rejected for the following reasons:

First, the Tribunal lacks the authority to order security for costs. Second,
and more importantly, even if such authority were deemed to exist, Italy’s
Request should fail because it does not satisfy the exacting requirements for
such orders to be made .... Third, Eskosol already has an after-the-event
insurance policy (the “ATE Insurance”) in respect of potential adverse
costs for up to €1 million that is more than sufficient to address Italy’s
request “for analogous security in the amount of $250,000 as security for
costs.” ...4

Finally, as Eskosol already disclosed that it has external funding here,
Italy’s request for document production has become moot and thus should
be dismissed.°

8. The Parties’ respective arguments are summarized in turn below.

> Request, Section V.
4 Response, J 2 (quoting Request, Section V(a)).
5 Response, 3.

A. The Security Application
I. Italy’s position

a. The power to order security for costs

9. Italy grounds its application on Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID Arbitration
Rule 39(1). It contends that “[iJt is undisputed that, in general, an ICSID tribunal has the
authority to order provisional measures to preserve a party’s right,” but admits that “some
controversy has arisen whether orders to request security for costs could be granted.”° In

its view, however, such power “has now been fully admitted by a large number of ICSID

tribunals.””

10. In Italy’s view, the granting of an order for provisional measures is subject to two
conditions: “(i) that a right in need of protection exists, and (ii) that the circumstances
require that the provisional measures be ordered to preserve such right, ‘which necessitates
a showing that the situation is urgent and the requested measure are [sic] necessary to
prevent irreparable harm to the party’s right to be protected’.”* Italy contends that, here,
the provisional measure is requested “for the protection of its right to claim reimbursement

of the costs it is incurring in the course of this phase of the arbitration.”

11. Italy argues that both substantive and procedural rights are protected by Rule 39(1).!° It

also contends that its request for reimbursement is part of its defense, and that it is directly

© Request, | 22.

7 Request, 23. Italy relies on the statement in RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia, ICSID Case No.
ARB/12/10, Decision on Saint Lucia’s Request for Security for Costs, August 13, 2014, Exhibit RL-028, | 48 (RSM
y. Saint Lucia), that “a large number of ICSID tribunals have ruled that a measure requesting the lodging of security
for costs does, generally, not fall outside an ICSID tribunal’s power provided exceptional circumstances exist”
(Request, J 23). Italy also cites Libananco Holdings Co. Limited v. Republic of Turkey, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/8,
Decision on Preliminary Issues, June 23, 2008, Exhibit RL-029, {| 57 (Libananco y. Turkey); Rachel S. Grynberg,
Stephen M. Grynberg, Miriam Z. Grynberg and RSM Production Corporation v. Grenada, ICSID Case No.
ARB/10/06, Decision on Respondent’s Application for Security of Costs, October 14, 2010, Exhibit RL-030, {| 5.16
(Grynberg v. Grenada); and Victor Pey Casado, Fundacién Presidente Allende v. Republic of Chile, CSID Case No.
ARB/98/2, Decision on Provisional Measures, September 25, 2001, Exhibit RL-031, {| 88 (Pey Casado v. Chile).

8 Request, [ 24 (emphasis in the Request).

° Request, 25.

1 Request, {| 26, quoting RSM v. Saint Lucia, Exhibit RL-028, 4] 66: “Costs decisions, while contingent upon the
tribunal’s ultimate and final decision on the merits and the exercise of its discretion to grant cost reimbursement, are
nonetheless part of the arbitral process the integrity of which deserves protection by Article 47 ICSID Convention and
ICSID Arbitration Rule 39.”

linked to the relief requested, namely the dismissal of the claim for manifest lack of legal

merit and the reimbursement of the expenses necessary for its defense.!!

12. Italy also relies on RSM v. Saint Lucia to reject the idea that, in order to be protected, a

right must be actual at the time of the request:

The Tribunal finds that the right to be preserved by a provisional measure
need not already exist at the time the request is made. Also future or
conditional rights such as potential claim for cost reimbursement qualify
as “rights to be preserved”. The hypothetical element of the right at issue

is one of the inherent characteristics of the regime of provisional
12

measures. '*
b. The granting of security for costs in the instant case
13. Italy argues that “an order for security for costs must be required by the circumstances.”

In its view, in this case there is a “material risk that a cost award will not be complied
with,” a risk that it deems more serious than the one considered by the tribunal in RSM v.

Saint Lucia, where the tribunal granted the security for costs order.!?

14. Italy contends that “the very fact that Eskosol has been declared into bankruptcy ...
confirm[s] that it would not have sufficient financial resources to compensate the
Respondent for its undue costs.”'* It also contends that where a claimant is funded by a

third party, “the risk that the cost award would not be complied with would become more

material and serious, and the need for security for costs even more urgent.”!>

1! Request, J 27.

2 Request, | 29, quoting RSM y. Saint Lucia, Exhibit RL-028, 72. Italy also relies on Grynberg v. Grenada, Exhibit
RL-030, (5.8.

3 Request, {{][ 31-33. Italy relies on the following passage from RSM y. Saint Lucia, Exhibit RL-028, 4 82: “[...]
contrary to the situation in previous ICSID cases where tribunals have denied the application for security for costs
(inter alia) because there was no evidence concerning the financial situation of the opposing party, it has been
established to the satisfaction of the Tribunal that Claimant does not have sufficient financial resources. Whereas it
has previously been held that such financial limitations as such do not provide a sufficient basis for ordering security
for costs, the circumstances of the present case are different. In particular Claimant’s consistent procedural history in
other ICSID and non-ICSID proceedings provide compelling grounds for granting Respondent’s request.”

14 Request, J 34.

15 Request, {f 35-36. See also RSM v. Saint Lucia, Exhibit RL-028, § 83: “Moreover, the admitted third party funding
further supports the Tribunal’s concern that Claimant will not comply with a cost award rendered against it, since, in
the absence of security or guarantees being offered, it is doubtful whether the third party will assume responsibility
for honoring such an award. Against this background, the Tribunal regards it as unjustified to burden Respondent

 

15. Italy invokes the declaration of Eskosol’s insolvency by the Brindisi bankruptcy tribunal,
and contends that the tribunal’s findings establish that “the value of [Eskosol’s] assets is
extremely low in respect of the outstanding exposure to creditors.”!° Specifically, Italy

quotes the Brindisi tribunal as follows:

In primis, with regard to the quantitative limit indicated in the last
paragraph of Article 15 of the bankruptcy law on the procedure for the
purposes of dealing with defaults, it should be noted that in the present
case, the amount of debt by far exceeds €30,000.00.

Finally, because the defendant company is in liquidation and of the
obvious lack of assets to cope with the amount of debt, one cannot even
abstractly refer to a future capacity to generate sufficient income to cover
the debt situation.!”

16. Italy asserts that, in this context, its chances of recovering the costs incurred in this
procedure would be put at serious risk, “if not made factually impossible.”!®
17. Italy also grounds its application on the suspicion (subsequently confirmed by Eskosol)

that Eskosol is relying on financing by third parties, whom Italy contends would not be
bound by an award on costs.!? Italy’s suspicions regarding third-party funding were
premised in part on the basis of the resolution of the Italian bankruptcy judge authorizing
Eskosol’s initiation of this arbitration, which (as submitted by Eskosol) contained “material

portions omitted” that appeared to suggest the judge understood the arbitration would entail

no costs and no commitment on the part of Eskosol.?°

with the risk emanating from the uncertainty as to whether or not the unknown third party will be willing to comply
with a potential costs award in Respondent’s favor.”

16 Request, 19.

17 Request, {ff 9-10, citing Exhibit R-001, p. 2,16 and p. 3, 13.

18 Request, J 11.

19 Request, J 12.

2 Request, {ff 12-15. Italy cites, in particular, the following passages of the judge’s resolution, emphasizing the
portions omitted by Eskosol in its submission: “having considered that it did not occur any obstacle for the requested
authorization (besides, consisting in the mere formal activities to execute the mandate and [OMITTED)) ... For these
reasons, authorizes the receiver Dr. Contardi to subscribe [OMITTED] and to give mandate to the law firm indicated
in the request.” (Exhibit C-005)

 

 

20.

Italy argues that “the need for a provisional measure as a matter of urgency is due in
particular to the fact that once an award is rendered, the tribunal will have no power to
order a funding third party to undertake a commitment to secure payment of costs to the
Respondent.”?! In particular, the urgency of the Request — at the time it was filed — was
said to be connected to the pendency of Italy’s Rule 41(5) application, because of a concern
that “in case its 41(5) objection is upheld,” there would be no further opportunity in the
case to seek protection of any costs award in its favor.2* The implication was that the
specific amount of the security sought in the Request — $250,000 — was connected to the
level of costs Italy had or would incur “during this first phase of the proceedings,” up
through the Tribunal’s decision on Italy’s Rule 41(5) application. Italy did not specify
what, if any, additional level of security it might wish in the event that application were

denied and the case continued into further phases.

2. Eskosol’s position

a. The power to order security for costs

Eskosol asserts that Article 47 and Rule 39(1) allow a tribunal to recommend provisional
measures to preserve the respective rights of either party. It argues, however, that “Italy
has no right per se to be awarded its costs here.””? In its view, Italy’s request presumes
that it will prevail in this matter and that costs will be awarded to it. Italy’s “right” to be
awarded its cost “is thus speculative at best, and not a concrete right that is the appropriate

subject of an Article 47 and Rule 39 application.”

Eskosol contends that Article 47 and Rule 39(1) do not grant the Tribunal authority to
impose a security for costs order on Eskosol. It also notes that while some decisions “have
departed from the wording of Article 47 and Rule 39 and accepted the power to order

security; others have held the opposite conclusion.”?>

2! Request, J 18. See also ff 16-17.
» Request, J 11.

3 Response, 12.

> Response, 12.

°5 Response, {{ 14, citing Emilio Agustin Maffezini

Spain, ICISD Case No. ARB/97/7, Procedural Order No. 2,

 

October 28, 1999, Exhibit RL-032, if 12-15 (Maffezini v. Spain).

21. Relying on Judge Nottingham’s dissenting opinion in RSM v. Saint Lucia, Eskosol
contends that there is no reason for a tribunal to ignore the terms of Article 47 and Rule 39
to create a procedural entitlement that the ICSID framework does not envisage. In its view,

doing so “would allow respondent-States to stifle claims, thus betraying the overall purpose

and objective of the ICSID Convention.””°

22. Eskosol agrees with Italy that the granting of an order for provisional measures requires a
showing that the situation is urgent and that the requested measures are necessary to
prevent irreparable harm.2” It contends, however, that according to ICSID case law a
tribunal can order a measure “only if the harm spared the petitioner exceeds greatly the

damage caused to the party affected by it,” and that these measures protect only “imminent

harm, not potential or hypothetical harm.”?®

23. Eskosol finally argues that, while Italy concedes that an order for security for costs requires
the existence of extraordinary circumstances, such circumstances cannot be grounded
simply on the basis of a claimant’s lack of funds.”? Eskosol relies on a series of decisions
to the effect that: “(1) access to ICISD should not be conditional upon a claimant furnishing
security for costs; and (2) a risk of non-payment of costs due to impecuniosity does not of
itself satisfy the extraordinarily high burden to order security for costs.”*” It distinguishes

the situation in RSM v. Saint Lucia, where “[t]he findings of the majority [of the tribunal]

26 Response, ff] 17; see also id., {9 15-16, citing RSM v. Saint Lucia (dissent).

2” Response, 20.

28 Response, J 21, citing Burimi S.R.L. and Eagle Games SH.A. v. Republic of Albania, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/18,
Procedural Order No. 2, May 3, 2012, Exhibit CL-088, {| 35 (Burimi v. Albania).

2° Response, J 32.

30 Response, {| 33; see also id., { 34-39. Eskosol relies on the following passage from Burimi v. Albania: “[e]ven if
there were more persuasive evidence than that offered by the Respondent concerning the Claimants’ ability or
willingness to pay a possible award of costs, the Tribunal would be reluctant to impose on the Claimants what amounts
to an additional financial requirement as a condition for the case to proceed.” (Exhibit CL-088, {[ 41). Eskosol also
relies on EuroGas Inc. and Belmond Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14, Decision on the
Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures, June 23, 2017, Exhibit CL-090, J 111, 123 (EuroGas v. Slovak
Republic), Gustav F W Hamester GmbH & Co KG v. Republic of Ghana, ICSID Case No. ARB/07/24, Award, June
18, 2010, Exhibit CL-091, | 17 (Hamester v. Ghana); Commerce Group Corp. & San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc. v.
Republic of El Salvador, ICISD Case No. ARB/09/17, Decision on El Salvador’s Application for Security for Costs,
September 20, 2012, Exhibit CL-089, {| 45 (Commerce Group v. El Salvador); Libananco v. Turkey, Exhibit RL-029,
4M 58-59; and RSM y. Saint Lucia, Exhibit RL-028, 99 30-31.

  

 

 

24.

25.

26.

27.

were influenced by an abusive pattern of conduct on the part of the claimant, RSM,” and

where RSM had refused twice to make required payments in ICSID proceedings.*!
b. The granting of security for costs in the instant case

Eskosol argues that, even if the Tribunal finds that it has the power to order security for
costs, in the instant case “‘it is neither urgent nor necessary to prevent irreparable harm to
Italy’s rights,” and there are no extraordinary circumstances requiring the imposition of

this exceptional measure.

According to Eskosol, the harm caused by the lack of payment of an award is “by its own
nature ... highly hypothetical,” as it requires two conditions to be met: the moving party
must prevail in the proceedings, and the tribunal must decide to shift costs, which is
discretionary under the ICSID framework.** By contrast, Eskosol asserts, “the harm caused
to a claimant is actual and could well prevent it from having access to justice,” and

therefore an order for security for costs can only be granted in “truly exceptional cases.”**

Eskosol argues that Italy cannot show in this case that security for costs is necessary to
prevent irreparable harm, because it already has obtained the ATE insurance, which makes
the risk of non-payment of an award non-existent or extremely limited.** Eskosol notes
that the coverage in the ATE Insurance (€1 million) significantly exceeds the amount of
security sought by Italy, while security in the terms sought by Italy (an irrevocable bank
guarantee) would increase the financial burden that Eskosol will have to bear to pursue its

case.*©

Moreover, an order for security for costs would be inappropriate in this case because Italy’s
application rests on the fact that Eskosol is bankrupt. In Eskosol’s view, its need to resort
to third-party funding is the result of the bankruptcy, and the bankruptcy ultimately is the

result of Italy’s internationally wrongful actions, which form the basis of its complaints in

3! Response, 39.

* Response, {ff 19, 32.

3 Response, {ff 22, 30.

4 Response, {ff 23, 43.

35 Response, {ff 24, 30.

% Response, {ff 24-25, 30.

these proceedings. As a result, “it would be abhorrent for the Tribunal to permit Italy to
benefit from its own misconduct by allowing Italy to impose even further financial burden

upon Eskosol through a security for cost order.”*”

28. Eskosol further argues that, in the light of the ATE insurance, Italy’s argument that security
for costs is needed as a matter of urgency is meritless. It also notes that the question of
urgency requires the Tribunal to consider the likelihood of harm if the measure is not issued
before the final award, and reiterates that Italy’s application is speculative in that it

presumes that it will prevail on the merits and that it will obtain a costs award.?®

29. Eskosol also contends that no extraordinary circumstances exist in this case that justify an
order for security for costs.*? Eskosol’s bankruptcy of itself does not amount to an
extraordinary circumstance that should lead the Tribunal to order security for costs.
Moreover, Eskosol has not engaged in any abusive behavior (and Italy does not argue

otherwise); rather, “an ATE insurance that protects Italy’s hypothetical interest is in place

and Eskosol has timely paid its share of the advance on costs.”4?

30. Eskosol finally argues that a number of arbitral tribunals have confirmed that the presence

of a third-party funder would not amount to an extraordinary circumstance requiring the

41

imposition of security for costs.*' It notes that Italy has not provided any authority

supporting its request that the third party funder provide a binding undertaking to pay any
costs ordered against Eskosol, which should be rejected.*? In any event, says Eskosol,
“while the third party funder has not agreed to be responsible for any eventual cost award

directly, it has already taken measures that address this question,” as the ATE insurance

57 Response, {| 26. Eskosol relies on the following passage of Dr. Griffith’s opinion in RSM vy. Saint Lucia, Exhibit
RL-028, Assenting Opinion (Griffith), § 2: “That the claimant does not have funds to meet costs orders if unsuccessful
is no reason to make orders for security. Commonly, this situation is contended to arise from the matters of complaint,
and it would be inconsistent with the BIT entitlements for such financial issues arising from its lacks of funds to
derogate from the investor’s treaty entitlements.”

38 Response, J 30, citing Burumi v. Albania, Exhibit CL-088, § 36: “[T]he alleged harm is speculative, there is no basis
for finding that the matter cannot await the outcome of an award.”

> Response, 32.

+9 Response, [ 40, distinguishing this case from the situation in RSM v. Saint Lucia (see Exhibit RL-028, 9§f 30-31).
4! Response, [ 41, citing EuroGas v. Slovak Republic, Exhibit CL-090, 123; and Hamester v. Ghana, Exhibit CL-
091, 9 14.

#2 Response, | 45.

 

has been paid by the third party funder.*? More generally, Eskosol argues that third party
financing is in principle no different from any other funding mechanism, and a tribunal
should not impose security for costs obligations on a funder unless it equally would have
been willing to impose such obligations on a bank providing traditional loan financing to

a party.

3. The Tribunal’s analysis
31. The Tribunal begins by addressing the issue of authority. As a threshold matter, nothing
in the Convention or the Rules, addressing an ICSID tribunal’s authority to recommend
provisional measures, suggests that this authority is limited only to certain types of
measures, or alternatively stated, excludes certain types of measures. Requests for
measures regarding security for costs are therefore not ipso facto beyond the scope of a

tribunal’s powers.*>

32. As with any provisional measure request, however, the starting point is identification of
the particular “rights” that the applicant claims are appropriate to be preserved. Article 47
confines a tribunal’s authority to a situation in which it finds that “the circumstances ...
require” a particular measure to be taken “to preserve the respective rights of either party.”
Before one can examine what is “required” — an inquiry that is commonly understood to
involve assessments of necessity, urgency and proportionality — it is important to examine

the nature of the “rights,” or entitlement, said to be in question.

33. In RSM v. Saint Lucia, the “right” sought to be preserved by the applicant was said to be a
“right to claim reimbursement of the costs it incurs” in the arbitration, in the event it
prevailed on the merits and the tribunal granted a claim for recovery of costs.*° This was

said to be “qualified as a procedural right ... and moreover as a contingent right which

43 Response, {| 47.

+ Response, {| 48.

45 See Grynberg v. Grenada, Exhibit RL-030, § 5.5 (“Neither Article 47, nor Rule 39 specify the type of provisional
measure a Tribunal may recommend. This being the case, and subject to one caveat, a measure requiring the lodging
of security for costs ... would not, as a matter of jurisdiction, appear to fall outside a tribunal’s power. That is, unless
such a measure cannot be said to relate to the preservation of the applying party’s rights — the preservation of which
is the only limiting factor on the nature of a permissible provisional measure.”).

46 RSM v. Saint Lucia, Exhibit RL-028, | 63 (emphasis added); see also id., 68 (referring to “Respondent's procedural
right to claim reimbursement of its expenses,” as “directly linked to the relief it requests” as part of its defense)
(emphasis added).

 

 

47

only arises if and when the two conditions ... are met. To be analytically precise,

however, what is really sought in such cases is not preservation of a right to “claim”
reimbursement, or even to obtain a costs award as a consequence of such claim. Neither
of these are obstructed in any way by the presence or absence of assets. Rather, what is
really sought in these cases is an assurance that this pursuit will be meaningful, in the sense
that there will be assets available at the end of the case against which to enforce any costs
award. At issue is thus not truly a concern about a procedural right (to preserve a path to
obtain a cost award), but instead an outcome-related worry about collection on such an
award. This concern about collection is sometimes framed as part of a broader right to
effective relief, considered to be part of the panoply of rights encompassed by the notion

of procedural integrity.**

34. Framed as about the ability to obtain effective relief, however, there are potential broader
consequences to recognizing the existence of such a “right.” The Tribunal accepts that
respondent States have genuine concerns about their ability to enforce an eventual costs
award against unsuccessful claimants, and some States are starting to raise the possibility
of reforms to the ICSID system to protect themselves more systematically.*? But at the
same time, such States would be unhappy to see a similar argument about a right to
effective relief used against them, for example by claimants worried about collection risk
associated with any final merits award of compensation. Article 53(1) of the ICSID
Convention imposes an obligation on “each party” (States and investors alike) to “abide
by and comply with the terms of the award,” and Article 54(1) obliges all Contracting

States to “enforce the pecuniary obligations imposed by [an] award within its territories as

47 RSM y. Saint Lucia, Exhibit RL-028, { 64 (emphasis in original).
48 See RSM y. Saint Lucia, Exhibit RL-028, {| 66 (“Costs decisions ... are ... part of the arbitral process the integrity
of which deserves protection”) and 4 69 (“the integrity of the proceedings ... comprises both substantive and
procedural rights, such as, e.g., the preservation of evidence. The right to seek reimbursement of one’s costs in the
case of a favorable award likewise constitutes a procedural right in that sense. Hence there has to be an effective
mechanism for protecting this right in order to render it meaningful.”) (emphasis added); see also id. ,{[ 67 (referencing
the Plama tribunal’s observation that provisional measures “must relate to the requesting party’s ability to have its
claims considered and decided by the Arbitral Tribunal and for any arbitral decision ... to be effective and able to be
carried out”) (emphasis added).
” See T. Jones, “ICSID to explore protections ageinst ‘judgment- proof claimants’,” Global Arbitration Review,

October 21, 2016, available at http://glc rticle/1069674/icsid-t pl

against-“judgment-proof-claimants (reporting ICSID press release promising, foll lowing a request from the
Government of Panama, to “seek the input of member states and report on the issue” as part of its forthcoming rules
amendment process).

 

 

 

if it were a final judgment of a court in that State.” But the Convention generally does not
concern itself with collection risk, and indeed, Article 54(3) makes explicit that
“{e]xecution of the award” is to be governed by national law, including (as confirmed in

Article 55) national law related to the immunity of State assets.

35. Against this backdrop, therefore, there is something analytically curious about the notion
that an ICSID tribunal, while not empowered to protect a claimant’s ability to collect on a
possible merits award, nonetheless should intervene to protect a State’s asserted “right” to
collect on a possible costs award.*° For this reason, some tribunals have expressed doubt
about whether there really is a “right” in play for security-for-costs that is entitled to
protection under Article 47 and Rule 39(1).>! Others have found that there is such a
protectable right, even if the standard for obtaining provisional measures to protect that

right is an exacting one, requiring a demonstration of exceptional circumstances.*?

36. In this case, the Tribunal need not resolve this interesting question now, because even if in
principle the “right” Italy asserts is one that would be deserving of protection in exceptional

circumstances, Italy has not demonstrated that such circumstances exist. A

°° See generally Burimi v. Albania, Exhibit CL-088, {] 49 (noting that the issue of non-payment is of concern both to
respondents and claimants, since it occurs both with respect to damages awards against States and costs awards in
their favor; the Burimi tribunal suggested that in this broader sense, non-payment “poses a systemic risk to the
arbitration of international investment disputes”).

5! See Maffezini v. Spain, Exhibit RL-032, § 15 (“we are unable to see what present rights are intended to be
preserved”); RSM y. Saint Lucia, Exhibit RL-028 (dissenting opinion), { 1 (disagreeing with the majority that a
security for costs order “is encompassed within the class of ‘provisional measures’ which may ‘be taken to preserve
the rights’ of Respondent”); Grynberg v. Grenada, Exhibit RL-030, note 9 (dissenting opinion) (“the use of the words
‘preserve’ and ‘preserved’ in Article 47 and Rule 39 presupposes that the right to be preserved exists. Because
Respondent has no existing right to an ultimate award of costs, the Tribunal is thus without jurisdiction”); see also
L.E. Peterson, “In New Ruling, BIT Tribunal Holds That Alleged Right to Future Costs-Recovery is Not a Right
Capable of Grounding an Interim ‘Security for Costs’ Request,” Investment Arbitration Reporter, September 26, 2016,
available at https://www.iareporter.com/ar s/in-new-ruling-bit-tribunal-holds-that-alleged-right-to-future-costs-
recovery-is-not-a-right-capable-of- i interim-security-for-costs-request/ (reporting on unpublished
decision in Valla Verde Sociedad Financieras S.L. v. Venezuela, 1CSID Case No. ARB/12/18, Procedural Order No.
4 (September 21, 2016), reportedly disavowing the tribunal’s power to order provisional measures “to protect a right
that as of yet does not exist”).

*2 See EuroGas v. Slovak Republic, Exhibit CL-090, {¥f 121, 123 (“security for costs may only be granted in exceptional
circumstances, “for example, where abuse or serious misconduct has been evidenced”; “financial difficulties and third-
party funding ... do not necessarily constitute per se exceptional circumstances justifying ... an order of security for
costs”); Libananco v. Turkey, Exhibit RL-029, 57 (concluding that “it would only be in the most extreme case — one
in which an essential interest of either Party stood in danger of irreparable damage — that the possibility of granting
security for costs should be entertained at all”); RSM v. Saint Lucia, Exhibit RL-028, 9] 52, 54, 57; Grynberg v.
Grenada, Exhibit RL-030, {{] 5.9-5.16, 5.18 (majority decision); see also Commerce Group v. El Salvador, Exhibit
CL-089, {i 42, 45 (finding similar authority, in the annulment context, from a Committee’s “inherent power” “[a]s
the guardian of the integrity of the proceeding”).

  

 

 

 

 

 

37.

38.

53 See, e.g., Burimi v. Albania, Exhi

recommendation of provisional measures should be issued only where doing so is
necessary to preserve identified rights and urgently required for that purpose, in the sense
that the requested measure is needed prior to issuance of an award. Tribunals also should
ensure that the particular measures requested are proportionate, in the sense that they do
not impose such undue burdens on the other party as to outweigh, in a balance of equities,

the justification for granting them.**

Here, Italy has not demonstrated that it is either necessary or urgent that Eskosol post
security of $250,000 for a potential costs award in Italy’s favor. The Tribunal accepts that
Eskosol’s bankruptcy makes it unlikely that it could pay an eventual costs award directly
from its own funds. The Tribunal is also not aware (at least as of now) of any terms in
Eskosol’s third-party funding agreement that would require the funder to meet an eventual
costs award rendered against Eskosol. However, the funder apparently has assisted
Eskosol in obtaining the ATE Insurance policy,** with a commencement date of October
8, 2015, for the specific purpose of “protecting [Eskosol] from the risk of a potential
adverse costs order or order for security for costs.”°> The policy covers up to “1,000,000
Euro in the aggregate for Opponent’s Costs,” with “Opponent” identified as “Republic of
Italy.”*° In these circumstances, the amount presently sought by Italy as security is well
below the threshold of Italy’s costs already addressed by the policy. Italy has not sought
leave to comment on the mechanics or sufficiency of the ATE Insurance policy. There has
been no showing of any imminent need for a different mechanism or to secure amounts

beyond the levels of the ATE policy.

Moreover, even if later in these proceedings Italy could demonstrate that its potentially
recoverable legal costs surpassed the €1 million threshold of the ATE policy, it still would
have to demonstrate that protecting its potential ability to recover such additional costs
would be proportionate, given the potential burden on Eskosol of arranging security of

additional amounts. As noted above, proportionality is a critical part of any provisional

  

it CL-088, {if 34-36 (citing prior cases).

ATE Insurance, Exhibit C-008 (stating on its front cover that the policy was arranged by The Judge Limited, with
QBE Insurance (Europe) Limited as the subscribing insurer).

°5 ATE Insurance, Exhibit C-008, Recital C.

°° ATE Insurance, Exhibit C-008, Schedule.

measures analysis, and a party seeking provisional measures must demonstrate that its need
for the measures are not outweighed by the hardships to which the other party would be
subjected if the measures are granted. This type of proportionality analysis would be
particularly critical where the burden of a potential measure is one that is said to impinge,
at least potentially, on a party’s ability to pursue its claims or defenses at ICSID.°7 A
tribunal should not lightly recommend a provisional measure that could impede access to

justice.

39. For these reasons, Italy’s request that the Tribunal “[d]irect Eskosol to post an irrevocable
bank guarantee or analogous security in the amount of $250,000” is hereby denied.**
Italy’s alternative request, that the Tribunal “direct Eskosol to procure from such third party

— proved to have demonstrably adequate assets — a legally binding undertaking to pay any

costs order entered against Eskosol,”*? is also denied.

B. Disclosure Application
L. Italy’s position
40. With its Security Application, Italy submitted also a Disclosure Application, alleging that
“in order to protect its rights Italy needs to know whether the Claimant is funded by a third

party and whether such third party would be financially sound as well as committed to

execute a cost award adopted by the Tribunal against Eskosol.”©°

Al. In making the Disclosure Application, Italy relies on the decision adopted in Muhammet

Cap v. Turkmenistan, where the tribunal granted the requested order for disclosure on the

97 See Hamester v. Ghana, Exhibit CL-091, { 17 (noting the tribunal’s prior ruling that “there was a serious risk that
an order for security for costs would stifle the Claimant’s claims and that, in any event, it had not been shown that the
measures requested were necessary and urgent”); Grynberg v. Grenada, Exhibit RL-030, § 5.19 (“it is simply not part
of the ICSID dispute resolution system that an investor’s claim should be heard only upon the establishment of a
sufficient financial standing of the investor to meet a possible costs award”); Burimi v. Albania, Exhibit CL-088, { 41
(“Even if there were more persuasive evidence ... concerning the Claimants’ ability or willingness to pay a possible
award on costs, the Tribunal would be reluctant to impose on the Claimants what amounts to an additional financial
requirement as a condition for the case to proceed.”); Commerce Group v. El Salvador, Exhibit CL-089, | 52
(expressing concern that a grant of security “might seriously affect the Applicant’s right to seek annulment of the
award”).

58 Request, Section V.

°° Request, Section V.

© Request, | 37.

  

42.

43.

44.

4S.

basis, inter alia, that this information was needed by the respondent to file its request for

security for costs.°!

2. Eskosol’s position
Eskosol contends that Italy’s document production request is now moot “in the light of
Eskosol’s confirmation that it requires external funding to have access to justice here.”
It also notes that, “given the existence of the ATE insurance, the commercial soundness of

the funder is immaterial to Italy’s position.”

Regarding the funder’s commitment to execute a cost award, Eskosol’s position is as

summarized in Section II.A.2.b above.

3. The Tribunal’s analysis
The Tribunal agrees with Eskosol that the issues raised by the Disclosure Application are
largely moot, in that Eskosol has now answered Italy’s initial question, namely “whether
the Claimant is funded by a third party,” as well as at least part of the second question,
“whether such third party would be financially sound as well as committed to execute a
cost award adopted by the Tribunal against Eskosol.”® It is now clear that the funder has
made arrangements to support any cost award against Eskosol up to the amount of €1
million. It is neither necessary nor urgent at this point to investigate whether the funder
would be in a position to arrange (or willing to arrange) insurance coverage or other
security for a potentially higher amount of costs. Such an investigation would be highly

premature.

For these reasons, Italy’s request for a provisional measure directing Eskosol to submit
Exhibits C-005 and C-006 without redactions, “to permit ... confirmation whether a
funding third party did commit itself to cover Eskosol[’s] costs of these proceedings,” is

hereby denied.™

©! Response, J 40, citing Muhammet Cap & Sehil Ingaat Endustri ve Ticaret Ltd. Sti. v. Turkmenistan, ICSID Case
No. ARB/12/6, Procedural Order No. 3, June 12, 2015, Exhibit RL-033, {{[ 8, 10, 12-13 (Muhammet Cap v.
Turkmenistan).

© Response, 50.

© Request, {| 37.

© Request, Section V.

Ill. ORDER
46. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal:

(1) Denies Italy’s Request for Provisional Measures Under Rule 39(1), filed on January

18, 2017; and

(2) Defers for a later stage of this case all requests for costs in connection with this

application.

On behalf of the Tribunal

[Signed]

Jean Kalicki
President of the Tribunal

Date: 12 April 2017

