Archived Content

 

Information identified as archived on the Web is for reference, research or recordkeeping purposes. It has
not been altered or updated after the date of archiving. Web pages that are archived on the Web are not
subject to the Government of Canada Web Standards. As per the Communications Policy of the Government
of Canada, you can request alternate formats by contacting us.

 

Contenu archivé

 

L'information archivée sur le Web est disponible a des fins de consultation, de recherche ou de tenue de
dossiers seulement. Elle n’a été ni modifiée ni mise a jour depuis sa date d’archivage. Les pages archivées
sur le Web ne sont pas assujetties aux normes Web du gouvernement du Canada. Conformément a la
Politique de communication du gouvernement du Canada, vous pouvez obtenir cette information dans un
format de rechange en communiquant avec nous.

 

*. Dec OFd, 19572 uSPE PRAY ENYZRONENT, CANeDaAW DIVISION

2

Decision
Regarding the Place of Arbitration

* in the
NAFTA / UNCITRAL Case

between
Ethyl Corporation (Claimant)
and
The Government of Canada (Respondent)

° before
the Tribunal consisting of

Prof, Dr. Karl-Heinz B&ckstiege! (Chairman)

Mr. Charles N. Brower (Arbitrator)
Mr. Mare Lelonde (Arbitrator)

Date of Decision; November 28, 1997

No, 9639

 

DexOGT, 49.701 44:,14AM ENVIRONMENT CANADALAW DIVIs {uN No. YOJY = P.azi2y

A
1
1
1
1

Both parties have presented extensive written submissions, as well as oral
arguments during the Procedural Meeting in New York City on October 2, 1997,
regarding what should be the place of arbitration In this casa. In these submis-
sions and arguments the parties have been ably represented as follows:

Ethyl Corporation ("Ethyl") by:

Mr. Barry Appleton
Prof. Andreas Lowenfeld
Mr. Steve Mayer

Mr. Anthony Macri

The Government of Canada ("Canada") by;

Ms. Valerie Hughes
Mr. Brian Evernden
Mr. David Haigh
Ms. Ann Ewasechko

Ethyl urges that the place of arbitration be New York City,’ whereas .Cana-
da (at page 26 of its Memorandum of October 2, 1987) requests the Tribune! "to
determine that the place of arbitration should be Ottawa, or alternatively, could be
Toronto...". ‘

Our decision on thia polnt, thy! sugessts (at page 2 of Its Submission of
October 16, 1997), has “importencs...not only for this arbitration but is 8 per-
Suasive precedent for future NAFTA investor-state arbitrations held under the
auspices of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules." Doubtless this view arises from the
fact, as the Tribunal is informed, that the present arbitration is the first NAFTA
dispute between Canada and en alien investor.

Our decision is governed by NAFTA Article 1130(b), which provides that
absent “the disputing parties ayree’! 4] otherwise, a Tribunal shall hold an arbitra-

 

* Ethyl has abandoned its alternative proposal, made in Its Notice of Arbitration, tnat the place of
arbitration be Washington, OC.

- DecOGE, 12.121 19.190" ENVIROWENT CenaDaAW DIVISION No, 9639 = B.47id3

tion in the territory of s Party {to NAFTA] that is @ party to the New York Conven-

* ton, selected in accordance with...the UNCITRAL. Arbitration Rules if the arbitra-
tion is under those Rules.” All three WAFI* >acties, £e@,, Canada, Mexico and the
United States, are partizs iv ihe New fork Convention. Therefore our selection is
to he made from among sites in nose three countries.

The UNCITRAL Rules themselves provide only, in Article 16(1), that "the
place where the arbitration is to be held...shall be determined by the arbitral tribu-

nal, having regard to the circumstances of the arbitration." (Emphasis added.)

' * The Tribunal’siso-has nein rafzrved by both parties to UNCITRAL’s Notes
on Organizing Arbitral Proc:sadin: 1 Shes. ‘ievss, which are not binding,? state (in
paragreph 22):

Various factual and legal factors influence the choice of the place of arbi-
tration, and their relative importance varias from case to case. Among the
mora prominent factors are: (a) suitability of the law on arbitral procedure
of the place of arbitration; (b): whether there is a multilateral or bilateral
tueaty on enforcement of arbitral awards between the State where the
arbitration takes place and the State or States where the award may have
to be enforced; (c) convenience of the parties and the arbitrators, including
the travel distances; (u} avaiabillty and cost of support services needed;

- and (a) location of. the aubjes*-~netter in dispute and proximity of evi-
dence. ¢ : :

Canada makes two threshaid arguments that must be addressed at the out-

 

2 Seg Introduction to ths Notes, paragraph 2:

No legal requirement binding on the arbitrators or the parties is imposed by the Notes.
The arbitral tribunal remains free to use the Notes as it sees fit and is not required to give
repaons for disregarding them.

> Consideration (b) would appear not td be relevant Nera, given that all potential places of arbitra-
tion are in States Parties to the New York Convention.

4 Canada correctly points out that a tixcii consideration, namely, “perception of a place as being
neutral,” was eliminated from an earlier graft of the Notes ez being “unclear, potentially confu-
sing? although something that a vibuns! “might wish to discuss,..with the parties." Report of the
United Nations Commission on international Trade Law on the work at its twenty-eighth seesion
(Vienna, 2-28 May 1995), U.N. Doc. A/60/17, paragtaph 337, reprinted in Vol. XXVI UNCITRAL
Yearbook (1985).

* pecQGL, 435182 AS245A" ENVIROWENT CANADA AH DIVISION No, 9639 B.s7iay
«4

set, It urges (at page 5 of its Memorandum of October 2, 1997), first, that Article
16(1) of the UNCITRAL Rules "permits the Tribunal to take into account certain
generel, universally appliea considerations which usually are found in the doctrine
of forum conveniens,” which “provides that the farum In which to try a matter
should be the jurisdiction that has the closest connection with the action and the
parties.” Canada than proceeds (st page 7 of its Memorandum of October 2,
1997) to list factors “which most directly connect [this arbitration) to Ottawa,"
Leaving aside the issue as to whether that municipal law doctrine has a place in
international erbitration, the Tribunal is constrained to say that in its view its deci-
sion regarding the place of arbitration in this case must be made, as Article 16(1)
prescribes, “havirig regard to tne trcumstances of the arbitration,” meaning all

 

 

such circe including thos". ek offered for consi In para-
gtaph 22 of the Notes, and without any individual circumstance being eccorded
p weight | ive of ite iva marits. In the end, Canada ep-

pears to agree, having stated (at paragraph 3 of its. Reply Memorandum of Oc-

tober 22, 1987) that it cited the doctrine “only to demonstrate that the criteria

which provide guldance in determining the appropriate forum eppear to be practi- '
cally the’same criteria which are cited in the UNCITRAL Notes...."

Canada then argues (at pages 8-9 of its Mamorandum of October 2,
1997), second, that since under NAFTA Chater 20 (Rule 22 of the Model Rules
of Procedure for NAFTA) the placy of arbitration ‘of a State-to-State NAFTA arbi-
tration is the capital of the respondent Stste, "Lal fortiori, where a private com-
mercial party bringa e compisint under Chapter 11, it should follow that tha cir-
cumstances of the case lend themselves to the government of a sovereign coun-
try responding in its own capital.” The Tribunal does not share this view. The fact
that the respondant Stete’s capital has bean expressly designated by rule adopted
pursuant to Chapter 20 would suggest, to the contrary, that the omission to do so
in connection with Chapter 11 was, If anything, deliberate. In any event, NAFTA’s
Chapter 11 clearly cuntemplates the, possibillty of disputes under it against any
NAFTA Party belng arbitrated In Washington, OC, since Articla 1120 allows a

Dei? UiSyP? AFkASP ENRON GONAPAAW DIVISION No 9639 P.67483

diaputing investor to choose arbitration (if and when It becomes available*) under
the ICSID Convention, Articis 62 of which provides that in the absence of agrea-
ment of the-arbitrating gartics “arbi retiur: proceedings shall be held at the seat of
the Centre" i.e., Washington, DC.*

Having disposed of thase threshold issues, the Tribunal now turns its atten-
tlon to the four factors relevant under the UNCITRAL Notes, considering each of
them in ion to the respective proposed places of arbi Ottawa (or, eiter-
natively, Toronto) and New York City.”

 

~As to -critericn (a!.f the Notas «.“suitability of the law on arbitral proce-
dure” - the Tribunal concludes that all proposed fore are equally suitable. It sp-
pears undisputed that Canada’s Commercial Arbitration Act is based on the
UNCITRAL Madel Law on International Commercial Arbitration and by its terms
would apply to this arbitration under NAFTA Chapter 11,It appears to be equally
undisputed that the relevant laws of the United States, and, to the extent rele-
vant, the State of New York, are no legs suitable. The fact that the laws applica-
ble to this arbitration, were it situated in New York City, have been in place longer
than Canada’s C ial Arbitration Act, and therefare are judicially more slabo-
rated, does not, in the view of the Trounal, significantly affect their comparative

 

 

5 To date neither Canada ner Mexico is 9 party to the IC8ID Convention. Thus although the United
States is a party to that Convention no present prospect of Such en arbitration exists. Under Arti-
cles 20 and 21 of the ICSID Additional Facllity Arbitration Rules, to which Article 1120 also al-
lows resort, “the place of arbitration shall ba determined by the Arbitral Tribunal after consultation
with the parties and the Secretariat” and must be in 2 State Party to the New York Convention.

¢ — ICSIO Convention Article 2 fixes the seat of the Centre at “the principal office“ of the World Bank,
Le, Washington, DC. While it is true, 26 Canada has noted (at paragraph 6 of ita Reply Memoran-
dum of October 22, 1997), that Washington, DC je not thereby the “place of arbitration,” that
concept itself is not relevant to the self-contained ICSID system.

7 ‘The Tribunal, es previously noted, hag the power, under NAFTA Article 1130(b), to select ag the
place of arbitration any situs in Canada, Mexico or the United States. The Tribunal notes that
Ethyl (at page 5 of its Submission of October 16, 1997) has “submitted that if this Tribunal finds
that it is inappropriate to have the pisce of arbitration in either Canada or the United States, the
Claimant suggests that the place of arbitration be in Mexico." The Tribunal limits itself in this
casa, however, to the sites recommended by ths parties. in doing so it emphasizes that It Is In no
wey precluded by the parties’ respective proposals from soneidering ot other locations. It proceeda

au It does because it beliaves the purtias objectively have searched out thore places that are most

likely In fact to be most appropriate, "having regard to the cirummatances of the erbitration."

 

 

* DeOTU Bat AQUE NEROENT SONAPAAW DIVISLON No, 9639 B. 77433

suitability.

Criterion (c) of the Novea® -“the convenience of the parties and the arbitra-
tors, including the travel distances" - likewise seems not to be significantly better
served by one proposed alternative as opposed to any other. As to the Tribunal,
the President, who normally is resident in Cologne, Germany, can travel with more
or Jass equal ease to New York City, Ottawa and Toronto. Mr. Lalonda, a resident
of Montreal, can travel to Ottawa or Toronto just 28 well as Judge Brower can
from his Washington, OC residence to New York City, By the same token, Judge
Brower would be no more and no lec4 inconvenienced by travel to Ottawa or
Toronto than’ would’Mr.'Laionds' bz by ‘th rsed to appear in New York City.®

The situation of the parties is substantially similar. Canada has noted (at
page 12 of its Memorandum of October 2, 1997) that:

Tha investment which Ethyl Corporation alleges has been damaged is the
wholly owned subsidiary, Ethyi Canada, which has its head office in
Mississauga, adjoining the City of Toronto, In the Province of Ontario. its
blending facility, where it processes MMT, is In Corunna, in the Province of
Ontario.

In response:to this Ethyl simply. contends (et page 4 of Its Submission of October
-46, 1997) that it has “its head «tice in [the. Commonwealth of] Virginia” and that
‘the "location of subsidiary offices is not a relevant factor for this arbitration." For
‘purposes of criterion (c) alone this may well be corract. If it is, there is no signifi-
cant difference in the convenience factor between Canada having to travel to New
York City and Ethyl having to be present in Ottawa or Toronto. If It is not, then a
degree of prefarence would be indicated for a Canadian venue.

 

¥ The Tribunal already has determined that criterion (b) « “whather there is @ multilateral or bilateral
treaty on enforcement of arbitral awards between the State where the arbitration takes place and
the State or States where the sward may have to be enforced” - is nat “relevent here.” Bee note

3, suore,
® The Tribunal does not belleve, as Ethyl has suggested (at page 4 of its Submission of October 16,

1897), that in determining tha “convenience of the...erbitvators™ It is relevant that "local offices of
the law firms of both Messrs. (slonde and Brower" exist in New York City.

 

 

+ peQT. ABs P* ASiaSer ENVIRONMENT caNADAL AW DIVISION No. 9639 B

“7.

Canada has introduced as a consideration the location of counsel to the
parties, emphasizing that Ett\’s counsel has an office in Toronto as wall as in
New York City. Ethyl disputes the relevance of counsel's convenience, while
nonethaless pointing out (at page 3 of ita Submission of October 16, 1997) that
“The Government of Canada #160 maintains a large consulate in Naw York City as
wall as a Permanent Mission to the United Nations which can eupport the needs
of the Government of Carisda’s legal team...." Canada terms this latter assertion
“incorract," as "[t]hese are diplumatic offices and sre not set up to act as alterna-
tive legal offices, such as [Claimant’s counsel] spparantly has available to

him,"

The Tribunal is inclined tc the view that the convenience of counsel is a
relevant considaration, subsumed under the “convenience of the parties." Certain-
ly the convenience of attorneys sppointed by the parties, which translates into
cost factors, affects their clients. The Tribunal also believes that the availability
for temporary use by government lawyers of facilities at a consular post or diplo-
matic mission Is not parable to a dedi d office of Accordingly, the
Tribunal’concludes that it Is relevant to consider that fixing the place of arbitration
in either Ottawa or Toronto will serwe the convenience of counsel collectively
batter than New York City.

We now turn to criterion (d), “availability and cost of support services
needed." It is clear that all necessary support services for this arbitration are avail-
able in all three of the cities that have bean proposed. The Tribursal believes it
appropriate to take judicial notice of the fact that such services inevitably will be
more costly in Naw York City than in elther Ottawa or Toronto. This includes
transportation, hotels, meal sarvice, hearing rooms and counsel rooms, and certi-
fied stenogrephic reporting services. Therefore application of criterion (d) favors
Ottawa or Toronto over New York City, but does not discriminate between them. —

The Tribunal does not, however, take into consideration in this regard, as

 

%” As fegarda Ethyl’s counsel this point would appear to apply equally to New York City and Toronto,

De O40. 19722 AA*AZAM ENVIRONMENT

  

ANADALAW DIVISION No, 9639 B.s7i2]3

Canada has proposed, the presence and availability in Ottawa of NAFTA Secretari-
at facilities. As Canada itself records (at page 7 of its Reply Memorandum of
October 22, 1997), “The NAFTA Secretariat operates in all thrae NAFTA coun-
tries, each of which funds the local office.” (Emphasis added.) While the Tribunal
accepts fully, as Canada itsalf has stressed (at page 7 of its Reply Memorandum
.of October 22, 1897), that "those offices operate independently of their host
country and are viewed by the NAFTA Parties as neutral centres,” the Tribynal
Nonetheless is concerned that to avail itself of such facilities could be viewed as
inconsistent with at least the spirit of the requirement of the UNCITRAL Rules

‘(Articles 9-10) that it zct 60 as to leave ro ccubt whatsoever as to its complete

independence of any party, Titis is ol che more so where, as here, Ethyl has regis-
tered its objection (at page 5 of its Submission of October 16, 1997) that the use
of such facilities “would be inappropriate.”

The last criterion of the Notes - “(e) location of the subject-matter in dis-
pute snd proximity of evidence” - finally turns the Tribunal definitely to selection
of & place of arbitration In Canaua. Clearly the subject-matter in dispute is fixed in
Canada.”Ethy! charges (sae page 4 of its Notice of Arbitration) that certein legisla-
tive and other-acts of:Canada “removing! MMT [mathylcyclopentedienyl mange-
nese tricarbonyl] from Canadian oas4uiine™ have resulted in breaches by Canada of
Articlas 1102, 1106 and 1110.7 NAFTA, thereby "harm[ing] Ethyl Corporation
and the value of its Canadian investment, Ethyl Canada.” The “location of the
subject-matter in dispute” is not subject to serious debate.

The parties have little to say as regards "the proximity of evidence.” Per-
haps the neture of the case and the early stage in which it now Is make it difficult
to be explicit on this subject. For its part, Canada has said (at page 7 of Its Mama-
tandum of October 2, 1997) qnly that "virtually the whole of the cause of action
In this case relatas to Canadisn laws, the Canadian law-making process, the ac-
tlons of the Canadian Parliament and certain ministers," and that it “should be evi-
dent...that the to this pi of Ia king snd policy 9 are for

 

Delt.

13.37! gO]47B" ENYIROWENT CONODPLAW DIVISION We, 9639 193

the most part located in Ottawa.""' In response Ethyl effectively asserts (at page
5 of its Submission of October 16, 1897) that no such witnesses will be required,
as it “intends to provide proof of statements made by Canadian officials through
the introduction of authoritative writings, such as Hansard,” which the Tribunal
understands to be the official record of debates in tha Canadian Parliament. In
reply, Canada argues (at page 6 of its Reply Memorandum of October 22, 1997)
that “it is potentially the whole process of law making and parliamentary proce-
dure and practice which is to be examined through tha evidence of witnasses". In
affirmative support of New York City as the place of arbitration Ethyl states only
that, “[a]s an example, all important documents on the issue of damages are
located In Richmond, Virginis,” where its headquarters are situated. Thus the
Tribunal is affordad little insight Into just how sny considerations of the proximity
of evidance should sffact Its decision.

Traditionally arbitrating parties, desiring both the reality and the appearance

_ +» Of a neutral forum, incline to agree on a place-of arbitration outside their respec-
tive national jurisdictions. This is especially the case where a sovereign party is

involved? Where an arbitral institution or a tribunal must make the selection, this
tendency is, if anything. even greater, ano for the same reasons. Article 16(1) of
the UNCITRAL Rules easily accommodates this consideration as ona of the "clr-

cumstances of the arbitration.” ,

Here, however, NAFTA Article 1130(b) circumscribes our powers, limiting
possible places of arbitration.to either of the two States here involved or Mexico.
A Mexican venue surely would reprasent neutrality in this case, and in all such
cases. The Tribunal concludes, however, that had the NAFTA Parties felt that
every arbitration under Chapter 11 of NAFTA must be sited in the NAFTA Party

 

Canada srques (at pages 9-11 of its Memorandum of October 2, 1987) also that certain “related
procesdings* are "additional factors that point ta Canada as the appropriate place of ar-
bitration...." Those proceedings are (1) @ suit by Ethyl’s Cansdian subsidiary seeking “a declara-
tion.,.that [the rélevant legislation! is of no legal force and effect* as weil as injunctive relief, and
(2) a forma! complaint by the Province of Alberta againet Canada which will be subject to dispute
resolution proceedings. The Tribunal does nat believe that the pendency of those proceedings has
Bny bearing on its determination of the place of arbitration.

1

4

3

PA AA AGEM ENVIRONMENT CONGDAAW DIVISION No. 9639 P.1i7783

10+

not involved in the dispute they would have said so and would not have remitted
us to Article 16(1) of tha UNCITRAL Rules. The Tribunal has readily concludad
that a Mexican venue would not sarve other important "circumstances" of this
arbitration.**

The Tribunal concludes on the basis of all of the foregoing that, on bal-
ance, the place of arbitration shvuld be in Canada. Although as to a number of the
“circumstances of the arbitration,” notably the respective suitability of the law on
arbitral procedure‘and the ot the af all three cities in conten-
tion are equally appropriate. other «ircumstances weigh in favor of Canada and
nane point toward New York City. Most significantly, Canada indisputably is the
location of the ‘subject-matter in dispute. In addition, a Canadian venue offers less
costly support services and overall would better suit the convenience of counsel
for the parties. It is far less certain, but likely, that Canada overall is mote conven-
ient for the parties themselves and as regards the proximity of evidence. In the
énd; therefore, the Tribunal finds a Canadian venue more appropriate as the place
of arbitration in thie case than New York City. .

-

 

“Once the: Tribunal-has deter:v'ned <9 select a Canadian venue, none of the
specific factors considered we'g71s strongly in favor. of Toronto, Canada’s alterns-
tive proposal, rather than Ottawa. The Tribunal has some reluctance, however, to
choose Ottawa. This Is due to the fact that it is the capital of Canada.

The Tribunal therefore has determined to designate Toronto as the place of
arbitration, for the reason that while it is no more, and no less, appropriate than
Ottawa when measurad by the uther applicable criteria. it is likely to be perceived

as a more "nautral” forum.

 

‘The fact that the UNCITRAL Notes omitted (aa note 4, suera) “perception of a pisce se belng

Neutral® from its list of criteria for selection of 3 place of arbitration because it was “unclear,
potentially confusing” does not mean that such criterion cannot be considered. UNCITAAL, in
taking this step, Jteelf indicated “that the arbitral tribunal, before deciding on the place of arbitra-
tion, might wish to discuss that with the parties.”

uP? AARP ENAROP ANT CONAPLAW DIVISION

“We

Signed by the members of the Tribunal:

Charles N, Brower:

aise « fe Conde

Mare Lalonde: sveeceensnngee

Karl-Heinz Béckstiegel

Names bee

Date of last signature:

 

 

Ww,

No, 9639

1947

P.187123

