COPY

 

Award

on Jurisdiction

in the

NAFTA / UNCITRAL Case

between

Ethyl Corporation (Claimant)
and

The Government of Canada (Respondent)

before

the Tribunal consisting of

Prof. Dr. Karl-Heinz Bickstiegel (Chairman)
Mr. Charles N. Brower (Arbitrator)

Mr. Marc Lalonde (Arbitrator)

Date of Award: 24 June 1998

VI

VIL

TABLE QF CONTENTS

The Parties

1 The Claimant

The Respondent
Summary Description of the Dispute and the Proceedings

Relief Sought
1 As Regards the Dispute Over Jurisdiction
2 As Regards the Dispute on the Merits

Chronology of the Dispute and of the Arbitral Proceedings
Major Facts and Contentions Regarding Jurisdiction

Major Legal Arguments of the Parties and Mexico on Jurisdiction .

Arguments of Canada Objecting to Jurisdiction
Arguments of Ethyl Regarding Jurisdiction

Points Raised by Mexico Regarding Jurisdiction

Points Made by Ethyl in Response to Mexico’s Submission

buen

Conclusions of the Tribunal

| General Considerations for the Interpretation of the Relevant NAFTA

Provisions

(a) Applicable Law wees

(b) Determination of Jurisdiction as a Preliminary Question

(c) Particular Considerations Relevant to the Determination of
Jurisdiction :

The Distinction Between Jurisdictional Provisions and Procedural Rules

Does Ethyl Claim a Breach Under Chapter] 1?

(a) Claim for Breach of Section A

(b) Relation to [Investment or Trade in Goods

(c) Requirement of a “Measure”

(d) Linutation of Claims to the Territory of Canada

ww

()

Page

Nw

ot
=

wrNnny
SO

le We we We We we
Sa

Aawts

4 Does Ethyl Claim a Breach Under Chapter! 1?
(a) Claim for Breach of Section A .
(b) Relation to Investment or Trade in Goods
(c) Requirement of a “Measure”
(d) Limitation of Claims to the Territory of Canada

VUL Conclusions of the Tribunal

(i)

 

I The Claimant
ETHYL CORPORATION

330 South Fourth Street
Richmond, VA 23219

The Claimant, Ethyl Corporation, is a corporation incorporated under the laws of
the State of Virginia, one of the United States of America, and has its head office in Richmond,
Virginia. {t manufactures and distributes, inter alia, methytcyclopentadienyl manganese
tricarbonyl (“MMT”), a fuel additive used at the refinery level to provide octane enhancement for
unleaded gasoline According to the Claimant, it is the sole shareholder of Ethyl Canada Inc.
(Ethyl Canada”), a company incorporated under the laws of Ontario in Canada, having its head

office in Mississauga, Ontario, and blending or processing facilities near Carunna, Ontario

In these proceedings, the Claimant is represented by:

Mr. Barry Appleton
Appleton & Associates
Royal Trust Tower

Suite 4400

Box 95

Toronto, Ontario MSK 1G8
Canada

and

Mr Christopher R. Wali

Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam & Roberts
1133 Connecticut Avenue, N.W
Washington, D.C 20038

GSA

The Claimant ts referred to hereinafter as “Ethyl”

 

The Respondent

 

GOVERNMENT OF CANADA
Office of the Deputy Attorney General of Canada
Justice Building
239 Wellington Street
Ottawa, Ontario KIA OH8
In these proceedings the Respondent is represented by
Ms. Valerie Hughes
General Counsel
Trade Law Division
Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade
125 Sussex Drive
Ouawa, Ontario KIA 0G2
Canada
‘The Respondent is referred to hereinafter as “Canada”
{I Summary Description of the Dispute and the Proceedings
3 This ts an arbitration under Chapter 11 of the North American Free Trade

Agreement (NAFTA") for the settlement of a dispute between Canada as a NAFTA Party and an

investor of another NAUTA Party, in this case Ethy!

4 Ethyl claims that Canada has breached certain of its substantive obligations in
relation to investments set forth in Section A of Chapter|1 and has submitted its claim to

arbitration as provided in Section B of Chapter 11
5 The substance of the dispute is briefly described

Ethyl essentiaity compiains of Canada’s Manganese-based Fuel Additives Act,
SC 1997, c. 11 (MMT Act"), which was first introduced in Parliament on 19 May 1995 as

Bill C-94, was reintroduced on 22 April 1996 as Bill C-29 (following prorogation of the previous

0

Parhament), and, after receiving Royal Assent on 25 Aprit 1997, came into force on 24 June
{997 It provides in Section 4

No person shall engage at interprovincial trade in or import for

commercial purpose a controlled substance except under an

authorization referred to in section 5
The “controiled sudstance{s]" to which Section 4 refers are listed in a schedule to the MMT Act
That schedule lists no substance other than MMT. Section 5 of the MMT Act expressly precludes
any authorization for additions to unleaded gasoline. Ethyl avers that whereas prior to the MMT

Act its MMT was blended into more than 95 percent by volume of unleaded gasoline sold in

Canada, the MMT Act deprived it of that business as of 24 June 19977

6 Ethyl notes that production and sale of MMT in Canada is not itself banned, Ethyl
could continue marketing MMT for use in unleaded gasoline throughout Canada, however, only

by establishing a manufacturing plant and distribution facility in each of Canada’s provinces.

~1

7 Ethyl claims that the MMT Act breaches three separate obligations of Canada

ander Chapter 11 of NAFTA

G

) Article 1102 -- National Treatment,

Ethyt states that it was the sole importer into Canada of MMT and also the sole distributor of it across
Canada

Ethy! also produces a second product, known as “Greenburn.” a fuel additive which contains MMT but is
designed for use in products other than unleaded gasoline. such as home healing, commercial boiler, and
various diesel fuels. Ethyl asserts in its Statement of Claim that it was dissuaded from tinplementing earlier
plans to market this product in Canada starting in 1996 by the introduction of the draft legislation that
became the MMT Act

we

qi) Article 1106 — Performance Requirements, and
Git} Article 1119 — Expropriation and Compensation

NAFTA Article | 102 states in pertinent part

| Lach Party shatl accord to investors of another Party
treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in like circumstances, to
is own mvestors with respect to the establishment, acquisition, expansion,

management, conduct, operation, and sale or other disposition of
IHVESUMENLS.

2 Lach Party shall accord to investments of investors of
another Party treatment no less favorable than that it accords, in like
circumstances, to investments of its own investors with respect ta the
establishment, acquisition, expansion, managenient, conduct, operation,
and sate or other disposition of investments,

The relevant portions of NAFTA Article 1106 provide

1 No Party may impose or enforce any of the following
requir emerns, or enforce any commitment or undertaking, fn connecuon
with the establishment, acquisition, expansion, management, conduct or

operation of an investment of an investor of a Party or of a non-Party in
us territory.

(b) to achieve a given level or percentage of domestic

content;
() to purchase, use or accord a preference to goods

produced or services provided in its territory, or to
purchase goods or services from persons in tts
territory

NAFTA Article 1110(1) mandates

No Party may directly or indirectly nationalize or expropriate an
investment of an investor of another Party in its territory or take a
measure tantamoun to nationalization or expropriation of such an
mavestment (“expropriation”), except:

 

(a) fer a public purpose:

(h} on a non-discriminatory basis,

(c) m accordance with due process of law and
Article 1103(1); and

(d) on payment of compensation in accordance with
paragraphs 2 through 6.

8 Ethyl asserts (in Paragraph 51 of its Statement of Claim) that in consequence of
the MMT Act it has suffered the following losses
Lost profits since the date of mnroduction of Bill C-94;

Loss of value of its investment in Etdiyl Canada;

Loss of world-wide sales due to ather countries relying on those measures taken
by tre Government of Canada which are inconsistent with its NAFTA

 

 

obligations;
The cost of reducing operations in Canada;

Fees and expenses incurred to oppose Bills C-94 and C-29 and the MMT Act,

and

Tax consequences of the award to maintain the integrity of tie award
9 In defense, Canada states that the Tribunal is without jurisdiction to entertain
Ethyl's claim and that, in any event, Canada has complied fully with its obligations under
Chapter 1] of NAFTA as the MMT Actis a law of general application and represents legitimate
regulation
10 The proceedings to date in this arbitration likewise are briefly described

Article 1120 of NAFTA provides three alternatives for the arbitration of
investment disputes: (1) the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (‘ICSID”
or “Centre”) pursuant to the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States, done at Washington, Mar. 18, 1965, 575 U.N.T.S. 159,
ICSID Basic Documents 7 (Jan. 1985) (“ICSID Convention” or “Convention”), (2) the ICSID
Additional Facility Rules, or (3) the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on

International Trade Law (UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules"). In this case, Ethyl, by its Notice of

Arbitration delivered 14 April 1997, has submitted its claim under the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules, which, therefore, govern this arbitration except to the extent modified by Section B of
Chapter 11 (see Article 1120(2) at note 6, wifra)

U1 As Arbitrators in this case Ethyl appointed The Honorable Charles N. Brower and
Canada appointed The Honorable Marc Lalonde, P.C.,,OC,QC_ The Secretary-General of
ICSID appointed as Presiding Arbitrator of the Arbitral Tribunal in this case Prof. Dr. Karl-Heinz
Bockstiegel, after first ascertaining that neither Party would have any objection to such
appointment

(2. Canada asserts that Ethyl’s claim is outside the scope of Chapter 11, and that in
any event Ethyl has failed to fulfill certain requirements of Section B of Chapter [1, so that the
Tribunal ts without jurisdiction over Ethyl’s claim.

13. As to the scope of Chapter | 1, Canada urges (paraphrasing Paragraphs 6(a) of its

Memorial on Jurisdiction)

{i) at the ume the Claimant submitted its Notice of Arbitration there was no
measure adopted or maintained by Canada within the meaning of that
phrase in NAFTA Article LLOT(),

(il) the alleged measures of which Ethyl complains do not relate to an
investment or an investor within the meaning of Article 1101(1), and

(ii) the Claimant's claim in respect of expropriation and loss or damage outside
Canada is not contemplated by Chapter |!

14 As regards the requirements of Section B of Chapter 11, Canada asserts
(paraphrasing Paragraph 6(b) of its Memorial on Jurisdiction)

(1) the Claimant failed to comply with the six-month waiting period from the
date of the alleged events giving rise to a claim before submitting a claim to
arbitration, as required by Article 1120,

(i) the Claimant did not deliver written consent and waivers required as
conditions precedent to submission of a claim to arbitration under
Article 1121, and

(ui) the Claunant introduced new claims in its Statement of Claim not contained
ints Notice of Arbitration (or in the Notice of Intent that preceded it
under Article 1119)

ql Relief Sought

t As Regards the Dispute Over Jurisdiction

 

 

As regards the dispute over jurisdiction the Parties seek the following relief,
respectively
Canada requests (in Paragraph 18 of its Memorial on Jurisdiction) that

.. fl fhe Tribunal should, as a preliminary matter, determine that
it does not have jurisdiction to hear the claim or any part of the
clainy

Uf however, the Tribunal determines that it has jurisdiction
to hear any part of the claim, the Tribunal must limit its
jurisdiction as follows .

(a) the Tribunal should consider only that part of the
claim relating to expropriation or loss or damage in
Canada and should not consider claims respecting matters
beyond the geographic scope of Chapter Eleven and
Canader’s territorial jurisdiction, and

. (b) the Tribunal should consider only the claim as
submitted in the Nouce of Arburation and should not
consider new claims or alleged facts advanced in the
Statement of Claim.

16 Canada also requests

an order that the Claimant pay all costs of the proceedings,
including all fees and expenses incurred by Canada

17 Ethyl requests (in Paragraph 103 of its Counter-Mermorial on Jurisdiction) that

the Tribunal adjudge and declare that it has full
jurisdiction to consider the merits of the... claim as
submited in [Fthyl's] Notice of Arbitration and Statement
of Claun. The Tribunal should also award to [Ethyl] the
costs of defending against this jurisdictional proceeding,
including but not limited to arbitrators’ costs and
attorneys’ fees

ta

 

Regards the Dispute on the Merits

 

18 In the event the Tribunal should determine that it has jurisdiction in this case, the
parties request relief as to the merits of the case as follows
Ethyl claims (at D of its Statement of Claim)
f {Damages in the amount of not} less than USS25 1,000,000
(7WO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-ONE MILLION UNITED

STATES DOLLARS) arising out of the Government of
Canada's breach of its NAITA obligations;

2. Costs associated with these proceedings, including all
professional fees and disbursements;

3 Pre-award and post-award interest at a rate to be fixed by
the Tribunal; and

4 Such further relief that the Tribunel may deem appropriate.

19. Canada requests (in Paragraph 104 of tts Statement of Defence) that the claim
be dismissed and that the Tribunal order Ethyl to pay all costs,
disbursements and expenses incurred by Canada in the defence of

this claim including, but not restricted to: legal, consulting and
witness fees; travel and administrative expenses

Iv Chronology of the Dispute and of the Arbitral Proceeding

20 ln this case, and particularly as regards the dispute on jurisdiction, the chronology
of events must be understood in order to appreciate fully the factual and legal arguments
presented. Set forth below, therefore, in a single chronology, are all major events to which the
Parties have referred, as respects both jurisdiction and the merits, without prejudice as to whether
or not the Tribunal considers them relevant to its consideration of the issues on jurisdiction or as
to whether the brief description of any event is sufficient in the context of the Tribunal’s
deliberations on jurtsdiction. (The description of each event is taken virtually verbatim from the

chronologies submitted, respectively, by Canada in Figure 5 in its Memorial on Jurisdiction and by

Ethyl at page 29 of its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction. As to each event, the source of the

description is noted at the end )

21 The chronology of events follows

 

Date

“5

October 1994

 

17 February 1995

Event

{Environment] Minister Copps states that MMT must be removed
from Canadian gasoline before August 1995. (Ethyl)

Environment Canada press release stating that the Government will
be taking action on MMT. (Ethyl)

 

“24 February 1995

Industry Canada advises Environment Canada that Ethyl Canada

would lose “a few tens of millions of dollars per year” — “some
50% of Lthyl Canada's total sales revenue” —- if it loses the MMT

business. (Ethyl)

 

 

“5 April 1995 Environment Canada issues a press release that the Government has
approved plans to draft legislation to prohibit the importation of and
interprovincial trade in MMT. (Ethyl)

19 May 1995

Bill C-94 introduced (First Reading) (House of Commons)
(Canada)

 

“19 May 1995

Minister Copps holds a press conference detailing the Government's
policy of banning the importation of and interprovincial trade in
MMT. (Ethyl)

 

19 May 1995

Environment Canada issues a press release detailing the
Government's policy of banning the importation of and
interprovincial trade in MMT. (Ethyl)

 

2 October 1995

Bill C-94 given second reading and referred to committee (House of
Commons), (Canada)

 

2 February 1996

Parliament prorogued, (Ethyl) Bill C-94 dies on the order paper.
(Canada)

 

“33 February 1996

The Minister for International Trade warns the Minister of the
Environment that “/a/m import prohibition on MMT would be
inconsistent with Canada’s obligations under the WTO and the
NAPTA.” (Ethyl)

 

“18 April 1996

22 April 1996

 

Environment Canada issues a press release announcing that the
Minister of the Environment will reintroduce Bill C-94 at the third
reading stage (Ethyl)

Bill C-94 reinstated as Bill C-29 (Third Reading)(House of
Commons) (Canada)

  

 

 
  
    

Event

10 Septemb “Notice of (Etiyl’s] Intent to Submit a Claim (Anticie 1119 of
NAFTA). (Canada)

 

 

 

Environment in which the Minister implies that MMT endangers “our
) children's health,” “the air we breathe and the water we drink.’

) (Ethyl)

 

 

 

10 October 1996 i The Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of the Environment
| states that banning and replacing MMT will benefit Canadians, as
opposed to “giving all af the money to an American firm.” (Ethyl)

 

 

 

 

2 December 1996 Bill C-29 passed by the House {of Commons] (Third Reading)
(Canada)

3 December 1996 Bill C-29 introduced (Senate)(First Reading). (Canada)

16 — 17 December 1996 | Bill C-29 given second reading and referred to committee

(Senate)(Second Reading) (Canada)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9 April 1997 Bill C-29 passed by Senate (Third Reading). (Canada)

14 April 1997 [Ethyl’s] Notice of Arbitration (Articles 1120(1){c) and 1137(1)(c) of
NAFTA). (Canada)

25 April 1997 | Royal Assent — Enactment of Bill C-29. (Canada)

“24 June 1997 ~ Coming into force of [MMT] Act. (Canada)

2 October 1997 [Ethyl’s] Statement of Claim (Anticles 3 and 18 UNCITRAL Rules)
and purported Consent and Waivers (Article 1121 of NAFTA).
(Canada)

22 The major steps of the arbitral proceedings have been as follows

In its Notice of Arbitration dated [4 April 1997 Ethyl appointed The Honorable
Charles N. Brower as Arbitrator
23 In a letter dated 14 July 1997 to counsel for Ethyl, Canada confirmed that it had
appointed The Honorable Marc Lalonde as Arbitrator
24 After Ethyl, by letter dated 30 June 1997, and Canada, by letter dated 29 August

1997, had informed ICSID that they had no objection to Prof Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel being

10

appointed as Presiding Arbitrator, and after Prof, Bockstiegel had accepted such appointment, his
appointment was confirmed by ICSID by letter dated 2 September 1997 to both Parties
25 Having thus been constituted, the Tribunal issued a first Procedural Order on
22 September 1997 regarding certain details of the arbitral procedure and suggesting, in
particular, that a Procedural Meeting of the Parties and the members of the Tribunal should be
held as soon as possible

26. With the agreement of the Parties, and without prejudice to the selection of the
official place of arbitration, such a Procedural Meeting was held in New York, N.Y., US.A., on
2 October 1997. At that meeting, Ethyl submitted its Statement of Claim

27 Following that Procedural Meeting, a further Procedural Order was issued by the
Tribunal on 13 October 1997. Since the Parties had not been able to agree on the official place of
arbitration, the Procedural Order of 13 October 1997 set forth a timetable for the filing of further
submissions regarding both the place of arbitration and jurisdiction. That Procedural Order also
recorded the Parties’ agreement that a Hearing on jurisdiction be held on 24 and 25 February
1998

28 On the basis of oral arguments presented at the 2 October 1997 Procedural
Meeting and of written submissions filed by the Parties either at that Meeting or thereafter
regarding the official place of arbitration, the Tribunal, by a Decision Regarding the Place of
Arbitration dated 28 November 1997 and setting out in detail the reasons for its conclusions,
designated Toronto, Canada, as the place of arbitration in this case

29. In accordance with the timetable established in the Procedural Order of 13 October

1997, the following further principal submissions were filed by the Parties on the dates indicated

Qn 27 November 1997 Canada’s Statement of Defence

1

On 29 December 1997 Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction together with a volume
of documents

On 30 January 1998 Ethyl’s Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction together with a
volume of documents

30 ‘The Parties also filed a number of shorter submissions regarding various aspects of
procedure and the Hearing on jurisdiction and the Tribunal issued a number of Procedural Orders
In particular, m order to enable the Parties to prepare as well as possible for the Hearing on
jurisdiction, the Tribunal issued a Procedural Order on 22 January 1998 regarding procedural and
logistical details of the Hearing

31 A Hearing on all issues of jurisdiction was held in Toronto, Canada, on 24 and

25 February 1998. The Parties were represented at that Hearing as follows

Ethyl
Mr. Barry Appleton Appleton & Associates
Counsel to Ethyl Corporation
Mr Anthony Maeri Appleton & Associates
Counsel to Ethyl Corporation
Mr Christopher R. Wall Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam & Roberts
Counsel to Ethyl Corporation
Mr. Phitip Le B. Douglas Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam & Roberts
Counsel to Ethyl Corporation
Mr. Steve Mayer Ethyt Corporation
General Counsel
Mr Pres Rowe Ethyt Corporation
Canada
Ms Valerie Hughes General Counsel, Trade Law Division

Department of Foreign Affairs and
International Trade

Mr. Bran Evernden General Counsel, Civil Litigation Section
3
Department of Justice

Mr. Mory Afshar Counsel, Trade Law Division
Department of Foreign Affairs and
International Trade
Mr. Fulvio Fracassi Legal Counsel
Environment Canada Legal Services
Mr. lan Gray Counsel, Trade Law Division
Department of Foreign Affairs and
International Trade

Mr. David Haigh Legal Adviser
Burnet, Duckworth & Palmer, Calgary
Mr. Jon Johnson Lega! Adviser
Goodman Phillips & Vineberg, Toronto
Ms. Lynn Pettit Secretary, Trade Law Division
Department of Foreign Affairs and
International Trade
Mr. John Tyhurst Counsel, Civil Litigation Section
Department of Justice
Ms. Denyse Mackenzie Director, Investment Trade Policy Division
Department of Foreign Affairs and
International Trade
Ms. Ann Ewasechko Policy Adviser, Investment Policy Division
Department of Foreign Affairs and
International Trade
32 A transcript was made of that Hearing, and copies thereof were provided to the

Parties and the members of the Tribunal a few hours after the end of each session of the Hearing
33 On the second day of the Hearing, Canada informed Ethyl and the Tribunal that it
had just received a letter dated 24 February 1998 trom the Government of the United Mexican
States (“Mexico”), copies of which (in Spanish) were provided to Ethyl and the members of the
Tribunal, in which Mexico informed Canada and the United States as the other NAFTA Parties as

well as Ethyl and the Tribunal that

Mexico desires to exercise its right, in accordance with Article
1128 of the [NAFTA] Treaty, to present to the Arbural Tribunal a
communication on quesuons related to the interpretation of the
NALTA which have been raised in the arguments of the case.

We would be grateful f the Government of Canada would inform
the Tribunal that Mexico will present its written comments within
the next 15 days.

(Cnotlicial translation provided by Canada )

34 The Tribunal requested Canada to inform Mexico that its submission should be
received by the Tribunal within 15 days and in an English text, inasmuch as English is the
language of this arbitration
35 At the same time, in order to avoid any possibility of a later similar submission by
the Government of the United States causing a further delay in the proceedings, the Tribunal
requested Ethyl to contact that Government and advise it of the importance of also proceeding
expeditiously, in the event that it, too, should wish to avail itself of its rights under Article 1128
36 Mexico filed its submission in accordance with Article 128 on 11 March 1998
37 The United States has not sought to make any submission under Article 1128
38 The Tribunal, by Procedural Order dated 16 March 1998, granted the Parties until

| April 1998 to submit any comments on Mexico’s submission On that date Ethyl submitted

such comments and Canada indicated it did not intend to do so

Acticle 1128: Participation by u Party

On written notice to the disputing parties, a Party may make submissions to a Tribunal on a question of
interpretation of this Agreement

39 This concluded the proceedings up to the point at which the Tribunal now issues

this Award on Jurisdiction

Vv Major Facts and Contentions Regarding Jurisdiction
40 In this dispute over jurisdiction, the major facts are undisputed. The Parties

disagrec, however, fundamentally and in many details, regarding the legal conclusions to be drawa
trom those facts

41 The factual side of the dispute is seen in the events that have been recounted in the
chronology in Paragraph 21 above of this Award on Jurisdiction. Insofar as the Parties refer to
these events and the factual side in their legal arguments, such references will be included in the
summary of the major legal arguments presented by the Parties in the following Section VI of this
Award on Jurisdiction. Insofar as the Tribunal considers them relevant to its conclusions on

Jurisdiction, the Tribunal will refer to them in Section VII of this Award on Jurisdiction

 

Vi Major Legal Arguments of the Parties and Mexico on Jurisdiction
42 A brief summary of the major legal arguments presented by the Parties on

jurisdiction is given below. Many further details are included in the various written submissions of
both Parties, in particular, by Canada in its Statement of Defence, its Memorial on Jurisdiction
and the volume of documents filed together with that Memorial, and by Ethyt in its Counter-

Memozrial on Jurisdiction and the volume of documents fited together with that Counter-

Memorial
i Arguments of Canada Objecting to Jurisdiction
43 Canada's objections to jurisdiction set forth in its Statement of Defence, as

previously noted, fall into two categories Canada first ts of the view that because Ethyl had not

 

met certain requirements of NAFTA’s Chapter U1 at the time it filed its Notice of Arbitration, Le,
as of 14 April 1997, this Tribunal is absolutely barred from proceeding [n Canada's view,
Claimant's only alternative would be to commence a new, separate arbriration addressed to the
MMT Act (for which, it appears the Parties agree’, the requirements in issue have in the meantime
been met)

44 Canada argues, second, that in any event the claims set forth in Ethyl’s Notice of
Arbitration (and tn its Statement of Claim) are outside the scope of Canada’s consent to
arbitration set forth in Chapter 11. Furthermore, Canada asserts, Ethyt’s Statement of Claim, in
relying on final enactment of the MMT Act, to which no reference was made in its Notice of
Arbitration, introduces an inadmissible new claim. [t is apparent that the issues in this second
category arise in good part out of the fact that at the time Ethyl submitted its Notice of
Arbitration, 4¢., 14 April 1997, the MMT Act, while passed by the House of Commons and the
Senate, had not received Royal Assent and had not come into force

45 In order to display fully and accurately Canada's jurisdictional contentions, the
Tribunal quotes below virtually verbatim paragraphs 20-23 of Canada’s Statement of Defence
To facilitate understanding thereof, the Tribunal adds footnotes setting forth the portions of
Chapter It which Canada cites. The text follows

Position on Jurisdictional ssues

20. The dispute resolution process laid down by the Parties in
Chapter 11 contemplates a series of steps that must be taken
before a claim ts properly before a Tribunal. They include

Page 224, line 13 - page 227 , line 13, of the transcript of the Hearing on jurisdiction

6

(a) a Party must adopt or maintain a measure that
breaches an obligation described in Article LIL6CLY’ of the

NALTA and the claimant must have“.
damage by reason of, or arising out of that breach”;

. incurred loss or

(b) the claimant must wait for six months after the
evens giving rise to the claim before submitting the claim
to arburation under Article 120° of the NAFTA:

 

subnutting its claim to arbitration the
claimant must submit written notice of its intention to
submit tre claim for arbitration. That notice must describe
the provisions of NAFTA “alleged to have been breached”
by the Party (Article 1119); and

Article 1116: Claim by an Investor of a Party on [ts Own Behalf

1. An investor of a Party may submit to arbitration under this Section a claim that another Party has
breached an obligation under

(a) Section A or Anicle £303(2) (State Enterprises). or

(b) Article 1502(3)(a) (Monopolies and State Enterprises) where the monopoly has acted in a
manner inconsisiont with the Party's obligations under Section A.

and that the investor has incurred less or damage by reason of, or arising out of, that breach

2) An investor mas not make a claim if more than three years have elapsed from the date on which the
investor first acquired, or should have first acquired, knowledge of the alleged breach and knowledge that the
investor has incurred loss or damage

Article 1120: Submission of a Claim to Arbitration

1. Except as provided in Annex 1120.1, and provided thal six months have clapsed since the events giving
rise to. a claim, a disputing investor may submit the claim lo arbitration under

(a) the 1CSID Convention, provided that both the disputing Party and the Party of the imvestor are
parties to die Convention,

(b) the Additional Facility Rules of (CSID, provided that cither the disputing Party or the Party of
the investor, but not bath, 18 a party to the [CSID Convention, or

{c) the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules

w

The applicabic arbitration rules shall govern the arbitration except to the extent modified by this Section.
Article 1119. Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim to Arbitration

The disputing investor shall delwer to the disputing Party written notice of ils intention to submit a claim
to arbitration at least 90 days before the claim is submitted, which notice shall specify

(a) the name and address of the disputing investor and, where a claim is made under Article LL17,
the name and address of the enterprise;

{continued ..)

fol a disputing investor may submit a clam “only if” it
delivers the consent and waivers described in Article 1121"

‘mn the submission of [the] claim to arbitration”, that is,
when the Notice of Arbitration is received by the disputing
Party (Article 37 CU (ey)?

(continued)

(b) the provisions of this Apreemeat ali
provisions:

ed to have been breached and any other relevant

 

(c} the issues and the factual basis for the claim, and
(d) the relief sought and the approxinute amount of damages claimed.
$ | ae wos ~ ays
Article Li21: Conditions Precedent to Submission of a Claim to Arbitration

1, A disputing investor may submit a claim under Article 1116 to arbitration only if-

(a) the investor consents to arbitration in accordance with the procedures Sct out in this Agreement,
and
(b) the investor and, where the clint is for loss or damage to an interest in an cnterprise of another

Party that is a juridical person that the investor owns or controls directly or indirectly, the enterprise,
wanve their right to initiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or court under the law of any
Party, or other dispute settlement procedures. any proceedings with respect to the measure of the disputing
Party thal is alleged to be a breach referred to in Article 1116, except for proceedings for injunctive,
declaratory or other extraordinary relief. not involving the pay ment of damages. before an administrative
tribunal or court under the kaw of the disputing Panty

2. Adisputing investor may subnut a claim under Article £117 to arbitration onls if both the investor and the
enterprise

(a) consent to arbitration in accordance with the procedures set out in this Agreement, and

(b) waive their right lo initiate or continue before any administrative tribunal or court under the law

of any Party, of other dispute settlement procedures, any proceedings with respect lo the measure of the
disputing Party thal is alleged to be a breach referred to in Article 1117, A... except for proceedings for
injunctive, dectaratory or other extraordinary relief. not involving the paytuent of damages, before an
administrative tribunal or court under the law of the disputing Party

A consent and waiver required by this Article shall be in writing, shall be delivered to the disputing Party
and shall be included in the submission of a claim to arbitration.

4. Only where a disputing Party has deprived a disputing investor of control of an enterprise:
(a) a waiver from the enterprise under paragraph {() or 2(b) shall not be required; and
0b) Annex £120 1(b) shall not apply

Article 1137: General
Time when a Claim is Submitted to Arbitration

1. Acclaim is submited to arbitration under tus Section when

(continued ..)

(

al Camecds asserts that because it had not adopted or
maintained a measure within the meaning of Articles 201° and
fo of the NALTA when Ethyl submitted its claim to arbitration,
and because t:thyl failed to comply with Aructes 1419 through
1121 and 1137 of Chapter 11 of the NAITA, the claim set out in
the Statement of Claim is null and void and this Tribunal is utterly
without jurisdiction to entertain i

?

Without resiricung the generality of the foregoing.

(a) Canada pleads and relies upon Articles 1421 and
1137 of the NAITA and says that Ethyl fatled to deliver the
required consent and waivers with the Nouce of Arbitration
and is therefore barred from proceeding to arbitrauion.

 

(}) Canada pleads and relies upon Articles 201
(definition of the word “measure”), 110101), L1L6(1), £137
and 2004” (which deals with the right of a Party to
challenge “an actual or proposed (emphasis added)
measure”) of the NAFTA and says that:

 

continued)

(c) the notice of arbitration given under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules is reecived by the
disputing Party

Article 205: Definitions of General Application

L. For purposes of this Agreement, unless othenvise specified:

measure includes any law, regulation, procedure, requirement or practice
Article 110: Scope and Coverage

1. This Chapter applics to measures adopted or maintained by a Party relating to

(b) investinents of investors of another Party in the territory of the Party; and

(c) with respect to Articles 1106 and 1114, all investments in the territory of the Party
Article 2Ml4: Recourse to Dispute Settlement Procedures:

Except for the matters covered in Chapter Nineteen (Review and Dispute Settlement in Antidumping and
Countervailing Duty Matters) and as othenvise provided in this Agreement, the dispute settlement prayistons
of this Chapter shall apply with respect to the avoidance or settlement of all disputes between the Parties
regarding the interpretation ar application of this Agreement or wherever a Party considers that an actual or
proposed measure of another Party is or would be inconsistent with the obligations of this Agreement or causc
nullification of impairment in the sense of Annex 2004

19

(i 10 the extent that the clarm 1s based on
siatements made in support of proposed
legislation, those statements are neither

“measures” Hor “nreasures relating to"
wnvestors” or “an investment” and cannot,
therefore, be the subject of proceedings
under Chapter 11 of the NAFTA;

  

fii) to the extent the claim is based on the
passage of a bill through the House of
Commons and the Senate of Canada,
passage of a bill that has not yet come into
force is neither a measure, nor is ita
Measure relating (0 GH ANVESINICHE OF Gt
tavestor and cannot, therefore, be the
subject of proceedings under Chapter 11 of
the NAFTA;

 

(tii) Ethyl’s submission to arbitration ts void in
that the legislation complained of in the
Statement of Claim had not been enacted or
come ano force at the time the claim was
submitted. There was therefore no measure
nor was there any measure relating (oan
invesiment or an investor in effect upon
which Ldiyl could found an alleged breach
of any obligation under Chapter 11;

(oJ Canada pleads and relies upon Arucles 201
(definition of the word “measure”), L1QI(1), 111 6(1),
1/201) and 1137 of the NAFTA and says that Eityl failed
to comply with conditions precedent for advancing the
claim set out in the Statement of Claint and is therefore
barred from proceeding with this arbitration. [:thyl failed
to wait six months from the date of an event giving rise to a
breach before submitting the claim to arbitration and
changed the basis of its claim from an attack on proposed
legislation (a Bill) in its Notice of Arbitration to actual
legislation (the “Act™) in its Statement of Claim;

cle 11101) and
1101¢0) and says that Ethyl ’s claum in respect of
expropriation of us intellectual property, reputation, and
goodwill throughout the world is not within the scope of the
NAFTA;

fe) further, Canada pleads that the claim is not within
the scope of Chapter 11 because the proposed legislation

 

(dh) Canada pleads and relies upon Ar

 

at least by the

of Chapter 11 cited by Canada, to the extent applicable, had been met. Specifically, according to

Ethyt

complained of does not constitite a measure relating to an
ivesimentor an uvestor within the meaning of

Arnucle 1£01(1). [itis a measure, which 1s denied, it
relates to trade in goods within the meaning of Chapter 3
of the NAFTA; anc,

  

ip tm the event that the proposed legislation relates to
both trade in goods under Chapter 3 and to investment
under Chapter 11, Canada pleads and relies on

2 1112(1)" of the NAFTA and says that there is an
inconsistency beoveen the two Chapters that must be
resolved in favour of Chapter 3

 

Artic.

23. . [The Statement of Clain refer{s] to alleged
defamatory statements without describing the Slalements at issue.
Assuming that the statements referred to are the statements [of
Canadian Government officials in relation to the subject-matter of
Bills C-9-4 or C-29 set forth in Ethyt's Notice of Intent and in its
Notice of Arburation] those statements are not “measures adopted
or maintained by [Canada] ” within the meaning of Articles 201
and 1101 of the NAFTA, nor could they, or their alleged effects,
CONsUate expropriation or a measure “tantamount (o
expropriation” “of an investor of another Party in [Canada’s]
territory” or of an investment “in [Canada's] territory” within
Article 1110 of tie NAFTA, Consequently, these claims are not
the proper subject mater of a claim under Chapter 11 of NALTA
/n any event, defamation is properly the subject matter of domestic
fon cine ty not protected by uternational law or the NAFTA

  

 

 

2 Arguments of Ethyl Regarding Jurisdiction
46 In response to this extensive jurisdictional attack Ethyl points out, in essence, that

Article 1132: Relation to Other Chapters

1

In the event of any inconsistency between this Chapter and another Chapter, the other Chapter shall

prevail to the extent of the inconsistency

time of the Hearing on these issues held 24-25 February 1998 all the requirements

(i) the MMT Act, which undoubtedly is a “measure” within the meaning of
Article 201 of NAFTA, had come into force on 24 June 1997,

 

(i) although the six-month period referred to in Article 1120 was inapplicable
in the circumstan it had elapsed, and

 

(iit) the express consent to arbitration and waivers required by Article 1121 had
been delivered with the Statement of Claim in a form not questioned by Canada

Ethyl contends that the fact that any of these requirements had not been fulfilled as of 14 April

1997 has no jurisdictional significance

47

4s

Mexico submitted views.!

~ 6
Canada

1

As to the further issues regarding the scope of Chapter 11, Ethyl notes that

() it complains of acts against it within the territory of Canada for which it is
entitled to compensation, including for damages resulting to it outside of Canada,
and

(it) to the extent, ifat all, that the acts of which it complains constitute acts
regarding not only its investment in Canada, but also trade in goods subject to
Chapter 3, the Tribunal nonetheless is empowered to apply Chapter I1

Points Raised by Mexico Regarding Jurisdiction

In exercise of its right to participate in this arbitration pursuant to Article 1128,"*

* Mexico makes three points specifically supporting the position of

See note 3, supra

15

Because Mexico's notice was received only on the second and last day of the Hearing on jurisdiction, Ethy!

raised an issue of timeliness. In these circumstances the Tribunat finds it appropriate to underscore the
importance of NAFTA Parties exercising their Anicte 1128 rights ina timely fashion Indeed. Articte 1127
is designed to facilitate timely intervention under Article £128 by providing’

Article 1127: Natice

A disputing Party shall deliver to the other Parties

written notice of a claim that has been submitted to arbitration no later than
30 days after the date that the claim is subsutted, and

(continued...)

(... continued)

(v On the facts, this caye mvolves a measure relating to trade
mw goods. The enforcement of rights that may accrue under
Chapter Three accrue not to the Claimant but to the United States.
Uf the United States is of the view that Canada has imposed a
measure which constitutes an import barrier under Article 309,
which cannot be justified under other provisions of the NAFTA, it
is entitled to commence dispute settlement proceedings under
Chapter Twenty.

Ay in other potential international trade cases, the present
Claimant is fully entitled to petition the United States authorities
fo commence such proceedings. However, if is not open to the
Claimant to use the investor-State mechanisni to launch what is in
reality a challenge against a trade measure in the guise ofan
tavestment dispute.

 

(iy [T]he opening language of Article 1101(1)(a) states
that the chapter “applies to measures adopted or maintained by a
Party relating to... finvestors or investments]. Thus, to
properly be the subject of an investor-State arbitration, the
measure at issue must have been in effect at the time that the
arbitral process was initiated. Given the express contemplation of
proposed measures in other parts of the NAFTA, this language
cannot be interpreted lo reach proposed measures. In Mexico's
submission, therefore, the use of the verbs “adopt” and

“maintain” means that the measure complained of must already
be wn existence al the time that the proceeding is initiated, t¢., at
the time the notice of claim: is filed pursuant to Article 1119

 

(b) copies of all pleadings filed in the arbitration.

The Tribunal notes, as it was informed by Canada by letter dated 2 March 1998 pursuant to the Tribunal’s
request, that the Government of Mexico had been informed of Canada’s jurisdictional objections as carly as

3 Deceinber 1997 and that on 11 December 1997 Canadian Government representatives had met in Ottawa
with a Mexican Embassy officer and Mexico's legal counsel to discuss Canada’s jurisdictional arguments
and the possibility of Mexico filing a subrnisston pursuant to Article 1128." Given that Mevico filed tts
substantive subrmussion within fifteen days after the Hearing on jurisdiction, however, as it had undertaken to
do and as the Tribunal had requested. and given that the Parties were accorded a period of three weeks within
which to comment thereon, of which opportunity Ethyl availed itself. the Tribunal perceived no prejudice to
Ethyl] in accepting Mexico's submission

 
 

The texts are quoted verbatim from Mexico's submission.

This ts parucularty so in the case of Chapter Kleven, since
ameasure that has not vet produced legal effects cannot cause
damages for which compensauion or restitution may be due.

 

 

(ii} Mexico ts also of the view that arbitral tribunals
established under Chapter

 

even must adhere to the requirements
of Section B for the initiation of arbitration proceedings. By
entering in the Agreement, the NAFTA Parties have given a
general consent to submit to all arbitrations commenced against
them. Having done so, this places a special duty upon tribunals to
ensure that claimants comply with the necessary requirements set
out in the Chapter. With respect to this particular case, this means
that the appropriate waivers must have been filed at the proper
time, that the claim should have been ripe at the time that it was
Siled, and that the claimant not be permitted to change its claim
Srom a non-arbitrable “non-measure"’ to an arbitrable measure
during the process. the language of Articles 1119 and 1120 is
clear. The Agreement has to have been allegedly breached at the
time that the Notice of Intent is filed and six months must have
elapsed “since the events giving rise toa claim”. Section B of
Chapter Eleven is a significant remedy fram the perspective of all
three NAFTA Parties, and it ts one which calls for observance of
such requirements by prospective claimants.

 

4 Points Made by Ethy! in Response te Mexico’s Submission
49 Canada advised the Tribunal by letter dated | April 1998 that it did “not intend to

make comments in respect of Mexico's submissions.”
Ethyl commented briefly as follows

a) As regards the “trade in goods” issue, it called attention to
a Statement by counsel for Canada at the Hearing on jurisdiction
that Canada “didn't drink it was an issue that was absolutely
criucal to be disposed of at this hearing."

Page 298, lines 12-14, of the transcript of the Hearing on jurisdiction

(i) “ieven Canada concedes that a measure was adopted no
later than April 23, 1997 when the MMT Act received Royal
Assent,” and therefore the “only question presently before the
Tribunal is whether bday violated a requirement to wail six
months after the ‘events giving rise to the claini’ and, if so, what is
the proper remedy for dus alleged procedural breach.” Thus “the
Tribunal may never need to decide what a measure iy.” and
indeed, “should avert” doing so

(ili) “0. Ethyl is not asserting that these procedures fof
Secuon Bf should be ignored.” The question instead is “whether a
procedural error may be remedied,” an issue on which “Mexico's
submission takes no postion

VU. Conclusions of the Tribunal

 

ion of the Relevant NAFTA Provisions

 

 

General Considerations for the Interpre
(a) Applicable Law

50. The Tribunal finds it useful to set out here the rules it is required to apply in
interpreting and applying NAFTA. Article 1131 of NAFTA is the first guide
Article 1131: Governing Law
i. A Tribunal established under this Section shall decide the

issues in dispute in accordance with this Agreement and applicable
rules of international law.

2. An interpretation by the Commission of a provision of this
Agreement shall be binding on a Tribunal established wider this
Section
No Party has argued, and the Tribunal is not otherwise informed, that the NAFTA Commission

has provided any interpretation here relevant. The Tribunal therefore looks to NAFTA itself and

“applicable cules of international law.”

51 The applicable rules of international law include the Vienna Convention on the

Law of Freaties (“Vienna Convention’), done at Vienna, May 23, 1969, entered into force,

we
a

January 27, 1980, U1 331

 

3t, reprinted in 8 LL.M. 679 (1969), in particular, Articles 31
and 32

Artucle 3£, General Rule of Interpretation

i A trealy shall be onterpreted in good faith in
accordance with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of
the treaty i their context and in the light of its object and
Purpose.

2 the context for the purpose of the interpretation of
a treaty shall comprise, in addition to the text, including its
preamble and annexes.

(a) Any agreement relating to the treaty which was made
between all the parties in connection with the conclusion
Of the realy;

(b) Any instrument which was made by one or more parties in
connection with the conclusion of the treaty and accepted
by the other parties as an instrument related to the (reat:

3. There shall be taken into account, together with the

CONLENL:

(a) Any subsequent agreement between the parties regarding
the interpretation of the treaty or the application of its
Provisions,

(h) Any subsequent practice in the application af the treaty

which establishes the agreement of the parties regarding
us inferprelauon;

{co Any relevant rules of international law applicable in the
relations between the parties.

4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is
established that the partes so intended.

Arucle 32. Supplementary Means of Interpretation
Recourse may be had to supplementary means of
interpretation, including the preparatory work of the treaty and
the circumstances of tts conclusion, i order to confirm the

meaning resulting from the application of article 31, or to
determine the meaning when the interpretation according to
article 31.

fa) Leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or

(b) Leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or
unreasonable

wn
nm

Canada is a party to the Vienna Convention, having acceded to it on 14 October

1970, and the United States accepts it as a correct statement of customary international law '

Moreover, given that 84 States are parties to the Vienna Convention (as of 1S April £998), and
that Articles 31 and 32 “were adopted without a dissenting vote,” these Articles clearly “may be

~ . ato
considered as declaratory of existing law

an

3 On the procedural level, Article 1120(2) of NAFTA provides that
The applicable arbitration rules [here the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules] shall govern the arbitration
except to the extent modified by this Section [B].

(b) Determination of Jurisdiction as a Preliminary Question

54 Aniicle 21(4) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, which is not modified by any
provision of Section B, provides

Jn general, the arbitral tribunal should ride on a
plea CONCEFHNE ity Jurisdiction as a preliminary question.
However, the arbitral tribunal may proceed with the
arbitration and rule on such a plea in their final award.

The present jurisdictional phase takes place in adherence to Article 21(4)

See The Islamic Republic of lran v. The United States of America, Dec. No. 32-A18-FT (6 Apr. 1984),
reprinted in 5 [ran-U.S. Cl. Trib. Rep. 251. 259 (£984). U.S courts look to the Convention when interpreting
the text ofa ueaty. See, e.g. Kremmermany Casa beerkamp, AS. de CA. 22 F.3d 634, 638 (5 Cir, 1994),
cert. den'd, WASS.Ct. 577 (1994). Day v Trans Shorld -lirlines, Inc. 528 F.2d 31, 33 (2d Cir, 1975). cert
dead, 429 US 896 (1976)

De Aréchaya, Invernational Law ut the Past Third of a Century, 139 RECUEIL DES COURS 1, 42 (1978)
(Legal rules concerning the interpretation of treatics constitute one of the Sections of the Vienna Convention
which were adopted without a dissenting vote at the Conference and consequently may be considered as
declaratory of exssung law").

nN
a

(c) Particular Considerations Relevant to the Determination of Jurisdiction

55 The Tribunal considers it appropriate first to dispense with any notion that

Section B of Chapter 11 1s to be construed “strictly.” The erstwhile notion that “in case of

doubt a limitation of sovereignty must be construed restrictively””’ has long since been displaced

by Articles 31 and 32 of the Vienna Convention.” As was so aptly stated by the Tribunal in

Amco Asia Corporation v. Indonesia (Jurisdiction), (CSID Case No. ARB/81/1 (Award of 25

Sept. 1983), reprinted in 23 LL.M. 351, 359 (1983) and | ICSID Rep. 389 (1993)

“{LJike any other conventions, a convention to arbitrate is not to
be construed restrictively, nor, as a mater of fact, broadly or
liberally. /¢ ts to be construed in a way which leads to find out and
to respect the common will of the parties; such a method of
interpretation ts but the application of the fundamental principle
pacta sunt servanda, a principle common, indeed, to all systems of
internal law and to international law.

(Emphasis in original.)

Canada’s statement at Paragraph 23 of its Memorial on Jurisdiction that “these procedures {of Section B]
must be strictly adhered to for a Tribunal to have jurisdiction to hear a claim under Chapter Eleven” appears
at least to hint at such a principle. Canada’s Memorial on Jurisdiction later quite clearly urges this principle
in stating {in the heading prefacing Paragraph 49) that “Jurisdiction Must Be Strictly Interpreted. "

free Zones of Upper Savoy and the District of Gex (Ft. v. Switz.), 1932 P.C.1J., ser. A/B, No. 46, al 167
(Judgment of 7 Junc).

The Vienna Convention resolved past debates concerning the wisdom of
pronouncements by international tribunals that limitations of sovereignty must
be strictly construed.

United States-Iran, Case No, 17, Decision No, DEC 37-A17-FT (May 13, 1985)(Brower, J., concurring),
reprinted in 8 Iran-U S, Cl. Trib, Rep. 189, 207 (1989)

28

56. Given the relevance under Article 31(1) of the Vienna Convention of NAFTA’s

  

“object and purpose ,” itis necessary to take note of NAFTA Article 102, particularly its (1){c)

 

and (¢)
Article 102: Objectives
f the objectives of this Agreement, as elaborated more

specifically through its principles and rules, including national
wreatment, most-favored-nation treatment and transparency, are
to

(@ elimmate barriers to trade in, and facilitate the
cross-border movement of, goods and services
between the territories of the Parties;

(b) promote conditions of fair competition in the free
trade area,

(o) increase substantially investment opportunities in
the territories of the Parties;

(d) provide adequate and effective protection and
enforcement of intellectual property rights in each
Party's territory:

(e) create effective procedures for the implementation
and application of this Agreement, for ity joint

admunstration and for the resolution of disputes;
anid

ip establish a framework for further trilateral,
regional and multilateral cooperation to expand
and enhance the benefits of this Agreement.

2. the Parties shall interpret and apply the provisions of this

Agreement in the light of its objectives set out in paragraph | and

wt accordance with applicable rules of international lav

The Tribunal reads Article 102(2) as specifying that the “object and purpose” of
NAFTA within the meaning of those terms in Article 31(f) of the Vienna Convention are to be

found by the Tribunal in Article 102(1), and confirming the applicability of Articles 31 and 32 of

the Vienna Convention

ie)

The Distinction Between Jurisdictional Provisions and Procedural Rules

 

 

58 It is important to distinguish between jurisdictional provisions, i.e., the limits set to
the authority of this Tribunal to act at all on the merits of the dispute, and procedural rules that
must be satisfied by Claimant, but the failure to satisfy which results not in an absence of
jurisdiction ab initio, but rather in a possible delay of proceedings, followed ultimately, should
such non-compliance persist, by dismissal of the claim Canada argues that all of its objections fall
into the first category, whereas Ethyl is of the view that such objections as may have been valid at

one point fall into the second category and have since been obviated

59. The sole basis of jurisdiction under NAFTA Chapter 11 in an arbitration under the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules is the consent of the Parties. Unlike [CS!D and its Additional

23

Facility Rules, there exist under the UNCITRAL Rules no other jurisdictional criteria.” It is clear
that Ethyl has consented to this arbitration by the very act of commencing it. Normally such act is

taken as consent to the arbitration thereby initiated.”*

60 The fundamental jurisdictional issue here, therefore, is whether Canada has
consented to this arbitration. It has two aspects, as the jurisdictional proceedings have

underscored. One aspect is that of scope: Is Ethyl’s claim within the types of claims that Canada

For a discussion of [CSID’s objective criteria see | acuum Salt Products Limited v. The Government of the
Republic of Ghana, \CSID Case No. ARB/92/1 (Award of 16 Feb, 1994), reprinted in 9 [CSID Rew -F 1LS
72 (1994)

See, e.g.. Christoph Schreucr, Commentary on the ICSID Convention, VC ICSID Rev.-F LLJ, 318, para, 277
(1996) (In the contest of ICSID, jurisdiction may be established by virtue of an offer to arbitrate by a host
State contained in its legistation or in a treaty, which may be accepted by an investor. The time of mutual
consent is determined by the investor's acceptance of the offer. This offer may be accepted through bringing,
a request for arbitration to the Centre )

has consented in Chapter 11 to arbitrate? The other aspect is that of conditions to consent To
what extent, if any, is Canada’s consent to arbitration in Chapter 11 conditioned absolutely on the

fulfillment of specified procedural requirements at a given time?
3 Does Ethyl Claim a Breach Under Chapter 1?

(a) Claim for Breach of Section A

 

61 On the face of the Notice of Arbitration and the Statement of Claim, Ethyl states
claims for alleged breaches by Canada of its obligations under Article 1102 (National Treatment),
Article 1106 (Performance Requirements) and Article 1110 (Expropriation and Compensation)
The Claimant indisputably is an “investor of a Party,” namely the United States, and alleges that it
has “incurred loss or damage by reason of, or arising out of,” such breaches, all as required by
Article 1116(1). Itlikewise is beyond doubt that Claimant has acted within three years of the time
when it “first acquired, or should have first acquired, knowledge of the alleged breach and
knowledge that [it] incurred loss or damage” as stipulated in Article 1116(2). Claimant’s
Statement of Claim satisfies prima facie the requirements of Article 1116 to establish the
jurisdiction of this Tribunal. As was stated in Administrative Decision No. If (1922), Decisions
and Opinions, Mixed Claims Commission, United States and Germany (1925) 6-7, quoted in K.S
Carlston, The Process of International Arbitration 77 (1946): “When the allegations in a petition

bring a claim within the terms of the Treaty, the jurisdiction of the Commission attaches.”
See also Ambatielos Case (Greece v. United Kingdom), merits: obligation to arbitrate, 1953

{CJ Rep €0, (1-12 Gudgment of May 19) (*{T]he words ‘claims... based on the provisions of

the Treaty of 1886" can only mean claims depending for support on the provisions of the
Treaty of 1886 The fact that a claim purporting to be based on the Treaty may eventualty be

found by the Comin

 

sion of Arbitration to be unsupportable under the Treaty, does not of itself
remove the claim from the category of claims which, for the purpose of arbitration, should be
regarded as falling within the terms of the Declaration of 1926."), and Cinited States of America
ex rel, Albert Flegenheimer v. The ltelian Republic, Case No. 20, Decision No. 182, § Decisions

ftallan-United States Conciliation Commission 18-19 (Sept. 20, 1958)
(b) Relation to Investment or Trade in Goods

62 Canada asserts that since the MMT Act excludes MMT from importation into
Canada, and prohibits inter-provincial trade in MMT, it should be viewed as affecting trade in
goods and therefore falling within NAFTA Chapter 3, which covers “National Treatment and
Market Access for Goods” within a broader Part 2 on “Trade In Goods” (which embraces
Chapters 3 - 8), The argument made is that issues of trade in goods under Chapter 3 give tise to
government-to-government dispute settlement procedures under Section B of Chapter 20, and, it
is contended, thereby necessarily exclude the possibility of investor-State arbitration under

Chapter 11

63 Canada cites no authority, and does not elaborate any argument, however, as to
why the two necessarily are incompatible Canada confines itself in this regard to a reference to
Article 1112, which simply requires that “In the event of any inconsistency between this
Chapter [11] and another Chapter [e.g 3], the other Chapter shall prevail to the extent of the

inconsistency.”

64 As Ethyl has pointed out, Canada indicated at the Hearing on jurisdiction that this

 

was not “an issue that was absolutely critical to be disposed of at [that] hearing.” In the

m

circumstances, further treatment of this issue, if) any, must abide another day. The Tribunal

cannot presently exclude Ethyt’s claim on this basis
(c) Requirement of a “Measure”

65 The bulk of the written and oral proceedings have been devoted to what
constitutes a “measure” within the meaning of Article 1101, which stipulates that Chapter |i
(including, therefore, Articles 1102, 1106 and 1110, all of which Ethy! claims Canada has
breached) “applies to measures adopted or maintained by a Party.” (“Measure” appears also

several times in Article 1106”, and Article 1110 addresses specifically “a measure tantamount to

 

nationalization or expropriation.”) Succinetly, Canada has argued that no legislative action short
ofa statute that has passed both the House of Commons and the Senate and has received Royal
Assent constitutes a “measure” subject to arbitration under Chapter 11. Since at the time Ethyl’s

claim was “submitted to arbitration,” £¢., 14 April 1997, by delivery of its Notice of Arbitration

Specifically, Article 1106(2) and (6}

2 A micasure that requires an investment to use a technology to mect generally applicable
health, safety or environmental requirements stall not be construed to be inconsistent
with paragraph 1¢f). For greater certainty, Articles 1102 and 1103 apply to the measure,

6 Provided that such measures are not applied in an arbitrary or unjustifiable manner, or do
not constitute a disguised restriction on international trade or invesiment, nothing in
paragraph 1(b) or (c) or 3{a) or (0) shall be construed to prevent any Party from adopting
or mamtaming measures, including environmental measures

(a) necessary lo secure compliance with faws and regulauvons thal are nol siconsisicnt
with the provisions of this Agreement;

(b} necessary to protect human, annual or plant life or health: or

(c

necessary for the conservation of living or non-living exhaustible natural resources

(see Article 1137(1)(c) at note 9, supra). the MMT Act had not yet received Royal Assent (which

was forthcoming eleven days later), Canada argues that jurisdiction fails

66 [In addressing what constitutes a measure the Tribunal notes that Canada’s
Statement on {riplementation of the North American Free Trade Agreement, Can. Gaz. Part
IC(1), Jan 1994 (hereinafter Comedian Statement on /mplementation of NAFTA) (at 80) states

that

The term “measure” is a non-exhaustive definition of the ways in
which governments nmpose discipline in their respective
furisdictions

This is borne out by Article 201(1), which provides that

measure includes any law, regulation, procedure, requirement or
practice

Clearly something other than a “law,” even something in the nature of a “practice,” which may not

even amount to a legal stricture, may quality

67 Nonetheless, Canada argues, not without effect, that an unenacted legislative
proposal, which is unlikely to have resulted even in a “practice,” cannot constitute a measure. It
is reinforced in this connection by the fact that Articles 1803(1) and (2) employ the term
“proposed or actual measure.”

i To the maximum extent possible, each Party shall notify
any other Party with an interest in the matter of any proposed or
actual measure that the Party considers might materially affect the
operation of this Agreement or otherwise substantially affect that
other Party's interests under this Agreement,

2. On request of another Party, a Party shall promptly
provide information and respond {0 questions pertaining to any
actual or proposed measure, whether or not that other Party has
been previously notified of that measure

Canada draws further strength trom the reference to “an actual or proposed measure” in
Article 2004, which provides “Recourse to Dispute Settlement Procedures” by the three NAFTA
Parties themselves The implication is that whereas any of these may complain of a “proposed

measure,” an investor cannot

68 In the end, however, the MMT Act did come into force 24 June 1997, after having
received Royal Assent on 25 April 1997, just eleven days following Claimant’s delivery of its
Notice of Arbitration. The MMT Act is, Canada concedes, a measure within the meaning of
Article 1101(1)°% Canada’s objection, then, is that Ethyl “jumped the gun,” and, having done so,
should be required to commence an entircly new arbitration, which, it is conceded, it can (sudject

to any scope limitations}

69 The Tribunal notes that the MMT Act, according to the allegations of Claimant’s
Notice of Intent, Notice of Arbitration, and Statement of Claim, was the realization of a legislative
program of the Canadian Government, sustained over a period of ume. As of the date on which
Claimant delivered its Notice of Intent pursuant to Article 1119, on 10 September 1996, Bill C-
94, the original proposal that resulted in the MMT Act and that had died after it had had a second
reading (and been reported back by committee without amendment) due to the prorogation of
Parliament, had been reinstated as Bill C-29 and deemed to have been read the second time,
reported out of committee without amendment and subject to third reading In other words, the
new Parliament was persuaded by the Government to pick up where the previous one had left off.

Within the 90-day minimum period Ethyl was then required by Article 1119 to wait before

Sce note 28. infra

on

commencing arbitration, C-29 had passed the House of Commons and been introduced in the
Senate, which, the Tribunal understands from Canada’s legistative expert witnesses, generally

concurs in House action *’ As already noted, by the time Claimant’s Notice of Arbitration was
delivered on 14 April 1997, Bill C-29 had in fact passed the Senate, five days earlier on 9 April

1997, aad only awaited Royal Assent, which, the Tribunal is given to understand, is granted as a

matter of course once the Government has requested it™
In any event, the MMT Act is, as of 24 June 1997, a reality, and therefore the Tribunal is

now presented with a claim based on a “measure” which has been “adopted or maintained” within

the meaning of Article 1101

(gd) Limitati

  

on of Claims to the Territory of Canada

70 Canada asserts that “Ethyl’s claim in respect of expropriation of its intellectual
property, reputation, and goodwill throughout the world is not within the scope of NAFTA,”
since Article 1101(1)(b) applies Chapter 11 only to “investments of investors of another

NAFTA] Party i the lerritory of the Party,
y 2 Y

 

» and Article 1110, one of the three provisions

alleged to have been breached by Canada, likewise addresses nationalizations or expropriations by

Canada’s three witnesses all dealt with the iegislative process, They were Raymond L., du Plessis, for

20 years Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel to the Senate of Canada. Hona Nickels, a Congressional
Consultant in the United States with, inter alia, 13 years service in the Congressional Research Service, and
Professor Alexander Wayne MacKay, an expert on Canadian constitutional law

Canada concedes that a Bill becomes 3 “measure” upon the giving of Royal Assent. even though tie Act may
not come imo force in accordance with its terms for some time, e.g., 60 days as in the case of the MMT Act
Pages 184 (line 17~185 (line 18) of the transcript of the Hearing on jurisdiction.

Article 1101(c) applies Article 1106 specifically to “all mvestments ot the territory of the Party.” (Emphasis
added)

a NAFTA Party of “an investment of an investor of another Party #7 its territory ° (Emphasis

added )
TY A distinction must be made, however, between the locus of the Claimant's breach

and that of the damages suffered {t is beyond doubt that the MMT Act was adopted, and

purports to have, ard tn fact has, legal force only in Canada. It bans MMT from importation into

Canada and prevents its movement between provinces. Ethyl’s claim is premised on the legal

force the MMT Act has in relation to tts investment in Canada, 7.e., Ethyl Canada

~
2

2 Ethyl has argued, however, that the damages resulting to it in consequence of the
MMT Act include losses suifered outside of Canada. As Ethyl itself succinctly notes (at
Paragraph 97 of its Counter-Memorial on Jurisdiction), “the Investor [Ethyl] claims that an
expropriation occurred inside Canada, but the Investor's resulting losses were suffered both inside

and outside Canada.”

73 Determination of the extent to which the damages claimed by Ethyl are in fact
compensable under Chapter || is an issue that can be considered by the Tribunal only in the
context of the merits. At this stage detailed allegations regarding damages have not been
advanced, as is reflected in the Tribunal’s Procedural Order dated 13 October 1997, which
expressly provided that in the submission of Canada’s Statement of Defence “no detailed response
to issues of damages is required.” Indeed, at the Hearing on jurisdiction held 24-25 February
1998 the Parties appeared to concur that if the Tribunal would find that it has jurisdiction, they

would favor bifurcation of liability and damages, each to be addressed in a separate stage

we
<3

The Tribunal therefore decides that it cannot at this time exclude any portion of the

claim due to considerations of territoriality.”

4 Procedural Requirements

a

lt remains to determine whether our jurisdiction fails due to lack of tulfillment by

Ethyl of any of the several procedural requirements to which Canada points

There is no doubt that Chapter 11 embodies certain requirements that an
arbitrating investor must meet before a Tribunal can proceed to consider its claim. The question
rather is whether the NAFTA Parties intended that any of these conditions must be fulfilled prior
to or simultaneously with delivery of a Notice of Arbitration in order for a Tribunal’s jurisdiction

to attach

75 Canada argues that such is the case Ethyl, noting that by now all of the
vequirements cited by Canada have been fulfilled, urges the contrary. In effect, it takes the view
that their fulftilment was a prerequisite to its claim being admissible, and thus impliedly accepts
that a prolonged absence of compliance with them would have justified dismissal of the claim It
contends, however, that our jurisdiction ah initio cannot be denied. Ethyl adds the quite practical
points that Canada has in no way been prejudiced, that Canada concedes Ethyl could now

commence a new arbitration addressed to the MMT Act with all conditions fulfilled, and hence

Accordingly, the Tribunal does not decide what significance. if ans. is to be attributed to the fact thal
Article £106. like Article 1110, includes the phrase “in its terrttory,” whereas Article 1102 does not

that the sole result of a dismissal for lack of jurisdiction on these grounds would be the

inefficiency, and, as Ethyl sees it, the injustice, of having to “start all over again.”

(a) The Requirement of Consultation or Negotiation
76 While Canada does not raise the point directly, it could be understood as implying

that Ethyl failed to heed Article 1118, styled “Settlement of a Claim through Consultation and

Negotiation.”
the disputing parties should first attempt to settle a claim
through consultation or negotiation.
77 Itis difficult to credit the possibility, however, that Canada would through

consultation or negotiation desist from a course which, according to Claimant’s allegations, was
determined on and persisted in by the Canadian Government through two Parliaments as a matter
of important national policy. Certainly, Canada has given no indication that it would have

relented and the Tribunal discerns none

78 In any event, Clatmant's undisputed proof in this phase of the arbitration Is that it
in fact approached Canada as urged by Article L118 and was rebuffed. Through a witness
affidavit of Mr. Jeffrey Paul Smith, Vice President, Public Affairs, and Deputy General Manager,
Marketing, of the Ottawa office of Hill and Knowlton Canada, sworn to 28 January 1998, Ethyl
details attempts at high levels to achieve a mutually satisfactory solution, beginning with the
introduction of Bill C-94. In particular, Mr Smith confirms that at a meeting held with Canadian
Government officials on 12 November 1996, two months following delivery of Ethyl’s Notice of

Intent, “[njone claimed to have authority to consult or negotiate.” He specifically identified
“Mc. John] Gero, the senior representative from the [nternational Trade Branch,” with whom

counsel for Ethyl had exchanged three letters dated 5 and 8 (two) November 1996 in his capacity

as Director General, Trade Policy Bureau Il, Department of Foreign Atfairs and International
Trade [tis noteworthy that on 12 November 1996, apparently just moments prior to that
meeting, counsel for Ethyl received a telefaxed message from Mr. Steve Brereton, Investment
Trade Policy Division, stating that “apparently it needs to be clarified that, in our view, today’s

meeting is nota consultation.”""

(b) Nouce of Intent to Arbitrate and The Six-Month Rule of
Article 1120.

79 Claimant's Notice of [Intent to Submit a Claim to Arbitration pursuant to
Article 1119 was delivered 10 September 1996, More than seven months elapsed from then until
14 April 1997, when Claimant delivered its Notice of Arbitration and thereby submitted its claim
to arbitrate pursuant to Article 1137(1)(c). Thus the former was delivered “at least 90 days

before” the latrer as required by Article 1119

80 Canada's only objection as regards Article 1119 is that it appears to question the
effectiveness of the Notice of Intent when, in its view, neither at the date of its delivery, nor at the
time of the subsequent delivery of the Notice of Arbitration, could Canada have “breached an
obligation” under Section A of Chapter 11, which is the basis of its consent to arbitration in

Article 1116, because no “measure” was in effect as required by Article 1101

[tis possible that the Canadian officials feared that admitiing a “consultation” might compromise the position
that Bill C-94, then pending third reading in the House of Commons. was not a “measure ”

8 Similarly, Canada argues forcefully that Claimant failed to comply with the
requirement of Article 1120 that it is only “provided that six months have elapsed since the events

giving cise to a claim [that} a disputing investor may submit the claim to arbitration.”

82 A claim is “submitted to arbitration” under the UNCLTRAL Arbitration Rules,
according to Article 1137(1}(c), when “the Notice of Arbitration is received by the disputing
Party.” Claimant's Notice of Arbitration was received 14 April 1997, Therefore, according to
Canada, as of six months earlier, namely 14 October 1996, “events giving rise to a claim” must
have existed. Canada maintains that since as of f4 October 1996 Bill C-29 was still awaiting third
reading in the House of Commons, hence had not even been introduced in the Senate, and Royal
Assent lay more than six months in the future, no “measure” existed to be breached and hence no

“events giving rise to a claim” existed

83 Initially, there is an issue as to whether the phrase “events giving rise to a claim” is
intended to include all events (or elensents) required to constitute a claim, or instead some, at
least, of the events leading to crystallization of a claim. The argument !s made that the object and
purpose of NAFTA, set forth in its Article 102(1)(c) and (e), to “increase substantially investment
opportunities” and at the same time to “create effective procedures for the resolution of
disputes” would not be best served by a rule absolutely mandating a six-month respite following
the final effectiveness of a measure until the investor may proceed to arbitration. Had the
NAFTA Parties desired such rigidity, it is contended, they explicitly could have required passage
of six months “since the adoption or maintenance of a measure giving rise to a claim.” It
nonetheless remains debatable, we are told, whether as of |4 October 1996 the status of Bill C-29

was sufficient to constitute “events giving rise to a claim ”

84 There also is an issue as to whether a six-month “cooling olf period” should be
applicable at all in this case, given the events discussed above. The Tribunal has been given no
reason to believe that any “consultation or negotiation” pursuant to Article 1118, which Canada
contirms the six-month provision in Article 1120 was designed to encourage,** was even possible
[tis argued, therefore, that no purpose would be served by any further suspension of Claimant's
right to proceed. This rule is analogized to the international law requirement of exhaustion of
remedies, which is disregarded when it is demonstrated that in fact no remedy was available and

any attempt at exhaustion would have been futile

85 The Tribunal finds no need to address these arguments as to Articles 1119 and
1120 since the fact is that in any event six months and more have passed following Royal Assent
to Bill C-29 and the coming into force of the MMT Act. It is not doubted that today Claimant
could resubmit the very claim advanced here (subject to any scope limitations). No disposition is
evident on the part of Canada to repeal the MMT Act or amend it. Indeed, it could hardly be
expected. Clearly a dismissal of the claim at this juncture would disserve, rather than serve, the

object and purpose of NAFTA

 

 

The Canadian Statement on Implementation of NAF EA (at page 154) expressly states that the six-month rule
“is intended to permit ume to resolve the matter amicably

 

 

Finnish Shups -Urhitvanos (Fuiand v UK), iward of 9 Mav 19343 (Bage, sole arb.) reprinted in 3
RLAA. 1479 (1934) (Finland's failure to appeal to the Court of Appeal did not mean that it had not
exhausted local remedies. Such an appeal would have been “obviously futile” because the Court of Appeal
could not have reversed the Boards’ finding of fact). Paneverys-Saldutiskis Railway Case, (Estoma y
Lithuania), P.C LJ. Rep , Ser A/B, No. 76. p. 18 (1939) (There can be no need to resort to the municipal
courtif’ .. the resul¢ must be a repetition of a decision already given.”)

In the spevitic circumstances of this case the Tribunal decides that neither

Article 1119 nor Article 1120 should be interpreted to deprive this Tribunal of jurisdiction

86 Uhe Tribunal notes, however, that Claimant could have avoided controversy over
these issues by first awaiting Royal Assent to Bill C-29 on 25 April 1997 before delivering its
Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim to Arbitvation, and then allowing another six montis to pass
ne, until 25 October 1997, before commencing arbitration. It thus would have lost just over stx
months’ delay in proceeding, and thus would be six months further away from a resolution of the

dispute

87 The Claimant may have “jumped the gun” for tactical reasons relating to the
legislative process. The Tribunal notes that the House af Commons debate on Bill C-29 on third
reading commenced 25 September 1996, and Claimant may have decided to file its Notice of
Intent on 10 September 1996 for the purpose of affecting that debate This is inferentially
confirmed by the witness affidavit of Mr. Smith of Hill and Knowlton, which states
(Paragraph 17) that

On February 5, 1997 [after Bul C-29 had passed the
House of Commons], representatives from Ethyl
Corporation appeared before the Senate Standing

Committee on Energy, the Lavironment and Natural
Resources [and] proposed as a means to resolve the

 

dispute that Ethyl Corporation would not proceed with its

Specifically. the Tribunal concludes that this results from interpreting those Arucies in good faith tt
accordance with the ordinary meaning lo be given to the terms thereof in their context and in the light of the
object and purpose of NAFTA, as prescribed by Articte 31 of the Vienna Convention, and that, considering
particularly the circumstances of NAFTA's conclusion, any different interpretation would Icad toa result
which is manifestly absurd of unreasonable within the meaning of Article 32 of the Vienna Convention

pending NAL TA claim if the Government of Canada would
not pass Bill 0-29.

Certainly the Notice of Arbitration was delivered right on the heels of Senate passage of
Bill C-29, ce. five days later

88 Had Ethyt first awaited Royal Assent to Bill C-29, and then bided its ume another
six months, the Tribunal would not have been required to deal with this issue. The Tribunal
deems it appropriate to decide, therefore, that Claimant shall bear the costs of the proceedings on

jurisdiction insofar as these issues are involved
(c) Consent and Waivers Under Article 1121

89 Canada argues that jurisdiction here is absent because the written consent of Ethyl
to arbitration, and the written waivers by Ethyl and also Ethyl Canada of any rights to certain
other dispute settlement procedures, which were required by Article 1121 (according to its title)
as “Conditions Precedent to Submission of a Claim to Arbitration,” were provided only with the
Statement of Claim, delivered 2 October 1997, and not with the Notice of Arbitration, delivered
14 April 1997, which, according to Article 1137(1)(c), is when the “claim [was] submitted to
arbitration” under Section B. The sufficiency of the consent and waivers thus provided is not

otherwise questioned

90 The Tribunal has not gained any insight into the reasons for the formalities
prescribed by Article 1121, which on their face seem designed to memorialize expressis verbis
what normally is the case in any event, namely, that the initiation of arbitration constitutes consent
to arbitration by the initiator, whereby access to any court or other dispute settlement mechanism

is precluded (except as allowed ancillary to or in support of the arbitration), The Tribunal

44

likewise is uninformed as to any reasons tor Ethyl’s not having provided the required
documentation with the Notice of Arbiration, and equally is unaware of any resulting prejudice to

Canada

9] Che Tribunal has little trouble deciding that Claimant's unexplained delay in
complying with Article 1121 is not of significance for jurisdiction in this case. While
Article 1121's title characterizes its requirements as “Conditions Precedent,” it does not say to
what they are precedent, Canada’s contention that they are a precondition to jurisdiction , as
opposed to a prerequisite to admissibility, is not borne out by the text of Article 1121, which must

govern, Article 1121(3), instead of saying “shall be included in the submission of a claim to
arbitration” — in itselfa broadly encompassing concept —-, could have said “shall be included

with the Notice of Arbitration”

 

the drastically preclustve effect for which Canada argues truly
were intended. The Tribunal therefore concludes that jurisdiction here is not absent due to
Claimant's having provided the consent and waivers necessary under Article 1121 with its

Statement of Claim rather than with its Notice of Arbitration.

92 Here, too, however, the Tribunal deems it appropriate that Claimant be responsible
for the costs of the jurisdictional proceedings insofar as they have related to the issues arising in
connection with Article [121 No reason appears why the consent and waivers were not
furnished with the Notice of Arbitration, which would have been the better practice. Had they

been, a certain part of these proceedings would have been obviated

(d)

 

93 The Tribunal finally deals with Canada’s contention that reliance in the Statement

of Claim on the MMT Act, which was enacted some six months following delivery of the Notice

a5

of Arbitration, which Notice was directed at Bill C-29 (which became the MMT Act), and specific
reference in the Statement of Claim for the first time to the product Greenburn,”’ constitute the

assertion of “new claims” which the Tribunal is prohibited from considering

94 The revised and expanded terminology in the Statement of Claim is not intrinsically
of such great signiticance. This is particularly so, bearing in mind that Article 3 of the
UNICTRAL Arbitration Rules, which in this regard remains unmodified by anything in Part B,
and which prescribes the form of a notice of arbitration, requires (in (3)(e)) simply that such
notice include “The general nature of the claim and an indication of the amount involved, if any.”
By contrast, Articie 18 of those Rules, likewise unmodified by Part B, requires (at (1)(b) and (c))
that a statement of claim set forth a “statement of the facts supporting the claim” and the “points
in issue.” Thus a greater elaboration of detail in the Statement of Claim is permissible, if not,

indeed, required

95 The nub of the matter, however, ts that the specific inclusion of references to the
MMT Act and the product Greenburn in the Statement of Claim is not, as the Tribunal sees it, to
be viewed as adding “new claims,” but rather, if anything, as amending the claim previously
described in the Notice of Arbitration. Article 20 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules, which
Part B does not modify, provides that Claimant “may” so amend “unless the arbitral tribunal
considers it inappropriate to allow such amendment having regard to the delay in making it or

prejudice to the other party or any other circumstances.” An amendment of Ethyl’s claim, if one

there has been, made as early as in the Statement of Claim hardly can be regarded as involving any

Sue note 2. supra

46

 

No prejudice or any other circumstances are cited by Canada which would tend to

 

rebut Article 20’s presumption of amendability

 

and the Tribunal apprehends none. Therefore, to

 

the extent, Pany, that the Statement of C

 

aim amends the claim of Ethyl, the Tribunal accepts

such amendiment

VUE Award

96 For the reasons set forth above the Tribunal awards as follows

Normally tits a statement of claim that is itself amended at a later stage. The issuc of a possible amendment
made by a statement of claim (o a notice of arbitration arises in the NAFTA context, however, because of the
procedural strictures discussed above.

As pointed out by Baker & Davis, he UN
Cnued States Ch

 

TRAL Arbitration Rules in Practice: The Experience of the lran-
mis Tribunal 91-92 (Kluwer 1992)

 

vlrticte 20 of te UNCITRAL Rules gives parties the right to amend or
supplement dheir claims or defenses during the course of the arbitration. A
iribunal may deny an amendment, but only if is “inappropriate” because of
“delay in making” the amendment, prerudice to the other party or “any other
circumstances.” The amendment must be rejected if tt would cause the claim
to fail outstde the tribunal's jurisdiction under the arbitration clause or
agreement.

 

sls originally proposed, Article 20 would have required a claimant to secure
the permission of the arbitrators before he could supplement or amend his
clam. The drafting committee chose to omut the clause “with the perntission of
the arbitrators” in order to “makfej it clear that, in principle, the parties were

entided io amend.” Indeed, despite the seemingly broad authority to

  

disapprove amendments in “any other circumstances,” the travaux clearly
Show that the tribunal's authority

 

is not meant (0 discourage legitimate
amendinents (0 claims and defenses, but rather w prevent frivolous or
‘ ous cmencine nts

 

 

(Footnotes omitted.) See
Interpreted ¢

also Pellonpda & Caron, Tae UNC th Arbitration Rules as
388-410 (Finnish Lawyers’ Publishing 1994)

 

   

and -inplied

N

we

The Tribunal rejects Canada’s objections to jurisdiction based on Articles 110i
(except tor 1101() addressed in 2. below), 1116, 1£19, 1120 and 1121 of

NAFTA

The Tribunal joins to the merits Canada's objections to jurisdiction based on
Articles 11 10(1) and 1101(b) (as referred to in Paragraphs 70-73, swpret), and on
Articles 11i2(1) and Chapter 3 of NAFTA (as referred to in Paragraphs 62-54,
supra)

The costs of the Government of Canada and of the Tribunal attributable to the
jurisdictional proceedings insofar as they have related to issues raised under

NAFTA Articles 1119, 1120 and 1121 shall be borne by the Claimant, and will be

set forth in the Final Award

Signed by the Members of the Tribunal

Charles N Brower Qney aq. Brat

Mare Lalonde

 

 

| ©
(ludw/\
Karl-Heinz Bockstiegel ee J ee

\
Date of last signature Vide 4 wo a

49

