UNOFFICIAL TRANSLATION

INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR
SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

 

WASHINGTON, D.C.
CASE No. ARB/98/5

MR. EUDORO ARMANDO OLGUIN
(Claimant)

v.

REPUBLIC OF PARAGUAY
(Respondent)

 

AWARD

Members of the Tribunal:

Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno, President
Mr. Francisco Rezek, Arbitrator
Mr. Eduardo Mayora Alvarado, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal:
Mr. Gonzalo Flores

Date of dispatch to parties: July 26, 2001

169

170 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

THE TRIBUNAL
Constituted as specified above,
Having completed its deliberations,

Hereby renders the following Award:

I. Introduction

1. The Claimant, Eudoro Armando Olguin, has dual Peruvian and
United States citizenship and has his residence in Miami, Florida, United
States of America. He is represented in these proceedings by:

Dr. Gonzalo Garcfa-Calderén Moreyra,

Estudio Garcia-Calderén, Ghersi & Asociados
with registered office for purposes of this case at:
Libertadores 350

San Isidro

Lima 27, Peru

2. The Respondent is the Republic of Paraguay (Paraguay), represented
in these proceedings by:

Dr. Juan Carlos Barreiro Perrotta,

Attorney General, Republic of Paraguay,

with registered office for purposes of this case at:
Embassy of Paraguay in Washington, D.C.
2400 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W.

Washington, D.C., 20008

3. This award contains the declaration of closure of the proceedings
made by the Tribunal under Rule 38 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (Arbitration Rules), as well as the award on the mer-
its of the dispute, pursuant to Rule 47 of the Arbitration Rules. The Tribunal
has considered all the arguments, documents, and testimony in the case that
were deemed relevant.

CASES. 171

Il. Summary of Proceedings
A Proceedings leading to the decision on jurisdiction

4, On October 27, 1997, the International Centre for the Settlement of
Investment Disputes (ICSID or the Centre) received a request for arbitration
from Eudoro Armando Olguin against the Republic of Paraguay. The request
involved a dispute that arose from the treatment Mr. Olguin allegedly received
from the Paraguayan authorities, in relation to his investment in a company
for the manufacture and distribution of food products in Paraguay. In his
request, the Claimant invoked the provisions of the Treaty between the
Republic of Peru and the Republic of Paraguay regarding the Promotion and
the Reciprocal Protection of Investments (BIT).!

5. On receiving the request for arbitration, the Centre, invoking Rules
5(1)(a) and 5(1)(b) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of
Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (Institution Rules), acknowledged
receipt of the request and informed the petitioner that no action of any kind
could be taken until such time as the fee for lodging requests was paid as stip-
ulated in Rule 16 of the ICSID Administrative and Financial Regulations. The
Centre additionally requested from Mr. Olguin: (i) supplementary informa-
tion on the parties to the dispute; (ii) more detailed information about
Paraguay’s consent to submit the dispute subject of the request to arbitration,
pursuant to the rules of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (ICSID Convention),
including information on the date of his request to settle the dispute with
Paraguay; and (iii) specific information on the issues subject to dispute. The
Claimant answered these questions in a letter dated December 15, 1997.

6. After the Claimant had paid the fee for lodging requests referred to
above, the Centre, in accordance with the provisions of Institution Rule 5(2),
on January 5, 1998, sent a copy of the request for arbitration and the supple-
mentary documentation provided by the Claimant, along with the existing
correspondence to date, to the Republic of Paraguay and to the Embassy of
Paraguay in Washington, D.C.

1 Treaty between Paraguay and Peru dated January 31, 1994, hereinafter referred to as the BIT,
which took effect on December 18, 1994

172 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

7. On February 11, 1998, the Centre requested additional information
from Mr. Olguin regarding the alleged existence of legal proceedings in
Paraguay, or in any other country, relating to the dispute subject of his request
for arbitration. It also asked him for more information on the origin of the
Republic of Paraguay’s alleged obligation to guarantee certain investment
instruments owned by the Claimant, as well as on the exact terms of said obli-
gation. The Claimant answered ICSID’s request on April 17, 1998.

8. In a letter dated May 21, 1998, the Republic of Paraguay notified the
Centre of its rejection of Mr. Olguin’s request for arbitration, and: (i) denied
that the transactions effected by the Claimant were investments; (ii) stated that
it was unaware of the existence of the guarantees the Claimant attributes to
Paraguay; (iii) acknowledged existence of a payment made to Mr. Olguin by
the Central Bank of Paraguay as a result of the facts in dispute; (iv) mentioned
the Claimant's written waiver of his right to institute any further action against
the Paraguayan authorities in relation to these facts; (v) mentioned the inad-
missibility of the dispute resolution mechanisms provided for in the
Peru—Paraguay BIT, since Mr. Olguin opted to pursue judicial proceedings,
thereby ruling out the possibility of international arbitration; (vi) denied the
existence of a dispute between the Republic of Paraguay and Mr. Olguin; and
(vii) mentioned the absence of prior consent by the parties to submit the dis-
pute to arbitration before ICSID. This letter was answered in detail by the
Claimant in a letter dated June 17, 1998.

9. On August 26, 1998, the Centre’s Acting Secretary-General registered
the request pursuant to Article 36(3) of the ICSID Convention, and notified
the parties, pursuant to Institution Rule 7, that the request had been regis-
tered, inviting them to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible.

10. On October 29, 1998, after more than 60 days had elapsed from the
date the request was registered, the Claimant informed the Centre’s Secretary-
General that it was opting to constitute the Tribunal in the manner provided
for in Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID Convention. Accordingly, the Tribunal
will be constituted by three arbitrators, one appointed by Mr. Olguin, anoth-
er by the Republic of Paraguay and the third, who shall be President of the
Tribunal, appointed by agreement of the parties. In the same letter, the
Claimant appointed Professor Dale Beck Furnish, a national of the United
States of America, as arbitrator for this case.

CASES. 173

11. On November 23, 1998, Paraguay, in a letter signed by the Director
of Legal Affairs for the Republic’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, José A.
Fernandez, informed the Centre that it had decided to propose Walter Villalba
Zaldivar, a national of Paraguay, for appointment as arbitrator in this case.

12. The Centre immediately informed the Republic of Paraguay that, pur-
suant to Article 39 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 1(3) of the Arbitration
Rules, in cases where the Arbitral Tribunal would be made up of three arbitra-
tors, a party's appointment of an arbitrator who was a national of the State that
was party to the dispute or of the State whose national was a party to the dis-
pute, required the other party’s consent. As the Claimant had not given his con-
sent, Paraguay was prevented from appointing Mr. Villalba Zaldivar as arbitra-
tor. Consequently, on November 25, 1998, the Republic of Paraguay appoint-
ed Judge Francisco Rezek, a national of Brazil, as arbitrator for this case.

13. The parties did not come to an agreement regarding the appointment
of the third arbitrator who would serve as President of the Tribunal. Under
these circumstances, after more than ninety days had elapsed from the date the
parties were notified that the request for arbitration had been registered, the
Claimant, in a letter dated January 12, 1999, requested that the third arbitra-
tor for the proceedings and the President of the Tribunal be appointed by the
Chairman of the Centre’s Administrative Council, pursuant to Article 38 of
the ICSID Convention and Rule 4 of the Arbitration Rules.”

14. After consulting with the parties, the Chairman of ICSID’s
Administrative Council appointed Rodrigo Oreamuno Blanco, a national of
Costa Rica, as President of the Arbitral Tribunal. On February 12, 1999,
ICSID’s Senior Counsel, on behalf of the Centre’s Secretary-General, and pur-
suant to Rule 6(1) of the Arbitration Rules, notified the parties that all the
arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was deemed
to be constituted as of that date. On that same date, pursuant to Rule 25 of
ICSID’s Administrative and Financial Regulations, the parties were informed
that Gonzalo Flores, ICSID Counsel, would serve as Secretary of the Arbitral
Tribunal.

2 Under Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and under Arbitration Rule 4, if the Tribunal is not
constituted within 90 days of the dispatch of the notice of registration, the Chairman of ICSID’s
Administrative Council, at the request of either party, and after consulting both parties as far as po
ble, shall appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators not yet appointed and shall designate an arbitrator to serve
as President of the Tribunal.

 

174 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

15. On March 16, 1999, the Centre received a letter from the Republic of
Paraguay’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, addressed to the Secretary-General of
ICSID, in which Paraguay disqualified Professor Dale Beck Furnish under
Article 57 of the ICSID Convention. The disqualification was based on the
fact that, since the Claimant held United States nationality in addition to his
Peruvian nationality, under the aforementioned Article 39 of the ICSID
Convention and Arbitration Rule 1(3), he was prevented from appointing a
national of the United States of America as an arbitrator in this case, without
the Respondent party’s consent. Up to that date, the Claimant's dual nation-

ality had been unknown to the Tribunal and to ICSID.

16. Pursuant to the provisions of Arbitration Rule 9, the Secretary of the
Tribunal immediately sent the proposal for disqualification to the other mem-
bers of the Tribunal and to the Claimant. On March 17, 1999, Professor
Furnish submitted his resignation as arbitrator in this case. Under the provi-
sions of Rule 8 of the Arbitration Rules, on March 19, 1999, the Tribunal
accepted the resignation submitted by Professor Furnish and notified the par-
ties thereof. Consequently, the proceedings were suspended until the Claimant
could appoint a new arbitrator. On March 22, 1999, the Claimant appointed
Dr. Eduardo Mayora Alvarado, a national of Guatemala, to replace Professor
Furnish as arbitrator, and this appointment was accepted according to the pro-
visions of Rule 5 of the Arbitration Rules. The proceedings were resumed on
March 29, 1999.

17. The first session of the Tribunal with the parties was held, after con-
sultation with them, on April 16, 1999, at ICSID headquarters, in
Washington, D.C. At this session, the parties expressed their agreement that
the Tribunal had been properly constituted, pursuant to the relevant provi-
sions of the ICSID Convention and the Arbitration Rules, indicating that they
had no objection of any kind in this regard. The Tribunal accordingly declared
that it was constituted in accordance with the provisions of said Convention.

18. In the course of the first session, the parties indicated their agreement
on various aspects of the proceedings, each of which was duly set down in the
respective minutes of proceedings, signed by the President and the Secretary of
the Tribunal. The parties elected Spanish as the language for the proceedings,
and Washington, D.C., the Centre's seat, was selected as the official venue.
The Republic of Paraguay, through its Attorney General, Dr. Juan Carlos
Barreiro Perrotta, announced that it had objections to the Centre’s jurisdic-
tion, and it asked to have these objections resolved as a preliminary question

CASES. 175

prior to the hearing on the merits of the dispute. The Claimant, through Dr.
Gonzalo Garcfa-Calderén Moreyra, asked the Tribunal to consider the objec-
tions to the Centre’s jurisdiction put forward by the Republic of Paraguay
jointly with the merits of the matter in dispute.

19. After hearing both parties, the Arbitral Tribunal set the following
schedule: the Claimant was to submit his memorial within sixty days follow-
ing the date of the first session; within the sixty days following receipt of this
memorial, the Republic of Paraguay would submit its counter-memorial with
its statements of fact and of law on the matter of jurisdiction, on the merits of
the dispute or both.

20. It was further agreed that, upon the close of the first phase of written
proceedings, the Tribunal would determine the steps it would take, leaving
open the possibility of allowing or requiring the parties to submit additional
briefs. It also left open the possibility of holding a hearing on the matter of
jurisdiction.

21. At the close of the first session, at the request of the Republic of
Paraguay, the Tribunal confirmed that submission of a memorial containing
arguments solely on the matter of jurisdiction would not preclude the right of
the Respondent to subsequently argue on the merits of the dispute.

22. Pursuant to the deadlines set by the Tribunal, on May 27, 1999, the
Claimant submitted his memorial to the Centre.

23. On August 2, 1999, the Republic of Paraguay submitted its memorial
formally setting forth its objections to ICSID jurisdiction, stating the argu-
ments on which it based those objections, and attaching documents support-
ing its arguments, thereby suspending the proceedings on the merits of the dis-
pute, pursuant to Article 41(2) of the ICSID Convention and Rule 41 of the
Arbitration Rules.

24. In a submission dated August 31, 1999, the Claimant answered the
objections to the Centre's jurisdiction put forward by the Republic of
Paraguay, stating the reasons why he felt that these objections should be denied
and submitting documents to support his position.

25. In a memorial dated December 18, 1999, received by ICSID on
December 21, the Republic of Paraguay submitted its reply to the answer

176 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

given by Mr. Olguin. On February 2, 2000, the Claimant submitted its rejoin-
der to ICSID on the matter of jurisdiction.

26. This first phase of the proceedings was subject to various delays caused
by the Republic of Paraguay’s failure to meet its obligation to make the pay-
ments set forth in Rule 14 of the ICSID Administrative and Financial
Regulations, which the Secretary of the Tribunal had duly requested from the
parties.

27. On August 8, 2000, after having deliberated by phone and in writing,
the Tribunal rendered a unanimous decision on the objections to jurisdiction
made by the Republic of Paraguay. In its decision, the Tribunal rejected the
objections to jurisdiction made by the Respondent, maintaining: (a) that the
Republic of Paraguay’s conclusion of the Peru—Paraguay BIT constituted the
written consent required by Article 25, subparagraph 1 of the ICSID
Convention; (b) that the investments made by the Claimant in the Republic
of Paraguay were included in the listing appearing in Article 1 of the
Peru—Paraguay BIT, and that said Treaty contained no rules that would require
the investments made by a national of one of the Contracting States to be pre-
viously allowed or acknowledged by the State in whose territory they were
being made; (c) that no pronouncement could be made in this first phase on
the possible defects of Mr. Olguin’s investments alleged by the Republic of
Paraguay, since that was clearly a subject relating to the merits of the dispute;
(d) that, for the same reason, no pronouncement could be made in this phase
of the arbitration on the Republic of Paraguay’s allegation that, should it be at
all liable, such liability would be subsidiary, and not direct; and lastly, (e) that
there was no evidence in the case file to the effect that Mr. Olgufn had filed a
claim in court against the Republic of Paraguay to collect on the liabilities he
is seeking to recover through these arbitration proceedings.

28. On these grounds, the Tribunal decided, unanimously, to reject the
objections to the Centre's jurisdiction put forward by the Republic of Paraguay
and to declare that the Centre had jurisdiction, and that the Tribunal was
competent to resolve the dispute between the parties pursuant to the provi-
sions of the Peru—Paraguay BIT and the ICSID Convention.

29. The Secretary of the Tribunal sent certified copies of the Tribunal’s
decision to the parties. Attached hereto, as an integral part of this award, is a
copy of the decision on jurisdiction handed down by the Tribunal.

CASES. 177

B. Proceedings leading to the award on the merits of the dispute

30. On August 8, 2000, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1, pur-
suant to Rules 19 and 41(4) of the Centre’s Arbitration Rules, to resume the
proceedings on the merits of the dispute. In said Procedural Order, the
Tribunal set the following schedule for the further proceedings:

Having the Claimant submitted, as agreed in the first session held April 16,
1999, his memorial with his statements of fact and of law on the merits of the
dispute, the Respondent was to submit its counter-memorial, with its state-
ments of fact and of law on the merits of the dispute, within sixty days of the
date of receipt of the Tribunal’s decision on the matter of jurisdiction. After
that, the Claimant would submit his reply regarding the merits of the dispute
within thirty days of the date of receipt of the counter-memorial, and lastly,
the Respondent would submit its rejoinder on the merits of the dispute, not
later than thirty days following receipt of the Claimant's reply. Once the
exchange of submissions was complete, the Tribunal would set a date for the
hearing.

31. Following this schedule, on October 5, 2000, the Republic of
Paraguay submitted its counter-memorial to the Centre on the merits of the
dispute. On November 9, 2000, the Claimant submitted his reply on the mer-
its. Finally, on December 18, 2000, the Respondent submitted its rejoinder on
the merits of the dispute.

32. Ina letter dated February 12, 2001, the Tribunal, after consulting with
the representatives of both parties, called a hearing on the merits of the dis-
pute, to be held from March 11 to 14, 2001, inclusive, at the Centre’s head-
quarters, in Washington, D.C. In the same letter, the Tribunal requested, pur-
suant to Rules 33 and 34 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, precise information
from each party regarding the evidence which it intended to produce and
which it intended to request the Tribunal to call for, together with an indica-
tion of the points to which such evidence would be directed.

33. Ina letter dated February 20, 2001, the Republic of Paraguay trans-
mitted the information requested by the Tribunal to the Centre and requested
that Mr. Eudoro Armando Olguin be present at the hearing for questioning.
The Claimant, in turn, in a letter of the same date, requested that Mr. Angel
Canziani be present for questioning.

178 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

34, In a letter dated February 21, 2001, the Arbitral Tribunal asked the
parties to indicate the specific points to which the statements of Mr. Olguin
and Mr. Canziani would be directed. The parties produced the requested
information by the deadlines set by the Tribunal.

35. Accordingly, in a letter dated February 23, 2001, the Tribunal, in
accordance with Rule 34(2)(a) of the Arbitration Rules, called upon the
Claimant to produce the following witnesses for questioning during the hear-
ing on the merits of the dispute: Mr. Eudoro Armando Olgufn and Mr. Angel
Canziani. In the same letter, the Tribunal instructed the parties on the manner
in which the hearing would take place.

36. According to the instructions, the hearing on the merits of the dispute
would take place as follows:

The hearing on the merits of the dispute would begin on Sunday, [March] 11,
2001, at 10:00 a.m.

First, the Claimant's representative would make an oral presentation lasting 30
minutes, and then the Respondent's representative would make his presenta-
tion for another 30 minutes.

After that, each party would have 15 minutes to present, by way of reply and
rejoinder, any further comments that they might have.

Then, each of the witnesses would be examined by the representative of the
Y P:

party requesting their presence, followed by the representative of the other

party, each party having two hours in which to question each of the witnesses.

The members of the Tribunal would also be able to ask questions of the rep-
resentatives of the parties and of the witnesses, and request explanations at any
time during the hearing. The time used for questions by the Tribunal and for
the replies would not count against the time assigned to each of the parties.

Lastly, the members of the Tribunal would meet on March 13, 2001, in pri-
vate, to deliberate, and if necessary, on the following day.

37. The hearing on the merits of the dispute was held, as scheduled, on
{March] 11 to 13, 2001, at the Centre’s headquarters, in Washington, D.C. In
attendance at the hearing were:

CASES. 179

Members of the Tribunal:
Mr. Rodrigo Oreamuno, President; Mr. Francisco Rezek, Arbitrator; and Mr.
Eduardo Mayora Alvarado, Arbitrator.

ICSID Secretary:
Mr. Gonzalo Flores, Secretary of the Tribunal

Claimant:
Mr. Eudoro Armando Olguin

Representing the Claimant:
Dr. Gonzalo Garcfa-Calderén Moreyra

Representing the Respondent:
Dr. Juan Carlos Barreiro Perrotta, Attorney General, Republic of Paraguay

Also in attendance at the hearing representing the Respondent:

Dr. Benigno Lépez, Central Bank of Paraguay

Dr. Amelio Calonga Arce, Office of the Attorney General, Republic of
Paraguay

Mr. José Marfa Ibdfiez, Embassy of Paraguay in Washington, D.C.

38. The hearing began, as scheduled, on Sunday, [March] 11, 2001 at
10:00 a.m. After a brief introduction by the President of the Tribunal, Dr.
Gonzalo Garcfa-Calderén Moreyra, on behalf of the Claimant, made a state-
ment to the Tribunal, referring to the arguments indicated in his briefs.
During his presentation, and in accordance with the announcements in his let-
ter of February 20, 2001, the representative for the Claimant, through the
Secretary, handed over to the Tribunal and to the Respondent, the evidentiary
documents for his pecuniary claims. After that, Dr. Juan Carlos Barreiro
Perrotta, Dr. Amelio Calonga Arce, and Dr. Benigno Lépez made a presenta-
tion to the Tribunal, on behalf of the Republic of Paraguay.

39. Mr. Canziani and Mr. Olguin, witnesses whose appearance was
requested by the Tribunal, attended the hearing on the merits of the dispute
and gave their respective statements, in that order, after consulting with the
parties. They were both questioned by the party requesting their appearance,
cross-examined by the other party, and answered questions posed by the
Tribunal. The examination, cross-examination, and questioning by the
Tribunal took place in the session held on [March] 11, 2001.

180 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

40. The hearing continued on the morning of [March] 12, 2001. During
this session, the representatives for both parties made their closing statements
and were questioned by the Tribunal, as scheduled. In addition, and pursuant
to the Tribunal’s request made during the session held on March 11, 2001,
both parties submitted their written answers to the specific questions posed by
the Tribunal the previous day. Lastly, the representatives submitted minutes of
their oral arguments to the Secretary, pursuant to the Tribunal’s suggestion
made in a letter dated February 23, 2001. The hearing ended with some clos-
ing remarks by the President of the Tribunal.

41. On the afternoon of [March] 12, 2001 and on March 13, 2001, the
members of the Tribunal met at the Centre's headquarters, in Washington,
D.C., to deliberate.

Cc. Declaration of closure of the proceedings

42. Rule 38(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules provides that when the par-
ties have completed their presentations, the proceedings shall be declared
closed.

43. Having examined the parties’ presentations, the Tribunal concluded
that there were no requests from either party, nor any other reason to reopen
the proceedings, as permitted by Rule 38(2) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

44. Consequently, in a letter dated May 8, 2001, the Tribunal declared the
proceedings closed, pursuant to Rule 38(1) of the ICSID Arbitration Rules.

III. | Summary of Facts

45. In November 1993, Mr. Juan Luis Olselli Pagliaro held a position in
the Central Bank of Paraguay. Mr. Pagliaro sent a letter to Mr. Olguin, on
non-letterhead stationery, dated November 3, 1993, informing him “...of the
arrangements made with the company ‘La Mercantil S.A. de Finanzas’ pur-
suant to the discussions with Oscar and on our behalf.”

Basically, the letter described the interest rates that that finance company was
willing to grant Mr. Olguin on his deposits in United States dollars and in
guaranis, which were 11% and 33% per annum, respectively.

CASES. 181

46. Mr. Olselli also stated in the letter that he was sending the Central
Bank of Paraguay’s Official Report on La Mercantil and the ranking it held
among finance companies in Paraguay. The letter ended with the following
paragraph:

“The friend I mentioned to you is Mr. Tomds Rovira, general
manager of the finance company, who can be contacted at the
phone number that appears on his card.”

47. On March 16, 1994, Mr. Olselli sent a note to Mr. Olguin, to which
he attached a newsletter “...for purposes of keeping you informed about La
Mercantil and its movement on the market.”

48. Starting in December 1993, the Claimant began transferring capital,
in dollars, to the Republic of Paraguay. These transfers, which came to a total
amount of U.S.$1,254,500.00, where converted to Guaranis (Gs) and
deposited in a finance company by the name of “La Mercantil S.A. de
Finanzas” (La Mercantil).

49. In exchange for the deposit of these sums, Mr. Olguin received invest-
ment instruments (T#tulos de Inversién, TDIs) which were successively
renewed.

The following TDIs existed as of July 1995:

i. No. 06361 with a value of Gs 570,000,000, dated August 2,
1994,

ii. No. 2225 with a value of Gs 481,250,000, dated June 23, 1995,
iii. No. 2226 with a value of Gs 481,250,000, dated June 23, 1995,
iv. No. 2227 with a value of Gs 508,200,000, dated June 23, 1995,
y. No. 2231 with a value of Gs 231,000,000, dated July 4, 1995,
vi. No. 2232 with a value of Gs 67,375,000, dated July 4, 1995,
vii. No. 2253 with a value of Gs 67,982,500, dated July 6, 1995.

a}

°

The first of these securities was issued to Mr. Angel Canziani Zuccarelli and
the remainder were made out to Mr. Eudoro Olguin. The latter securities bore
the signature of an officer at the Central Bank of Paraguay. The seven securi-
ties came to a total of Gs 2,407,057,500.00.

182 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

50. On August 26, 1996, a payment of Gs 48,006,750 was made on each
of these securities, with the exception of the one issued to Mr. Canziani.
Although the parties differ in regard to the legal consequences of that signa-
ture, it was clear to the Tribunal that no payment had been made on the secu-
rity issued to Mr. Canziani because it did not bear the signature of an officer
of the Bank Examiner, which was present on Mr. Olguin’s securities.

51. The aforementioned funds were slated to finance the installation of a
corn products plant in Paraguay whose owner would be the company known
as “Super Snacks del Paraguay S.A.” (Super Snacks).

52. On May 25, 1994, Juan Luis Olselli Pagliaro and Tomés Gumercindo
Rovira Barchello, accompanied by Mr. Olguin and other persons, appeared
before the Public Notary and Recording Officer Blanca Cilda Nuifiez Noguera,
to execute the articles of incorporation for Super Snacks del Paraguay S.A.,
appointing them, respectively, as the company’s Vice Chairman and Director,
and at that moment, they subscribed for 12 shares of Gs 1,000,000 each. The
corporate by-laws and legal status of the company were approved on July 26,
1994, by arrangement of Mr. Olselli. Super Snacks was officially entered in the
Commercial Registry of the Republic of Paraguay on August 22, 1994.

53. In June 1994, the firm “Andlisis & Propuestas Consultores” presented
Mr. Olgufn with a “Technical, Economic, and Financial Feasibility Study” in
reference to the corn products plant. According to this study, the project
would require an investment of Gs 1,425,500,000, with 36.9% of the financ-
ing coming from the company’s own funds, and 63.1% from bank resources.

54. On September 22, 1994, Resolution 415 of Paraguay’s Ministry of
Industry and Commerce granted Super Snacks the tax incentives provided for
in Statute No. 60/90.

55. In the midst of the economic crisis the financial system was undergo-
ing in the Republic of Paraguay, on July 14, 1995, La Mercantil suspended its
operations and ceased honoring payment of the TDIs.

56. On December 18, 1994, the Bilateral Investment Treaty between the
Republic of Peru and the Republic of Paraguay regarding the Promotion and
Reciprocal Protection on Investments entered into force, and whose stated
purpose was “...to create and maintain conditions favorable to investments of

CASES. 183

nationals of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other Contracting
Party.”

57. In July 1995, Statute No. 417/73, which regulated Banks and other
financial institutions, was in force in Paraguay, and Article 66 of this law pro-

vided:

“Once a dissolution decision in the cases provided under this
law has been made, the Central Bank of Paraguay shall admin-
ister the assets and liabilities of the entity for the sole purpose
of its liquidation and shall lend financial support aimed at the
payment of holders of savings accounts, with deduction of the
legal reserves corresponding to the savings accounts...”

58. | On December 4, 1995, the Legislature of Paraguay approved Statute
No. 797 on Financial Stabilization and Recovery, which amended the above-
mentioned Article 66 to read as follows:

“Once a decision has been made to withdraw a financial insti-
tution’s license to operate, the Central Bank of Paraguay shall
guarantee payment of the deposits consisting of monetary
deposits duly recorded in the entity’s liabilities, in whatever
form, in domestic or foreign currency, made by individuals or
legal entities, in the banks, finance companies and other cred-
it houses, up to the equivalent of the monthly minimum wage
times one hundred per account.”

59. After La Mercantil suspended its operations, Mr. Olguin, personally
and on behalf of Super Snacks, made numerous efforts to try to recover the
funds deposited with that financial institution.

Iv. Considerations

60. Paraguay insists that the Tribunal examine the matter of Mr. Olguin’s
nationality, a subject that naturally is preliminary to the examination of the
merits. The Respondent’s thinking is that, since Mr. Olguin is a Peruvian
national, and at the same time, a national of the United States of America, and
since the Peruvian legal system supposedly establishes that in cases of dual
nationality, the person’s registered address will determine the exercise of spe-
cific rights by that person, Mr. Olgufn, who resides in the United States, may
not claim the protection under the BIT.

184 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

61. | What is important in this case in order to determine whether the
Claimant has access to the arbitral jurisdiction based on the BIT, is only
whether he has Peruvian nationality and if that nationality is effective. There
is no doubt on this point. There was no dispute regarding the fact that Mr.
Olguin has dual nationality, and that both are effective. What one, or the
other, or even both of his mother countries understand regarding, for exam-
ple, the person’s exercise of political rights, civil rights, the responsibility for his
diplomatic protection and the importance of his registered address for deter-
mining any such rights has no bearing on the legitimate legal fact that Mr.
Olguin effectively has dual nationality. To this Tribunal, the effectiveness of his
Peruvian nationality is enough to determine that he cannot be excluded from
the provisions for protection under the BIT.

62. In the case of a dual national’s diplomatic protection, either of his
mother countries has the capacity to act on his behalf against a third country,
and the third country would have no way of invoking rules, on an interna-
tional scale, that would serve, in the protecting nation’s internal laws, to trans-
fer the responsibility for such protection—which is, in any case, not obligato-
ry—to the co-mother country, on account of the person’s registered address or
other similar factor. The third nation, the hypothetical author of the unlawful
act that caused damage to the foreign individual, would only be authorized,
under international law, in this precise field, to deny the legitimacy of such
diplomatic protection in the absence of a tie of effective nationality between
the individual and the protecting nation; it could never do this based on rules
of internal law, which in either of the two co-mother countries, serve to regu-
late the exercise of given rights, and which furthermore, might prove to be in
conflict with each other.

But even if this were not the case, internal rules of this nature, pertaining to
the grant of diplomatic protection to individuals, and therefore, to something
that under international law is a prerogative of the mother country, could not,
by analogy, be applied to the case of access to the ICSID forum, one of whose
most important and unique objectives is to effectively give the individual the
right of action, excluding the mother country’s endorsement of his claim or
any other initiatives from the mother country, the only requirement being that
it be a party to the 1965 Convention and the relevant BIT.

63. The Claimant is seeking to have the Republic of Paraguay refund him
the unpaid portion of his investment, which as of June 30, 1995, came to Gs
2,407,057,500.00, along with the applicable adjustment for the devaluation of

CASES. 185

the guarani, from June 1995 to the effective payment date, the interest on that
amount, over the same period, at the interest rate agreed in the TDIs, the dam-
ages incurred due to the failed payments of principal, and the costs of the arbi-
tration proceedings.

64. Mr. Olguin states that Paraguay’s liability emerges from four distinct
causes:

(a) The TDIs were endorsed by the Bank Examiner of the Republic of
Paraguay, a Paraguayan State agency.

(b) The Republic of Paraguay and its agencies were negligent in super-
vising the activities of La Mercantil, and this negligence led to the suspension
of operations of that financial institution.

(c) The Republic of Paraguay and its agencies engaged in discrimina-
tory conduct, in violation of the provisions of the BIT, particularly the provi-
sions of Article 4, subparagraph 2 of the treaty.?

(d) The actions of the Republic of Paraguay in respect to Mr. Olguin’s
investment were the equivalent of expropriation.

65. The Arbitral Tribunal then analyzed each of these arguments:

a) This Tribunal does not share the Claimant's contention that the signa-
tures appearing on the six TDIs issued in Mr. Olgufn’s name constitute an
endorsement or other similar legal act, capable of obligating the Republic of
Paraguay to pay that security. Setting aside the subject of whether the Bank
Examiner has the legal authority to obligate the Republic of Paraguay by
extending a guaranty of this kind, it appears evident that the effect of that sig-
nature is meant solely to register the TDIs.

Legal scholars have discussed at length the possibility of creating secu-
rities that are distinct from those expressly set forth in a given legal system. The

3 “ARTICLE IV: Protection—Treatment and Economic Integration Zone

(2) TREATMENT: Each Contracting Party shall guarantee fair and equitable treatment in
its territory to investments of investors of the other Contracting Party. This treatment shall
be no less favorable than the granted by each Contracting Party to investments of its own
nationals made in its territory or than that accorded by each Contracting Party to invest-
ments of nationals of a most favored nation in its territory, if the latter treatment is more
favorable.”

186 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

Claimant has repeatedly stated that the TDIs were documents distinct from
certificates of deposit. To conclude that any signature placed on one of these
TDIs constituted an endorsement or similar guaranty would require the exis-
tence of an explicit rule in Paraguayan law that so provided. The existence of
such a rule has not been demonstrated in the case file.

b) As explained further on in this Award, the Tribunal feels that
Paraguay’s general conduct in relation to the operations of La Mercantil was
not overly sound. Nonetheless, it seems excessive to attribute to this careless
conduct the effect of making the Republic of Paraguay liable for the payment
of the TDIs.

It seems obvious to this Tribunal that there are serious shortcomings in
the Paraguayan legal system and in the functioning of various State agencies.
This Tribunal is not seeking to determine whether this situation is more severe
in Paraguay than in other nations. What is evident is that Mr. Olgufn, an
accomplished businessman, with a track record as an entrepreneur going back
many years and experience acquired in the business world in various countries,
was not unaware of the situation in Paraguay. He had his reasons (which this
Tribunal makes no attempt to judge) for investing in that country, but it is not
reasonable for him to seek compensation for the losses he suffered on making
a speculative, or at best, a not very prudent, investment.

°) The Claimant's statement that the Republic of Paraguay fully paid for
the investment by the Hamilton Bank of the United States of America was not
borne out in the file, nor did the party show any other case in which favorable
treatment was shown, in a manner that was discriminatory against Mr.
Olguin, to another Paraguayan, or foreign creditor. Statute No. 797/95 on
Financial Stabilization and Recovery sought to compensate, in part, the losses
suffered by a large number of investors, for purposes of helping to mitigate the
severe economic crisis the country of Paraguay was undergoing. However, to a
small extent, Mr. Olguin benefited (along with many other people) from the
enactment of that law, which, on amending Article 66 of Statute No. 417/73,
extended the coverage of the protection that under the previous law was lim-
ited to those with savings accounts, which earned meager amounts of interest.

d) The Tribunal, despite numerous efforts, was unable to understand the
Claimant’ reasoning on attempting to equate the loss of money Mr. Olguin
suffered to an expropriation. In the latter, a person is deprived of property
through an action to take ownership of that property by the State, which log-

CASES. 187

ically, contracts an obligation to pay its price. In this case, it cannot be said that
the Paraguayan State had appropriated the investment made by Mr. Olguin,
which was lost due to the crisis suffered by La Mercantil and by the
Paraguayan financial system in general.

The Tribunal will return to these issues in more detail further on.

66. As stated previously, it has been clearly shown that Mr. Olguin made
a substantial investment in Paraguay. Freely, and it would seem, on the advice
of various people, among them Mr. Olselli and Mr. Rovira, with whom he
established a close relationship, to the point of naming them to the Super
Snacks Board of Directors, he decided to convert to guaranis the dollars he had
brought from another country (which country being of no importance for
purposes of the BIT), and invest them in La Mercantil, which offered to pay
him interest at a rate of 33%, which, at the time, seemed extremely attractive.

67. On finalizing the proceedings for the taking of evidence, the Tribunal
wished to make certain, by directly consulting the parties in the presence of
them both, that its understanding—that of the Tribunal—of the essential part
of each of their arguments, both in relation to the facts of the case, and the
legal consequences derived therefrom, was substantially correct. This was so
confirmed.

68. Two aspects directly related to these arguments call for examination in
order to ensure that the grounds for the award are not in any way diminished.
They are: (a) the existence or lack of certain omissions in regard to the dis-
charge of the obligations that fall within the scope of Paraguay’s accounting
bodies, in matters of financial supervision; and (b) the existence of a causal
relationship between such omissions—if any—and the obligation to compen-
sate that the Claimant is seeking in his favor.

69. Both parties concur, albeit to differing extents, the Claimant accusing,
and the Respondent admitting, that the bankruptcy of La Mercantil, occur-
ring within the broader context of a national financial crisis, was the conse-

4 During the hearing on the merits of the dispute, held from March 11 to 13, 2001 at the ICSID
headquarters in Washington, D.C., the Republic of Paraguay argued that the funds invested by Mr.
Olguin in Paraguay came, physically, from the United States (the Claimant's place of residence), and that
therefore, his investment was not protected by the Paraguay—Peru BIT. According to this argument, for
an investment to be protected by the Paraguay—Peru BIT, the funds invested must come from the coun-
try in which the investor is a national. This requirement is not expressly indicated in the BIT; conse-
quently, the Tribunal rejects that argument.

188 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL.

quence of irregular conduct on the part of its managers, that could have been
detected, brought to a halt, and if necessary, sanctioned, thereby fostering con-
fidence in both the integrity of Paraguay’s financial system, and investor cred-
its in securities issued by La Mercantil.

70. Without getting into an analysis of third-party opinions, be they
media outlets or other entities, on the sociopolitical problems confronting
Paraguay, which clearly extend beyond the object of this Award, it is nonethe-
less possible to gather sufficient evidence to draw the conclusion that there
were considerable omissions on the part of Paraguay’s public bodies, which
had the duty to preserve the integrity of that country’s financial system, in
regard, not only, but especially, to foreign investment. In other words, in the
case before us, the government accounting bodies of Paraguay clearly appear
to have been negligent in regard to their duties to monitor, supervise, or con-
trol the agents of their country’s financial market, during the period of time in
which the facts arose that led to this dispute.

71. That being said, it needs to be determined whether, in this case, there
existed a suitable causal link that would produce specific legal consequences,
such as an obligation, on the part of the State of Paraguay, and a right, on the
part of Mr. Olguin, to demand and obtain compensation for the losses he suf
fered. This question would require the existence of one or more ruling scenar-
ios to which the facts could be subsumed, with the aforementioned legal
effects.

72. Asa result of a careful analysis of the BIT, this Tribunal concludes that
said text does not contain any rules that obligate the State in whose territory
an investment is made to guarantee the payment of that investment in the
event it were to fail.

73. Had the BIT envisaged as a suitable hypothetical scenario for produc-
ing legal consequences like those sought by the Claimant, that the Contracting
States might commit gross omissions in regard to their legal and constitution-
al duties or obligations, thereby causing third parties to suffer losses, then in
the light of the facts considered to be shown in this case, this Arbitral Tribunal
might well have ruled in favor of the Claimant. The probability—and not the
certainty—of such an outcome is due, as stated earlier in this Award, to the
fact that the Claimant contributed significantly, within his own individual cir-
cle of action, to the occurrence of the facts that he is also censuring.
Nonetheless, this hypothesis must be discarded, since there is no rule in the

CASES. 189

BIT relating to “gross omissions” that would serve as a basis for the Claimant's
cause of action.

The scope of the Bilateral Investment Treaties was categorically specified in the
award issued in the arbitration proceedings between Emilio Agustin Maffezini
and the Kingdom of Spain (ICSID Case No. ARB/97/7). That award, ren-
dered by a distinguished Arbitral Tribunal on November 13, 2000, stated, in
paragraph 64:

“...the Tribunal must emphasize that Bilateral Investment
Treaties are not insurance policies against bad business judg-
ments.”

74. Although, as explained elsewhere in this ruling, the establishment, in
the future, of strict rules that impose economic sanctions on States that fail to
closely monitor their financial entities is desirable, the truth is that these rules
do not now exist in either Paraguayan law or in the BIT. The Tribunal adds
that they do not exist in the majority of the countries in the region either.

75. This Tribunal does not accept Mr. Olgufn’s contention that he was
induced to make his investment by the bulletins issued by the Central Bank of
Paraguay. To the contrary, the Tribunal feels that prudence would have
prompted a foreigner arriving in a country that had suffered severe economic
problems to be much more conservative in his investments.

76. The statistical bulletins from the Central Bank of Paraguay (BCP) and
the Bank Examiner, official in nature, on the situation of various entities that
make up Paraguay’s financial system, can be understood to be published to
allow various economic agents to make decisions on investments or consump-
tion. It so happens that copies of a few of these bulletins, the content of which
produced no objection from the parties, were attached to the record of these
proceedings, and they show, for example, that La Mercantil was ranked second
among finance companies with the greatest net worth in the country as of
September 30, 1993 (the date appears in the tables, although not beneath the
bar charts).

77. That situation contrasts with Angel Canziani’s and the Claimant's own
statements and with numerous statements by the representative and other
attorneys for the Paraguayan State during the evidentiary hearings, from which
it was inferred that La Mercantil—among other entities—issued investment

190 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

instruments that, while they should have been reflected in the issuer's account
liabilities, were circulated as off-the-book securities (“titulos negros”) as they
were referred to by the attorneys for the Respondent. In this regard, the report
of “the Government Auditors from the Central Bank of Paraguay in La
Mercantil S.A. de Finanzas,” dated October 20, 1995, a copy of which can be
found in the files, indicates the following:

“We noted that the volume of the entity’s deposits as of April
28, 1995 came to a total of G. 20.225 billion, and remained
relatively stable through May 30 of that year. However, after
May 31, there were substantial increases in deposits, in
amounts not recorded in the company’s normal course of busi-
ness, a situation that was at odds with the official explanatory
statements established. It should be noted that this discrepan-
cy was due to an attempt to legalize parallel deposit transac-
tions, by making improper use of the deposit instruments
authorized by the Central Bank of Paraguay. This caused a
surge in the level of deposits from G. 20.225 billion to G.
98.259 billion...”

78. This means that, on the date of that report, La Mercantil had issued
and placed in circulation securities in an amount that was approximately five
times what showed in its books or account ledgers. The report goes on to state
the following:

“...By means of preferred loans granted to individuals related
(with either employment or business ties) and entities related
(Dimex S.A., Financiera Corpus SA., Publicity S.A.,
Laprofarm, Arami S.A., Super Snacks, Distrimport, among
others) to La Mercantil S.A. de Finanzas, funds collected by
the company were diverted, in violation of the legal principles
of Art. 35 f) of Act 417/73 on Banking and Other Financial
Entities...”

79. The inclusion of “Super Snacks” stands out among the legal entities
related to La Mercantil. However, in the context of these issues, it is more
important to analyze these facts and circumstances as they relate to the exis-
tence of omissions on the part of the competent Paraguayan authorities, as will
be done further on.

CASES. 191

80. Further related to the auditors’ findings are two facts that were
acknowledged by both parties. One, that an officer of the Central Bank of
Paraguay (BCP), Mr. Juan Luis Olselli Pagliaro, furnished the Claimant with
a written recommendation (letter dated November 3, 1993, referred to earli-
er) for carrying out financial undertakings with La Mercantil; the other, that
the latter's general manager, Mr. Tomds Rovira, and Mr. Olselli, agreed to form
the Board of Directors of “Super Snacks,” apparently without any conse-
quences in terms of oversight actions by the Bank Examiner.

81. Perhaps it would be overly zealous to attempt to demand that the
Paraguayan financial control bodies be obligated to detect and prevent hidden
or “shadow” relationships of public officers (in the case of Olselli) or private
ones (in the case of Rovira), that place them in a clear situation of legally cul-
pable conflict of interest, as indicated by the auditors of La Mercantil.
Nonetheless, as stated earlier, both officers went to the extreme of appearing
before a public notary to incorporate, together with Mr. Olguin, “Super
Snacks Paraguay Sociedad Anénima.”

82. The file makes no mention of how long Mr. Olselli retained his posi-
tion as an officer of the BCP, which could be of significance when considering
the overall impact of the fact, significant in itself, that it was Mr. Olselli who
submitted the “presentation” to the Ministry of the Interior that led the
President of the Republic to issue Decree 4,861 (a copy of which is included
in the case file), approving the corporate by-laws of Super Snacks and recog-
nizing its legal status.

83. As indicated in the preceding paragraph, the Tribunal wished to ensure
that it understood clearly the party’s positions, and in this sense, it noted that
the Claimant's legal argument is based, among other things, on the existence
of an expropriation, within the context and under the terms of Article 6 of the
BIT. Said expropriation, states the Claimant, would be indirect in nature,
made up of omissions such as the ones the Arbitral Tribunal refers to above,
by way of example, and without limitation. To give the legal institution of
expropriation the scope that the Claimant attempts to give it would imply, on
the part of the Arbitral Tribunal, a departure from the general principles of law
and the rules of substantive law that define and regulate expropriation.

84. For an expropriation to occur, there must be actions that can be con-
sidered reasonably appropriate for producing the effect of depriving the affect-
ed party of the property it owns, in such a way that whoever performs those

192 ICSID REVIEW—FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW JOURNAL

actions will acquire, directly or indirectly, control, or at least the fruits of the
expropriated property. Expropriation therefore requires a teleologically driven
action for it to occur; omissions, however egregious they may be, are not suf
ficient for it to take place.

Costs

85. Although this Tribunal is rejecting all of Mr. Olguin’s claims, it does
not feel that it is fair to make him pay the costs for these proceedings. In the
first place, the Respondent's questioning of this Tribunal’s jurisdiction was flat-
ly rejected, on the grounds expressed earlier.

In the second place, as already stated various times in this Award, while the
oversight exercised by the Paraguayan State through its bodies did not rise to
a level of negligence that created liability to pay the losses suffered by the
Claimant, it is also true that it cannot be considered to have been exemplary.
Moreover, the conduct of the Republic of Paraguay needlessly prolonged these
proceedings by repeatedly failing to meet the deadlines set by the Tribunal, in
particular, the obligations imposed by the ICSID Administrative and Financial
Regulations. For the above reasons, this Tribunal feels that it is fair that the
parties each contribute part of the expenses arising from these proceedings,
dividing the procedural costs in equal shares, and each assuming the costs for
their legal representation.

Vv. Decision
For the above reasons, the Tribunal unanimously resolves:

1 All contentions made by the Claimant Eudoro Armando Olguin are

hereby denied.

2. Each party shall pay one half of the fees for these proceedings and the
entire cost of their representation.

RODRIGO OREAMUNO
President of the Tribunal

 

EDUARDO MAYORA ALVARADO
Arbitrator Arbitrator

