OLGuiN v. REPUBLIC OF PARAGUAY
(Case No. ARB/98/5)
Decision on Jurisdiction. 8 August 2000
Award. 26 July 2001

(Arbitration Tribunal: Oreamuno B., President;
Rezek and Mayora Alvarado, Members)

Summary: The facts: — The Claimant referred to Icstp a dispute which arose
from the Claimant’s investment in a finance company in Paraguay. The Claimant
alleged that a finance company, Mercantil SA de Finanzas, had defaulted on pay-
ment of investment bonds in relation to a food supply company in Paraguay, and
that the Government should be regarded as a guarantor of the said investment.
The Claimant invoked the provisions of the Convention between the Republic of
Peru and the Republic of Paraguay on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of
Investments of 31 January 1994.

SUMMARY 155

Paraguay denied that it had consented to ICsiD jurisdiction, that the operations
conducted by the Claimant were investments within the meaning of the Bit, and
that it had guaranteed any obligations of the finance company, and it relied on a
written waiver by the Claimant of his right to institute any further proceedings,
in return for which certain payments were made by the Paraguayan Central Bank.

As to the merits, in 1993 an official of the Central Bank wrote to the Claimant,
referring to dealings conducted with the finance company, and cited rates of interest
which the latter was prepared to pay to the Claimant on his deposits. The official
forwarded a report of the Central Bank on the finance company and its position
in Paraguay, and referred the Claimant to the General Manager of the finance
company. One month later, the Claimant began to make capital transfers, in dollars,
to the Republic of Paraguay. These transfers, which amounted to the sum of US
$1,254,500.00, were converted into local currency and deposited with the finance
company. Against the deposit of these sums, the Claimant was sent investment
bonds which (with one exception) were issued in the name of the Claimant, and
bore the seal of a clerk of the Central Bank. Subsequently a payment was made
by the Bank in Paraguayan guaranis for each of the investment bonds (again with
one exception). The funds were set aside to finance the installation in Paraguay of
a factory for maize products, to be owned by a corporation named Super Snacks of
Paraguay Inc. The Central Bank official who had previously communicated with
the Claimant, together with the Claimant and others, concluded various formalities
required for the incorporation of Super Snacks and the subscription of twelve shares
in the corporation founded. The Government of Paraguay subsequently granted tax
incentives to Super Snacks.

In December 1994, the Convention between the Republic of Peru and the Repub-
lic of Paraguay on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments came
into force. Seven months later, in the midst of an economic crisis in Paraguay, the
finance company closed its operations and defaulted on the payment of the invest-
ment bonds. Paraguay promulgated a law regulating its financial institutions and a
second law containing an amendment to the first, to the effect that its Central Bank
would guarantee deposits up to a certain amount.

At its first meeting, the Tribunal set down a timetable for written submissions
by the parties on the issues both of jurisdiction and merits, but confirmed that even
if Paraguay’s memorial was confined to the question of jurisdiction, this would not
preclude its right to argue at a later stage on the merits of the claims.

Decision on Jurisdiction: 8 August 2000

Held: — (1) By ratifying the 1994 Convention, Paraguay consented in writing
to ICsip jurisdiction as provided for in Article 25(1) of the 1csip Convention (paras.
26-1).

(2) The Claimant was an “investor” within the meaning of both Conventions
and had complied with the prerequisites in Article 8 of the 1994 Convention for
invoking ics1p jurisdiction (para. 28).

156 OLGUIN vy. PARAGUAY

(3) There was no evidence that the Claimant had irrevocably elected to sue in
the courts of Paraguay (para. 30).

(4) Paraguay’s other jurisdictional objections would be joined to the merits
(paras. 28-9).

Award: 26 July 2001

Held: — (1) Even though the Claimant held both Peruvian and United States
nationalities and was domiciled in the United States, he was entitled to treaty
protection as he held a valid and effective Peruvian nationality (paras. 61-2).

(2) The Claimant’s allegation that he should be reimbursed by Paraguay for the
unpaid part of his investment, together with an adjustment for the devaluation of
the guaranf and other ancillary payments, failed. The seal placed on the six invest-
ment bonds did not involve a guarantee of the substantive obligation by Paraguay.
Although criticisms could be levelled at the Paraguayan officials whose task was
to ensure the integrity of the financial system of that country, such conduct did not
create liability on the part of Paraguay for payment on the bonds (paras. 63-5).

(3) Nothing in the 1994 Convention obliged the host State to guarantee payment
of an investment in the event of bankruptcy; rather, that risk was assumed by the
Claimant, an experienced businessman. Nor could a claim be brought under the
treaty on the basis that the Claimant was induced to make his investment by reports
of the Central Bank and the office of the Superintendent of Banks; the fact that
information and assessments about investments were provided by a State did not
dispense the investor from making due inquiries nor did it make the State a guarantor
of the investment (paras. 72-6).

(4) The claim that loss of an investment arising from a bankruptcy involved
conduct tantamount to an expropriation of the investment by the State lacked any
foundation (paras. 83-4).

(5) Having regard to deficiencies in the conduct of Paraguayan officials and the
fact that the Claimant had been successful in upholding the Tribunal’s jurisdiction,
each party would bear its own costs and half the costs and expenses of the Tribunal
(para. 85).

The texts of the decisions are set out as follows:

Decision on Jurisdiction (8 August 2000) p. 156
‘Award (26 July 2001) p. 164

DECISION ON JURISDICTION (8 AUGUST 2000)

(Translation)
I. Introduction

1. On 27 October 1997, the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment
Disputes (1Cstb or the Centre) received from Mr Eudoro Armando Olgufn, a national

DECISION ON JURISDICTION 157

of the Republic of Peru (Peru), a Request for Arbitration against the Republic of
Paraguay (Paraguay). The Request related to a dispute which arose from treatment
which Mr Olguin allegedly received from the Paraguayan authorities, relating to
his investment in a company for the manufacture and distribution of food products
in Paraguay. In his Request, the Claimant invoked the provisions of the Convention
between the Republic of Peru and the Republic of Paraguay on the Reciprocal
Promotion and Protection of Investments (“the Convention” or “the cpr”).

2. On receiving the Request for Arbitration, the Centre, in accordance with Rules
5(1)(a) and 5(1)(b) of the 1cstp Rules of Procedure for the Institution of Concilia-
tion and Arbitration Proceedings (Institution Rules), acknowledged receipt of the
Request and informed the applicant that it would not be possible to take any other
action with respect to this until it had received payment of the lodging fee pre-
scribed by Regulation 16 of the 1csip Administrative and Financial Regulations.
In addition, the Centre requested Mr Olguin to provide: (i) complementary infor-
mation relating to the parties to the dispute; (ii) more detailed information on the
consent of Paraguay to submit the dispute that was the subject of his Request to
arbitration in accordance with the rules of the Convention on the Settlement of In-
vestment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (Icsip Convention),
including information on the date of his Request for the settlement of his dispute
with Paraguay; and (iii) specific information on the questions which constituted the
subject-matter of the dispute. The Claimant replied to these questions by means of
a letter dated 15 December 1997.

3. The Claimant having paid the appropriate lodging fee, on 5 January 1998, the
Centre transmitted to the Republic of Paraguay and to the Paraguayan Embassy
in Washington, DC a copy of the Request for Arbitration, of the complementary
documentation provided by the Claimant, and of the correspondence which had
taken place up until that time.

4. On 11 February 1998, the Centre asked Mr Olgufn to provide additional
information relating to the alleged existence of judicial cases in Paraguay, or in
any other country, relating to the dispute which was the subject of the Request for
Arbitration. It also requested from him more information on the origin of the alleged
obligation of the Republic of Paraguay to guarantee certain deeds of investment
belonging to the Claimant, as well as on the precise terms of the said obligation.
The Claimant replied to 1csip’s request on 17 April 1998.

5. Ina letter dated 21 May 1998, the Republic of Paraguay informed the Centre
that it contested the Request for Arbitration presented by Mr Olguin, on the fol-
lowing grounds: (i) it denied that the operations conducted by the Claimant were
investments; (ii) it denied knowledge of the existence of obligations of guarantee
attributed by the Claimant to Paraguay; (iii) it affirmed the existence of a payment
made by the Central Bank of Paraguay to Mr Olgufn after the facts in dispute;
(iv) the written waiver by the Claimant to his right to institute any further action
against the Paraguayan authorities based on these facts; (v) the inapplicability of
the dispute settlement mechanisms contemplated by the cri, given that Mr Olguin
had chosen the jurisdictional route, thereby waiving international arbitration;
(vi) the non-existence of a dispute between Paraguay and Mr Olguin; (vii) the
previous lack of consent of the parties to submit the dispute to arbitration before

158 OLGUIN v. PARAGUAY

icsip. The Claimant responded in detail to that letter by a communication dated
17 June 1998.

6. On 26 August 1998, the Acting Secretary-General of the Centre registered the
Request, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the 1csip Convention and, in accordance with
Institution Rule 7, he notified the parties that the Request had been registered and
invited them to establish an Arbitral Tribunal as soon as possible.

7. On 29 October 1998, after more than 60 days had elapsed from the date of
registration of the Request, the Claimant informed the Secretary-General of the
Centre that it had opted for the formula envisaged in Article 37(2)(b) of the 1csip
Convention for the constitution of the Tribunal. Consequently, the Tribunal was
established with three arbitrators, one appointed by Mr Olgufn, another by the
Republic of Paraguay and a third, who would preside over the Tribunal, would be
appointed by common agreement of the parties. In the same communication, the
Claimant appointed as arbitrator for the present case, Professor Dale Beck Furnish,
a national of the United States of America.

8. On 23 November 1998, Paraguay, in a letter signed by the Director of Legal
Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign Relations of that Republic, Mr José A. Fernandez,
informed the Centre that it had decided to nominate the appointment of Mr Walter
Villalba Zaldfvar, a national of Paraguay, as an arbitrator for this case.

9. The Centre immediately informed the Republic of Paraguay that, pursuant to
Article 39 of the 1csip Convention and Rule 1(3) of the Rules of Procedure for
Arbitration Proceedings (Arbitration Rules), in cases where the Arbitral Tribunal
has been established with three arbitrators, the appointment as arbitrator by one
of the parties of a national of that party’s State, or of a State whose national is a
party to the dispute, requires the consent of the other party. As the Claimant had not
given such consent, Paraguay was prevented from appointing Mr Villalba Zaldivar
as arbitrator. Consequently, on 25 November 1998, the Republic of Paraguay ap-
pointed Justice Francisco Rezek, a Brazilian national, as arbitrator for the present
case.

10. The parties did not reach agreement in respect of the appointment of the third
arbitrator who was to preside over the Tribunal. In those circumstances, with more
than 90 days having elapsed from the date on which the parties had been notified
of the registration of the Request for Arbitration, the Claimant, by a letter dated
12 January 1999, requested that the third arbitrator in the case and the President
of the Tribunal be appointed by the Chairman of the Administrative Council of the
Centre, pursuant to Article 38 of the 1csip Convention and Rule 4 of the 1cs1p Rules
of Arbitration.

11. After having consulted with the parties, the Chairman of icsip’s Administra-
tive Council appointed Mr Rodrigo Oreamuno Blanco, a national of Costa Rica,
as the President of the Arbitral Tribunal. On 12 February 1999, the Chief Legal
Adviser, on behalf of the Centre’s Secretary-General, and in accordance with Rule
6(1) of the Arbitration Rules, notified the parties that all the arbitrators had accepted
their appointments and that the Tribunal was therefore deemed to be constituted
from that date. On the same day, pursuant to Regulation 25 of 1csip’s Administra-
tive and Financial Regulations, the parties were informed that Mr Gonzalo Flores,
Counsel, 1csip, would serve as Secretary of the Arbitral Tribunal.

DECISION ON JURISDICTION 159

12. On 16 March 1999, the Centre received a communication from the Ministry
of Foreign Relations of the Republic of Paraguay, addressed to 1csip’s Secretary-
General, in which Paraguay challenged the appointment of Professor Dale Beck
Furnish, pursuant to Article 57 of the 1csip Convention. The challenge was based
on the fact that, because the Claimant held United States nationality in addition
to Peruvian nationality, pursuant to the above-mentioned Article 39 of the IcsiD
Convention and Arbitration Rule 1(3), the latter was prevented from nominating a
United States national as arbitrator in the present case.

13. Pursuant to Arbitration Rule 9, the Secretary immediately transmitted the
disqualification proposal to the other members of the Tribunal and to the Claimant.
On 17 March 1999, Professor Furnish tendered his resignation as arbitrator in this
case. Pursuant to Rule 8 of the Arbitration Rules, the Tribunal on 19 March 1999
accepted the resignation tendered by Professor Furnish and informed the parties
thereof. Consequently, the proceedings were suspended for the Claimant to appoint
anew arbitrator. On 22 March 1999 the Claimant appointed as arbitrator, to replace
Professor Furnish, Dr Eduardo Mayora Alvarado, a national of Guatemala, who
accepted the said i pursuant to Arbitration Rule 5. The i
were resumed on 29 March 1999.

14. The first session of the Tribunal with the parties present was held, after
consulting with them, on 16 April 1999, at the seat of Icstp, in Washington, DC. At
that session the parties expressed their agreement that the Tribunal had been properly
constituted in accordance with the relevant provisions of the icsip Convention and
the Arbitration Rules.

15. In the course of this first session, the Republic of Paraguay expressed objec-
tions to the jurisdiction of the Centre and requested that these objections be resolved
as a preliminary matter, prior to addressing the merits of the claims. The Claimant,
for his part, requested that the Tribunal deal jointly with both the objections to
jurisdiction of the Centre submitted by the Republic of Paraguay and the merits of
the claims.

16. After hearing both parties, the Arbitral Tribunal set down the following
timetable: the Claimant would present its memorial within 60 days of the date
of the first session; within 60 days following receipt of the Claimant’s memorial
the respondent would present a counter-memorial containing its factual and legal
arguments on the question of the Centre’s jurisdiction and the merits.

17. It was also agreed that when this first stage of written submissions was
completed, the Tribunal would determine the subsequent steps, leaving open the
possibility of permitting or requiring the parties to make additional submissions
and of fixing a date for a new hearing with the parties.

18. At the close of the first session, at the request of the Republic of Paraguay,
the Tribunal confirmed that even if the memorial contained arguments relating only
to the question of jurisdiction, this would not preclude the right of the Respondent
to argue at a later stage on the merits of the claims.

19. In accordance with the timetable fixed by the Tribunal, the Claimant submitted
his memorial to the Centre on 27 May 1999.

20. On 2 August 1999 the Republic of Paraguay formally submitted its objection
to the jurisdiction of 1csip, expounded the arguments on which such objection was

160 OLGUIN v. PARAGUAY

based and attached documents in support of these arguments. The following is a
summary of those arguments:

(a) To be subject to the jurisdiction of icsip, a State must expressly accept this
jurisdiction since “. . . no contracting State shall by the mere fact of its
ratification, acceptance or approval of this Convention and without its consent
be deemed to be under any obligation to submit any particular dispute to
conciliation or arbitration”. (Preamble to the 1cs1D Convention).

(b) The fact that the Republic of Paraguay concluded with the Republic of Peru,
on 31 January 1994, the “Convention on the Reciprocal Promotion and Pro-
tection of Investments” does not signify that Paraguay has given its consent
to submit to the jurisdiction of 1csip, because:

(a) Speculative financial investments are not protected by the CPi; and

(b) To be protected by the cri, the investments made must have been accepted
in advance by the State in which they are made, which was not the case
for those of Mr Olgufn [; and]

(c) Mr Olguin made a judicial claim before the courts of the Republic of
Paraguay “with a view to recovering his financial speculation”, which,
pursuant to Article 8(3) of the cri, prevents him from requesting arbitra-
tion before icsip for the same purpose; and

(d) In conformity with the domestic legislation of Paraguay, even if the
Republic of Paraguay were liable to fulfil the obligations as sought by
Mr Olgufn, that liability would not be direct but only subsidiary, obliging
the Claimant first to claim the fulfilment of these alleged obligations
from the agents of the State involved in the actions which gave rise to
this dispute, and only subsidiarily from the Republic of Paraguay.

21. On 31 August 1999, the Claimant referred in writing to the objections
to the Centre’s jurisdiction raised by the Republic of Paraguay, expounded the
reasons why he thought that those objections should be dismissed, and submit-
ted documents in support of his position. In essence, Mr Olgufn’s case was the
following:

(a) The Republic of Paraguay, by concluding the Convention with the Republic

of Peru, impliedly submitted to the jurisdiction of csp;

(b) The operations conducted by the Claimant constitute an investment under
the 1csip Convention and the cpr; and

(c) Mr Olguin never submitted any judicial claim in Paraguay the fulfilment of
the obligations to which the arbitration referred.

22. In its statement dated 18 December 1999, received by icsip on the 21st
of that month, the Republic of Paraguay formulated its Counter-Memorial to the
reply given by Mr Olguin. ‘The statement contained in the document of 2 August
specified that Mr Olguin had lodged a “judicial claim for the purpose of recovering
his financial speculation”, indicating that what Mr Olguin had done was to request
a declaratory judgment of bankruptcy and liquidation of a commercial corporation
and it insisted in its argument that even in a case where the Republic of Paraguay
was liable to fulfil the obligations sought by Mr Olgufn, that liability would not be
direct but only subsidiary, obliging the Claimant first to claim this alleged debt from
the agents of the State who were involved in the actions that gave rise to the dispute

DECISION ON JURISDICTION 161

and “only where the latter could not comply” could the claim be made against the
Republic of Paraguay.

23. On 2 February 2000, the Claimant submitted to icsip his rejoinder on the
question of jurisdiction. In it he expounded with greater precision and detail the
reasons why he considered that the objection to the jurisdiction of the Centre should
be dismissed and he cited abundant doctrine and jurisprudence in support of his
case. In particular, the Claimant elaborates on the plea that no judicial proceedings
had been brought by him against the Republic of Paraguay and he argues that the
only existing proceeding is one of bankruptcy in which Mr Olguin was considered
acreditor of the financial institution in question.

24. This case suffered several delays caused by the non-fulfilment on the part
of the Republic of Paraguay of its obligation to make the payments set down
in Regulation 14 of 1csip’s Administrative and Financial Regulations, which the
Secretary had requested from the parties in good time.

II. Considerations on the Objection to Jurisdiction

25. In resolving the question raised, the Arbitral Tribunal will not elaborate on
the facts which have been accepted by the Parties, namely:

a) This Tribunal has the powers to resolve the question of its own competency
and consequently, in this case, to rule on the objection raised as to ICSID’s
jurisdiction;

b) The Republic of Paraguay is a Contracting State to the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other
States, and Mr Olguin is a national of another Contracting State (the Republic
of Peru);

c) The Republics of Paraguay and Peru concluded the “Convention on the Re-
ciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments” (the “cpr”) on 31 January
1994.

26. The conclusion by the Republic of Paraguay of the cPt constitutes the written
consent required by Article 25(1) of the Convention which created icsip. This
statement has been strongly endorsed by scholarship and by many decisions given
by Icsip Arbitral Tribunals. Amongst others, the following may be cited:

i) “Bilateral Investment Treaties” by Rudolf Dolzer and Magrete Stevens, pub-

lished under the auspices of icsip in 1995, pages 132 ff."

} Citing the Réport of the Executive Directors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Devel-
‘opment on the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of
States, 1cstb Doc. 2, of 18 March 1965, paragraphs 23 and 24:

23. The consent of the parties is the cornerstone of the Centre’s jurisdiction. Consent to juris-
diction must be given in writing and once given cannot be unilaterally revoked (Article 25(1)).

24. The consent of the parties must exist when the request is made to the Centre (Articles

28(3) and 36(3)), but the Convention does not specify in any form the time at which the consent

must be given. Consens may be given, for example, in the clauses of a contract of investment,

to the Centre of from the

contract, or ina settlement between the Parties relating toa dispute which has already arisen. Nor

162 OLGUIN vy. PARAGUAY

ii) The award rendered in the arbitration Asian Agricultural Products Limited v.
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka on 27 June 1990 (icsip Case No.
ARB/87/3);?

iii) The decision on jurisdiction handed down in the arbitration of Tradex Hellas
SA v. Republic of Albania, on 24 December 1996 (1cstp Case No. ARB/94/2,
especially paragraph D.1);?

iv) The award rendered in the arbitration of American Manufacturing & Trading,
Inc. v. Republic of Zaire, on 21 February 1997 (icsip Case No. ARB/93/I,
especially paragraphs 5.20 and 5.23);

v) The decision on jurisdiction handed down in the arbitration of Ceskosloven-
ska Obchodni Banka, AS v. Slovak Republic, 24 May 1999 (icsip Case No.
ARB/97/4, especially paragraphs 37 and 38).°

27. In this instant case, the consent of Paraguay is clearer since Article 8 of the CPI
indicates clearly that when disputes arise between contracting parties, they should
meet to resolve them, and if that is not possible within 6 months, the person making
the investment may submit the dispute, inter alia, to international arbitration by the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes.

28. This Tribunal has no doubt that the investments made by Mr Olgufn in the
Republic of Paraguay are included in those enumerated in Article 1 of the cP1.
Moreover, there exists no rule in the cri which requires investments made by a
national of another Contracting State to be accepted or recognized by the State in
which they are made. With regard to the possible flaws in Mr Olgufn’s investments,
this is clearly a subject relating to the merits, which cannot be resolved at this stage
of the proceedings.

29. Nor can this Arbitral Tribunal analyze at this stage of the arbitration the plea
of the Republic of Paraguay to the effect that if any liability existed, it would not
be direct but only secondary.

30. There is nothing in the file of the proceedings to demonstrate that Mr Olguin
submitted a judicial claim against the Republic of Paraguay in order to collect
payment in fulfilment of the latter’s obligations, which he is seeking to collect in
the present arbitration case. The application which he apparently made (proof of
which is not ive) for a 'y judgment of iquidati
of acommercial corporation, cannot have the same juridical effect as a claim against
the Republic of Paraguay.

 

does the Ci both: Thus,
a receiving State could propose in its legislation on the promotion of investments that disputes on
certain classes of investments be submitted to the jurisdiction of the Centre, and the investor can
give his consent by written acceptance of the offer. (Emphasis not in the original).

 

2 Asian Agricultural Products Limited v. Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, 27 June 1990,
icstp Case'No. ARB/87/3, Award of 27 June 1990, ICSID Reports, Vol. 4, p. 246.

Tradex Hellas SA v. Republic of Albania, wes Case No. ARB/94/2, Decision on jurisdiction of
24 December 1996, ICSID Review—Foreign Investment Law Journal, Vol. 14, 1999, p. 161 [5 ICSID
Reports 43}.

+ American Manufacturing & Trading, Inc. v. Republic of Zaire, west Case No. ARB/93/1, Award of
21 February 1997, International Legal Materials, Vol. 36, 1997, p. 1534 [5 ICSID Reports 11}.

5 Ceskoslovenska Obchodni Banka, AS v. Slovak Republic, 1csw Case No. ARB/97/4, Decision on
jurisdiction of 24 May 1999, ICSID Review—Foreign Investment Law Journal, Vol. 14, 1999, p. 250
[5 JCSID Reports 330}

DECISION ON JURISDICTION 163
Il. Decision

31. For the foregoing reasons the Arbitral Tribunal unanimously decides to dis-
miss the objection to the jurisdiction of the International Centre for the Settlement
of Investment Disputes submitted by the Republic of Paraguay and declares that it
is competent to proceed with this arbitration. Accordingly, the Tribunal has made
the necessary Order for the continuation of the procedure pursuant to Arbitration
Rule 41(4).

[Source: ‘Translated from the Spanish text at  http:/Avww.worldbank.org/
icsid/cases/paraguay-decision.pdf by Mr Jonathan Goldberg.]

