INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc.
v.

Slovak Republic

(ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 3
DECISION ON THE PARTIES’ REQUESTS FOR PROVISIONAL MEASURES

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Pierre Mayer, President of the Tribunal
Professor Emmanuel Gaillard, Arbitrator
Professor Brigitte Stern, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Lindsay Gastrell

23 June 2015

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)
Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Contents
L Introduction and Parties 3
Il. Procedural Background 4
Ill. Background of the Dispute 10
A. The Dispute. 10
B. The Claims and Relief Sought ..........csscssssssssssssssssssssssssesessssessssessssesssseeseseees 12
Cc. Recent Events 12
IV. The Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures ..........s.sccsssssssssssseseseseeeeceee 14
A. The Parties’ issi 14
1) Clai 14
2) Respondent 17
B. Analysis 18
1) The Claimants’ request that the Tribunal order the Respondent to permanently
withdraw the criminal proceedings ......0...0..ceee cece tees ee tenets
2) The Claimants’ request that the Tribunal order the Respondent to maintain the
status quo 22
3) The Claimants’ requests that the Tribunal order the Respondent to return all

copies made of the seized documents and to refrain from using in the
arbitration proceedings any material or documents seized or any information
gathered during the criminal proceedings...........0.cccccee eee ees eeeeeeeeneeeeeeee 24
4) The Claimants’ request that the Tribunal order the Respondent to undertake
that the documents and property returned constitute the full set of documents
and materials that were seized and that no copies thereof are kept... +26

 

5) The Claimants’ request that the Tribunal order the Respondent to refrain from
taking any measure of intimidation against Rozmin, EuroGas, Belmont or any
director, employee or personnel of any of these companies.

 

 

 

 

 

Vv. The Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures.............sssssssssseseseseeeeee 28
A. The Parties’ issi 28
1) Respondent. 28
2) Clai 30
B. Analysis 31
VI. Decision 32

 

Page 2 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

I. INTRODUCTION AND PARTIES

1. The present dispute has been submitted to arbitration under the auspices of the
International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID”) on the basis of:
(i) the Treaty between the United States of America and the Czech and Slovak Federal
Republic Concerning the Reciprocal Encouragement and Protection of Investment,
which entered into force on 19 December 1992 (the “US-Slovak BIT”)1; (ii) the
Agreement between Canada and the Slovak Republic for the Promotion and Protection
of Investments, which entered into force on March 14, 2012 (the “Canada-Slovak
BIT”)2; and (iii) the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between
States and Nationals of Other States, which entered into force on 14 October 1966 (the

“ICSID Convention”).

2. The Claimants are EuroGas Inc. (“EuroGas”), a company incorporated under the laws
of the United States, and Belmont Resources Inc. (“Belmont”), a company incorporated
under the laws of Canada (together, the “Claimants”). The Claimants are represented in
this proceeding by Dr. Hamid Gharavi, Dr. Mercedéh Azeredo da Silveira and Mr.

Emmanuel Foy of the law firm Derains & Gharavi in Paris.

3. The Respondent is the Slovak Republic (also referred to as the “Respondent”). The
Respondent is represented in this proceeding by Mr. Stephen P. Anway of the law firm
Squire Patton Boggs (US) LLP in New York, Mr. George M. von Mehren and Mr.
Alexis Martinez of Squire Patton Boggs (UK) LLP in London, Mr. Rostislav Pekat and
Ms. Maria Lokajova of Squire Patton Boggs in Prague and JUDr. Ing. Andrea Holikova
of the Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic.

4. This Order sets out the Tribunal’s analysis of and decision on the Claimants’
application for provisional measures, submitted on 8 July 2014, and the Respondent’s

application for provisional measures, submitted on 10 September 2014.

' Exhibit C-1,
> Exhibit C-2.

Page 3 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

IL.

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

On 27 June 2014, the Claimants filed a request for arbitration dated 25 June 2014,
together with 42 exhibits (the “Request for Arbitration”).

On 8 July 2014, the Claimants submitted a letter to the Secretary-General of ICSID
containing an Application for Provisional Measures (the ‘Claimants’ Application”). In
their letter, the Claimants requested, pursuant to Rule 39(5) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, that the Secretary-General establish time limits for the parties to present their
observations on the Claimants’ Application, which could then be considered by the

Tribunal promptly upon its constitution.

In accordance with Article 36 of the ICSID Convention, on 10 July 2014, the Secretary-
General of ICSID registered the Request for Arbitration and so notified the parties. At
the same time, the Secretary-General provided the parties with a schedule for their
written submissions on the Claimants’ Application, noting that it would apply unless

the parties agreed on an alternative schedule.

Further, in the Notice of Registration, the Secretary-General invited the parties to
proceed to constitute an arbitral tribunal as soon as possible pursuant to Articles 37 to

40 of the ICSID Convention.

On 16 July 2014, the Claimants sent a letter to the President of the European
Commission, copied to the Respondent and ICSID, setting forth allegations concerning
the actions of the Slovak Republic in response to the Request for Arbitration and
informing the European Commission that the Claimants had filed an application for

provisional measures with ICSID.

By an exchange of letters dated 22 and 24 July 2014, the parties agreed that the
Tribunal would be composed of three members, with each party appointing one
arbitrator by 29 August 2014, and the two party-appointed arbitrators jointly appointing
the President of the Tribunal after consultations with the parties by 30 September 2014,

failing which the appointment(s) would be made by the ICSID Secretary-General.

Page 4 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

In accordance with the briefing schedule established by the Secretary-General, on 11
August 2014, the Claimants submitted a Full Briefing on Provisional Measures,

together with four exhibits and 27 legal authorities (the “Claimants’ Full Briefing”).

On 25 August 2014, Mr. Stephen P. Anway of Squire Patton Boggs informed ICSID
that his firm had been retained to represent the Respondent in this proceeding, and

provided the corresponding power of attorney.

In accordance with the parties’ agreed method of appointment, on 29 August 2014, each
party appointed an arbitrator. The Claimants appointed Professor Emmanuel Gaillard, a
national of France, and the Respondent appointed Professor Brigitte Stern, also a

national of France. Both arbitrators subsequently accepted their appointments.

On 10 September 2014, the Respondent submitted its Application for Provisional
Measures and Opposition to Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures, together

with 62 exhibits and 13 legal authorities (the “Respondent’s Application and Answer”).

By letter of 11 September 2014, ICSID acknowledged receipt of the Respondent’s
Application and Answer, and informed the parties that they were welcome to agree on a
schedule for the parties to present their observations on the Respondent’s Application,
or alternatively, either party could request the Secretary-General of ICSID to establish

such a schedule pursuant to ICSID Arbitration Rule 39(5).

On 16 September 2014, the parties informed ICSID that they had agreed upon a
briefing schedule for the exchange of written submissions on both parties’ applications
for provisional measures, and ICSID acknowledged the parties’ agreement by letter of
the same date. The parties informed ICSID on 30 September 2014 that they had agreed
to an amended schedule for the parties’ written submissions on provisional measures

and for the appointment of the presiding arbitrator.

Page 5 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

17.

20.

21.

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

In accordance with this agreed schedule, the parties filed the following submissions:

a. Claimants’ Reply on their Application for Provisional Measures and Answer to
Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures dated 16 October 2014,

including 11 exhibits and 73 legal authorities;

b. Respondent’s Reply Application for Provisional Measures and Rejoinder
Opposition to Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures dated 21

November 2014, including 17 exhibits and 10 legal authorities; and

c. Claimants’ Rejoinder on Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures

dated 22 December 2014, including 9 exhibits and 23 legal authorities.

Regarding the constitution of the Tribunal, on 20 October 2014, ICSID informed the
parties that the party-appointed arbitrators proposed to appoint Professor Pierre Mayer,

a national of France, to serve as President of the Tribunal.

On 24 October 2014, the Respondent made a disclosure concerning its counsel’s
relationship with Professor Mayer in a separate case, and on this basis, the Claimants
objected to his proposed appointment. In light of this objection, on 4 November 2014,

Professor Mayer declined to serve as President of the Tribunal.

At this stage, as the parties’ agreed deadline for the party-appointed arbitrators to
appoint the President had elapsed, the parties agreed to an alternative appointment
procedure by letters of 7 November 2014. Under this procedure, the ICSID Secretary-
General would provide the parties with a list of candidates from which the parties
would strike one candidate and rank those remaining. The Secretary-General would
then appoint the candidate with the best ranking. On 1 December 2014, ICSID provided

the parties with a list of candidates.

The appointment procedure was postponed by agreement of the parties on 2 and 24
December 2014 and 1 and 8 January 2015, and the list of candidates was amended on
19 and 23 December 2014. Before the procedure was completed, on 13 January 2015,
the parties informed ICSID that they had agreed to appoint Professor Pierre Mayer as

the presiding arbitrator.

Page 6 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

Professor Mayer accepted his appointment on 20 January 2015. On the same date, in
accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 6(1), the Secretary-General notified the parties
that all three arbitrators had accepted their appointments and that the Tribunal was
therefore deemed to have been constituted on that date. Ms. Lindsay Gastrell, ICSID

Legal Counsel, was designated to serve as the Secretary of the Tribunal.

On 23 January 2015, the Respondent sought leave to enter an additional legal authority
into the record, and the Tribunal granted this request by letter of 27 January 2015,
authorizing the Respondent to include the authority as RA-25.? The Tribunal also
offered the Claimants an opportunity to comment on this new authority. In response, the
Claimants informed the Tribunal that they may choose to address the authority at an

oral hearing on provisional measures, should the Tribunal decide to hold such a hearing.

By letter of 27 January 2015, the Tribunal informed the parties that it was available to
hold a first session and hearing on provisional measures in Paris on either 17 or 26
March 2015. The Respondent replied on 28 January 2015, stating that key members of
its counsel team were unavailable on the proposed dates due to a hearing in another

matter.

On 2 February 2015, the Claimants submitted a letter stating that it would be
unacceptable for the Respondent’s unavailability to delay an order on the Claimants’

Application and requesting that the Tribunal:

Issue forthwith an Order on Claimants’ Request for Provisional
Measures or, if it deems oral arguments on their Request to be
absolutely necessary despite the Parties’ multiple and thorough
written exchanges, that the Tribunal issue a provisional order
prohibiting Respondent and its Counsel from reading and gathering
information from records and property seized in the context of the
criminal proceedings launched in June 2014 in the Slovak Republic.

The Tribunal responded on the same day, proposing to hold the first session and hearing
on provisional measures on 22 April 2015, and inviting the Respondent to comment on

the Claimants’ letter. In response, by letter of 4 February 2015, the Claimants requested

> By separate letter of 23 January 2015, the Respondent requested that the “Claimants specify the identity of their third-party funder for the
purposes of determining whether there is any conflict of interests”,

Page 7 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

that the Tribunal propose a date to hold the first session within the timeframe set forth

in ICSID Arbitration Rule 13(1).4

On 5 February 2015, the Respondent provided its comments on the Claimants’ letter of
2 February 2015, noting in particular that the relevant criminal proceedings had been
suspended and that neither counsel for the Respondent nor the Slovak Ministry of
Finance had read or gathered any information from the materials seized in the
investigation. The Respondent also undertook that they would not read or gather such

information pending the Tribunal’s decision on the Claimants’ Application.

On 9 February 2015, the Tribunal informed the parties that, in light of the Respondent’s
undertaking, it considered that the Claimants’ request of 2 February 2015 had been
rendered moot. At the same time, the Tribunal proposed that the first session and
hearing on provisional measures be held by teleconference or videoconference on the

afternoon of 17 March 2015.

On the same day, the Claimants submitted a letter commenting on the Respondent’s
letter of 5 February 2015 and confirming their availability for a teleconference or
videoconference on the dates proposed by the Tribunal. By letter of 12 February 2014,
the Respondent commented on the Claimants’ letter and also confirmed its availability

on 17 March 2015.

On 20 February 2015, the Respondent informed the Tribunal that, in light of a
settlement in another matter, its counsel would be available to attend an in-person

hearing on 17 March 2015.

The Tribunal then confirmed that the first session and the hearing on provisional
measures would be held at the ICC in Paris, France, on 17 March 2015. Prior to the
hearing, on 6 March 2015, the parties submitted a jointly proposed schedule for the first

session and hearing, which the Tribunal adopted.

By letter of 15 March 2015, the Respondent sought to introduce three new exhibits into

the record (R-81 to 83), to which the Claimants objected. In a decision communicated

* ICSID Arbitration Rule 13(1) provides*[t]he Tribunal shall hold its first session within 60 days after its constitution or such other period as
the parties may agree”,

Page 8 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

33.

34,

35.

36.

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

to the parties on 16 March 2015, the Tribunal determined that the new exhibits would
not be entered into the record prior to the hearing, but that following the hearing, the
exhibits would be admitted and the Claimants given an opportunity to comment. In
accordance with this decision, the Respondent resubmitted the documents on 23 March
2015 and the Claimants provided their observations on 3 April 2015. The Respondent

then submitted additional comments on this issue on 16 April 2015.

The first session and hearing on provisional measures was held on 17 March 2015 at the
ICC in Paris. During the hearing, in accordance with the parties’ agreed schedule, each
Party was given the opportunity to present oral arguments on provisional measures as
well as rebuttal oral arguments. As neither party had submitted witness statements with
its written submissions, no witness testimony was given at the hearing. The audio
recording of the first session and hearing was dispatched to the Tribunal and the parties

on 30 March 2015.

Following the first session and hearing, on 24 March 2015, the Tribunal’s decision to
hear the Respondent’s objections to jurisdiction and the merits of the dispute in a single
phase of the proceeding was communicated to the parties. The Tribunal also confirmed

the corresponding agreed schedule for the parties’ written submissions.

On 1 April 2014, the Tribunal issued Procedural Order No. 1 concerning the procedural
matters addressed during the first session. The issue of whether future hearings will be
open to the public was reserved for later decision, and on 16 April 2015, the Tribunal
issued Procedural Order No. 2, ordering inter alia: “Hearings held shall be open to the
public. To the extent necessary to ensure the protection of confidential information, the

Tribunal may hold portions of hearings in camera”.

On 1 April 2015, the Claimants submitted their Memorial, together with the witness
statements of Dr. Ondrej Rozloznik, Mr. Vojtech Agyagos, and Mr. Wolfgang Rauball,

and an expert report prepared by Mr. Alex Hill from Wardell Armstrong International.

Page 9 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

Til.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

5 Request for Arbitration,
© Request for Arbitration,
7 Request for Arbitration,
* Request for Arbitration,
° Request for Arbitration, para,

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

BACKGROUND OF THE DISPUTE

To the extent required for the Tribunal to address the parties’ Applications for
provisional measures, and for this limited purpose only, the Tribunal briefly
summarizes the factual background to the dispute as pleaded in the Request for
Arbitration with regard to the dispute, the claims and the relief sought. This summary

does not constitute any finding by the Tribunal on any facts disputed by the parties.
A. THE DISPUTE

The present dispute arises out of the Claimants’ alleged ownership of Rozmin sro
(“Rozmin”), a Slovak company that, until 2005, held the exclusive rights for mining

activities at one of the world’s largest talc deposits, located in the Slovak Republic.°

According to the Request for Arbitration, Rozmin was constituted in 1997, and shortly
thereafter, it was issued a general mining authorization for an indefinite duration by the
District Mining Office in Spisska Nova Ves (the “DMO”). Subsequently, on 11 June
1997, Rozmin entered into an agreement with a State-owned entity named Geological
Survey, by which Rozmin allegedly obtained exclusive rights to mine the Gemerska

Poloma talc deposit.®

The Claimants state that EuroGas first became an indirect shareholder of Rozmin in
1998, when EuroGas GmbH, a wholly-owned subsidiary of EuroGas incorporated in
Austria, purchased an interest in one of Rozmin’s three initial shareholders.” Then, in
2002, as a result of subsequent stock purchase agreements, EuroGas GmbH became the

direct owner of a 33% interest in Rozmin.®

According to the Claimants, in May 1998, the DMO approved Rozmin’s plan for the
opening, preparation, development, and exploitation of the deposit.” Over the following

years, Rozmin commissioned and financed works at the deposit with a view to

   
  
  
 

1
.. 19; Agreement for the Transfer of the Gemerska Poloma Mining Area, Exhibit C-24.
8.

8.
21; Exhibit C-25.

Page 10 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

42.

43.

44.

45.

"© Request for Arbitration, p:
" Request for Arbitration, p:

' Request for Arbitration, p:
Request for Arbitration, p:
'S Request for Arbitration, p:
' Request for Arbitration, p:
” Request for Arbitration, p:

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

preparing it for its commercial development by 13 November 2006, a deadline agreed

with the Respondent.'°

While this process was ongoing, on 24 February 2000, Belmont allegedly acquired a

57% share in Rozmin.!!

The Claimants allege that problems began on December 30, 2004, when the Respondent
announced, by way of a publication in a business journal (and without prior notification
to Rozmin), that it was initiating a new tender procedure for the assignment of the
mining rights to the Gemerska Poloma deposit.'? On January 3, 2005, Rozmin received
a letter from the Director of the DMO stating that Rozmin’s mining rights had been
revoked and were to be awarded to a new company.'? The DMO subsequently assigned
the Gemerska Poloma deposit to Economy Agency RV sro, a Slovak company that had

little expertise in the mining sector.'*

The Claimants contend that the tender process and the revocation of Rozmin’s mining
tights were unjustified and unlawful, motivated by the rise in the price of talc from
2000 to 2005.'> The Claimants reject the Respondent’s purported justification for these
actions, and point out that just weeks before the revocation, on 8 December 2004, the
Director of the DMO had carried out an inspection of the deposit and concluded that

Rozmin’s activities were in compliance with all legal regulations in force.!°

According to the Claimants, Rozmin challenged the revocation of its rights in the
Slovak courts, and in a 28 February 2008 decision, the Supreme Court of Slovakia
found that Rozmin’s due process rights had been violated by the tender process.!”
However, the DMO allegedly ignored this decision, and revoked Rozmin’s general
mining authorization in April 2008.'* Two further decisions of the Supreme Court

found that the Respondent’s revocation of Rozmin’s rights in 2005 and in 2008 was

. 25.
.. 10; Exhibits C-16 and C-17.
3

 

3: Exhibit C-30.
4.

 
   

2.
10; Exhibit C-28.
46-47; Exhibit C-33.

'§ Request for Arbitration, paras. 48-50; Exhibit C-35.

Page 11 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)
Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

 

unlawful. '? Nevertheless, the Respondent allegedly refused to reinstate Rozmin’s

rights.?°
B. THE CLAIMS AND RELIEF SOUGHT

46. The Claimants submit that the Slovak Republic has breached inter alia the following
obligations under the US-Slovak BIT and the Canada-Slovak BIT:

a. to provide fair and equitable treatment;7!
b. to provide full protection and security;
1:23

c. to provide national treatment;

d. to provide most-favored-nation treatment;?*

e. to provide treatment that is no less than that required by international law;?°

f. not to expropriate, except in cases in which such measures are taken in the public
interest, observing due process of law, are not discriminatory, and are

accompanied by adequate compensation effected without delay;?° and
g. to observe specific commitments entered into with regard to investments.””

47. The Claimants seek an award granting it a declaration that the Slovak Republic has
violated the US-Slovak BIT and the Canada-Slovak BIT, monetary compensation,

costs, interest and such other relief as the Tribunal deems appropriate.”*

C. RECENT EVEN’

 

48. According to the Respondent, on 26 May 2014, the National Unit of Finance Police of

the Slovak Republic received a criminal complaint dated 5 May 2014, alleging that a

'° Request for Arbitration, para 55 57; Exhibits C-36 and C-37.

» Request for Arbitration, par

>! Article I1(2)(a) of the US- Sova BIT; Article III(1)(a) of the Canada-Slovak BIT.

® Article 11(2)(a) of the US-Slovak BIT; Article III(1)(a) of the Canada-Slovak BIT.

® Article 11(1) of the US-Slovak BIT; Article III(4) of the Canada-Slovak BIT.

™ Article 11(1) of the US-Slovak BIT; Article III(2) and (3) of the Canada-Slovak BIT.

2 Relying on Article 11(2)(a) of the US-Slovak BIT and Article III(1)(a) of the Canada-Slovak BIT.
% Article Ill of the US-Slovak BIT; Article VI(1) of the Canada-Slovak BIT.

™ Article 11(2)(c) of the US-Slovak BIT.

% Request for Arbitration, para. 73

  
 

Page 12 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

49.

50.

Sl.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

crime of fraud was underway in respect of a potential arbitration against the Slovak

Republic.”

On 23 June 2014, Mr. Vasil Spirko, a prosecutor affiliated with the Office of the
Special Prosecution, issued an “Order for Preservation and Handing over of Computer

Data” against Rozmin and Ms. Jana Czmorikovd, the external accountant of Rozmin.

On 25 June 2014, Mr. Roman Ptichovsky, Judge on Preliminary Proceedings of the
Special Criminal Court in Banska Bystrica, Slovak Republic, issued an “Order for a

House Search”*” against Ms. Czmorikova.
On 2 July 2014, a search was carried out at the home of Ms. Czmorikova.

Ms. Czmorikova was requested to hand over all materials and documents referred to in
the “Order for a House Search” of 25 June 2014 and to make available all electronic
data, in accordance with the “Order for Preservation and Handing over of Computer

Data” dated 23 June 2014.

A list of materials and documents seized is included in the Minutes on Performance of

House Search dated 2 July 2014.?!

According to the Claimants, Ms. Czmorikova was summoned to appear to testify before

the Police Corps in Roznava on 2 July 2014.7?

As noted above, on 8 July 2014, the Claimants submitted their Application for

Provisional Measures to the Secretary-General of ICSID.

On 26 August 2014, the prosecutor affiliated with the Office of the Special Prosecution
ordered the return of seized hard-copies and electronic documents to Ms. Czmorikova,**
and the National Unit of Finance Police issued the corresponding decision on 4

September 2014.**

® Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures and Opposition to Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures, 10 September
2014, para. 49,
® Exhibit C-49, Order for a House Search, 25 June 2014.

+! Exhibit C-51, Minutes on Performance of House Search, 2 July 2014.
® Exhibit C-52, Witness Summons, 2 July, 2014.

® Exhibit R-1, Resolution, 4 September 2014.

™ Exhibit R-1, Resolution, 4 September 2014.

Page 13 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

57.

58.

IV.

59.

60.

61.

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

On 5 September 2014, the prosecutor issued a resolution suspending the criminal

proceedings pending the resolution of the instant ICSID arbitration.**

On 1 October 2014, originals of the seized property and documents were returned to the
Claimants. However, the Respondent acknowledges that copies of the seized documents

have been retained.*°

THE CLAIMANTS’ APPLICATION FOR PROVISIONAL MEASURES

A. THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

1) Claimants

According to the Claimants, the “Order for Preservation and Handing over of Computer
Data” of 23 June 2014 and the “Order for a House Search” of 25 June 2014 “were taken
by the Slovak Republic in reaction to the Claimants’ legitimate exercise of their right to

initiate ICSID arbitration proceedings against the Slovak Republic”*’.

The Claimants contend that these orders were intended and had the effect to:
- place the Respondent in a privileged position with full access to all of the
Claimants’ files including legally privileged materials;
- intimidate the Claimants and their potential witnesses;
- aggravate the dispute between the Parties; and

- jeopardize the integrity of the arbitration process, including the principle of
equality of arms and the right to the protection of legally privileged materials and

information.

Based on the foregoing, the Claimants submit that it is necessary and urgent that the

Tribunal order provisional measures in order to protect their rights.

°S Exhibit R-2. Resolution, 5 September 2014.

* Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures and Opposition to Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures, 10 September
2014, para. 59,

¥ Full Briefing on Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures, 11 August 2014, para. 4

Page 14 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

62.

63.

64.

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

In their Application dated 8 July 2014, the Claimants requested that the Tribunal take

the following measures:

Order the Slovak Republic to maintain the status quo as of the date of the filing of
the Request of Arbitration and put the Parties in the position they should have

been in as of the said date;

Order the Slovak Republic to return to Rozmin and Ms. Czmorikova all originals

of documents and all property seized on 2 July 2014;

Order the Slovak Republic to refrain from using, in the arbitration proceedings,

any material or documents seized on 2 July 2014; and

Order the Slovak Republic to refrain from taking any further measure of
intimidation against Rozmin, EuroGas, Belmont or any director, employee or
personnel of any of these companies, and to refrain from engaging in any conduct
that may aggravate the dispute and/or alter the status quo that existed prior to the
initiation of the criminal investigation or any local proceedings related to the
subject-matter of this arbitration, including any further steps which might
undermine the Claimants’ ability to substantiate their claims, threaten the
procedural integrity of the arbitral process, or aggravate or exacerbate the dispute

between the parties.

In their Full Briefing on Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures, dated 11

August 2014, the Claimants amended the above list of provisional measures.

They further amended it in their Reply on their Application for Provisional measures,

dated 16 October 2014, requesting that the Tribunal take the following measures:**

Order the Slovak Republic to withdraw permanently the criminal proceedings

launched on June 23, 2014;

°* Claimants’ Reply on their Application for Provisional Measures and Answer to Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures,
16 October 2014, para. 238.

Page 15 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

b. Order the Slovak Republic to maintain the status quo as of the date of the filing of
the Request of Arbitration, namely as of June 25, 2014, and put the Parties in the

position they should have remained in as of the said date;

c. Order the Slovak Republic to return to Rozmin and Ms. Czmorikova all copies
made of documents and material seized pursuant to the Order for Preservation and
Handing over of Computer Data dated June 23, 2014 and the Order for a House
Search dated June 25, 2014, including records, documents, and software collected

in the course of the search carried out on July 2, 2014;

d. Order the Slovak Republic to undertake, in writing, that the documents and
property returned on October 1, 2014 constitute the full set of documents and

materials that were seized, and that no copies thereof are kept;

e. Order the Slovak Republic to refrain from using, in the arbitration proceedings,
any material or documents seized pursuant to the “Order for Preservation and
Handing over of Computer Data” dated June 23, 2014 and the “Order for a House
Search” dated June 25, 2014, including records, documents, hardware and
software collected in the course of the search carried out on July 2, 2014, or any
information gathered in the course of the criminal proceedings launched on June

23, 2014 in the Slovak Republic;

f. Order the Slovak Republic to refrain from taking any further measure of
intimidation against Rozmin, EuroGas, Belmont or any director, employee or
personnel of any of these companies and to refrain from engaging in any conduct
that may alter the status quo that existed prior to the initiation of the criminal
investigation launched on June 23, 2014, including taking any further steps which
might undermine Claimants’ ability to substantiate their claims, threaten the
procedural integrity of the arbitral process, or aggravate or exacerbate the dispute

between the Parties.

Page 16 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

2) Respondent

65. The Respondent points out that the originals of the seized documents have been
returned, the criminal proceedings have been suspended until the resolution of the
instant ICSID arbitration and that it has committed not to read and not to use the copies
of the documents during the arbitration proceedings. According to the Respondent, the

Claimants’ Application is therefore moot.

66. The Respondent further submits that, in any event, the Tribunal cannot order the
requested provisional measures since it has no prima facie jurisdiction in respect of

either EuroGas II or Belmont.

- The Respondent alleges that the Tribunal has no prima facie jurisdiction over
EuroGas II since it is a different legal entity from EuroGas I. According to the
Respondent, EuroGas II is “a company registered for the first time on 15
November 2005, under the same name as EuroGas I”.*? As a consequence,
EuroGas II cannot claim “to have been affected by measures that occurred before
it came into existence”.*° Moreover, the Respondent maintains that it has validly
exercised its right to deny the advantage of the US-Slovak BIT to EuroGas II on
the basis that EuroGas II has no substantial business activities in the United States

and is controlled by nationals of a third country.*!

- The Respondent also contends that the Tribunal has no prima facie jurisdiction
over Belmont since the dispute arose in 2005, more than three years before the
entry into force of the 2010 Canada-Slovak Republic BIT. In addition, the
Respondent submits that the Claimants have not provided evidence to show that
Belmont is a shareholder in Rozmin. The Respondent notes that, as the Claimants
confirm, Belmont sold its 57% shareholding to EuroGas I in 2001. According to
the Respondent, there is no evidence that the 2001 agreement is, as the Claimants
allege, ineffective because its conditions were not met.

® Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures and Opposition to Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures, 10 September
* Respondents Application for Provisional Measures and Opposition to Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures, 10 September
a Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures and Opposition to Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures, 10 September

2014, paras. 62-64; Respondent’s Reply Application for Provisional Measures and Rejoinder Opposition to Claimants’ Application for
Provisional Measures, 21 November 2014, paras. 16-60.

     

Page 17 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

Moreover, according to the Respondent, the Claimants are not entitled to seek
provisional measures that would impact the criminal proceedings in the Slovak

Republic.

Finally, the Respondent submits that the Claimants’ Application is, in any event,
baseless since the Claimants have failed to demonstrate that the provisional measures

they seek are necessary and urgent.
B. ANALYSIS

The Tribunal notes that the Respondent challenges the Tribunal’s jurisdiction in respect
of EuroGas II and Belmont. However, as acknowledged by the Respondent, for the time
being, the Tribunal needs only to be prima facie satisfied that it has jurisdiction over the

dispute.

As set out by the tribunal in the Decision on the Application for Provisional Measures

in Millicom v. Senegal:

[T]he arbitral Tribunal cannot and must not examine in depth the
claims and arguments submitted on the merits of the case; it must
confine itself to an initial analysis, i.e. “at first sight”. For this, it is
necessary and sufficient that the facts alleged by the applicant
establish this jurisdiction without it being necessary or possible at
this stage to verify them and analyze them in depth.*”

In the instant case, the facts alleged by the Claimants establish “at first sight” the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal. It is not necessary, at this stage, to verify them in depth.
The objections raised by the Respondent against the Tribunal’s jurisdiction will be fully
addressed at a later stage of the proceedings. For the time being, the Tribunal is of the

view that the lack of jurisdiction alleged by the Respondent is not blatant.

With regard to EuroGas, the Claimants contend that EuroGas II “stepped into the
shoes” of EuroGas I. Indeed, according to the Claimants, the corporate documents of
EuroGas II were amended to mirror those of EuroGas I, which allowed the two

companies to perform a “‘type-F reorganization” whereby EuroGas II assumed all of the

* Exhibit CL-24, Millicom International Operations B.V. and Sentel GSM SA v. The Republic of Senegal, Decision on the Application for
Provisional Measures, 24 August 2009, para. 42.

Page 18 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

73.

74.

75.

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

EuroGas I’s assets, liabilities and issued stock certificates. The Claimants submit that
thereafter, EuroGas II was, as a matter of Utah State law, “a mere continuation” of
EuroGas I: “it had the same corporate structure, the same shareholder base, the same
assets and the same liabilities” as EuroGas I. Hence, according to the Claimants,

EuroGas II is, for purposes of the present proceedings, “the same entity” as EuroGas
L3

The Claimants further contend that the Respondent’s assertion that EuroGas does not
maintain any substantial business activities in the United States is contradicted by the
Respondent’s own reliance on the dispute between EuroGas and Tombstone
Exploration Corporation. According to the Claimants, the subject-matter of this dispute
stems from a number of mining claims in the United States, in which EuroGas wishes to
acquire an interest. The Claimants therefore submit that “this alone demonstrates that
EuroGas’ activities in the United States are neither fictional nor motivated by any
treaty-shopping purposes”.**

With regard to Belmont, the Claimants submit that the dispute did not arise in 2005, as
the Respondent contends, since “the dispute argued by Rozmin before local courts (...)
is not the same as the international law dispute brought by Belmont against the State in
the present arbitration proceedings”*°. According to the Claimants, the international law
dispute brought by Belmont against the Slovak Republic did not arise before 1 August
2012, which is “well after the critical date”.‘° In addition, the Claimants deny that
Belmont effectively transferred its shares in Rozmin to EuroGas in 2001. They contend

that the 2001 agreement was not effective since its conditions were not met.‘”

The Tribunal takes due notice of the Respondent’s disagreement on all points; however,
it is not in a position, at this stage, to address these issues. Without prejudice to a
different assessment at a later stage, the Tribunal is prima facie satisfied that it has

jurisdiction over the dispute.

Claimants’ Reply on their Application for Provisional Measures and Answer to Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures,
16 October 2014, paras. 137-139.
“ Claimants’ Reply on their Application for Provisional Measures and Answer to Respondent's Application for Provisional

 

“5 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures, 22 December 2014, para

46

Claimants’ Rejoinder on Respondent's Appli

 

on for Prov 22 December 2014,

     

ara,
“7 Claimants’ Rejoinder on Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures, 22 December 2014, paras. 92-98.

Page 19 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

76. Under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 39 of the ICSID Arbitration Rules,
provisional measures may be granted to protect certain rights of the applicant, if such
measures are necessary and urgent. As noted in Procedural Order No. 14 in Churchill
Mining**: “the applicant must establish the requirements with sufficient likelihood,

without however having to actually prove the facts underlying them”.

77. At the outset, the Tribunal recalls that the right and duty to conduct criminal
prosecutions is a prerogative of any sovereign State and that only exceptional
circumstances may therefore justify that an arbitral tribunal order provisional measures

which interfere with criminal proceedings.

78. The Tribunal shall assess whether each of the requested provisional measures is

necessary and urgent to protect the Claimants’ rights.

79. The Tribunal points out that such assessment is necessarily made on the basis of the
record as it presently stands and is without prejudice to a different assessment at a later

stage.

1) The Claimants’ request that the Tribunal order the Respondent to
permanently withdraw the criminal proceedings

80. The Claimants submit that the return of the property and documents seized and the
suspension of the criminal proceedings constitute “a mere strategic move” to allow the
Respondent to argue that the Claimants’ Application is now moot.” According to the
Claimants, since the criminal proceedings have only been suspended and not
permanently withdrawn, it is necessary and urgent that the requested provisional
measure be ordered so that the integrity of the arbitration process be preserved. The
Claimants acknowledge, referring to Abaclat v. Argentina™®, that, in principle, an

arbitral tribunal cannot prohibit a party from conducting criminal court proceedings

“8 Exhibit Ri

  

Churchill Mining and Planet Mining Pty Ltd v. Republic of Indonesia, \CSID Case No. ARB/12/14 and 12/40, Procedural
Order No. 14, 22 December 2014, para. 64.

* Claimants’ Reply on their Application for Provisional Measures and Answer to Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures,
16 October 2014, para. 4.

° Exhibit CL-26, Abaclat and Others v. Argentine Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/O7/5 (formerly Giovanna a Beccara and Others v. The
Argentine Republic), Procedural Order No. 13, 27 September 2012.

Page 20 of 33

 

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)
Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

 

before competent state authorities.°! However, the Claimants maintain that exceptional
circumstances may lead an arbitral tribunal to depart from this general rule, notably if
the criminal proceedings interfere with the arbitration process**, and they submit that

this requirement is satisfied in the instant case.

81. The Respondent does not contest that exceptional circumstances may justify that an
arbitral tribunal interfere with criminal proceedings,** but it denies that this requirement
is fulfilled in the present circumstances. According to the Respondent, such exceptional
circumstances are not met. It further contends that, since the criminal proceedings have
been suspended and the originals of documents have been returned, the requested

provisional measure is, in any event, moot.

82. The Tribunal stresses that “a particularly high threshold” must be reached before an
ICSID tribunal can order provisional measures which interfere with criminal
proceedings, as the right and the responsibility to conduct such proceedings is a
prerogative of any sovereign State.** As acknowledged by both parties, an arbitral
tribunal will not recommend such measures unless exceptional circumstances threaten

the integrity of the arbitration proceedings and the principle of due process.

83. As the tribunal held in Procedural Order No. 14 in Churchill Mining*: “An allegation
that the status quo has been altered or that the dispute has been aggravated needs to be

buttressed by concrete instances of intimidation or harassment”.
84. Yet, in the instant case:

- The criminal court proceedings have been suspended;

- The originals of the seized documents have been returned;

5! Claimants’ Reply on their Application for Provisional Measures and Answer to Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures,
18 October 2014, para. 44,

s’ Reply on their Application for Provisional Measures and Answer to Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures,
iedetuber 2018 para. 45.
5 Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures and Opposition to Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures, 10 September
2014, para. 84,
Exhibit RA-9, Caratube International Oil Company LLP v. Republic of Kazakhstan, 1CSID case No ARB/08/12, Decision regarding
Claimant’s Application for Provisional Measures, 31 July 2009, para. 137; Exhibit RA-25, Churchill Mining and Planet Mining Pty Lid v.
Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/14 and 12/40, Procedural Order No. 14, 22 December 2014, para. 7
85 Exhibit RA-25, Churchill Mining and Plane Mining Pty Ltd v. Republic of Indonesia, \CSID Case No. ARIS and 12/40, Procedural
Order No. 14, 22 December 2014, para. 7

 

 

 

Page 21 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

- The Respondent undertook not to read the copies of the seized documents and not

to use them in the arbitration proceedings;

- As it will be explained (infra, para. 105-109), there is no evidence showing that
the Claimants or potential witnesses have been the targets of abusive behavior, or
that they have been intimidated or harassed during the criminal proceedings and

investigations.

85. In this context, the Tribunal is of the view that the requested provisional measure is
neither necessary nor urgent and that the Claimants have not met the burden of
establishing that exceptional circumstances justify an interference with the sovereign

tight of the Slovak Republic to conduct criminal prosecutions.
86. The requested provisional measure is therefore denied.

2) The Claimants’ request that the Tribunal order the Respondent to
maintain the status quo

87. The Claimants submit that “provisional measures may be ordered to preserve either
substantive rights or procedural rights, including the general right to the preservation of
the status quo and to the non-aggravation of the dispute”.° The Claimants point out that
the Respondent “provided no assurance that it would refrain from taking measures
during the arbitration proceedings that could further jeopardize the integrity of these
proceedings or aggravate the dispute between the parties, in particular, further measures
of intimidation of Claimants’ potential witnesses”.°’ The Claimants therefore request
that the Tribunal “order the Slovak Republic to maintain the status quo as of the date of
the filing of the Request of Arbitration and put the parties in the position they should
have been in as of the said date”. Referring to Biwater,** the Claimants contend that no

actual harm needs to be shown to justify the issuance of an order that a party refrain

 

Full Briefing on Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures, 11 August 2014, para, 36. The Claimants refer to Exhibit CL-8,
Quiborax S.A., Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan Fosk Kapliin  v. Plurinational State of Bolivia, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/2, Decision
on Provisional Measures, 26 February 2010; Exhibit CL-13, Burlington Resources Inc. v. Republic of Ecuador, 1CSID Case No. ARB/O8/5,
Procedural Order No. 1 on Burlington Oriente’s Request for Provisional Measures ; Exhibit CL-14, Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd v. United
Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Procedural Order No. 1.
* Claimants’ Reply on ther Application for Provisional Measures and Answer to Respondent's Appli
October 2014, paras. 35~

8 Exhibit CL-31, Bivate Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/2, Procedural Order No. 3,
29 September, 2006.

   

   

tion for Provisional Measures, 16

 

Page 22 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

from taking any step that might harm or prejudice the integrity of the proceedings or

aggravate the dispute.*°

88. The Respondent submits that the Claimants’ request must be rejected because they have
failed to provide sufficient evidence of an actual threat of aggravation of the dispute.
Furthermore, the Respondent contends that this request has, in any event, become moot
since the criminal proceedings have been suspended, the originals of the seized
documents have been returned and the Respondent has undertaken not to read the

copies of the seized documents and not to use them during the arbitration proceedings.

89. The Tribunal points out that, as held in Caratube,°! as well as in Procedural Order No. 9
in Churchill Mining © and in Procedural Order No. 2 in SGS v. Pakistan,® a
recommendation for the preservation of status quo should only be granted if the
claimant provides sufficient evidence of an actual threat of aggravation of the dispute.
Moreover, the Tribunal recalls that, as held in Lao Holdings: “[A] criminal proceeding
does not per se (...) aggravate the dispute”.* Something more has to be at stake in
order to allow an arbitral tribunal to conclude that there is a threat of aggravation of the

dispute.

90. The Tribunal is of the view that, as noted in Biwater® and as underlined by the
Claimants, the assessment of a threat of aggravation of the dispute “involves
probabilities, not certainties”. However, in the instant case, the criminal proceedings
have been suspended, originals of the seized documents have been returned, the
Respondent has undertaken not to read the copies of the seized documents and not to

use them during the arbitration proceedings and no witness intimidation has occurred.

® Claimants’ Reply on their Application for Provisional Measures and Answer to Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures,
16 October 2014, para. 81.

© Respondent’s Reply Application for Provisional Measures and Rejoinder Opposition to Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures,
21 November 2014, para. 116.

&! Exhibit RA-9, Caratube International Oil Company LLP v. Republic of Kazakhstan, ICSID case No ARB/O8/12, Decision regarding
Claimant’s Application for Provisional Measures, 31 July 2009, para. 139.

© Exhibit RA-13, Churchill Mining PLC and Planet Mining Pty iid v. Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/14 and 12/40,
Procedural Order No. 9, 8 July 2014, para. 91-95.

© Exhibit RA-8, Société Générale de Surveillance v. Islamic Republic of Pakistan, ICSID Case No. ARB/01/13, Procedural Order No. 2,
16 October 2002, p. 305.

© Exhibit CL-15, Lao Holdings N.V. v. Lao People
the Provisional Measure Order, 30 May 2014, para. 30.

© Exhibit CL-31, Biwater Gauff (Tanzania) Ltd. v. United Republic of Tanzania, ICSID Case No. ARB/05/22, Procedural Order No. 3,
September 29, 2006, para. 145.

 

Democratic Republic, CSID Case No. ARB(AF)/12/6, Ruling on Motion to Amend

Page 23 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

91.

92.

93.

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

In view of these circumstances, the Tribunal considers that while an aggravation of the

dispute is always possible, there is no element in the record evidencing an actual threat.
The requested provisional measure is therefore denied.

3) The Claimants’ requests that the Tribunal order the Respondent to return
all copies made of the seized documents and to refrain from using in the
arbitration proceedings any material or documents seized or any
information gathered during the criminal proceedings

The Claimants submit that it is necessary and urgent, in order to preserve the integrity
of the arbitration proceedings, that the Tribunal order the Respondent to return all
copies of the seized documents and to refrain from using in this arbitration any
information gathered in the course of the criminal proceedings. According to the
Claimants, the retention of copies of the seized documents by the Respondent is “in
blatant violation of Claimants’ right to the protection of privileged and confidential
information and of the most basic procedural rules and principles, including the

principles of equality of arms, fairness and due process”.

The Respondent maintains that the Tribunal should reject the requested provisional

measures since:

- The original of the seized documents and materials were returned;

- The Claimants have failed to evidence how the retention of copies would

prejudice their procedural rights;

- The return of copies would turn the suspension of the criminal proceedings into an
effective termination, exposing the prosecution and court to a risk that the

evidence might disappear;

- The Respondent has already declared in writing that the Slovak Ministry of

Finance has not read the documents;

Claimants’ Reply on their Application for Provisional Measures and Answer to Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures, 16

October 2014, para. 8.

Page 24 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

94.

95.

96.

97.

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

- The Respondent has committed to the Tribunal not to read them “unless the
Claimants make the seizure for the criminal investigation part of this proceeding,

by alleging it is a violation of the BIT”.

The Tribunal is mindful of the Claimants’ argument that the Respondent might obtain
an unfair advantage in the instant ICSID arbitration by using, in the course of these
proceedings, the copies of the documents seized or the information gathered during the

search carried out at Ms. Czmorikova’s home.

However, the Tribunal stresses that the copies of the seized documents are part of the

criminal proceedings, in relation to which the Tribunal has not made any order.

Furthermore, the Tribunal takes due notice of the facts that:

The originals of the seized documents have been returned;

- The Respondent has represented to the Tribunal, both in writing® and during the
Hearing on Provisional Measures,” that the Slovak Ministry of Finance has not

read the seized documents;

- The Respondent has undertaken that it will not read or produce the copies of the

seized documents in the arbitration proceedings.’”

The Tribunal notes that the Respondent’s undertaking will not apply in case “the
Claimants make the seizure for the criminal investigation part of this proceeding, by
alleging it is a violation of the BIT”.”! The Tribunal understands this restriction to mean
that, in such circumstances, the Respondent might need to read or produce the seized
documents in order to organize its defense. However, even in such situation, the
Respondent committed to the Tribunal to seek its leave to produce any of the copies of
the seized documents.” The Tribunal underlines that this would allow the Claimants to
express any objection they may have with respect to the evidence at issue. The Tribunal
further notes that if it decided to admit the production of a copy of a seized document, it

would assess its evidentiary value taking into account, among other factors, its source.

°7 First Session and Hearing on Provisional Measures, 17 March 2015, Transcript, p. 115.
8 Respondent's Letter to the Arbitral Tribunal, 5 February 2015,
© First Session and Hearing on Provisional Measures, 17 March 2015, Transcript, p. 115.

® Ibidem; The Slovak Republic's Presentation of the Parties’ Applications for Pr

  

isional Measures, 17 March 2015, p. 71

™ Ibidem,
® Ibidem,

Page 25 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

98.

99.

101

10

10:

S

N

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

Based on the foregoing, the Tribunal finds that it is neither necessary nor urgent to
order the Respondent to return all copies of the seized documents or to refrain from

using them in arbitration proceedings.
The requested provisional measures are therefore denied.

4) The Claimants’ request that the Tribunal order the Respondent to
undertake that the documents and property returned constitute the full set
of documents and materials that were seized and that no copies thereof
are kept

According to the Claimants, the minutes prepared on 1 October 2014, when the seized
documents were being released, indicate that certain pages of some documents were
missing. ’? The Claimants therefore submit that it is necessary and urgent for the
Tribunal to order the Respondent to undertake that the documents and property returned

constitute the full set of documents and materials that were seized.

. The Respondent contends that this request is neither necessary nor urgent since it is

improbable that Ms. Czmorikova was in possession of the only original copies of the
documents necessary to Claimants. According to the Respondent: “Rozmin is unlikely
to have provided originals of documents of which it did not keep copies to an

independent contractor”.

The Tribunal is mindful of the Claimants’ right to substantiate their claim in the instant
ICSID arbitration. However, the Tribunal is reluctant to order the Respondent to repeat,
in a more solemn way, what it has already clearly stated during the Hearing on
Provisional Measures.’> This would imply that the Tribunal has doubt as to whether the
Respondent’s statements during the hearing reflected the truth, without any evidence
justifying such doubts. Indeed, no element has been brought to the attention of the

Tribunal showing that the Claimants have been deprived of relevant evidence.

® Claimants’ Reply on their Application for Provisional Measures and Answer to Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures,
16 October 2014, para. 7

™ Respondent’s Reply Application for Provisional Measures and Rejoinder Opposition to Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures,
21 November 2014, para. 136.

75 First Session and Hearing on Provisional Measures, 17 March 2015, Transcript, p. 114; The Slovak Republic’s Presentation of the Parties”
Applications for Provisional Measures, 17 March 2015, p. 69.

Page 26 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

103.

104.

105.

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

Furthermore, in light of the Respondent’s recent behavior and commitments, the
Tribunal is of the view that there is no reason to believe that the Respondent did not

return the full set of documents and materials that were seized.
The requested provisional measure is thus denied.

5) The Claimants’ request that the Tribunal order the Respondent to refrain
from taking any measure of intimidation against Rozmin, EuroGas,
Belmont or any director, employee or personnel of any of these
companies

The Claimants contend that, during her examination, Ms. Czmorikova was asked
questions “exclusively related to the issues in dispute and which will be raised in the
arbitration”,”° as well as questions directly related to her knowledge of the arbitration
proceedings. They allege that Ms. Czmorikova is now concerned that the Slovak
authorities may cause her trouble given her position as an employee of Rozmin.
According to the Claimants, “everyone fears that at any time, she may be the object of
an unannounced search and/or interrogation, at her own private home, by Slovak
officials or police force members, and that herself or her whole family may even be
targeted”.’’ According to the Claimants, Ms. Czmorikova has “become reluctant to
being involved in any way in the arbitration proceedings”.’* They further maintain that
“other individuals (including Dr Rozlozkin, who was a director and general manager of
Rozmin between 1997 and 2011) have expressed similar concerns and reluctance with
respect to having to cooperate with Claimants in relation to the arbitration

8° the Claimants submit that

proceedings”. ” Referring to Quiborax v. Bolivia,
provisional measures are justified to preserve the applicant’s right to access evidence
through potential witnesses.*! They therefore contend that it is necessary and urgent that
the Tribunal order the Respondent to refrain from taking any further measure of

intimidation against the Claimants or potential witnesses.

Full Briefing on Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures, 11 August 2014, paras. 30-31.

7 Ibidem,

® Ibidem,
® Full Briefing on Claimants’ Application for Provi
® Exhibit CL-8, Quiborax
ARB/06/2, Decision on Provisi

 

ional Measures, 11 August 2014, para. 32
Non Metallic Minerals S.A. and Allan Fosk Kapliinv, Plurinational State of Bolivia, ICID Case No.
jonal Measures, 26 February 2010.

  

“' Full Briefing on Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures, 11 August 2014, para. 39.

Page 27 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

106.

107.

108.

109.

Vv.

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

According to the Respondent, the request is moot because the prosecutor has suspended
the criminal proceedings which the Claimants allege amounted to intimidation of
potential witnesses. Moreover, the Respondent contends that, in any event, the
Claimants failed to demonstrate that a potential witness was ever intimidated. The
Respondent points out, referring to Occidental v. Ecuador,® that provisional measures
are not meant to protect against potential or hypothetical harm. Rather, they are meant

to protect against imminent harm.

The Tribunal is mindful of the Claimants’ right to present their case and to access
evidence through potential witnesses. However, the Tribunal notes that the criminal
proceedings have been suspended and that there is no indication that either
Ms. Czmorikova, any of the Claimants, or any potential witness, had been intimidated

or harassed before the suspension of the investigation.

Even though Ms. Czmorikova’s uneasiness, deriving from the search carried out at her
home, is understandable, it does not imply, in itself, that the search was irregular. As
noted in Procedural Order No. 14 in Churchill Mining, it is “common practice, in
criminal law systems to conduct on-site searches and to seize relevant evidence, for the
purpose of a criminal investigation”. ** The Tribunal is of the view that there is no
concrete element on record showing that Ms. Czmorikova has been the object of undue

pressure, intimidation, abuse, mistreatment, harassment or threats.

Based on the foregoing, the Tribunal finds that the requested provisional measure is

neither necessary nor urgent. It is therefore denied.

THE RESPONDENT’S APPLICATION FOR PROVISIONAL MEASURES

A. THE PARTIES’ SUBMISSIONS

1) Respondent

® Exhibit CL-2, Occidental v. Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/11, Decision on Provisional Measures, 17 August 2007.
® Exhibit RA-25, Churchill Mining and Planet Mining Pty Ltd v. Republic of Indonesia, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/14 and 12/40, Procedural
Order No. 14, 22 December 2014, para. 7

Page 28 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

110.

11

112.

113.

114.

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

The Respondent asserts that, pursuant to Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and to
ICSID Arbitration Rule 39, the Tribunal has the power to order the security for costs

which the Respondent requests.

. The Respondent alleges that the Claimants “have a history of engaging in fraud and

reneging on payment obligations”** and that they do not have the means to pay for the
costs of the arbitration proceedings, which are entirely funded by third parties.** The
Respondent therefore submits that the Claimants are not capable of satisfying a future

costs award.

The Respondent also contends that it has a plausible defense and that a future claim for

cost reimbursement is “not evidently excluded”.®°

According to the Respondent, it is therefore both necessary and urgent that the
Claimants be ordered to provide a security for costs in order to prevent the Respondent

from suffering an irreparable harm if it cannot recover the costs to which it is entitled.
As a consequence, the Respondent requests the Tribunal to:

Order Claimants to obtain within 30 days an irrevocable bank
guarantee from a reputable international bank in the U.S., Canada, or
the European Union in the amount of EUR 1,000,000, callable on in
whole or in part by the Respondent upon presentation of the
Tribunal’s Final Award or any Decision on Costs, with the amount to
be updated if necessary in the Tribunal’s Decision on Jurisdiction to
ensure that the Slovak Republic’s costs are secured until the end of
the arbitration.*”

™ Respondent’s Reply plication for Provisional Measures and Rejoinder Opposition to Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures,
21 November 2014, par

* Respondent’s Apnision for Provisional Measures and Opposition to Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures, 10 September
2014, para. 3.

% Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures and Opposition to Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures, 10 September
2014, para. 75; Respondent's Reply Application for Provisional Measures and Rejoinder Opposition to Claimants’ Application for

 

" Respondent Application for Provisional Measures and Opposition to Claimants’ Application for Provisional Measures, 10 September
2014, para. 147,

Page 29 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)
Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

 

2) Claimants

115. The Claimants deny the Tribunal’s authority to order security for costs and contend
that, to date, virtually all ICSID tribunals have declined to recommend that an investor

provide security for the host State’s costs in the arbitration proceedings.**

116. The Claimants point out that there is no reason to presume that the Respondent will
succeed on the merits and that the Tribunal will shift the parties’ costs onto the
Claimants, especially as the trend in investment arbitration is not to automatically shift
costs to an unsuccessful claimant. According to the Claimants, since the Respondent’s
right to the reimbursement of its costs is highly hypothetical, it cannot constitute a
“right to be preserved” under Article 47 of the ICSID Convention and ICSID
Arbitration Rule 39.

117. The Claimants contend that the Respondent’s request goes against the very purpose of
the ICSID framework, which aims at providing investors with direct access to a neutral
forum for the resolution of their dispute with a State. According to the Claimants,
“given that the power struggle in investor-State disputes is generally in favor of the
State, any additional financial burden imposed on Claimants is very likely to unduly
restrict their ability to bring forward meritorious claims”.”°

118. Moreover, the Claimants submit that the requested provisional measure is, in any event,
neither necessary nor urgent. The Claimants acknowledge that they are encountering
financial difficulties. However, according to them, such difficulties are “in large part
attributable to acts and omissions of Respondent”.”! They further assert, citing Burimi v.
Albania,” that mere financial difficulties are not sufficient to justify granting the

Respondent security for its costs.°> Referring inter alia to Commerce Group & San

* Claimants’ Rejoinder on Respondent's Application for Provisional Measures, 22 December 2014, para. 101

® Claimants’ Reply on their Application for Provisional Measures and Answer to Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures,
16 October 2014, para. 206.

® Claimants’ Reply on their Application for Provisional Measures and Answer to Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures,
16 October 2014, para. 221

°' Claimants’ Reply on their Application for Provisional Measures and Answer to Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures,
16 October 2014, para. 229.

"Exhibit CL-65, Burimi S.R.L and Eagle Games SH.A v. Republic of Albania, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/18, Procedural Order No. 2, 3 May
2012, para. 41

® Claimants’ Reply on their Application for Provisional Measures and Answer to Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures, 16
October 2014, para. 224,

 

Page 30 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)
Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

 

Sebastian Gold Mines v. El Salvador,* they maintain that an arbitral tribunal should
only exercise its power to order security for costs “in extreme circumstances” which are

not met in the instant case.°>
B. ANALYSIS

119. The Tribunal stresses that the provisional measures envisioned in Article 47 of the

ICSID Convention are mainly those formulated to preserve the status quo.°®

120. The Tribunal further notes that, as held in RSM v. Grenada, it is “not part of the ICSID
dispute resolution system that an investor’s claim should be heard only upon the
establishment of a sufficient financial standing of the investor to meet a possible costs

award”.*”

121.

As regularly held by ICSID arbitral tribunals, security for costs may only be granted in
exceptional circumstances,”® “for example, where abuse or serious misconduct has been

evidenced”.°°

122. It is true that in RSM v. Saint Lucia, an ICSID tribunal ordered security for costs.
However, the underlying facts in that arbitration were rather exceptional since the

claimant was not only impecunious and funded by a third party, but also had a proven

® Exhibit CL-98, Commerce Group Corp. & San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc. v. Republic of El Salvador, ICSID Case No. ARB/O9/17,
Decision on El Salvador’s Application for Security for Costs of 20 September 201

° Claimants’ Reply on their Application for Provisional Measures and Answer to Respondent’s Application for Provisional Measures, 16
October 2014, para. 22
% Exhibit RA-4, Disser
ARB/12/10, 13 August 2014.

Exhibit CL-68, Rachel S. Grynberg, Stephen M. Grynberg, Miriam Z. Grynberg and RSM Production Corporation v. Government of
Grenada, ICSID Case No. ARB/10/6, Tribunal’s Decision on Respondent's Application for Security for Costs, 14 October 2010, para. 5.19;
see also Exhibit CL-5, Victor Pey Casado Fondation Président Allende c. la République du Chili, Affaire CIRDVARB/98/2, 25
September 2001, para. 86.

°* Exhibit RA-4, RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia, ICSID Case No. ARB/12/10, Decision on the Respondent’s Request for
Security for Costs, 13 August 2014, para. 48; Phoenix Action, Ltd. v. Czech Republic, ICSID Case No. ARB/06/5, Decision on Provisional
Measures, 6 April 2007, para. 32; Plama Consortium Limited v. Republic of Bulgaria, ICSID Case No. ARB/03/24, Order of the Tribunal
on the Claimant's Request for Urgent Provisional Measures, 6 September 2005, para. 38; Saipem S.p.d. v. People’s Republic of Bangladesh,
ICSID Case No. ARB/05/7, Decision on Jurisdiction and Recommendation on Provisional Measures, 21 March 2007, para. 175; Occidental
Petroleum Corporation and Occidental Exploration and Production Company v. Republic of Ecuador, ICSID Case No. ARB/O6/11,
Decision on Provisional Measures, 17 August 2007, para. 59; Rachel S. Grynberg, Stephen M. Grynberg, Miriam Z. Grynberg and RSM
Production Corporation v, Grenada, 1CSID Case No. ARB/10/6, Decision on Respondent’s Application for Security for Costs, 14 October
2010, para. 5.17; Commerce Group Corp. & San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc. v. Republic of El Salvador, \CSID Case No. ARB/09/17,
Decision on El Salvador’s Application for Security for Costs, 20 September 2012, para. 44; Burimi S.R.L. and Eagle Games SH.A. ¥.

Republic of Albania, ICSID Case No. ARB/11/18, Procedural Order No. 2, 3 May 2012, para. 34.

® Exhibit CL-98, Commerce Group Corp. & San Sebastian Gold Mines, Inc. v. Republic of El Salvador, ICSID Case No. ARB/O9/17,

Decision on El Salvador’s Application for Security for Costs, 20 September 2012, para. 4:

Page 31 of 33

 

 

Opinion of Judge Edward W. Nottingham in RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia, \CSID Case No.

 

 

 

 

 

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

123.

124.

VI.

125.

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

history of not complying with cost orders. As underlined by the arbitral tribunal, these

circumstances were considered cumulatively.!°

Yet, no such exceptional circumstances have been evidenced in the instant case. The
Claimants have not defaulted on their payment obligations in the present proceedings or
in other arbitration proceedings. The Tribunal is of the view that financial difficulties
and third party-funding — which has become a common practice — do not necessarily
constitute per se exceptional circumstances justifying that the Respondent be granted an

order of security for costs.

The requested provisional measure is therefore denied.

DECISION

Based on the above analysis, the Tribunal issues the following decision:

(1) Denies the Claimants’ Application, as amended, for provisional measures;
(2) Denies the Respondent’s Application for provisional measures;

(3) Takes due note of the Respondent’s commitments, set out in paragraphs 96-97
above;

(4) Reminds the parties of their general duty arising from the principle of good faith
not to take any action that may aggravate the dispute or affect the integrity of the
arbitration.

‘© Exhibit RA-4, RSM Production Corporation v. Saint Lucia, \CSID Case No. ARB/12/10, Decision on the Respondent's Request for
Security for Costs, 13 August 2014, para. 86.

Page 32 of 33

EuroGas Inc. and Belmont Resources Inc. v. Slovak Republic (ICSID Case No. ARB/14/14)

 

Procedural Order No.3 — Decision on the Parties’ Requests for Provisional Measures

[Signed]
Professor Pierre Mayer
President of the Tribunal

[Signed]
[Signed]
Préfessor Emmanuel Gaillard Professor Brigitte Stern
Arbitrator Arbitrator

Page 33 of 33

