IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION
UNDER THE UNCITRAL RULES

BETWEEN

EUROPEAN MEDIA VENTURES S.A.

Claimant
-and-
THE CZECH REPUBLIC
Respondent
ibunal:
Lord Mustill (Chairman)
Sir Christopher Greenwood
Dr. Julian Lew Q.C.
Secretary to the Tribunal:
Jain Quitk
PARTIAL AWARD ON LIABILITY
A. INTRODUCTION.
Ll. This Award concludes the second stage of an arbitration between European Media

Ventures S.A. (“EMV”) as Claimant and the Czech Republic as Respondent determining
finally all issues of liability between the parties (except for the costs of this arbitration).
The subject-matter of the arbitration is a claim by EMV that the conduct of the Council for
Radio and Television Broadcasting of the Respondent (“The Media Council”) in relation to
the intended transfer of a Licence to broadcast television programmes was a breach of the
obligations of the Respondent under the Agreement for the Reciprocal Promotion and
Protection of Investments (“the Treaty”), originally concluded between the Belgium-

1

 

 

Luxembourg Economic Union and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, to which the
Respondent subsequently became a Contraoting Party by virtue of succession to the rights

and obligations of that Republic.

The first stage of the arbitration concluded with an Award on Jurisdiction dated 15 May
2007, a copy of which is appended hereto as Annex A. The terms of that Award are deemed
to be incorporated in, and to form part of, the present Award as if they were expressly set

out herein.

The procedural background to the arbitration is set out in Annex B,

THE TREATY

The Treaty is authentic in the Czech and French languages. However, both parties have
agreed that the English translation which they provided faithfully reflects the meaning of
the authentic texts and it is to that translation that the Tribunal will refer. So far as

material, the Treaty provided as follows:

“Preamble

The Belgian-Luxembourg Economic Union, and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic,
Desiring:

- to develop their friendly relations in accordance with the principles of the
Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, signed in
Helsinki on August 1, 1975;

- and to strengthen their economic cooperation by creating conditions
favourable for the making of investments by the investors of one of the
Contracting Parties in the territory of the other Contracting Party;

Recognizing the beneficial influence that such an agreement might have on the
betterment of economic relations and on the fostering of trust in the field of
investments;

Have agreed as follows:
Article J

(1) The term “investor” shall mean:
(a) with respect to the Belgian-Luxembourg Economic Union:

(aa) any natural person who, according to Belgian or Luxembourg
legislation is a citizen of the Kingdom or Belgium or the Grand Duchy of
Luxembourg;

(ab) any legal person constituted in accordance with Belgian or
Luxembourg legislation with its registered office in the territory of the
Kingdom or Belgium or the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg;

(2) The term “investment” shall mean every kind of asset and every ditect or indirect
contribution in all companies in any sector of economic activity whatsoever, and

notably:
(2) movable and immovable property, as well as other rights in rem;

() shares and other forms of participation in companies;
(0) titles to money and tights to any performance having an economic value;
(d) rights in the field of industrial and intellectual property as well as goodwill.

Any changes in the legal form of investments or re-investments shall not affect their
status within the meaning of the present Agreement.

Article 2

()G.)

(2) (4)

(3)Each Contracting Party shall assure to investments made on its territory by
investors of the other C ing Party a luding all illegiti or

 

discriminatory measures, which could impair their management, their maintenance,
their use, their exploitation or their liquidation.

(4) Except for measures necessary to maintain the public order [1’ordre public], these
investments shall enjoy a constant protection and security, which shall be equal to that
enjoyed by investments belonging to investors of the most favored nation.

 

 

Article 3

(1) Investments made by investors of one Contracting Party in the territory of the other
Contracting Party may not be expropriated or subjected to other measures of direct or
indirect dispossession, total or partial, having a similar effect, unless such measures
are:
(a) taken in accordance with a lawful procedure and are not discriminatory;
(b) accompanied by provisions for the payment of compensation, which shall
be paid to the investors in convertible currency and without delay. The amount
shall correspond to the real value of the investments on the day before the
measures were taken or made public.

(2)(..)

(3)The provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 are applicable to investors of each
Contracting Party, holding any form of participation in any company whatsoever in the
territory of the other Contracting Party .

Article 7.

(1) Any dispute relating to the interpretation of this Agreement shall be settled, as
much as possible, between the Contracting Parties by means of diplomatic channels.

(2)(.)

(3) If the dispute cannot be settled in this manner... it shall be submitted to an arbitral
tribunal, at the request of one of the Contracting Parties,

(4)(.)
(5)(...)

(6) The arbitral tribunal shall decide on the basis of the provisions of the present
Agreement and the generally-accepted rules and principles of international law.

(1)

Article 8.

(1)Disputes between one of the Contracting Parties and an investor of the other
Contracting Party concerning compensation due by virtue of Article 3 Paragraphs (1)
and (3), shall be the subject of a written notification, accompanied by a detailed

4

 

 

memorandum, addressed by the investor to the concerned Contracting Party. To the
extent possible, such disputes shall be settled amicably.

(2)If the dispute is not resolved within six months from the day of the written
notification specified in Paragraph (1), and in the absence of any other form of
settlement agreed between the parties to the dispute, it shall be submitted to arbitration
before an ad hoc tribunal.

(3) ()

4.)

(5}The ad hoc tribunal shall rule on the basis of:
- the national law of the Contracting Party, party to the dispute, on the
tertitory of which the investment is located, including its conflict of law rules;
- the provisions of the present Agreement;
- the provisions of the particular commitment, which may have been entered
into relating to the investment;

- the generally recognised rules and principles of international law.

(6) The arbitral award shall be final and binding upon the parties to the dispute.
oe

THE DISPUTE ON JURISDICTION

During the first stage of the arbitration two distinct claims were before the Tribunal. The °

first was founded on Article 2 of the Treaty, asserting that the conduct of the Media
Council was illegitimate and discriminatory, and that it had denied to EMV the protection
and security to which it was entitled. EMV claimed damages for this breach of the Treaty.
The second claim was based on Article 3(1) of the Treaty, and comprised an allegation that,
by the conduct of the Media Council in relation to certain investments of EMV, the
Respondent had expropriated the investments, or alternatively had subjected them to
measures having a similar effect, not excused by anything which fell within sub-paragraphs
(a) or (b) of Article 3(1), and that accordingly EMV was entitled to compensation for the

resulting loss,

At the end of the first stage, the Tribunal held that it had jurisdiction with regard to the

5

 

Article 3 claim (for expropriation) but not with regard to the Article 2 claim. EMV did not
attempt to disturb that part of the Award which denied jurisdiction in relation to Article 2
but the Respondent did apply in the English High Court to annul the Tribunal’s holding
that it had jurisdiction with regard to the claim under Article 3 but it did not attempt to
disturb that part of the Award which denied jurisdiction in relation to Article 2. The
annulment application failed, ' with the result that the Tribunal is still seised of the dispute,
but only in respect of Article 3.

These decisions transformed the arbitration, The Article 2 claim meant that an essential
part of the dispute, which concerned the propriety of the Media Council’s treatment of an
application, as part of a plan which we shall later describe, to transfer a terrestrial
broadcasting Licence to EMV, did not have to be determined. This would have called for
consideration not only of a complex course of conduct, but also of the motives for that
conduct, in the light of extensive oral and written evidence, and numerous contemporary
documents. Now that the claim under Article 2 has fallen away much of this material has
become redundant, although we have closely studied it again for any light which it may
shed on the expropriation claim. This latter claim is largely a matter of interpreting the
Treaty and applying it to facts which essentially are not in dispute. The account of events
which we shall set out is therefore much less broad and detailed than it would have been if

the Article 2 claim had still been alive before us,

NARRATIVE

It is to that narrative that the Tribunal now turns. During the year 1998 Mr.

was operating through his company (“RTV Gemma”), a media business from
Hradec Kralové, a city in Eastern Bohemia, broadcasting terrestrially and also by cable and
satellite a local television programme (“TV Galaxie”), under the authority of a Licence
issued to and held personally by Mr. (“the Licence”). TV Galaxie was later

ublic v. Euro Media Ventures SA, [2007] EWHC 2851 (Comm.); (2008) 1 Lloyds Reps. 186
(Simon J.),

6

renamed and rebranded as TV3.

Within its modest ambitions this station had proved successful, and Mr.

conceived the idea of using it as a model competing with the existing national broadcasters,
two commercial and two public. There was no room in the frequency spectrum for another
nationally-propagated terrestrial transmission but Mr, believed it possible to
create a nationwide coverage through a mosaic of local stations, each broadcasting a
combination of core national content with locally focussed material. Such a concept would
require substantial finance, which Mr. “set about raising, assisted in particular by
Mr. . an investment manager specialising in Central and Eastern Europe,
and Mr. ° a venture capitalist with experience in developing television and
radio broadcasting companies in that part of Europe. Considerable interest was generated,
but there were two obstacles. First, there was a general sentiment that whatever its merits
the Hradec Krélové operation was on too small a scale to serve as the growing point of the
proposed network. For this purpose it would be necessary to establish a presence in Prague,
where viewers and advertisers would be more numerous, wealthy and sophisticated, As it
happened, it became known at about this time that the Media Council was planning to
allow interested parties to apply for a Licence to broadcast on Channel 11 in Prague: This
was one of the few unallocated terrestrial broadcasting frequencies in that city, This would

suit the new venture very well, and the obtaining of a Licence for it became a significant

element of both Mr. ‘expansion plans and the willingness of new investors to
finance the project.
Accordingly, Mr. bid for permission to broadcast on Channel 11. On the advice

ofa Media Council member he did so in the shape of an application to extend the territorial
scope of his existing Licence, rather than to create a completely new Licence in favour ofa
new broadcaster, as the latter approach was considered to betoo politically sensitive for the
Media Council. This application was successful, a latge step forward in the implementation
of Mr. iplans. However, the attachment of the Channel 11 permission to Mr.

individual personal Licence was for more than one reason unwelcome to the

new investors, who would have preferred the broadcasting tights to be held by a legal

 

 

entity; and the obvious response to this objection, which would have been to incorporate a
company with the investors as shareholders, and transfer to it not only the business of TV3
but also the Licence which would enable it to be carried on, was not available under Czech
media law which disqualified a personal Licence from transfer to a company. This obstacle
would have been only temporary, since it was already anticipated that the legislation would
be amended so as to permit a one-off transfer from a physical person to a legal entity, but
meanwhile the Licence would have to continue in the name of Mr. with all the

perceived risks which that entailed.

This being so, steps were taken to minimise the interim risks by binding the Licence as
tightly as possible to the corporate body through which the capital investment would be
made, There were three elements. The first was a new corporate structure, A Luxembourg
company, European Media Ventures s.a, (“EMV”, the present Claimant) was incorporated
to provide via shareholdings a single vehicle for the individual investments, the internal
relationships being governed by a Shareholders Agreement. A. Czech company, Cesca
medialni spolecnost a.s, (“CMS”), was incorporated as a wholly-owned subsidiary of EMV,
in turn owning 100 per cent of the capital of TV3.

Next, provision was made for what was to happen when the anticipated change in the
statutory regime caine into effect. Under a Future Licence Transfer Agreement (“FLTA”)
Mr. undertook to transfer the Licence directly to TV3 as and when this became

permissible under Czech law.

Finally, two steps were taken to protect the value of the Licence to EMV whilst itremained
in the name of Mr. First, under a Services Agreement, Mr. agreed
that the Licence would be employed exclusively to validate the broadcasting of the
programming of TV3. Secondly, he undertook to have the terms of the Licence varied by
the Media Council so that it could be used only for the propagation of TV3's programme,
thus paradoxically restricting his own rights — something which was to prove troublesome

in due course,

 

14,

By this time-31 March 2000 —a degree of optimism would have seemed in order. The
initial financing was in place; backers had been mustered; the corporate scaffolding had
been erected; the legislative wheels were turning; and all that was left for the future was to
await the decision of the Media Council, which had favourably received the application for
the Channel 11 Licence and might seem to have no reason to take a different view of the

transfer from Mr. to TV3.

This was not, however, the way matters turned out in practice, The amending legislation
duly materialised, but was not entirely as foreseen. Article 68(6) of the new Media Law was

in the following terms:

“Within 6 months of the effective date of this Act, any private individual who is a
Licenced broadcasting operator or an operator of retransmission may request that the
Licence or registration which was granted to him/her be transferred to a legal entity;
the Council shall only grant such a request in the event that the legal entity concerned
is 100% owned by the private individual concerned.”

Another change brought about by the new Media Law was to enable a legal entity with a
registered address outside the Czech Republic to becomea Licenced broadcasting operator,
provided it had a branch within the Republic. These two alterations in the law appeared to
leave the way open for the realisation of the plan: but perhaps only “appeared” to do so, for
there was an ambiguity in the passage from Article 68(6) quoted above which was to bea
major source of conflict in the present dispute. Was it enough for the intended transferee of
the Licence to be 100 per cent owned by the private transferor, in which case the Media
Council had no option but to pevmit the transfer? Or was this no more than a requirement
which had to be satisfied before, as a matter of discretion, the Media Council could go on
to consider in the light of all relevant circumstances whether or not the transfer should be

permitted? We return to this below.

Resuming the narrative, it was decided to take advantage of the opportunity afforded by the
new Media Law by establishing a legal entity outside the Czech Republic to act as recipient
of the Licence, Accordingly, a Luxembourg company (“KTV”) was incorporated, with Mr.

as its sole shareholder, and with a branch office in Prague, with the intention
9

 

 

 

 

that when the Licence had been transferred to KTV, Mr. would transfer his
interest in the latter to EMV. To ensure that this would actually happen, Mr.

granted to EMV under a “KTV Call Option Agreement” an option to acquire his shares in
KTV, and backed it by pledging his KTV shares to EMV as security for performance of the
Call Option Agreement. In addition, TV3 assigned to BMV its rights under the FLTA (see
paragraph 11, above), upon which EMV entered into an agreement with Mr.

requiring him (a) to assume an obligation to transfer the Licence to KTV, and (b) thereafter
to transfer his interest in KTV to EMV. In addition, an Amended Licence Transfer
Agreement (the “ALTA”) concluded between Mr and EMV provided that, if the
Media Council did not permit the transfer of the Licence to KTV, Mr. ‘would
incorporate a Czech company, with the approval of EMV, transfer the Licence to that

company, and then transfer his shares in that company to EMV.

The outcome of these various agreements was therefore that (a) EMV would become at one
remove the owner of TV3, and (b) EMV would control the exercise of the Licence via its
control of KTV (or the company to be incorporated and act as transferee under the ALTA).
Asa step towards the implementation of this package of agreements, the interested parties
prepared an application to the Media Council for permission to carry out the transfer to
KTV, but before its formal submission the Media Council held a session on 28 August
2001, at which the application was discussed. There is a dispute, which in the present
circumstances the Tribunal need not resolve, about how the possibility arose for discussion
that the transfer should be, not to KTV but to a Czech company, and, if so, whether it
should be to RTV Galaxie (“RTVG”), a Czech company which Mr. ‘controlled.

In the event, Mr. went ahead with the plan as originally conceived and
submitted to the Media Council a formal application for such a consent. In a response, first
contained in a press release issued on 11 September 2001, the Media Council explained
that:

“The Council highly values foreign investments flowing into the Czech media

environment, but gives priority to such broadcasting operators whose ownership
structure and manner of in the Czech Republicis entirely controllable and

10

 

 

20.

21.

22.

23.

can be regulated under Czech laws.”

This negative response prompted Mr. to makea fresh application, this time fora
transfer to RTVG, Notwithstanding protests by EMV, the Media Council on 20 November
2001 approved the transfer to RTVG, and two weeks later formally rejected the transfer to

KTV. In accordance with the usage adopted at the hearings in the present case, the

Tribunal refers to the decision refusing the application to transfer the Licence to KTV as

the “negative, transfer decision” and the decision granting the application for transfer to

RTVG as the “positive transfer decision”.

These developments effectively spelt the end of EMV’s plan. EMV could no longer require

the Licence to be transferred to it or its nominee, KTV, because Mr no longer
had the Licence to transfer, although EMV may have had a remedy in damages against Mr
Similarly, TV3, though it still had a contract with Mr requiring that

the Licence be used only for the broadcasting of TV3 programming, could not enforce that
contractual right against RTVG, since RTVG was nota party to the contract. All it wasleft

with was the Licence condition.

Initially the Media Council took no steps to resolve this dilemma, but on 29 November
2001 it issued a declaration that TV3 was broadcasting without a Licence, and ordered the
broadcasting to cease. TV3 had no alternative but to comply, thus leaving RTVG with no
programming content permissible under the Licence condition. During the following month
a decision of the Media Council withdrew the Licence from RTVG for breach of the

condition,

It is unnecessary for present purposes to detail the subsequent history of RTVG’s
continuing use of the Licence to broadcast its own programming content, notwithstanding
the restrictions imposed by the Licence Condition. During June 2002 a constitutional
complaint was brought by KTV before the Municipal Court in Prague to the effect that the
Media Council had wrongly failed to recognise KTV as a party to the proceedings in
respect of the transfer of the Licence, thus infringing its right to be present at the hearing

i

 

 

 

24.

25.

26.

and on the evid The Municipal Court dismissed the claim on the ground that
although KTV was the intended transferee of the Licence only Mr. had rights
and obligations protected by law at the relevant time. On appeal, the Czech Supreme Court
took a different view, stating in its judgment of 10 November 2004 that: “Parties to the
proceedings are also private individuals or legal entities whose legal status may be directly
affected by law and obligations of other entities...”, The Supreme Court therefore set aside
the judgment of the Municipal Court, leaving KTV to seek a remedy within the general
court system. This limited success has no bearing on the present claim by EMV to which

we now turn.

The challenge through the Courts having ultimately succeeded on purely procedural
grounds, the Media Council became once again seised of applications by Mr. for
the transfer of his personal Licence to KTV or alternatively to RTVG. In the end these led
nowhere; the Licence was not transferred to either party, RTVG became a subsidiary of one
of the two large commercial television companies; and TV3 went out of business. It was

declared bankrupt on 26 June 2002.

Meanwhile, RTVG was engaged in challenging the revocation of the Licence, with some
initial success, to the extent that the Municipal Court restored the Licence to RTVG, and
remitted the matter to the Media Council, which imposed a fine on RTVG during August
2002. By this time, RTVG had ceased broadcasting TV3’s material, and was negotiating
with TV Prima’s parent company (“GES”) towards a consolidation of the businesses of
RTVG and GES. This bore fruit on 21 January 2003 when the Media Council approved the
take-over of RTVG by GES.

To complete this outline of the history, recourse was sought through the courts against the
decision of the Media Council not to permit the transfer of the Licence to KTV. This failed
in the Municipal Court but succeeded before the Constitutional Court, essentially on
procedural grounds, and the lower court was directed to annul the determination of the
Media Council awarding the Licence to RTVG. After further inconclusive proceedings, Mr.
surrendered his Licence to the Media Council, which deemed it to have expired

12

 

 

27.

28.

on 10 August 2005. EMY also relied on a report prepared in around October 2001 in
relation to the decision not to permit the transfer of the Licence to KTV, provided by JUDr.
Payel Rychetsky, then Chairman of the Legislative Council of the Government and Deputy
Prime Minister (“the Rychetsky Report”). The Report expressed concern with the Media
Council’s decisions on the transfer of the Licence including as to whether those decisions

discriminated against a foreign investor.

In short, the position came down to this, The holder of the Licence was able to make use of
it only subject to a condition about programming which it could not fulfil, whereas the
programmers had no means of broadcasting their programme. It proved impossible to
bridge this gap and Mr.. plan, and the ambitions of his backers, were totally
frustrated. The backers pointed the finger of blame at the Media Council for their losses,
asserting not only that the Council had no idea of the principles which it should apply when
considering a transfer request, but more seriously that the refusal of the transfer was the
result of double-dealing. The more serious allegations were denied by the Council, which
claimed to have acted in good faith within its powers, and asserted that even if it might
have acted wrongly, its actions had not caused the loss in respect of which the claim was
made, since the ‘plan had always been impossible ofrealisation. The concept of
a piecemeal accumulation of nationwide transmission was in the opinion of the Media
Council fanciful, since it was already widely acknowledged that there was no space for itin

the frequency spectrum,

This was the shape of the dispute when EMV started the present arbitration. It is essential
to keep in mind that the claim had two elements. First, there were allegations of serious
misconduct at all stages, the outcome, so it was said, of a chosen strategy to wreck Mr.

project. The brief account given above shows how the largely undisputed bare
bones of the events can make this seem a plausible account, though not necessarily the
sufficient proof, of a breach of Article 2 of the Treaty. The second element is quite
different. For a claim under Article 3 the focus is much narrower than under Article 2. Itis
neither necessary nor sufficient to show that the acts of the Media Council prevented there
from being a “level playing field” or that they amounted to unfair treatment. The test is

13

 

 

29.

whether the acts complained of amounted to an “expropriation” or similar measures, in the
very special sense in which those terms are used in Article 3. Unless this test is satisfied
there is no breach of Article 3, however unconscionable the conduct of the respondent. It
follows that just as the test is narrower, so also is the scope of the enquiry. At the time
when Article 2 was still a feature of the present case the large volume of documentation,
oral and written evidence, and submissions was directly relevant to the outcome of the
dispute. The Tribunal studied it closely at that stage, and has sifted all of it again during the
second phase, to see what was to be found there of relevance to the claim under Article 3.
In the event however, little of it proved to be of substantial importance, which has enabled
the facts to be stated in very much less detail than would have been required for a decision

under Article 2.

THE ISSUES
The claim under Article 3 raises three issues:-

(1) Did the Claimant possess an investment, within the meaning of Article 1 of the
Treaty? If it did not, then the obligations of the Respondent under Article 3 are

simply not engaged;

(2) Ifthe Claimant did possess an investment, was the treatment of that investment an
expropriation or other measure of similar effect such as to involve a violation of

Article 3?

(3) If there was a violation of Article 3 in respect of the Claimant’s investment, what
sum of money (if any) is the Claimant entitled to receive by way of compensation

or damages?

Before turning to those questions, however, the Tribunal must first address an argument
raised by the Respondent for the first time during the hearings.
14

30.

THE RESPONDENT’S PUBLIC POLICY ARGUMENT

During the course of its cross-examination of Mr one of the Claimant’s key
witnesses, the Respondent raised for the first time the suggestion that the Claimant might
have been blackmailing ? the Deputy Chairman of the Czech Chamber of Deputies. On that

basis, the Respondent then developed an argument which may be summarised as follows:-

@

i)

(iii)

(iv)

International public policy demands probity in international commercial dealings.

Violations of international public policy do not ipso facto invalidate rights created
by commercial contracts. That is a matter for the governing law. But such a
violation may render rights unenforceable in an international investment arbitration,

at least if there is a sufficient nexus between the violation and the investment in

question.

In the present case, two aspects of international public policy are said by the
Respondent to be relevant. First, so it is said, it flows from Article 1 of the OECD
Convention on Combating Bribery of Public Officials that anyone who offers a
pecuniary or other advantage to a foreign public official in order that the official
shall act or refrain from acting in relation to official duties, or to obtain or retain
business or other improper advantage in the conduct of international business,
commits a breach of international public policy which renders unenforceable any
tights so obtained. Secondly, the Respondent contends that blackmailing a public
official to confer an advantage in relation to an investment is an infringement of
international public policy which equally renders unenforceable any claim in an

arbitration founded on that investment.

Jn the present case, entries in the diary or jotter of Mr. (the Deputy
Chairman of EMV) made on 5 April 2001 were said to show that persons on the

 

 

 

 

31.

32.

side of EMV were contemplating the use of information discreditable to the Deputy
Chairman of the Chamber of Deputies of the Czech Parliament, a person with
influence over the Media Council, to induce him to use that influence in favour of
granting additional frequencies to TV3. (See post). Such conduct would have been

an infraction of the principles stated above,

(v) Accordingly, whatever the rights and wrongs of EMV’s complaints about the
conduct of the Media Council during September 2001 in relation to the transfer of
the Licence its conduct six months earlier aimed at enlarging its spread of

frequencies should entirely exclude its claim in the present arbitration.
On this basis, the Respondent applied for a stay of proceedings.

In the opinion of the Tribunal this reasoning cannot be sustained, even if the statements of
principle which it embodies can be endorsed to their full extent (as to which the Tribunal

expresses no view).

As a preliminary observation, the Tribunal feels bound to state that the application for a
stay was made too late, even allowing for the fact that the grounds for such an application
only emerged when Mr. documents were produced. Almost without preamble, Mr.

‘was asked in cross-examination whether he or his colleagues were blackmailing the
Deputy Chairman. When he denied that, he was pressed with entries in his diary, to the
general effect that he and his colleagues had damaging information which they could, if
they chose, make use of against the Deputy Chairman, and that they had had it in mind to
do so. The Tribunal finds this disturbing. An allegation of blackmail, or even of a
contemplation of it, is very serious, especially in the public domain, and the ground for it
must be scrupulously laid, because of the obvious risk of unfairness. That did not happen
here, which risked being unfair to Mr. on whom the allegation was sprung without

any opportunity to cast his mind back to the time in question, more than six years

 

See the questions put by counsel at Transcript Day 2, page 16, lines 7-8; page 18, line 23. In his responses at
pages 17, 19 and 21 Mr. uses the word three times. There can be no doubt that he understood what
was being put to him.

16

 

33.

34,

35,

previously, and consider how the scribbled entries might be presented in a more favourable
light. It risked being unfair to EMV, which could have set to work in advance to investigate
and marshal for the Tribunal a full account of the circumstances in which the words were
written, rather than have the presentation of its case interrupted by the introduction of a
contentious new issue, And it risked unfairness to all concerned, by distracting the attention

of the Tribunal from the real issues which it was appointed to resolve,

Nevertheless, what should have happened did in the end happen. The Tribunal halted the
examination of Mr. on this particular issue, and permitted separate written
submissions upon it, which all concerned had an adequate opportunity to consider. No
lasting harm was done. The Tribunal has, therefore, considered the Respondent’s

submission, notwithstanding the circumstances in which it was raised.

The Tribunal is clear, however, that the public policy argument must fail. There was no
sufficient link between the conduct said to have infringed public policy and the right being
asserted in the arbitration so as to make it unconscionable to enforce the latter. Evidence of
discreditable conduct on the part of Mr. tight have been relevant to an attack on
his credibility as a witness when giving evidence about what happened around the time
when the Licence was up for transfer, some months later, but this is not what the
Respondent is saying. What is urged is that the Claimant’s conduct has cast such a shadow
over the investment that it would be wrong to entertain proceedings which assert that the
investment had been devalued by misconduct on the part of the Respondent. The argument
asks too much, important as probity in international life undoubtedly is, some element of
proportionality must be maintained, and the Tribunal would have hesitated long before
finding a sufficient link between the misconduct and the investment for which a large claim
for compensation is being maintained to justify the disqualification of the claim from even

being put forward for consideration.

There is however another, and more fundamental, answer to the Claimant’s public policy

argument, which is that there is simply no foundation for it on the facts. Whatever standard

of proof is required to establish an assertion of contemplated blackmail, it must at least be
17

 

 

 

36.

for the party who asserts such conduct to show that it is more likely than not to be true. In
the opinion of the Tribunal the evidence falls far short of this standard, The Respondent
shows no more than scribbled jottings by Mr. of which he was unable to give a
convincing account when faced with them years later, True, this might on one view be said
to show him in a poor light, but his general character and credibility are not in issue here.
True also, this episode might have been relevant to a case under Article 2, but no such case
is before the Tribunal, because of the earlier decision on jurisdiction. To justify its
allegation of bribery or conduct contrary to public policy, what the Respondent has to show
is a sufficiently high degree of wrongdoing to rank as a breach of international law, actually
having a disqualifying impact on the investment in question. The Tribunal has no doubt
that in this it has totally failed.

INVESTMENT

The Tribunal therefore turns to the arguments of the parties regarding the expropriation
claim, beginning with the first group of issues identified in paragraph 29, above. The
Respondent has complained, with some justification, that the Claimant has never fully and
consistently identified the investment or investments which it argues was expropriated. It is
true that in part the Claimant’s case is straightforward. At one remove, it was the owner of
the share capital of TV3, a company incorporated and carrying on business in the Czech
Republic. We do not understand it to be challenged that this was a relevant investment for
the purposes of the Treaty; and in any event it is obvious that it was. No doubt for good
reason, the Claimant thought it prudent to reinforce its case by alleging an investment ofa
different kind, taking the form of contractual rights. The identification of this second
investment mutated as the dispute progressed, This wasted some time and effort for the
parties, and the Tribunal, in accommodating different conceptions of the issue, but no
lasting harm has been done, and we are content to approach the case by reference to the
most recent formulation, according to which the investment consisted of “.... rights to any
performance having economic value...” in the shape of the agreements “... which gave
EMV contractual rights against to ensure the ongoing, exclusive use by
18

37,

38.

39,

TV3 of the Licence, and the ultimate transfer of the Licence to an entity approved by
EMV™,

We must therefore consider, as a first step, whether the rights so defined are capable of
amounting to an investment for the purposes of Article 3. The Respondent offers more than
one reason why they are not. In the first place, it is said that a mere right in personam
against a private party cannot of itself constitute an investment because, unlike the case ofa
tight in rem, the host State has no constructive notice of rights in personam unless it is
itself the counterparty to the contract. We do not follow this argument, The Treaty is
concerned with the status of an asset as an investment, and not with whether the host State
is aware of its existence, although such an awareness or otherwise may be relevant to

whether there has been a breach of Articles 2 or 3,

Nor are we persuaded by the proposition that it is not possible to localise a right in
personam, and that accordingly the Treaty cannot apply to such a right since itis concerned
only with protecting assets which are “on the territory” of one of the contracting State
Parties. We accept the latter part of this proposition, but not the remainder of it, Whileitis
true that many rights in personam cannot be said to have a situs in a particular State, this is
not the case with all such rights. In the present case the contractual right in question related
to an intended transfer by a Czech individual, effected in accordance with a Czech statute,
of a Licence issued by the Czech State, the subject-matter of the Licence being the
transmission of broadcasts within the territory of that State. This right appears to this
Tribunal to be firmly anchored within the territory of the Czech State, and hence to qualify,
other things being equal, for the protection of that State.

The third ground of objection is that a right in personam cannot qualify unless and until it
has been recognised by an adjudication. Until then it is rootless, and cannot be an
investment “‘in the territory” of any State. We do not follow this argument. Examination of
the widely differing definitions contained in the hundreds of investment treaties does not,
we believe, disclose any hint that whilst the protection of the international investment law

Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, para. 5. 9

 

 

40.

regime can in principle extend to a contractual right, this is so only if it has been “franked”
by a judgment or award. Naturally, if an asset in the shape of a contractual right is put
forward as an investment for the purposes of a claim under an investment treaty the
existence of the right is a prerequisite to the success of the claim, and if this proves
controversial some form of adjudication may be required. But this is simply a matter of
proof, not of the re-characterisation of the right by the act of adjudication. We cannot see
any reason why the parties to the treaties should have wished to create a situation in which
the international investment law regimes offer no protection to a contractual right at the
outset, and yet begin to apply ifand when the right has been challenged and held to exist.
We must reject this aspect of the Respondent’s submissions.

So also with another proposition, namely that a contractual right will not qualify as an
investment unless the other party to the contract is the host State, Again, we cannot ses the
rationale for this. It may be that in the early days of the international investment law
system it would have been possible to argue that an obligation owed to a foreign party by
the State could not be a relevant investment, because the whole purpose of the ICSID
regime was to protect the foreigner from the depredations of the State, and that it would be
absurd for the State to promise that it would not interfere with its own obligations. The
purpose of the international investment law regime was (so it might have been argued) to
inhibit external interference by the State as a dominant power, not internal wrongdoing by
the State as an obligor. Whatever the merits of this opinion might have been, the
jurisprudence of international investment law tribunals quite clearly leaves no room for it.
But this does not mean that only obligations of the host State are protected by that regime.
Although the proposition was argued with vigour for the Respondent we cannot see any
ground, either in the words of the Treaty or in its underlying economic policy, why this
consequence should have been intended; and indeed we believe that the prime object ofthe
Treaty and its subordinate bilateral and multilateral offspring, was not so much to protect
the foreign party from breaches by the host State of its own contractual obligations, a
protection which would already be afforded to some degree by the domestic courts or by
chosen private dispute-resolution methods, but to make sure that the State did not cut
across rights established by the kind of dealings between the foreigner and a party within
20

41.

42."

43,

the State, which in the past had been unsupported save by diplomatic intervention.

Finally, it is suggested that an investment must be something which is capable of
expropriation otherwise Article 3 will not work. This must surely be wrong. The whole
Treaty is permeated by a single concept of investment, which cannot in any way be
controlled by Article 3, any more than it is controlled by the wider provisions of Article 2.4
In our opinion, the non-exclusive definitions in Article 1 mean what they say and they are
quite broad enough to cover the different assets which the Claimant here contends

constitute investments.

We therefore reject, with due respect to the skill which they were advanced, the specific
grounds advanced by the Respondent for limiting the scope of “investment”, We are
sustained in this view by the fact that all of the grounds argued by the Respondent could, if
the drafters of the Treaty had thought fit, have been made plain by express provision, of

which there is no trace.

We must, however, advert to a wider problem which has caused us some concern, namely
the apparent breadth of the language of Article 1, when applied to the second of the two
investments postulated by the Claimant. Does the indirect right of EMV to require the
transfer of the Licence from Mr. ‘to KTV, by virtue of the ALTA, amount to a
“...tight to any performance having an economic value...” within the meaning of Article 1
{2) c} of the Treaty? The answer is not obvious, Taken in isolation, KTV’s right to a
transfer had no monetary worth. Offered in the market it could never have found a buyer.
Nobody would have “invested” by purchasing it. However, after due consideration we
have concluded that this right has to be viewed in context and that, seen as such, it does

indeed have an economic value and thus constitutes an investment.

While we reject the Respondent's argument on this point, we do, of course, have to consider whether the
investment in question is capable of expropriation under Article 3, since that is the only claim over which we
have jurisdiction, We do so below (see paras, 62-65). We wish lo make clear, however, that we consider the
questions (a) whether the contractual rights on which the Claimant relies constitute an investment within
Article 1 of the Treaty; (b) whether those rights are capable of expropriation under Article 3; and (c) whether
they were in fact expropriated, to be three entirely separate questions,

 

44,

H

45.

46,

Accordingly, the Tribunal concludes that each of the two assets identified by EMV was an
investment for the purposes of the Treaty. Accordingly, we turn now to the central group of

issues, relating to expropriation.

EXPROPRIATION

This leads to the central issue, namely whether either or both of the investments of EMV
were the victims of conduct prohibited by Article 3 of the Treaty. The text of that
provision is set out in para. 4, above, and need not be repeated here. Itis instructive to look
more closely at the shape of the relevant treaty provision than has been the practice in most
published discussions of expropriation, Article 3(1) prohibits two classes of act:

(i) expropriation

(ii) other measures of dispossession (direct or indirect)/(total or partial) having a

similar effect (sc. to expropriation).

Article 3(1) goes on to provide that the measures in question are permissible if they meet the

following requirements, namely:

(i) they are taken in accordance with a lawful procedure;
(ii) they are not discriminatory, and
(iii) they are accompanied by the required provisions for the payment of compensation,

A number of points need to be made regarding this provision, First, the concept of
“expropriation” is not defined in the Treaty. It is appropriate, therefore, to look to general
international law for assistance in ascertaining what the State Parties meant when they
included reference to expropriation in Article 3(1). The need to do so is reinforced by the

fact that the Tribunal is directed by Article 8(5) of the Treaty * to apply the generally

Article 8(5) provides —
“The ad hoc tribunal shall rule on the basis of:

22

 

47.

tecognized rules and principles of international law. Unfortunately, neither the leading
commentaries nor the case law yields a clear definition. Writing a few years before the
conclusion of the Treaty, Professor Rosalyn Higgins (as she then was) observed that neither
international law nor municipal law had developed a coherent meaning of expropriation. ©
Doizer and Stevens, in their leading commentary on Bilateral Investment Treaties,
published in 1995 note that expropriation includes “indirect expropriation” but then go on
to state that, in spite of the case law, there is “no clear definition of the concept of indirect
expropriation”.’ A leading recent commentary - McLachlan, Shore and Weiniger,
International Investment Arbitration (2007)— concludes that “the concept of expropriation
is reasonably clear: it is a governmental taking of property for which compensation is
required” * but then adds that
“However, it is difficult to define with precision the situations covered by the concept.
The definitions of expropriation appearing in investment treaties are of such a
generality that they provide little guidance to parties or arbitral tribunals confronted by
concrete cases. In the absence of firm guidance, arbitral tribunals have fashioned a
variety of tests for assessing whether States are liable for expropriation, which can
create both opportunities and uncertainties for parties in circumstances where
expropriation has arguably occurred.”

It is plain from these discussions that international law offered no clear and generally
agreed definition of expropriation when the Treaty was concluded in 1989 and does not do
so now. Nevertheless, the Tribunal considers that the core features of the concept are
sufficiently clear. The essence of expropriation is the taking of property by the State.
Although it has come to include notions of indirect and “creeping” expropriation, this
central element has not been lost: the measures in question must, however indirect, amount
to a “taking” and they must be carried out by the State. Moreover, the taking of property is
not absolutely prohibited; such taking is not a breach of international law ifit meets certain

criteria. While those criteria may be stated in different terms in different places, the

 

~ The national law of the Contracting Party, party to the dispute, on the territory of which the investment
is located, including its conflict of law rules;
- The provisions of the present agreement;
R. Higgins, “The Taking of Property by the State”, (1982) 159 Recueil des Cours 259 at 268.
Page 100.
Page 266.
23

 

 

 

48.

49,

essential elements are that for a taking to be lawful it must be non-discriminatory, it must
be fora legitimate purpose (or, at least, carried out in accordance with a lawful procedure)
and it must be accompanied by provision for the payment of appropriate compensation.
The Tribunal is mindful of the provision, in Article 31(3)(c) of the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties, 1969, that in interpreting.a treaty it is necessary to take into account
“any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations between the parties” and
accordingly considers that it was this concept of expropriation to which the Parties to the

Treaty intended to refer when they adopted the text of Article 3(1).

At first sight, the structure of that provision suggests that it is only the second class of act
encompassed by Article 3(1), namely measures similar to expropriation, and not the first
class, expropriation itself, which can be saved from illegality by compliance with the three
requirements set out in paragraph 45, above. However, as we have explained, generally
recognized rules and principles of international law treat takings of property which are for a
public purpose, in accordance with law, non-discriminatory and accompanied by proper
provision for compensation as falling outside the scope of expropriation. In any event, the
case has not been argued by either party as though there were any difference for these
purposes between expropriation and “other measures...having a similar effect”. The

Tribunal has not, therefore, pursued this discussion any further.

In the course of their submissions, both parties have made extensive reference to other
arbitration awards concerned with claims for expropriation, as well as to the decisions of
international courts and bodies, including, in particular, the Iran-United States Claims
Tribunal. This jurisprudence, while not, of course, binding on the Tribunal, is helpful,
provided that two caveats are borne in mind. First, the courts and tribunals in question
derived their jurisdiction from, and were applying the provisions of, treaties which were not
identical to the one under which this Tribunal operates. It cannot, therefore, be assumed
that the standards which those courts and tribunals applied invariably coincide with those
on which this Tribunal is required to base its decision, Secondly, while it is always

tempting for a party to extract isolated sentences, apparently stating general principles,

 

Page 267.

24

 

50.

from past awards and judgments, those statements of principle cannot be divorced from the
factual setting in which they were given. When a tribunal makes a statement about, for
example, what constitutes indirect expropriation, it is necessary to have regard to the
particular conduct which that tribunal was considering. That is particularly important with
some of the statements made by the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal on which the

Claimant has relied, as the facts which gave rise to those statements were very far removed

-from the facts of the present case,

Nevertheless, with those allowances duly made, the jurisprudence confirms three points

which the Tribunal considers can properly be derived, in any event, from the text of Article

3(1):-

qd) It is only acts attributable to the State which can constitute a violation of Article
3(1). That follows both from the general international law on State Responsibility,
which plainly states that only actions attributable to the State can engage the
international legal responsibility of the State,!° and from the principle, discussed
above, that the essence of expropriation is a taking of property by the State. This
consideration is particularly important in the present case because the claim
concems allegations of interference with contract rights contained in a contract
between private parties. While the Media Council is an organ of the Czech State
whose actions are attributable to that State, the conduct of Mr and
RTVG is not so attributable and, consequently, is not capable of amounting to a
breach of Article 3(1); only conduct of the Czech Republic is so capable, :

(2) In determining whether or not there has been a violation of Article 3(1), a two-stage
analysis is normally required. First, it is necessary to determine whether or not the
act or acts attributable to the State amount to an expropriation (or other measures of
dispossession having an effect similar to expropriation). Secondly, if those acts do
so amount, it must then be asked whether the measures in question are nonetheless

compatible with the Treaty, because they comply with the requirements outlined in

25

 

 

@B)

paragraph 45 above, In the Tribunal’s view, it is entirely wrong to invert this
analysis and begin by inquiring whether or not the three conditions have been
satisfied and then, if one or more of them has not been met, to deduce from that
failure that there must, therefore, have been an expropriation or equivalent measure.
The fact that a measure adversely affects a foreign investment and is not “taken in
accordance with a lawful procedure” and/or is discriminatory and/or is not
accompanied by appropriate provision for compensation does not mean that it
constitutes expropriation. The conditions in the second part of Article 3(1) come
into play only if there has been an expropriation or a measure having similar effect;
the absence of one or more of them is not in itself indicative of expropriation or a
similar measure. This is an important point which has been emphasized by some
other tribunals |! but which is all too frequently overlooked. It is again of particular

significance in the present case.

Expropriatory measures and measures of similar effect no longer have to entail a
direct taking of property. There is abundant arbitral authority? for the proposition
that contemporary international law prohibits indirect forms of expropriation. This
represents a development of the law beyond the classic notion of expropriation as a
direct confiscation of assets or rights which prevailed until comparatively recently,
That development is reflected in the present Treaty, since the text of Article 3(1)
refers to “other measures of direct or indirect dispossession, total or partial, having
a similar effect” (emphasis added). Nevertheless, it is easy to exaggerate the
significance of this development. Indirect expropriation must still be expropriation
and, as the text of Article 3(1) makes plain, “measures of ... indirect dispossession”

must involve dispossession and must be of “similar effect” to expropriation.

 

See Article 1 and following oft ine International Law Commission Articles on State Responsibility, reprinted

in Crawford,

(2002), p. 94.

See, in particular, the award in Fireman’s Fund Insurance Company v. Mexico, ICSID Case No,

ARB(AF)02/01, para, 174. Although this award was not cited at the hearing, the Tribunal considers that the

proposition which it states is self-evident.

See, e.g., Dolzer and Stevens, above, at p. 99, and the awards in Metalclad v. Mexico, 5 ICSID Reps 209 at
230, Teomed v. Mexico, (2004) 43 ILM 133 at 161, Tippetts v, Iran 6 Iran-US CTR 219 at 225, Feldman v,

Mexico 7 ICSID Reps 341 at 366.

26

 

The Positions of the Parties

51.

52.

As explained above (para.36), the Claimant identifies two separate investments which it
maintains have been expropriated: its shareholding in TV3 and its contractual rights vis-a-
vis Mr . It does not contend that these have been the subject of a direct taking. It
continued to have both legal title to, and physical possession of, its shareholding until TV3
was put into liquidation, and its contracts with Mr were not abrogated by the
Media Council (or any other organ of the Czech State). Nevertheless, it contends that there
‘was an indirect, “creeping” expropriation which effectively deprived it of the economic

substance.of its investments. It relies, in particular, upon the following:-

(a) The decision of the Media Council, announced in the press release of 11 September
2001, not to approve Mr application to transfer the Licence to KTV

(“the negative transfer decision”);

(b) The decision of the Media Council to allow Mr. _ later application to
transfer the Licence to RTVG (“the positive transfer decision”); and

{c) The alleged failure of the Media Council to enforce the condition in the Licence
requiring that the operator (Mr and subsequently, following the transfer,
RTVG) broadcast TV3’s output, culminating in the Council’s decision, following a
petition from RTVG, to lift the condition altogether.

The Claimant maintains that the transfer decisions effectively expropriated its contractual
Tights to have the Licence transferred to KTV and then have Mr tshares in KTV
transferred to the Claimant, thus giving the Claimant contro] and ownership over the
company which held the Licence. By blocking the original application to transfer the
Licence to KTV, the Media Council (so it is claimed) prevented the ALTA contract from
being performed in the manner envisaged by its parties; then, by allowing the application to
transfer the Licence to RTVG, the Council made it impossible for the Claimant to secure
the Licence and left it with a claim for damages against Mr which, so the

27

 

 

 

 

 

 

33.

54,

55.

Claimant states, was worthless because Mr had insufficient assets to satisfy that

claim.

In advancing this argument, the Claimant maintains that the Media Council acted
unlawfully as a matter of Czech law. It refers in this regard to the decision of the
Constitutional Court, which found that there was a procedural defect in the way in which
the Media Council arrived at the negative decision, and the broad criticisms made of the
decision by the Rychetsky Report. The Claimant maintains that the Media Council lacked
the power to refuse the original application for the transfer of the Licence to KTV, On the
Claimant’s analysis, once it was shown that the company to which the Licence was to be
transferred was wholly owned by Mr ', the Media Council had no discretion and
was required to approve the transfer, The negative decision was thus ultra vires and, if the
Council had acted lawfully, the second application and the consequent positive decision
would never have been made, However, the Claimant also contends that the positive
decision is flawed in its own right, since the Council was aware that, in making this
application, Mr . was acting in breach of contract and, had the Council exercised
the same powers of review which it had employed in relation to Mr first

application, it would have refused the second application.'*

The Claimant also maintained, however, that the Tribunal did not need to decide whether
the Media Council had a discretion or not, since, even if the Council had acted lawfully
under Czech law, that did not prevent its conduct being a breach of the Treaty. That, the
Claimant contended, it plainly was, because the negative decision was discriminatory and
neither decision was reached in accordance with lawful procedure. Moreover, the effect of

the decisions was to desiroy the economic value of the contract rights without any form of

compensation."

The Claimant also contends that the actions and omissions of the Media Council deprived

its shareholding in TV3 of its economic value, The Claimant’s pleadings do not always

See Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 34.

28

 

56.

57.

distinguish between the effects on the contractual rights and the effects on the shareholding
in TV3. Nevertheless, it is clear that the Claimant maintains that by allowing Mr

to transfer the Licence to a company (RT VG) over which the Claimant and TV3
had no control, by failing to enforce the Licence condition requiring the Licence holder to
broadcast TV3’s output and eventually by removing the Licence condition altogether, the
Media Council deprived TV3 of the only guaranteed outlet for its production and thus

destroyed its business, rendering the shares in TV3 worthless.'>

An important part of the Claimant’s reasoning was its argument that, prior to the decisions
of the Media Council, TV3 was a viable company with significant economic prospects,
While this part of the Claimant’s case (and the Respondent’s reply thereto) was presented
chiefly in connection with arguments on the measure of compensation (an issue which
arises only if the Claimant is successful in establishing a violation of Article 3(1) of the
Treaty), it is also an important part of the case on whether such a violation occurred,
because if TV3 was a failing company with no real prospects (as the Respondent argued;
see para.61 below), then the actions and omissions of the Media Council could not have
been the cause of the Claimant’s losses. In effect, had TV3 been non-viable even before
the decisions of the Media Council, those decisions could not have destroyed an economic

value which the company did not possess in any event.

The Respondent counters by arguing, first, that the Claimant’s rights under the contracts
with Mr “were not capable of being expropriated. The Respondent notes that the
contracts in question were of a purely private character; that is to say they were between
private parties and did not bind any organ or agency of the Respondent State. According to
the Respondent, rights derived from contracts of that kind are not susceptible of

expropriation by the State and have never been held to be so susceptible.’

 

See Claimant’s Post-Hearing Brief, paras. 37-45,

See Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief, para. 46.

See Respondent’s Rejoinder at paras, 40 et seq. and Post-Hearing Brief at paras, 19 et seq.
29

 

 

 

58.

59.

60.

1s
19

Secondly, the Respondent argues that the chronology of the Media Council’s actions
precludes there having been an expropriation of the Claimant’s contract rights (even if

those rights were capable of being expropriated). This argument proceeds as follows:-

(a) The press release of 11 September 2001!” was not a legally binding decision and
could not therefore amount to an expropriation. The Media Council’s negative
decision only took effect some weeks later when it was formally published.

(6) — The formal decision could not amount to an expropriation either, because by the
time that formal decision was issued, Mr | had withdrawn his original
application and lodged the second application which the Media Council was
obliged to grant.

(c) Accordingly, by the time any formal decision was taken by the Media Council, the
only action which negatively affected the Claimant’s contractual rights was Mr

action in breaking his contract with the Claimant.'*

Thirdly, the Respondent contends that the Media Council acted lawfully throughout under
Czech law. In particular, itnot only had a power to inquire into whether Mr shad
beneficial ownership and actual control over KTV, as opposed to mere formal ownership
and control, it had a duty to do so, The Respondent maintained that, if the Media Council
had acted throughout in accordance with Czech law, its conduct could not amount to an
expropriation of the Claimant’s contract rights, nor could it give rise to a claim for any

diminution of the value of the shares in TV3.!”

Fourthly, the Respondent argued that the Claimant had misrepresented the effect of the
international decisions on indirect expropriation, which, it maintained, were of far more
limited effect and, in particular, did not extend to conduct of the kind involved in the

present case,

See paragraph 19, above,

See Respondent's Rejoinder at paras, 97 et seq.

See Respondent's Post-Hearing Brief at paras. 26-44.

See Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief at paras. 45-94.
30

 

 

61.

The Deci.

62.

63.

64,

Finally, the Respondent contested the Claimant’s case that TV3 was a viable economic
concer and argued that it was already facing grave financial difficulty and would not have

been able to succeed economically in any event!

 

e Tribunal

(a) Was the Claimant's Investment Capable of Being Expropriated

It is appropriate to begin with the Respondent’s argument that an investor's in personam
tights under a contract with a private party are not capable of expropriation. This argument
is closely related to the argument that the contract rights were not an investment within the
meaning of the Treaty, an argument which the Tribunal has already rejected (see paragraph
44 above). But the rejection of that earlier argument does not of itself entail rejection of the
Respondent’s thesis that, even if they were capable of constituting an investment, the

contract rights were not capable of being expropriated.

There is no inconsistency in holding that rights to performance under a contract with a
private party constitute an investment but not one which is capable of being expropriated,
Protection against expropriation is not the only safeguard which the Treaty affords to
investments, even though it is the only one the breach of which would fall within the

jurisdiction of a tribunal established under Article 8,

Nevertheless, the Tribunal is not persuaded by the Respondent's argument on this point,
Nothing in the text of Article 3(1) suggests, let alone compels, the conclusion that some
investments are simply incapable of expropriation or of being subjected to other measures
of similar effect. Nor is such a conclusion dictated by considerations of logic. Once it is

accepted that rights to performance under a contract between an investor and a private party

See Respondent’s Post-Hearing Brief at paras. 95-118.
31

 

 

 

65.

 

constitute an investment (as the Tribunal has decided), then if the State intervenes to
abrogate those rights, it follows that the State has taken, or at least destroyed the economic
value of, that investment. An obvious example would be a case in which the State
legislated to terminate rights for foreign investors under contracts concluded between those
investors and nationals of the State concerned. Moreover, the Tribunal is not convinced by
the Respondent’s analysis of the case law on this subject. While the Respondent argued
with great ingenuity that the decisions in Certain German Interests in Upper Silesia? and
the Norwegian Shipowners’ claims ™ were in reality decisions regarding rights in rem, the
actual reasoning in both cases strongly suggests that those who decided the two cases
considered that private contractual rights were, in principle, capable of expropriation and
they clearly approached the cases on that basis. While the Respondent is, of course,
entitled to argue that the two cases could have been decided more coherently on other
grounds, the Respondent’s attempts to force the actual decisions into the framework ofits
own legal analysis begins to resemble the attempts to force an ungainly foot into

Cinderella’s glass slipper and is no more successful.

The Tribunal therefore rejects the Respondent’s argument on this point and holds that the
Claimant’s rights under its contracts with Mr were capable of being
expropriated by the Czech Republic. The Tribunal considers that its conclusions on this
point are supported both by the two decisions cited in the previous paragraph and by the
language of the Treaty. Rights under a private contract plainly fall within the definition of
an investment under Article | of the Treaty and there is no indication in the text of the
Treaty, or in considerations of principle, that the Parties intended this category of
investment to fall outside the protection of Article 3(1). Whether the contract rights were
in fact expropriated is, of course, an entirely different matter. The Respondent’s
arguments, though unsuccessful on the broad argument of principle, nonetheless highlight
the fact that rights under a contract to which the State is not a party and which the State has
not intervened to annul will not easily be found to have been the subject of expropriation or

measures having a similar effect, The Tribunal turns to this issue at para.70 below.

PCI, Series A, No.7, 1926
Norway v USA, (Award, 13 October 1922) I RIAA 307.
32

 

 

 

66.

67.

25

(b) — The Respondent's Arguments Concerning the Sequence and Timing of the Different
Actions of the Media Council

Nor is the Tribunal persuaded by the Respondent’s arguments regarding the sequence and
timing of the Media Council's actions. The Respondent’s case, developed in particular in
its Rejoinder, is that the press statement published on 11 September 2001 had no legal
effect as a matter of Czech law, since decisions of the Media Council do not have binding
effect until formally served on the parties and the negative decision was not formally
delivered to Mr until 17 October 2001 by which date be had made the second
application, requesting permission for transfer to RTVG. The Respondent argues that the
publication of the press statement on 11 September was not a “measure attributable to the
Czech Republic” and that the formal decision on 17 October, while plainly a measure
attributable to the Czech Republic, cannot be impeached because of Mr -acts in
the intervening period which left the Media Council with no choice but to reject the initial
application since “the Licence-holder’s choice of legal entity is sovereign in an application

under Article 68(6) of the Media Law”.*

This argument is not convincing. The Tribunal accepts that the decision taken by the
Media Council became effective in Czech law only when formally notified on 17 October.
But the plain fact is that the decision was taken on an earlier date and then made public.
The Media Council is an organ of the Czech State for the purposes of international laws
and both the decision which it took, and the action of publishing a statement about that
decision, are acts which are attributable to the Czech State. If, when that decision became
legally effective, it would have amounted to expropriation of the Claimant’s rights (a
niatter we consider below), then it would be contrary to principle to hold that it lost that
character because Mr “had acted on the informal press announcement and made a
new and different application before he received the formal notification of the rejection of

Rejoinder, para. 101.
International Law Commission Articles on State Responsibility, Article 4; reprinted in Crawford, The

international Law Commission’s Articles on State Responsibility (2002), p. 94.
33

 

 

 

 

68.

69.

70.

his original application. The reality is that once the initial negative transfer decision had
been taken and notified, albeit informally, to Mr what followed was influenced

by that decision.

(c) Whether Compliance with Czech Law Precludes a Breach of the Treaty

The Claimant is plainly correct in its general assertion that even if the Media Council
complied throughout with the requirements of Czech law, that fact would not, by itself,
preclude the Council’s conduct from amounting to a breach of the Treaty, As Article 3 of

the International Law Commission’s Articles on State Responsibility provides —

“The characterization of an act of a State as internationally wrongful is governed by
international law. Such chare acterization i is not affected by the characterization of the
same act as lawful by internal law.”

This provision states a well established rule of international law of particular importance in

the investment field.

However, the fact that conduct might violate a rule of international law even though that
conduct is in accordance with the internal law of the State concerned does not mean that the

position under national law is irrelevant. This point is considered further below.

(d) Whether the Acts and Omissions of the Media Council Amounted to Expropriation

As the Tribunal has already explained, the present case turns on the concept of indirect
expropriation. The Claimant, understandably, urged on the Tribunal a very broad concept
of indirect expropriation, which, it maintained, occurs “whenever events demonstrate that
the owner was deprived of fundamental rights of ownership and it appears that the

Op. cit., p. 86.
34

 

7h.

72.

23.

 

deprivation is not ephemera!”.?” On the Claimant’s analysis, the intention of the State is
largely immaterial; “the intent of the government is less important than the effects of the
measures on the owner, and the form of the measures of control or interference is less
important than the reality of their impact”.”* The critical test is said to be whether “the
measures of which complaint is made substantially deprive the investment of economic

value”.”°

These statements (and a number of others relied upon by the Claimant) certainly point to an
expansive (and expanding) concept of indirect expropriation but the Tribunal believes that
these statements should be approached with a degree of caution and it has come to the view
that they do not sustain the conclusions advanced by the Claimant with regard to the facts

of the present case,

First, the context in which the statements about indirect expropriation were made is
important. The very broad language of the statement from Telenor 30 for example, is in the
context of an award dealing only with jurisdiction, in which the relevant issue was whether
or not the claimants had demonstrated a prima facie case of expropriation, rather than
whether such a claim was made out on the merits. The Telenor tribunal concluded (in what
may be described as fairly robust terms) that the claimants had failed to establish even a
prima facie case. The tribunal did not, therefore, have to grapple in any detail with the

limits of the concept of indirect expropriation.

Tippetts *! was a case in which the claimants were left with legal title to the investment but
that legal title had been reduced to a mere shell by the action of the Iranian Government in

taking over the management of the concer and effectively excluding the claimants from

Post-hearing Submissions, para. 25, quoting from the award of the lran-United States Claims Tribunal in
Tippetts v. Iran 6 Iran-US CTR 219 (29 June 1984) at 225.
Loc, cit., para. 26, quoting Tippetts at p. 225-6.
Loo, cit., quoting Telenor v. Hungary, ICSID Case No, ARB/04/15, Award (13 September 2006) at para. 63.
Telenor v. Hungary ICSID Case No. ARB/04/15, Award (13 September 2006),
Tippetis v. Iran 6 Iran-US CTR 219 (29 June 1984),

35

 

 

 

74.

75.

any participation therein. Starrett Housing **, another decision of the Iran-United States
Claims Tribunal on which the Claimant has relied, is very similar. It is not difficult to see
that the facts of these cases fall squarely within any concept of indirect expropriation. Yet
they are very far removed from the facts of the present case, Here, the Czech Republic has

not assumed control of the Claimant’s investment, which the Claimant continued to

manage to the last.

Moreover, the approach of the Iran-US Claims Tribunal in these cases is more cautious
than the brief quotations in the pleadings would suggest. Thus, the full text of the
paragraph in the Tippetts award from which the two clauses quoted in paragraphs 25-26 of
the Claimant’s Post-Hearing Submissions were taken is as follows (the part not quoted in

the Submissions being shown in italics):

“While assumption of control over property by a government does not
automatically and immediately justify a conclusion that the property has been taken.
by the government, thus requiring compensation under international law, such a
conclusion is warranted whenever events demonstrate that the owner was deprived
of fundamental rights of ownership and it appears that this deprivation is not merely
ephemeral. The intent of the government is less important than the effects of the
measures on the owner, and the form of the measures of control or interference is
Jess important than the reality of their impact.”

Seen as a whole, this passage is not only less expansive than the parts originally quoted
might appear, it is also very clearly linked to the assumption of control by a State of the

investment. That is not at all the case here,

Similarly, several of the cases, such as Metalclad ca which contain broad statements about
the scope of expropriation, were concerned with the refusal or withdrawal of permits which
had been granted, or at least promised, to the investor or his investment and without which

the business concerned could not lawfully be carried on. That is not this case. Nor is the

ration et al v, Islami ublic. (nterlocutory Award No. ITL32-34-1) 4 Iran-

US CTR 122.
6 Iran-US CTR 219 at 225-6.
Metalclad Corporation v. The United Mexican States ICSID Case No. ARB(AF)/97/1, Award, 30 August

2000,
36

 

76.

77.

78.

Tribunal assisted by the award in the case of CME v, Czech Republic (unreported). That
award is not only highly controversial and, indeed, directly contradicted by the award in
Lauder vy, Czech Republic (unreported) which arose out of the same set of facts, the
Tribunal considers that the Respondent is right in its submission that the case is

distinguishable from the present case on the facts.

Secondly, an investor who contracts with a private party, as the Claimant did here, and who
depends for the achievement of the full benefit of those contracts upon the host State’s
exercise of its regulatory powers is not entitled to compensation for expropriation merely
because regulatory decisions go against him, even ifthe consequence is that his business is
ruined. Certainly, he is entitled to fair and equitable treatment and not to be subjected to a
denial of justice but these are entitlements quite separate and distinct from the right not to

be subjected to expropriation; unfair and inequitable treatment by a regulatory agency is not

necessarily expropriation.

In the present case, the conduct of the Media Council may have fallen short of the standard
of fair and equitable treatment — the criticism ofits behaviour by the Rychetsky Report and
the Constitutional Court certainly raise a prima facie case to that effect— but that issue falls
outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.® The Tribunal has concluded, however, that,
whether the individual acts and omissions are considered separately or as a whole, they do

not amount to expropriation of the Claimant’s two investments.

To take, first, the negative transfer decision of the Media Council. This is said to amount
(whether by itself or in combination) to an expropriation of the Claimant’s rights under its
contracts with Mr » But the decision, whether or not it was ultra vires the
Council, did not alter the Claimant’s rights under the contracts, It did not even frustrate the
performance of the contracts. On the contrary, it was an event for which the ALTA
contained specific provision. In the event of the Media Council refusing permission for the

transfer of the Licence to KTV, the ALTA expressly provided a “plan B” in the form ofa

Similarly, these considerations may give rise to rights under national law but these also, and a fortiori, are not

within the jurisdiction of this Tribunal.
37

 

 

79.

80.

81.

requirement for Mr to make a fresh application for transfer of the Licence to a
Czech company owned by himself and of the Claimant’s choosing. It cannot be said that
by rejecting the contractual “plan A”, the Media Council negated the Claimant’s rights
under the ALTA.

What then went wrong for the Claimant was that, instead of complying with the fallback
provisions of the contract, Mr applied to transfer the Licence to a company
which had not been approved by the Claimant. This may well have been a breach of
contract by Mr but that is not an act attributable to the Czech Republic and
cannot give rise to a claim before this Tribunal. The Claimant maintains that the Media
Council should have rejected the application and thus prevented Mr from
committing a breach of contract. It is questionable whether the Council had the power to
do that; its function was not to enforce private contractual obligations but to ensure
compliance with the Media Law. However, even if it could or should have rejected the
application on the grounds suggested by the Claimant, its failure to do so did not amount to

expropriation of the Claimant’s rights under the ALTA.

Contrary to the way the Claimant has sometimes expressed its case, the Claimant had no
right vis-a-vis the world at large to the Licence, nor did it have any such right to acquire the
Licence, What it had was (i) a right against Mr to have Mr make
certain applications to the Media Council, and (ii) once one of those applications was
successful, aright to have Mr transfer his shares in the recipient company to the

Claimant,

The Claimant argues that the decisions of the Media Council left it with nothing but a right
to claim damages from Mr and that Mr financial circumstances

rendered that claim worthless.** There are three reasons why the Tribunal does not accept

that argument.

See Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief at para. 36,

 

 

 

82.

83.

84,

First, even after the positive transfer decision had been taken, it was still open to Mr
‘to transfer his interest in RTVG to the Claimant. Had he done so, the Claimant
would have been in the same position as if the ALTA’s plan B had been properly carried
out from the outset. It is arguable that Mr ‘had a duty to behave in this way,
Conversely, had the Licence been transferred to a Czech company approved by the
Claimant, there would still have been the risk that Mr would then have declined
to transfer his ownership interest. In other words, the reason why the Claimant failed to get
what it considered was its contractual entitlement was the behaviour of Mr
That behaviour by a private party is not a “taking of property by the State” even ifthe State
(in the form of the Media Council) could have prevented that behaviour.

Secondly, and more fundamentally, if the Claimant were right, then a court which failed to
order performance of a contract between a private party and a foreign investor (whether by
way of an order for specific performance or some equivalent form of relief) in
circumstances where damages later proved an inadequate remedy because of the private
party’s penury would have committed an expropriation of the investor’s coniract rights.
Such a proposition is simply untenable and there is no authority which comes anywhere
near supporting it. And if such an argument cannot succeed in the case of a court, which
has a duty to enforce contractual rights, then, a fortiori, it cannot be correct in the case ofa

regulatory body with very different functions.

Thirdly, and perhaps most fundamentally of all, the Claimant’s argument is based upon a
misconception of the relationship between contractual rights and the law of expropriation.
While the Tribunal accepts that rights contained in a contract between an investor and
another private party are capable of being expropriated by the State (see paragraphs 62-65
above), such an expropriation will normally take the form of action by the State which
terminates or substantially amends the contractual rights and entitlements of the investor. In
the present case, the Media Council did nothing of the kind. The extent of the Claimant’s

rights against Mr: under the ALTA were not altered in any way.

39

 

 

85.

86.

87.

The Claimant’s case is, of course, that, even though its contractual rights remained, they
were rendered worthless, so that the Media Council’s actions amount to a form of indirect
expropriation. But that misunderstands the nature of rights under the contract. The essence
of those contractual rights was that one party to the contract has a right to performance of
the contract by the other party and a right, in the event of that other party failing to perform,
to damages for non-performance. Even if one accepts that the combined effect of the
negative and positive transfer decisions was that the Claimant could no longer secure
performance of the ALTA, it was left with its right to damages. The Claimant’s answer is
that that right was worthless, because Mr had insufficient assets,”” so that the
practical effect of the decisions was to destroy its rights under the ALTA. That suggests,
however, that, if Mr. had had sufficient assets, then there would have been no
destruction of the Claimant’s contract rights and no expropriation (or other breach of
Article 3(1)). Whether the action of a State amounts to a taking of an investor’s rights
under a contract with another private party cannot, however, be dependent upon the
financial circumstances of that other private party. The host State of an investment is not
the guarantor of the performance by private parties of their contractual obligations, nor is it

the guarantor of their financial viability.

That leaves the rights under the service agreement between TV3 and Mr and
the shareholding in TV3. The service agreement gave TV3 the right to broadcast its
programmes through Mr channel. That was a private contractual right. TV3

also had the benefit of the Licence condition which required the Licence holder to use

TV3’s output.

The decisions of the Media Council were not the reason for the breakdown of the service
agreement. Following the transfer of the Licence, Mr. (as the owner of RTVG)
offered to enter into negotiations for the continuation of the service agreement provisions
but TV3 declined to do so. Whether Mr was in breach of contract or whether
TV3 was being obdurate, there can be no question of an expropriation at this point. This

was a contract dispute between the parties to a private law agreement, The behaviour of

See Claimant's Post-Hearing Brief at para. 36. 40

88.

89,

those parties was not conduct attributable to the Czech Republic as amatter of international
law and it was not capable of amounting to an expropriation or a measure similar to an

expropriation.

Nor is the treatment of the Licence condition a measure of — or similar to — expropriation.
The Licence condition imposed obligations upon the Licence holder but it did not confer
rights upon TV3. Moreover, the relationship between TV3 and Mr (and RTVG)
was already in a bad state when the Media Council was confronted with this issue. While
the Council’s attempts to enforce the Licence condition may have been half-hearted,
neither the failure of those attempts nor the subsequent removal of the Licence condition,
which occurred after TV3 had indicated that it could not work with RTVG, could be said to
amount to an expropriation of the rights under the service agreement. On the contrary, the
record shows that the Media Council took action against RTVG to ensure that it complied
with the Licence and only revoked the Licence condition after TV3 had written to it to
make clear that it could not work with RTVG. Thus, on 25 February 2002 TV3 stated, in a
letter which was copied to the Media Council, that “in the current situation there is
absolutely no possibility of co-operation of TV3 a.s. with the company RTV Galaxieas. in
any sphere” and that “T'V3 a.s. does not wish to be associated with RTV Galaxie a.s, and its
broadcasting in any manner”,”*® .

Nor does the Tribunal accept that any of the measures referred to by the Claimant and
discussed above can amount to an expropriation of the Claimant’s indirect shareholding in
TV3. The Claimant’s legal interest in TV3 was not altered by these measures — what it
owned (directly or indirectly) before those measures, it still owned after they had been
taken. The Claimant’s case is, of course, that the measures had had the effect of destroying
the value of that legal interest, The Tribunal does not agree, For the reasons given above,
the Tribunal considers that it was the actions of Mr and RTVG, rather than those
of any organ of the Czech Republic, which caused the losses which the Claimant sustained.

Exhibit R-57 to the Statement of Defence.
41

 

 

90,

91.

That fact, by itself, is fatal to the Claimant’s case and makes it unnecessary for the Tribunal
to consider the Claimant's legal arguments. Nevertheless, in view of the skill with which
they were advanced we wish briefly to comment upon them, The Claimant’s argument was
that the destruction of the value of its indirect legal interest in TV3 was such as to amount
to an indirect expropriation or similar measure, The Tribunal considers that this pushes the
concepts of indirect expropriation and measures similar thereto beyond whatis sustainable
either as a matter of the interpretation of the text of Article 3 or by way of application of the

general principles of the law of expropriation.

As explained above (paragraphs 46-50), while both the Treaty and the general international
law recognize a concept of what may be termed “indirect expropriation”, they do so only
within limits. Article 3 refers to “measures of ... indirect dispossession” having an effect
similar to expropriation. In the present case, the Tribunal cannot see that there has been
any dispossession — total or partial, direct or indirect — of the Claimant's legal interest in
TV3. So far as the general law is concemed, indirect expropriation must still be
expropriation. The cases in which indirect expropriation has been found to have occurred
notwithstanding that there has been neither a physical taking nor a transfer of legal title
have to be approached with considerable care. The most prominent of these awards, those
emanating from the Iran-United States Claims Tribunal, concerned cases in which the
owner of property had effectively been deprived of any opportunity to manage or control
that property, e.g., through the appointment by government of managers who took over the
entire operation of the investment. In a case of that kind, it is appropriate to speak of the
owner being subjected to indirect expropriation even though he retained the legal title to the
property in question. But that is not the case here. The Claimant retained not only legal
title but full control of the investment throughout. Certainly that investment had declined
in value but that is not at all the same as saying that it had been expropriated. As the
Tribunal in the Fireman's Fund case put it, for indirect expropriation, there “must be a
substantially complete deprivation of the economic use and enjoyment of rights to the
property, or of identifiable distinct parts thereof (i.e. it approaches total impairment)”. We

do not consider that the present case reaches that level.

42

 

92,

93.

94,

QUANTUM

The Tribunal is glad to acknowledge the skill and care devoted by the parties to the
preparation of the evidence and submissions on the issue of quantum, to which the
arbitrators themselves devoted equal attention. Inevitably, it is a matter of some
disappointment that this material cannot be deployed in the present award. Nevertheless the
Tribunal is quite clear that there would be no benefit to the parties, or to the world of
arbitration at large, by entering into this area of the dispute, Given the conclusions of the
Tribunal on liability an exploration of quantum would have been empty of practical
content, and the expression of a purely academic line of reasoning could be a real
impediment if the same or similar questions were to arise in the future, It will be better to

leave these questions for decision elsewhere if and when they become live issues,

COSTS

There remains the question of costs. Although the State has ultimately prevailed, it had
only a partial success on the separate issue of jurisdiction, and not all ofits submissions on
liability were accepted. It may be that a simple solution, that “costs follow the event”, is
nevertheless appropriate here, or that the successes were so evenly divided that it would be
fair to allow the costs to lie where they fall; or that some intermediate soiution best fits the
circumstances. While the Tribunal could proceed immediately to a choice, and embody it in
the present Award, the amount of money involved in costs is likely to be substantial, and
the Tribunal considers it more fair to allow time for a possible compromise on costs, or at
least for the exchange of submissions, We therefore leave out this topic which will thereby

become a further partial award.

CONCLUSION

Accordingly, the Tribunal hereby makes and publishes its Partial Award as follows:
43

a. The Claimant’s claim fails and is dismissed

b. All issues regarding the costs of and occasioned by the arbitration and this our

Award arereserved for subsequent determination.

 

Lord Mustill (Chairman)

Ai Z/

Sir Christopher Greenwood

 

 

3 july 2009

London

44

ANNEX B

The Parties and Representation

1.

w

*

The Claimant is European Media Ventures S.A., a company incorporated and organised
under the laws of the Grand Duchy of Luxenberg and having its registered address at 12,
tue Léon Thyes, L-2636 Luxenbourg.

The Claimant is represented by Brenda D.Horrigan of Salans, 9, rue Boissy d’Anglas,
75008 Paris, and Ladislav Storek of Salans, Platnétska 4, 110 00 Prague 1, Czech
Republic. In addition, Mr Jeffrey M Hertzfeld is acting as Special Counsel to Salans.

. The Respondent is the Czech Republic, a sovereign State, represented by its Ministry of

Finance as the body responsible for, among other matters, protection of foreign
investments, The address of the Ministry of Finance of the Czech Republic is Letenska
15, 118 10 Prague 1, Czech Republic.

The Respondent is represented by Zachary Douglas of Counsel, Lud&k Vrana of
Linklaters, Palac Myslbek, Na Pfikopé 19, 117 19 Prague 1, Czech Republic, and Greg
Reid of Linklaters, One Silk Street, London, ECZY 8HQ. By letter dated 11 June 2009,
Linklaters notified the Tribunal that the Prague office had become part of an independent
law firm rebranded as Kinstellar, but retaining the same address.

The Treaty

5.

The Agreement between the Belgian-Luxembourg Economic Union and the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic concerning the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of
Investments, 1992 (“the Treaty”) was entered into between the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic and the Belgium Luxembourg Economic Union on 24 April 1989 and, in
accordance with its Article 10(1), entered into force on 13 February 1992, As of |
January 1993, the Respondent succeeded to the rights and obligations of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic under the Treaty and is now a Contracting Party thereof.

The seat and language of the arbitration

6.

At the first procedural conference held on 18 October 2006, the Tribunal confirmed that
the seat of the arbitration was to be London and the language English.

Progress of the Proceedings

7.

The Claimant filed a Notice of Dispute in this matter under Article 7(1) of the Treaty
addressed to the Respondent dated 17 February 2003. During the course of 2003 and
1

 

2004, the parties engaged in efforts towards an amicable resolution, but settlement was
not achieved.

8. The Claimant formally referred the dispute to arbitration under the UNCITRAL
Arbitration Rules by Notice of Arbitration dated and served on 22 August 2005, by which
it nominated Dr Julian D M Lew Q.C. as its party-appointed arbitrator.

9. Subsequently, the Respondent appointed Professor Christopher Greenwood CMG, Q.C.
as co-arbitrator, On 12 December 2005, the two arbitrators invited Lord Mustill to act as
the Chairman of the Tribunal. Lord Mustill acknowledged the appointment by letter of 1
February 2006, and invited the parties in the first instance to confer between them as to
the dates for exchange of statements of case. Lord Mustill confirmed his acceptance
subject to specified terms by correspondence to the parties dated 31 July 2006.

10, The Claimant submitted its Statement of Claim, together with exhibits, on 29 May 2006.

11. By correspondence dated 5 June 2006, the Respondent notified the Claimant that it
maintained preliminary objections to the jurisdiction and admissibility of the Claimant’s
claims and proposed a timetable for the proceedings including potential bifurcation of
those objections from the parties’ submissions on the mierits.

12. By order dated 30 June 2006, the Tribunal instructed the Respondent to address the issues
comprehensively in its Statement of Defence. In default of consent between the parties,
the Chairman ruled on 3 July 2006 that the Respondent was to deliver its Statement of
Defence and Counterclaim on or before Friday 1 September 2006 (“the First Procedural
Order).

13. In the event, the Respondent enclosed its Statement of Defence, together with exhibits, in
correspondence dated 15 September 2006. In the covering letter thereto, the Respondent
again advocated bifurcation of jurisdiction and the merits by reference inter alia to
Article 21(4) of the UNICITRAL Arbitration Rules, which the Claimant rejected by letter
of 6 October 2006. At this time, the Claimant contended that there should be discrete
hearings of liability and quantum, citing efficiency and Articles 15 and 32(1) of the
UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules,

14. The Tribunal and parties convened for the first procedural conference on Wednesday 18
October 2006 at Essex Court Chambers, London. At this meeting, the Tribunal issued
directions which included that two of the jurisdictional issues should be heard as
preliminary issues, viz:

(1) The issue of interpretation arising under Article 8(1) [of the Treaty]; and

(2) Whether an Article 8(1) claim can extend to the minimum standard of treatment
obligation.

15,In addition, the Tribunal established a timetable for the parties’ written and oral
submissions on the preliminary issues; the format and delivery of statements of case, and
confirmed that the seat and language of the arbitration were to be London and English

respectively.

16. The preliminary issues were heard on Thursday 18 January 2007 at Essex Court
Chambers, London. On Thursday 22 February 2007 the Tribunal communicated to the
parties in these terms:

1, The Tribunal has deliberated on the jurisdictional objections raised by the Czech
Republic which were the subject of the oral hearing held on 18 January 2007,

2, The Tribunal has concluded, not without some hesitation:-

a. that its jurisdiction is circumscribed by the provisions of Article 8(1) of the
Agreement between the Belgian-Luxembourg Economic Union and the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic concerning the Reciprocal Promotion and
Protection of Investments, 1992 (“the Treaty”);

. that, contrary to the Claimant's submissions, jurisdiction does not extend to
making findings in respect of Article 2(3) and (4) of the Treaty;

S

be)

that, contrary to the Respondent's submissions, jurisdiction extends to
determining whether there has been an expropriation and, if so, whether there
arises, under Article 3(1) of the Treaty, a duty on the part of the Respondent to
pay compensation; and

that the burden of establishing that there has been an expropriation and that
there is a consequent duty under Article 3(1) of the Treaty to pay
compensation rests on the Claimant.

x

3. In light of the above decision, the Tribunal intends to go ahead with the short
procedural hearing scheduled for the morning of 1 March 2007, with a view to
prescribing a timetable and fixing the date and duration of the substantive hearing.
The parties are requested to consult regarding the agenda for that hearing and a
proposed timetable for the next phase of written and oral pleadings and the
appropriate date and approximate duration of the substantive hearing; and to notify
the Secretary of their proposals not later than 5,00 pm, London time, on 27 February
2007.

 

 

4, The Tribunal will set out its detailed reasons for its conclusions regarding
Jurisdiction in its award on the merits.

17, At the second procedural conference on Thursday 1 March 2007, the Respondent
requested the Tribunal to furnish the parties with a reasoned award on the preliminary
issues prior to the third procedural conference scheduled for Thursday 15 May 2007.

. In addition, at the second procedural conference, and as recorded in the second procedural
order, dated 1 March 2007, the Tribunal determined the forthcoming timetable for the
reference, including in relation to disclosure, service of Reply by the Claimant and
Rejoinder by the Respondent, and further rebuttal witness statements and expert reports,
Dates for the substantive hearing were reserved.

os

, On 15 May 2007, the Tribunal provided to the parties its Award on Jurisdiction, in which
it gave a reasoned award in relation to the decision communicated to the parties on 22
February 2007.

S

20, At the third procedural conference on 15 May 2007, and as recorded in the third
procedural order of the same date, the Tribunal heard applications for and ordered the
disclosure of certain documents, following requests for disclosure by both parties.

21. The Respondent commenced proceedings in the Commercial Court in London, seeking to
set aside the Tribunal’s Award of Jurisdiction dated 15 May 2007, pursuant to section
67(1)(a) of the Arbitration Act 1996, on the grounds that the Tribunal lacked substantive
jurisdiction. A hearing in the Commercial Court took place on 6 September 2007. On 5
December 2007, Simon J handed down judgment finding that the Tribunal was conferred
with substantive jurisdiction and dismissing the Respondent’s application.

22. By letter dated 13 September 2007, the Claimant informed the Tribunal that the parties
had agreed that the service of the Claimant’s Reply be deferred to 17 or 18 September
2007 due to a hospitalisation of one of the witnesses for whom the Claimant was

submitting a statement.

. In the event, the Claimant submitted its Reply with exhibits on 19 September 2007.

N
o

. By letter dated 4 December 2007, the Respondent’s solicitors set out a proposed variation
to the procedural timetable, by which the time limits for submission of the Respondent’s
Rejoinder, and the rebuttal witnesses were extended, and the hearing listed to take place
in London during the second week of the period previously set aside, The Claimant
agreed in large part to the variation. By email on 5 December 2007, the Tribunal
informed the parties that it agreed to this variation of the timetable.

nD
=

25. The Respondent submitted its Rejoinder on 21 December 2007, together with exhibits,
4

 

26, The Tribunal issued a procedural order by email on 23 January 2008 in relation to the
service of rebuttal witness statements, and convening a procedural hearing for 7 February

2008.

27. The Claimant submitted rebuttal witness statements and reports from its experts on 25
January 2008, The Respondent submitted a rebuttal expert report on 5 February 2008.

28. A procedural hearing was held by telephone on 7 February 2008 regarding outstanding
steps and housekeeping matters before the main hearing.

29. Written pre-hearing briefs were submitted by both parties,

30. The main hearing was held between 18 to 22 February 2008. The Tribunal heard opening
submissions from Counsel. We also heard evidence from the following witnesses:

(@) Mr
(b) Mr
(©) Mr
(d) Ms Lauren Cole (expert)
(e&) Mr

() Mr

() Mr

(h) Mr

@ Mr

(Gj) Mr Ronaid Milier (expert)
(k) Mr William Inglis (expert)

31. The parties submitted written post-hearing briefs. In addition, the Respondent submitted
an application based on its international public policy argument, which the Claimant
replied to.

 

 

 

 

 

