IN THE MATTER OF AN ARBITRATION
UNDER THE UNCITRAL RULES

ETWEEN
EUROPEAN MEDIA VENTURES S.A.
Claimant
-and-
THE CZECH REPUBLIC
Respondent
Tribunal:

Lord Mustill (Chairman)
Sir Christopher Greenwood C,.M.G., Q.C.
Dr. Julian Lew.Q.C.

Secretary to the Tribunal:

Tain Quirk Esq.

|
|
i
1

 

 

 

 

 

i
L
|

 

 

L ARD (C Ss

This is the third and final award in this arbitration. This Award deals
with liability for the parties’ respective costs and the Tribunal’s costs
incurred in connection with this matter.
The two earlier awards were:
i, the Partial Award on Jurisdiction dated 15 May 2007
(the Award on Jurisdiction); and
il. the Partial Award on Liability dated 8 July 2009 (the
Award on Liability).
These two awards form an integral part of, and are incorporated
into, this Final Award on Costs. They detail, inter a/ia, the parties
and their representatives, the procedural arrangements and
timetable, and the arguments raised and determined in this
arbitration. Except where otherwise expressly stated all references
and abbreviations are the same as used in these earlier two awards.

Background facts

4,

5.

It Is convenient to begin by recalling the events relevant to the

issue of costs.

(a) The arbitration was brought under the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules. The Claimant maintained that the Respondent had
violated Articles 2 and 3 of the Bilateral Investment Treaty
between the Belgian-Luxembourg Economic Union and the
Czechoslavak Socialist Republic (“the Treaty”) and brought
claims in respect of each alleged violation.

 

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

The Treaty stipulated that disputes relating to its
interpretation or application should be submitted to
arbitration. It further stipulated (by Article 8) that disputes
concerning compensation due by virtue of Article 8(1) and (3)
should be submitted to ad hoc arbitration.

The Respondent objected that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction
over claims based on Article 2 of the Treaty, and that its
jurisdiction in relation to claims under Article 3 was limited to
disputes concerning the amount of any compensation due,
and did not extend to the question whether any compensation
at all was in principle payable,

Pursuant to an order of the Tribunal the proceedings were
divided into two consecutive stages. The first dealt with the
issues of jurisdiction. Oral and written evidence and
submissions were advanced, culminating in an oral hearing on
18 January 2007. In its Award on Jurisdiction, dated 15 May
2007, the Tribunal ruled that it had no jurisdiction under
Article 2, but that it did have jurisdiction to determine
whether the Respondent had expropriated the Claimant's
property and, therefore, whether any compensation was in
principle due under Article 3.

The Claimant did not attempt to overturn the adverse ruling of
the Tribunal in relation to Article 2, but the Respondent
instituted proceedings in the High Court in London to set aside
that part of the Award which asserted jurisdiction over the
claim under Article 3, These proceedings terminated in a
judgment of Mr. Justice Simon on 5 December 2007 upholding
the decision of the Tribunal on this issue.

 

 

 

i
i

 

 

(9)

(h)

(i)

 

The outcome of this phase was that the arbitration remained
alive, but in a much curtailed form: only one of the two bases
of claim could thenceforth be pursued and there was much
less scope for a close examination of facts and motives than
there would have been under the standard of fair and
equitable treatment set by Article 2.

Although, as appears from the Award on Liability, a
substantial body of subsidiary issues remained for
consideration, the dispute about whether the Respondent
was liable to “compensate” the Claimant for an
“expropriation” of an investment, within the meaning of
Article 3, and if so what the amount of the compensation
should be was essentially a question of principle. This was the
subject of the second stage of the arbitration, at which further
evidence and submissions were advanced, leading to an oral
hearing during February 2008, ‘

In the course of this hearing the Respondent introduced a new
Issue, namely whether the proceedings should be completely
halted, on the ground that an executive of the Claimant was
said to have engaged in conduct, related to the matters in
issue in the arbitration, which was contrary to international
public policy.

Ultimately, in its Award on Liability the Tribunal rejected the
application to halt the arbitration on the grounds of public
policy and rejected several other submissions by the
Respondent but it concluded that there had been no
expropriation and therefore rejected the claim in Its entirety
(see paragraphs 71-89 of the Award on Liability).

   

Costs sought by Parties

6.

It is against this background that the Tribunal now turns to the

question of costs. The Parties were unable to reach an agreement.

between themselves regarding the question of costs and each,
therefore, made submissions to the Tribunal.

The Claimant contends that the most appropriate order in this case
would be for each Party to bear Its own costs. The Claimant argued
that “neither party can truly be said to have succeeded on the case
each presented to the Arbitral Tribunal” and that it had prevailed on
a number of issues in the Award on Liability. The Claimant did not
provide the Tribunal with a statement of the legal fees and other
expenses which it had incurred in connection with this arbitration.

The Respondent contends that it should recover ail its costs on the
ground that the Tribunal found that it had no jurisdiction in respect
of the Article 2 claim and dismissed the Article 3 claim. The
Respondent stated its costs and expenses to be £1,410,400.

Both parties have contributed equally to the Tribunal’s costs, having
deposited £250,000 (£125,000 each) in an escrow account
administered by. LCIA (“the LCIA account”), as requested by

Tribunal.*

The Tribunal’s Authority to Determine Costs

10.

The Tribunal’s authority to determine these costs issues is governed
by Articles 38 and 40 of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules. The power
and duty to make an award of costs is created by Article 38 of the

The Claimant and the Respondent also paid £200 and £293.75 respectively in
5

respect of appointment fees.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1i,

12.

 

Rules, which distinguishes between the costs of legal representation
and assistance of the successful party (Article 38(e)) on the one
hand, and the fees and expenses of the arbitrators, and of certain
witnesses (Articles 38(a)-(d)) on the other. We shall refer to these
two categories as “representation costs’ and “tribunal fees”,
respectively.

The UNCITRAL Rules prescribe rather different regimes for the two
categories of costs, For “representation costs” they stipulate that —

‘the arbitral tribunal, taking into account the
circumstances of the case, shall be free to determine which
party shall bear such costs or may apportion such costs
between the parties if It determines that apportionment is
reasonable.” (Article 40, paragraph 2).

For “tribunal fees”, by contrast, the Rules require that

“,,,the costs of arbitration shall in principle be borne by the
unsuccessful party ...” (Article 40 paragraph 1)

but the same Rule permits a tribunal to apportion the costs between
the parties --

‘, if it determines that apportionment Is reasonable, taking
into account the circumstances of the case.”

Before setting out to apply these provisions we must address the
Claimant’s threshold argument that ™..,the Arbitral Tribunal’s powers
under the UNCITRAL Rules should be seen through the prism of

6

 

 

13.

14,

is.

standard practice in treaty arbitration cases” and that this practice
is that “costs shifting’ in treaty arbitration cases is not common.”

Striking though the metaphor may be, it amounts in ordinary
speech to saying that— (a) an apportionment of costs in investment
treaty arbitrations is uncommon, (b) from which it follows that an
apportionment should be avoided even if the parties have explicitly
empowered the Tribunal to make one, In the opinion of the Tribunal
this proposition has only to be stated to be rejected, for a usage (if
there is one, on which the present Tribunal finds it unnecessary to
rule) must yield to the choice of a particular regime expressed in
the UNCITRAL Rules.

The next step is to note the problems which can be created by the
word “unsuccessful” in Article 40 (1) in those cases where there is
no outright winner. For example, when a claimant recovers only
one-half of his claim, each party has both won and lost, and it can
be said that neither has been unsuccessful. Only if the word is
understood as subject to an implied qualification such as “wholly”
can the presumption be made to work, and to read in such a

qualification would entail significant alteration to the express terms:

of the Article. We do not however have to reach a conclusion upon
it, for in the present case the Claimant began the arbitration to
recover a large sum of money, and has come away with nothing.

Whatever may have happened at the intermediate stages, the
adventure as a whole has been a failure. It follows that there is a
presumption that “tribunal fees” follow the event, and should be
borne by the Claimant. This presumption is however rebuttable, and
does not apply at all to “representation costs.” Accordingly, the
Tribunal is free to look to the interests of justice, and to make such
apportionment, If any, that It considers appropriate and reasonable

to meet the particular circumstances of the case- amongst which,
7

 

 

 

 

 

16,

17,

albeit not decisive, will be the degree of success of each party, The
shape of Article 40 suggests that for this purpose different
enquiries, leading to potentially different results, may be
appropriate for the two different types of costs. Whilst accepting this
as a theoretical possibility, however, the present Tribunal sees no
ground to distinguish between the two in the present case.

There is however another, and this time more conspicuous,
distinction to be drawn; namely, between the two consecutive
phases of the arbitration, relating first to jurisdiction and then to
“the merits”, The application of Article 40 to a situation of this kind
is not straightforward, for the two phases differed both as to the
degree to which each party obtained what it sought, and also as to
the distribution of success and fallure among the individual issues
arising in each phase. Thus, at the end of the jurisdictional phase
the Respondent had taken a major step forward, and yet could still
have lost on the merits. It was not until the end of the second phase
that it could be identified as the overall winner and, on the way, a
number of subsidiary battles had to be fought, and in some
instances lost.

One way to deal with this problem would be to perform separate
adjudications for each phase, starting with the first and weighing up
all the factors relevant to the proceedings on jurisdiction and
arriving at an appropriate allocation of costs; and then, drawing a
mental line under it, proceed to a similar exercise in relation to the
merits; and finally combining the two allocations into a single
outcome. This process although attractive would not in our opinion
be sound, for there were not here two arbitrations, but only one,
separated into two phases for convenience and economy alone; and
the weights to be attached to each of the relevant factors should not

 

18.

19,

be affected by the choice of the Tribunal to proceed step by step
rather than with a unified hearing,

Tt would however be pedantic to carry this approach to the extreme
of ignoring altogether the additional time and expense resulting
from the Respondent’s unsuccessful attempts to terminate the
arbitration altogether on jurisdiction, or its equally unsuccessful
multiple defences on the merits (including the allegation of
blackmaif), rather than concentrating on the short question of
expropriation,

Taking all these matters together, the Tribunal thinks it plain that
the whole of the costs should not be left to lie where they fall; such
an approach would be too favourable to the Claimant. At the same
time the Respondent would be over-compensated by an indemnity
for anything approaching the totality of its expenditures. Exact
arithmetical computation is impossible in this field, and would only
give a false air of scientific method, We think it preferable to take a

broad view and work in round figures.

The Tribunal’s Conclusions regarding Costs

20.

 

Accordingly the Tribunal has decided to allocate the costs in this
case along the following lines. Although Respondent has been
successful in this arbitration, i.e. it defeated Claimant’s claims under
Articles 2 of the Treaty, as falling outside the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal, and its claims under Article 3 on substantive grounds, the
Respondent was unsuccessful on one aspect of its jurisdictional
challenge, and on several grounds relating to the substantive issue
in this arbitration. The Tribunal has accordingly concluded that it
would be unfair to apportion to the Claimant all of the

representation costs. Rather, the Tribunal has concluded, to reflect
9

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

21,

22,

23.

24,

 

the result in this arbitration, that the Claimant should reimburse the
Respondent for a portion of Its costs in this arbitration. The
Tribunal has unanimously concluded that an appropriate amount for
the Claimant to pay the Respondent as a contribution towards its
representation costs is £400,000. This conclusion has been reached
in light of the total fees claimed by Respondent and what the
Tribunal considers reasonable in the light of the overall conduct and
result in this arbitration.

Payment of this sum shall be made within 30 days of the date of
this Award, failing which simple interest shall accrue on the
£400,000, at the rate of 8% per annum, from the date of this Award
until the date of payment.

There remain the “tribunal fees”, These amount to £243,945.62.
As required by Article 38(a) of the UNCITRAL Rules the fees are
stated separately for each arbitrator.?

Here the Tribunal has decided that the share borne by each Party
should be adjusted so as to reflect the principles applied by the
Tribunal in respect of representation costs (as set down in
paragraph 21, above). On that basis, the Tribunal considers it
appropriate that the Claimant should bear two thirds of the total
tribunal fees, This amounts to £162,630.41. That leaves the
Respondent's share as £81,315.21,

Taking account of the deposit paid by each Party, the appointment
fees and the interest earned by the account, the LCIA account
currently stands at £253,266,57, Since the Tribunal’s fees and
expenses come to £243,945.62, this leaves a surplus of £9,320,95

2 In Appendix A hereto.
10

25,

26,

27.

to be returned to the Parties. As the Respondent has contributed
significantly more (£125,293.75) than the share of tribunal fees
which the Tribunal has determined (see paragraph 23, above) it
should bear (namely £81,315.21), the Tribunal considers that the
entirety of this surplus should be refunded to the Respondent. That
will reduce the amount contributed by the Respondent to
£115,972.80. The difference between that sum and £81,315.21,
namely £34,657.59, should be paid by the Claimant to the

Respondent.

The Tribunal therefore directs that: (i) the fees of the Tribunal, as
detailed in Appendix A, shall be paid from the escrow account
forthwith; (ii) the balance remaining in this account after such
payment (£9,320.95 ) shall be paid to the Respondent; and (iii) the
Claimant shail pay to the Respondent a further sum of £34,657,59.

Payment of the sum of £34,657.59 shall be made by the Claimant
within 30 days of the date of this Award, failing which simple
interest shall accrue on that sum, at the rate of 8% per annum,
from the date of this Award until the date of payment.

WARD

Accordingly, the Tribunal has determined and makes this Final

Award:

(a) The Claimant shall pay £400,000 in respect of
representational costs and £34,657.59 in respect of
tribunal fees; ie. a total of £434,657.59, to the
Respondent within 30 days of the date of this Award.

ii

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(b)

(c)

(a)

(e)

In the event that payment of the above amount is not
made within 30 days of the date of this Award, simple
interest shall accrue on that amount at the rate of 8%
per annum from the date of this Award until the date of
payment,

The fees and expenses of the Tribunal, as detalled in
Appendix A to this Award, shall be paid forthwith from
the escrow account.

The balance of funds held on deposit after paying the
Tribunal’s fees and expenses shail be repaid to the
Respondent,

All other claims and reliefs sought by the Parties are
dismissed,

Place of Arbitration: Loncion
Date gsm” January 2010

 

12

 

 

Appendix A

 

ARBITRATION: European Media Ventures v The Czech Republic
{LCIA Ref; 6842F)

FINANCIAL SUMMARY as at 28 January 2010

g £ £
FUNDS RECEIVED
From Claimant;
09-Oct-06 Appointment Fee 200.00
03-Sep-07 Deposit 50,000.00
19-Jun-09 Deposit 60,000.00

18,000.00 125,200.00

From Respondent:

01-Jun-06 Appointment Fee 293.75
05-Sep-07 Deposit 50,000.00
26-Jun-09 Deposit 60,000.00
45,000.00 425,293,758
Bank Interest Credited 2,772.82
TOTAL FUNDS RECEIVED & CREDITED 253,266.57
LESS COSTS OF ARBITRATION:

Tribunal's fees;

 

Lord Michael Mustill - to 17Augd9 72,025,00
Dr Jullan Lew - to 17Aug09 69,600.00
Sir Christopher Greenwood - to 17Aug09 64,850.00 206,475.00

 

Tribunal's expenses: :
|

Lord Michael Mustill 1,003.00 :
Dr Jullan Lew 73.33 nl
Sir Christopher Greenwood 230.00 1,306,33

ee,

Fees of Secretary to the Tribunal

 

4July08 to 6Dec07 7,872.62
7Dec07 to 29Jul09 + 28,900.00, 33,772.62
LGIA's accrued administrative charges / 0‘ 2,391.67
TOTAL COSTS OF ARBITRATION we 243,945.62

BALANCE OF FUNDS as at 28 JANUARY 2010 9,320.96
——

 

i
i
i

 

       

