   
 

COUR PERMANENTE D’ARBITRAGE 3 PERMANENT COURT OF ARBITRATION
af

PRESS RELEASE

ARBITRATION BETWEEN EVEREST ESTATE LLC AND OTHERS
AS CLAIMANTS AND THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION AS RESPONDENT

THE HAGUE, 9 MAY 2018
The Tribunal Issues its Award on the Merits

As reported previously (Press Release dated 26 October 2017), after the hearing on the merits in this
matter was held from 5 to 6 October 2017, the Tribunal invited the Parties to file post-hearing
submissions by 11 December 2017.

On 11 November 2017, the Tribunal posed supplementary questions on valuation to the Parties, inviting
them to respond in their post-hearing submissions. The Claimants filed their post-hearing brief, together
with an additional valuation report, on 11 December 2017. The Russian Federation did not file any post-
hearing submissions.

Having consulted the Parties, on 23 March 2018, the Tribunal declared the hearings in this arbitration
closed according to Article 29(1) of the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules 1976.

On 2 May 2018, having deliberated, the Tribunal issued its unanimous Award on the Merits, addressing
issues pertaining to liability and damages.

Background on the Arbitration

The above-referenced arbitration was commenced by the Claimants against the Russian Federation
pursuant to the Ukraine-Russia BIT and in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules 1976 on
19 June 2015. The Claimants contended that, as of August 2014, the Russian Federation breached its
obligations under the Ukraine-Russia BIT by interfering with and ultimately expropriating their
investments in real estate located in Crimea.

The Tribunal was constituted on 27 October 2015. It is comprised of Dr. Andrés Rigo Sureda (Presiding
Arbitrator), Professor W. Michael Reisman (appointed by the Claimants), and Professor Dr. Rolf
Knieper (appointed by the appointing authority, Mr. Michael Hwang, on behalf of the Respondent).

Under the instructions of the Tribunal, the PCA issues press releases from time to time containing
information on the procedural steps taken by the Tribunal. Basic information about the proceedings is
available on the PCA Case Repository http://www.pcacases.com.

* * *
Background on the Permanent Court of Arbitration

The Permanent Court of Arbitration is an intergovernmental organization established by the 1899 Hague
Convention on the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes. The PCA has 121 Contracting Parties.
Headquartered at the Peace Palace in The Hague, the Netherlands, the PCA facilitates arbitration,
conciliation, fact-finding, and other dispute resolution proceedings among various combinations of
States, State entities, intergovernmental organizations, and private parties. The PCA’s International

Bureau is currently administering 5 interstate disputes, 88 investor-State arbitrations, and 49 cases
arising under contracts involving a State or other public entity. More information about the PCA can be
found at www.pca-cpa.org.

Contact: Permanent Court of Arbitration
E-mail: bureau @pca-cpa.org

