INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT
OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
WASHINGTON, D.C.

IN THE PROCEEDING BETWEEN

EVN AG
(CLAIMANT)

 

- AND -

THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
(RESPONDENT)

(ICSID Case No. ARB/09/10)

AWARD

Members of the Tribunal
Professor Piero Bernardini, President
Professor Vaughan Lowe, Arbitrator
Professor Francisco Orrego Vicuiia, Arbitrator

Secretary of the Tribunal
Ms. Milanka Kostadinova

Representing the Claimant Representing the Respondent

Mr. Noah Rubins Dr. Sebastian Seelmann-Eggebert

Dr. Willibald Plesser Dr. Robert Volterra (until 9 March 2011)
Ms. Elizabeth Snodgrass Ms. Angela Angelovska-Wilson

Mr. Jeffery P. Commission Mr. Hussein Haeri

Ms. Alexandra van der Meulen Mr. Jan Spangenberg

Mr. Leon Kopecky Latham & Watkins LLP

Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP

with co-counsel Dr. Christian W. Konrad
Konrad & Justich

Date of Dispatch to the Parties: 2 September 2011

L PROCEDURE

1. On 12 May 2009, EVN AG (the “Claimant”), a company organized under the
laws of Austria, filed a request for arbitration (the “Request”), dated 8 May 2009, with
the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (“ICSID” or the “Centre”)
against The former Republic of Macedonia (the “Respondent’).

2. In its Request, the Claimant relies on the dispute resolution provisions contained
in Articles 12 and 13 of the 2002 Austria — The former Federal Republic of Macedonia
bilateral investment treaty (“BIT”) providing for ICSID arbitration, and on the ICSID
arbitration provision of Article 26 of the Energy Charter Treaty (“ECT”).

3. On 12 May 2009, ICSID’s Acting Secretary-General acknowledged receipt of the
Request in accordance with Rule 5 of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for the Institution of
Conciliation and Arbitration Proceedings (the “ICSID Institution Rules”) and transmitted
copies of the Request to the Respondent and the Embassy of Macedonia in Washington,
D.C.

4. The Request was registered by the Acting Secretary-General of ICSID on 3 June
2009, pursuant to Article 36(3) of the Convention on the Settlement of Investment
Disputes between States and Nationals of Other States (the “ICSID Convention”).

5. The Request for Arbitration contained the Claimant’s Application for Provisional
Measures filed pursuant to Rule 39(1) of the ICSID Rules of Procedure for Arbitration
Proceedings (the “Arbitration Rules”). On June 4, 2009, in accordance with Rule 39(5)
of the Arbitration Rules, the Acting Secretary-General fixed time limits for the filing of
the Parties’ observations on the Claimant’s Application for Provisional Measures. The
Parties filed observations on 18 June 2009 (Claimant) and on 24 July 2009 (Respondent).
On 17 August 2009, the Claimant responded to the Respondent’s observations of 24 July
2009. On 9 September 2009, the Claimant withdrew without prejudice its Application
for Provisional Measures. On 14 September 2009, the Respondent submitted its response
to the Claimant’s observations of 17 August 2009.

6. On 3 August 2009, Claimant informed the Centre that the Parties were unable to
agree on the method for constituting the Arbitral Tribunal (the “Tribunal”) and requested
that the Tribunal be constituted in accordance with Article 37(2)(b) of the ICSID
Convention. On 26 August 2009, the Respondent appointed Professor Vaughan Lowe, a
national of the United Kingdom, as arbitrator. Thereafter, on 28 August 2009, the
Claimant appointed Professor Francisco Orrego Vicufia, a national of Chile, as arbitrator.

7. On 8 September 2009, the Claimant informed the Centre that the Parties were
unable to reach an agreement on the appointment of the President of the Tribunal and
requested the Chairman of the ICSID Administrative Council (the “Chairman”) to make
the appointment in accordance with Article 38 of the ICSID Convention and Rule 4 of
the Arbitration Rules. Accordingly, on 9 October 2009, the Chairman appointed
Professor Piero Bernardini, a national of Italy, as President of the Tribunal.

8. The Tribunal was constituted on 9 October 2009. Mr. Marat Umerov, Consultant
of the ICSID Secretariat, was appointed Secretary of the Tribunal. He was subsequently
succeeded by Ms. Milanka Kostadinova, Senior Counsel of the ICSID Secretariat.

9. On 4 December 2009, the Tribunal held its first session with the Parties at The
Hague. The Parties confirmed at the first session that the Tribunal had been properly
constituted. An agreement was reached on most procedural issue in this proceeding,
including on the procedural calendar for the written pleadings. The Tribunal also heard
at the first session the Parties’ oral argument concerning the allocation of the costs
associated with Claimant’s submission and subsequent withdrawal of its Application for
Provisional Measures. Having deliberated, the Tribunal confirmed its earlier ruling of 19
October 2009 that the issue of the allocation of costs shall be decided in the final award.

10. On the basis of its consultation with the Parties, the Tribunal fixed at the first
session a schedule for written procedure. Subsequently, the Parties agreed on several
amendments to the timetable for submission of the written pleadings, which were
approved by the Tribunal.

11. After a period of negotiation, on 1 June 2011, the Parties entered into a Settlement
Agreement. On the same date, pursuant to Rule 43(2) of the Arbitration Rules, the
Parties filed with the Secretary-General and the Tribunal a full and signed copy of their
Settlement Agreement.

12. In accordance with Rule 43(2), the Parties jointly requested that the Tribunal
embody their settlement in the form of an award.

13. The Tribunal notes that paragraph 5 of the Settlement Agreement provides as
follows: “Notwithstanding this joint request, either the Claimant or the Respondent may,
at any time following 60 days after the date of the settlement, request the Arbitration
Tribunal to discontinue the Arbitration.”

14. On 15 July 2011, the Parties were asked to clarify this provision of their
Settlement Agreement. By letters of 19 July 2011, the both Parties confirmed that they
agreed to the permanent discontinuance of the proceeding by the Tribunal’s award
incorporating the Settlement Agreement pursuant to Rule 43(2) of the ICSID Arbitration
Rules, without any residual rights to discontinuance surviving the award irrespective of
its date.

IL. AWARD

15. The Tribunal, pursuant to the Parties’ request and in accordance with Rule 43(2)
of the ICSID Arbitration Rules, unanimously decides that the Settlement Agreement
signed by the Parties on 1 June 2011, as set below, shall be recorded verbatim as Award
on agreed terms:

PENYEAMKA MAKEQOHUJA
BAADA HA PENYENKKA MAKEROHKJA

sp Bl Stoa|d

Si. OF » 2013 rag.
cKONJE

 

 

Between

EVN AG
{the *Claimant”)
anc
THE REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
(the “Responient™)
in
ICSTD Case No. ARTVN9/10

On this day 1 qunen \,

WHEREAS

 

(A) On 17 Decomber 1994 the Republic of Austria signed the Enerey Charter Treaty (

“RCT"), which entered inta force in the Republic of Austria on 16 April 1998, The Republic af
Macedania acceded 0 and ratified the FCT on 26 March 1998, which entered into force in the
Republic of Macedonia on 25 June 1998.

 

¢B) On 28 March 2001 the Republic of Macedunix and the Republic of Austria signed the
Agreement on Promotion and Protection of Investments {the “Iuvestinent Treaty"), which
entered into force on 14 April 2002.

 

(€) On 17 March 246 the Claimant entered into an agreement for the Sale and Purchase of Slate
Owned Shares of AD Tlektrostupanstve na Makedonija (RSM) with the Ministry of Eeonomy
af che Republic of Macedonia (the "SPA),

 

{D) A dispute acose between the Claimant and the Respondent regatding the SPA. ‘This dispute
led tr the Claimant suhmitting a request for arhitration (the “Request”) to the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes ("1CSID”) on 8 May 2009 with reference to
Arlicle 36 of the Canvention an the Settlement of Investment Dispules between States and
Nationals of Other States and the Rules of Procedure for the Inscitution

iation and Arhitration Priweed:ngs. TCSTD registered the Request on 3 June 2009 as
“asc No. ARBAIO! | U tthe

  
 

 

 

rhitration”).

(F) The Claimunt and the Respande::t Lave agreed to settle the dispute subject matter of the
Arbitration and to extinguish any und all claims and rights which the Claimant may have apainst
the Respozdent arising out of or in connection with the ECT, the Investment ‘Treaty and the SPA.
and other agreements relied upxin by the Claimanc in the Arbitration proceedings, and that this
insteument shall be submitted to the Arhitration Tezbuna’ as the text of their settlement with
respect to the dispute subject matter of the Arbiteation, to be embodied in aa award.

 

    
  

     

 

THE CLAIMANT AND THE RESPONDENT HAVE THEREFORE AGREED AS
FOLLOWS:

 

1. Without any admission of Liability, Ge Claimant and the Respondent agree that the Claimant
shall and hereby does withdraw all its claims i the Arbitration wacther past, present or future,
with no order as Lo cass as more specifically set wut beiow.

 

2. The Claimant and the Respondent agree hat the withdrawal pursuant to paragraph | ubove
shal! be with prejudice and that. accordingly, this instrument shall be effective in law ro settle.
fully and finally, the dispute subjcet matter of the Arbiteution,

3, The Claimant and the Respondent agree that this instrument shall be submitted to the
Arbitration Tribunal as the full and signed text of their settlement with respect wo the dispule
subject matter of the Arbitration, to be embodied in an award in accordance with ICSID
Arbitration Rule 43 purayraph 2. This instrument shall be without prejudice to the provisinns of
any other agreement of the same or subsequent date to which the Claimant and the Respondent
ure or muy be parties.

 

   

4. The Clmant and the Respondent agree Hut each party ls the Arbitrativn shall bear its own
legal and other expenses: that the Claimant and te Respondent shall bear in equal shares the lees
and exponses af the Arbitration Tribunal and the charges for use of the facilitics of [CSID; and
that any searaining sums advanced to ICSID in accordance with ICSID Regulation “4 shall be
returned to the Claimant and to the Respondent in equal shares,

5. The Claimant and the Respondent hereby jnintly request the Arbitration ‘Iribunal to embody
this settlement in an uward in accordance with ICSID Arbitration Rule 43 purageaph 2
Notwithstanding this joint request, either the Claimant or the Respondent may, at any time
following 60 duys after the date af this settlement, request the Arhitrat'on Tribunal to discontinue
the Arbitration.

     

  

 

6. Tor the avoidance of doubt, the Claimant and the Respondent each waive and renounce any
secourse they may have under the Convention with respect to the interpretation, revision or
annulment of an award embodying this settlement in accordance with ICS1D Arbitration Rule 43
parageaph 2.

f the once Republie of Macedonia

1e2u.t

16. The Tribunal notes the agreement of the Parties in paragraphs 1 and 4 of the
Settlement Agreement that each Party shall bear its own costs and other expenses, and
that the Parties shall bear in equal shares the fees and expenses of the Arbitral Tribunal
and ICSID.

[Signed] [Signed]
Professor Francisco Orrega Vicufia Professor Vaughan Lowe
Arbitrator Arbitrator
Date: [17 August 2011] Date: [8 August 2011]
[Signed]

Professor Piero Bernardini
President

Date: [26 July 2011]

